LADY LIVINGSTON'S LEGACY. 




CHAPTER I. 

FOR ENGLAND, HO ! 

EEP her away . steady there at 
the helm . three parts speed, if 
you like, captain; the current 
will do the rest," said the pilot, as the good 
steamship "Quebec," homeward bound, 
glided rapidly down the mighty stream of 
the St. Lawrence, on her way to the sea. 

It was the late autumn, emphatically 
styled the Fall, when the warmth of the so- 
called Indian summer is succeeded by the 
first signs of the coming winter. The 

VOL. I. I 



Lady Livingston's Legacy. 



dense masses of virgin forest, as yet un- 
cleared by the axe of the settler, which 
here and there clothed the summit of 
some bold bluff along the river's bank, 
were royally robed in flaming scarlet and 
deep crimson, in russet, orange, and gold. 
Somewhat of the mellow warmth and 
softened radiance of the genial weather yet 
lingered, but from time to time a gust of 
keen wind chilled the air, as if in warning of 
what was to come; while the crisp red 
leaves were whirled in showers from the 
trees that overhung the water, and dropped, 
swirling, into the eddies below. 

"We shall be the last boat, I reckon, 
that will get down the Big Drink this 
year," said the " Quebec's " first officer, a 
gaunt, lank-haired citizen of the Great 
Republic. "A cold snap's a-coming, or 
.my name is not Ephraim Jones. Lucky if 
we don't get jammed in the ice-pack, 
moving south, outside Anticosti." 

It was late, and the glorious autumn that 



For England, Ho I 3 

had lasted so long in the ripe perfection of 
its beauty, was beginning to droop before 
the frigid breath of conquering winter. 
Already the far-off cliffs of Labrador were 
ribbed in sevenfold ice; the bergs were 
moving southward in glistening pageant, 
like so many floating islands of shimmering 
.crystal ; and soon the north-west wind 
would come howling over the Red River 
prairies, bearing on its mighty wings the 
.snow that should enwrap the northern 
portion of the continent as in a fair white 
shroud. 

It was high time for those who did not 
wish to pass their long winter in Canada to 
seek shelter elsewhere. A good many 
passengers were on board of the " Quebec " 
. officers coming home on leave, colonists 
visiting the mother-country on business, 
stray tourists returning to pour the contents 
of their note-books, and their holiday ex- 
periences of bears and buffaloes, Yankees 
and mosquitoes, into octavo volumes of 

1 . 2 



Lady Livingston's Legacy. 



print There were also one or two families 
bound for Europe, whose ostensible purpose 
was education for the junior branches ; al- 
though it is possible that titled husbands, 
for the elder sisters, whose gay hats and 
velvet jackets were conspicuous on the 
deck, might also form an important, if un~ 
acknowledged, item in the maternal pro- 
gramme. Almost unnoticed among all 
these, yet well deserving of observation on 
a wider stage than that afforded by the 
holy-stoned deck-planks of the packet, was 
the tall and graceful figure of a young girl, 
who appeared not to belong to any of the 
loquacious groups around her. 

"Isn't that Miss Violet Maybrook, 
yonder by the binnacle ? It must be 
awkward for the poor girl, if she is quite 
alone," said a good-natured, grizzle-headed 
major of artillery, who stood beside the 
brass-rimmed cabin stairs. 

i( Oh no ; the captain, old Morrison, takes 
charge of her. But there is really no diffi- 



Far England, Ho I 



.culty for a lady travelling by herself, either 
in the States or the Dominion," answered 
the Canadian to whom he spoke ; " though, 
I dare say, she does feel herself a little 
lonesome at the change.' 1 

Meanwhile, the subject of these remarks 
stood apart, looking wistfully, as it seemed, 
on the fast receding shores of the broaden- 
ing river, the gleaming surface of which 
"was dotted by fishing-skiffs, and wave- 
washed rafts of rough-hewn timber floating 
down to Quebec ; and diversified here and 
there by some green group of fairy islets, 
whose willows dipped their yellowing 
branches in the rippling water, and where 
the mimosa and the maple flourished 
among the rocks that marred the rank 
luxuriance of the long grass. She was 
young . not more than two and twenty at 
the most . and her face was one to which 
the most fastidious critic could scarcely 
have denied the praise due to a rare loveli- 
ness ; yet her features were far from being 



Lady Livingston's Legacy. 



regular, and her complexion was of a 
creamy whiteness, untouched by any 
warmer tint What struck the observer 
most was the exceeding beauty of the eyes 
. those large, dark, passionate eyes, fringed 
with coal-black lashes, that looked strangely 
long and heavy when they rested on her 
soft cheek. She had a wealth of raven 
hair, that rendered her independent of the 
chignon-maker's art; and her delicate 
mouth was well shaped, with red lips that 
were perhaps a little too firm. She was 
simply, even plainly, dressed, and her de- 
meanour was quiet and unassuming; but 
there was an unstudied grace in all her 
movements, and what she wore became 
her better than was the case with the much 
more brilliantly attired colonial belles chat- 
ting and laughing at the distance of a few 
paces. 

The girl from time to time with- 
drew her pensive eyes from shorewards*. 
and glanced inquiringly, and perhaps im~ 



For England, Ho / 



patiently, along the deck, as if in search of 
some one whose appearance was unduly 
delayed. 

" Well, Miss Maybrook," said a mascu- 
line voice at last, as its owner approached 
her, and stood, as if waiting for her to 
speak. A tall, fair-haired man of some 
thirty years of age, well-dressed and well- 
looking, with even a certain charm of voice 
and manner, but yet with a nameless some- 
thing in his tone and lineaments, that, to a 
heedful physiognomist, should have cried, 
Beware ! There was some craft, but no 
intellect, in that low white brow, from 
beneath which the blue eyes looked out so 
boldly ; some tenacity in that square jaw, 
with its white teeth just shining through 
the heavy moustache of golden tawny hue ; 
but the expression of the lips was sensual, 
hard, and cruel. Women are not, ordi- 
narily speaking, very severe judges of the 
character that underlines a showy exterior ; 
and yet the new-comer winced perceptibly 



8 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

as his eye met those of the girl whom he 
had addressed. 

" Well, Sir Frederick Dashwood ?" she 
said, in measured accents, and almost, as it 
seemed, with a touch of sarcasm in her 
tone ; then, after pausing in vain for a 
reply, she added, petulantly ; " Is that all 
you have to say to me ?" 

He laughed, stroking, meanwhile, with 
his strong white hand, sparkling with more 
rings than most men wear in these days of 
careless attire and easy manners, the fair 
moustache that shaded his upper lip. It 
was a low laugh, not good to hear, hard and 
sardonic rather ; but his voice was pleasant 
enough when he said : " Never mind the 
Sir Frederick just now, Violet. I have not 
been long enough used to the blushing 
honours of my baronetcy to feel the omis- 
sion of the title . such as it is. Besides, 
you were not always so formal. It was 
4 Fred/ wasn't it, Violet, a little time ago ?" 

And as he spoke, he bent over her, and 



For England, Ho I 



looked into her face, and it was wonderful 
to see how the girl's proud eyes softened, 
and how rapidly her whole expression 
changed, as a gloomy landscape brightens 
under a gleam of sunshine. 

" If I could trust you . if I could do 
that/' she murmured, as if her thoughts 
had found unbidden utterance ; but his ear 
was quick, and he caught the sounds, low 
and hardly audible as they were. 

44 You can," he answered, earnestly but 
gently ; " and you must It is too late in 
the day, now, for either of us to hang back, 
where that is concerned." 

" Yes ; that is true, though you say it," 
returned the girl, speaking in the same 
dreamy manner as before. " Whoever is 
free, you and I are bound to confidence. 
If you loved me . but that was an idle 
fancy . I should have something to cling 
to, some one plank of safety in the storm 
that must one day burst upon me. But if 
that cannot be " 



io Lady Livingston 9 s Legacy. 

" It can ; believe me that it can," inter- 
rupted Sir Frederick, eagerly, but in cautious 
accents. " You are restless and unreason- 
able to-day, Violet ; and see ! all those 
gossiping fools yonder are staring at us. 
Come with me a few steps, here on the 
poop, and let us appear to be contemplat- 
ing the prospect as we talk. We shall 
attract less remark in that way." 

Violet Maybrook allowed him to lead 
her to the raised portion of the deck beyond 
the wheel, whence a better view of the 
receding shores could be obtained, and 
there leant against the vessel's taffrail, with 
her eyes fixed, as before, on the darkening 
masses of the forest, the fields where fence 
and fallow were fast growing blurred and 
indistinct as the shadows deepened, and 
the rocks that rose, bare and ghostly, 
from amid the shallow waters near the 
bank. 

44 See I" she said, pointing towards a 
group of tiny islets, over which hovered a 



For England^ Ho ! 1 1 



white haze that crept upwards and onr 
wards ; " see how the mist takes shape, and 
seems to follow us like a troop of sheeted 
spectres ; while yonder, again, it lies spread 
over the meadows like a silver fleece. But 
I forgot You are like Peter Bell, and to 
you a yellow primrose is a yellow primrose, 
and nothing more, Frederick." 

"Well, I don't know about that/; re- 
plied the young man, frankly enough ; " it 
is true, I'm not literary and so on ; but 
when a thing is pretty, I suppose I see it 
A silver fleece, eh ? By Jove, I wish it 
was F And this time his laugh was good- 
humoured, for his torpid fancy was tickled 
by the suggestion. 

" How you worship money !" rejoined 
Miss Maybrook, with somewhat of scorn 
in her voice ; but the baronet coolly an- 
swered : 

" Of course I do ; I never saw much of 
it, you know, though I had credit in plenty 
once, which is all very well till the smash 



1 2 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

comes, and then a fellow finds out the dif- 
ference. Come, Violet, you are trying to 
put me out of temper ; but it won't do, so 
we may as well be friends. I wonder what 
you'll say of London ?" 

" I scarcely expect to see much of this 
wonderful London of yours/' said Miss 
Maybrook. " The Right Honourable the 
Dowager Lady Livingston . yes, I think I 
am accurate as to the designation of my 
noble employer . resides at Richmond, you 
may remember, not in London. And it 
could make little difference to me, as her 
salaried companion, whether her house, the 
Fountains, be in ' town/ as you call it, or 
in the country. I know, from books, some- 
thing of the old country, and something, too, 
of the sort of life I shall have to lead, and I 
assure you that I do not cherish any very 
rose-coloured ideas of what lies before 
me. 

There was a suppressed bitterness in 
the tone in which these words were 



For England \ Ho ! 13 



uttered, which was not lost upon the 
hearer. 

" Upon my word," he said, hastily, " I 
think you will not find things half so bad 
as you fancy them. The dowager always 
hated me " 

"What singularly bad taste!" mur- 
mured Violet ; but the irony of the remark 
produced no effect on Sir Frederick's evi- 
dent determination to retain his good- 
humour unruffled. 

" Well, but she did," he continued ; 
"always disliked me from a boy . you 
know there's some relationship through 
my mother . and when I was a child, I 
was always getting into the old lady's 
black-books by teasing her fat brute of a 
lapdog, making her parrot scream, and 
tumbling amongst her china ; but she can 
be kind, and generous too, where she takes a 
fancy. Some of these old women are ter- 
rible Tartars ; but I don't think you will 
have much to complain of with her. She 



14 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

is an awfully rich woman ; and though she 
calls herself an invalid, she does entertain 
now and then, and dooced liberally, I can 
tell you ; and she's well thought of by the 
great guns of London society, the slow 
ones, I mean, such as Lady Blunderbore, 
the Duchess of Snowdon, and all that 
heavy lot I dare say there will be lawn- 
parties in summer, and boating-parties, and 
the rest of it. If you can tide over the 
time until the fine weather comes, I dare 
say you won't be moped beyond bearing. 
And I shall run down when I can, and, at 
worst, it will only be a temporary thing, 
this engagement of yours. I must have 
time, of course, to look about me, and to 
see how the governor's affairs really stood, 
and if I have inherited anything beyond 

the handle to my name ; and then " 

" And then I shall come to your home, 
and be your wife, Fred, shall I not ?" in- 
terrupted Violet, watching him narrowly, 
as if to mark the effect which her words 



For England^ Ho ! 15 

should produce. He did not make an im- 
mediate reply, but stood lazily twisting the 
ends of his thick moustache, meditating, it 
may be, on the answer that he must give, 
and at length he said, deliberately, and in 
the manner of one who weighs every 
word : 

" Yes, Violet, I hope so . that is, at any 
rate, the theory of the thing; but then 
there may be difficulties, yes, and delays, 
about carrying out this little scheme of 
ours. You women have a way of over- 
leaping obstacles, steeple-chase fashion/and 
going slapdash over every impediment 
that lies in the way of matrimony. I'm 
sure, Vi, that I take it as a compliment, 
and I suppose you must be fond of a fellow, 
to be ready to share the fortunes of one 
who may, if the last letter of those plod- 
ding old attorneys is but near the truth, 
turn out only that most pitiable of paupers, 
a pauper with a title. But I am bound to 
think for both ; and being older than you, 



1 6 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 



and having seen more of the world, and so 
forth, to see that I have a home for you to 
be mistress of, before I ask you to come to 
it Do you understand me, Violet ?" 

" I think I do," returned the girl, with 
curling lip and flashing eyes, " though sel- 
dom has selfishness been more elegantly 
masked. You are afraid, is it not so, to 
drag me . me, Violet Maybrook . whom 
you love so well, and to whom you owe so 
much, down to poverty ? That is the gist 
of your pretty oration. Well, but if I do 
not fear poverty ? If a small income and a 
struggling life have no terrors for me, will 
you dare to confess yourself less brave, less 
fitted to face the trials of life, than is the 
woman whom you have sworn to love ?" 

The scorn that broke forth in her ring- 
ing voice and passionate gesture was not 
lost upon the baronet ; yet he bore it, to all 
appearance, stoically enough. There was 
no frown on his low brow, no angry 
sparkle in his steel-blue eye, and his 



For England, Ho I 17 

voice was gentle, and almost caressing, 
as he said : 

" It is because I do care so much for 
you, my little Violet, that I am content to 
be called selfish, rather than to do you 
serious harm. You tell me that you don't 
fear poverty ; but that is precisely because 
you do not know what poverty, in its true, 
old-world, European, humiliating sense, 
implies. I don't myself believe that any 
man is thoroughly poor if he has not, in 
some sense, come down in the world, slid, 
that is, to a lower level than that to which 
he has been accustomed. When I was 
quartered in the west of Ireland, I have 
envied the appetite with which those poor 
Connemara bogtrotters devoured their 
dishful of potatoes . not, mind, the mealy, 
floury vegetables that you Canadians born 
call " Irish " potatoes, but black lumpers, 
that look as inviting as a mess of horse- 
beans. Your only notion of poverty, Violet, 
is shabby furniture, a bad dinner, and 

vol. 1. 2 



1 8 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

. - 1 - - - . . i - - 

scanty fuel. Mine is one which comprises 
duns, debt, endless lies to stave off the 
creditor from week to week, a smiling face 
kept up before the world when the heart is 
half breaking, sickly children pining for 
good food and pure air, shams, insults. 
Care night and day as an inmate of the 
house, and everything aggravated by the 
necessity for keeping a smooth face be- 
fore a society that votes misfortune a 
bore, sorrow a bore, ruin a bore, and that 
hardly permits a man or woman to die in 
peace unless well-feed doctors issue daily 
bulletins, and Mr. Banting himself con- 
ducts the funeral ceremonies. On my soul, 
Violet, what I say is true !" 

He had commenced his speech in 
sugared accents, and guardedly withal; 
but as he went on, his voice had gathered 
force and volume, and he spoke with all 
the conviction of one who acts a part no 
longer, but believes sincerely in the solid 
truth of every word. Miss Maybrook her- 



For England^ Ho ! 19 

self, though perhaps by nature distrustful, 
and doubly so by habit where this man was 
concerned, could not help admitting to her- 
self that what he had said was probably, to 
the best of his belief, true. 

" This last letter from old Sir George's 
lawyers," she said, after a pause, "what 
was its exact purport? You have men- 
tioned it to me before we sailed, but you 
said little about it. I merely gathered 
from your words that your grandfather was 
not so rich as you supposed him to be." 

" You shall see the letter itself to-morrow, 
or to-night/' returned Dashwood, seriously : 
" I want to keep nothing back from you. 
No ; it seems, unless the lawyers are out 
of their reckoning, that the old man was 
not, close and sly as he was about money 
matters, the shrewd, old, tight-fisted miser 
I have for years believed him to be. His 
papers were so muddled, and the hiding- 
places where he kept his securities so hard 
to come at, that Nupen and Smink . a 

2 . 2 



20 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

decent firm in Lincoln's Inn . they once 
compromised with some money-lenders for 
me, at Sir George's request . cannot make 
out whether my grandfather was rich, or as 
poor as Job : they are attorneys, and there- 
fore, as seeing plenty of the shady side of 
life, think the latter. There is no will, and 
I take what there is ; but every Jew in 
London holds a bit of stamped paper with 
my signature to it ; and if I had not sailed 
for Canada when I did, my address would 
have been Whitecross Street, E.C. I 
know the tribes well, Violet, and that they 
always give a promising fish plenty of line. 
They won't immediately, now I come back 
as Sir Frederick, pounce on me, as they 
would have done on poor Fred Dashwood 
of the Lancers. No, no; they will con- 
sider that I may get a lump of money,, 
somehow, out of my grandfather's succes- 
sion, or that I may 1 don't like to 

say it, Violet, for fear you should fire up 
again, my dear, but. " 



Far England, Ho ! 21 

^. . . ^ . ^. . ^ . . . . . . --,- -- . .! I -Ml . .ll^^TBI ^-1-^ . ^. ^^^»i 

" Speak, pray, without fear of any out- 
break on my part/ 1 said Violet, wearily : 
u you were going to say that the people to 

whom you owe money might think " 

"That I was likely to marry money. 
An heiress, you see, Vi, is generally the 
resource of a man like myself; and Moss, 
and Abrahams, and the rest of them know 
well enough that some little party or other, 
whose papa has made a fortune in long- 
cloths or Manchester printed cottons, 
would not object to be called Lady Dash- 
wood. Everything commands a price, 
and a title can be quoted in the mar- 
riage-market just as freely as any other 
\ commodity. You need not mind what I 
say about that I have no intention of 
selling myself for a dowry . break stones 
on the road sooner, or take the shilling as 
a private in the old regiment . but 1 only 
mention it to show that the Hebrews would 
set upon me tooth and nail, if I began my 
career in England by marrying for lave." 



22 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

" For love, Frederick Dashwood ? Say, 
gather, for fear," haughtily rejoined the 
, girl, as she turned her flashing eyes full 
upon his provokingly calm face. " Do you 
think I do not read you, and know you, 
and that I do not see that you would play 
me false, and leave me to flutter on my 
aimless course, like a dead leaf blown 
before the wind, if you only dared to risk a 
breach between us ? But you do not dare 
it Enough of these excuses. You have 
asked for time to settle your affairs, and 
you shall have it, free from any importunity 
of mine. Who is, may I ask, this young 
girl, this Miss . Miss . I forget the name, 
now on a visit to Lady Livingston, as Mrs* 
Dashwood's letter informs me ?" 

" I suppose you mean my cousin Bea- 
trice . Beatrice Fleming . a nearer relation 
to the dowager that I am," answered Sir 
Frederick, half sullenly. "She is a 
favourite, and often there." 

"A favourite, and your cousin, and 



For England, Ho ! 23 

young, and pretty perhaps," said Violet 
Maybrook, slowly. " Ah, well, I shall soon 
see her, and judge for myself. Come, it is 
dark, and we can stay here no longer ; so 
I will take your arm, if you please, and 
join the company yonder. I have one con- 
solation, Fred . you dare not, even if you 
would, be false to me." 




CHAPTER II. 

CANADIAN MEMORIES. 

DON'T care, not the snapping 
of a gun-flint, not the scale of a 
pickerel, for the reasons why it 
should be so. There must be some- 
thing wrong about the man, something 
worse, I mean, than his being a horse- 
jockey and a pippin " . (which last colonial 
colloquialism for a scapegrace fell flat 
enough on the English ears of the audi- 
ence) . "something worse even than his 
being a conceited dangler after the foolish 
women who are taken by his looks and his 
London airs. There always is something 



Canadian Memories. 25 

wrong about a chap for whom nobody has 
a good word: I learned that during the 
eight or nine and twenty years I have sat 
on the bench of our supreme court yonder," 
said a keen-featured elderly man, whose 
glistening gray hair matched well with a 
face that was shrewd, but not unkindly of 
aspect 

" Can't say, Fm sure, judge !" rejoined 
one of the listeners, a pale lieutenant 
of engineers. " Dashing Dashwood . he 
brought the sobriquet with him from the 
Plunger regiment he belonged to before he 
exchanged into the infantry, and was quar- 
tered here . is, so I have always heard, not 
half-bad." 

i 

" Which means, that he has not been 
detected in cheating at cards, pays his bets 
on settling-day, is never seen intoxicated, 
and has not, in short, done anything to 
forfeit the character of an officer and a 
gentleman," said the judge, very austerely. 
*. It is just those men whom your British 



26 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

slang calls * not half-bad' who do thrice the 
harm that a branded and transparent 
scoundrel can work. I speak . strongly, 
gentlemen, but that is because I feel 
strongly. It is Captain Dashwood, and 
such as he, who earn your cloth a bad 
name among us plain colonials. But I 
think I can safely say that no man, and no 
woman, was ever anything but the worse 
for having to do with this redcoat Lothario, 
whose fellow-passengers we have the privi- 
lege to be." 

: " You are hard on the young fellow, 
'pon my word, judge, you are," said the 
honest captain of the " Quebec," in whose 
cabin, around a table whereon were bottles 
and glasses of various shape and dimen- 
sions, a knot of male passengers sat con- 
versing as they smoked their cigars, and 
imbibed those iced beverages, juleps, 
smashes, coblers, and stone fences, so 
called, which are plentiful in Atlantic 
steam-packets. " Very likely the lad never 




% * . 

had a c 1- \ ^ very- 

start ^ the pace 

.,*." ^leatricals here, 

% , endless balls and 

*a -s, the regimental drag 

\. . of thorough-breds matched 
. olind-hookey in the small hours, 
-very contrivance to help the poorer of 
.aem down the steep road to ruin. That 
was his father, I suppose, that Sir George 
who died the other day ?" 

" No, it was his grandfather," said a pert 
little tourist, who had borne the tribu- 
lations of prairie travel and Far West 
savagery for the express purpose of being 
a lion, next May, in London society. 
" Everybody knew that old fogey, and his 
pill-box with the big brown horses, i 
he was still a practising physician in J 
Street. He was very old, had been i 
a baronet by George IV., and 
more fees at one time than any i 
doctor in town. He ougl 




26 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

slang calls * not half-bad' who do thrice the 
harm that a branded and transparent 
scoundrel can work. I speak . strongly, 
gentlemen, but that is because I feel 
strongly. It is Captain Dashwood, and 
such as he, who earn your cloth a bad 
name among us plain colonials. But I 
think I can safely say that no man, and no 
woman, was ever anything but the worse 
for having to do with this redcoat Lothario, 
whose fellow-passengers we have the privi- 
lege to be." 

" You are hard on the young fellow, 
'pon my word, judge, you are," said the 
honest captain of the " Quebec," in whose 
cabin, around a table whereon were bottles 
and glasses of various shape and dimen- 
sions, a knot of male passengers sat con- 
versing as they smoked their cigars, and 
imbibed those iced beverages, juleps, 
smashes, coblers, and stone fences, so 
called, which are plentiful in Atlantic 
steam-packets. " Very likely the lad never 




Canadian Memories. 29 

children to be real aristocrats; and the 
younger of the two indulged the parental 
fancy by going into the army, flinging about 
his golden sovereigns at such a rate that it 
must have puzzled the doctor to supply 
them, and marrying a lady of very old 
stock, the Honourable Louisa Fleming, 
who was ten years his senior, and had been 
brought out in the London marriage- 
market when Fred Dashwood . Fred pri- 
musy we may call him . got his first birching 
at Eton, and deserved it too, as I have heard 
my governor say, for a wilder pickle never 
lived ; and indeed he didn't live very long . . 
it's the pace that kills . and hard-drinking, 
a hide-and-seek career, late hours, and the 
Queen's Bench prison, made an end of 
Captain Dashwood. His wife is alive, in 
some Bath or Cheltenham boarding-house, 
they say, living on allowance from the old 
doctor. I hope her son will be dutiful 
enough to pay it as punctually. As for 
Philip, Sir George never liked him, thought 



30 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

him a poor-spirited creature, without the 
pluck to get into debt ; and when Phil set 
the seal to his disgrace by marrying a good 
girl, the daughter of a country parson, 
whom he had known as governess in some 
family at which Mr. Dashwood visited, the 
old man fairly shut the door in his son's 
face, and cast him off, in fact, as a disgrace 
to the budding genealogical tree of the 
Dashwoods. 

" Well, it was easy to send Philip to the 
rightabout, to scratch his name out of a 
will, and to return his letters unopened ; 
but the old medico had no more power to 
deprive Esau of his birthright, the succes- 
sion to the baronetcy, than . than scores of 
men have, peers and commoners, who hate 
the future occupant of their very comfort- 
able shoes. He had emigrated, Philip 
had ; and some distant connections of his 
wife being established in Montreal, he 
settled there, set up as a merchant . he 
had some few hundred pounds, inherited 



Canadian Memories. 3 \ 

from his mother's relations, to begin with, 
and throve tolerably well. Then he died, 
as you know, and the poor little boy died 
too . an accident, wasn't it . ice-breaking, 
or something of that sort ? and so Sir 
George died, and Frederick the Second 
reigns in his place. But I suspect Sir 
Frederick will not have much to reign 
over, since the old man was hard hit by the 
smash of three or four bubble companies, 
as I happen to know. I suppose the 
captain will have to look out for some 
minor heiress who wants to be called ' My 
Lady.' " 

Somebody here observed that the baronet 
seemed to admire that pretty Miss May- 
brook, and wondered how she would ap- 
prove of such fortune-hunting arrangements 
as had been suggested. The judge shook 
his head. 

" The sooner that young lady learns to 
forget him, the better I should say," was 
his out-spoken opinion. "They are ac- 



32 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 



quaintances of long date now . she and he 
were muffins all last winter, and " 

" Excuse me, judge," interrupted the 
dapper tourist, taking out his pocket-book ; 
" I really must ask for a word of explana- 
tion regarding that term muffins. I thought 
I knew a thing or two, but " 

" But not the natural history of the Cana- 
dian muffin/' said the judge with a chuckle. 
" True, yours has been a summer visit to 
the Dominion, or you would have been 
aware that, in the best society of our cities, 
young ladies and gentlemen pair off for the 
season, at sleighing-parties, snow picnics, 
skating, dancing, and taboggining. It is a 
custom which temporary residents, like our 
military friends here, are found to take to 
kindly enough/' 

" Quite true !" said the engineer lieuten- 
ant, smiling at the bewildered incredulity 
that was visible in the traveller's face. 
" It is rather a serious thing, though, as 
regards making a good choice. Your 



Canadian Memories. 33 

business is to drive out your muffin, 
wrapped in warm furs, as fast as the gal- 
loping horses can whirl the sleigh along, to 
dance with your muffin, escort her every- 
where, and so forth. No chaperons, capital 
fun, and no harm done to anybody. Must 
not change, though ; always a row if you 
do that. Instead of a partner for a dance, 
you take one for a Canada winter." 

"Which often leads, I presume, to a 
partnership for life, unless you are laughing 
at my ignorance ?" observed- the tourist. 

" Often, but not always/' answered the 
judge. " But Mr. Scarper was right when 
he said that nobody was the worse for the 
practice ; and indeed our Canadian girls, 
with all their buoyant spirits and innocent 
mirth, are quite capable of taking care of 
themselves. Sometimes an unpleasantness 
does occur." 

" Ah, yes," said another officer ; " as 
when young Larpent shot Jack Lovelace 
at the skating rink . Lovelace of the Fusi- 

vol, 1. % 



34 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

liers . because of some wrong or other 
done to his sister ; and the jury found him 
not guilty at the trial, you remember, 
judge? 'Served him right/ would have 
been a better verdict still. By-the-by, he 
was a friend of Dashing Dashwood's. 
Birds of a feather, eh ? I was with the 
detachment at Toronto most of the cold 
season myself; but I was in the way of 
hearing the Montreal town-talk, and when 
Willis dropped into the messroom with the 
news that that youngster, Larpent . he was 
scarcely seventeen . had loaded his re- 
volver, and pulled trigger on that unlucky 
Jack, before the eyes of all the gay com- 
pany skating quadrilles by gaslight to the 
music of a military band, we all agreed 
that it was just what might have been 
expected, and that Dashwood's turn might 
not unlikely come next But Miss May- 
brook, to judge by her looks and that 
proud carriage of her head, is of a differ- 
ent stamp from little Aphy Larpent that I 



Canadian Memories. 35 

remember seeing in Toronto. She was 
governess, or companion, or something, in 
the house of Mrs. Dash wood, was she 
not?" 

"She was," the judge replied . "com- 
panion, that is, to Mrs. Dash wood, and 
governess to little Charley, and mother 
and child were both very much attached to 
her . deservedly so, as I believe, for a 
better and more sweet-natured girl than 
Violet Maybrook never lived ; and her 
affection for the tiny boy . he was but six 
years old when he died, poor little fellow ; 
but that was a sad piece of business. won 
the mother's heart. The widow was a 
kind, easy-tempered creature, who never 
forgot, as some ladies do, that a governess 
is a sentient human being like themselves, 
and not a mere teaching machine, to be 
laid on the shelf in the intervals of im- 
parting a sound elementary education ; and 
Miss Violet was allowed a good deal of 
liberty, and was able to accept the many 

3.2 



36 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

invitations she received exactly as if she 
had been a niece or younger sister of her 
employer. She was allowed, too, as I 
have said, to associate with Captain Fred 
Dashwood, who was her constant com- 
panion in the many merry outdoor amuse- 
ments with which we colonists enliven our 
long winter. Few ladies in England would 
have sanctioned such a degree of intimacy 
between a governess and her nephew, but 
out here we are more simple in our social 
habits; and besides, Mrs. Philip Dash- 
wood perhaps remembered that she had 
herself once filled a similar position ; but 
at any rate the fact was so. 

"Then, in the bright spring weather, 
came the unlucky death of poor little 
Charley ; and after that happened, the 
widow lost her health and spirits, and 
began to pine to go home to her own 
people, and to leave behind her the Cana- 
dian residence in which she had been twice 
left a mourner for the dead that were dear 



Canadian Memoties. ' 37 

to her. She was tolerably well off, and 
had many friends in Montreal, but she 
could not bear to remain, and has gone 
back to England and her relations. But 
her attachment to Miss May brook was not 
impaired ; and she promised to exert her- 
self to procure her some really good ap- 
pointment in England, and has succeeded 
in doing so. That old Dowager . Lady 
Livingston is her name . who has engaged 
Miss Maybrook at a high salary, as her 
companion, is in some way a kinswoman 
of Captain Fred's mother, and there had 
always been some intercourse by letter 
maintained between Philip Dashwood and 
his fashionable brother's household ; indeed, 
I fancy the captain did not scruple to bor- 
row from the civilian when his purse was 
at low-water mark ; and that the present 
Sir Frederick was also under pecuniary 
obligations to his colonial relatives. In the 
meantime Miss Violet resided with her 
parents, a mile or two out of Montreal, 



i 



38 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

worthy, struggling persons, who have a 
large family and a narrow income, and who 
naturally expect their young folks to shift 
for themselves as early as they can. Now 
she is bound for Europe ; and here, as you 
see, is Dashwood, a passenger in the same 
ship ; but I think I was not far wrong ia 
saying that Miss Maybrook would act 
wisely in forgetting him, as he will her 
when once among familiar scenes and old 
associates." 

Meanwhile, the steamship, aided by the 
might of the giant river's powerful current^ 
rushed swiftly and surely on upon her way 
to the ocean, bearing with her the hopes 
and fortunes, the plans and aspirations, of 
a hundred passengers, every one of whom 
had doubtless his or her allotted part in the 
complicated drama of human life. A little 
corner of the veil, as concerned Violet 
Maybrook and Sir Frederick, had been 
lifted for the curious inspection of that seg- 
ment of the public to be found on board of 



Canadian Memories. 39 

the " Quebec ;" but if something was 
known, and more guessed, regarding these 
two, how much might have lain beyond the 
reach either of research or of conjecture. 
Popular opinion, as a rule, was by far more 
lenient towards the handsome Canadian 
girl, going for the first time among absolute 
strangers to earn a precarious livelihood, 
than towards the titled Englishman with 
whom she paced the deck so often, and 
with whom she lingered so late beneath 
the white moonlight, against which the 
rigging stood out as if carved in ebony. 
That he was dissolute, selfish, utterly cor- 
rupt and lost, most of those who had any 
acquaintance with him knew, as by intu- 
ition ; but with her the case was different 
It was her misfortune, not her fault, that 
she loved such a one as he was. 

That she did love him no one doubted. 
In spite of her pride, of the feminine deli- 
cacy that was innate in her, of the training 
which education imparts, she was unable 



40 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

long to hide from even a dull-witted ob- 
server the fact that her heart was irre- 
vocably given to this man, unworthy as he 
was. There were some of the lookers on 
who were sagacious enough to see that she 
despised him, that she mistrusted him, that 
she hated herself at times because she 
loved him, and yet that she was never 
happy but in his presence, never at ease 
but when he was beside her. One or two, 
keener than the rest, saw one thing more. 
Sir Frederick Dashwood, man of the world 
as he was, was nevertheless afraid of giving 
serious offence to this penniless little gover- 
ness of Canada, though why it should be 
so was an enigma beyond their powers of 
solution. So the good ship "Quebec" 
proceeded on her way, past the heights of 
that fortress city whence she took her 
name, past the rocky islands that stud the 
mouth of the St Lawrence, past the dark- 
ling cliffs of Anticosti, out into the dim 
gray waters of the measureless Atlantic, 



Canadian Memories. 41 

where already glistening castles, and 
steeples, and crags, and hillocks of translu- 
cent green and vivid blue, were rolling 
massively southwards before the arctic 
breeze. On she went, with her living 
freight of hopes, and cares, and fears, 
4t homeward bound " for England. 



CHAPTER III. 



THE FOUNTAINS. 




HE Dowager Lady Livingston* 
being a valetudinarian, wealthy,, 
and with no ties, chose to live 
near London, for the benefit, as she 
said, of the best medical advice. In 
London, however, she did not care to re- 
side, being impatient of the encircling 
bonds of brick and mortar ; and she had 
therefore pitched her tent, to quote her 
own words, at Richmond. The old lady's 
obstinate predilection for a suburban abode 
was a thorn in the flesh, and a weariness ta 
the spirit, of more than one eminent pro* 



The Fountains. 43. 

fessor of the healing art Sly old Sir 
Joseph Doublefee, who had pocketed so 
many guineas that his less lucky brethren 
regarded him as a sort of Midas, beneath 
whose touch all things were transmuted to 
gold, grumbled savagely to himself as his 
well-horsed chariot bore him to and from 
the Fountains. Blunt Dr. Sterling, with 
Abernethian bluffriess of diction, told his 
noble patient that while so many sick per- 
sons craved his presence, he really could 
not spare the time to visit a lady to whom 
he could by no possibility do good. And 
as Dr. Sterling's fame was justly held in 
the profession to be second to none, it may 
easily be divined that the dowager's ail- 
ments were rather of a fanciful than of a 
serious nature. 

Lady Livingston belonged, in fact, to 
that small but unfortunate class of persons, 
cursed with a superfluity of time and money, 
who conceive themselves to be chronically 
ill, and who would be as angry with the 



44 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

meddlesome doctor who should convince 
them of their own complete cure, as was 
the Brahmin with the microscope that re- 
vealed animal life among the vegetables 
that were preparing for his Pythagorean 
repast She was old, to be sure ; she had 
no daughters to marry off, no grandchil- 
dren to pet, no husband to manage. In 
person she was a thick-set, sturdily-built 
old woman, who could never in youth have 
been fair to look upon, but whose homely 
features and upright carriage seemed to 
defy the assaults of time. Nevertheless, 
one young doctor, a rising man, and who, 
perhaps, took the trouble to look a little 
deeper into the millstone of a patient's con- 
stitution than did his seniors at the top of 
the tree, shook his head ominously when 
he spoke of Lady Livingston, and made 
use, confidentially, of the irreverent phrase, 
41 popping off," with reference to an un- 
suspected heart-complaint, of which he con- 
ceived himself to have discovered the as 



The Fountains. 45 



yet obscure symptoms. In the meantime, 
the dowager continued, in lay estimation, to 
enjoy rude health. 

The appellation of the Fountains was 
not, like those of most suburban residences, 
of a wildly imaginative character. There 
really were fountains ; no mere jets of the 
height of a fishing-rod and thickness of a 
walking-stick, but roomy marble basins, 
half-filled with stony allegory, with nymphs, 
tritons, nereids, dolphins, and the rest, who 
did on occasion spout forth from shell, and 
urn, and horn, and gaping fish-mouth, a 
considerable volume of tortured water . 
more, in fact, than the company on whose 
reservoirs the dwellers in those parts were 
dependent for the lymph, were at all times 
willing to supply. These fragments of 
petrified mythology were expensive relics 
of a bygone age and taste ; and the same 
might be said of the statuary and the formal 
terraces of the garden, the quincunx, the 
bowling-green, the clipped hedges of yew, 



46 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

the fish-pond, and even the great old man- 
sion itself, the bricks of which were of a 
ripe mellowness of tint, that told of many 
a frost and storm. The house had a his- 
tory. It had been built when George III. 
was king, by a nabob, to employ the lan- 
guage of his contemporaries, and in imita- 
tion of the villa of some travelled noble- 
man of earlier date, whose dwelling and 
ornamental pleasure-grounds had evoked 
the admiring envy of the nabob in his boy- 
hood, years before he went out to become 
collector, magistrate, and lieutenant-gover- 
nor ; and to return yellow and bent, with 
no digestion worth mentioning, but with 
such savings as could be amassed in the 
old days of official jobbery and high-handed 
rule. The stripling's daydream had been 
carried into effect by the white-whiskered 
man, whose prime had been spent in storing 
up the wherewithal to gratify the whims of 
his declining years ; the mansion was buil% 
the pleasaunce laid out, and the nabob lived 



The Fountains. 47 

to smoke his hookah within hearing of the 
plash of the fountains whence his suburban 
residence took its name. It is likely that 
the reality was not so delightful as the pro- 
ject, and that the successful Indian admini- 
strator did not enjoy it very much. At any 
rate, it is certain that he did not enjoy it 
very long ; and when he died, and his heirs 
fought tooth and nail over his will, the pro- 
perty fell into Chancery, and was neglected, 
as of course. It was not, when in the ful- 
ness of time a legitimate owner was found 
for it, what is called a lucky house, or one 
profitable to those who tried to make money 
by it A school for young ladies, a private 
lunatic asylum, a hydropathic establish- 
ment, it broke down and became bankrupt 
in every one of these characters ; while as 
a dwelling it was not much more fortunate. 
It was the despair of house-agents, who 
could rarely find a solvent tenant to inhabit 
a house so gloomy, and so costly as to its 

* 

rent and surroundings; and it would no 



48 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 



doubt have been pulled down, and the gar* 
dens turned into eligible sites for crescents 
and terraces, had not Lady Livingston 
bought it, repaired it, and dwelt in it, as 
she had now done for several years. 

The dowager was "at home," in the 
literal, not the social sense of the word, 
which latter was, with her, only applicable 
to the bright summer weather, before ex-* 
haustion and the grouse season had caused 
everybody to leave London. Then, indeed, 
there were pleasant days on which the dry 
fountains cast into the air their showers of 
glittering spray, when gay toilets enamelled 
the lawn, and fringed the terrace bordering 
on the Thames, and when the old house 
awoke to unwonted life at the sound of 
silvery laughter and the tread of many 
feet. In winter, however, Lady Livingston 
did not ' entertain/ and, indeed, hibernated 
tranquilly, inhabiting almost exclusively a 
little room on the first floor, with a southern 
aspect, certainly, but which commanded no 



The Fountains. 49 



more extended prospect than that of a red 
peach-wall, nailed to which were sundry 
ancient fruit-trees, that in their wrappings 
of plaited straw seemed to hibernate too, 
as they awaited the welcome warmth of the 
next June sun. 

A queer, little, three-cornered room it 
was, with some old-fashioned creeper, 
valued before gardeners knew the merits 
of climbing plants from America and Aus- 
tralia, trained so as to encircle the windows 
with its slender tendrils. Within, there 
were a few hot-house flowers, heedfully 
renewed as the branches grew ragged or 
the blossoms became thin ; a few books on 
shelves of dark wood ; some furniture of a 
bygone pattern, angular, ugly, but of rich 
materials and elaborate workmanship ; and 
a heterogeneous collection of objects, some 
of which were rare, others simply precious, 
but none new. A mandarin might have 
coveted those towering jars of antique 
porcelain, those sprawling dragons of old 

vol. 1. 4 



50 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

m 

Nankin manufacture, those frail cups of 
* eggshell ' china, that had been imported 
many a year since, before Taeping rebels 
had massacred the cunning craftsmen, and 
destroyed the ceramic treasures of the 
Central Kingdom. Those little pictures in 
frames, of which the gilding had been 
dimmed by years, were signed by mighty 
masters of the brush, long dead, and, as 
gems of the Dutch and Flemish schools, 
would have brought in much money under 
the hammer of the auctioneer. Those 
Sevres cups, covered with an eighteenth 
century Arcadia of impossible shepherd- 
esses and beribboned Corydons, were of 
the true " tender paste," incomparable for 
richness of colour, and of which no monarch 
could now gratify his wish for a new ser- 
vice ; those quaint mirrors were of Vene- 
tian make, the like of which Wardour 
Street cannot produce ; and the deep tints 
of the stained glass were of the lost blule 
and crimson of four hundred years ago. 



The Fountains. 5 1 

But along with these were miscellaneous 
articles scarce worth the keeping . hideous 
miniatures, tawdry French toys, boxes from 
which the ladies of Louis XV/s reign may 
Tiave distributed sugar-plums to their 
friends, odd clocks that had not ticked for 
forty years, coral charms from Naples, 
.silver-gilt monstrosities of the tasteless 
.days that preceded Waterloo, ostrich eggs, 
and grotesque ivory idols from Siam or 
Pegu. 

In this room, and in the midst of her 
hoarded bricabrac, sat Lady Livingston in 
the corner of her square-shaped, silk- 
covered sofa, engaged on some species of 
-embroidery which she called white-stitch, 
and the delicate complexity of which would 
have approved itself a cruel trial to younger 
eyes than hers. The work proceeded very 
slowly, but it went on, nevertheless, for the 
dowager was proud of her powers of vision, 
and the renouncing of her accustomed task 
was a capitulation to the inroads of old age 

4.2 



> my 



52 Lady Lwingstoris Legacy. 

that she was reluctant to make. So she 
plied her needle, by the help of her gold- 
rimmed glasses, and talked the while. 
Her ladyship's personal appearance has. 
been already mentioned. She was not 
handsome, even with the venerable beauty 
that age sometimes lends to those who in 
youth were not accounted comely. But 
there was something in the shape of the 
massive forehead, in the undimmed bright- 
ness of the hawk-like eyes, in the very 
wrinkles that branched from the corners, 
of the compressed lips, which expressed 
thoughtfulness and resolution, along with 
some pride, and what is called an uncer- 
tain temper. Throughout life this woman 
had met with scanty affection, possibly with 
no love, but with much respect, earned by 
her courage and her honesty of purpose. 
She had been a truth-teller from childhood 
upwards, and lost many a friend by her un- 
seasonable plainness of speech, which no 
consideration of worldly prudence could 



The Fountains. . 53 



.ever induce her to modify. Perhaps it was 
well for Lady Livingston that she had been 
born in the purple, so to speak, and was 
an heiress, for had she been less well- 
endowed and of humbler origin, her pecu- 
liarities might have stood seriously in her 
way. As it was, she was regarded as a 
privileged person, and was held in high 
esteem by some of those weighty orna- 
ments of London society, such as the Mar- 
chioness of Blunderbore, the Duchess of 
Snowdon, and the like, whose prejudices 
she chanced to share, and to whose 
genuine opinions on things in general she 
had the daring to give utterance. 

The other occupant of the room was a 
young and very pretty girl, by name Bea- 
trice Fleming, a relative and a favourite of 
the dowager, whose guest she then was. 
Slight and small of figure, with brown hair 
and soft gray eyes, she was accurately de- 
scribed as very pretty; a sweet, tender 
little rose-bud of a girl, but not beautiful. 



54 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

Violet Maybrook was beautiful ; but the 
one face called up quite a different train of 
ideas from that which was evoked by the 
other. Miss Fleming was a frequent visitor 
at the Fountains. She was an orphan and 
poor ; but popular rumour proclaimed her 
as at least the presumptive heiress of all 
that Lady Livingston had to bequeath ; of 
Heavitree Hall in Warwickshire, with all 
the fat acres that belonged to it ; and of 
the ready-money standing to the dowager's 
credit in consols, a fortune which report 
estimated at a clear ten thousand a year. 
Six or seven thousand of annual revenue 
would have been nearer the mark ; but 
even that was well worth the having. 
Lady Livingston had more, but then she 
had her life-interest in the larger portion of 
the late peer's property, and had she been 
of a saving nature, would, no doubt, have 
been a very much richer testatrix than she 
was likely to prove. That Beatrice would 
be the future mistress of Heavitree Hall 



The Fountains. 5$ 

was certainly probable, for the dowager 
.had always shown a marked preference for 
her society, and there was a gentleness id 
her tone, when she addressed her, which 
the resolute old lady did not exhibit to- 
wards any living being save her. 

" Raining again, is it not ? and a fog 
creeping yonder by the edge of the shrub- 
bery," said Lady Livingston, breaking a 
silence that had lasted some minutes, and 
glancing upwards at the leaden sky. "In 
London, I should say, they must have the 
gas burning hours since, and scarcely be 
able to grope their way about the streets, 
even then. I wonder what this Miss Mer- 
ton . Maybrook . this Canadian girl that is 
coming, will think of it all ? Her first 
impressions of England will not be very 
pleasing ones, I suspect ; and so much the 
better, for then she will not be disap- 
pointed. A governess, or companion, for 
it's all the same, ought to be prepared to 
rough it." 



56 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

"I do not think she need be afraid of 
having to rough it very much with you, 
dear Lady Livingston," said Beatrice, 
laughing. She had never been afraid of 
the dowager, of whom so many stood in 
terror, but then she was secure in her own 
singleness of purpose. Over and over 
again had she been cautioned, when a 
child, to avoid giving offence to Lord 
Livingston's widow, who could make or 
mar the fortunes of the impoverished 
family to which she belonged ; worldly 
counsels, to which she hearkened wonder- 
ingly, but which it would have been impos- 
sible to her to act upon in the spirit of the 
well-meant advice. Others of her kindred 
had humbled themselves to the dust before 
this autocrat in brocaded silk, and after 
years of flattery and scheming, had seen 
their castles in the air crumble to nothing- 
ness before the angry contempt of their 
patroness. Beatrice alone, who never 
schemed, who never flattered, who would 



The Fountains. 5 7 



have far sooner become a seamstress or a 
shop-girl than have degraded herself by 
undue compliance or fulsome subservience, 
kept her place in the favour of the capri- 
cious old peeress. 

"Won't she? She ought to rough it. 
According to those Jacobin revolutionary 
newspaper men, who dictate, everything 
now, she ought to expect a bitter time of 
it. If I do not starve her and stint her, 
that is probably because I have plenty of 
money. Lady Margaret Screwby would do 
that. She need not mend the house-linen, 
run errands, or copy the tradespeople's 
hills. I know a dozen women who insist 
that their companions' duties include this," 
rejoined Lady Livingston harshly, but with 
a twinkle in her eye, as if she spoke 
habitually as much in jest as in earnest. 
" And, for that matter, there are no limits 
to what can be exacted from the persons 
who are paid salaries instead of wages. 
There is a great deal in words, my dear. 



58 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

My housemaids have, each of them, cer* 
tain fires to light, certain work to do, and 
they would give notice if I tried to double 
their tasks. It is different with an educated 
drudge. I can't bully my servants who 
wear caps and aprons ; but I can bully my 
governess, and I mean to do so if she does 
not suit my fancy." 

" I don't think, Lady Livingston, that 
she has much to fear from you in that 
way," said Beatrice ; " and I am nearly 
sure that you fancy you shall like her, or 
you would hardly have sent for her from 
such a distance." 

" That shows how little you understand 
me," replied the elder lady, as she plied 
her needle. " I must have somebody with 
me. I cannot keep you, Beatrice, always 
in this old jail of a house, enduring this 
detestable climate, that is wearing away my 
lungs with its raw, damp chill, and with nc^ 
amusement beyond a drive now and then 
to Hampton Court. I am hard to please,. 



The Fountains. 59. 

perhaps, but at any rate I have not beea 
pleased as yet, though I have made trial of 
a good many specimens of feminine per- 
fection, whom my friends were so obliging 
as to send to me. Either they flattered 
me, or they were pert. I hate pert people,, 
and I hate flatterers. Mrs. Philip Dash- 
wood is a fool, no doubt, but she is a good 
woman, and this paragon of hers may have 
some real merits. I am glad she does, 
come from Canada; that gives her a 
chance of not resembling those who pre- 
ceded her here. They were all alike, the 
rest, as if they had been made by machinery. 
Either it was ' Yes, my lady/ or 'No, my 
lady/ to everything I happened to say ; or 
else they proved their independence by 
contradicting an old woman of thrice their 
age and ten times their experience. If 
Miss . what do you call her ? . Maybrook 
deserves half the good that Mrs. Dash- 
wood writes of her, she may stay, and 
welcome, as long as I stay. That won't 



<6o Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

be very long, perhaps. Doublefee was 
tormenting me, yesterday, to go to Algiers 
or Malaga. I suppose he's tired, selfish 
old time-server as he is, of trotting down to 
Richmond to feel my pulse, and yet he 
-dares not throw me over, as Sterling did. 
Sterling is a ruffian, but he is a good 
doctor. Sir Joseph is a charlatan; but 
he was not far wrong in recommending a 
warm climate, and I would go to-morrow, 
only that those foreign places are odious . 
no fires to warm one, no food to eat, no 
doors and windows that close properly, no 
newspapers, not even a decent undertaker. 
No ; Sir Joseph shall not get rid of me 
quite so easily. If die I must, the Foun- 
tains will do well enough to die in." 

There are people who dread death, and 
abhor the mention of it, as the old Greeks 
did, yet whose minds are seldom free from 
the haunting shadow that must one day 
overtake them. There are others who talk 
freely and habitually of the King of Ter- 



The Fountains. 6 r 



rors, but who in their secret hearts, feel 
no immediate apprehension of his grim 
presence. Lady Livingston belonged to 
the latter class. 

And now came the sound of wheels, and 
the quick clang of the gate-bell ; and after 
a brief interval of time, the old butler, to 
whom surely must have descended the 
Shoes of Silence once worn by giant-killing 
jack, so noiseless was his foot-fall, ushered 
in " Miss Maybrook." 

" How do you do, my dear ?" said the 
dowager, half-rising from her seat, and ex- 
tending two of her bejewelled fingers, in 
sign of welcome, to the new-comer. " I 
am glad to see you, and I dare say you are 
not sorry to be at your journey's end. By- 
the-by" . and as she spoke she adjusted 
her gold-rimmed glasses, and took a survey 
of Violet Maybrook, with as much coolness 
as if she had been contemplating some work 
of art . " I have not seen you yet . Too 
pretty . very much too pretty for any- 



t>2 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

thing!" The last words were muttered 
T>etween the false teeth of the old peeress, 
and, as being presumably of the nature of 
a soliloquy, should have been, at least, con- 
ventionally inaudible to the subject of the 
Temark. Lady Livingston, like many mem- 
bers of the Upper Ten Thousand who live 
habitually among their inferiors in worldly 
station, was accustomed to think aloud 
concerning the foibles of those dependent 
on her for bread or recommendation. To 
soliloquize is, in fact, so natural, that the 
discipline of social life can alone repress it 
As matters stand, two orders of human 
beings indulge in those stage-whispers, 
which, if universal, would turn the every- 
day world of semblance and compromise, 
which we inhabit, into a bear-garden. 
These are recluses . the lonely student, 
the philosopher out of tune with his times 
. and the wealthy, whom circumstances 
have cut off from the wholesome bond of 
mutual dependence, which teaches most of 



The Fountains. 63 



us to keep shoulder to shoulder in the 
world's march. The relict of Adolphus 
George Fitznorris, Baron Livingston, was 
more apt to utter comments on the conduct 
or appearance of those who served her, 
than she was herself aware of. 

" Not, I hope, for anything f 9 echoed 
Violet, in that fearless tone that suited well 
with the steady gaze of her undaunted eyes, 
" My former employers have found me 
useful ; and so will you, I trust, Lady 
Livingston, if you will give me a trial." 

The noble mistress of the mansion arched 
her eyebrows for a moment, and then 
smiled graciously. " I shall like you, Miss 
Maybrook, I'm sure I" she said, motioning 
with her soft old hand to Violet to seat 
herself on the square sofa ; " and I will try 
to make you like the Fountains . and me, 
too, if I can. . This is Miss Fleming, a 
relation of mine, who is good enough to 
spend a few weeks with a lonely old 
woman. By-the-by, another cousin of hers 



64 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

and of my own . a sad fellow . has been in 
Canada these two years. Do you know 
Captain Dashwood ?" 

u Sir Frederick Dashwood came over in 
the same ship with myself, the " Quebec," 
answered Violet, without the slightest 
tremor in her voice ; " but, indeed, I knew 
him quite well when I lived with his aunt; 
Mrs. Dashwood, in Montreal." 

Women, from training and from instinct, 
are by far superior to men in the arts of 
concealment On this occasion, Violet 
Maybrook's mention of the man whose 
fate was in some mysterious manner linked 
with her own, was, as a piece of drawing- 
room diplomacy, simply perfect There 
was no affectation of indifference, no sud- 
den heightening of colour, no tell-tale 
quiver of the lip, nothing, in short, that 
could have revealed to even the most lynx- 
eyed observer the interest which the 
speaker took in him to whom her words 
referred. But she ran no risk of self* 



The Fountains. 65 



'betrayal, for Beatrice was neither inquisi- 
tive nor prone to suspicion; while the 
-dowager was preoccupied by the thoughts 
which the mention of her kinsman had 
.evoked. 

11 Yes, yes ; Fred Dashwood has the 
title now, and the property, if there is any 
property," muttered the old lady, as she 
ifixed her eyes upon the fire ; " but he'll 
.come to no good, you'll see. Some men 
never sow their wild oats. He has been 
ilinging his about broadcast since he was 
a boy in a jacket, and a nice crop he will 
liave to reap, presently. I don't believe 
Sir George left a sixpence behind him . 
. all muddled away. Came over in the same 
ship, did he ? It won't be long, then, 
before he finds his way here, especially if 
he suffers from his old complaint . empty 
.pockets. I was fool enough to write him 
a cheque for . never mind what; I had 
better have put it into the poor-box at 
.church . before he started for Canada." 

vol. 1. 5 



66 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

As Lady Livingston rambled on thus, 
gazing on the burning coals, and forgetful 
of her auditors, Beatrice came across to 
speak a few kind commonplace words to 
the Canadian girl, whose solitary position 
in a country and household new to her 
might have proved the open sesame to a 
less gentle heart than that of Miss Flem- 
ing. Then the dowager's reverie came to 
an end, and she remembered that the new- 
comer was probably tired, and would, per- 
haps, like some tea before dinner, the hour 
of which was not very remote, and that the ' 
housekeeper, Mrs. Hart, had been busying 
herself with the preparation of Violet's 
room. " A south aspect, my dear, though 
I dare say, coming from the ice and snow 
out there, you don't care much about that 
However, it is in the west wing, the warmest 
part of the house, and very near mine. I 
like to have some one near me." 

" What do you think of her ?" asked 
Lady Livingston, arousing herself from 



The Fountains. 67 

what had seemed to be a doze, five minutes 
after Violet had been duly consigned to the 
care of Mrs. Hart, the housekeeper, as the 
dressing-bell sent its warning summons 
through the house. 

" I have seen so very little of her yet !" 
said Beatrice quietly ; and then, seeing that 
the dowager looked unsatisfied with this 
evasive reply, she added, slightly lowering 
her tone : " I hardly know what I think. 
She is very pretty, and her voice is a 
pleasant one, and she seems to be naturally 
a lady ; but . don*t think me foolish, dearest 
Lady Livingston . I almost feel as if I were 
a little afraid of her. The feeling will wear 
off, I dare say." 




CHAPTER IV. 

THE PICTURE ON THE WALL. 

INNER, at the Fountains, during 
the occupancy of that red-brick 
mansion by the Dowager Lady 
Livingston, pertained rather to the nature 
of a ceremony than of a repast The old 
peeress, like most ladies, made luncheon 
her real dinner. But she was none the less 
resolved that the great meal of the day, for 
which, so far as food and wine were con- 
cerned, she cared nothing, should in nowise 
be shorn of its proper glory as the main- 
spring and central pivot of a well-regulated 
establishment In defiance of London, and 



The Picture on the Wall. 6<> 

its compliance with the rhythmical advice 
of the late Mr. Thomas Moore, to " steal 
a few hours from the night;" she chose to 
adhere to antique maxims, aud to dine at 
seven o'clock. Why not ? The hour had 
been, when she . Susan Beatrice Living* 
ston . was a young married woman, 
« reckoned a culpably late one by the N es- 
ters and Nestorias of an elder generation. 
She had herself, when a child, heard her 
mother relate how Mr. Fox had refused to 
dine at seven with the Duchess of Dorset- 
shire, because he was engaged to sup at 
six with the Bishop of Oxbridge. Mr. 
Fox was then but freshly laid to rest by 
the side of his rival in Westminster Abbey, 
and the memory of his rejoinder was fresh 
too. And Lady Livingston chose to dine 
at seven o'clock. 

A grand, sad, spacious room was the 
dining-room of the Fountains, a room over- 
looked, after the fashion of the two cen- 
turies that preceded ours, by a gallery 



70 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

Tailed in with balustrades covered with 
sprawling Cupids and tarnished gilding . a 
room where there were odd echoes and 
strange reverberations of sullen sound, as 
if the ghosts of dead revellers chimed in 
now and then with spectral laughter, or 
with hollow applause, at some toast or 
speech inaudible to mortals. Many a fine 
feast had been held there, doubtless, during 
the reign of the nabob who had returned 
from the East with his rupees and without 
his liver. It was in the thick of the fierce 
old French war that these banquets had 
begun. What bumpers of fiery sherry and 
heady port must have been quaffed there ! 
what hip, hipping to the triumph of the 
British arms, and the overthrow of the Cor- 
sican usurper, must have awaked the sym- 
pathizing voices of that arched roof, painted 
all over with plump and multi-coloured 
mythology! How that fleshy Olympus 
must have trembled to the roaring after- 
dinner chants of Britons (in several waist- 



The Picture on the Wall. 7 1 

- ...... 

coats) who never would be slaves, and to 
patriotic and bacchanalian refrains as punch 
completed what claret and champagne 
^smuggled in from the French enemy) had 
begun ! And to fancy the founder of the 
feast sitting, yellow, lean, taciturn, a death's 
head, in the chief seat of his own table, 
wondering, perchance, when the loud mirth 
was at the highest, whether he had made 
the best bargain for himself and his own 
happiness, after all ! 

Since Lady Livingston had dwelt there> 
it needs hardly to be said that the great 
<iining-room of the Fountains had wit* 
nessed no such frantic scenes of extrava- 
gant merry-making as had taken place 
under the rule of the first owner of the 
house. And the every-day dinner was 
almost as melancholy an affair as a funeral 
could have been. There was an exhi- 
bition of gold and silver plate on the side* 
board such as had never glittered there in 
.the nabob's time, for Lord Livingston's 



7* Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

well-endowed widow had for her life the 
use of the family shields and vases and x 
epergnes and candelabra, to say nothing of 
ancient cups and tankards that wine and 
ale had mantled in before drinking-glasses 
grew common. The butler and his liveried 
subordinates went through the routine of 
their duties with praiseworthy and noise- 
less solemnity. But there were hardly 
candles enough burning to illuminate the 
whole of the great room, and the conver- 
sation was apt to flag; and as for the 
dinner itself, no one seemed to care in the 
least for it The whole scene had an air 
of hollow unreality, as if it had been the 
mere presentment of some mimic banquet 
on the stage of a theatre. 

In the midst of these almost funereal 
splendours Violet Maybrook bore herself 
gracefully and well, so that her titled 
employer, who kept furtive watch for some 
sign of the deficient breeding which, in her 
mind, was inseparably connected with 



The Picture on the Wall. 7$ 



humble birth and a dependent position* 
gradually came round to the belief that 
Beatrice had been right after all, and that 
Violet was naturally a lady. The girl's 
manner, she admitted to herself, was per-: 
fection. There was no servile eagerness to 
please, no uneasy self-assertion, while what 
little Violet did say, was well expressed 
and in good taste. The very servants, 
severe critics, like all their tribe, had a 
good word to say for the young lady from 
Canada when they discoursed concerning 
her in the basement ; and the old coachman 
who had brought her from the railway 
station spoke of her as a "thoroughbred 
un ;" the loftiest commendation which he 
could have found it in his heart to bestow 
upon even a duchess. The good impres- 
sion which the new companion had made 
seemed to grow deeper as the evening 
progressed. She talked but little, yet 
Beatrice Fleming listened with an interest 
which surprised herself to what she said of 



74 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

.colonial life and habits, the climate and the 
people of that strange northern land 
whence she came. At Lady Livingston's 
fequest she took her place at the piano, 
and played and sang more than once. 
Her voice was rich and flexible, but the 
chief charm of her singing was the exqui- 
site skill with which her tones were modu- 
lated so as to express the feelings that 
tallied with the words upon her lips. 

" That is very good : you must have 
had good masters, indeed, my dear," said 
the dowager, who had been gifted by 
nature with a finer ear and a more correct 
musical taste than were often to be met 
with. " I should really like to know 
whether it was an Italian or a German 
who taught you ?" 

" Neither, Lady Livingston/' answered 

Violet, smiling ; " I was taught by a 

neighbour of ours, a Montreal girl like 

- myself, a very good musician, and whose 

iine voice, if you could but once hear it> 



The Picture on the Wall. 75 

would make you think very poorly of mine* 
It was a treat to hear her sing." 

"And her name ?" asked the dowager* 
with that aimless curiosity which the aged 
often exhibit 

Violet Maybrook's brow darkened for a 
moment, as if some painful thought had 
crossed her mind. " Her name," she said, 
gravely, "was Miss Larpent" 

"I like her," said Lady Livingston, 
speaking decisively, as if she were the 
forewoman of a feminine jury delivering a 
verdict on Violet Maybrook, as she 
lingered with her favourite young kins- 
woman in the yellow drawing-room after 
the new member of the household had re- 
tired to rest . " I like her, and I shall keep 
her. It is not her fault if she is so pretty, 
after all ; and I am sure she is too sensible 
.not to remember that she has to earn her 
own living. If she were anybody's 
daughter, she would be brought out, of 
.course, and make a sensation in London, I 



76 Lady Livingston 9 s Legacy. 

should say. As it is, she will make a 
capital companion for me ; and if she plays 
her cards properly, who knows if she may 
not be decently provided for some day. 
There's Chasuble the curate ; his wife was 
a governess in Lady Blunderbore's family, 
and the engagement lasted six years, till 
his aunt died. I don't see why Miss May- 
brook should not have as good luck, if all 
goes well," 

While Lady Livingston was engaged in 
predicting this qualified amount of good 
fortune for her dependent, the subject of 
her ladyship's discourse was moving rest* 
lessly to and fro in her own chamber, like 
some beautiful wild animal, caged, and 
raging against confinement. The mask 
had dropped, now that she was alone, from 
her fair face, and she was as one trans- 
figured, so quickly had the frost of con- 
ventional self-restraint thawed before the 
influence of the hidden fires beneath the 
smooth surface. She, who had so lately 



The Picture on the Wall. ^77 

. . . . '* 

ordered every movement of her person, 
every intonation of her voice, so as to win 
the approbation of her noble employer, 
now paced the room with the lithe tread of 
a panther, her head held high, her hand 
extended, yet all unconscious of the angry 
gestures that an actress would have been 
glad to copy as the theatrical manifesta- 
tion of her mock wrath and counterfeit 
defiance. There Was nothing mock, nothing 
counterfeit, in the passionate energy with 
which Violet Maybrook communed with 
herself. 

" And I must bear this . bear it for 
months, perhaps . and it will only be said 
that the penniless girl from Canada was 
lucky in finding food and shelter on such 
easy terms as those of falling in with the 
whims of a wealthy old woman. Did I 
not despise myself as I . I, Violet May- 
brook . studied every turn of my head, 
weighed every syllable that I uttered, 
watched, as the seaman watches when the 



78 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

breakers are white upon the reef, lest I 
should offend against the unwritten code 
that is as a religion to such persons as 
yonder titled mistress of mine. I have 
passed the inspection fairly well, as I should 
say, and my poor accomplishments have 
earned the meed of praise that is appro- 
priate to those of a hired subordinate ; 
and, for the rest, her ladyship is satisfied 
that the young woman from Canada knows 
her position without need of preliminary 
lectures. Yes, I shall read to my lady, 
and pick up dropped stitches in my lady's 
Berlin wool-work, and find keys and spec- 
tacles that are mislaid, write letters, rate 
servants, and go through the whole dreary 
round of duties . I, who have done so much, 
dared so much, and am no nearer to my 
destined goal than this !" 

She flung up her arm as she spoke, and 
her fingers contracted as though they had 
closed upon a dagger-hilt, and for a moment 
stood still like a statue, fiercely beautiful as 



The Picture on the Wall: 79 

Medea's self. Then some new thought; 
seemed to force itself upon her, and as she 
resumed her eager pacing to and fro, her 
thoughts again found unbidden utterance. 

%i It is not that I think it shame to work/* 
she said, hurriedly, as if pleading her own 
cause before some viewless tribunal, " or 
that I shrink from earning the bread I eat. 
How happy I have been, before this, in 
some quiet farm-house in a far-off clearing 
of the forest, where the good wife expected 
me to take my share of the daily toil, as her 
own daughters did, and where young and 
old gathered as equals around the evening 
fire, and all were valued according to what 
they were, not by the old-world standard of 
what they had ! And yet . and yet I knew 
in my own heart that I was unfit to pass 
my life with those simple folks in their 
snow-white Norman caps and yellow coifs, 
and with their quaint old songs and pro* 
verbs, brought by their ancestry from a 
long dead France, and that my hopes and 



Lady Livingston's Legacy. 



-dreams lay in Europe . in the great, rich, 
wonderful world east of the Atlantic . 
lottery though I knew it to be, where the 
prizes were few and the blanks many ; and 
It seemed at last as if I had gained my 
pass-key that should admit me to try my 
fortune among the millions that crowd and 
jostle one another at the grand game of 
life." 

She took a turn or two in the room, 
speechlessly, and then paused in her walk, 
and leant against the corner of the massive 
chimney-piece, with her eyes bent upon the 
ground, " Selfish, cowardly, base, cruel" . 
such the words that dropped one by one 
from her lips : " all this I knew him to be, 
this man for whom I have sold my soul, 
and yet . woe is me, and bitter as is the 
truth, I love him . love him still! Can 
love and contempt go hand in hand ? I 
Icnow, to my cost, that they can." 

Her hand as she spoke fell listlessly by 
her side, and a look of depression and sad- 



The Picture on the Wall. 8 1 

ness came over her bright face, like the 
sudden darkening of a tropic sky when the 
sun has plunged into the western sea. 

" I have schemed for him, laboured for 
him, had no hope, no dream," she mur- 
mured faintly, "that did not link his tri- 
umph with my own ; yet he would play me 
false, and fling me off, as no longer neces- 
sary to his ambition. I read the treason 
in his eyes, I hear it in his voice ; every 
word betrays it ; yet he fears me, and dares 
not openly to tell me that his caprice is * 
over, and that he cares for me no more. I 
would be his true wife, more helpful, and 
more ready to guide and warn and guard, 
more faithful and more fond than ever 
woman was. And he has no heart to feel 
this, no intellect to comprehend that with 
me by his side he might rise to be what 
without me he could never attain to : could 
be really great, powerful, prosperous. His 
coarse fancy can but grovel in the mire 
where gold can be grasped by the unscru- 

vol. I. 6 



82 Lady Livingston* s Legacy. 

pulous, and he would sell himself to-mor- 
row for money. And this doll . this 
Beatrice Fleming . first favourite, as I 
should guess, with yonder beldam of 
quality . his cousin, forsooth . will doubt- 
less inherit very much money. I remem- 
ber how guardedly, with what feigned 
indifference, he mentioned her name ; but 
it is difficult to blind eyes sharpened, as 
mine have been, by bitter and hard ex- 
perience. If he dared But beware f 

Sir Frederick Dashwood . beware how you 
play fast and loose with me !" 

And as she uttered these last words all 
signs of lassitude or despondency passed 
away, and she stood erect, with a royal 
scorn imprinted in every line and feature of 
her beautiful face, her eyes glowing, her 
clear-cut lips trembling with anger. 

" He does not dare," she said, with a 
haughty confidence that well became her 
proud loveliness and the queen-like carriage 
of her head. " Nay, more, I do believe 



The Picture on the Wall. 83 

that, fickle and shallow that he is, he does 
care for me somewhat, though he loves 
money more. Lady Dashwood! The 
title is no very magnificent one, but it is 
fairly mine, and none, if they are wise, will 
try to cheat me out of my rightful reward 

for Heavens, how came that here !" 

And in a moment Violet's face became 
as pale as sculptured marble, and she 
reeled, and caught at a table near her for 
support, as with dilated eyes and set 
features she gazed at a picture on the wall 
before her, and on which her glance now 
rested for the first time. The fabled ter- 
rors of the Gorgon's head could hardly 
have produced a greater effect than this, 
for the girl's very breathing was hushed as, 
with white lips parted and motionless 
limbs, she contemplated the object on 
which her eyes had suddenly fallen. It 
was one of those oval paintings technically 
known as pastels, more common in France 
than in England, and mounted in a hand- 



84 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

;some frame, the gilding of which was 
beginning to grow dull. It was merely the 
portrait of a child . of a pretty tiny boy 
. with golden hair, and blue eyes full of mirth 
and trust, and the soft, peach-like cheek of 
happy healthy infancy. But at the sight 
of it Violet Maybrook seemed, for a short 
:time, as though she had been abruptly 
: transformed into stone, so ghastly was the 
face which she turned towards the por- 
trait 

For a short time only. Presently, the 
haggard look of anguish passed away, and 
rising up from the crouching attitude in 
which she had till then remained, she ap- 
v proached the picture, and coldly inspected 
, it, without any further sign of repugnance 
or agitation. 

"A pretty sketch," she said, critically. 
" French, by the style, and the artist's 
monograph in the corner. I wonder what 
the original . marquis, banker, or advocate 
. looks like by this time. I should be 



The Picture on the Wall. 



85 



paying the picture too great a compliment 
to turn it to the wall." 

And with a low laugh she turned away, 
and methodically completed her prepara- 
tions for retiring to sleep. The mask 
was on again now, and Violet Maybrook, 
although alone, was once more the quiet 
and decorous companion of the Dowager 
Lady Livingston. 



CHAPTER V. 



IN THE GARDEN. 




[HE morrow that succeeded Violets 
arrival at the Fountains was one 
of those golden days of mellow 
glory which, in our variable English 
climate, sometimes occur, like oases of fine 
weather interspersed amid the desert of 
wintry gloom. So it was on this occasion. 
The noisome fog had rolled away, the 
sullen canopy of clouds had disappeared, 
the yellow sunbeams shone resplendent 
through the pure blue of the sky, and the 
breeze was soft as the caressing touch of 
some loving hand unseen. The birds sang 



In the Garden. 87 

11 1 1 . . . 1 a 

among the half-stripped boughs, where yet 
the russet leaves clung to the parent branch, 
as if new hope had sprung up amongst 
them, and winter's dreaded march been 
checked for yet awhile. The earth cast off, 
as it were, the garments of sorrow, and 
decked herself bravely once more, no 
longer, as in spring and jovial summer, 
flaunting the insolent loveliness of sanguine 
youth, but rather assuming the matured 
beauty of a fair and noble woman, such as 
smiles upon us yet from the painted canvas 
of great masters of the brush . long dead. 

Lady Livingston was far from indulging 
in meditations such as these. She saw, 
however, that the day was remarkably fine, 
and one on which an invalid might take 
exercise without fear of bronchial Nemesis ; 
wherefore, she ordered her carriage at the 
early hour of two, and declared her inten- 
tion of taking Violet with her to Hampton 
Court Were there not, besides the peach- 
cheekqd maids of honour, whose portraits 



88 Lady Livingston *s Legacy. 

preserved the memory of Charles II.'s 
witty, wicked times, other curiosities there 
in the shape of certain ancient gentle- 
women, dignified pensioners of royalty, 
with whom the mistress of the Fountains 
had kept up her acquaintance with a scru- 
pulous politeness that was surely disinte- 
rested ? For no one could hope to derive 
advantage, in a worldly sense, from com- 
munion with Mrs. General Buckram, Lady . 
Lucy Spindrift, or the Honourable Eliza- 
beth Trenchard, all of whom were needy; 
elderly, and not inclined to take too lenient 
a view of a world that had done no better 
for them than to bring them to this com- 

r 

mon refuge for their old age. Fortune had 
dealt more kindly with the dowager ; nor 
had she ever forgotten the day when pretty, 
lively Bessie Trenchard and laughing Lucy 
Spindrift had danced their first quadrille in 
her house in Mayfair Square. She was 
herself a bride then, and Belgravia a 
swamp as yet uninvaded by Fashion. She 



In the Garden. 89 

well remembered to have been present at 
Mrs. Buckram's wedding, oddly as the 
idea of orange flowers and a veil of Brus- 
sels lace contrasted with the personal ap- 
pearance of the general's relict as she now 
was. So she made these dissatisfied waifs 
and strays of aristocracy welcome when- 
ever there was feasting at the Fountains ; 
and she lent them a ten-pound note some- 
times when livery-stable keepers grew 
rude, or milliners importunate ; and par- 
took of their hospitality as well, so far as a 
cup of weak tea and an hour's gossip went> 
some dozen times in the twelvemonth. 
This was to be one of those red-letter days 
in the limited calendar of the ladies who 
led an unexciting life at Hampton Court 
It was pleasant for these decayed persons 
of quality when they could insert in the 
closely-written letters which their fluent 
pens were always scratching off to friends 
at a distance : " Dear old Lady Livingston 
was here all the morning ;" or, " The dear 



-go Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

old dowager from the Fountains was say- 
ing, only yesterday." For, in very truth, 
such visits from the outer world were rare, 
the young and vigorous members of the 
distinguished stocks from which these 
.dames and damsels sprang being somewhat 
forgetful of the withered blossoms living 
on the memory of the past The present 
Earl of Spindrift would as soon have sat 
through a tragedy or a sermon as have 
endured the martyrdom of his aunt's con- 
versation. Lord Platterborough, his wife, 
and his daughters, troubled their heads 
very little about " poor Elizabeth at Hamp- 
ton/' The card of Her Grace the Duchess 
of Snowdon always found its way to the 
top of the china-bowl in which Mrs. 
General Buckram kept the pasteboard re- 
minders of her friends, although the ducal 
call had been paid four mortal seasons 
since. 

There was very little doubt but that 
Lady Livingston would be cordially rey 



In the Garden. 91 

ceived by her contemporaries at Hampton 
Court, and none the less so that she would 
bring with her so beautiful a novelty as the 
girl from Canada, of whose faultless bear- 
ing the old peeress was secretly proud. 
But Beatrice put in a little plea for the 
dowager's early return, only to be met by 
a decided negative. 

" Nonsense, my love. No ; the day is 
a great deal too fine for me to give up a 
bit of it ; and, I should not wonder, unless 
I am too tired, if we went on to Bushey 
afterwards. . Oswald Charlton coming, eh ? 
Pooh, my dear, I don't believe a word of it ; 
not I. Young men never do what they 
promise to do . not in that way, I mean . 
and I dare say he has forgotten all about 
the note he wrote from Scotland, and will 
not show himself at the Fountains this 
month or more; if he does, you must 
manage to amuse him until I do get back, 
and tell him I insist on his staying to din- 
ner. Tradgett" [Tradgett was the butler, 



92 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

shod with the Shoes of Silence] " will find 
him some of that yellow-sealed wine of my 
lord's, if there is any left ; and we must do- 
our best to keep him from being bored, 
that's all." 

Lady Livingston, who could be conve- 
niently blind on occasion, took no notice of 
the fact, that at the mention of Oswald 
Charlton's name, Beatrice first blushed, 
and then grew pale, and busied herself 
with exceeding devotion in collecting the 
furs and foot-warmers, the shawls and 
cloaks, without which the dowager would 
as soon have thought of setting forth for 
an airing in her carriage as would a New- 
foundland fisherman put to sea without an 
ample provision of deep-sea line, cod- 
hooks, and mussel-bait Her ladyship's 
prophecy regarding the forgetfulness of 
young men was, as events proved, signally 
falsified; for the yellow chariot with its 
coroneted panels and its fat gray horses had 
not rolled very far on the road that leads 



In the Garden. 93 



to Hampton Court, before the bell at the 
lodge-gate awoke the echoes with its me- 
tallic tongue, and " Mr. Charlton" was 
announced, 

" So my aunt has gone out," said the 
visitor, cheerfully resigned under the tem- 
porary privation of that aged relative's 
.company. " W ell, she would never find a 
better day for a drive the year through. I 
.can only hope that you will not get; tired of 
my society, Miss Fleming, before she re- 
turns." 

Beatrice looked shyly up at him. She 
had noticed . women are very quick to 
notice such things . that the young man's 
.manner was not quite such as was usual 
with him. He seemed anxious, restless 
.even, as if there were some weight upon 
his mind ; less at his ease, too, than she 
ever remembered to have seen him, and 
since he was often at the Fountains, she 
and he had often met 

A fine young fellow, with his bright 



94 . Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

truthful eyes, and dark hair tossed back 
from a broad forehead, and well-shaped 
mouth, kindly and resolute withal as to its 
expression, was the visitor. He was some 
three years younger than Sir Frederick 
Dashwood, not quite so tall, not quite so 
handsome ; but indeed it was difficult to 
institute a comparison between the two 
men, so utterly unlike were they. Dashing 
Dashwood had through life been one of 
those spoiled favourites of fortune who 
unite the fatal beauty of the tiger to some 
of the worst qualities of the feline race. Woe 
be to those who loved or trusted him, won 
by the magic of a fair face, or the charm of 
a voice that seldom spoke but to deceive t 
But Oswald Charlton's countenance was 
one which inspired confidence and liking 
even in the worldly wise ; and his was a 
name never mentioned among men other- 
wise than with respect, a respect which 
rank and riches, even when coupled with 
blameless behaviour, fail to elicit. The 



In the Garden. 95 



Duke of Snowdon, for instance, was a 
great patrician, a model husband and 
father, regularly in his pew at church as in 
his place in parliament, a chairman of 
quarter-sessions, and a man whose doings 
might have been chronicled by a town- 
crier without offence being given to the 
censorious . yet men did not scruple to 
describe His Grace as a well-meaning old 
fool ; while they pronounced Charlton a 
clever fellow, sure to make his way in the 
world, yet honest as the day. He had the 
good opinion of Lady Livingston, in whose 
favour he stood second only to Beatrice 
Fleming. Although he called her aunt, 
however, he was no relation of hers by 
blood. He was a nephew of the late Lord 
Livingston; and as regarded his actual 
position in life he was simply a barrister, 
with a small professional income and slender 
private means . less than five hundred a 
year, when all was reckoned. 

This modest revenue was in itself a proof 



.96 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

that Mr. Charlton was not what is popu- 
larly called a rising barrister. Members 
of the bar rarely get credited with the 
faculty of ascending until they have 
mounted a good many rungs of the forensic 
ladder, and are visible above the bewigged 
heads of their rivals. And then attorneys 
are an incredulous generation, slow to de- 
tect untried talent, and with a preference 
for the counsel learned in the law, who 
were gaining verdicts and terrifying wit- 
nesses, while they, the attorneys, were still 
but in the embryo condition of articled 
clerks. They like, too, the comic men of 
the circuit, facetious fellows who can extract 
the maximum of fun from the sentimental 
letters in a breach-of-promise case, red- 
faced, loud of voice, truculent in cross- 
examining, yet not too proud to study 
the tastes and defer to the opinion of a 
solicitor with briefs to bestow. Oswald 
Charlton trod none of these paths to suc- 
cess. What work was entrusted to him 



In the Garden. 97 

he did well, and in a manner that won the 
approbation of veterans in the profession ; 
but for every guinea he received, a perfect 
shower of retainers and refreshers fell on 
Serjeant Browbeat, on Botherham, Q.C., 
and other luminaries whose names were 
constantly before the public, yet who were 
glad to take their law at a second-hand, in 
consultation from Oswald, junior in the 
cause. He did not lecture, had never even 
tried to get into Parliament ; but still he 
was regarded as one who might one day 
get steadily into political and professional 
harness, and so come to be rich and 
famous, a probable judge, a possible At- 
torney-General. 

There was one person, however, who 
augured ill of Oswald's future prospects, 
and this was no other than his own father. 
Mrs. Charlton was long since dead. She 
had been a half-sister of the late Lord 
Livingston, and it was her slender income 
which her son had inherited, and which 

vol. 1. 7 



98 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

had enabled him to subsist in London 
whilst reading for the bar. He had neither 
present allowance nor ultimate expecta- 
tions from his surviving parent, who, never- 
theless, should have been fairly rich in the 
world's goods, uniting as he did the pro- 
ceeds of his own fat living of Dullingham 
to those of his canonry of Slochester. 
But Dr. Charlton, rector and canon, had 
married again, and had five daughters for 
whom to provide by keeping up the poli- 
cies of life-assurance, at which he grumbled 
as horse-keep and old port grew dearer, 
and had nothing to spare for the offspring 
of his first marriage. He and his second 
wife liked Oswald with that languid liking 
that is often entertained, in the best-regu- 
lated families, for relatives seldom seen, 
and who make no inconvenient demands 
on purse or patience. But this tepid 
affection was no bar to the rector's habit of 
indulging in gloomy prognostications as to 
his son's future. 



In the Garden. 99 

"A little too clever," he would say, 
blinking at the beeswing in the ruby-tinted 
glass that he held between his half-shut 
eyes and the light that streamed through 
the French windows of his spacious dining- 
room ; " and a great deal too fond of crotch- 
ets. A young man ought to choose his 
groove, and stick to it ; whereas, if Oswald 
were in the House, he would insist on his 
independence, which means sitting below 
the gangway, voting wildly, making speeches 
that annoy everybody in office or about to 
be in office, and getting for himself the 
hearty dislike of Opposition and Govern- 
ment It's just the same with his law 
business . didn't he say, before half the 
county, at old Sir Robert's, that if he were 
convinced his client's case was an unjust 
one, he would throw up the brief at once ? 
No good ever yet came of being too par- 
ticular, so far as my experience goes. He 
has but one chance . to marry well, and he 
is much more likely to fall in love with 

7.2 



,joo Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

some parson's daughter " (the doctor's lines 
had fallen in such pleasant places that he 
sometimes forgot that he was himself in 
orders), "and find himself at forty-five a 
struggling, disappointed man, with a small 
practice, and an increasing butcher's bill." 

Such, then, was Oswald Charlton, as 
viewed by his friends and by his father. 
And here, at the Fountains, was the actual 
Oswald in the flesh, strangely pre-occupied, 
and so ill at ease, that observant Beatrice 
took courage as she remarked his embar- 
rassment 

" I have strict injunctions to provide for 
your amusement until Lady Livingston re- 
turns," she said almost archly ; " for, indeed, 
I believe she was afraid you would run 
back to London without waiting for her. 
Will you walk through the grounds ? It 
really seems wrong to stay indoors on such 
a day as this, and the paths are quite dry 
again in spite of all the rain that has fallen 
lately." 



In the Garden. ft)i 

" I should like to go round the old place; 
that is, if you will be kind enough to bear 
me company," replied Oswald Charlton, 
and Beatrice went straightway in quest of 
her outdoor attire. The pretty hat and 
velvet jacket became her wonderfully well, 
so Oswald thought, as together they trod 
the glistening gravel of the garden walks, 
among the evergreen clumps and smooth- 
shaven lawns, and the beds where a few 
sober autumnal flowers did duty for the by- 
gone blaze of the summer flora, and the 
fantastically trimmed and clipped trees, 
which dated from a period when art strove 
to improve upon nature. " So my aunt 
has set the fountains playing again, in de- 
fiance of frost and the almanac/' said the 
young barrister, as the liquid sound of 
splashing water fell musically on his ear. 
" Yes, there they are. I see Neptune and 
all his court, nymphs and tritons, dolphins 
broken in for saddle and harness, urns, 
trumpets, tridents, shells, and chariots, busy 



102 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 



in sending up the tinkling spray as of old. 
How the drops glitter, jewel-like, in the 
sunlight! I never knew these classical 
personages to be at work in winter before." 

" I think Lady Livingston wished Miss 
Maybrook . that is her new companion, 
from Canada, whom I suppose she men- 
tioned as being expected when she wrote 
to you, Mr. Charlton," said Beatrice, . " to 
see the fountains playing. I don't suppose 
they impressed her much, though, after 
Niagara/' 

" I am sure I do not know why they 
should not/' returned Oswald, smiling ; 
"just as old Father Thames yonder, with 
his silvery stream and green eyots, is worth 
notice, though the Rhine and the Danube 
may run wider and deeper than he does. 
Shall we stroll along the terrace, Miss 
Fleming ? It was always a favourite spot 
with me, and I think the view from it is 
the very prettiest on this part of the river." 

"You stayed till late in the north this 



In the Garden. 103 

year," said Beatrice, as they paced side by 
side along the terrace in question, over- 
looking the Thames, not then, as in sum- 
mer, gay with pleasure-boats and busy with 
snorting steam-yachts. There was a barge 
or two to represent traffic; and on the 
banks a few patient anglers were trolling 
for the pike that persisted in not being 
" on the feed ;" but that was all, with the 
exception of a four-oared boat with its crew 
of zealous amateurs, practising with well- 
meant earnestness under the superintend- 
ence of their bawling cockswain. ." What 
did you find to do in Scotland after the 
grouse-shooting ?" 

"Killing blue hares among the hills," 
answered Oswald, promptly. "At least," 
he added, after a pause, "such was sup- 
posed to be my all-engrossing occupation 
when in Cateranshire ; but the truth is, that 
the keen air and the wild scenery tempted 
me much more than the wanton slaughter 
of some unlucky ruminants, that had thq 



104 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

bad fortune to be chased up the rocky pass 
in droves, live targets that died to make a 
Highland holiday. I know that, for my 
own part, I was often lost in day-dreams 
among the mountains, and earned the con- 
tempt of lairds and gillies by the scantiness 
of my contribution to the 'bag* of the 
party. Perhaps you will let me tell you 
of what I was dreaming ?" 

These last words were spoken with a 
significance which made the fluttering 
colour mount in a moment to Beatrice's 
fair cheek. H itherto she had derived con- 
fidence from the visitor's unusual awkward- 
ness, but now she almost feared that the 
tables were to be turned upon her. It was 
not the first time that she had found her- 
self alone with Oswald; but now, she 
scarcely knew why, she felt as if she could 
have given much to have brought about 
the immediate return of Lady Livingston. 
Still she could not remain silent, so she re- 
joined : " Perhaps I can guess what it was. 



In the Garden. 105 

You were thinking of your chambers an4 
briefs, and all the speeches you would 
make when you got back to the courts 
again. Lady Livingston always says you 
are sure to be Lord Chancellor, some day." 
" Every man at the bar would be a caliph, 
or chancellor for a day," replied Oswald 
Charlton, "if his aunts and cousins and 
grandmother had a voice in the matter. 
But seriously, and leaving the wool- 
sack . the thirty thousand pound prize 
in the lottery . alone for the moment, as 
metal too hot and too heavy for ordinary 
handling, I was filled with Alnaschar pro- 
jects and ambitious thoughts . dashed with 
a little self-reproach, perhaps, Miss Fleming, 
for wasted time and opportunities neglected. 
That I could rise in my profession, I be- 
lieve ; that I might attain to high success 
is, I think, possible ; but then I want, as 
many a man has wanted, something to 
work for . some one who would rejoice at 
each step gained on the toilsome ladder 



106 Lady Livingstorijs Legacy. 

that leads to fame and fortune . some one 
who would cheer me if I grew weary or 
faint-hearted by the way . some one, lastly, 
whose happiness would be dearer to me 
than my own, and for whose loved sake I 
could struggle on, eager to win honours, 
that I might deck her with the spoils 
of victory. Can you guess, Miss Fleming 
. Beatrice . why I have told this to 
you ?" 

Beatrice bent her eyes upon the ground, 
and trembled, almost visibly. It was 
coming, then, that disclosure that she 
dreaded, that she was powerless to avert. 
She had known, or suspected for some 
time past, that Oswald's love was given to 
her ; but he had never told her so, had 
never asked her to be his, and therefore 
she could indulge in those sweet vague 
reveries that float through a girl's mind, 
too intangible to be grasped and bound by 
the hard rules of logic. It had been so 
pleasant to her to note his preference for 



In the Garden. 107 

her society, to mark, by many a small sign 
that she was not indifferent to him, and ta 
close her ears and eyes to the stern, im- 
perative necessity which to her thinking 
must always keep him and her apart* 
That was all over now. She could not 
doubt that he was about to ask for her 
hand in marriage. Of her own answer, of 
the answer which she must give, she had 
no doubts at all. And then . and then 
perhaps he would be very angry with her, 
and go away, to come no more, and so- 
learn, it might be, to forget her. And she 
wished for a ready wit to avert the coming 
scene, and tried to speak once and again, 
and broke down hopelessly, and so stood 
silent, to listen to him. 

" You are not offended that I should call 
you Beatrice ?" said the young man, and as 
he spoke he took her hand. "We have 
known each other for a long time, and we 
are almost relations, you know ; but it is not 
that which emboldens me to take such a 



108 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

liberty. I am blunt of speech, and must 
go straight to my point in a case where my 
heart is concerned. When I spoke of some 
one whom I longed for to be always with 
me, the sharer of my joys and sorrows, of 
my triumphs, if triumphs come, of one for 
whom I could really put forth all my 
strength, that I might be owned by men to 
be worthy of such a treasure, I was thinking, 
dearest, of you ! I love you, Beatrice, dar- 
ling, love you very dearly and truly. Will 
you try to love me, and be the crowning 
blessing of my life ? Speak, my love !" 

She was trembling very much by this 
time, insomuch that when his arm stole 
round her slender waist, the proceeding 
seemed really needful to give her support. 
She bent down her head, weeping, on his 
strong shoulder as he bent over her. 
u Oh, no, no !" was all she said, through the 
sobs that now came thick and fast It 
would be necessary to be a woman fully 
to appreciate all the delicious misery, the 



In the Garden. 109 

sweet pangs, that thrilled through Beatrice 
as she barkened to her lover's voice, and 
felt the tender touch of his caressing hand. 
Now she knew, really knew, on the 
evidence of his own words and tones, how 
he loved her. Her gladness and her pride 
that he should love her so much and so 
truly almost predominated over the bitter 
sense that all this was in vain, and that 
when she spoke, it must be to return an 
answer that should dash his hopes for ever 
to the ground. 

He mistook the character of her emo- 
tion, and drew her the closer to him. 

" You will be mine, dear Beatrice," he 
said gently, " my very own, dearer than all 
the world besides, my darling wife !" 

And he stooped to press his lips to her 

cheek, but she averted her head, still 

sobbing as though her heart would break. 

" If I have been too sudden, too rough 

. ' " he began ; but Beatrice interrupted 

him. 



1 10 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

" No, no ; it is not that !" she said in 
broken accents, but with an energy that 
under the circumstances would have sur- 
prised herself : " it is my fault, all mine. 
I should not have allowed . that is, I 
should have guarded against . against this 
that has come to pass ; but I was so sur- 
prised and' . and so foolish Mr. Charl- 
ton, your good opinion of me is a great 
compliment, but I must try to deserve it, 
even at the risk of losing it I am not 
free to give you the answer that you 
desire . not free to be your wife. I . 
I " 

And now it was her turn to break down. 
Oswald's brow grew very dark, and his 
smile vanished. " I was not aware," he 
said coldly, " th at I was a trespasser here, 
asking for what was already plighted to 
another. I knew how I had garnered you 
in my heart ; I was vain enough to believe 
that you were predisposed in my favour ; 
or, at the least, fancy-free. My error has 



In the Garden. 1 1 1 



proved a painful one to both of us. I cer- 
tainly did not think, when I poured my 
innermost thoughts into your ear, Miss 
Fleming, that you would meet me with 
the stereotyped reply of engaged affec- 



tions." 



" Nor do I now," exclaimed Beatrice, 
hiding her face with her slender fingers, 
through which the tears welled fast " I should 
be much, much to blame if I had permitted 
you to address me as you did just now, if 

my feelings were not But what am I 

saying ? Oh ! Mr. Charlton, you are a man, 
and in your strength should be merciful to 
a weak girl like myself. Let me go, let me 
go back to the house ! It is not fair, it is 
not generous to press me further on a 
subject which, as you cannot fail to see, 
distresses me as this does." 

" Excuse me, Miss Fleming," returned 
Oswald, knitting his brows, and speaking 
in a firm, almost harsh tone, " if I take the 
liberty of differing from you for once. A 



112 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

man who asks a woman to be the crown and 
glory of his life, earns at least the right to- 
an explicit answer. I have not had one as 
yet, and your words are an enigma to me. 
I hope I am not a conceited coxcomb if I say 
that they implied no personal repugnance 
to myself. Still more sure am I that they 
do not convey the meaning, which would 
indeed be a death-blow to my hopes, that 
your heart is given elsewhere. You are 
not, you say, free to be my wife. I am, I 
know, a poor man, and of course " 

" You wrong me by the suggestion/* 
said Beatrice indignantly, as she drew 
back a pace from where he stood : " pov- 
erty would not repel, riches would not 
attract me, in such a case as this. But I 
do not belong to myself, and this poor 
hand of mine was placed, long ago, by that 
of one now dead . of my mother, in that of 

my cousin, Dash wood, as I promised "" 

She paused, weeping. 

" Dashwood ! Surely not your cousin 



In the Garden. 1 1 x 



o 



whom I have met at Lady Livingston's 



not Captain Dashwood . Sir Frederick, as 
they call him now ?" cried Oswald, eagerly. 
" I know the man to be utterly worthless, 
false and bad, gambler, profligate, vile mis- 
leader of youth as he is. Who could have 
had the cruelty to " 

" It was my mother's dearest wish that 
I should marry him/' answered Beatrice 
simply ; " and on her death-bed she joined 
our hands, and made me repeat the words 
of a solemn vow, of a pledge that binds me 
doubly, since it was she who exacted it, 
whose pale lips uttered the promise which 
I repeated. I was very young, and . and 
had I been older and less timid, I might 
have refused the oath, which now I dare 
riot break. . Hark ! I hear the carriage 
and the gate-bell. Let me go. You have 
wrung from me, Mr. Charlton, what I have 
hitherto kept a secret, even from my dear 
friend and benefactress yonder. Suffice it 
that I cannot listen to your suit . I am 

vol. i. 8 



ii4 Lady Livingston 9 $ Legacy. 

Frederick's, if he comes to claim me. 
Now, let me go ; and pray . pray, let this 
be the last time that this folly is mentioned 
between us. We can be friends, but 
nothing more." 




CHAPTER VI. 

CONTAINS AN OFFER OF MARRJAGE. 

ADY Livingston, in spite of the 
beauty of the day, of the agree- 
able conversation of Mrs, Gen- 
eral Buckram, and of her own intention 
that Mr. Charlton and Miss Fleming 
should have some space for talking 
together undisturbed by the presence of a 
third person, had not remained from home 
very long. The worthy old lady had 
somewhat of the matchmaking instinct, 
which is so deeply implanted in the femi- 
nine bosom, and, like many exemplary 
chaperons, she felt loath to permit her 

8.2 



n6 Lady Livingston 's Legacy. 

charge more than short periods of liberty 
to manage her own affairs. Many a man- 
oeuvring mother nips inchoate proposals in 
the bud, and scares away sons-in-law the 
most eligible, from a sheer inability ta 
understand that the young people can get 
on exceedingly well without the aid of her 
vast experience and practised tact. It was * 
certainly the dowagers wish that Oswald 
and Beatrice should become engaged 
lovers, but it may be doubted if she would 
not have preferred to put off the happy 
termination of a courtship over the com- 
mencement of which she had benignly 
watched, rather than have had no ostensible 
finger in the pie matrimonial. Wherefore, 
she made haste back to the Fountains, and 
was somewhat chagrined to find that 
Beatrice had hurried up to her own room 
at the very instant of her arrival, and that 
Oswald Charlton was slowly walking up 
the broad path, bordered by tall hedges of 
clipped yew, that led to the house, with 



An Offer of Marriage. 117 

an air of angry dejection that boded fto 
good. 

" Can the silly little puss have refufeed 
him after all ?" thought the dowager, as she 
sent a servant to notify her return to " Mr. 
Oswald," as the immemorial servants had 
called the nephew of their late lord ever 
since the days of ponies and cricket-bats. 

Oswald Charlton was sufficiently a man 
of the world to assume a tolerably serene 
aspect as he entered the presence of the 
dowager ; but the old lady noted signs 
enough of mental perturbation to convince 
her that something was amiss. 

"This is my young friend, Miss May- 
brook, just arrived from Canada," said 
Lady Livingston ; and as the young bar- 
rister bowed in acknowledgment of the 
introduction, he could not help owning to 
himself that he had very seldom beheld a 
beauty so perfect as that of this new 
addition to the household. 

" This must have been your first visit, 



1 1 8 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

Miss Maybrook, to Hampton Court, I 
should suppose ?" he said, drawing near, 
to Violet, as the old lady tossed over the 
heap of letters that lay waiting for hen 
" You found it curious, did you not ?" 

" Yes ; I was shown several curiosities," 
returned Violet, with a flash of her dark 
eyes, and in a tone that puzzled him : 
" portraits by Lely and Kneller, and Mrs. 
General Buckram, and a Lady Lucy some- 
body . all very unlike anything which I 
ever saw on the other side of the Atlantic." 

She spoke in a low voice, so that Lady 
Livingston did not catch the words, or 
appreciate the sarcasm which, to Oswald's 
fancy, they appeared to convey. At 
another time, he might have taken some 
interest in the study of a nature differing 
from the various types with which he was 
familiar, but he was now in no mood for 
an analysis of character. 

"Ah, Miss Maybrook," he said care- 
lessly, "when you have seen something 



An Offer of Marriage. 119 

more of us in the old country, I shall ask 
you to tell me your opinion of us all. You 
colonial fellow-subjects of ours have one 
immense advantage over the intelligent 
foreigner who usually takes notes among 
us prior to printing his impressions of per- 
fidious Albion ; that is to say, you know 
the language and some of the traditions, 
and can see the weak side of our institu- 
tions from a nearer stand-point than is 
possible to a French or German traveller. 
I grant that poor Mrs. General is as much 

a work of art as the picture of " 

" Pictures ! We had hardly time to do 
justice to the pictures, and must wait for 
another fine day, if we are lucky enough to 
have one before the spring sets in, to go 
through the gallery more regularly. But 
some of my friends were at home, and they 
were delighted to see Miss Maybrook, and 
I think I may say that the pleasure was 
mutual," said the dowager, who had now 
finished the inspection of her corre- 



120 Lady Livingstotis Legacy. 

spondence. "It might make * you vain, 
young lady, if I repeated what Mrs. Buck- 
ram whispered to me on the landing-place 
as we went away ; and I can tell you that 
praise from Sophia Buckram . I remember 
her as Sophy Whipstock, in her father, old 
Sir John's, time . is worth having. The 
king used to say . George IV., my dear, so 
you see my memory goes a long way back 
. that she was plain enough, but deserved 
a pension as a pattern of good breeding, 
and the best drilled young woman in all 
the Mayfair battalion. We will have some 

music, Oswald, after dinner, and " 

" I am afraid I cannot stay to dine to- 
day/' said Oswald Charlton hurriedly. " I 
will come again very soon, aunt, to see you, 
but I must get back to chambers as quickly 
as I can. I have been idle for a long time, 
you see, while in the north, and there are 
papers waiting for me which I ought not 
to neglect There is a train in twenty 
minutes," he added, glancing at the old 



An Offer of Marriage. 121' 

ormolu clock on the chimney-piece, " and I 
shall scarcely catch it, unless I am very 
brief in my leave-taking." 

All this was said with some hesitation 
and awkwardness. Violet was as inca- 
pable as the old dowager herself of being 
hoodwinked by so transparent a pretext as 
this sudden devotion to business ; and by 
the covert smile that lurked about the 
corners of her well-shaped mouth, it was 
evident that she divined pretty clearly the 
real motive of Oswald's abrupt departure. 
Lady Livingston's tone changed at once. 

" May I ask you to go to your room for 

a time, Miss May brook ?" she said, almost 

tartly ; " I must have a word with Mr. 
Charlton before he leaves us." 

And Violet obeyed. 

" Now, nephew," said the dowager, tak- 
ing a deliberate survey of the young 
barrister through her glasses, " I may as 
well tell you that you will never make 
your fortune at the bar if you cannot put 



122 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

a better face upon a bad cause than you 
have done to-day. I don't in the least 
wonder that you look ashamed of yourself, 
when all you can offer as a reason for ne- 
glecting your best friends is a lame excuse 
about law-matters that cannot be kept 
waiting. No, no ; I am too old to be so 
easily taken in. You and Beatrice have 
quarrelled, I suppose, like geese as you 
both are ; and I want to know why, that is 
all, that I may bring you together again. 
Don't stare at me, dear boy, as if I were a 
fortune-telling gipsy, instead of an old 
woman who has only two people to care 
for in this world, and who does not intend,, 
if she can help it, that they should spoil 
their own happiness by any absurd mis- 
understanding. How you look at me ! 
Why, my dear Oswald, you boys and girls 
are like the ostrich, that thinks no one can 
see him because he thrusts his head into a 
hole. Do you fancy that I am in my do- 
tage already, or that I am so much taken 



An Offer of Marriage. 123 

up with my knitting-needles and my worsted 
frame and my gossip, that I cannot keep 
my eyes open to what goes on around me, 
or see that you love Beatrice, and that 
she likes you well enough to accept you if 
you will but give her an opportunity ? 
You shake your head. Why, Oswald, 
what, in the name of mischief, is amiss ?" 

And now the dowager, who had been 
talking in the tone of comfortable self- 
complacency which the old often assume 
when chuckling over the fulfilment of their 
predictions, or claiming recognition for 
their superior sagacity, suddenly changed 
her voice to one of alarm. 

" You cannot mean to tell me," she said, 
rising from her seat, " that you have asked 
Beatrice to be your wife, and that she has 
refused your offer ? I can't believe it ; I 
don't believe it. Speak to me, nephew, 
and let me know the truth, however bitter 
it may be." 

" Dear Lady Livingston," said Oswald, 



1 24 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 



drawing his chair nearer to the old lady's 
sofa, " I am sorry you have been so keen- 
sighted ; sorry, too, that you should be in 
some sense a sharer in the disappoint- 
ment which I cannot deny that I feel. I 
never doubted your affection for me, but I 
was unaware that you knew my affections 
to be given to one whom you love de- 
servedly still better than you do me. I 
may admit that you have guessed aright 
When I came here to-day, there was a 
struggle in my breast as to whether or no 
I should ask Miss Fleming to be my wife ; 
not, let me hasten to say, from any doubts 
as to the full sincerity of my own attach- 
ment, but simply because I shrank, perhaps 
foolishly, from urging her to marry one 
who had yet his way to make in the world, 
and who could have offered her for the 
first years but a poor home, and a life of 
comparative privation. ,, 

" How do you know that ?" demanded 
the old peeress, austerely. " Or how can 



An Offer of Marriage. 125, 

you tell what I might have done for Bear 
trice on her wedding-day ? I have no one 
else to care for, except you two ; and," she 
added, smiling, but with a wistful look, 
" Beatrice is my godchild, and it is not a 
fairy godmother only who is privileged to 
bestow gifts. If there is any difficulty 

that money can " 

" Djear Aunt Livingston," said Oswalds 
taking the dowager's wrinkled hand, and 
kissing it, "you are the same generous- 
minded friend that I have ever known 
you ; but, believe me, money can do no- 
thing here. And I hope you will not be 
offended with me when I tell yau that I 
could not have borne to be indebted, even 
to you, for a maintenance. I must earn 
the bread I eat ; and, after some hesitation, 
I decided that if Beatrice cared for me, we 
two should be none the worse for a few 
years of that struggling life which to 
people of fashion appears as downright 
destitution. I could not have given my 



126 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

wife a carriage, of course ; and even the 
smallest boy in buttons would have been a 
retainer too costly for our modest house- 
hold ; but I suspect it is possible for happi- 
ness to exist even in the absence of equip- 
ages and liveried servants." 

Lady Livingston listened to this speech 
with a very dubious expression on her face, 
as if uncertain whether it was incumbent 
upon her to be affronted at such bluntness 
of speech, and so absolute a rejection of 
her proffered bounty. Benevolent despots 
. and rich old ladies, when not simply 
egotists, are often disposed to be arbitrary 
in their kindness . do not easily reconcile 
themselves to the wilful stubbornness, as 
they deem it, of those who decline to pur- 
sue the royal road to happiness in all do- 
cility. But after an effort which did credit 
to her ladyship's latent magnanimity, the 
better nature of the woman prevailed, and 
she made answer, almost playfully : " You 
were always a sad rebel, Oswald, and have 



An Offer of Marriage. 127 

made me angry with you many a time 
when you were a schoolboy, and my lord 
too, for that matter ; and the worst of it 
was, that you had a trick of being in the 
right, or nearly in the right, which vexes 
one the more when one gets over one's ill- 
humour. Perhaps, if I were a man, I 
might have felt much as you do; but never 
mind that I want to know why Beatrice 
answered you with a l No f not because 
she was afraid of life and love in a cottage, 
I am sure ?" 

Oswald Charlton rose from his seat, and 
took one or two hasty strides towards the 
window, and there stood, drumming with 
his fingers on the glass. " That is a ques- 
tion, aunt, that I don't know whether I 
have the right to answer," he said 
hoarsely. 

" She cannot care for any one else ? I 
don't believe it," cried the dowager, ener- 
getically. " No ; I would wager my life 
that she does love you, whatever she may 



1 28 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 



say about it Have I not seen her colour 
change at the sound of your very name ? 
Have I not heard the tones of her voice 
when she spoke to you, utterly unlike 
those in which she replied to the pretty 
speeches of those brainless, well-whiskered 
young dandies who dangled after her 
at my garden-parties last season ? and 
do you think that I, who love Beatrice sa 
dearly, am purblind enough not to know 
for whom she has a preference ? Non- 
sense ! I would not believe it, if she her- 
self told me so." 

" And yet she is engaged to be married 
. and yet she is the betrothed bride of 
another man!" answered Charlton, half- 
savagely, as he struck the floor with his 
heel ; " of a man, too, no more worthy of 
such a wife as Beatrice, than if he wore 
the felon's garb that many a less pestilent 
scoundrel than himself has had to don. I 
ought to ask your pardon, Lady Living- 
ston, for speaking thus of one who is akin 



An Offer of Marriage. 129 

to you by blood, but I lose all patience 
and all self-restraint when I think that. 
Beatrice . my pure, tender, delicate Bea- 
trice, should be sacrificed to such a one as 
Captain . now, save the mark ! Sir Frede- 
rick Dashwood!" 

" Fred Dashwood !" repeated the old 
lady, her voice growing shrill with surprise 
and anger. " Impossible ! The mistake 
must be yours, Oswald. She never could 
have told you, unless she is mad, indeed, 
that she loved h.er cousin Frederick." 

" No ; but that she was pledged to 
marry him, that she most assuredly did 
tell me, but an hour ago," replied Oswald 
Charlton, with a groan, and still turning 
away his face. " It was her mother, it 
-seems, who extorted from her a solemn 
promise . an oath, sworn beside her death- 
bed . that she would give her hand to 
Frederick Dashwood whenever he should 
be pleased to claim it ; and this claim she 
regards as absolutely binding upon her 

vol. l 9 



130 Lady Livingston 9 s Legacy. 

- 

conscience. She made no attempt to con- 
vince me that her heart inclined to him in 
the least ; nay, so far as I could judge, her 
feelings towards him rather savour of 
dread and of repugnance, than of esteem. 
But she is the slave of her word, wrung 
from her as it was under such painful cir- 
cumstances, and " 

" I will not allow it I will point out to 
her how wrong and preposterous it would 
be to adhere to such an engagement I 
say, it shall not be," said Lady Livingston,, 
in a tone that might have suited Queen 
Elizabeth. 

Oswald shook his head. " Those gentle 
natures," he said, in an accent of deep 
conviction, " are often the hardest to turn 
from any course which is dictated by a 
sentiment . mistaken, very likely . of duty. 
You will not, believe me, prevail with Bea- 
trice by any of the ordinary arguments or 
inducements which might have weight with 
others. She is of the stuff of which, in 



An Offer of Marriage. 131 

other times than these, martyrs were made. 
Your displeasure, if you could find it in 
your heart to be . incensed with her for 
even exaggerated notions of filial obedi- 
ence, would give her very great pain, but 
I am sure that her resolution would remain 
unshaken. It has been tested, and it has 
come victoriously through the trial, for I 
may tell to you," he added, sadly, " that 
the innocent darling's unguarded words 
betrayed that she could have loved me, 
did love me, perhaps ; yet she never wa- 
vered in her determination to yield up her 
own happiness at the wish of her dead 
parent. Oh, Lady Livingston, do, if you 
can, save her . not for me, or for my sake, 
but for her own . from being the wife of a 
man who would break her spirit first, and 
her heart afterwards !" 

Then he went; and as he walked rapidly 
along, with his hat pulled down over his- 
brows, on his way to the railway station, a 
sadder and a sterner expression than was 



132 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

common with him sat upon his features. 
Once he stopped in his walk, clenching his 
hand as if to strike down some invisible 
enemy. Then, with a bitter laugh, he 
passed on. It was a gloomy evening at 
the Fountains. Beatrice, silent and pale, 
scarcely spoke ; and Miss Violet May- 
brook, narrowly observing her every action, 
drew her own deductions from the events 
of the day. Lady Livingston was in the 
worst possible temper, speaking curtly and 
snappishly when addressed, and at other 
times knitting her bushy eyebrows as 
though she pondered, over some knotty 
and intricate problem. Long after others 
were asleep, the old lady sat over the 
glowing fire in her own room, thinking 
deeply. But the answer to the riddle 
seemed hard to find ; and in her sleep she 
muttered uneasy words, which told that 
her fancy was busied yet with the fortunes 
of her young kinswoman. 




CHAPTER VII. 



MESSRS. GOODEVE's CLERK. 



T was the third day since that 
bright and beautiful one that had 
shed its mellow beauty on the 
garden-terrace of the Fountains while Os- 
wald Charlton vainly urged his suit to Bea- 
trice Fleming, and lo ! a mightier trans- 
formation scene had taken place than ever 
was contrived by the most public-spirited 
of theatrical managers. The weather had 
changed, suddenly and utterly, and the 
streets of London were clogged with snow. 
Snow, snow everywhere, though a country- 
man might have been pardoned if he had 



134 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

failed to recognize in the black, unctuous 
substance that clung to his boots, or en- 
cumbered the wheels of his cab, the con- 
gener of the dazzling purity that clothes 
down and dell and heathery moor with a 
winding-sheet of silvery tissue. The gray 
flakes, stained already by their passage 
through the overhanging canopy of smoke, 
came whirling down upon the greasy pave- 
ment, or added to the heaps that obstructed 
the carriage-way, to be churned by hoofs 
and ground by wheels, and trampled down 
by the tread of innumerable feet, until they 
turned into a dirty pulp of half-congealed 
water, and so thawed and ran to add their 
trickling tribute to the Thames. A social 
philosopher, snugly posted, let us suppose, 
within the bay-window of a club, might 
have moralized on the resemblance be- 
tween these fluttering flakes and the hun- 
dreds of new recruits that London daily 
attracts to herself, too often with the self- 
same result of being besmirched and black- 



Messrs. GoodevJs Clerk. 135 

ened, and trodden pitilessly under foot, with 
perhaps the sullen river at last as the re- 
fuge of impotent despair. But, at any rate, 
if such a philosopher were on the outlook, 
he would not have found himself in his 
element in Bedford Row, where it was 
getting very dark as the afternoon wore 
on, and the gas had been long alight, and 
the legal mill turned merrily in many an 
office and in many a set of chambers. 

On the door-posts of one of the old 
houses in Bedford Row was painted, in 
.characters almost illegible through age, the 
name of a firm. The partners went in and 
out two or three times a day during term, 
and could not have failed to note the dilapi- 
dation of the words " Goodeve and Glegg." 
But they would have esteemed it as sac- 
rilegious, had any one proposed to them 
to have the old inscription freshly painted. 
Those who had business with those very 
-eminent family solicitors knew their way 
to the office well enough, and so did the 



136 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

clerks and messengers of other attorneys. 
Good law, it would appear, like good wine, 
needs no bush, and the quality of the pro- 
fessional assistance which Messrs. Good- 
eve's clients asked at their hands was of a 
good, sound, serviceable sort, worthy of 
the decorous customers to whom it was 
supplied. The outer or clerks' room, be- 
yond which were the apartments of Mr. 
Goodeve and of Mr. Glegg, was large, low- 
ceiled, and dingy. The grimy windows 
bore testimony to the tenacity with which 
the particles of carbon which a metropolitan 
fog bears on its foul wings can adhere to 
glass, and the panels were as mottled as if 
the fumes of ink had coagulated upon the 
worm-eaten wood-work. There were some 
surviving strips of carpet, but they were 
worn away until they formed a party- 
coloured network, perilous to unwary feet; 
the desks and stools, and hard, high-backed 
chairs were splashed with ink, and hacked 
by penknives, and presented the aspect of 



Messrs. GoodevSs Clerk. 137 

scarred veterans that had undergone so 
much as to have grown callous to wounds 
and contusions. 

All this ugliness and discomfort, how- 
ever, were far from indicating poverty. 
There was never any lack of grist in that 
particular legal mill which did its grinding 
for the behoof of Messrs. Goodeve and 
Glegg. From floor to ceiling were stacked, 
on wooden shelves, in the corners of which 
lurked dusty cobwebs, the japanned deed- 
boxes, on which were emblazoned in letters 
of gold the names and titles of the high, 
puissant, and mighty ones of the earth . of 
the Duke of Snowdon, the Marquis of 
Blunderbore, Sir Hotspur Whipstock, and 
many a knight, lord, or esquire passing 
rich in lands and beeves. The emissaries 
of other firms came and went, and the fre- 
quent reference to " the Rolls," the " Chan- 
cellor," as well as darker allusions to 
" Vices " and " Masters," proved that the 
bulk of business was of that lucrative 



138 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

and creditable sort which pertains to Chan- 
cery. 

There were several clerks in the room, 
of every variety of the genus . from the 
spruce young gentleman in articles, with 
fancy-patterned shirt, gaudy neck-tie, and 
bunch of charms dangling from his watch- 
chain, to the bald copyist, whose earnings 
maintained a wife and children at Wands- 
worth or Camden-town, and who had en- 
grossed so many thousand sheets of legal 
folio, that "whereas," "the said," and 
"heirs, executors, administrators, and as- 
signs," ought to have become engraved 
upon his heart, like the name of captured 
Calais on that of Queen Mary. There 
were grave elders doing their work steadily, 
and pert lads who enlivened the period of 
drudgery by irreverent gibes and slang 
catch-words picked up in music-halls. The 
latter were a vexation to the spirit of their 
plodding seniors, on whose unwilling ears 
their thoughtless conversation forced itself. 



Messrs. Goodeves Clerk. 139 

" Silence, pray, silence, gentlemen !" said, 
in irritable accents, an elderly man, whose 
ink-stained finger-tips could never have 
been cleansed save by chemical agency. 
4t How am I to get through with this mar- 
riage-settlement if you keep up this . I will 
say, scandalous noise close by ? Already 
you have twice made me insert some idiotic 
allusions to banjoes and bones, belonging, 
probably to an Ethiopian melody, in the 
middle of the trusts for remainder men ; to 
say nothing of interpolating 'Aunt Sally, 
come up T where ' separate use and benefit ' 
should have preceded the name of the 
bride. I must complain to Mr. Glegg, if 
this continues." 

" No more than I intend to do myself," 
chimed in another senior, more authorita- 
tively than the first speaker. " Mr. Jones 
is perfectly right; and this disgraceful 
chattering shall be stopped, if I have to 
report your behaviour to the governor. 
Can't you take pattern by Mr. Davis there ? 



140 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

he sticks to his work, new as he is to the 
office ; and I can tell you he will be draw- 
ing double the salary you will, if he goes 
on for a twelvemonth as he has begun." 

The object of the chief clerk's eulogy sat 
at a desk a little apart from the rest, plying 
his pen with an assiduity that was certainly 
commendable, and, to all appearance, was- 
utterly indifferent to the idle talk of his 
contemporaries, as well as to the grimaces 
and jeering whispers with which the chidden 
striplings turned towards him who had just 
been placed in the invidious position of a 
model. He was a very young man, of dark,, 
almost swarthy complexion, with lank dark 
hair, and black bold eyes, that looked as 
though they could flash on occasion. Young 
as he was, there was about him an air of 
quiet, cool determination and premature 
thoughtfulness, which forbade those who 
saw him to class him among boys ; while, 
although somewhat low of stature, his well- 
knit frame and muscular hands indicated 



Messrs. GoodevJs Clerk. 141 

a considerable degree of strength. His 
attitude as he sat absorbed in his work, had 
a careless grace, very seldom to be found 
among the diligent subordinates of an at- 
torney ; and his firm lips, the upper one of 
which was shaded by a small raven-black 
moustache, parted at intervals to disclose a 
set of teeth that were beautifully white and 
regular, but pointed to an unusual degree, 
a circumstance which gave a somewhat 
sinister character to a smile that might 
otherwise have been bright and winning. 

The attire of this pattern clerk was in a 
different style from that of any of his col- 
leagues in the office, where the seniors, in 
their bulging boots, shabby coats, and dingy 
wisps of black cravats, contrasted with the 
cheap finery of the talkative neophytes, 
and the more chastened splendours of the 

inchoate solicitors serving their apprentice- 

. 

ship. Mr. Davis was simply dressed, but 
his clothes fitted him well and were in good 
taste and of good quality. He displayed 



142 Lady L ivingstotis Legacy. 

no jewellery, beyond the few gold links of 
his watch-guard ; whereas the fingers of 
most of the young men were decked with 
big bright rings of dubious value. His 
hands, which were supple and well shaped, 
were a good deal embrowned by exposure 
to the sun, and showed one or two odd- 
looking scars, indelible records of a stirring 
life spent among far different scenes than 
that presented by the office of the Bedford 
Row attorney ; while on the brawny wrist 
of the right arm was a dark-blue mark, that 
had probably been produced by tattooing. 
Altogether, it would not have been very 
difficult to imagine Mr. Davis as even more 
at home on board ship, or careering on a 
half-broken horse across the llanos of South 
America, or "prospecting" for nuggets 
among the craggy heights of the Sierra 
Nevada, than in the legal factory of whose 
mechanism he was now a useful portion. 

Mr. Davis, Christian name Daniel, be- 
lieved to be a native of that shire of Mon- 



Messrs. Goodeve s Clerk. 143 

mouth which is Welsh by nature, but 
English by act of Parliament, had not been 
long in the employment of Goodeve and 
Glegg. He was what the clerks of his 
own generation styled a " close fellow," not 
prone to indulge the curiosity of casual 
acquaintances as to his antecedents. The 
elder brethren of the quill were less inqui- 
sitive and more tolerant The young man 
did his work sedulously, and with an intel- 
ligence that removed him from the cate- 
gory of mechanical scribes. He must have 
been well recommended, or Goodeve and 
Glegg would never have accepted his ser- 
vices. There were lazy young scamps, 
often, in the Bedford Row office, but they 
were invariably boys born in the purple, so 
to speak, of the lower branches of the 
legal profession, or of the parasitical over- 
growth that hangs thereon. Solicitors, 
minor members, it is fair to suppose, of the 
great attorney interest, scriveners, law- 
stationers, registrars, robe-makers, judges* 



144 Lady Livingston 's Legacy. 

clerks, and pleaders below the bar, liked 
their sons to learn the rudiments of the 
legal game in so sound and reliable an 
office as that of Goodeve and Glegg. The 
boys, even those hooked-nosed young 
Hebrews with the mosaic rings and breast- 
pins, paid premiums which were a con- 
siderable set-off against the moderate 
amount of their weekly wages. But Mr. 
Daniel Davis, whom the irreverent young 
fry mentioned in private conclave as " Black 
Dan," had entered the establishment on a 
different footing, and had evinced from the 
very first not only a willingness to labour, 
but also a knowledge of legal formulae 
which argued some previous experience of 
a solicitor's craft. His salary was noto- 
riously higher in amount than those of 
others who had been longer in the firm's 
employ than he had, and this circumstance 
did not tend to decrease the unpopularity 
which the new clerk had originally earned 
by his strangely ungenial and uncommu- 



Messrs. Goodeve* s Clerk. 145 

Aicative disposition. But, worst of all his 
.offences, Messrs. Goodeve seemed to have 
a high opinion either of his ability or of his 
reliable qualities, since he was frequently 
-despatched on missions as to which he 
treathed no word to the garrulous tenants 
.of the desks bordering on his own. 

" A gentleman . here's his card . wishes 
to see one of the partners," said a plump 
young junior from Somersetshire, who 
passed half his working hours in obeying 
the summons of the office-bell; and the 
chief clerk glanced at the card. 

" Dashwood . Sir Frederick Dashwood 
. to be sure! Beg him to step in, Mr. 
Lobb. I think Mr. Goodeve will be dis- 
engaged soon. Sir F. is a client, after a 
fashion." 

This last remark was guardedly made, 
but it was perfectly intelligible to the ears 
that heard it. Every lawyer has clients 
that are the props of his business, and 
other clients, not inaccurately described as 

vol. 1. 10 



146 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

filling that capacity "after a fashion/* 
These are the ne'er-do-weels, the black- 
sheep who derive some consideration on 
account of the respectability of the fold 
from which they have gone astray ; or now 
and then poor relations of great people, 
whose only crime is the impecuniosity that 
clings to them through life, and who are 
charged nothing for an occasional letter or 
scrap of verbal advice. The client in 
question, Sir Frederick Dashwood, was 
ushered in, and a chair was offered to 
him while his card was sent in to the pri- 
vate room of the head of the firm. He 
took the chair accordingly, and stared 
around him, as unembarrassed in his sur- 
vey as if he had been contemplating the 
monkeys in the Zoological Gardens. 

Sir Frederick Dashwood, in the pleni- 
tude of that easy contempt with which it 
was his habit to regard his worldly infe- 
riors, was probably by no means aware 
how much several of the despised clerks 



Messrs. Goodeve's Clerk. 147 

around him knew of his past and of his 
present career. That he was the son of a 
doctor ; that he owed money to all Israel ; 
that his scores with West End tradesmen 
were classed as " bad debts ;" that he had 
started in a crack regiment of light cavalry, 
and was now an infantry captain whose 
"papers" were lodged at the Horse 
Guards, and over the price of whose com- 
mission his creditors would wrangle like 
dogs snarling over a bone ; and that he 
led a shifdess, hand-to-mouth existence, 
replete with lying excuses and false pro- 
mises, was notorious. Even the careful 
old conveyancing clerk, who was obliged 
to look long and sharply at every sixpence, 
so many were the claims on his weekly 
hire, would not have relished the life of 
harassing expedients and self-humiliation 
which were inseparable from the condition 
of such a one as Sir Frederick. Still, 
somehow, the very youngsters who sneered 
at him, envied him. He was very well 

10 . 2 



148 Lady Livingston 's Legacy. 

dressed. His pearl-gray gloves were spot- 
less and unwrinkled. The prettiest trinkets 
rattled on his watch-chain. He had an 
ineffable air of assurance, which suited well 
with his handsome reckless face and well- 
shaped form, but which, if never so slightly 
exaggerated, would have degenerated into 
a swagger. He was a baronet, too, after 
all, and belonged to clubs that were hard 
of access ; and he might, at any moment, 
marry an heiress, cast his old slough of 
poverty, and come forth gilded and sleek, 
like a snake in its summer skin. 

" Mr. Goodeve can see Sir Frederick 
now," said the voice of the plump lad from 
Somersetshire, as its owner emerged from 
the attorney's inner room ; and Sir 
Frederick rose, and prepared to follow the 
messenger. As he did so, he jostled 
slightly against the desk at which the dark- 
complexioned young clerk, of whom men- 
tion has been previously made, was plying 
his pen. 



Messrs. Goodeves Clerk. 149 

" Beg pardon, I'm sure," said Dash wood, 
half superciliously, and as he spoke he 
looked down ; and Mr. Davis looking up, 
the eyes of the men met. Sir Frederick 
gave a start that was quite perceptible. 

" By Jove !" he muttered, through the 
tawny moustache that overhung his mouth, 
" I didn't expect." And then he bit his 
lip, and grew first red, and then paler than 
before. The dark young clerk shrugged 
his shoulders. 

" It was a mere accident," he said, civilly, 
but in measured accents . " an inadvertence 
which we had better both forget." And 
with a cold bow he bent again over his 
task. The words were commonplace 
enough, and it could only be said that they 
went beyond what so trifling a circumstance 
required ; but the peculiar tone of th% 
speaker indicated a hidden meaning, unin- 
telligible to the bystanders. Sir Frederick 
had, perhaps, a clue to the speaker's drift 
which the others did not possess, for, with 



150 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

a smile, and an apologetic murmur of 
" Confoundedly clumsy on my part !" he 
passed on to Mr. Goodeve's presence. 

" And that's the chap they call Dashing 
Dashwood !" muttered one of the juvenile 
scribes in the ear of his nearest friend. 
" Lets himself be put down in that sort of 
style by a quill-driver at thirty shillings a 
week, like Black Dan yonder ; and instead 
of kicking him for his answer, slinks off 
like a cock that won't fight" 

" You be quiet, Larkins !" growled out 
the more experienced comrade referred to. 
" Can't you see how the game lies ? The 
baronet's not one to show the white-feather 
for nothing. He has a plaguy sight too 
good an idea of himself for that Don't 
you see that it is evident he and Davis 
have met before somewhere or other, and 
that neither of them much cares, for reasons 
best known to themselves, to acknowledge 
the acquaintance ?" 

After which rejoinder, the substance of 



Messrs. Goodevis Clerk. 151 

which soon made the circuit of the office, 
all the juniors began to eye the silent pen- 
man with a renewed curiosity, while they 
exhausted their ingenuity in efforts to guess 
the possible nature of the connection 
between their fellow-clerk and Sir Frederick 
Dashwood. 

Sir Frederick's interview with Mr. Good- 
£ve did not last long, nor was its result, so 
far as could be judged, peculiarly satis- 
factory. Dashwood came out with a dark- 
ling brow, savagely tugging and twisting 
his moustache, threw on his hat rather than 
placed it on his head, and made his way 
from the office with quick impatient strides, 
heedless of the falling snow and the half- 
melted drifts that here and there impeded 
the passage of a pedestrian. He reached 
the nearest main thoroughfare, and after 
Some moments of angry expectancy, hailed 
a Hansom cabman who was plying for hire 
with his vehicle temporarily converted into 
a tandem by the addition of a leader, and 



152 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

who was jocund at the fact that stress of 
weather doubles even the elastic tariff of a 
Hansom, jumped Into it, and had himself 
conveyed to the "Flag Club," where he 
could smoke cigars and play pool until it 
was time to dine. He was the last to be 
admitted on that afternoon to the presence 
of either of the partners in the Bedford 
Row firm, and indeed the labours of the 
day were nearly concluded by the time Sir 
Frederick had got clear of the legal pre- 
cincts. The scratching sound of the pens, 
as they were ceaselessly applied to paper 
and parchment, grew feebler, and finally 
ceased altogether. Unfinished deeds were 
folded, and there was tying with red tape 
and green ribbon, and docketing, and con- 
signing to pigeon-holes in bureaux and 
compartments in desks, of many a bundle 
of documents that would have thrown light 
upon the private history of more than one 
family of standing. And then came shuf- 
fling of feet, and putting on of greatcoats, 



Messrs. Goodevds Clerk. 153, 

and hunting out of umbrellas that had 
been placed in out-of-the-way nooks, and a 
babble of voices, this time unrestrained by 
the reproofs of the staid seniors. 

Out from his private room came Mr. 
Glegg, pink-faced, plump, and brisk, a 
florid little man, whom no one would have 
taken for an attorney, so much did his 
aspect suggest sillabubs and new-mown hay, 
cowslips, cream, and other rural associa- 
tions, but who was, nevertheless, as keen 
and tenacious a practitioner as any litigant,, 
wishing to wear out the purse and patience 
of a feebler adversary, could desire as his 
pilot among the shoals and rapids of law. 
Mr. Glegg had a word or two to say> 
admonitory or exhortatory, to the office- 
lads and articled pupils ; another word or 
two, of a more technical sort, to the steady, 
working scribes ; and then he buttoned up 
his glossy overcoat, and tripped actively ofF 
to where his brougham, with a strong 
satin-skinned horse in the shafts, that had 



154 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

cost as much, for all his cob-like sturdiness 
of build, as many a pair of showy steppers, 
was waiting to bear him off to his trim villa 
on the Surrey side of the Thames. Then 
there was a general move, the dark Mr. 
Davis being the last to rise from his seat 
He had not, indeed, as yet reached down 
his hat from the peg on which it hung, 
when Mr. Goodeve opened the door of his 
private room, and called out : 

" Any one here ? Oh, Mr. Davis, I 
see. Please bring me in that deed-box of 
Lady Livingston's . the dowager's, I mean 
. before you leave." 

The clerk complied ; and Mr. Goodeve 
proceeded to unlock the japanned case 
with a patent key, and to toss over the 
various bundles of papers which it contained. 

"That will do; thank you," said the 
lawyer, " No ; stop one moment !" And 
he continued his examination of the con- 
tents of the box. Clerk and employer 
presented, personally, a striking contrast : 



Messrs. Goodeves Clerk. 155 

the one young, vigorous, and of low stature ; 
the other tall, thin, and frail, with colour- 
less hair, and limp whiskers that had 
scarcely found it worth while to become 
gray, but who was one of those persons 
whom it is impossible to conceive as having 
ever been young. " I shall remain a little 
while here, to look through these papers 
and refresh my memory," said the lawyer, 
half-absently, "before I go home. I got 
this letter" . and he selected one with a 
coronet on the seal from amongst a heap 
of others . "when I was too much occu- 
pied to attend to it at once. By-the-by, 
Davis, I may want you to go down with 
me in a few days to a place a short dis- 
tance from town . Richmond, in fact . to 
witness a will. You are a close, quiet 
fellow, and will not mention it in the office, 
to oblige me ?" 

" Certainly not I am no great talker at 
any time," returned Black Dan, with a 
grave smile. 



156 Lady Livingstotis Legacy. 

"That's right, that's right!" said his 
employer. " Now, Mr Davis, I need not 
detain you. I shall lock the door myself." 

And in a minute more the clerk was in 
the street, with his face set westward, as he 
walked rapidly onwards through the gather- 
ing darkness and the driving snow. 




CHAPTER VIII. 

MR. DAVIS AT HOME. 

OLBORN and New Oxford Street, 
when a north-westerly wind, cold 
and damp as well, drives blinding 
showers of sleety snow into the faces of 
pedestrians who have turned their backs 
upon the City, are not perhaps to be 
reckoned as among the most genial spots 
on earth. During the late afternoon of 
that winter's day which Sir Frederick 
Dashwood had selected for his visit to the 
office of Messrs. Goodeve and Glegg, these 
important thoroughfares were seen at their 
worst . hillocks of stained snow narrowing 



158 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

the carriage-road, the flag-stones a pool of 
mire and half-frozen water, and the jostling 
and growling incessant as the foot-pas- 
sengers struggled to maintain their equi- 
librium on the slippery pavement Those 
who walked were perforce by far more 
numerous than is the case in ordinary 
weather, since every one of the rare omni- 
buses that ploughed its weary way west- 
ward was black with steaming humanity 
within, and shivering humanity without,, 
and being overfull already, held steadily on 
its course, regardless of the despairing 
signals of the many candidates for con- 
veyance. The few cabs that were visible, 
extra-horsed, prowled in search of belated 
fares who would prove liberal paymasters,, 
and were luxuries beyond the mark of those 
whom prudence or habit had rendered 
thrifty custodians of their loose silver. 

Among all those who, under these dis- 
piriting circumstances, plodded from the 
scene of the day s toil, there was not one 



Mr. Davis at Home. 159 

whose tread was more elastic, or whose 
foot was surer, than those of the pattern 
clerk from Bedford Row, whom we have 
heard described as Mr. Daniel Davis. The 
rough weather that made many a narrow* 
chested slave of the desk cough painfully 
as he confronted it, and which even hale 
men met with an impatient dislike, really 
seemed to refresh him after his sedentary 
labours. The more the wind blew, and the 
whirling flakes and arrowy sleet thickened, 
the greater was the cheerfulness with 
which he breasted the storm, as if the con- 
test warmed his blood, and gave a zest to 
his monotonous life which was usually 
lacking. Once, at a street corner, he 
glanced up at the hurrying clouds that 
peered blackly through the murky air and 
pelting snow-showers. 
' " North-west, by west, three-quarters 
west, as near as I can make out the points/ 1 
he muttered to himself ; " and will blow 
half a gale by sundown, at sea. A night 



160 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 



for close-reefed topsails and hatches bat- 
tened down, I somehow think," he added, 
absently, and then, with a start and a heavy 
sigh, strode on, unceremoniously shoulder- 
ing his way through the groups that had 
collected, here and there, around the 
lighted portals of some house of public 
entertainment, where alcoholic aid, "hot 
with," was in immense request as a cor- 
rective of the chill damps of the dying 

day. 

Hyde Park was already in sight when, 
crossing the road, Mr. Daniel Davis 
plunged into a labyrinth of dismal little 
streets, every one of which had doubtless 
seen better days, before the tide of fickle 
Fashion ebbed off southwards, and carried 
with it rank, fortune, and expenditure. 
When Grosvenor reigned supreme among 
squares, and before upstart Belgravia was, 
as old nurses love to say of flesh and blood 
mushrooms, born or thought of, these 
streets had been thriving metropolitan 



L 



Mr. Davis at Home. 1 6 1 

arteries, where a snug competence could be 
readily amassed by sedulous hangers-on of 
Fortune's favourites. Now, it was but a 
poverty-stricken district, where shops pined, 
and green-grocers became prematurely bald 
and insolvent, and public-houses were 
quieter and more select than their land- 
lords could have wished them to be, and 
the superannuated butlers and ex-ladies' 
maids found it harder every year to secure 
an adequate amount of weekly guineas for 
those dingy apartments wherein the cadets 
of so many great families had formerly 
taken up their expensive quarters, that the 
dear girls might have the benefit of attend- 
ing Cousin Lacquerton's parties, and that 
papa might jog the earl's memory as to that 
very desirable appointment as salaried In- 
spector of Things in General. 

In one of the most decayed of these 
smoke-dried and deserted thoroughfares, 
Great Eldon Street by name, but the 
narrowness of which suggested to inquiring 

VOL. I. II 



1 62 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

minds the idea that the dwellers in Little 
Eldon Street might easily shake hands 
with one another from the opposite first- 
floor windows, was a lean little house, on 
the dark-green street door of which was a 
small brass plate bearing the monosyllable 
"Gulp." The word did not look like a 
patronymic, but it was one ; and the faint- 
spirited female with artificial flowers in her 
antediluvian bonnet, who apologized for 
the " servant girls " absence without leave, 
as she came to that door in answer to the 
clerk's knock, was Miss . by brevet of seni- 
ority, Mrs, . Gulp, the landlady. Thirty- 
five years, as she was fond of mentioning 
over the social tea-cup, had Maria Gulp 
eaten the bread of servitude as young 
ladies' maid, lady's maid, and at last house- 
keeper, at Hardup Hall, the residence of 
the Right Hon. the Earl of Diddleham. 
She was not called Gulp there, however ; 
she was called Harris or Willis, or by some 
such appellation, more euphonious than the 



Mr. Davis at Home. 163 

^ . . . m . mmmmm . ^ mm , _ _. _^ . ^___ . .«^ ^ . .. ^ ^ ^_ ^^^ . ^^ 

unfortunate four letters which she had in- 
herited, and the change was " considered 
in the wages." It is to be supposed that 
she got her wages, in spite of the reputation 
<rf the noble family of Downie for paying 
nobody ; or, if not, visitors must have been 
bountiful and perquisites abundant, since 
Maria certainly saved money, and set up 
comfortably as a Brighton lodging-house 
keeper, with a good house in the Paragon, 
and a sum in the funds. In an evil 
hour, however, the Honourable Frederick 
Downie, with his wife and child, took her 
apartments for the benefit of the sea-air ; 
and the distinguished lodger not merely 
did not pay his rent . that, she had hardly 
expected . but he actually succeeded in in- 
ducing Mrs. Gulp to invest her savings in 
his pocket ; of course at a thumping rate of 
interest, far beyond the pittance from the 
consols. The poor woman must have 
known perfectly well that Frederick 
Downie was a rogue and a knave ; but her 

11 . 2 



1 64 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

- . . 11 . Bi. . . 

cherished weakness was her loyalty to that 
illustrious family, under whose roof her 
best years had been spent, and she made 
the investment as desired, and was ruined 
by it, of course ; and thus sunk to shabbi- 
ness, poverty, and a mean little abode in 
Great Eldon Street, where she eked out 
her slender livelihood as best she might* 
by letting every available corner of her 
house. 

It was now what Mrs. Gulp called the 
"dead time of the year," a time which 
begins when parched and parboiled Londoa 
rushes out of town, in quest of seas and 
mountains ; and since the commencement 
of this stagnant season, Mr. Davis had 
been the tenant of Mrs. Gulp's drawing- 
room. She had sighed when she accepted 
him in that capacity ; not that he was un- 
punctual with his rent, or obnoxious as an 
inmate ; but then he was a clerk, and in a 
subordinate position withal as regarded 
attorneydom ; and therefore the landlady 



Mr. Davis at Home. 1 65 

felt as if his residence among her Lares and 
Penates brought with it some sour after- 
taste along with the sweets of periodical 
payments. She could no longer hope in 
her shabby lodgings to entertain even the 
minor aristocracy, but she still wished to 
harbour those who, if not the rose, had 
been near enough to that flower to have 
imbibed a sprinkling of its scent Had 
Mr. Davis been a tutor, or a land-agent, 
or a turfite trencherman to some sporting 
peer, Mrs. Gulp would have been better 
pleased. As it was, and in hopes of 
brighter times, when town should fill, she 
consoled herself by remembering that 
Messrs. Goodeve were at least eminent 
solicitors, with whom Lord Diddleham had 
had transactions, until he quarrelled with 
them for not consenting to his mortgaging 
Cloverley Meadows twice over. 

* Yes, a very bad day, Mrs. Gulp. My 
sister is upstairs, I suppose ?" said the 
lodger, civilly eluding his landlady's inco- 



1 66 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

herent eloquence on the twin subjects of 
the rough weather and the unjustifiable 
truancy of Betsy Jane, the maid. Mrs- 
Gulp was, like many of her sex who have 
suffered pecuniary losses, fond of hearing 
the sound of her own voice as she sang 
paeans in praise of bygone glories at Hard- 
up, with jeremiads on the present degener- 
acy of the vile world around her; and 
sometimes Mr. Davis was good-natured 
enough to be a patient listener. He was 
in no humour now, however, for such dis- 
course ; so, without further ceremony, he 
made his way upstairs, and threw open the 
door of the tiny three-cornered sitting- 
room. It seemed empty at first, save for 
the scanty and quaint furniture. There 
was no light save that of the flickering fire* 
for the blinds were pulled down, and the 
faded curtains drawn to the full extent of 
their width, or rather narrowness, as if for 
the purpose of excluding the leaden twi- 
light that brooded in Great Eld on Street 



Mr. Davis at Home. 167 



The fire burned but dimly, a few tongues 
of flame leaping lambent above the black 
surface of the half-ignited coals. The room, 
as has been said, appeared untenanted; 
but presently a form that had hitherto 
crouched on a low stool, half-hidden by a 
cumbrous arm-chair of the Georgian type 
of upholstery, started up almost as abruptly 
as some gnome or elf gprings forward in a 
pantomime. 

An elf ! In very truth, the word seemed 
fairly applicable to her who thus suddenly 
uprose, with the fitful firelight gleaming on 
her pale, keen face. A young girl, as 
years went, but with an expression so 
weird, so old, and so strange, that her age, 
like that of some fairy changeling, might 
have been reckoned by centuries. She 
was low of stature, slight, and small, with a 
peculiar suppleness of limb and elasticity of 
movement, such as we associate with the 
pliant vertebrae of the eel or the snake, 
rather than with those of a being of our 



1 68 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

own race and blood. Her face showed no 
tinge or trace of colour, and lacked also 
the plump softness of early girlhood ; but 
the features were regular, and not ill shaped, 
<and the oval of the countenance was perfect. 
Her hair, which was loosely twisted around 
the small head, was fair, but of an unusual 
tint, without the golden sheen we admire, 
free from the redder tinge which often ac- 
companies a delicate clearness of com- 
plexion, and approaching more nearly to 
the shade of pale amber than to any 
known hue. Her teeth were very white, 
small, and regular ; but the most noticeable 
peculiarity of her face was, that the eyes 
appeared to possess some of those pro- 
perties which the ancients attributed to the 
chameleon, and to change their colour at 
will. Such eyes there are, which one ob- 
server will behold as of a pale gray, and 
another describe as brown or green, but 
which, under the influence of emotion, can 
glitter as variously as the multicoloured 



Mr. Davis at Home. 1 69 

iires of the opal . eyes not beautiful, but 
with a terrible fascination about their infi- 
nite mobility and fierce intentness. Such 
r was the sole occupant of the hired drawing- 
room in Great Eldon Street. 

" So, brother, you have come at last, to 
save me from my own thoughts. I have 
been alone a long while now, and find my- 
self but sorry company/' said the girl 
slowly, and with a sad smile. 

" It's but a dull life for you, my dear," 
returned the young man, as he stooped for- 
ward to stir the fire ; " a life fitter for a 
snail, or a slug, than for such as you are, 
my poor wood-jay. No more pupils as yet, 
I suppose, though, perhaps, you did not get 
so far as to the library, where they pro- 
mised to take in the letters in answer to 
your advertisements ?" 

" I have jailed at the library : there were 
no letters," answered the sister, dreamily. 
" People do not, it seems, believe in talent 
that knocks so humbly at their doors, and 



1 70 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

so I had only the three little learners to put 
through their paces. I almost fell asleep 
over the feeble tinkling of the piano under 
the uncertain touch of the clumsy little 
fingers. No ! A music-mistress, unless 
she is lucky enough to have titled patrons, 
or to be a newspaper celebrity, does not 
find her path strewed with roses here, in 
this astonishing London, where you and I 
are, brother ! I wish you had consented to 
my wish, and let me go on the stage, ac- 
cording to my first idea/' 

His face grew darker, and he frowned 
and bit his lip; but when he looked up 
again there was a wonderful tenderness in 
his voice, as he said : " You know, as well 
as I do, how glad I am when I can give 
you what you ask, and how sorely it vexes 
me to thwart you in what you long for. 
But the stage . here in England . would 
have been unsafe. I mean/' he added,, 
hurriedly, " that you would inevitably have 
been recognized, your story known and) 



Mr. Davis at Home. 171 



bruited about, all the painful past raked up 
again, and that would scarcely have been 
right, dear, would it ? What would be 
said of me, too, or who would accept of 

service from one whose hand Never 

mind that !" he muttered, as he held it out, 
in the ruddy light of the fire. " The deed 
I did was done for your sake, my sister ; 
and if it were undone, and the man living 
yet, a thousand leagues away, I would not 
know rest until I had paid the heavy debt 
in full. But our aim, when we came here, 
was to bury the past, was it not ?" 

"And so the past is buried . buried,, 
dead, and gone," replied the girl, with 
sudden playfulness, and gliding lightly 
across to lay her slender hand caressingly 
on her brother's arm . "and we are Mr. 
Davis and Miss Davis, supposed to be 
natives of the north of England, and ia 
London just now to earn our bread : I, by 
my poor powers as a musician ; and you, 
as the most diligent clerk that ever entered 



172 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

Messrs. Goodeve's office. And that re- 
minds me, Bruce, that you must be hungry, 
and that I have postponed my dinner, much 
to the tearful perplexity of good Mrs. 
Gulp, until you should come back to share 
it." So saying, she rang the bell ; and 
after some delay, the truant Betsy Jane, 
one of those typical handmaidens who exe- 
cute all work equally ill, and whose rebel- 
lious locks strayed picturesquely from under 
the restraining cap, arrived to lay a cloth 
and make the needful preparations for a 
scrambling and miscellaneous repast, that 
was not precisely dinner, tea, or supper, but 
united -some of the characteristics of all 
three. Then the constituents of the meal 
itself were placed upon the table along with 
two or three black bottles ; and brother and 
sister sat down to partake of their cheer, 

the one eating hungrily, almost fiercely; 
the other doing little more than taste what 
was set before her. 

" And now, Bruce, let me hear if you 



Mr. Davis at Home. 1 73 

have learned anything that may be of use 

to us afterwards/' said the girl, as her 
brother finally thrust aside his plate, and 

drank his last glass of frothing beer. " You 
were to tell me, you remember, everything." 
This was the second time that she had 
addressed him by this name, unfamiliar to 
the ears of his fellow-clerks. 

" Humph ! There was little in the 
morning, at least, worth the telling," said 
the young man moodily, striking the fender 
with his boot-heel as he spoke, and fixing 
his eyes on the red caverns between the 
coals. " The partners, if that matters, seem 
to put more confidence in me every day. 
Twice I was sent out to cash cheques, one 
of them for a large amount. I also was in- 
trusted with a sum of money, gold and 
notes, to carry to a person whose receipt I 
obtained after a few minutes of haggling. 
The nature of the transaction was not 
explained to me, but I gathered that it was 
a compromise of some sort We have many 



1 74 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 



such on the stocks In our office. This is 
the second or third time that I have made 
payments for the firm." 

11 Good !" said the attentive sister, laying 
her slender forefinger upon the table, as if 
to mark a point " Nothing could be better. 
Now go on." 

"Easier said than done," replied the 
clerk, with some embarrassment . "since 
there was abundance of routine-work, six- 
and-eightpenny worths, of no interest to 
anybody who does not pay costs, or pocket 
them, to get through. To be sure, there 
dropped in a visitor . one whom we both 
know, that Sir Frederick Dash wood." 

"Ah!" exclaimed Miss Davis, starting 
forward, while her neutral-tinted eyes began 
to sparkle and darken ; " the baronet came 
in ! Did he know you ?" 

" Of course he did, sister. The recog- 
nition was mutual, and about equally 
pleasant, I should say, for both parties," 
rejoined the model clerk. " At any rate," 



Mr. Davis at Honte. 175 



he added bitterly, " the military dandy had 
the sense to keep his tongue quiet as to my 
real name, and the. place where we had met 
before. He grew pale . white as a ghost, 
would be the truer word, as he spied me 
out. Perhaps he thought of the day when, 
arm in arm with as great a scpundrel as 
himself, he sauntered down from barracks, 
and saw his precious brother-officer carried 
home feet foremost." 

" Hush, hush !" said the girl, in a low, 
earnest voice ; " let the dead rest ! He of 
whom you speak paid a heavy forfeit, and 
we are quits now. So this fine Sir 
Frederick came to Bedford Row, did he ? 
Of course I can guess his errand. He 
wants, I suppose, what we all want. Do 
you think he got anything by his visit ?" 

" I should say, decidedly not," returned 
the brother, with a scornful laugh, "to judge 
by his looks when he went out These 
London men of fashion . 'swells/ as the 
old country phrase is . pride themselves on 



1 76 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

the cool calmness of their manners and 
appearance, and really there is something- 
of the Red Man in their cold, passionless 
bearing, as if they would hardly condescend 
to be astonished by an earthquake in Pall* 
Mall. But flesh and blood cannot stand 
the wearing anxieties that go along with 
pretentious poverty, and not show some 
trace of it Dashwood is sorely tried, I can 
see that ; and when the lawyer refused him 
a loan to-day, as I have no doubt he did, 
he could not keep up the impassive stoicism 
of his class. Men don't make bargains for 
their souls, nowadays, at least direcdy, or 

else" 

" Or else you and I know where Apollyon 
could buy one cheaply," broke in his sister, 
with a curl on her mobile upper lip and a 
glow in her variable eyes. " But the day 
may come, perhaps, when Sir Frederick 
Dashwood may be thankful to treat with 
us, ay, and to sue humbly too, for our 
friendly help. Never mind what I mean, 



Mr. Davis at Home. 1 77 



just now, Bruce, dear. You know I have 
a trick of waiting until I think the fruit is 
ripe, before I gather it" 

11 1 know/' rejoined Bruce, if such were 
his name, " that your brains are worth mine 
a dozen times over, and that you can keep 
half a score of trains of thought separate ; 
whereas with me they would soon get into 
kinks like a tangled fishing-line. And I 
know, too, that when I was a boy, always 
in disgrace at home or in hot-water abroad 
on account of some prank or another, I 
found in you the truest and kindest sister 
that ever sided with a wild lad against 
crabbed neighbours and angry relations ; 
and that when I came back, sick nearly 
unto death, from that whaling voyage, when 
the Good Intent was wrecked on the coast 
of Tierra del Fuego, you nursed me, till, 
from the living skeleton that I was, I rose 
up to take my place again in the working 
world. I swore to myself then, sister, as 
since then to you, to back your quarrel, let 

VOL. i. 12 



178 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

it be with whom it might, and to follow 
your lead in all things, right or wrong. 
After all, what am I ?" he added, tossing 
back the dark hair from his brow ; " or 
what good could be looked for from such as 
I am, a rolling stone that moss has never 
had the time to stick to ! Sailor, hunter, 
trapper, teller in a bank, and clerk to a 
lawyer; I've gone through more, in the 
years since I first ran away from home, 
than most of double my age, and just got 
rations and kit . not always that . for my 
pains and my danger. If ever I'm to make 
a fortune, it won't be through my own 
steering, I know that You must pilot 
the ship, if we are to come snugly into 
harbour/' 

There was an air of genuine admiration 
about him as he thus spoke, and, indeed, 
his manner towards his sister was invariably 
gentle, and almost deferential. 

" I will try to do so, Bruce/' she answered 
him, smiling ; " but I want to know a little 



Mr. Davis at Home. 1 79 

more of my bearings before I shape my 
course. Did nothing else occur, while you 
were at the office, which may be twisted 
into some source of ultimate profit ? Very 
valuable secrets are often to be picked up, 
like nuggets and precious stones among 
the spurs of the Sierra Nevada, in attorneys' 
rooms." 

The young man took a moment for con- 
sideration. "I am afraid I have learned 
little worth talking about," he said at length : 
" Mr. Goodeve did say that he wished me 
to accompany him shortly to Richmond, to 
witness some old dame's will . one Lady 
Livingston's, perhaps, by the way, though 
I never thought of it before, the same with 
whom Miss Maybrook" . and at the 
mention of that name an expression as of 
pain flitted across his swarthy face . " now 
lives." 

" Violet Maybrook ! Of course it is !" 
answered the girl with flashing eyes. 
" The news you have brought me, Bruce, 

12 . 2 



180 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

may prove more important than you guess ; 
but I must have time to think it out Poor 
boy, you lode weary ! Shall I sing to you ? 
My singing used to please you, when 
nothing else could do so." And without 
further prelude, she took her seat at the 
piano, and sang song after song, until the 
cloud passed away from her brothel's 
gloomy brow, like that which the strains of 
David's harp banished from the spirit of 
SauL A wonderful voice, so flexible, so 
clear, so sweet, that it might have been the 
carol of a bird ; while rarely has a more 
skilful touch evoked music from so wretched 
an instrument as that battered old piano. 
Quite suddenly she rose from her seat and 
held out her hand. " Good-night, brother," 
she said ; " the last air has awakened a 
string of old memories, and I want to sleep 
them away, if I can. I will be up early to- 
morrow ; but now, good-night !" 



CHAPTER IX. 



THE LAST WILL AND TESTAMENT. 




to Mr. 

inquiry 



Y lady is at home to you, sir, 
of course," said the porter 
at the gate-lodge, in reply 
Goodeve's mechanically-muttered 
and, indeed, the solicitor was a 
not infrequent visitor at the Fountains, and 
stood high in the esteem of the household. 
Lady Livingston's landed property was 
certainly not large when compared with 
those colossal congeries of acres which go 
along with many a coronet, but the rent- 
roll was of a comfortable amount, and the 
holdings, as usual in the midland counties, 



1 82 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

numerous in proportion to the size of the 
estate. There was, therefore, what with 
repairs, renewals of leases, fines, recoveries, 
covenants, and local custom, a good deal 
of business to transact; and the dowager 
chose that her lawyers should treat with 
her tenantry on all points on which a dis- 
pute .might conceivably arise. She was a 
shrewd old lady in her way, and much as 
she liked money and power, she had an 
abhorrence of litigation. 

" The best way to avoid going to law, 
my dear," she would say to her kinswoman, 
Beatrice Fleming, "is to choose a good 
lawyer, and let him fight your battles for 
you. You may laugh, but it's true. 
Goodeve and Glegg, and men of that 
stamp, hate and detest an action in the 
Common Pleas, or whatever they call it, as 
much as a cat dislikes wet feet, and some- 
how they generally manage to settle things 
in a friendly way. Before I hit upon this 
idea I had an agent down at Heavitree, 



TIte Last Will and Testament. 183 

who drew a salary of four hundred a year 
for setting me by the ears with half the 
farmers, and allowing the others to play 
the mischief with the land, and do just as 
they pleased. Goodeve's yearly bill never 
comes to half what he saves for me . I say 
Goodeve, because I don't think Glegg 
troubles himself very much about me." 

And it was the fact that Lady Living- 
ston was one of those clients whose affairs 
the senior partner in the Bedford Row firm 
preferred to keep in his own hands, and on 
which he seldom or never consulted his 
yoke-fellow. 

Mr. Goodeve was not alone ; he was 
accompanied by a clerk, a dark young man, 
who walked silently after his employer as 
the latter entered the grounds, and who 
was indeed no other than Mr. Daniel Davis 
to whose residence and domestic life we 
have been lately introduced. Very stoop- 
ingly, very awkwardly, did the solicitor, 
who was, it has been mentioned, tall, thin, 



184 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

and elderly, traverse the firm glistening 
gravel, on which his subordinate moved 
with so light and free a tread. Mr. Good- 
eve, never robust at any time, had lately 
shown signs of failing health. His powers 
of attending continuously to business were 
not what they had been a year ago. They 
were not what they had been even six 
months ago. The penmen in Bedford 
Row had begun to find this out. It was* 
no secret from his junior partner. Mr.. 
Glegg had said in confidence to the wife of 
his bosom that old Goodeve was no longer, 
as a working lawyer, worth his salt, and 
had bemoaned the perverse pertinacity 
which prevented him from retiring, or, at 
any rate, from agreeing to some more 
reasonable rule as to the division of profits. 
And Glegg had protested that he had him- 
self to toil like a horse, and yet to defer in 
all things to the opinion of a colleague 
whose judgment grew constantly less 
reliable, but who remembered his po- 



The Last Will and Testament. 185 

1 

sition as the moneyed head of the 
-house. 

There was something almost plaintive 
tin the frequent efforts which Mr. Goodeve 
made, as he approached the mansion, to 
assume a jaunty air, and to shake off the 
outward signs of debility. There was no 
reason why the lawyer and his clerk should 
have made their way on foot across a 
portion of the grounds. The gates could 
have been opened, and the carriage 
could have driven up to the white stone 
pillars of the portico. But Mr. Goodeve 
Jiad preferred to alight. The country air, 
he declared aloud, " freshened him up." 
He looked around him «as he walked, and 
uttered laudatory comments upon the 
weather, which had again become dry, and 
was crisp, keen, and frosty, so that the 
roads were hard, and there was a silvery 
rime of hoar-frost every morning on the 
grass of lawn and meadow. 

The shrubbery at the Fountains was t for 



\ 



1 86 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

a suburban shrubbery, large, and sundry 
paths wound tortuously betwixt the masses- 
of evergreens. There had been some in- 
tention, on the part of the landscape-gar- 
dener who laid out the pleasure-grounds, 
or of the nabob his patron, to form a leafy 
labyrinth in imitation of the neighbouring 
maze at Hampton Court ; but the design 
had been abandoned, and its sole result 
was, that the miniature jungle was inter- 
sected by an unusual number of narrow 
and mossgrown tracks. The spot was a 
favourite one with Violet Maybrook, wha 
would sometimes pace for an hour beneath 
the shadow of the black fir-trees and 
towering cedars that rose high above the 
glistening leaves of the holly, the bay> and 
the laurel, communing with her own ever- 
busy thoughts. There were two parts of 
the pleasaunce which she sought, as by 
instinct . the gloomy and neglected shrub- 
bery, where the weeds grew rankly, without 
fear of the gardener's hoe ; and the breezy 



The Last Will and Testament. 187 

terrace that commanded a prospect of the 
bright river speeding onwards to the sea. 
The latter view was replete with life and 
motion ; the former was melancholy enough 
to have been that of some islet in the 
Dismal Swamp where runaway negroes hid 
their outlawed heads; but it suited well 
with Violet's mood. She was in the 
shrubbery when the clang of the gate-bell 
heralded Mr. Goodeve's approach, and, 
herself unseen, she gazed forth between 
the spear-pointed leaves and scarlet berries 
of the hollies, and saw the lawyer and his 
clerk walk from the lodge towards the 
house. Why does she start and turn pale 
as she sees two such commonplace per- 
sons pacing side by side up the smooth, 
firm carriage-road ? Mr. Goodeve, with 
his thin grayish hair, his uncertain step, 
and feeble gait, was scarcely capable of 
inspiring alarm or agitation in any beholder 
who had* not the ill-luck to owe him money.. 
As for dark Mr. Daniel Davis, he was 



1 88 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

.surely a highly-respectable young clerk, in 
professional attendance on his employer; 
Yet Violet, herself unseen, watched hiis 
.every movement with anxiety, and her 
eyes dilated as she looked out from her 
leafy ambush, and her breathing all but 
ceased, so that she resembled a marble 
effigy of Terror more than a sentient 
being, so white and motionless was she. 

" No, no !" she murmured, as the two 
figures disappeared behind the pillars of 
the portico : " I was not mistaken. It was 
he ; somewhat graver and paler than I 
remember him, but with a lurking devil 
behind his eyes still. He is here for no 
good ; I am sure of that." 

These expressions could hardly have 
been applicable to Samuel Goodeve, gen- 
tleman, attorney-at-law. 

By what invisible telegraph do those 
mysterious gnomes and brownies who make 
our beds, cook our dinners, and execute 
our behests, those familiar strangers of the 



The Last Will and Testament. 1 89 

basement who dwell beneath our roofs for 
half a lifetime without our gaining more 
than a skin-deep knowledge of their real 
dispositions, learn what goes on among 
their worldly superiors in the drawing- 
room? That they do so is beyond dis- 
pute. Sarah Jane, beyond a patent weak- 
ness for ribbons, and a suspected hankering 
after followers, is a sealed book to Lady 
Fanny, whose hair she brushes, and at 
whose toilet she ministers. But be sure 
that Sarah Jane knows a great deal more 
of Lady Fanny than that titled Girl of the 
Period would consider possible, and has a 
very decided opinion as to her character 
and conduct It might be wholesome for 
young Sir Harry, curled darling of For- 
tune though he be, to hear what " That 
fellow, my man," stolid, mute, lynx-eyed, 
respectful, has to say of his master behind 
his back. The Vehmgericht of servitude 
sits in judgment on us all, and before that 
pitiless tribunal, crowns and coronets, robes 



190 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

of state and gorgeous uniforms, nay, even 
the decorum of deans and of bankers, are of 
no more account than they will prove here- 
after in the grim presence of Death. 

It is to the dowager's credit that Lady 
Livingston's servants, as a rule, approved 
of Lady Livingston. They were by no 
means blind to her failings, but they were 
good enough to be lenient to human imper- 
fections, and to admit that, as mistresses 
went, where there was one better, there 
were a dozen worse. The testamentary 
disposal of her property was a matter of 
immense interest to them, not from selfish 
motives, but from an odd feeling of semi- 
feudal loyalty which still lingers in some 
households. They had themselves no ex- 
pectation of deriving any extraordinary 
benefits from her ladyship's posthumous 
liberality. " My lady's own maid," a tried 
abigail of sixty summers, and the old coach- 
man, who was growing too frail for a start 
in alien service, would probably receive 



The Last Will and Testament. 191 

small pensions. The rest had no anticipa- 
tion of much beyond what was curtly 
summed up by the silent-shod butler as 
u the correct thing . a year's wages, a suit 
of mourning, and ten pounds apiece." So 
that this was not one of those ghoul-like 
establishments in which the kitchen looks 
out for the profitable decease of the eccen- 
tric master or mistress upstairs. 

But the dowager's servants were quite 
excited at the notion that a new will was 
being executed upstairs, where the lawyer, 
Mr. Goodeve, and his clerk, were now in 
conference with Lady Livingston, The 
testatrix herself was not one of those weak- 
minded persons who babble about their inten- 
tions to all unconcerned, or who choose confi- 
dants from sheer inability to keep a secret. 
Yet the domestics were as perfectly aware 
that a will was being read over, signed, 
sealed, and delivered, and that this instru- 
ment was the third or fourth of its species 
that had been successively prepared, as if 



1 86 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

a suburban shrubbery, large, and sundry 
paths wound tortuously betwixt the masses- 
of evergreens. There had been some in- 
tention, on the part of the landscape-gar- 
dener who laid out the pleasure-grounds, 
or of the nabob his patron, to form a leafy 
labyrinth in imitation of the neighbouring 
maze at Hampton Court ; but the design 
had been abandoned, and its sole result 
was, that the miniature jungle was inter- 
sected by an unusual number of narrow 
and mossgrown tracks. The spot was a 
favourite one with Violet Maybrook, wha 
would sometimes pace for an hour beneath 
the shadow of the black fir-trees and 
towering cedars that rose high above the 
glistening leaves of the holly, the bay> and 
the laurel, communing with her own ever- 
busy thoughts. There were two parts of 
the pleasaunce which she sought, as by 
instinct . the gloomy and neglected shrub- 
bery, where the weeds grew rankly, without 
fe&r of the gardener's hoe ; and the breezjr 



The Last Will and Testament. 187 

~ - . 

terrace that commanded a prospect of the 
bright river speeding onwards to the sea. 
The latter view was replete with life and 
motion ; the former was melancholy enough 
to have been that of some islet in the 
Dismal Swamp where runaway negroes hid 
their outlawed heads ; but it suited well 
with Violet's mood. She was in the 
shrubbery when the clang of the gate-bell 
heralded Mr. Goodeve's approach, and, 
herself unseen, she gazed forth between 
the spear-pointed leaves and scarlet berries 
of the hollies, and saw the lawyer and his 
clerk walk from the lodge towards the 
house. Why does she start and turn pale 
as she sees two such commonplace per- 
sons pacing side by side up the smooth, 
firm carriage-road ? Mr. Goodeve, with 
his thin grayish hair, his uncertain step, 
and feeble gait, was scarcely capable of 
inspiring alarm or agitation in any beholder 
who had* not the ill-luck to owe him money.. 
As for dark Mr. Daniel Davis, he was 



1 88 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

. . » . 

surely a highly-respectable young clerk, in 
professional attendance on his employer; 
Yet Violet, herself unseen, watched hfe 
.every movement with anxiety, and her 
eyes dilated as she looked out from her 
leafy ambush, and her breathing all but 
ceased, so that she resembled a marble 
effigy of Terror more than a sentient 
being, so white and motionless was she. 

" No, no !" she murmured, as the two 
figures disappeared behind the pillars of 
the portico : " I was not mistaken. It was 
he ; somewhat graver and paler than I 
remember him, but with a lurking devil 
behind his eyes still. He is here for no 
good ; I am sure of that." 

These expressions could hardly have 
been applicable to Samuel Goodeve, gen- 
tleman, attorney-at-law. 

By what invisible telegraph do those 
mysterious gnomes and brownies who make 
our beds, cook our dinners, and execute 
our behests, those familiar strangers of the 



The Last Will and Testament. 1 89 

* - 

basement who dwell beneath our roofs for 
half a lifetime without our gaining more 
than a skin-deep knowledge of their real 
dispositions, learn what goes on among 
their worldly superiors in the drawing- 
room? That they do so is beyond dis- 
pute. Sarah Jane, beyond a patent weak- 
ness for ribbons, and a suspected hankering 
after followers, is a sealed book to Lady 
Fanny, whose hair she brushes, and at 
whose toilet she ministers. But be sure 
that Sarah Jane knows a great deal more 
of Lady Fanny than that titled Girl of the 
Period would consider possible, and has a 
very decided opinion as to her character 
and conduct. It might be wholesome for 
young Sir Harry, curled darling of For- 
tune though he be, to hear what " That 
fellow, my man," stolid, mute, lynx-eyed, 
respectful, has to say of his master behind 
his back. The Vehmgericht of servitude 
sits in judgment on us all, and before that 
pitiless tribunal, crowns and coronets, robes 



196 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

to that noble slave that man treats but sor- 
rily, yet from whose allegiance he derives 
such profit and such pride. 

" Sir Frederick do know the points of a 
horse for a young one, now, he do." Such 
was the old coachman's verdict, when the 
baronet had strolled off. " He'd have made 
a living, if he'd been in that line of life, as. 
a dealer, or a farrier, or steeple-chasing, he 
would." 

" Ay, and an honest living," chimed in 
the chief stableman cordially, and quite un- 
conscious of the sarcasm on Dashwood's 
present means of subsistence which his 
words conveyed. 

Lady Livingston was unusually gracious 
to her graceless kinsman when she had 
completed her business with the lawyer. 
She was, indeed, in a peculiarly affable 
mood, and all around her appeared to come 
in for a share of her expansive benevolence. 
She had pressed Mr. Goodeve to stay and 
dine, an invitation which she privately re- 



The Last Will and Testament. 197 

garded as a greater compliment than did 
the eminent family solicitor, who was well 
used to take his seat beside the social ma- 
hogany of still more exalted persons than a 
dowager baroness. But she was of the 
old school ; he, elderly though he was, of 
the new, and had sat habitually at the 
boards of very great people, like the Mar- 
quis of Windermere, Lord Harrowgate, and 
the Duke of Snowdon, conscious that his 
serviceable aid in getting the family coach 
round awkward corners and out of quag- 
mires of the law, was good and valuable 
consideration for their hospitality. She 
had been almost angry with his clerk, Mr. 
Davis, because he declined the glass of 
sherry which the butler brought to him 
after he had played his part as a witness. 
But she had consoled herself by the reflec- 
tion, that the clerk . a decent-looking young 
man, probably from Wales . was doubtless 
shy and nervous in the presence of one of 
her own lofty rank, and had smiled as she 



198 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

acknowledged his parting salute. She was 
now very genial in her reception of Sir 
Frederick. 

" I have come . like a prodigal as I am 
. to invite myself to dinner, if I may," the 
young man had said, looking very hand- 
some and good-humoured as he spoke. 

" I am very glad to hear it I meant to 
have scolded you for neglecting me so long, 
but I will put that off. You will give me 
plenty of occasions for that, never fear," re- 
turned the old lady, with unusual warmth 
of manner. She actually thanked him, later 
on, for coming to see her so soon after his 
return, bade him welcome to the Fountains* 
and quoted the proverbial saying, that 
blood is thicker than water ; whereat Dash- 
wood, who could remember many a meta- 
phorical rap over the knuckles received 
from his imperious old relative, hardly be- 
lieved his ears. 

" I declare," he said afterwards, " I feel 
certain that, if I had asked her that even- 



The Last Will and Testament. 199 



ing, the old woman would have given me a 
cheque for five hundred, without boggling 
about lawyers and security. Five hun- 
dred ; yes, or six, perhaps. And I, like a 
fool, was afraid to back my luck !" 

Dinner, on that day at the Fountains, was 
more lively than was often the case, and was 
served on a scale of unwonted splendour. 
Some rare old wine . rarer even than that 
which had been uncorked for Oswald 
Charlton . was brought forth from the cob- 
webbed crypt of its concealment, to tickle 
the palate of the guest. " That's amazing 
Burgundy!" observed Dashwood, as his 
glass was refilled with the liquid ruby ; 
" I've a faint recollection of its flavour as a 
boy. But it's better now." 

" Yes, it's better now," said the dowager; 
" at least if age makes perfect My lord 
had it as a present from Nesselrode or 
Pozzo di Borgo, I forget which, in the year 
'14, when he was at Paris. There is not 
much of it left" 



200 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

Violet Maybrook's part must on that day 
have been a difficult one to play. She had 
met Dashwood in the presence of Lady 
Livingston and of Miss Fleming ; and no- 
thing could have been less calculated to 
attract remark than the manner in which 
she did meet him. 

" I am glad to see you again/ 9 she had 
said, simply, and her whole demeanour was 
that of one who is pleased to encounter an 
old acquaintance, though rather for the 
sake of the association with other scenes 
and times than on account of any personal 
preference. But it was trying to her 
haughty spirit to have to spend hours in 
the company of the man whom she loved 
in spite of herself, and of the contempt 
which she could not but feel for his nature. 
And this ordeal was the more irksome, be- 
cause Sir Frederick chose to pay marked 
attention to his cousin Beatrice, and to 
exert for her benefit all his powers of 
pleasing. That he succeeded in pleasing 



The Last Will and Testament. 201 

Miss Fleming was more than Violet could 
perceive ; but there was no doubt of his 
Jiaving at all events achieved the minor 
triumph of riveting her notice, and of bring- 
ing to her lips, once and again, the smiles 
which had of late been rarely seen there. 
It was a remarkable circumstance that 
Lady Livingston's indulgence towards her 
scapegrace relative extended on this occa- 
sion so far that she seemed to regard with 
positive approval the efforts of the ruined 
baronet to ingratiate himself with the 
heiress, and more than once backed Dash- 
wood's entreaty that his cousin would sing 
some song, " an old favourite," to use his 
.own words, when Beatrice manifested some 
reluctance to comply with his request 

" I thought the dowager hated the man " 
it was thus that Violet communed with her- 
self; "but I suppose old women can be 
whimsical, as well as young ones. To 
judge by her present conduct, a bystander 
might suppose Sir Frederick to be a suitor 



202 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

of the most eligible sort, whose proposals it 
was desirable to meet half-way, and that 
my noble employer was ready at a mo- 
ment's warning to utter the traditional 
* Bless you, my children/ by way of beni- 
son on this interesting pair." 

Keen-sighted as Violet was, her powers of 
perception were somewhat obscured by the 
tempest of jealous wrath that raged within 
her heart, and to conceal which, she had need 
of all her self-control. A very astute and 
impartial observer might have noticed that 
the autocratic mistress of the Fountains, 
with all her benignity of look and manner, 
eyed her insolvent kinsman with somewhat 
of the expression which a cat wears when 
watching the movements of a half-killed 
mouse. With what amused intentness 
Puss observes the panting creature as it 
stirs afresh ; how blandly, yet with what 
pitiless vigilance in her green eyes, does 
she note its struggles to escape ; nay, how 
softly, as in sign of encouragement, does 



The Last Will and Testament. 203. 

she pat with her velvet paw, purring the 
while, the trembling victim, that in a minute 
more will be crunched, body and bones, by 
the cruel gripe of her sharp teeth. To all 
outward appearance, Lady Livingston was 
fully reconciled to the impenitent prodigaL 
whom she had known and distrusted so 
long; but there was a half- humorous 
twinkle in the dowager's eye which was 
lost on the other members of the company, 
and which seemed to be suggested by some 
secret sense of enjoyment 

Once, as she stood beside the piano, 
turning over the leaves of a music-book, 
Dashwood contrived, unheard, to exchange 
a word or two with Violet Maybrook. 

" You are not angry with me, Violet ?" 
he said in a low voice ; " we ought not ta 
quarrel, ought we?" And he took her 
hand in his ; but she snatched it from him, 
not petulantly, but with the steady resolve 
of an indignation too deep for words. 

" Carry your attentions elsewhere," she 



204 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

said bitterly ; " they may be valued there 
by one who has not learned to read you as 
I, to my sorrow, have done. You have 
begun well, and had better go on as you 
have begun. Go, Sir Frederick, to Miss 
Fleming's side, before we are observed." 

"On my life, on my soul, Violet," the 
baronet returned earnestly, " you have no 
cause for anger, none. I have been acting 
a part, nothing more. You don't suppose 
I care a straw for the pretty baby-face 
yonder ! But the way to loosen the old 
woman's purse-strings is to be civil to my 
cousin Beatrice, whom she thinks perfec- 
tion, and so. -" 

Violet interrupted him fiercely. " And 
so you would have no objection to a rich 
bride, whose dower would free you from 
your debts ; and the old lady is capricious, 
and Beatrice gentle and weak-willed ; and 
all would go smoothly on, were it not for 
her whom you now insult by paying court 
to another before her eyes. Beware, Sir 



The Last Will and Testament 205 

Frederick Dashwood, how you make an 
enemy of me !" 

And the next moment she was seated at 
the piano, singing, in the richest tones of 
her sweet clear voice, one of those Canadian- 
French boat-songs which Dashwood had 
heard, many a time, among people and 
scenes now far away. Her passionate 
anger merely served to add a charm and a 
pathos to her accents as they rang through 
the room, and she looked royally beautiful 
as she rose to receive, with becoming meek- 
ness, the praise of her scanty audience. 

" After that? said Beatrice, laughing, " I 
shall sing no more. My poor little ditties 
would be ashamed to make themselves 
audible after Miss Maybrook's perfor- 



mance." 



It was late when Dashwood left the house 
to return to London, and, as he passed 
down the carriage drive, in the clear air of 
a frosty night, with the starlit sky above 
his head, he lingered for a moment or two,. 



206 Lady Livingstoris Legacy. . 

and looked up at the mansion that he had 
just quitted. 

"I wonder," he said softly, "which of 
those lighted windows is that of her room ? 
Pshaw ! What on earth does it matter ? 
A pretty fellow am I, indeed, to be spooning 
about here like a love-sick Romeo ; and 
yet, by Jove ! I feel to-night as if I could 
have been fool enough to marry that girl 
outright, if she would have me. Queer, 
that I should prize her more, now that she 
is scornful, hostile, almost, than when she 
took every word I said as truth and law, 
out yonder. But I should grow tired of 
her in a week, and, what is more to the 
purpose, I cannot afford it So I must 
chuck sentiment over, and stick to busi- 
ness." 

Still, as Frederick Dashwood, baronet of 
the United Kingdom, and still (thanks to 
the dilatory proceedings of Cutts and 
Spatterdash, the well-known army agents, 
whose incoming client boggled at the heavy 



The Last Will and Testament. 207 

over-regulation price which their outgoing 
customer demanded) a captain in Her 
Majesty's army, walked towards the railway 
station, he thought more of Violet May- 
brook than he had done since they parted 
on the platform of the London terminus, 
after their landing from the Canadian home- 
ward-bound packet which had brought 
them to' Liverpool. It was with some 
regret, and almost a touch of compunction, 
that he thought of her, and of the gradual 
change which had been worked in her. 
When first they met, she had been a bright, 
clever, high-spirited girl ; and now she was 
.a woman, fierce, vindictive, reticent of 
counsel, sensitive to wrong. 

" Not the sort of lady-love to be lightly 
cast off;" thus ran the thread of his medi- 
tations ; " and yet, in the Fiend's name, 
what can she do ? To hurt me, she must 
harm herself . not that such a consideration 
would stop her," he added ruefully, and 
this time aloud, "if once her mind were 



208 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

fairly bent on vengeance. And yet, who- 
knows ? There is a soft spot in the hearts- 
of almost all women, when it comes to the 
point of settling scores with the man who 
has injured them. FU risk it . must risk 
it. The Jews could sell me up any morning,, 
and I am as ill off as the fellow in the fable 
. Damocles, wasn't he ? . with the sword 
hanging over his head by night and day. 
And yet, if Violet and Beatrice were a 
brace of heiresses, I'd not hesitate long as 
to which I would choose for my partner in 
life. The dowager's money-bags over- 
weight the scale." 

Thus brooding over the necessity and 
the precariousness of his position, he 
reached the station in time to be a pas- 
senger by the last townward train. And 
as that train rushed on through the darkness,, 
the peaceful stars serenely shining over- 
head, the trees, the hedges, and the house- 
roofs looming through the uncertain light,, 
even the choicest of tobacco could not 



The Last Will and Testament 209 

soothe Sir Frederick into that condition of 
calm stolidity which is the privilege of a 
sound constitution and a callous conscience. 
It was one of those rare moments when the 
most reckless pause to look back, like a 
pilgrim who has gained some ridge along 
the mountain-road, at the worse than wasted 
life that lies behind them, and see, in the 
clear cold gray of the distant horizon, the 
.opportunities lost for ever, the right path 
neglected for crooked ways, all that might 
have been, but which now can never be. 
Dashwood had schemed and striven, and 
he had had his will and his way. There 
had been a time when the baronetcy had 
seemed out of his reach, and when he could 
scarcely have hoped to inherit whatever 
his offended grandfaher might have to leave. 
He was Sir Frederick now, and the very 
rank that he had once desired so ardently 
merely supplied him with an additional 
reason for grumbling at the fate which had 
decreed that he should be a titled pauper. 
vol. 1. 14 



210 Lady Livingston's Legacy, 

" A precious mess I have made of it !" . 
such were his last reflections. " And as 
for Violet, poor girl, it would have been* 
better for both of us if our ways in life had 
always been apart" 




CHAPTER X. 

THE SNAKE IN THE GRASS. 

ADY LIVINGSTON, though an 
imperious, was not a hard task- 
mistress to those beneath her 
domestic sway, and did not, as some 
employers do, regard her companion as a 
sentry never to be off" duty, a sort of useful 
shadow, never to be too far separated from 
its proprietor. Hale and able-bodied, she 
did not stand in need of those small services 
which are so constantly exacted by opulent 
infirmity from youthful indigence, did not 
drop her handkerchief at one moment,[mis- 
lay her spectacles at another, and periodi- 

14 . 2 



212 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 



cally institute a quest in search of an 
invaluable bunch of keys (all the time re- 
posing in the innermost recess of her own 
cavernous pocket), which entailed a game 
at hide-and-seek in every nook and corner 
of the house. The dowager readily agreed 
that Violet, who had been accustomed to 
much outdoor exercise and fresh air, should 
spend her leisure time in rambling about 
the grounds, or, indeed, elsewhere. 

" Go into the town, if you like, my dear, 
and take one of the servants if you prefer 
it. You'll not do it twice, I suspect The 
shop-lads from London will stare at you, 
and you won't care about the grocer's two- 
and-ninepenny Moning . good tea cost a 
guinea a pound when I was a child, in. the 
days of convoys and the old Honourable 
Company, but then it was tea . there is 
none now . or the linendraper's ticketed 
goods, or the music-seller's window, full of 
pictures of black men making themselves 
ridiculous. Nobody will tease you here, at 



The Snake in the Grass. 213 



any rate, and you get the air twice as well 
on the terrace as in the streets." 

Violet was on the terrace now, looking 
dreamily up the reaches of the river, steel* 
blue in the pale sun-gleams that fell through 
the broken clouds above, for now a fresh 
change of weather seemed imminent The 
sky was covered by long filmy threads of 
white vapour, some gathered into skeins, as 
though newly twisted by the distaff of Norse 
Valkyr or Greek Destiny, some woven into 
webs fit to be the winding-sheet of a dead 
Titan. Still the stream ran down, and the 
narrow-leaved willows waved their gaunt 
arms, and the water rippled among the 
sedges and reeds that hid the pike and 
harboured the white armada of swans, as 
stream, willow, and wave had done before 
the glint of the Roman helmets and the 
flash of the Roman spears had scared the 
painted indwellers of British London. 

" And this is England !" she murmured, 
scarce conscious that her thoughts had 



214 Lady Livingston 9 s Legacy. 

shaped themselves into articulate sounds; 
" so like, yet so unlike, the Old Country of 
my girlish dreams. What have I found as 
yet? A packhorse round of duties, a 
carking weight of care, the monotony of 
the cloister, unrelieved by the fervour of a 
willing sacrifice of self. Was it for this 
that I have done and dared so much, until 
the heart within my breast seems changed 
to very stone, and I can pray no more, 
weep no more, but must wait, and long with 
unsatisfied longing for what can never be 
mine! To be in England, in wonderful, 
wealthy England, where power and splen- 
dour were the appanage of the high-born, or 
of such as could win their way upwards to 
the eminence on which the accident of birth 
had seated others, such was my wish. I am 
here, and in what am I the better for the 
change ? To be my lady . one of the titled 
ew of whom I had read, even as a baronet's 
wife . was my ambition, and even that poor 
prize seems to be as far beyond my grasp 



The Snake in the^ Grass; 2 1 5 

as the heaven that I shall never win. I 
might force him to marry me. The alter- 
native is too dreadful for a luxurious 
Sybarite to defy, were it once but fairly put 
before him, with no loophole for subterfuge 
or escape; but in such a wedding, Hate 
would stand, ghostly, behind bride and 

bridegroom, and " 

She paused, and stood, with dilated eyes 
and lips half-parted, gazing with as much of 
startled eagerness as if she had in very 
truth beheld the grim Presence of which 
she spoke, incarnate before her. What she 
saw in reality was a girl of slender form and 
low stature, with colourless hair and pallid 
face, and cold keen eyes riveted on those of 
Violet, a girl whose attire was faultlessly 
neat, and of almost Quaker-like soberness 
as to shape and colour, and who had 
approached her so softly in the midst of 
her reverie, that a less lively imagination 
than that of Miss Maybrook might easily 
have conceived that she had risen out of 



2 1 6 Lady Livingstoris Legacy. 



the earth, like the elf that she seemed to 
be. In short, the intruder was no other 
than the lodger whom Mrs. Gulp of Great 
Eldon Street knew by the name of Miss 
Davis, and whose brother was the pattern 
clerk of those very eminent solicitors,. 
Goodeve and Glegg, of Bedford Row. 
The elf looked smilingly up in Violet's face, 
and made a quick fluttering movement 
forward, so like to the abrupt dart of a 
snake, that Lady Livingston's companion 
instinctively shrank back, though in the 
next instant an unwonted tinge of crimson 
rose to warm the creamy whiteness of her 
fair face, and she drew herself up to her 
full height, as if in scorn. 

" To think that I should frighten you !"" 
said the elf, with sportive malice : " you 
were not always so easy to alarm, Violet, 
love !" 

" Nor am I alarmed now," answered 
Violet coldly ; " nor is your coming, Miss 
Larpent, so absolute a surprise to me as 



The Snake in the Grass. 217 

you appear to consider it Erom the 
moment when I saw your brother arrive 
here, in attendance on his employer, I felt 
assured that you could not be far away. 
Now, frankly, what would you have of me ? 
I know you too well to suppose that you 
have come here without wanting something, 
Miss Larpent" 

" Call me Aphy," said the elf, in the 
prettiest tone of playful reproach : " why 
be so formal with your old playfellow and 
schoolmate ! What have I done, Vi, that 
I should cease to be Aphy to you ?" 

" Dare you ask me !" burst out Violet,, 
with a passionate indignation that made her 
voice quiver, as with flashing eyes she 
confronted the intruder. " Is it nothing that 
you have brought disgrace upon an honest 
name, and on kindred whose misfortune 
it was to be near to you ? Is it nothing 
that your shame embittered the last days of 
your grayrhaired father's life, and that he 
learned to be thankful that your mother 



2 1 8 Lady Livingston *s Legacy. 



had not lived long enough to know her 
best-loved child for what she was ! Is it 
nothing that your brother has gone forth 
from his native place with the brand of 
Cain upon his brow, made into a murderer 
by his stubborn fondness for a sister who 
merited so little sympathy ! Is it nothing 
that you are yourself a wanderer, as guilty 
of yon poor wretch's violent death, as if 
your hand had held the weapon that sent 
him, with all his sins upon his head, to 

judgment ! And now you come here" 

" And now I come here," interrupted the 
elf, with glittering eyes that had changed 
colour repeatedly during the course of 
Violet's speech, and in which there now 
shone a baleful green light, such as glows 
in those of the serpent as he lifts his head 
to strike . " and now I come here to have 
this unkind version of my story flung in my 
teeth so rudely, and that by an old friend 
like you, Vi. Do be careful, for your own 
sake, dearest. Take my advice, Violet 



The Snake in the Grass. 219 

Maybrook, and don't forget that your own 
reminiscences should make you more charit- 
able in your criticisms on your neighbours. 
You played the same game with Dash- 
wood, yonder, as mine with Lovelace." 

" I deny it I" flashed out Violet, towering 
above her almost dwarfish adversary, like a 
grand statue of Scorn : " there rests no 
stain on my name, or on my soul." 

" No stain, Violet, darling !" sneered Miss 
Larpent, with one of those serpentine move- 
ments which made her pliant frame appear 
unnaturally supple, and with eyes that 
seemed to sparkle as with an unholy fire of 
awakened malignity. " It may be, in one 
sense, that you speak the truth, and at any 
rate your prudence or your luck has kept 
you from the breath of scandal ; but yet 
you had best beware lest the true story of 
a certain bright spring day, far off in the 
woods of our own Canada, should ever ooze 
out The worst that can be said of me 
lias been told, and if many would con- 



220 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

demn, some would pity me. But as tot 
you " 

11 Hush ! hush ! for the love of Heaven/* 
said Violet, hurriedly ; and glancing quickly 
to left and right, as if in fear of eaves- 
droppers : " I cannot bear this. You take 
a cruel advantage of me, Aphy : but . but 
you are right after all. I have no claim to 
judge harshly of others." And as she thus 
spoke, she wrung her hands with a slight 
but fearfully expressive gesture, and then 
allowed her arms to fall passively down by 
her side, as she stood slightly bending 
forward, as one who had striven against 
fate, and has been vanquished. 

" I thought," said the elf triumphantly* 
"that you would hear reason by-and-by,. 
Violet, love ! And now to business." 

11 Business ; ah, yes ! I had forgotten, 
that/' returned Miss Maybrook, without 
any change of attitude. " You want some- 
thing of me, or you would not be here." 

" Of course I want something," com- 



The Snake in the Grass. 221 

posedly answered she who has hitherto 
l>een known by the strange name of Aphy : 
*' every one does, so far as I know. And 
my present want is a very old and common 
one . money." 

" I have very Kttie of that," said Violet, 
almost eagerly, as she drew forth her 
purse ; " but if that little can be of any ser- 
vice, you shall be welcome to the use of it." 

" Thank you ; no !" answered her former 
friend demurely : " your finances, Vi, are 
scarcely worth poaching upon. But, if you 
are not the rose of aristocracy, you are 
near enough to it to imbibe its perfume, 
which is wealth. You live, metaphorically, 
in the lap of luxury. You are the daily 
and hourly companion of grand folks, who 
would hesitate to allow their garments to 
brush against mine, should we meet by 
, accident. The employer whom you serve 
is rich and whimsical ; that much I know. 
The man who promised to marry you . his 
brother officer promised to marry me, and 



222 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

you remember the result . is at least a. 
baronet, and has some sort of bemuddled 
fortune. Bruce and I are poor, Vi, dear. 
He has his wretched pay as a clerk, and 
the few weekly shillings that I earn by 
teaching do not greatly swell the stock. 
In this strait, I naturally remember that I 
have a friend in you, Violet, a friend who- 
cannot refuse my petition." The last 
words were uttered fawningly, but with sl 
malicious emphasis that was not thrown 
away upon the hearer. 

" What can I do ?" said Violet wearily z. 
" my position here scarcely entides me ta 
. beg. Anything beyond a small sum. 
Lady Livingston would probably deny me. 
As for my salary " 

" Once again, I have no designs upon 
your pittance of salary," tartly broke in the 
elf : " nor just at present, Vi, do I urge you 
to make a raid on the dowager's purse. 
What would seem to her ladyship as a 
magnificent donation, five pounds . or, in 



The Snake in the Grass. 223. 

case of marvellous liberality, ten . to a 
" deserving object, " would but stave off the 
evil hour of sheer destitution for some few 
days more. No ; it is to Sir Frederick 
that I would have you apply." 

" And to what good purpose ?" pleaded 
Violet, with averted face. " You, who 
know so much, must be aware that he is 
crippled by debts and beset by creditors ; 
that he is a desperate and broken man, 
growing daily more and more callous and 
reckless; and that he treats me with 
neglect, now that he is at home again 
among his early associates. Of what avail 
would my request be, were I to humble 
myself so far as to proffer it !" 

" You underrate your influence, dear 
Violet," said Miss Larpent with a mocking 
laugh. " It is not to his affections that you 
should appeal, but to his selfish fears. 
You know as well as I do, that he cannot 
refuse you a boon which it may be in his 
power to grant. And there are always pick- 



22 4 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

ings to be found among the rags and relics 
of a ruined fortune. Those only are really 
poor who never had a chance of being 
what the world calls " broken down." Sir 
Frederick will growl and show his teeth I 
doubt not, but he will presently recognize 
the truth, that discretion is the wisest 
policy for such as he is. Come, I will be 
moderate, but there must be no delays. In 
three days at farthest, I shall expect to 
receive as many hundred pounds. Silence 
is a marketable commodity, and worth its 
pnce. 

Violet shook her head. " I have scanty 
hopes," "she answered; but I will try to 
arrange matters as you wish." 

" Do so, like a dear, dear old friend," 
replied the elf, with a sprightly buoyancy 
of tone and manner that made her resem- 
blance to a malevolent fairy even more 
striking than before. " Nor need I recom- 
mend secrecy. For your own sake you 
will be mute. So, now, I must go, before 



The Snake in the Grass. 225 

my presence attracts the attention of some 
member of my lady's household. I am a 
trespasser here, you must know ; and had 
not the gardener fortunately left the wicket- 
gate unfastened, yonder, by the river-bank, 
I should not have reached your presence 
without provoking remark and inquiry. 
Here " . and as she spoke she thrust into 
Violet's hancl a card on which some words 
were written . " is my address in London. 
Bring the money, or let Sir Frederick 
bring it, as you choose, but remember the 
three days . for I grant no further grace. 
Now, one thing more, and then I vanish 
like a ghost at cockcrow. Kiss me, Violet !" 
And the little creature opened her lithe 
arms and lifted her face, as waiting for the 
embrace of her former friend. Slowly, and 
as if under the overmastering influence of 
some magic spell, did Violet bow down her 
stately head and press her lips to Miss Lar- 
pent's sallow cheek, shuddering the while, 
as if she had touched the slimy skin of an 
vol. 1. 15 



226 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

actual snake. Nor could the eye of the 
fellest reptile that ever haunted the long 
grass of an Indian jungle glitter with a 
more intense expression of exultant malig- 
nity, than did those colourless ones of Miss 
Larpent's, as they looked up at Violet 
when that enforced caress had been duly 
paid. 

" Now, farewell ; but remember !" she 
said, and then was gone. 

But Violet stood motionless on the ter- 
race long after her unwelcome visitant 
had left her, nor could a sculptor have 
desired a fairer model, had he dreamed of 
moulding a statue of Despair. A pagan 
of old days might have believed her to be 
one who had met, face to face, with 
Medusa's self, and to be stiffening into 
stone under the potency of the Gorgon 
glance. At last, with a faint low sigh, she 
stirred, and as the light of a re-awakened 
intelligence came back into her eyes, she 
drew herself up, and for a moment gazed 



T/ie Snake in the Grass. 227 

around her with all the scornful anger of 
an insulted queen. 

" It begins, then, in this world . the 
doom of the lost ones," she murmured so 
faintly, that the sound of her voice reached 
her own ear but as a whisper from afar off; 
4S and mine has not tarried long. And she 
. yonder viper . has defied me, humbled 
me, forced me to own that I hold my place 
in the world, such as it is, on the frail 
tenure of her greed and her caprice, and 
she has left me . uncrushed !" She raised 
her arms as she spoke, and let them drop 
again, repeating, unconsciously, the gesture 
by which she had expressed the utter help- 
lessness of a proud spirit to cope with some 
resistless force that will not be gainsaid. 
Then, without a word more, she walked 
slowly back towards the house. 

Violet's duty of reading aloud to the 
dowager, a task which she executed after 
dinner on most days, was but badly fulfilled 
on that which had witnessed her interview 

15.2 



u 



22% Lady Livingstons Leguj. 

with Miss Larpent. Her voice; usually so 
dear and musical, was now so unsteady 
and indistinct, that Lady Livingston, who 
had that all-devouring interest in fiction 
which we sometimes notice m the survivors 
cf a bygone generation, became for the 
first time dissatisfied with the conduct of 
her dependent. 

There, there, chfld, w she said angrily; 
put the book down, please, if you can read 
no better than that It's a novel that I'm 
quite absorbed in, and you've tried my 
patience beyond bearing for the last ten 
minutes, so that I have completely lost the 
thread of the heroine's speech, and don't 
know what the villain is driving at. I 
never remember you to have been so ab- 
sent as you seem to-night" 

Beatrice Fleming smiled as she offered 
to read the remainder of the chapter in 
Miss Maybrook's stead, and indeed neither 
of the girls thought much of the petulance 
of the old lady, who was accustomed to say 



The Snake in the Grass. 229 

*^»^^BB«^^B^BMBBBBaBBBBBBBaBBBBBBBBBBB«B^H^^^BIBBBBBBHBBaBBH^^BBBBlBH^BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBaH^^a^BBaB^B^^B^M^BB«n^B^M^^B^B^BaBBBBBaaaBB^^^^H^^B^^^^BBBBBBB» 

.of herself that her bark was by far more for- 
midable than her bite, and whose chiding 
was commonly softened by the quaint sense 
.of humour which rarely deserted her. But 
Beatrice could not but observe how pale 
and grave her kinswoman's companion had 
become, and how evident was the effort by 
which she kept her thoughts from wan- 
dering, as she went through her habitual 
routine of duty. . 

" I thought Miss Maybrook was ill to- 
day," she said on parting for the night 
with Lady Livingston ; " her hand was 
very cold and her mind seemed to be pre- 
occupied." 

" Nonsense !" returned the dowager : 
"" she was a little careless and dull, that's 
all . moped, I suppose, in this stupid 
house, where I can't allow you, dear, to 
stay much longer. But you see that I 
scolded her, and she brightened up won- 
derfully after that." 



CHAPTER XL 



BY THE BOATHOUSE. 




OME down at once, dear Frede- 
rick. Lose no time. Meet me 
at the boathouse by the river,, 
to-morrow, at two. Lose not a moment. 
What you know of has come to light. Do 
not fail me. Come at once. . V. M." 

The note was addressed to Sir Frederick 
Dashwood. 

Strange to say, Violet Maybrook, in her 
own room, had spent two hours in com- 
posing this apparently simple and un- 
studied document, surrounded as she was 
by torn fragments of letter-paper, on each 



By the Boat house. 231 

of which had been traced a few lines, 
written only to be condemned before the 
ink was dry. The style of some of these 
inchoate epistles varied very much. Some 
were proud, curt, and cold ; others breathed 
fond words of love, never destined to reach 
the hands of him for whom they were de- 
signed. At length, and after many failures, 
Violet wrote, directed, and sealed her letter ; 
and in the cold gray of early morning she 
carried it herself to the post-office. The 
day was yet young, the metropolitan de- 
liveries are frequent enough to insure 
Dashwood's prompt receipt of the missive, 
she could not doubt that he would obey 
her summons. 

The weather being still fine, with fre- 
quent sunshine and filmy cloud-streaks to 
mottle the pale blue sky, it was probable 
that Lady Livingston would take her accus- 
tomed carriage-exercise at three o'clock, 
accompanied as usual by Miss Maybrook, 
and hence the choice of two, as the hour 



232 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

most convenient for a meeting between 
Violet and Sir Frederick. The attendance 
of the former on her titled employer was 
not very close, and she anticipated no diffi- 
culty in leaving the house unquestioned 
and unseen, to keep her appointment with 
the baronet. All combinations, however, 
that relate to human conduct are liable to 
be disturbed by some unexpected action 
on the part of another, and so it proved in 
this instance, since it was the dowager's 
fancy to order her carriage full an hour 
earlier than usual, and to notify the fact to 
Violet Whatever might have been the 
faults in Miss Maybrook's nature, she was 
at least superior to the petty artifices con- 
genial to some dispositions, and it was with 
strong repugnance and keen self-reproach 
that she schooled her proud and passionate 
soul to dissemble. She was ill, she said 
at length, faint and giddy, and must ask 
Lady Livingston to excuse her for being 
unequal to accompanying her during her 



By the Bo at house. 233 

-drive. It was nothing, a mere trifle, and 
would soon pass away ; but if the dowager 
pleased, Violet would go to her room and 
lie down for awhile, 

" I don't like companions who are always 
ill," said the mistress of the Fountains, 
drumming with her foot upon the silken 
footstool, so soon as the door had closed 
on Violet. " One invalid in a house is 
enough, I should say. Miss May brook was 
just what I could wish, until last night, but 
now she seems quite altered, It's all very 
well, Beatrice dear, for you to volunteer to 
drive out with me in her stead, and I'm too 
selfish to say no ; but it is intolerable that 
you should be boxed up in a chariot, and 
bowled along a dull road that you don't 
care about, merely because this girl has the 
fancies of a fine lady. Nerves, I suppose ! 
I don't know, I declare, what the world is 
coming to. I presume Molly the house- 
maid will be troubled with nerves presently. 
When I was young, nobody had such things, 



234 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

except ladies of quality and rich old maids. 
It is abominably inconsiderate, on the part 
of Miss Maybrook, and I shall take care 
that she knows my opinion." 

Having uttered which severe remarks 
with a becoming austerity, the dowager 
summoned Mrs. Hart the housekeeper, and 
bade her to administer wine, sal-volatile, 
or whatsoever cordial or anodyne her ex- 
perience might suggest, and to pay all 
attention to the comfort of the culprit whom 
she had just been denouncing. And before 
starting for her early drive, she went her- 
self to Violet's darkened chamber, and 
spoke to its lonely occupant almost as ten- 
derly as she would have done to her own 
daughter. But Miss Maybrook would have, 
nothing, not even the solace of a fire. Sleep 
and quiet were all that she wished for, and 
Mrs. Hart's suggestions were all met with a 
gentle negative. Wherefore the dowager 
came downstairs grumbling at the incon- 
siderate behaviour of her new companion 



By the Bo at house. 235 

in falling ill, and, with Beatrice, started for 
her drive. 

" I think, if I could sleep, it would do me 
good. I need not trouble you any more; 
Mrs. Hart, thank you," said Violet, and 
the housekeeper, with her jingling keys 
and rustling raiment, at length retired, and 
left Miss Maybrook free to act. It is no 
easy matter, in most cases, to quit a large 
house, well garrisoned by servants, unper- 
ceived. And Violet well knew the risk 
which she was forced to run, and was aware 
that for the seeming invalid of half an hour 
ago to be seen abroad would be sufficient 
to attract towards her the fatal curiosity of 
the domestics, a curiosity Argus-eyed, and 
as full of tongues as Rumour itself. As 
yet, she was not unpopular with the house- 
hold, in spite of the increasing favour with 
which she was viewed by their noble mis- 
tress, but then she had been very wary to 
give no vantage-ground to malicious gos- 
siping. Violet divined, rather than knew, 



236 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

that the old saying, * A favourite has no 
friend/' would approve itself true in her 
case, should she lay herself open to re- 
proach on the part of her inferiors in station. 
She had to wait, then, till the coast should 
be clear, and until she was pretty well as- 
sured that the part of the house in which 
her chamber was situated was free from the 
presence of Mrs. Hart and her subordinates 
in cap and apron. She did wait, with a 
beating heart and clenched hands, hearken- 
ing to the ticking of the French clock on 
her chimney-piece. It was now long past 
two, and she might surely, nay, most surely, 
incur the venture. 

The Fountains, like most eighteenth 
century mansions, was more liberally pro- 
vided with back-stairs, passages, and side- 
doors, than are the houses of similar pre- 
tensions, but of later date. There was a 
seldom-used staircase, as Violet well knew, 
leading down from the upper portion of the 
west wing to a corridor on the ground- 



By the Boathouse. 237 

floor, whence a glass-door, barred with iron, 
as a precaution against burglars, gave 
egress to the flower-garden, and permitted 
an inmate of the dwelling to emerge into 
the outer air with fair prospect of being 
wholly unobserved. Hastily attiring her- 
self, Violet softly opened the door of her 
room, satisfied herself that no prying eye 
was upon her, then closing the door, she 
locked it on the outside, and, carrying the 
key with her, made the best of her way 
down the narrow and carpetless stairs, along 
the white-washed passage, and through the 
garden-door, the bolts of which, as she had 
expected, yielded readily to her touch, 
while the key, red with rust, stood stiffly 
rooted in the corroded lock, as it had done 
for years. Her plans were carefully laid. 
She had not failed to 'mark whereabouts, at 
that hour, the gardeners would be employed, 
and this part of the pleasure-grounds she 
heedfully avoided, gliding from tree to tree, 
and from one thicket of shrubs to another, 



238 Lady Livingstons legacy. 

with the stealthy caution of the Indian 
hunter of her native woods, and preferring 
a long circuit to any shortening of her road 
which might expose her to unfriendly scru- 
tiny from the windows. The chances were 
against the housekeeper's return to the 
room which Violet had left tenantless ; but 
should such an event occur, the locked door 
would prove an effectual barrier, and Mrs. 
Hart, after a cautious tap or two, would 
conclude the occupant of the chamber to 
be asleep, and would naturally withdraw. 
Lady Livingston was by this time miles 
away. There would be time to get through 
the interview with Dashwood, and to re- 
gain the room in the west wing, before the 
dowager should order her horses' heads to 
be turned towards home. 

The boathouse belonging to the Foun- 
tains stood beside a tiny creek opening on 
the Thames, and outside the gardens. It 
was, like many of its congeners, a roomy, 
low building, in what is called rustic wood- 



By the Boat house. 239 

work, roughly composed of timber with 
the bark on it, and with an overhanging 
roof of thatch. It contained boats which 
were in requisition, at most, some three or 
four times in the year, when the dowager 
-entertained her fashionable friends from 
London at a lawn-party, and for the rest of 
the twelvemonth appeared to exist for the 
benefit of a superannuated waterman, who 
derived a snug annuity from the light duty 
of keeping this miniature flotilla in good 
repair and trim condition. There was a 
lane that led from the public road to the 
river-side at this point, but it was very little 
frequented, while the angle of the boat- 
house formed a screen that prevented those 
who stood beneath it from being visible 
from the stream itself. The same garden- 
wicket which had given the means of ad- 
mittance to Miss Larpent, and which was 
always unlocked by day, allowed Violet to 
quit the grounds without trouble. 

She found Dashwood angrily pacing to 



240 Lady Livingstotis Legacy. 

and fro, gnawing his tawny moustache a& 
he did so. 

" So here you are at last," he said 
roughly, and without lifting his hat or offer- 
ing his hand. " Half an hour and more 
have I had to stand sentry, kicking my 
heels beside this confounded shed, and all 
because it is your fancy to send me some 
absurd directions to hurry down here, post- 
haste, as if life and death depended on it 
On my word, you take it coolly, Violet. 
My time is of value to myself, I assure you,. 
in the present precious state of my affairs, 
whatever it may be to you." 

"You are uncivil, Sir Frederick/' said 
Violet, with a contemptuous curl of the lip ; 
"and not merely rude, but rash also. In 
whatever fashion you may employ your 
time, rest assured that the portion of it 
which you have spent in obeying my sum- 
mons has not been the most unprofitably 
spent." 

There was something in her tone and 



By the Boathouse. 24 1 

bearing which enforced his attention, and 
he gazed at her fixedly. 

" You look anxious and harassed, Violet," 
he said in more subdued accents ; " I begin 
to think that you really have something to 
say to me. I was half afraid to tell you 
the truth, that you only wanted me to run 
down that you might reproach me, as you 
did the other day. It cuts a fellow up, 
my dear, more than you can guess, to find 
himself treated like a dog by the woman he 
loves." 

And as he spoke, he tried to take her 
hand, but she repulsed him. 

u There was a time, Fred," she an- 
swered, " when even those few half-careless 
words that you have just uttered would 
have been as music to me, something to be 
treasured and gloried in, as a miser hugs 
his hoarded gold ; but I have grown older 
and wiser now, and you have taught me 
much. Suffice it that I did not send for 
you to reproach you with any part of your 

vol. 1. 16 



zrsniaiis 

* 



"Jeter-- n *-v^ - 



IIIIK1I4I 



.inn ;cjt i;ci _sn: 
v*finr : vr^reri -n is ^sr. ?nci r?n-re.f hi m to 

" I ion- like to see you nx tfri«s mood, 
;r.i*tt, rie rejoined, earnestly- : ** nor do I 
think I Kar/ft ^its deserved it. Tax not a 
very jwyyi fellow, I know that well enough, 
hut whftn you say I never loved you, you 
do me. injustice. I know I have not 
k'-.pt my word . about the marriage and 
that hut, Vi, a man with a millstone of 
d'-.bt hung about his neck, ought to have a 
litilf. patu-.ncf: shown to him. Set me up 
will. r,w. thousand a year, three. two, even 
»'.'<» ' iM-.w:r thought the governor could 
l«»v« had |««, to lcave-and I would only 



By the Boat house. 243 

be too proud to take Violet, Lady Dash- 
wood, on my arm into any small drawing- 
room in London. It's my poverty, and 
not my will, as the fellow says in the 
play." 

How is it that an habitual liar can con- 
trive, now and again, to have some true 
statement accepted as worthy of credence, 
even by those who know him the best ? 
By what subtle test of the intellect do we 
learn to distinguish the ring of the true gold 
from the chink of spurious metal, and feel a 
just assurance that we are not deceived 
this once, even though the lips that have 
spoken be on other occasions as utterly un- 
trustworthy ? Nobody, not Dashwood him- 
self, was so familiar with the worst side of 
the baronet's character as was Miss May- 
brook. She knew him, and scorned him, 
and yet, now that he stood before her, she 
felt, by some unerring intuition, that in that 
moment of emotion he had uttered the literal 
truth. Scorn, doubt, anger, were all for the 

16 . 2 



242 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

treatment of myself. When you promised 
me your hand, I really was credulous 
enough to believe that there was a heart to 
go along with it How you must have 
laughed at my simplicity ! I could almost 
share in your merriment, though at my own 
expense." 

And she did laugh, but the unnatural 
sound grated on his ear, and caused him to 
look upon her with renewed anxiety. 

" I don't like to see you in this mood, 
Violet," he rejoined, earnestly ; " nor do I 
think I have quite deserved it. I'm not a 
very good fellow, I know that well enough, 
but when you say I never loved you, you 
do me injustice. I know I have not 
kept my word . about the marriage and 
that . but, Vi, a man with a millstone of 
debt hung about his neck, ought to have a 
little patience shown to him. Set me up 
with five thousand a year, three . two, even 
. and I never thought the governor could 
have had less to leave . and I would only 



By the Boat house. 243 

be too proud to take Violet, Lady Dash- 
wood, on my arm into any small drawing- 
room in London. It's my poverty, and 
not my will, as the fellow says in the 

Play." 

How is it that an habitual liar can con- 
trive, now and again, to have some true 
statement accepted as worthy of credence, 
even by those who know him the best ? 
By what subtle test of the intellect do we 
learn to distinguish the ring of the true gold 
from the chink of spurious metal, and feel a 
just assurance that we are not deceived 
this once, even though the lips that have 
spoken be on other occasions as utterly un- 
trustworthy ? Nobody, not Dashwood him- 
self, was so familiar with the worst side of 
the baronet's character as was Miss May- 
brook. She knew him, and scorned him, 
and yet, now that he stood before her, she 
felt, by some unerring intuition, that in that 
moment of emotion he had uttered the literal 
truth. Scorn, doubt, anger, were all for the 

16 . 2 



244 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 



instant swept away before the rising flood 
of passionate feeling, and, hardly knowing 
what she did, she threw her arms round 
Sir Frederick's neck, and kissed him re- 
peatedly, while her tears fell like rain. 

" My own again !" she exclaimed - y 
" bought so dearly, not to be lost . my 
love, my love, my love !" 

This sudden outburst of resistless love 
and tenderness, that contempt itself had 
failed to kill, on the part of one so proud as 
was Violet, was not quite thrown away 
upon him to whom it was addressed. 
Dashwood's hard heart, indurated by years 
of unchecked selfishness and self-indulgent 
unscrupulousness, softened for a minute. 
He drew the weeping girl closer to him^ 
and so held her, with his powerful arm 
around her waist. 

" Poor little Vi !" was all he said, but 
the unwonted gentleness of his voice lent 
a charm to the words that made them 
eloquent to Violet, and she clung to him, 
sobbing. 



By the Boathouse. 245 

. .i . ..-..... 1 . ^ . - . - ., , » _ .. 1 1 ... m m 

" We ought to be true to one another, 
you and I, Fred/' she murmured ; " we, 
who have all the world against us." 

He was kind and patient, nay, even 
gracious, with her as she nestled by his 
side, with her soft caresses and words of 
endearment, to which her lips had long 
been unused, though they had been fre- 
quent during the earlier part of their ac- 
quaintance beyond seas. The capacity of 
loving was not great in Sir Frederick 
Dashwood, who had been a rake from his 
boyish days, and who had no very exalted 
estimate of the feminine character at any 
time. Yet he was proud, after a fashion, 
to be loved by such a one as Miss May- 
brook, with all her beauty and courage and 
cleverness ; and a hazy kind of pity rose up 
within him as for a moment he ceased to 
concentrate his thoughts upon himself, and 
remembered her forlorn condition and her 
baffled hopes. 

"I do love you, Vi, my dear ; never 



246 Lady Livingstoris Legacy. 

doubt it !" he said, stooping his head to kiss 
her ; and as he spoke, he felt a sharp thrill 
of remorse, such as seldom awakened his 
seared conscience, as that inward monitor 
whispered to him, that to-morrow he would 
marry another woman for her money's sake, 
if only he could ; and that he would never 
hesitate for an instant between Violet's hap- 
piness and his own ease. 

Presently, after a long time, Violet 
seemed to arouse herself from the sweet 
dream of loving and being loved, and she 
gently but firmly released herself from 
Dashwood's encircling arm. 

" I have been silly, Fred, dear," she 
said, as she shook the tear-drops from her 
eyes, and stood erect and resolute before 
the baronet ; " silly in my gladness that you 
had still a little thought for Violet May- 
brook. It was not for this that I summoned 
you ; it was not for this that I have stolen,, 
like a thief, from the house where I am 
believed . to such subterfuge have I been 



By the Boathouse. 247 

forced to stoop . to be lying ill. Thero is 
danger !" 

" Real danger ?" said Sir Frederick, with 
a slight change of colour. " You would 
hardly be alarmed at a trifle, Violet, unless 
you are greatly altered." 

" Very real, very near, very pressing," 
said Violet, with a deliberation that added 
weight to what she said. " I have had a 
visitor here . an old acquaintance of yours 
and mine." 

" A visitor," rejoined Dashwood, knitting 
his brows thoughtfully ; " and from Canada, 
of all places on this earth! Not that 
murdering fellow . not young Larpent . 
for he is in London, as I happen to know ?" 

" Not Bruce," replied Violet, gravely : 
"his coming, if it had boded little good, 
might not in itself have been a portent of 
evil. No I You remember his sister, Aphy ?" 

"His sister ? To be sure I do ; and 
with some reason," said Dashwood, strok- 
ing his heavy moustache. " Wasn't I arm 



248 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

in arm with Lovelace, poor lad, when that 
pretty business happened at the skating- 
rink ! It was I who took the young fellow 
prisoner, with the smoking pistol yet in his 
hand, and a sharp tussle we had for it be- 
fore I got him disarmed and down. Not, 
to do him justice, that he bore me any 
grudge for that, since I remember that when 
I gave evidence against him in court, and he 
was acquitted, he leant over the edge of the 
dock and offered his hand to me . but I 
couldn't take it, much obliged to him, be- 
cause of poor Jack !" 

Sir Frederick looked down for a moment, 
and his lip quivered a very little. Perhaps 
he was thinking, as he recalled the memory 
of the dead man, his very dear friend, how 
far his own pernicious counsel had helped 
him along the devious road that had led to 
so ghastly an ending. He was not, how- 
ever, much given to the sentimental mood, 
and his voice was quite steady and almost 
scornful as he went on. 



By the Bo at house. 249 



" And so his sister, the fair Helen of 
that affair . not that her looks were any- 
thing to boast of . is in England, is she, 
and has been here ? I remember. A 
little sallow creature, limber as an eel, and 
with eyes that made a man feel awkward 
when she looked at him ; sang like a 
skylark, though, and danced admirably. 
Aphy . Aphrodite . what was her real 
name ?" 

"Her name was Aphrodite Larpent," 
answered Violet. " You must have heard, 
in Montreal, how she came to bear it. 
Her mother, a very foolish, half-educated 
woman, lighted on the name in some 
printed book, and insisted on her bearing 
it The father was away, called off on 
business to Quebec ; and the minister, who 
ought to have known better, never re- 
monstrated, so that the poor girl grew up 
the lawful wearer of what was worse than 
a nickname/' 



250 Lady Livingston *s Legacy. 



" And so, after I forget how many 
hundred or thousand years Aphrodite 
came to be christened, ,, said Dashwood, 
yawning. " I never liked her, and what 

Lovelace saw But that is not worth 

talking of at this time of day. The es- 
sential is, what does she want ?" 

" What every one wants . money . 
three hundred pounds, as the price of her 
silence/' answered Violet, seriously. 

Dashwood laughed incredulously as he 
rattled the bunch of glittering charms on 
his watchguard. 

" She is a clever minx," he said ; " but 
shell be cleverer than I take her for if she 
gets three hundred pounds out of me. 
Three hundred ! She might just as well 
ask me to liquidate the national debt, that's 

all." 

" Listen to me, Fred," said Violet, im- 
pressively. " I know that you are poor, 
dear, and pressed on all hands, and in 
endless troubles about money. But she . 



By the Boat house. 251 

Aphy . is no common creditor, to be put 
off with excuses or fair words. How you 
are to obtain this sum . which seems large 
to her and to me, with our homely habits, 
but which to you must appear trifling . I 
must leave to yourself. I only warn you^ 
that within three days the wages of her 
silence must be paid, unless we are both 
prepared to face the worst that can be 
endured." 

" What does she know ?" asked Dash- 
wood, biting his lip savagely. 

" All !" answered Violet, and her lips 
became quite white as she uttered the 
word. 

" Ah !" exclaimed Sir Frederick, stamp- 
ing his . boot-heel into the weed-grown 
earth beneath his feet. " I can't congratu- 
late you on your choice of a confidante/' 

" She was none !" returned Violet, 
eagerly laying her hand upon his arm. 
" We were companions at school and play, 
but friends never. Nay, I had often a 



252 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

lurking fancy that Aphy hated me. Do 
you not remember that I told you of some 
one . or rather two persons . who were in 
the forest on a certain day in spring . you 
know the date as well as I . but of whose 
discretion I felt assured ? Those two were 
Aphy Larpent and her brother Bruce. It 

was the first whose eyes watched, when " 

" Hush ! who can tell what ears may be 
near!" interrupted Dashwood, nervously. 
" She wants to be bought off, then," he 
added, with a groan ; " and yet to sponge 
on me for ready cash, is like trying to get 
blood from a stone. You don't know, 
Violet, how miserable I am, or to what 
straits I am reduced. I have to fling my 
silver about, and make small bets, and 
share in the petty extravagances of men of 
my station, merely to keep a good face on 
the matter, and prevent the world from 
saying that Dashing Dashwood is utterly 
bowled out ; and yet I know I ought to 
hoard up every half-crown that I toss to a 



By the Boat house. 253 

cabman or a waiter. I'm in debt to my 
servants, my laundress, my very baker, I 
believe. The lawyers give me cold com- 
fort when I beat up their musty quarters. 
Half the men I used to know cross the 
street when they see me coming, afraid, I 
suppose, of some design upon their pockets. 
Youngsters about town, who, when first 
they showed their foolish faces in Pall 
Mall, would have paid pretty smartly for 
the credit of being seen hand-in-glove with 
Fred Dashwood of the old regiment, now 
shirk me as if I were a dun. There's an 
atmosphere of misfortune that attaches 
itself to a man broken down as I am, and 
if, like the scent of carrion, it allures the 
vultures that prey on ruined wretches, it 
scares off those who would have been the 
first to hold out the hand of good-fellow- 
ship, had a fat legacy dropped in." 

At that moment the dull, but fast ap- 
proaching roll of wheels struck upon 
Violet's quick ear. She turned her head, 



254 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

and saw with dismay the well-known gray 
horses pass the head of the narrow lane, 
and close following at their heels, the 
yellow chariot with the coronet panels and 
the coroneted hammercloth, and, doubtless, 
as inside passengers, the dowager and Miss 
Fleming. 

"That is Lady Livingston . back 
already. The same ill luck pursues us !" 
the girl hurriedly exclaimed. " Here is 
Aphy Larpent's address. I must go." 
And before Sir Frederick could glance at 
the card that was thrust into his hand, she 
had sprung forward and kissed him again, 
this time with a sort of despairing eager- 
ness, and was gone like a vision of the 
night. He caught one glimpse of her as 
she darted through the garden-gate, and 
then the trees concealed her. Sullenly, 
and with many feelings warring in his 
breast, he made his way back to London. 

Lady Livingston's early return from her 
customary drive was due to no fickleness of 



By the Boathouse. 255 

purpose. The day was fine, the roads in 
-excellent condition, and the dowager 
would, in the normal course of things, have 
carried out her original intentions, but 
illness, genuine enough, had laid its grasp 
upon her, and instinctively she yielded to 
the warning touch. 

" I feel strangely tired, my dear," she 
said, " and there is an odd sensation, too, 
about the heart, such as I don't remember 

to have Never mind ; it will be 

nothing," continued the sturdy old lady ; 
u and you need not speak and look, Bea- 
trice, as if I were ready to be measured for 
my coffin. Only, I will thank you, my 
love, just to pull the check-string, and give 
the word ' Home. ,,, 

The dowager, during the remainder of 
the drive, was very white and silent, lean- 
ing heavily back in her corner of the 
roomy vehicle, but she uttered no com- 
plaint ; and the few words which she did 
speak were derisive of the evident alarm 



256 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 



which her young ward and kinswoman en- 
tertained on her behalf. As, however, the 
carriage, drawing near to the Fountains, 
passed the lane that led down to the river, 
Lady Livingston, who had been steadfastly 
gazing out through the window nearest to 
her, suddenly exclaimed : " See, look ! 
Beatrice ; that must be Miss Maybrook, 
yonder by the boathouse, with somebody V 

And Beatrice, as her eyes sought the 
direction indicated, was also convinced, not 
merely that the female figure which she 
beheld was that of Violet, but that her 
masculine companion was no other than 
her own cousin, Sir Frederick Dashwood. 

" I think it was Miss Maybrook," she 
said, hesitatingly, as the carriage swept on 
towards the lodge-gates; "at least, it was 
strikingly like her/' 

The dowager, in the excitement of the 
recognition, had quite shaken off all signs 
of suffering. " Strikingly like . yes, very," 
she muttered, with an ominous tightening 



By the Boat house. 257 

of the lips, and a portentous contraction of 
her bushy eyebrows. "A pretty trick, 
this, to feign illness, and then steal out to 
meet a lover so soon as my back is turned. 
If this be so, she will find that the old cat 
. as no doubt she calls me to her Lothario 
yonder . has claws. I forgive anything 
but treachery." 

Beatrice Fleming, whose gentle nature 
led her to find excuses for the supposed 
culprit, tried to interpose a word between 
the offender and the wrath which she had 
provoked. " It was a long way off, dear 
Lady Livingston, and we had, you must 
remember, only a moment, before those 
persons, whoever they may have been, 
were out of sight We may be deceived 
by a resemblance, after all." 

"Very probable, I should say," answered 
the old lady, grimly. " But we shall get 
at the truth, I dare say, for here we are at 
home. How stupid of Peters to have 
shut the gate ; and here the dawdling old 

vol. 1. 17 



258 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 



creature, his wife, keeps us] waiting, as if 
she did not know I was out for a drive." 

Now, in strict justice, this blame was- 
undeserved by both the superannuated 
servants who earned an easy livelihood as 
janitors at the Fountains. It was indeed 
an established rule that the gates were to 
be kept closed, for the exclusion of beery 
excursionists, who were apt to break 
boughs and pluck flowers as they went by ; 
and Mrs. Peters had come with all reason- 
able promptitude to give ingress to her 
mistress. But Lady Livingston, eager to 
confront the truant dependent, whom she 
imagined to have practised on her credu- 
lity, felt as if the plump^fgray horses had 
never gone so slowly ; as if the footman 
had never been so tediously inactive in 
swinging himself from the rumble, and in 
letting down the clattering steps ; and as if 
every one around her were in league to 
impede her investigations and to screen 
the guilty. Once in the t hall, she hurried 



By the Boaihouse. 259 

upstairs, at a pace which amazed the do- 
mestics, unused to such agility on the part 
of their valetudinarian mistress, and made 
the best of her way direct to the west 
wing, and to Miss Maybrook's room. 

" Come with me, child," she had said to 
Beatrice, on whose arm, however, she re- 
fused to lean, as she hastened on. " She 
will be rather surprised," said the dowager, 
" to find me waiting for her, when she 
tears herself away from her stolen inter- 
view yonder." 

And without further ceremony than a 
peremptory tap against the woodwork, she 
threw open the door. The room, at first, 
appeared so dark by contrast with the day 
without, that neither Beatrice nor Lady 
Livingston could distinguish whether or 
not the chamber was tenanted. Presently, 
as their eyes grew more accustomed to the 
dim light that filtered through between the 
heavy window-curtains, they beheld a sight 
which staggered their faith in the evidence 

17 . 2 



260 Lady Livingstotis Legacy. 



of their own senses. There, on the bed, 
half-covered by shawls, lay Violet, just as 
they had left her, and in the same attitude, 
with her beautiful head pillowed on one 
arm, and a tress of dark hair disarranged 
and falling loosely over her cheek. Quite 
quiet and motionless she lay, as if asleep, 
and there was nothing, which Lady Living- 
ston's peering eyes could detect, changed 
since her last visit to her companion's 
room. And yet, how few were the in- 
stants since Violet, traversing the grounds 
with the speed of some hunted animal, to 
whose feet the anguish of imminent peril 
lends a frenzied swiftness, had darted, un- 
seen, up the stairs that led to the garden, 
had, unseen, regained her chamber, and 
tearing off the hat and velvet walking- 
jacket which she wore, had flung herself 
on the bed, where she lay crouched like 
the weary hare among the fern, when 
spent with fierce exertion in the long effort 
to escape the coming hounds ! But she 



By the Boat house. 261 

played her part so well, that quick and 
wildly as her heart was beating, her 
awakening, as the dowager stood beside 
her couch, was so natural, that the old 
peeress grew ashamed of her suspicions. 

m 

" You feel better now, my dear," she 
said, half gruffly, half in kindness; and 
then added : " but your hand is burning 
hot, poor child, though you lie here, on 
this cold day, without a fire. I don't want 
to frighten you, but you had better see 
some one. There's Dr. Eccles . he doesn't 
understand my constitution, but he may 
yours." 

But Dr. Eccles, when summoned, agreed 
with Miss Maybrook that the latter's in- 
disposition was trifling ; she was a little 
feverish, but that was all. Nevertheless, 
Beatrice, though she kept her conviction 
to herself, was none the less assured that 
the man whom she had seen was Sir 
Frederick Dashwood, and that Violet had 
been at his side. 




CHAPTER XII. 

DOING BUSINESS WITH THE BEHEMOTH. 

OU are cornered, Fred. No use 
in mincing matters about it, 
my dear boy ! You are in the 
Behemoth's hands, and must just try to 
make the best of the unhandsome hole in 
which bad luck has landed you." So said, 
between the lazy puffs of his cigar, Major 
Raffington, who belonged to the " Flag 
Club," and was indeed a committee-man 
of that institution, in the smoking-room of 
which the above oracular words were de- 
livered. It was early in the day, one of 
those lazy hours of the forenoon which the 



Doing Business with the Behemoth. 263 

most inveterate idler finds it hard to kill, 
and Dashwood and the major were the 
sole occupants of that apartment, sacred to 
nicotine. The latter warrior was by four 
or five years the older of the two, if there 
be faith in Debrett and in the more pro- 
saic parish register ; but to judge by the 
wrinkles on his face and the mottled tints 
of his complexion, Major Raffington was a 
perfect Nestor in comparison with the still 
handsome baronet. That his experience 
was considerable, was matter of notoriety. 
" Old Raff knows a thing or two," was the 
verdict of the junior members of the mili- 
tary club, and as the words were generally 
coupled with a wink or smile, intended to 
be profoundly significant, it may be conjec- 
tured that the " thing or two " pertained 
to the shadier arcana of London life. 

There are men who through life con- 
trive to pick their way through muddy 
places without being visibly bespattered by 
the mire that adheres to the less prudent, 



264 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

and Major Raffington was one of those 
men. No one had ever heard of his pos- 
sessing any property in particular, and yet 
he had lived on the fat of the land from 
infancy upwards, and was never heard to 
complain of insufficiency of means. An 
astonishing number of gentlemen succes- 
sively fail to attain the rank of field-officer, 
sell out, more for the benefit of their cre- 
ditors than of themselves, and are shelved 
thenceforth as captains by courtesy. But 
Raffington had done better for himself, 
and was now a major unattached, still 
drawing pay from the national exchequer, 
although what he had ever done to merit 
his position as a pensioner of confiding 
Britannia, was an enigma which cold- 
blooded utilitarians found difficult of solu- 
tion. The pay of a major of infantry, 
unattached, did not, however, in Raffing- 
ton's opinion, suffice for his maintenance* 
and the " private means," of which he was 
wont negligently to speak at times, being 



Doing Business with the Behemoth. 265 

a mystery to the veriest busy-bodies of his 
club, he was popularly reported to provide 
for his wants by somewhat dubious in- 
dustries. Jackal to a money-lender, hanger- 
on to a great racing-stable, volunteer bear- 
leader to any young cub of fashion who 
was willing to part freely with his cash in 
return for the good offices of an Asmodeus 
who expected his Cleophas not to prove 
close-fisted ; the major managed to make 
both ends meet, and with something to 
spare, at the termination of the year. What 
he did with his savings, if such he possessed, 
nobody knew. He was a man who never 
lent a shilling, dined luxuriously at the 
expense of other people, perhaps three 
hundred days in the twelvemonth, and 
when he played at whist, generally rose a 
winner. Men said that " Raff" was a deep 
dog, and it is certain that he was not over- 
communicative about his personal affairs, 
though he received the confidences of 
many. 



266 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

" Of course I am cornered ; I know 
that well enough, without your telling me 
so," was DashwoocTs half-savage retort. 
" I declare that some of you fellows really 
seem to roll out your words as if you 
luxuriated in them when you are on the 
theme of another man's ruin. You tell 
him he's up a tree, and under a cloud, and 
the rest of it, when the poor devil only asks 
a helping hand to get clear of the plight 
that he sees more clearly than any one else 
can do." 

".Something to enjoy, eh, in the mis- 
fortunes of our best friends ?" composedly 
chimed in the major. " I don't know 
whether you have read Rochefoucauld, or 
whether you are misquoting him intuitively, 
as Monsieur Jourdain talked prose without 
knowing it. There . there, old boy, I see 
you are in no humour for chaffing, and 
indeed I'm not very literary myself, though I 
do dip into a book now and then, for the sake 
of the dinner-parties. A little bit of read- 



Doing Business with the Behemoth. 267 



ing helps a man over many a conversational 
stile, at least with women. And now to 
business. First of all, the Behemoth has 
bought up all your loose kites, and holds 
^very attainable bit of stamped paper signed 
by Frederick Dashwood. There's not a 
doubt of that" 

" I don't see why that circumstance 
should concern me so very much, after all," 
gloomily rejoined the baronet, knocking 
away the feathery white ash from his 
cigar. 

" Don't you ? I do," answered Major 
Raffington, with a twinkle in his eye. " I 
should have thought you had cut your eye- 
teeth long enough ago to have found out 
that there is sometimes safety, not merely 
in the multitude of counsellors, but in the 
multitude of creditors as well. Perhaps it's 
on the same principle which inspires the 
proverb that a council of war never fights, 
but, at any rate, a fellow who is down on 
his luck had better trust to the forbearance 



268 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

of the ruck of those to whom he owes 
money, than depend on that of some one 
thumping capitalist When once, however, 
you are fairly netted, you had better look 
your position fairly in the face. The 
Baron, the King, or the Behemoth, which- 
ever you like to call him, is, really and 
truly, not one half so black as he is 
painted " 

" I'm glad to hear it. Report certainly 
does lay on the colour with a full brush, as 
artists say," growled Dashwood, as he 
twisted his tawny moustache. 

" I know him pretty well," pursued the 
major, " and it is my belief that four-fifths 
of what is said of him are sheer lies, and 
that the residue is exaggerated. Like 
some other of the dons and great-guns in 
his own line, he can afford to be lenient* 
and even generous, when he likes, which is 
precisely what the small fry of the loan- 
mongers cannot. I could tell you of a 
dozen instances in which Shylock has been 



Doing Business with the Behemoth. 269 

. I won't say satisfied with less than his 
bond ; that's common enough, when more 
.can't be had . but liberal to some poor 
beggar that he had got tight in his clutch, 
to do as he pleased with. I'm not given to 
fine phrases ; ' but if one of ourselves, my 
lord, or Sir Harry, or the like, had shown 
as much mercy to a defaulter on the double 
event as I have known the Behemoth to do 
to some deep in his books, he would have 
been canonized by the clubs as the prince 
of good-fellows. That's all !" 

Dashwood flung away the stump of his 
cigar. 

"And when, Raff, am I to have the 
honour to be presented to this chivalrous 
king of the money-lenders ?" sneered he. 
u You are Lord Chamberlain, and under- 
stand the etiquette of the thing. I do not. 
But the sooner I make a spoon or spoil a 
horn, as the phrase is, the better, for I am 
sick of suspense, and, besides, I want a 
little ready cash. Such a Croesus as you 



270 Lady Livingston s Legacy. 

describe, and a disguised philanthropist to 
boot, might oblige me with the trifle I 
require . only three poor hundreds . with- 
out boggling about marketable security,, 
surely." 

" Nothing more probable," coolly replied 
the major. " I don't think . for, mind you, 
I do not know anything of the Baron's 
intentions . that he means mischief because 
he has bought up your floating securities. 
And if he takes a fellow in hand, he 
generally stands by him like a trump. As 
for the meeting, I will introduce you now, 
if you like, and at this hour we shall be 
sure to find the Behemoth at his post. 
You've got the papers that I told you 
would be necessary ? . All right The 
streets are not bad for walking to-day, 
and Pitt Street isn't a very laborious 
pilgrimage." 

"One word of advice, Fred, my boy," 
said Major Raffington impressively, as the 
two walked together towards the narrow 



Doing Business with the Behemoth. 271 

and gloomy street, in the parish of St 
James the Courtley, which towards the 
close of the last century had been named 
after the Heaven-born minister ; " or, 
rather, two words. Take them in good 
part, old man, for they are kindly meant, I 
assure you." 

" I- never heard anything disagreeable 
that was not supposed to be kindly 
meant/' answered Dashwood, almost sul- 
lenly. " Well, fire as many shotted guns 
as you please, Raff, and I promise to con- 
sider them as an amicable salute." 

" Well : don't lie to him, for he won't 
stand it ; and don't higgle with him, for he 
won't bear it. That is all !" returned the 
major quietly ; and as Dashwood turned 
and glared at him, he went on, with perfect 
phlegm : " You see, dear boy, it's well to 
know the country you ride over before you 
get into the pigskin. Swartz is a very 
peculiar man to deal with. His hobby, to 
conduct both sides of a bargain at once, and 



272 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

to settle the terms of the transaction once 
for all, and without contradiction. Queer, 
you'll say." 

" Very queer !" struck in Sir Frederick. 

" And yet," pursued the major, " I don't 
call the plan a bad one. It saves time and 
temper. Give the Behemoth his head, and 
you will find yourself on the sunny side of 
the hedge. Dispute with him, as if you 
were dealing with a pig-jobber for live-pork, 
and you will be in Queer Street before 
you've done with him, as some uncommonly 
knowing gentlemen have been before this. 
There was a man we both knew . Downie, 
Fribble Downie . who tried to be too 
clever, for the Jew, and burnt his fingers, 
rather !" 

" I say, Raff," exclaimed Sir Frederick, 
with a forced laugh, " while we are on 
the candid and outspoken line of country, 
perhaps you'll tell me, confidentially, what 
percentage you will get from the Behemoth 
if we do business together ? It ought to 
be a good one." 



Doing Business with the Behemoth. 2 73 

Major Raffington chuckled with imper- 
turbable good-humour as he passed his arm 
through Dashwood's. " That little poke, 
which you meant for a home-thrust, Fred, 
does not disturb me in the least," was his 
cool reply : " you would hardly have paid 
me the compliment of seeking me out as 
your adviser in this affair, but for the 
gossip you have heard as to my supposed 
understanding with the Baron. Now, if I 
were a humbug, or easy to affront, I should 
get on my high horse, and inform you that 
I did not stir in the matter except to render 
service to an old friend and brother-officer. 
As it is, I'll tell you the exact truth. I 
shan't get a sixpence of commission. But 
Swartz likes to extend his connection, and 
when I help him to do it, I feel sure that 
I shall be the better for it in pocket one 
day or other. I suppose he makes some 
sort of calculation, but hang me if I know, 
when I cash his cheque, the precise fashion 
in which I earned* it" 

vol. 1. 18 



274 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

Dash woods laugh this time was one of 
hearty amusement. " You are a character, 
old boy," he said, " and I was an ungrateful 
beast to be rude to you. This is Pitt 
Street I never was in the mouldy old 
thoroughfare before." 

" And here is the Baron's house," 
responded the major, stopping before one 
of the tall, narrow, and high-roofed dwell- 
ings, begrimed by the smoke of many years, 
which line the two sides of Pitt Street. 
" Now, don't forget my advice. He will 
make a better bargain for you, on the 
smooth, than you will ever make for your- 
self if you object to his proposals. " 

A dismal house it was, with its dirty 
windows, its blistered area railing, and 
stained steps, above which stood two 
preposterous extinguishers of rusty iron, 
into which many a link and flambeau had 
been thrust, in the benighted times when 
gas was not The door was opened by a 
white-faced small boy, preternaturally 



Doing Business with the Behemoth. 275 

sharp-featured, slim, and alert, whose page's 
livery was of the glossiest green cloth, and 
his sugar-loaf buttons not of vile brass, as 
are those of so many of these duodecimo 
male retainers, but resplendent with new 
gilding. This precociously intelligent 
urchin grinned benignly on the major, while 
regarding his companion with a furtive leer. 
Guided by this gorgeously apparelled imp 
the two officers ascended the stairs to the 
second floor, and Dashwood, who looked 
inquisitively about him, was struck by the 
incongruities which he beheld. The house 
would have been much improved by fresh 
paint, fresh paper-hangings, and fresh air ; 
but the staircase was draped in thick and 
soft carpet of costly material, but sober 
pattern. Cobwebs clung to the cornices, 
and the walls were blotched by damp ; but 
the open doors of two or three rooms 
revealed silken curtains, statues, china, and 
costly furniture. But the greatest surprise 
awaited Dashwood when he was inducted 

18.2 



276 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 



into the presence of the king of the London 
money-lenders himself. 

Sir Frederick, who, unluckily for himself, 
had been a borrower ever since he had 
emerged from the halcyon period of legal 
infancy, was well used to the manners and 
practices of the majority of those accommo- 
dating persons who accelerate the spend- 
thrift's progress down the slippery road to 
ruin. Some of these philanthropists inhabit 
squalid dens at least during the hours of 
business ; others are unwholesome-looking 
attorneys, whose legitimate profession is a 
mere screen to their illicit dabbling in post- 
obits ; but there are a few who dwell in 
showy sets of chambers, and a smaller 
minority whose mansions fill their suburban 
neighbours with admiring envy. Dash- 
wood knew the Behemoth's religion, or, at 
least, race, and he was prepared to en- 
counter a fleshy-featured Jew, with a hook 
beak, raven-black hair, and an Oriental 
addition to emerald breast-pins, brilliant 



Doing Business with the Behemoth. 277 

rings and cable-like watch-chains. Swartz 
was originally from Frankfort too . that he 
knew, and might be expected to speak with 
that Hebrew-German accent, which is only 
to be heard in perfection in the Judengasse 
of that ex Free City. What Dashwood 
really saw was a florid gentleman, light- 
haired, and with trim .whiskers of an amber 
tint, and who, from his dress and demeanour, 
might easily have been mistaken for a 
Somersetshire squire, of a more modern 
type than honest Mr. Western, one who 
rode a little, and shot a little, and farmed a 
good deal, but who never allowed his field- 
sports or his agricultural operations to 
interfere with his presence in his place in 
parliament, or in the bay-window of his 
club. His hands, on which glittered no 
rings, were pink, plump, and well-cared for ; 
his teeth were very white, and his small 
steady eyes were of a dark-blue ; alto- 
gether, but for the aquiline nose, and the 
faintest tinge of foreign accent, no one 



278 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

could have guessed the Baron to be either 
an alien or an Israelite. The Behemoth's 
chamber of audience was a long, low room, 
formed, no doubt, by some pulling down of 
part) -walls, and here there were no signs 
of the decay and neglect elsewhere visible. 
The pictures were few, but choice ; and 
their gilt frames and the mouldings of the 
large mirrors contrasted well with the 
subdued tint' of the pearly French wall- 
paper, and the sober richness of the 
Tournay carpet The furniture and hang- 
ings were of pale-blue silk ; and there was 
even a profusion of works of art, of precious 
marbles, stained glass, tall vases from 
Japan, richly inlaid weapons from the East, 
of books in costly bindings, and of miscel- 
laneous prettin esses in silver, ivory, and 
bronze. Baron Swartz rose from his chair 
with a courteous bow and a wave of the 
hand, as he motioned to his visitors to be 
seated. 

"I am happy to make your acquaintance. 



Doing Business with the Behemoth. 2 79 

Sir Frederick," he said, with much urbanity; 
" and, as your time is probably of value, as 
well as my own, I will not keep you longer 
in suspense as to what you come about 
than is unavoidably necessary. The major 
here, my good friend, yesterday handed to 
me a written statement . here it is. of the 
general state of your affairs, which, with a 
few rectifications, I find to be tolerably 
correct Have you the papers which I 
requested you to bring ? Thanks !" 

And as the baronet, somewhat sullenly, 
laid the documents on the table, he felt 
that the Baron's steady blue eyes were 
reading him, though with no obtrusive 
scrutiny, like a printed book. 

" Ah, well," said the Behemoth smilingly, 
as he spread out the papers before him, " I 
only ask a few minutes . ten, at the outside 
. while I glance at these. Can you em- 
ploy them, gentlemen, in the perusal of 
light, very light literature ?" indicating with 
his plump forefinger a collection of periodi- 



280 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 



cals, illustrated newspapers, and novels in 
all the freshness of their newly hatched 
condition. ** Or, if Sir Frederick cares for 
Cuyps and Poussins, perhaps, my dear 
major, you will do the honours of my 
litde collection. There are some pretty 
little gems of pastoral landscape, which are 
no strangers to you." 

And without further preface, he began 
to peruse the documents, making notes on 
a sheet of paper as he read on. The 
major and his friend rose, and made the 
circuit of the room, the former assuming, 
willingly enough, the office of cicerone, and 
calling attention to the beauties of this or 
that valuable painting, without much heed 
to the evident indifference of the baronet, 
to whom a bull by Paul Potter, and an over- 
driven ox on its road to the cattle-market, 
were objects of equal unconcern. 

" I conclude it's all right," at last said 
Dash wood with a yawn. " I say," he 
added, with more animation, but below his 



Doing Business with the Behemoth. 281 



breath, " if he lends me any money, he 
won't insist, will he, on my taking part of 
the loan in these sort of things ? I've 
known that done before this." 

" So have I !" coolly answered the major. 
" But set your mind at rest, Fred, my boy, 
for, unless your loan be one worthy of 
Rothschild, he'll hardly ask you to walk off 
with these. Did you take the paintings I 
have been showing you for Wardour Street 
imitations . Old Masters done to order at 
thirty shillings ! There's not one of these 
bits of canvas that Swartz has not covered, 
continental fashion, with gold naps, once, 
twice, ay, thrice over. Bless you, my dear 
fellow, do you suppose he lives here out of 
office hours ? Not he ! He has a villa at 
Kensington, that cost Heaven knows what 
for conservatories and decorations ; and 
the dinners he gives there are royal, sir, for 
taste and splendour. I've only been asked 
there once ; and as for the company, I 
assure you " 



282 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 



But Major Raffington's definition of 
those who sat around the Baron's mahog- 
any was cut short by the bland voice of 
the Baron himself. 

" Excuse me, gentlemen, for having tres- 
passed so long upon your patience. I shall 
be happy, as refers to Sir Frederick Dash- 
wood's business with me, to come to the 
point at once. Pray, sit down. I promise 
to be brief." 

" I may as well say at once, Baron 
Swartz," said Dashwood, as he resumed 
his seat, " that I am in pressing want of a 
small advance at the present time. I 
cannot explain " 

" My very dear sir," interrupted the 
Behemoth, again lifting his forefinger, " let 
me entreat you to spare yourself the un- 
necessary trouble of even a partial explana- 
tion. I never met with a new client who 
did not require some such slight assistance 
at the first What is it to be ? . A hundred 
pounds ? . two . three ?" And he rustled 



Doing Business with the Behemoth. 283 

over the leaves of his open cheque-book, 
and, dipping his pen in the ornamental 
inkstand beside him, smiled upon Sir 
Frederick with a benevolence that abso- 
lutely disconcerted the baronet. 

"Three hundred pounds will be suffi- 
cient," said the latter, almost sheepishly; 
" but as regards interest and security " 

" Leave the consideration of both, if you 
please, to me," said the Baron, again 
breaking in on the thread of his customer's 
discourse. 

" I told him," said Major Raffington, 
with soldierly bluntness, "that he would 
find that the best plan." 

" And you were right, my good major," 
rejoined the Baron. " So, now, with your 
kind permission, I will state my views. 
The case, to my poor fancy, lies, as your 
English lawyers say, in a nutshell. I am 
now the proprietor of . here they are . all 
the acceptances, sadly overdue, which Sir 
Frederick has scattered over London. To 



284 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

press for immediate payment . n and here 
the blue eyes fixed themselves very steadily 
on those other blue eyes, by far the hand- 
somer in shape and hue, but not so piercing 
or so steady, which belonged to Dashwood 
. "would put you, my dear sir, to sad 
inconvenience. I have also a list of 
liabilities, simple contract debts, mere ex- 
tracts from tradesmen's ledgers, for which 
I could compromise, without any bank- 
ruptcy or unpleasantness of that sort ; and 
these, on certain conditions, I am willing 
to discharge. Here is a bill at three 
months " (hastily filling it up) " for the 
advance which you require . interest stamp 
and premium deducted. You receive, in 
cash, two hundred and forty pounds for 
your acceptance for three hundred. Natu- 
rally, I expect you will be punctual in 
meeting this demand " (and here the Baron 
smiled) " when due. This bond, this bill 
of sale on your horses and furniture . and 
this agreement to insure your life in such 



Doing Business with the Behemoth. 285 

office as I may select, will, with the ad- 
ditional formality of bills at two and three 
months respectively, make up the amount 
of your former securities, which I will 
return to you cancelled. And I don't 
think, Sir Frederick, that I could easily 
have stated terms that should have been 
less onerous to you, as you probably 
perceive. " 

There was a little pause, as Dashwood 
read over the memorandum of the various 
sums ; he could not but admit, as he 
signed the required papers, and pocketed 
the cheque, and cancelled the acceptances, 
that he was leniently and considerately 
dealt with. 

" A glass of sherry ?" said the Baron, 
and as he touched the knob of a bell within 
his reach, the page in the green livery 
brought in the desired refreshment. 

" Beats any cellar in London," the 
major said afterwards of the wine in 



286 Lady Livingstotis Legacy. 

question. " He had it a present from 
some tremendous grandee in Spain. 

<# Tell me one thing, Raff," said Dash- 
wood, as the pair walked away down Pitt 
Street ; " what did he let me off so cheaply 
for ? I declare it was a relief when he 
knocked sixty off the draft for the three 
hundred. It proved him to be a flesh and 
blood Hebrew, after all. Still he must 
have some motive, mustn't he ?" 

" I suppose so," said the major care- 
lessly ; " most of us have. But as for 
guessing what the Behemoth's intentions 
are, that is too hard a nut to crack. I 
dare say you'll find it out for yourself, some 
day, dear boy." 




CHAPTER XIII. 

UNDER THE SCREW. 

HAT belief which attributes to the 
spendthrift a soft heart and a ge- 
nial nature, blemished by the ve- 
nial drawback of a characteristic inability 
to say No, deserves a prominent place on 
the black-list of vulgar errors. Society 
harbours in her capacious bosom few frozen 
snakes more prone, when thawed by kindly 
warmth, to flesh their venomed fangs, than 
that idle prodigal of whom the word goes 
forth that he is no man's enemy save his 
own. In very truth, the profligate insensi- 
bly contracts some of the worst qualities of 



288 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

the buccaneer, and notably that hardness 
of heart which is the certain result of a 
long-continued sacrifice of the interests of 
others, of duty, and of all that is noble in 
life and aspirations, to the craving idol of 
self. There is many a gentleman of fair 
abilities and good manners who hides be- 
neath the mask of nineteenth century con- 
ventionalism a greed, a fierceness, and an 
insensibility to the welfare of others, that 
would have done credit to the ruthless con- 
querors of old Peru, or to the pirates who, 
in after-days, despoiled the spoiler on the 
wealthy coasts of the Spanish Main. 

Dashwood's indignation at being held to 
ransom, so to speak, by Miss Aphy, or 
Aphrodite, Larpent grew stronger as he 
strode through the streets, after his inter- 
view with the money-lender. The idea of 
parting so immediately with the crisp bank- 
notes that he had so lately received, was 
excessively painful to him. He was one of 
those free-handed persons, so called, through 



Under the Screw. 289 



whose fingers money slips rapidly and imper- 
ceptibly. But the easy-going man of plea- 
sure, to whom it would be a misery to deny 
himself any gratification within his reach, 
and who gives gratuities and submits to 
over-charges because he prefers shopkeepers 
to be obsequious, and crossing-sweepers 
and holders of horses to bless his honour 
for a generous gentleman, can easily be pro- 
voked to fury by a bluff demand for some- 
thing considerable. Three hundred pounds ! 
There are those to whom the amount re- 
presents almost fabulous wealth, and those 
to whom it is the easily afforded price of a 
trained hunter or a carriage from Long 
Acre. There are others, magnates of the 
Stock Exchange, or of the swart and sable 
interests of coal and iron, to whom three 
hundred sovereigns are as a little loose 
silver, the fractional fluctuations, from day 
to day, of Turkish Consolidated; the differ- 
ence in the price of a myriad tons of rails; 
vol. l 19 



290 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

or in a million tons of steam-fuel, from the 
quotations of yesterday. 

Three hundred pounds, to one who was 
perhaps the neediest baronet numbered in 
that curious order of hereditary knighthood 
which King James I. invented for the re- 
plenishment of his exchequer and the con- 
quest of Ulster, meant a great deal of 
money. 

" She must take two . hang her ! I'm not 
the only one, I suppose, on whom the screw 
can be put" So ran Dashwood's thoughts, 
as he walked moodily northwards. He had 
not acknowledged to himself that he was 
bound direct for Great Eldon Street, and 
this because he felt some instinct warn him 
that otherwise the cash would forge for 
itself wings, and fly away beyond his keep- 
ing. He belonged to other clubs than the 
11 Flag," institutions where there seemed 
to be some confusion in the minds of the 
managers and frequenters between night 
and day, so frequent was the pulling down 



Under the Screw. 291 

of blinds and the closing of curtains, and 
the lighting of green-shaded lamps, when 
Sol himself was vainly volunteering to shine 
on cards and players around the little green 
tables. There, at guinea and two-guinea 
points, with what you pleased upon the 
rubber, Whist might be worshipped in com- 
pany with some of the most formidable per- 
formers in Europe, men who must surely 
have had cards for hornbooks and primers, 
and whose sympathies with courtly life ap- 
peared to be reciprocated, so plentiful were 
king and queen, and, for that matter, knave 
and ace as well, in the hands that they held. 
Major Raffington could hold his own among 
these pundits. Sir Frederick Dashwood, 
petulant and eager, could not 

There is perhaps something humiliating 
in the self-admission of a bearded man, that 
coin, or its representative, burns in his 
pocket, and that he can no more, unless by 
some spasmodic effort he places himself 
beyond temptation, avoid the fascination of 

19 . 2 



292 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

high-play, than a schoolboy can pass the 
tarts in a pastry-cook's window. But Dash- 
wood, if he felt any qualms on this account* 
crushed them down. As he reached South 
Audley Street, he owned to himself that he 
was about, in his own words, to " pay off 
the jade, little Larpent, and have done 
with her ;" and as he did so, the veins on 
his low forehead swelled, and he swore an 
oath, and clenched his muscular right hand, 
as he groaned over the unlucky fastidious- 
ness of modern social arrangements, ren- 
dering it as they did a matter of quasi 
impossibility to insure Aphy's silence on 
easier and cheaper terms. He even paced, 
angrily, twice or thrice the length of the 
narrow thoroughfare, to and fro, half me- 
chanically opening and reclosing his strong 
fingers, as if in the act of compressing a 
hated throat ; but presently he found him- 
self the object of attention to a patrolling 
policeman, and with a scornful laugh at his 
own reverie, he turned away. 



Under the Screw. 293 



Great Eldon Street is not very remote 
from South Audley Street, and at the corner 
of the former stands a public-house, where 
stable-helpers, grooms out of employment, 
mouldy men who polish spoons for lazy 
giants in livery, and especially mutes and 
hearse-drivers, quaff their beer, and which 
is called, indeed, the "Jolly Undertakers." 
To the private bar of this ill-omened 
hostelry, Sir Frederick, after vainly glanc- 
ing around for better accommodation, be- 
took himself, and here in rapid succession 
he swallowed three fiery thimblefuls of 
British brandy ; and then sallying out, 
knocked at the door on which was the 
brass-plate that bore the name of Gulp. 

The name of Gulp suggested nothing to 
the baronet's preoccupied mind, but the 
number was identical with that inscribed 
on the card of address which he had re- 
ceived from Violet, and accordingly he 
knocked. 

" Does a Mr. Davis live here, or a Miss 



294 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

Davis rather . since my business is with 
her ?" demanded Dashwood, who saw only 
a bundle of middle-aged feminine humanity* 
strongly perfumed with peppermint and 
bitters, and topped by a black cap adorned 
by artificial flowers and straggling curl- 
papers. But the bundle of humanity sud- 
denly exclaiming : " Evins ! Captain Dash- 
wood . at least Sir Frederick, for I would 
be the last to bilk any nobleman or gentle- 
man of his proper title, as well becomes . 
to think of your finding me here, and in 
such a position, along of Betsy Jane !" The 
visitor opened his eyes wider than before, 
and began to recognize the bundle. 

" I ought to remember you, by Jove f 
Mrs. Harris . Willis, whatever it is . surely 
you were housekeeper at Hardup, and 
nursed me when I was a lad and broke my 
collar-bone out with Lord Diddleham's 
hounds ?" he said at last 

" Yes, I was, Sir Frederick. And never 
did I think to see the day when lodgings 



Under the Screw. 295 



such as these would be my dependence," 
returned the landlady half hysterically; 
" for I did hope to live and die along with 
the noble family I served so faithful And 
I held on till most of the other servants 
had left, along of the execution in Hardup 
Hall, and my lord and my lady gone to the 
continent But you saw me afterwards, 
sir, at Brighton, when you was quartered 
there, and used to be a good deal with the 
Honourable Frederick, who occupied my 
apartments there . to my sorrow, I regret 
to say." 

And Maria Gulp sobbed in real earnest, 
as she thought of her little all, absorbed so 
gracefully by the Hon. Frederick Downie, 
whom she had known as a curly-headed 
child in a velvet frock, and who might have 
had some repugnance, one would have 
thought, in robbing the soft silly creature 
who had administered surreptitious comfits 
to his greedy infancy. Even Dashwood, 
who now remembered to have heard that 



296 Lady Lwingstotis Legacy. 

his friend " Fribble Downie " had borrowed 
and spent the savings of this too trusting 
follower of the Diddleham family, pitied 
her a little. 

" Yes, I heard of that," he said. " But I 
hope you get on tolerably, Mrs. " 

"Gulp, Sir Frederick. Not that the 
word . which is plebeian . was ever used 
at Hardup; but being what my parents 
were known by, it is lawfully mine, like 
Maria," explained the unfortunate house- 
holder. " But not wishing to deceive you, 
sir, I do not get on even tolerably; and 
what with rent and rates and Her Majesty's 
tax-gatherer, and hurdygurdies, and but- 
chers' bills, I almost wish I was dead." 

" Ah, well, it's a great shame," said Sir 
Frederick, in whom weariness was over- 
coming the transitory sentiment of com- 
passion : " and I'm doosed sorry, and some 
day I'll be glad to hear about it; but I'm 
in a hurry just now, you see, driven from 
pillar to post, and every minute is of con- 



Under the Screw. 297 



sequence. Is your present lodger, this 
Miss Lar . Davis, I mean, in the house ?" 

The brandy which Sir Frederick had 
imbibed for the purpose of steadying his 
nerves, had proved itself, as usual, a double- 
edged tool, unfit for rash handling, and its 
effects were palpable to himself at least, 
for there was a humming in his brain as if 
of summer flies, and his speech had slightly 
thickened. Perhaps this last Symptom was 
one familiar to the landlady, for, without 
any further reference to her own troubles 
and trials, she proceeded upstairs to the 
triangular drawing-room, and presently re- 
turning, said, with official solemnity, that 
u Miss Davis " was " at home ;" then she 
ushered the baronet up her darkling stairs. 
Poor Maria Gulp ! her connection with the 
titled classes had not been much to her 
ultimate benefit, yet her heart yearned to- 
wards her old employers and their guests ; 
nor had she even much of the gall of bitter- 
ness to lavish on the boy, grown to be a 



2g& Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

man, who had condescended to relieve her 
of her small economies. Of him she yet 
spoke with bated breath as the Honourable 
Frederick. There are creatures so easily 
tamed that servitude seems with them to 
be first, rather than what we call second 
nature. The dog keeps closest to the heels. 
of the worst master. The landlady of 
Great Eldon Street, sorely tried by duns 
and disappointment, was yet a sedulous 
student of the " Morning Post," cared which 
Lady Blanche married a Peer, and which 
Lady Flora an iron-master of fabulous, 
wealth ; said " Ah dear !" when a well-re- 
membered countess was gathered to her 
fathers; and grew quite excited over the 
list of guests at the Duchess of Snowdon's, 
or the details of the gay doings at the 
Marchioness of Blunderbore's fancy ball. 

" How do you do, Sir Frederick Dash- 
wood ?" said the elf, as the baronet's tawny 
moustaches and handsome face appeared in 
the doQrway. " How kind ! to remember 



Under the Screw. 299 



an old friend not exactly moving in the 
same distinguished circles as yourself! 
How sorry my brother will be, when I tell 
him of your visit, to have missed the grati- 
fication of seeing you !" 

All this for the edification of Mrs. Gulp 
the landlady, whose former acquaintance 
with Dashwood she did not in the least 
suspect, and for the discomfiture of Sir 
Frederick, whom Miss Larpent judged, and 
rightly judged, to be unwilling that his suffi- 
ciently well-known name should be publicly 
mentioned in a place to which he would 
probably prefer that his visit should be 
wrapped in mystery. Dashwood had in- 
deed kept floating before his brain some 
hazy idea of having himself announced as 
Jones, or Robinson, when Mrs. Gulp's re- 
cognition had dispelled his incognito ; but 
he partially appreciated Miss Larpent's mo- 
tive, and scowled as he bowed. 

" I have but lately heard that you were 



3<x> Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

in London," he said awkwardly, and then 
held out his hand. 

That mechanical impulse by which we 
extend the hand of good-fellowship, as often 
as not, to those whom we loathe or despise, 
is so much a product of our actual state of 
civilization, that it is commonly accepted 
as it is offered, as a thing unmeaning. But 
Miss Larpent, quick-sighted, and prompt 
to snatch at an advantage, as women often 
are, did not take Sir Frederick's hand. 
She swept him a courtesy such as might 
formerly have been performed on the slip- 
pery floors of the palace at Versailles, such 
as, perhaps, she had learned from French 
Canadians, in her own land over-sea, and 
then motioned him to a chair, as compo- 
sedly as if she had been a princess, and he 
a courtier of somewhat lower degree. 
And Mrs. Gulp slowly closed the door. 

" It was kind of you, Sir Frederick," she 
repeated, smiling on him, while her neutral- 
tinted eyes scanned him narrowly. The 



Under the Screw. 301 

onus of speaking to the point was mani- 
festly to be thrown on the visitor. A fresh 
flush of anger at the thought mounted to 
his cheek, and he set his teeth hard, and a 
wrathful gleam was in his blue eyes ; but 
yet he bent his head a very little, and con- 
trived to smile in answer to the beaming 
expression on the false face opposite to him. 
He was rapidly shaking off, however, the 
effect of the drams which he had swallowed, 
as men do sober themselves, by some in- 
tinct of self-preservation, in the presence of 
danger ; so that while Aphy, perceptive ac- 
cording to the gifts of her sex, thought 
within herself: " He has been drinking, and 
will be violent, and then maudlin," her op- 
ponent was really conquering, not merely 
the fumes of liquor, but his own innate ten- 
dency to petulance. Such temporary victo- 
ries over self are not infrequent. The 
worthless tippler on shore is sometimes 
changed by the very sight of blue water, 
and becomes a careful seaman until paid off 



302 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

at the end of the voyage. The brawling 
pest of the barrack-yard is steady as a rock 
under fire, brisk on the march, and helpful 
in the bivouac, until sloth and drink bring 
again into prominence the worst side of his 
versatile nature. 

" You know my errand here, Miss Lar- 
pent," began Dashwood, "and you can 
guess, perhaps, how difficult it has been to 
me to comply in any respect with your 
wishes. It is town-talk, I believe, that my 
grandfather left me little or nothing, that I 
have all my old debts on my shoulders, 
and that I no more know what is to end 
this hand-to-mouth existence, than I know 
what the weather will be next week. Do 
you believe that ?" 

"Yes, I believe that, Captain Dash- 
wood," answered Miss Larpent guardedly. 
" Not that I have much reason," she added, 
in a different tone, "for putting faith in 
what you fine gentlemen find it expedient 
to say to such as myself. But I believe 



Under the Screw. 903 

that you have found the inheritance of old 
Sir George by far less profitable than you 
expected it to be, and that you have sold 
your soul, in fact, for nothing." This time 
he did not redden, but grew a shade paler 
than before, yet never a muscle of his fair 
face quivered, and his voice was unshaken 
as he replied : 

"The less you and I have to do with 
unpleasant reminiscences, the better. Now, 
Miss Aphy . excuse the familiarity . we 
were all pretty familiar as to calling by 
Christian names, and nicknames too, in 
Canada ; it has cost me more trouble than 
you can conjecture to bring you a brace 
of hundreds, and, by Jove ! I feel in part- 
ing with them as a drowning man might 
feel at letting go the plank he clings to. 
What security have I that the payment of 
this hard-got money will put an end to 
your demands ? How do I know . pardon 
me ! . that you will leave Violet, or myself, 
in peace for the future ?" 



304 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 



" I will tell you, Sir Frederick Dash- 
wood," said the elf, whose eyes never for 
an instant left his, "why you may rely, 
within certain limits, on my discretion, and 
on 'that of my brother Bruce. Up to this 
moment our acquaintance with your secret 
has been merely a passive knowledge ; but 
so soon as I shall have taken your pay to 
be silent, we become, in the eyes of the 
law, what the law is so uncivil as to call 



accom " 



« 



Hush ! that's dangerous talk," hurriedly 
broke in the baronet, on whose brow the 
heat-drops were now standing, while he 
glanced distrustfully around. " No one 
knows, in a lodging-house, what ears are 
listening. I remember your landlady, the 
woman of the house, for years, when she 
was housekeeper at Lord Diddleham's, 
and, what is worse, she remembers me, 
and may chatter." 

" And the consequences, Captain Dash- 
wood . you see the old name comes the 



Under the Screw. 305 

. ..- . - - - 1 . 1 1 1 I. 1 1 

readier to my uncourtly tongue," said Miss 
Larpent, with malicious exultation . "the 
consequences might be exceedingly em- 
barrassing. You are a baronet, after all, and 
your title jingles prettily enough to enhance 
the delight which people feel at a shocking 
story which does not affect themselves. 

How the newspapers would gloat over " 

" Have done with this, woman !" ex- 
claimed Dashwood roughly, as he started 
from his seat, " unless you want to drive 
me mad. Did I ever do you any harm, 
Miss Larpent, that you torture me with 
taunts which, if a man dared to utter, I 

would " He paused, frowning, while 

the veins on his forehead swelled ; and 
the fierce light in his eyes, and the manner 
in which he clutched the chair on which he 
leant, until the frail wood-work creaked 
and trembled under the pressure of his 
strong fingers, sufficiently completed the 
half-spoken sentence. 

" Whether you have done me any harm 
vol. 1. 20 



306 Lady Livingstons Ldgacy. 

Sir Frederick," returned the elf fearlessly, 
44 is best known to yourself I have a 
shrewd suspicion that your advice to your 
friend Lovelace, to regard little Aphy Lar- 
pent as a plaything to be flung aside when 
wearied of, and his dread of your sneers 
and ridicule, helped to harden his weak 
and fickle heart against me when I knelt 
at his feet, and bathed them with my tears, 
in vain. I would have made him a good 
wife, believe it or not, as you list But a 
truce to sentiment! I am not made of 
very tender stuff, and do not often indulge 
in tender regrets for my lost happiness, or 
the world's approval. Chance has given 
me a hold on you, and I do not choose to 
slacken my gripe, save on my own terms. 
You spoke, just now, of two hundred 
pounds ; my demand was for three." 

" You don't suppose," said Dashwood 
sullenly, "that with me, or from me, to 
ask is to have, or that a man with my un- 
lucky reputation can draw upon the Jews 
as your City grandees drop into the parlour 



Under the Screw. 307 

of the Bank of England for discount ! 
Here are two hundred pounds ready, if 
you'll sign me a receipt, and hard enough 
it was to rake as much together. Refuse 
it, and you may wreak your spite as you 
please, but never a shilling of profit will 
come to sweeten your pleasure." 

His mind, such as it was, was quite 
made up, and, as often happens, the im- 
mediate motive for his desperate resolve 
was the desire to keep for his own use a 
portion of what he had obtained from the 
Behemoth. The two hundred he must 
disgorge, but for the sake of these remain- 
ing fifty pounds he would brave the worst 

MissLarpent's quick wits divined somewhat 

» 

of this, and she remembered that policy 
forbade her to strain the chain to breaking. 
" I agree, as respects the money," she 
said ; " but I have another boon to 
ask. It will cost you nothing beyond a 
little diplomacy," she hastened to add. 
41 I am, as you know, a first-rate musician, 

20 . 2 



308 Lady Livingston y s Legacy. 



and teach singing better than many of the 
foreigners who grow rich in London on 
your English gold. You have a young 
cousin . Miss Beatrice Fleming . and Lady 
Livingston is wealthy ; contrive that I 
shall be allowed to give some music-lessons 
at the Fountains. You need tell no more 
of my history than you please ; and with 
a little tact, the thing can be arranged,, 
since I have set my heart on it ; no matter 
why. Come, a fair exchange : my receipt 
against the bank-notes and your written 
promise that I shall be music-mistress to 
the dowager's heiress. Here are pen and 
ink, and we need not delay." 

" It was wisest so," said Aphy to her- 
self, as she looked from the window after 
the baronet's retreating figure ; " the man 
was growing blindly furious like a bull 
maddened by the darts of the chulos in 
some torida of Mexico. Give him a little 
more rope, and then . hang him !" 

END OF VOL. I.
LADY LIVINGSTON'S LEGACY. 



CHAPTER I. 



DOUBLE-DEALING. 



irfrederickdashWood 

was bad enough, as he admitted 
freelyinhis nowmore frequent self- 
communings, even according to the vicious 
codewhich prevails among thewildest men of 
so-called pleasure. It isprobablethathadthe 
Accusing Angel suddenly appeared, in one 
of those companies of gamblers and profli- 
gates which the baronet was wont to fre- 
quent, ready to recount with trumpet-tongue 
the hidden misdeeds of all the revellers 
VOL. n. I 



Lady Livingstotis Legacy. 



there, most of those present would have 
shrunk from one another, like the wretches 

in Beckford's Hall of Eblis. But Dash- 

* 

wood well knew that they would have re- 
coiled from him, as from the noisome breath 
of the plague, though once he had laid to his 
soul theflatteringunction that hewas no worse 
than very many who die in the odour of re- 
spectability, and whose mortuary tablets 
give them credit for every virtue that can 
be practised beneath the sun. Yet the man 
was not all badl There were moments 
when his unquiet spirit groped, as it were, 
through the mists of vice and ignorance, in 
a vague search for something better, much 
as some blind monster might struggle 
through mud and weed, piteously seeking 
for something which its sightless eyes were 
now impotent to discern. He had been so 
untaught, so misled by evil example, so cast 
away from the threshold of manhood until 
now ! What did he know, beyond company 
drill and garrison routine, except how to 



Double- Dealing: 



handle the reins, to play a good game at 
pyramids, to ride a steeple-chase I Every- 
thing and everybody seemed to have com- 
bined to impress upon him the adijantages 
of rank and riches, and the charms of 
worldly pleasure, and that Brazen Rule of 
getting all one can, and keeping all one gets, 
which has been irreverently styled the 
Eleventh Commandment It was not won- 
derful that he had " gone to the bad," as an 
apt pupil in such a school. 

But there was That in Dashwood's me- 
mory which, like a familiar demon, never 
suffered itself to be long forgotten, putting 
in a reminder when his mirth was high, and 
brooding at his elbow in the dark hour of 
hazy remorse. Once it had been, like what 
sailors call the Eye of a hurricane in the 
tropics, a mere handbreadth of dark cloud, 
a speck in the turquoise blue of the pure 
summer sky. Now it had grown, and grew, 
a threatening blackness that would not 
allow him to forget. He had his punish- 



Lady Livingstotis Legacy. 



ment already, on this earth of ours, for all 
that he could hold up his head still among 
men. 

He was going down again to Richmond, 
to Richmond and to the Fountains on a 
differeht errand. It is possible, as the gay 
and gallant Captain Macheath discovered, 
to have too much of even so agreeable an 
occupation as that of making love, and to 
find two beloved objects worse than none at 
all. Sir Frederick had a very delicate 
game to play. To marry Beatrice might 
be the sheet-anchor that would save him 
from utter beggary. That, at best, was an 
uncertainty. That Beatrice did not love 
him, he was aware. That she had a girlish 
fancy for somebody else was, he con- 
sidered, probable. He had, however, a 
firm reliance on the binding efficacy of the 
promise which, on so solemn an occasion, 
her dead mother had extorted, and on 
Beatrice's submissiveness to her mother's 
often expressed wish that the cousins 



Double-Dealing. 



should marry. The dowager was the dis- 
turbing element in these venal calculations. 
Lady Livingston had always disliked Fred 
Dashwood. She had, it is true, been pecu- 
liarly indulgent towards the titled scape- 
grace since he had returned from Canada, 
but then there had been something suspi- 
cious in the very abruptness of the change. 
The old peeress was not old enough to be 
in her second childhood, or to evince that 
doting affection towards those previously 
detested, which is sometimes observed in 
extreme age. And unless the inheritance 
were quite secure, Dashwood would care but 
little to call Beatrice his wife. 

Then there was Violet Maybrook . Violet 
with her flashing eyes, her royal beauty, 
her untamable spirit] chafing] against re- 
straint, not a woman to allow herself to be 
lightly thrown off for the sake of a better- 
dowered rival So far as the man had pre- 
served the capacity of loving, he did love 
Violet Had he been rich and free, and 



Lady Livingstotis Legacy. 



had she been beside him to claim the fulfil- 
ment of his pledges of old time, probably 
he would have kept his word with reason- 
able alacrity. But that induration of the 
heart that comes from an ill-spent life, does 
not leave many soft spots on which the 
gentle emotions can fasten. Some sparks 
of grace, of goodness, and of mercy, linger 
with the worst of us, at all events, until an 
inpenitent old age has set its seal upon an 
evil youth and reckless prime. But so few 
are the precious embers of a hallowed fire 
Ipng died out, that their pale gleam seldom 
irradiates the darkness. We may grant 
some compassion to such as Sir Frederick 
Dashwood,' men who can love but a litde, 
who c^n pity but for an instant, who snatchy 
as it were, but a momentary glimpse of the 
Promised Eden where sin and sorrow can- 
not enter, far, far away ! 

"My lady is not so well to-day. Sir 
Frederick," said the softly-shod butler at 
the Fountains. " I am not sure whether 



Donble-Dealing. 



i^er ladyship will be able to see you. Miss 
Beatrice is with my lady, upstairs. There 
is no one in the drawing-room except Miss 
Maybrook." 

" Nothing could be better !" muttered 
Dashwood, as he followed this silent-footed 
attendant to the well-known yellow saloon, 
where, as the butler had correctly stated, 
the dowager's companion was alone. Lady 
Livingston, among her other peculiarities, 
being impatient, in moments of sickness, 
of any society but that of those whom she 
loved. 

" Look here, Violet," said the baronet 
eagerly, so soon as they were left alone. 
" We are in the same boat, my girl, and must 
sink or swim together. You said as much the 
other day, and it was better put ; but so it 
is, anyhow. Well, I scraped together as 
much as contented the she-vampire yonder, 
this charming importation from the colo- 
nies ; but she had only told you, it seems, of 
one of her demands. She didn't say, did 



8 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 



she, that she must be allowed to teach 
music ? 

" To teach music . here ?" echoed Violet, 
in surprise. 

"Ah, just so," returned Sir Frederick: 
"she does make that a stipulation, and 
sticks to it with such bulldog tenacity that 
I was forced into giving her a promise in 
writing that I would manage it Don't 
look so alarmed. She'll keep a quiet tongue, 
for her own sake ; but you must talk over 
Miss Fleming, my Cousin Beatrice, who is 
to be the pupil, of course, and she must 
persuade the dowager. I leave it to you 
whether you had better mention this girl's 
real name, or the assumed one which she 
bears in London. It is a thousand to one 
against your having breathed the word 
Larpent in this house. 

" Yes, I have," answered Violet slowly. 
*'When I arrived here, your cousin, or the 
dowager . I forget which . asked me who 
was my instructor in singing, and I did 



DoubU-Dealing. 



mention the name of yonder viper. It 
never answers to rely on the blankness of 
other people's memories, old or young. I 
must introduce her as one I have knSwn 
before, and as an old schoolmate, if I am 
to do so at all, and the fewer falsehoods 
the safer !" 

" Well, I suppose you are right there, 'g 
rejoined Dashwood disconsolately. He was 
not himself one of those artists in fiction 
.whom we occasionally meet with, and who 
misspend their ingenuity in weaving webs 
more subtle than those of the spider, gos- 
samer textures that a touch can brush 
away. But, as some bad men do, he cre- 
dited women with a perverse power of 
making the thing that is appear as if it 
were not, and esteemed himself hardly 
used because Miss Maybrook had not a 
cut-and-dried romance, in which Aphy 
should be the central figure, ready to be, 
imposed upon the credulity of her em- 
ployer. 



lo Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

" You can answer for my Cousin Beatrice^ 
can you not ?" he said, after a brief silence ; 
" at least, I should hope so ! She has only 
to ^sk and to have, here. One would 
think she had bewitched the old woman^ 
sure as she is, too, of every acre of stiff 
clay, and every sixpence of the consols." 

" The thought of Lady Livingston's 
succession haunts you like a phantom," 
said Violet, scorn in her burning eyes, 
scorn in her ringing voice. " We who 
were born in the New World have at least 
this merit, that we are not taught from the 
cradle to the coffin to hanker after an 
inheritance, and to crave and hunger for 
the spoils of dead men, who have the ill 
luck to be akin to us. No! We carve 
out our own fortunes with the strong arm 
and the thoughtful brain, or live contentedly 
on the fruits of honest labour. You it was, 
Frederick, who first taught me to be am- 
bitious . and see to what a point that 
perilous guide has brought us ! It would 



Double-Dealing. 



be better for a man to toil among rude 
gold-diggers in the gulches of the Sierra 
Nevada, than to drag on such a life as 
yours, or, for that matter, as my own !" 

" You look prettier, by Jove ! when your 
eyes flash in that way, and your grand 
manner becomes you well," said Dash- 
wood, lazily leaning back in his chair, to 
watch her as she stood, upright and grace- 
ful as a sapling pine, beside the massive 
chimney-piece " I sometimes think, do 
you know, that not having chanced to be 
bom a real queen, your true vocation would 
have been the stage !" 

Violet coloured, and bit her Up in im- 
patient anger. It was his habit, in some 
of his moods, to provoke her to wrath by 
an affectation of polished cynicism . which 
was perhaps of all qualities the most dis- 
tasteful to such a nature as hers. But he 
never cared to push matters far enough to 
run the risk of a breach, which he had many 
reasons to avoid. " Come, come, Violet," 



1 2 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

he said more earnestly ; ** do not take my 
words amiss. My heart is heavy enough, 
if you did but know it, and I never felt 
less inclined for jesting. Can I rely on 
your managing, so that this importunate 
friend of ours in Great Eldon Street shall 
have her way ? No need to bring my 
name into the discussion, of course." 

'' I will do what I can," said Violet, 
wearily, "thankless office though it be. 
To see her face and hear her voice in this 
house, will be to me as if I had evoked a 
ghost to haunt me . a ghost more terrible 
than the spectres that gibber, it is said, 
around the death-bed of a ^" 

She paused; and there was reason for 
her ceasing to speak, since Beatrice Flem- 
ing entered at the moment, with old Lady 
Livingstone leaning on her arm. 

" Your coming has done me more good, 
you see, than Doublefee's visit!" said the 
Dowager, with somewhat of a sickly smile, 
as she held out three of her jewelled fin- 



Double- Dealing. 1 3 

gers for Dashwood to take . she seldom 
gave her whole hand, save to her equals in 
age and station. "Sir Joseph found me 
altered, I could see, by the manner in which 
he pursed up his lips; though, of course, 
he was by far too much of the courtier to 
admit it But I always feel better when 
you come, Fred." And, oddly enough, 
this really did seem to be the case. The 
baronet had not, in the whole course of the 
long period for which he had known his 
aged kinswoman, appeared to stand so 
high in her good graces as since his return 
from Canada . a change which might more 
correctly be said to have dated from the 
day on which Mr. Goodeve, of Bedford 
Row, had brought down her ladyship's will 
to Richmond for signature. There were 
moments when Sir Frederick was inclined 
to be sanguine as to the inferences which 
he drew from this remarkable coincidence. 
Persons of Lady Livingston's time of life, 
and whose social consequence largely de- 



14 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

pends upon their wealth, often, by insen- 
sible degrees, transfer to their heir a por- 
tion of the regard which they have been 
wont to entertain for the riches themselves. 
But Dashwood was, after all, too shrewd a 
student of character to permit any very 
fervent hope to be kindled in his bosom, 
so far as concerned his own chance of any 
legacy worth the having. 

" No, no," he would say, or rather think ; 
" the old g^rl isn't going to make my for- 
tune, in that way, anyhow. A mourning- 
ring, or a bequest of a few pounds to buy 
one, may be scored up for my consolation 
when they bury her ; that is all. Naturally, 
everything goes to Beatrice. The one 
bright spot in the sky is, that the dowager's 
kindness seems to have some connection 
with the fact of my being attentive, and so 
forth, to my cousin . ^and if so, ought I 
not to strike in for such a prize, before the 
favourable wind veers round again! No 
doubt but that every acre and every sove- 



Double-Dealing. 1 5 

reign will prove to be tied up as tightly as 
parchment can bind them, so that Beatrice's 
husband shall never make ducks and drakes 
of the principal; but even to be a rich 
wife's pensioner would be better than 
playing at hide-and-seek with my creditors 
. ^hang them! It's awkward, too, on 
Violet's account" 

But Lady Livingston, in her novel be- 
nignity towards her prodigal relative, did 
something towards smoothing away the 
awkwardness which undoubtedly exists in 
paying particular attention to one lady- 
love under the eyes of another. Old 
ladies could give a lesson in finesse to any 
male diplomatist, so far, at least, as the 
management of girls and unmarried men is 
in question, and on this occasion the dow- 
ager manoeuvred her pawns with the same 
triumphant dexterity which a veteran of 
the chequered board exhibits in deploying 
his mimic warriors in carved ivory. Sir 
Frederick . Freddy, for once, according to 



i6 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

the nomenclature of the day when the baro- 
net was but a wilful child . must stay and 
dine, and cheer up that lonely household 
of moping women. He had half-cured the 
dowager's indisposition, by the sight of his 
good-for-nothing face, and must not leave 
the good work incomplete. Lady Living- 
ston felt better, but not disposed to walk or 
drive ; no, she would stay at home, and get 
quite strong by dinner-time; and Violet, 
dear Violet, should stop with her and read 
to her, while Sir Frederick and Miss Flem- 
ing strolled out together. 

" You are cousins, after all, and saw each 
other very often when Frederick was still 
in a jacket, and you had better have a good 
chat over old times, and quarrel if you like 
. and make it up, as cousins should." 

Nevertheless, the old lady, as she watched 
Sir Frederick's retreating form, while he 
walked away towards the river, side by 
side with Beatrice, eyed him with the same 
quaint expression of amusement which had 



Double-Dealing. 17 

lurked beneath her aspect of outward bene- 
volence on the very day of the signing of 
the will. There seemed to be some grim 
joke, only intelligible at present to Lady 
Livingston herself, in the all but undis- 
guised encouragement which she afforded 
to this insolvent suitor for the hand of her 
young relative. 

The sentiments which Miss Fleming en- 
tertained towards her cousin were not of a 
nature to make her either seek or shrink 
from his society. She had never had a 
brother, and to brotherless girls a first- 
cousin, when no thought of Hymen's ob- 
trusive torch comes in to mar the calm of 
consanguinity, is the nearest approach to 
one. As a child, she had been gratified 
by such notice as the handsome lad, of 
whose pranks and high spirit so much had 
drifted to her ears, vouchsafed to a little 
creature like herself. She could, then and 
later, have been very proud and fond of 
Fred Dashwood . as a brother. But then 

VOL. II. 2 



1 8 Lady Livingstons Legacy, 

. » 

had come the never-forgotten day when 
her dying mother, in pursuance of her dar- 
ling project of bringing Beatrice and her 
cousin together, had joined the hands of 
the two young people, and had made them 
repeat after her the words of a solemn vow 
to be husband and wife. On Sir Frede- 
rick, this bond sat very lightly. His aunt, 
he told himself, had a craze, as some old 
women had, on the subject of match- 
making . and he had merely humoured her 
fancy at a time when to refuse would have 
seemed harsh. It was not thus, however, 
that the more sensitive conscience of Bea- 
trice estimated the obligation she had in- 
curred. To her thinking, she was bound 
by every tie of honour and of duty, if only 
he to whom she had been pledged chose 
to claim the fulfilment of the promise. 
Her love for her mother had been deep 
and warm, and hers was a character not 
easily deterred from doing what was right 
from any dislike to self-sacrifice. She had 



Double-Dealing. 1 9 

given up Oswald Charlton, whom she did 
love, because of her engagement to Dash- 
wood, whom she did not. But this was 
one of the cases in which there was room 
for crushed hopes to revive, so long as she 
continued to bear the name of Miss Flem- 
ing. As Lady Dashwood, the cup of 
wormwood would be almost too bitter; yet, 
if he to whom she conceived herself to be- 
long chose to hold it to her reluctant lips, 
she would even drink of it. 

Sir Frederick did not leave her very 
long in doubt of his intentions. 

" Beatrice," he said, as they walked on 
along the path, bounded by sedges and 
bulrushes, through which the water gurgled 
as the flood-tide fell, while a brisk breeze 
stirred the surface of the river into a 
myriad of ripples bright as diamond facets 
in the winter sunlight, " I wish, dear, you 
could learn to like me just a little." 

It was coming, then. She trembled very 
much, and then, with the blameless hypo- 



20 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

crisy of her sex, she tried to return an in- 
different reply. 

" So I do like you, Frederick ; very 
much indeed," she said. 

The baronet turned upon her with a 
laugh of dubious purport 

" No fencing, Beatrice," he said, roughly, 
" with an old hand like myself, please ; and 
so we may skip all that cousinly affection 
and namby-pamby of that sort You are 
not the girl I take you to be if you deny 
your own words, or refuse to be bound by 
them. And you are mine, in virtue of 
your solemn pledge ; are you not ?" 

She had turned her face away, that he 
might not see the tears that now stood 
thickly in her eyes ; and as he repeated the 
question, she uttered but an inarticulate 
sound by way of answer. 

"And I love you, Beatrice, dear, and 
I will try to make you happy," he said, 
catching at her hand ; but she eluded his 
grasp, and walked on, somewhat faster 
than before, with her head bent down, 



struggling hard to repress her sobs. 
" Don't you care for me at all ?" he said, 
reproachfully, as he stooped forward so as 
to catch a glimpse of her tear-stained face. 

" Not in that way," she answered, reso- 
lutely ; " not so." 

Now, Sir Frederick had never laid it 
down as part of his programme that Bea- 
trice was to be romantically attached to 
him, and of a certainty he was no devoted 
lover ; yet his vanity was piqued by this 
reply. Never mind ! . such were his re- 
flections . ^the day might come, when they 
were married, when his wife would learn to 
estimate the value of a kind word or a con- 
descending caress. At present, he must 
humour her. 

"Listen, my dear," he said, gently, "while 
I make my meaning clear. I am a poor 
man, and a disappointed one, as you have 
heard ; and cares ^and annoyances chafe a 
fellow's temper, and make him but a blunt 
wooer ; yet, for all that, I will try to be a 



22 Lady Limngstotis Legacy. 

good husband to you, Beatrice, and to 
make you happy. It was my poor aunt's 
fondest wish, you remember that ?" 

"Yes; I remember." Her poor little 
lip quivered piteously as she stammered 
out that fatal assent. 

He went on, conscious of his advantage: 
"And you have not forgotten when and 
how your promise was given that you 
would be my wife one day. Ever since 
then, I have regarded you as my own, 
pretty Beatrice! but I have not been urgent 
in laying claim to what was mine. Am I 
right to do so now ?" 

No answer. 

"Come, dearest," he said, as he again 
grasped at her hand, and this time with 
success ; " I must have a word from you . 
one little word . to make me happy ; only 
'Yes.'" 

Beatrice tried to release her hand. "Oh 
Frederick, cousin . do be merciful to me P' 
she exclaimed, determining in her despera- 



Double-Dealing. 23 

tion to try an appeal to his pity. " Don't 
ask me for what I cannot give . for the 
love which I have it not in my power to 
bestow. Be my friend, be my brother! 
and a more loving sister and true well- 
wisher never was, than I will prove myself 
to be ; but be generous, and spare me !" 

" One would think," said Sir Frederick, 
half nettled by the candour of this speech, 
" that I was a downright ogre, or something 
of that sort, that it would be sheer misery 
to marry. It certainly is not compliment- 
ary, this petition of yours, my dear. But 
you will learn to know me better, love; 
when we see more of one another ; and it 
shall not be my fault, if I do not teach you 
to grow fond of me when you are my wife. 
At any rate, you acknowledge my claim, 
do you not ?" 

" Yes," she answered, tremulously . "yes. 
If you choose to take me, I am yours ; but 
it is cruel . cruel !" 

He laughed, and tried to clasp his arm 



24 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

around her; but she shrank away from him* 
" Pretty, timid little flutterer !" he said, in 
his most winning tone ; " how I wish I could 
tame you !" Dashwood's voice was natu- 
rally a rich and musical one, and certainly 
he had not allowed its persuasive powers 
to grow rusty for lack of practice ; but 
Miss Fleming shuddered as she heard it, 
as if its accents had been the harsh cry of 
some bird of prey. 

" Do not let there be any mistake about 
my sentiments," said she, earnestly ; " I will 
be true to my plighted word, and will keep 
my promise. If you insist upon the fulfil- 
ment of the pledge, you shall have what 
you have a right to exact; and if it be 
your good pleasure to have an unloving 
and joyless bride to take her place beside 
you at the altar, even so let it be. Only, 
understand this clearly . ^that I submit be- 
cause I am bound, but that, were I free, 

my choice would not fall upon ^" She 

broke down, sobbing, and Dashwood, who 



Double-Dealing. 25 

felt that he had gone far enough, did his 
best to console her. 

" There, there, Beatrice," he said, releas- 
ing her hand, of which he had hitherto re- 
tained possession. " I never wanted to 
distress you, only the time had come when 
it was necessary that we should arrive at 
some understanding. Come! let us talk 
of something else. I will not tease you 
any more, and, indeed, there is no need for 
hurry : take your own time ; and perhaps 
it would be as well to say nothing to Lady 
Livingston about our little conversation of 
to-day. I was abrupt, and I startled you ; 
but I don't mean to press you unduly, or to 
tease you ; so dry your eyes, dear girl, and 
let us walk on for a while in silence, if you 
prefer it It would not suit your book, nor 
mine, to bring on an explanation and a fuss 
under this roof" 

Lady Livingston said nothing, when the 
cousins returned from their walk, regarding 
her young kinswoman's paleness and the 



26 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

evident depression of her spirits ; but it is 
possible that her conscience may have 
pricked her for having thrown Beatrice in 
the path of a suitor so manifestly distaste- 
ful to her ; for her manner towards Dash- 
wood was more capricious than it had been 
of late. Violet, too, had probably been 
keen-sighted enough to draw her own de- 
ductions from the half-effaced traces of 
tears around Miss Fleming's eyes, for the 
cold pride of her ordinary bearing towards 
the baronet was more marked than it had 
previously been, and, altogether, Sir Fred- 
erick did not overmuch enjoy his evening at 
the Fountains. 

" She does care for some one ; she as 
good as told me so," he reflected on his 
homeward journey that night; "but what 
signifies a girl's fancy !" The indifference 
which Dashwood felt on the subject of 
Beatrice's possible preference for another 
was based on his estimate of her inability, 
should she but keep her promise, materially 



Double-Dealing. 27 

to affect his happiness. Violet was of a 
different mould, and it was not without un- 
easiness that he remembered the last glance 
from those dark and burning eyes of hers, 
that seemed to haunt him in his sleep- 
Still, he slept ; for it is not always the best 
of us whose slumbers are the soundest 




CHAPTER II. 

THE BEHEMOTH MEANS MISCHIEF. 

|HE Winter, short in itself, if only 
such wintry days as fell within 
the formal limits prescribed by 
the almanac be taken into account, but en- 
croaching, as modem winters are apt to do, 
on the traditional season sacred to springs 
wore itself away. At the Fountains, scanty 
change, outwardly at least, appeared to 
mark the gradual slipping away of weeks 
and months. But the homes which are in 
outward show the most serene, are not in- 
variably the freest from carking care and 
smouldering passions; nor was Lady 



The Behemoth means Mischief. 29 

Livingston's well-appointed abode an ex- 
ception to the rule. Beatrice was far from 
happy, and it was seldom that her fair 
pure face was irradiated by the sunny 
smile which had once been so frequent 
She had prolonged her visit to the dowager 
far beyond the limits originally designed 
for it. For, somehow, at Richmond, and 
under the eyes of her dragon-guardian, 
she felt herself safer than elsewhere from 
Dashwood's hateful suit, based as it was 
upon her own rash promise to be his. 
Her other memories were of a kind to 
afford her little relief Oswald Charlton, 
after the day which had witnessed] his 
fruitless proposals, came to the Fountains 
no more, and Beatrice told herself that he 
was doubtless learning to forget her, and 
that was better so, much better. But 
though, she repeated this comforting as- 
surance to herself a thousand and a thou- 
sand times again, the truth is that she 
drew little comfort from it She could not 



30 Lady Livingston! s Legacy. 

forget. Men, it might be, could more 
quickly efface a once-loved image from 
their hearts. She had heard as much, and 
perhaps it was very natural and proper, 
and Mr. Charlton would be much happier 
than if he had continued to set his hopes 
on one beyond his reach. Yet Beatrice 
knew that she feared this in her secret 
soul, not hoped it, and that she yearned 
for his presence with the unsatisfied long- 
ing of those who are all but despairing. 

The dowager was herself becoming a 
little more fretful, and slightly less genial, 
perhaps, than when first Violet Maybrook 
became an inmate of her house. She talked 
less frequently about her health than it 
had been her custom to do ; but her physi- 
cians found her a more censorious and un- 
manageable patient than before, and old 
Sir Joseph Doublefee, in particular, be- 
nioaned the hard exigencies of fashionable 
society which compelled him to go so far 



The Behemoth means Mischief, 3 1 



to visit an influential invalid who launched 
so many darts of sarcasm at her doctor. 

" I declare," said that veteran ^Escula- 
pius of the West End . " I declare I be- 
lieve that old woman spends her time in 
devising disagreeable things to say to me 
the next visit I pay her. I felt, yesterday, 
nearer apoplexy in her company than Fve 
done these two years." 

For poor Sir Joseph had a number of 
weak points, moral and physical, which 
were tolerably well known amongst his 
lucrative professional connection, but which 
were oftener mentioned behind his broad 
back than when his rubicund face and 
silvery whiskers and moist twinkling eyes 
were brought to bear upon a noble valetu- 
dinarian. 

Lastly, Violet Maybrook, although per- 
haps even more beautiful than when she 
first reached England, looked somewhat 
graver and sadder than she had ever done 
before. But she kept her secret well, 



32 Lady Livingstori s Legacy. 

whatever was the hidden cause of care 
which followed her like her shadow ; and 
she continued to discharge the duties of 
her situation with a tact and cheerfulness 
that never failed her. As for Sir Frede- 
rick, he was indeed a frequent visitor at 
the Fountains, but he played his cards 
prudently, and did not persecute Beatrice 
by any overt display of attentions. Yet 
Miss Fleming was never easy in his pre- 
sence. She felt, rather than knew, that 
there lurked under the bland indifference 
of Dashwood's manner a consciousness of 
power, founded on that sense of proprietor- 
ship which an " engaged " swain so often 
exhibits towards his betrothed. Had she 
known his whole history, or, if not quite 
the whole, a part, it is probable that she 
might have entertained some degree of 
sympathy with the unfortunate baronet 
The hands of the world's great clock had 
not stood idle for Sir Frederick Dashwood. 
His difficulties had thickened around him, 



The Behemoth means Mischief. 33 



and if there had been occasional gleams of 
broken sunshine to checker the gloom, 
these had but served to deepen by contrast 
the gathering blackness. 

" Head and ears in debt," was the 
general verdict of those male gossips who 
are the oracles of club smoking-rooms; 
and indeed Dashwood himself, when in a 
thoughtful mood, was wont to liken him- 
self to some strong swimmer who strains 
every muscle and sinew in the vain at- 
tempt to breast some swollen current 
He was passing rapidly into that state of 
suspicious irritability in which men loathe 
the postman's startling knock, and eye 
every stranger askance, seeing duns, 
bailiffs, and executions everywhere. 

He was not entirely destitute, although 
his supplies of ready money were inter- 
mittent and scanty. His grandfather's 
senile avarice had taken the not uncommon 
form of desperate speculation. The 
modern miser has only the rapacity of 

VOL. II. 3 



34 Lady Livingston's Legacy, 

the old hoarder of French crowns and 
broad gold double joes, not his tenacious 
hold upon tangible ringing specie. So Sir 
George, when he took to the good, old 
gentlemanly vice of thirsting after gain 
and gold, found his philosopher's stone in 
the share mart, and his powder of pro- 
jection in the Stock Exchange, buying 
what was cheap, in hopes that every 
silvern sprat might bring in noble returns 
by the capture of an auriferous whale. 
Thus his grandson and heir found him- 
self a creditor of the very queerest common- 
wealths and monarchs, holding stock of 
South American republics laid desolate by 
the torch and tomahawk of the bordering 
savage ; or possessing promises to pay 
sanctioned by dethroned hospodars and 
fugitive kings of Araucania. There were 
shares, too, in docks never dug, and rail- 
roads unknown to Bradshaw, in companies 
(limited) that had not as yet attained to 
the dignity of a dividend, and in all sorts 



The Behemoth means Mischief. 3 5 

of insolvent concerns, old and new. The 
brokers to whom these shaky securities 
were shewn had curtly pronounced them 
as unsaleable, except by weight, and to the 
butterman. 

Yet there was a boxful of papers, of 
bonds, scrip, debentures, coupons, titles, 
and so forth, the shadow, so to speak, of 
the substantial fortune of Sir George Dash- 
wood, the very mention of which inspired 
creditors with a sort of respect for the 
broken-down baronet who was so deep in 
their books. There was a chance of that, 
to use the words of more than one of these 
worthy tradesmen, " out of so many irons 
in the fire some might get hot." War, 
revolution, and commerce effect such semi- 
miracles, that it was possible that several 
of the medical investor's wild purchases 
might prove remunerative. The faction 
of the Blacks or Reds, long suppressed by 
summary shooting and pillage, might again 
come to rule the wealthy states of Platina 

3.2 



36 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

del Douro, might keep faith with old lenders, 
and send up Platina stock to above par. 
The Prince of Poyais might come back. 
Cotton, gold mines, or an international canal, 
might convert Lonely River into a Pac- 
tolus. 

He was a baronet too, and that had 
weight with those who held him in the 
hollow of their hand, and who, by legal 
process, might on any day have qualified 
him for the casual ward of a metropolitan 
workhouse. There are many who exist 
on sufferance, flickering tapers that a puff 
could extinguish, but that flicker on un- 
disturbed. And this holds true of all, or 
of most, classes of society. We admire 
the bronzed boatman, his black whiskers 
lightly tipped with silver gray, putting out 
to sea, in the old smack, with its picturesque 
ruddy sail, patched, but workmanlike, his 
stalwart giants of sons beside him, and a 
brave little curly-headed water-baby of a 
boy, exhibiting such playful importance as 



The Behemoth means Mischief. 37 

he hauls the heavy heap of nets forward, 
or " bears a hand " at the sheet 

" I could sell him up to-morrow," is the 
soliloquy of some bent old man with narrow 
chest and close-buttoned coat, who stands 
watching the mackerel fisher's departure 
with keen eyes that peer from under 
grizzled brows. 

A smart fellow, yonder bright -eyed 
artisan, who earns ever so much a day, 
four times a week, and who is rather an 
artist than a mechanic, so deftly do his 
dexterous fingers subdue tough bronze, or 
clumsy iron, or stubborn clay, into sub- 
mission. But he also exists, and makes 
and spends, by the kind permission of 
tallyman or loan office, precisely as doe^ 
solemn, fair-haired Captain Heaviswell, 
driving his wdl-horsed drag, as if to hold 
the reins were a religious duty, carry on 
the war by the tolerance of some dozen 
persons who could extinguish him in an 
instant It is an advantage, in such cases, 



38 Lady Livingston! s Legacy. 

to have a handle to one's name, and Sir 
Frederick's did him good service, but yet 
he was sorely tried. 

Mr. Longtick, managing partner of 
Longtick and Sons, the well-known army 
tailors, of Bowler Street, Mayfair, was the 
man whom he feared the most There 
are tailors and tailors, and these especial 
ones were of the good old breed, honey to 
the fresh young palate, but with an awk- 
ward aftertaste of gall for the jaded and 
world-weary. They were patient traffickers, 
very patient. Prompt payments they gently 
but firmly deprecated, as they would a 
demand for vulgar discount on a tender 
of cash. They could wait, and the bill 
could swell ; and if high mettled young- 
sters, military or civilian, wanted jewellery, 
wine, or even a little cash, the gentlest 
compulsion induced the firm to include 
such supplies among the coats and trousers, 
the swords, shakoes, gold-laced caps, 
feathers, fripperies, and other articles of 



The Behemoth means Mischief. 39 

their lengthy account But there was a 
fearful reckoning in store for the chubby- 
cheeked young subalterns whose insolence 
the much-enduring Longtick had borne 
with such smirking philosophy. " Snip " 
grew in later years to be a Monster beyond 
the management of the puny Franken- 
steins who had called him into being, and 
the "goose" and "shears," and other 
paraphernalia of the fashioner, suggested 
any but jocose associations to the facetious 
young fellows who now deprecated the 
severity of that same Simon Longtick 
whose occupation had once supplied so 
broad a target for their dull wits. Now, 
Dashwood had never been out of debt to 
Longtick since he was introduced at the 
tailor's as "just joining" his first and 
costliest regiment. He had paid, now and 
again, something on account ; but to be 
credited with, say, a fifty pound instalment, 
to be balanced a fortnight later by a new 
uniform, three suits of mufti, studs, watch- 



40 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

guaxxl, jewelled waistcoat buttons, and a 
hamper of Champagne and Mozelle, is 
not adapted to set a man clear with the 
worid He owed, then, a great deal to 
Longtick and Sons; and Simon, the only 
Longtick whom he had ever dealt with, 
and who may have been paternal or filial 
for aught that his careless customers knew, 
was ambiguously threatening and vaguely 
peremptory. 

The Behemoth, too, was a very per- 
plexing patron. Sir Frederick's first visit 
to Pitt Street had by no means been the 
last Such visits never are. He had 
found his way back to the money-lender's 
lair without requiring the guidance of 
friendly Major Raffington. The recep- 
tion which awaited him there was never 
very certainly to be divined beforehand 
Sometimes the Behemoth would not see 
him ; sometimes he had his audience, only 
to be entertained with urbane reproaches 
on his want of punctuality as to the taking 



The Behemoth means Mischief, 4 1 

up of his bills. There were also lucky 
days, days which Roman superstition 
would have marked with a white stone, 
when he went away from Pitt Street with 
a brisk step, a light heart, and a little 
magic slip of gold-compelling paper in 
his pocket But on these rare occasions 
he was compelled to sign all kinds of docu- 
ments, until it would have puzzled an 
actuary to ascertain the precise relations 
between Dashwood and the obliging Baron 
Swartz. Sir Frederick had had an easier 
time of it since be had become a client of 
that estimable capitalist : he could pay his 
washerwoman, settle with the waiter at 
his club, and get rid of one or two irre- 
pressible persons who had been prone to 
sit for hours in his entrance-hall in Jekyl 
Street, loudly proclaiming that they would 
not stir until Sir Frederick, " as he called 
himself," had settled their little account of 
fourteen, twelve, six. But he was yet in 
Longtick's power, and, metaphorically 



42 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

. 

speaking, knew himself to be under the 
thumb of Baron Swartz, a white thumb, 
adorned by a signet-ring of price, and set 
off by a filbert nail of exquisite pinkness, 
but a thumb that looked as if it could press 
cruelly, if its owner were so minded. 

What object the monarch of money- 
lenders had in view was more than Dash- 
wood could conjecture. Sir Frederick did 
not believe in disinterested benevolence, 
and had little faith in philanthropy. He 
was certain that the Behemoth's acquaint- 
ance with himself was not maintained for 
the friendly purpose of enabling him to 
liquidate his dinner-bills, or to pay off testy 
shopkeepers and job-masters, infuriate at 
having been " kep' out " of the amounts 
due for hacks, carriages, and horse-keep 
longer than human patience could endure. 
But he had sense enough to see that Baron 
Swartz was none the richer for the trans- 
actions into which he had as yet entered 
with the impenitent prodigal of Jekyl 



The Behemoth means Mischief, 43 



Street. Dashwood's bills were constantly 
falling due, and being renewed, and con- 
solidated, and so forth ; and what with 
interest, premium, and principal, the aggre- 
gate was growing like isome huge financial 
fungus. But, save in promises, Sir Frede- 
rick had in nowise reimbursed the Jew 
such advances as had from time to time 
been doled out to him. He felt strangely 
unnerved, then, when a coroneted envelope 
was brought to him, inclosing a note in the 
well-known handwriting, smaller and clearer 
than our insular penmanship produces, and 
which ran briefly thus : " Baron Swartz 
presents his compliments to Captain Sir 
Frederick Dashwood, and would feel him- 
self greatly obliged if Sir Frederick Dash- 
wood could conveniently call in Pitt Street, 
say to-morrow, about twelve." 

" He never sent for me before," said 
Dashwood ruefully, as he showed this 
letter that evening, in a cardroom at his 
military club, to his ally, Major Raffington. 



44 Lady Livingstofis Legacy. 

" I have always called on him of my own 
accord, ay, and kicked my heels in the 
ante-room while I was about it I have a 
notion, now^ that the Behemoth mean$ mis* 
chief." 

Major Raffington shook his head^ and 
groaned sympathetically. 

" I suppose youll go, though, old feUow,"^ 
he said : ^' the Behemoth's invitations ar^ 
like royal commsmds, not to be refused." 



CHAPTER III. 



A SAD CHAPTER. 




ARRYING and giving in marriage 
certainly do occupy a larger pro- 
portion of feminine than of mas- 
culine thoughts, and it is natural, although 

* 

the strong-minded sisterhood may object, 
that this should be so. Such, at any rate, 
was the opinion of the Dowager Lady 
Livingston, who was rather inclined, than 
otherwise, to plume herself on her superior 
sagacity, when she wrote urgently to 
Oswald Charlton, all but entreating her 
late Lord's nephew to resume his visits at 
the Fountains. The aged peeress was 



46 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

beginning to feel, and to resent, the truths 
that there are things which money cannot 
buy, and she was the more angry because 
she desired nothing but to bring about the 
happiness of those who were dear to her. 
It is not only, according to Lamb's quaint 
saying, the round man alone, but sometimes 
the round woman as well, who finds herself 
roughly inserted in the three-cornered hole. 
To have been the abbess of some highly 
privileged convent, a despotic queen-reg- 
nant, or a good fairy, able by the wave of 
her starry wand to bestow riches and 
felicity on the deserving hunchbacks and 
rags on the bad, would have precisely 
suited her. And now, here was Beatrice, her 
darling Beatrice, strangely dear to the child- 
less old woman, who had never schemed or 
laboured for the welfare of a daughter, pining 
and fading beneath her . eyes, because she 
loved a man whom duty compelled her to 
abandon for another, whom she regarded 
with dislike and fear; for the sentiment which 



A Sad Chapter. 47 



Dashwood now inspired in the object of 
his interested affections was akin to fear. 

The dowager was angry with all con- 
cerned, but chiefly with herself There 
was Beatrice, with her Quixotic code of 
honour, and her blind devotion to the 
wishes of her dead mother ; there was Sir 
Frederick, grasping, greedy, callous, con- 
cealing the iron hand beneath the velvet 
glove ; there, lastly, was Lady Livingston, 
self-convicted of having blundered sadly 
when she believed herself to be acting for 
the best Had she not put forth all coax- 
ing arts for the conciliation of the veiy 
man, who, of all others, was the likeliest to 
make her darling miserable ! Had she not 
thrown Beatrice and her cousin together, 
confident in her own wisdom, and secure 
in the knowledge of her own ultimate re- 
solves, and with what a result ! She had 
merely riveted the chain that bound her 
young kinswoman to the disreputable baro- 
net, and caused much unhappiness to the 



48 Lady Livingstotis Legacy. 

person from whom, if she could, she would 
most willingly have fenced off all the ills of 
life. She, therefore, eager to repair the 
errors of the past, wrote to Oswald Charl- 
ton to call him back to the Fountains. 

Oswald could not choose but comply 
with this behest He knew, or divined, 
what was the dowager's purpose in thus 
recalling him, and he instinctively fdt that 
more of pain than pleasure was likely to 
accrue from such a renewal of his former 
intimacy. But the temptation was more 
than he could resist, and he came. As he 
passed the hall-door, the sound of singing 
met his ears, and he paused, listening, as 
some wayfarer in a South American forest 
might pause to hearken to the strange 
wild notes of some feathered minstrel as 
yet uncatalogued by the naturalists of 
Europe. A clear and powerful voice, ex- 
quisitely modulated, and managed with 
much skill, but yet unpleasing in the 
general effect which it produced upon an 



A Sad Chapter. 49 

ear that was quick and sympathetic, such a 
voice as that of the mocking-bird, whose 
sweetest strains of borrowed music are apt 
to change abruptly into shrieks of anguish, 
and the despairing laughter of the Lost 
There was no such violent transition in this 
instance, and it was not until the last ca- 
dence had died away, that Oswald looked 
his inquiry of the old butler at his elbow. 

" Miss Beatrice s music teacher, sir . ^a 
young teacher from London . comes twice 
a week, and mostly spends some time here," 
said that steady functionary. 

And when Oswald entered the well- 
known room, he found, in addition to the 
regular members of the family, a slight and 
elfish form, with colourless hair, and sallow 
face, and weird expression, not at all such 
as he should have connected with the chant 
which he had just overheard. 

But it was not immediately that Charlton 
had leisure to observe so insignificant an 
individual as Aphy Larpent, the " young 

VOL. II. 4 



50 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

woman from London." There was the 
dear, dear face, so often seen in dreams, so 
steadfastly enshrined in memory, somewhat 
paler and sadder than of old, but with the 
same pure prettiness of mould, the same 
look of trustful innocence. One glimpse he 
had of the lovelight shining forth from 
Beatrice's eyes, and there was a delicious 
instant when he marked her sudden blush 
and start at his unexpected entry ! But the 
drill of good society teaches us to subdue 
all outward manifestations of feeling, and 

« 

Miss Fleming betrayed herself no more, 
save that her little hand was cold and trem- 
bling as It rested for a moment in his. The 
dowager was brisker and more genial than 
she had been of late, but she was careful 
not to say a word regarding her own prayer 
to her husband's nephew to resume his old 
intimacy at a house which he had of late 
learned to avoid. Lady Livingston's desire 
was to atone for the harm done by her 
former diplomacy, and she really, on this 



A Sad Chapter. 5 1 



occasion, displayed the supreme tact which 
consists in letting things, tg all appearance, 
alone. That is not the most expert coach- 
man who squares his elbows obtrusively, 
and forces on the notice of all beholders 
what a painful and difficult task it is to 
drive. The fencer who flourishes his sword, 
and gives staccato beats with his blade, and 
cries Ha ! ha ! with the ferocity of a blood- 
thirsty Bobadil, is not always a match for 
the quiet swordsman who thrusts home at 
the unguarded moment 

Presently, the young person from Lon- 
don, who had to some extent ingratiated 
herself in the goodwill of the titled mistress 
of the Fountains, and was, as the butler had 
truly indicated, often pressed to remain as 
a guest after having executed her official 
duties as a teacher, went away ; and Lady 
Livingston unostentatiously contrived that 
both Violet Maybrook and herself should 
quit the room, and that the lovers should 
be left alone together. It was for this that 

4.2 



5 2 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

the dowager had asked Oswald to resume 
his visits at the house of his uncle's widow, 
and she purred with blameless satisfaction 
as she perceived the partial success of her 
simple stratagem. Violet fell, more than 
willingly, into her employer's arrangements. 
She would, herself, have given very much 
to have separated Dashwood's future for- 
tunes from those of Miss Fleming, and her 
prompt prescience had warned her from the 
first that in this innocent girl she had en- 
countered her most dangerous rival with 
the man whom, knowing and reading him 
as she did, she still loved so well. 

The lovers were left alone. Who is there 
so cold and dull as not to remember when 
those few and simple words would have 
been as a foretaste of Elysium, when the 
base earth, and the grovelling cares of 
sordid life, rolled away like the changing 
scenery of a theatre, and all was glorious, 
tender, almost divine, because of the one 
world-old story of loving, and being loved 



A Sad Chapter. " 53: 



again ! But there is a difference between 
the first thrilling emotion of new hopes, new 
interests, new joys, and the mere tremulous 
longing when some rigid barrier of honour 
or of faith arises to divide those who would 
gladly join their hands. So it was now. 
Beatrice looked timidly down, as if afraid 
that her eyes might betray her thoughts, 
and Charlton, too, was more embarrassed 
than is usual with members of his profes- 
sion. It was for him to speak, however, 
and so he began, not taking refuge in 
general topics, but plunging at once into 
the only one which could have had a zest 
for those two. " I have been a long time 
absent from the dear old house," he said ; 

\ . 

" you can guess why. Miss Fleming, unless 
I am much mistaken." 

" Yes !" she said, softly ; but as yet she 
did not look up, and he went on. 

" I stayed away for more reasons than one. 
I feared, for one thing, that my presence 
might give you needless annoyance . might 



54 Lady Livingstoiis Legacy. 

remind you of hopes which were very 
likely presumptuous, but which, at any rate, 
were never to be realized And then I 
could not come without pain to myself. 
Lady Livingston . dear, good, old soul . 
wrote to reproach me with neglecting her, 
and I had not the heart to stay away. But 
was it right that I should come here ?" 

" I am . ^that is, we are . ^very glad in- 
deed to see you, Mr. Charlton," said Bea- 
trice, with that beautiful hypocrisy which 
only a young girl, and an innocent one, can 
practise, transparent as it is, without its de- 
generating into affectation. 

Oswaldsmiled somewhat sadly. "Perhaps, 
for my own peace of mind, it is not right," 
he said, as he rose from his chair and leaned 
against the comer of an old cabinet, richly 
inlaid in rare woods, and ivory, and mother- 
of-pearl, the work of some cunning Japanese 
artist of those far-off days when Japan was 
as a book bound and clasped against the 
intrusive West " But dearly as I may 



A Sad Chapter. 55 

have to pay for the present pleasure of 
hearing the one voice, and of looking upon 
the one face, that to me are more than all 
the world, I am glad that I came." 

Miss Flemings only answer was, that her 
head bent down a little lower, and that a 
flush of dainty pink suffused her pale cheek ; 
and yet she was supremely happy for one 
short instant, as she drank in those wel- 
come words. She was not forgotten, then. 
She was loved still by the man whom, in 
her heart, she acknowledged as her own 
chosen one ; and that sweet assurance did 
much to take away the smart of weeks and 
months of care and sorrow. But she did 
not speak ; and after a while Oswald's voice 
again broke the silence. 

** When I came to Richmond to-day," he 
said, " at my good aunt's invitation, I had, 
schooled myself into believing that, even 
if the opportunity occurred, I should say 
nothing to you. Miss Fleming, which mere 
acquaintance, mere friendship, would not 



56 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

warrant Here is the opportunity, and I 
cannot help, as you see, recurring to the 
past . cannot help expressing the anxiety 
which I feel as to your future. May I, 
without rudeness, ask if your cousin, Sir 
Frederick Dashwood, has been often here 
of late ?" 

"He comes sometimes . not very often. 
He was here two days ago," replied Bea- 
trice, with evident reluctance. 

" And does he . forgive me if I presume 
on the memory of our former conversation 
to ask questions which only my deep in- 
terest in your welfare could excuse . press 
his suit, his claim, I would say ?'* rejoined . 
Oswald. 

"He spoke once, once only : it is some 
time since then," answered Beatrice, in a 
faint, low voice. 

"He perseveres, then, in forcing his ad- 
dresses upon you, even in opposition to your 
own will ?" said the young man ; and there 
was a hard, metallic ring in his voice, that 



A Sad Chapter. 57 

made Beatrice, for the first time, lift her 
head in alarm and look Oswald in the 
face. 

" You will not quarrel with him . not 
seek him out, I mean," she said, eagerly : 
" that would be worse than all." 

Charlton laughed somewhat bitterly. 
"No fear of that," he replied ; " the days 
of chivalry are past, and gentlemen no 
longer break spears or cross swords be- 
cause they love the same lady. I have no 
reasonable ground for differing with Sir 
Frederick Dashwood . so the world would 
say . ^because he would snatch from me the 
one flower that I would have for the pride 
of my own garden, for the joy and solace 
of my own life, merely . I know him . to 
crush It in his reckless grasp, and then 
to toss it aside to fade and wither! I 
only want to know what answer he re- 
ceived." 

" From me, you mean ?" said Beatrice^ 
sobbing* 



58 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

" From yourself, dear Beatrice," returned 
Charlton, as he approached hen " I can 
imagine how he spoke and acted; but what 
was your reply ?" 

" That I must keep my word," said Bea- 
trice, as she looked up, and her truthful eyes, 
swimming in tears, met Oswald's ; " that I 
must keep it at any cost ; that if he cho^e 
to take me, I was bound to submit ; but 
that I could never, never care for him, 
never love him, if I wearied out a lifetime 

by his side ! I even said " She was 

silent, blushing deeply, and her eyes 
drooped ; but her sudden change of colour, 
and her embarrassment, gave the young 
man a clue to her meaning, and he hastily 
exclaimed . 

" That you did care for another ! You 
told him that, and he was too mean, too 
heartless, to release you from this hateful 
compact, into which you had been so cruelly 
entrapped ? Knowing what I know, by 
report, concerning this man, I cannot won- 



A Sad Chapter. 59 

der that his ear should have been deaf to 
your appeal." 

" He was deaf to it," said Beatrice, de- 
spondently. " I did not tell him in distinct 
words that I . I valued another above him; 
but he understood me, and treated my poor 
little remonstrance as if it had been the 
wayward fancy of a child. Oh, it is hard, 
it is hard ; but if he will have the fulfilment 
of my pledge, exacted by her who is gone, 
I can but yield. He said he would not be 
in a hurry to press his claim, so that it 
were but fully and fairly acknowledged as 
binding ; and hitherto he has been so far 
merciful that he has said no more to me 
since then. But each morning the detested 
thought comes, cold and numbing as the 
touch of death, that he may speak, and that 
I am his slave, if he will have it so." Her 
tears fell quick and heavily ; and Oswald 
Charlton almost forgot the ruin of his own 
high hopes in unselfish pity for her, so 
tender, young, and pure, thus doomed to 



6o Lady Livingstones Legacy^ 

vistas of misery far beyond her own ima- 
gining. 

" Beatrice," he said . " I may call you 
Beatrice, may I not ? . we were always to 
be friends, you know, and I do but take a 
friend's privilege in caring for your happi- 
ness. Unless I do Sir Frederick Dash- 
wood great injustice, it is the prospect of 
enjoying, as your husband, the use of Lady 
Livingston's ample inheritance, that makes 
him so resolute in asserting the rights over 
you which an evil fortune has given him. 
In your place, I would go to the dowager, 
tell her all, and " 

" I have told her everything already," 
interrupted Beatrice, wringing her hands ; 
'* but it was useless. I have begged and 
prayed of her to make me no heiress, since 
the very idea of her bounty had already 
allured the cupidity of one as ruthless as 
any vulture that ever flew screaming to- 
wards a prey. But she did but laugh, in 
her kind, wise way, telling me not to fret 



A Sad Chapter. 6 1 

myself, since all would presently be well. 
She has tried, indeed, to reason me out of 
my belief that I am bound by my promise 
made beside my mother*s death-bed ; but 
she was compelled to admit that I had the 
best of the argument. And, indeed, so I 
had. You, Oswald . I may call my friend 
so . you would not counsel me to perjure 
myself, or to break my word ?" 

" No, dear," Said Oswald, hoarsely, as he 
drew his hand across his own eyes ; " I 
would not That was a noble poet who 
penned those words : . 

" * I could not love thee, sweet, so much, 
Loved I not honour more.' 

If ever you need a friend, remember you 
have one in Oswald Charlton, one who 
would give his life to save you from sor- 
row! But he will not, for his sake or yours, 
counsel you to break your spoken word." 
He took her hand, and pressed it, and then, 
unable to trust his voice to utter more. 



62 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

walked from the room, and from the house. 
When Lady Livingston returned, she found 
that Oswald had gone back to London, that 
Beatrice was weeping in her room above, 
and that her pet scheme for bringing the 
young people together had turned out a 
total failure. 



CHAPTER IV. 



AT PIRATE*S POST. 




EDFORD ROW, on a bright, 
bleak day, when spring sunshine 
went hand in hand with the 
searching blasts of an easterly wind, pre- 
sented a cheerier aspect than it had done 
on that snowy afternoon of early winter 
which had witnessed Sir Frederick Dash- 
wood's fruitless visit to Goodeve and 
Glegg. But the mechanism of the legal 
mill within doors went on working with its 
usual slow and smooth precision, and still 
the bones of litigants were ground to make 
the bread of the eminent practitioners whose 



64 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

names were dimly visible on the dingy door- 
posts. There, each at his desk, were the 
veteran clerks and the irreverent office- 
lads of Oriental descent, and there, as be- 
fore, was that pattern penman and discreet 
copyist, Mr. Daniel Davis. The last-men- 
tioned personage stood higher in the firm's 
regard than during the first months of his 
being numbered among the scribes in those 
Bedford Row offices. Or perhaps it would 
be more accurate to say that he had risen 
in the opinion of his chief, the senior part- 
ner in* Goodeve and Glegg's well-known 
house. Mr. Goodeve himself had by no 
means raised himself, of late, in the eyes of 
his partner and his subordinates. Glegg 
groaned over his sins of omission and the 
vacillating policy that threw so much of 
thankless toil upon the hard-worked junior. 
It was now no secret in the office that Mr. 
Goodeve's business capacitieis were not 
what they had been. " The governor's 
going stale !" was a frequent comment 



A t Pirate's Post. 6 5 

among the boys who carried bagfuls of 
papers to and from the law-courts and tax- 
ing-masters ; and although the steady old 
clerks were too heedful of the common- 
weal to disparage their employer s intellect, 
they could not forbear from speaking to 
him on business topics in more peremptory 
style than they would have ventured to use 
a year or two before. 

There are few positions more painful 
than that of a man dimly conscious of fail- 
ing powers, and nervously anxious lest 
those with whom he deals should find out 
the weak joints in his harness. Small 
slights are magnified in his estimation, and 
the more so that he dares not resent them, 
for fear of betraying the feebleness that he 
would fain hide from himself, if he could. 

So it was with Mr. Samuel Goodeve. 
Before the outside vulgar, he could yet 
keep up a show of fair seeming. The 
crass ignorance which every lawyer reck- 
ons on as the first attribute of a client, 

VOL. II. 5 



66 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

prevented his increasing mistakes from 
being made patent. But he knew that Glegg 
was beginning to humour him as though he 
were a child; while the managing clerks 
could not restrain their impatience when 
his memory proved deficient, as was often 
the case, in little matters of detail with 
which he had once been fully conversant. 
Davis alone treated him with the same 
grave and intelligent deference which he 
had from the first displayed ; and it is not 
wonderful that Mr. Goodeve should have 
learned to consider Davis as a verj^ supe- 
rior young man indeed, and to apply to 
him for help in moments when the routine 
of regular work was interrupted by some 
jarring of the machinery. And 'Davis, 
when thus consulted, was so admirable a 
coadjutor, never presuming on the trust 
reposed in him, suggesting rather than ad- 
vising, and having the crowning art of 
making his own lucid thoughts appear as 
though they sprang, Minerva-like, from the 



At Pirates Post. 67 

bemuddled brain of the head of the 
firm ! 

The dark young clerk's services had 
been acknowledged, but not very substan- 
tially ; his salary had been raised, but only 
by some poor half-crown a week; and 
Mr. Glegg had protested stoutly against 
any such largess. 

*' You'll make every quill-driver of the 
lot discontented and envious;" such had 
been the remonstrance of the junior solici- 
tor; "and the end of it will be that we 
shall have to raise their wages all round. 
Make use of the fellow, if he's the para- 
gon you say, but don't overpay him ; and, 
if you'll allow me to interfere on such a 
point, Mr. Goodeve, I'd not let him make 
so many cash out-goings on our behalf, or 
be quite so constant at the banker's counter, 
as I understand to have been the case 
lately." 

But on these subjects Mr. Goodeve was 
confident of his own right to judge, and 

5.2 



68 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 



Daniel Davis continued to fetch and carry- 
coin and cheques as before, and got to 
know a good deal of the arcana of the 
firm's business. 

Office-hours were at length over on the 
day which had beheld Oswald Charlton's 
interview with Beatrice Fleming, and the 
clerks of Goodeve and Glegg, some in 
company, and others alone, went on their 
several ways. Among these last was 
Daniel Davis, who, as usual, set his face 
westwards, and walked sturdily on, as if 
bound for Great Eldon Street and home. 
Not for long, however, since, plunging ab- 
ruptly into a narrow court, where the day^ 
light filtered down between high roofs and 
overhanging chimney-stacks, as into some 
ravine among the rocks, he left the 
roaring thoroughfare behind, and presently 
emerged into a net work of slimy streets,, 
where the tenacious London mud seemed 
perennially to cling to the slippery stones 
of the carriage-way, and where all the 



Ai Pirate's Post. 69 

dwellings, and the shops, and the people 
looked distressingly alike. Daniel Davis 
must have known town well, or his former 
experiences of seafaring and a woodsman's 
life must have facilitated the results of his 
study of the map, since he struck out a 
course for himself, which, devious as it was, 
he followed without any sign of hesitation 
or of perplexity. It was not, however, until 
after a long spell of swift walking that he 
emerged from the grimy labyrinth of dis- 
mal streets, and was once more in one of 
the main arteries of London traffic. His 
face was set eastwards now, and that too at 
the hour when the tide of human beings 
was running strongly in the opposite direc- 
tion, and when the City was fast being 
emptied of its fast but floating population. 
An empty omnibus, creeping towards 
the deserted heart of the world's commerce, 
whence the black stream of busy life was 
.ebbing so rapidly, was not hard to find, and 
Mr. Daniel Davis thus journeyed on through 



70 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 



famous streets where for generations for- 
tunes had been made or marred, until at 
last the dilatory vehicle in which he was a 
passenger crossed London Bridge, and 
there set him down. He pulled down his 
hat over his brows, and pushed on, walking 
swiftly, as before, and still towards the east, 
It was not so easy, there, as he had found 
it on the Middlesex side of the Thames, to 
proceed by parallel routes, or to make cir- 
cuits which should enable him, with some 
extra trouble and fatigue, to strike the main 
road at a point remote from that which he 
had already reached. Yet, whenever it was 
possible to do so, he avoided the principal 
thoroughfares, skirting blocks of ancient 
buildings huddled together, diving down 
unsavoury lanes, and gliding rapidly past 
the prison-like walls of monstrous factories, 
and grudging, to all appearance, no trouble, 
so that his progress should be unperceived. 
At last he found himself in a region where 
liquor saloons, shopfronts full of cheap and 



Ai Pirate's Post. 7 1 

tawdry wares, and the narrow doorways, 
blocked by stands of sun-sketched portraits, 
of touting photographers, began to give 
way to emporiums still more markedly 
suburban, low-browed taverns, sheds where 
coals, greens, and potatoes were vended in 
picturesque confusion across the rough 
board that did duty for a counter, and con- 
stantly recurring marine store shops. 

A queer district this, and not a very 
likely one in which a client of Messrs. 
Goodeve and Glegg, solicitors with so dis- 
tinguished a connection, might be expected 
to reside. There was an ancient and fish- 
like smell which pervaded the dusky alleys 
and crowded courts to left and right, and which 
was not dispelled even by the wholesome 
but pungent odours of heated tar and seeth- 
ing pitch from yonder boat-builder's yard, 
where hammering and caulking were still 
going on in lively fashion, though the toils 
of ordinary workmen seemed over for that 
day. A queer district, with decidedly a 



72 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 



maritime and amphibious flavour about it, 
which yet lacked the racy smack of real 
sea-water. There were giant warehouses 
topped by towering cranes that looked as 
though nothing, not even the Tun of 
Heidelberg, could have been too weighty 
for the sway of their iron arms ; and there 
were stores where masts and sails, booms 
and cordage, overflowed the buildings, and 
lumbered the enclosures behind the palings 
viciously studded with crooked nails, like 
hooks set to catch men. 

It was not a spot to which to resort, 
surely, for purposes of pleasure, and yet, 
if Mr. Daniel Davis was there on some errand 
of the firm's whose pay he drew, it must be 
confessed that he went about this business 
after a most peculiar and stealthy fashion. 

Looking at his watch, he threw a quick 
upward glance at the fading sky, and then 
shook his head. 

" I have made good speed," he said ; 
" too good, and have time to spare." 



Ai Pirates Post. 73 

And without any further comment, he 
walked on, though in more leisurely style 

. 

than before, stopping now and then, as if 
to make sure of some landmark or local 
indication. 

"It ought to be hereabouts," he said ; 
***but it is better to be certain on that 
head." 

Accordingly he made choice of a booth 
where potatoes, firewood, and modicums of 
coal were being vended by the glare of 
three unshaded gas-burners, and propounded 
two inquiries, to which the wooden-legged 
proprietor of the establishment readily re- 
joined. 

"As for the Creek, master, it's right 
ahead of you ; and if you bear up a little 
towards the starboard tack, youll find the 
toll-bridge and the causeway for foot- walkers 
. the carts and carriages pass round t'other 
side of the church. And as- for a decent 
public near the water, you can't do better 
than the ' Anchor Fluke,' kept by an old 



74 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

shipmet of mine, in Rodney Row. Any- 
bodyll show it to you." 

Briefly thanking this communicative 
trafficker, Mr. Davis, or, to give him his 
proper name, Bruce Larpent, proceeded to 
follow the directions which he had been 
given. Evening was now closing in, and 
that the more quickly for the dull damp fog 
that rose from marsh and pool along the 
river's shore, and hung like a gray shroud 
worn breast-high, around the lounging 
groups that gathered, pipes in their mouths, 
and hands thrust into the pockets of loose 
monkey-jackets, made of coarse blue pilot- 
cloth, soddened by much exposure to wea- 
ther, around the stone stairheads, of which 
the lowest steps were worn by the lapping 
of water, and discoloured by ooze and slime. 
Bright lights gleamed through the thin red 
curtains of upper rooms, wherein, to judge 
by the squeaking of fiddles and the stamp- 
ing of feet, to say nothing of the various 
shadows that gyrated from window to win- 



At Pirate's Post. 75 

dow, dancing, perhaps not duly licensed by 
an enlightened magistracy, was going on. 
From these and other houses of entertain- 
ment came the clink of glasses and the 
chorus of sailors' songs, and shrill female 
objurgations or shriller laughter, and the 
deeper tones of men, some brawling, others 
loud in noisy good-humour. There were 
more men, more women, more children, 
abroad, since the first closing in of the 
darkness, than there had been before ; and 
oyster-stalls, and orange-sellers, and peripa- 
tetic purveyors of hot coffee, pies, whelks^ 
and other creature comforts appeared to 
drive what was literally a roaring trade. 

" This must be the Creek, and yonder is 
the foot-bridge, with its toll-bar, and collec- 
tor in his white apron," said Bruce Larpent, 
as he came to a halt. " Now, where, I 
wonder, is Rodney Row ?" Of the three 
first persons to whom he put this question, 
one, a woman, whose tangled hair hung 
loose beneath a battered bonnet, answered 



76 Lady LivingstotCs Legacy. 

with a laugh of tipsy scorn ; the second, a lad 
in tattered corduroy, made some jeering re- 
ply as he sidled off up an alley; and the third, 
a thoughtful-faced mechanic in paper cap 
and fustian vest, civilly deplored his inabi- 
lity, as a stranger to the district, and, " no 
just that long frae Aberdeen," to impart the 
required information. But a gruff, old, rum- 
perfumed boatman, rolling past in his tar- 
paulin hat and loose mud-boots, gave a 
more satisfactory response to the appeal. 

" Fm a-going thereabouts myself," said 
this Triton of the Thames ; " so, if you 
walks along o' me, 111 show you, from the 
comer, where the 'Anchor Fluke' stands." 

He further, as they paced onwards, re- 
plied to another question of Bruce's as fol- 
lows : " Do I know Pirate's Post ! Do I 
know my grandmother's best set of tea- 
things, when I see it ! Why, I was bom 
not a quarter of a mile off it ; and all us 
chaps by the water, longshoremen and that, 
know the old rotten bit o' timber where 



At Pirates Post. 77 

Captain Kydd s second mate, or the bo'sen^ 
I don't mind which, was hanged in chains 
after the lot of *em had suffered at Execu- 
tion Dock. Many's the time IVe played, 
when I was a boy, near that rotten bit of 
old timber ; but none of us, hark ye, would 
overly have cared to go there alone by 
night. 'Tis in a field, if you can call it a 
field now, where there's a lot of rusty steam- 
boilers and broken machinery lying about, 
a stone s throw from the * Anchor Fluke,' 
and you can see it when the moon's up^ 
from the door." 

It was a squalid district that they were 
traversing, and one not exempt from some 
risk to the belated wayfarer. At the mouth 
of lanes and courts that looked like caverns^ 
and from within which resounded oaths, 
and ear-piercing whistles, and the sharp 
sound of catcalls, loitered several unwashed 
knots of lads and young men, some of 
whom laughed rudely as they stared the 
stranger in the face, while others swaggered 



78 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

. t 

forward, as if to dispute the passage of the 
foot-way. As the dark young clerk and 
his nautical Mentor passed by the largest of 
these gatherings, one of the company, a 
mere boy, made a quick dash at Bruce Lar- 
pent's silver watch-chain, a few links of 
which were visible through the lappels of 
his closely buttoned coat, at the same time 
uttering in shrill accents the well-known 
watchword of the London thieves. But 
Bruce, cool, strong, and active, caught the 
lad by the collar, and held him at arm s 
length, and there was something in his re- 
solute aspect which deterred the seniors of 
the group from joining in the attack. 

" I don't want to hurt you, my young 
friend," he said, as the captive writhed and 
and struggled ; "but we must have no more 
jokes of this sort, if you please ;" while the 
old mariner broke in with : " For shame, 
young limb, you ; I know your carroty head 
well enough, you Ste Jackson, and youll 
never be worth your salt, on the cross or on 



At Pirates Post. 79 

the square, you won't Come, you clear off, 
since the gentleman's willing to take it as a 
lark ; so no more of your nonsense !" 

And the discomfited stripling, as soon as 
Bruce's hold relaxed, slunk back ; while the 
others, one of whom muttered something 
about " not worth while . regular game look 
. old Billy with him too," offered no 
hindrance to Larpent's proceeding on his 
way. 

" You see, sir, our people hereabouts are 
apt to be a little saucy with a stranger. 
Keep your temper, though, and your wea- 
ther eye open at the same time, and, bless 
ye, you'll come to no hurt," said the boat- 
man as they turned the corner. " Now, 
my road lies down here; but yon is Rodney 
Row, close to the river ; and you'll find the 
* Anchor Fluke' at the end of it." 

Rodney Row was not, as Bruce saw it, a 
very cheerful place of residence, consisting 
as it did of four or five hovels, each stand- 
ing in a garden, where a few cabbages 



8o Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

were cultivated behind palings made of 
the tarred staves of old casks ; of a dismal 
warehouse, abutting on the river ; of a dis- 
used factory, the tall chimney of which rose 
ghastly above the creeping fog ; and of a 
largelow building, from the windows of which 
a few lights glimmered, and which the ex- 
plorer rightly guessed to be the oddly named 
hostelry of which he was in search. The 
" Anchor Fluke " proved to be one of those 
mouldering, rat-haunted public-houses that 
here and there crop up among the out- 
skirts of what seafaring men describe as 
the Port of London. Once, it had proba- 
bly done a flourishing business, when pri- 
vateersmen, flushed with plunder, and men- 
of-war's crews eager to get rid of the pay 
and prize-money burning in their unthrifty 
pockets, had revelled in its dingy tap-room, 
and considered its frowsy garden, with the 
sunflowers and wooden images, a very Pa- 
radise of delights. Those days were gone, 
for there is a fashion even among sailors 



At Pirate s Post. 8i 

ashore; and now the " Anchor Fluke " re- 
sembled some rotting hulk perishing at 
moorings in the muddy river hard by. 
Such as it was, however, the smoke-dried 
landlord (in red flannel jacket, hairy cap, 
and high sea-boots), and the one-eyed Hebe 
of the bar, were civil enough ; and Bruce 
was inducted into the deserted coffee-room, 
and was served with the simple refresh- 
ments for which he had asked. He had no 
great appetite, however; and when the 
Dutch cheese and the ship's biscuits, and 
the pewter measure of frothing ale had been 
placed upon the stained and rickety table 
at his elbow, he sat idly looking forth from 
the window, glancing up from time to time 
at the great yellow-faced clock, that ticked 
so loudly in the bar without, and the dial- 
plate of which was visible from where his 
chair was placed. 

An hour went by in this manner, during 
which the darkness gradually increased, 
and the lights on board ship came twinkling 

VOL. II. 6 



82 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

out, one after another, until they were so 
numerous that it seemed as if they were 
wandering stars that had dropped, unex- 
tinguished, into the water; and the fog 
crawled higher and higher along the melan- 
choly shore, and then the moon peeped 
out from between the bars of cloud that 
spanned the sky, and shone white through 
the gray mists of evening. With a sigh of 
relief, Bruce Larpent tossed off what was 
left of the ale, and rising, he paid for what 
he had consumed, and left the tavern with- 
out making any inquiry as to the direction 
which he should take. 

"If Pirate's Post be as near as my talk- 
ative old friend asserted it to be," said the 
young man, as he sallied forth, " it will be 
no hard task to find its whereabouts for 
myself." 

And, indeed, at no great distance, he dis- 
cerned what looked at first like the carcasses 
of some primeval monsters, giant saurians 
left stranded on the tide-mud. Approach- 



At Pirate's Post. 83 

ing, he could see that these were old boilers, 
corroded and worthless, until such a time 
as a new baptism of fire should turn the 
rejuvenated metal into a molten stream, 
ready to take new shapes and serve new 
uses. And beyond these rose a ragged 
stump of weather-stained timber, irregular 
in outline, hacked, chipped, and battered, 
but yet standing forth from the swampy 
soil in uncompromising endurance, like some 
huge tooth left alone in the midst of an 
otherwise denuded jaw. 

" The Pirate's Post, 111 lay my life on 
it," said Bruce, and he walked briskly to- 
wards it 

The white moon yielded but a weak and 
wavering light, and it was not until the 
young clerk had drawn very near, that he 
thought he could distinguish the outline of 
a human form leaning against the jagged 
pile, and seeming almost as if it were some 
grotesque image rudely carved by the tools 
of some semi-savage sculptor. Then, as 

6.? 



S4 Ladj Lhin^cKS Legacy, 

Bnxre came dose up to the wooden pillar, 
the ungainly tgure before him glided back 
a pace or soi wriggiing its body, and con- 
torting its limbs as it did so. 

** Is that yoa. Craney ? But of course 
it is," called out Larpent. half-impatiently, 
but in a cautious undertone. The twisting 
form came shambling towards him, not 
moving in a direct line, but crab-wise, and 
was soon distincdy visible. The white 
moonlight showed the figure of a man of 
middle height, narrow in the chest, narrow 
in the forehead, hatchet-faced, but with 
high shoulders* limbs that were lean and 
loosely hung, and a neck so long and spare, 
that a single inspection of it served to ex- 
plain whence its owner had derived the 
nickname by which Bruce had just ad- 
dressed him. 

"Yes, my noble sportsman; yes, my 
gallant captain ; Craney it is, and no mis- 
take r said the long-qecked man, bending 
his body as if he had been an actual eel, 



At Pirate's Post. 85 

and rubbing his bony hands together. 
" Was I the sort to keep a gentleman, and 
my benefactor too, kicking his heels in such 
a moist meeting-place as this !" Distress- 
ingly glib of speech was Craney, slurring over 
his words with the slippery fluency of one 
whom it was easy to fancy as presiding 
over a stock-in-trade consisting of a deal 
table, a pea, and three thimbles, and who 
at other times might be a plausible " welcher" 
on a racecourse, a seller of counterfeit sove- 
reigns " for a wager," or even a voluble as- 
sistant at a mock auction-room. 

"We are both of us, I believe, pretty 
punctual," returned Bruce. " And now to 
business. When last we met, I explained 
to you the nature of the job, and the kind 
of assistance I should require at your 
hands. Have you spoken to those former 
associates of yours of whom you told me 
when we met ^" 

" When we met, indeed, my kind young 
gentleman ! And what a blessed surprise 



86 'Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

it was to poor old Craney to see one whom 
he believed to be hundreds and thousands 
of miles away, here in the London streets ; 

but the sight of you is indeed good for '^ 

interrupted the man, in the wheedling tone 
that was habitual to him ; but Larpent in 
turn cut short his discourse. 

" Hark you, Craney," he said ; " time is 
of value, and we may as well understand 
each other at once. You have a habit of 
spinning yarns, so confirmed, that I doubt 
if you know wjien you are sincere, and 
when your talk is mere palaver. But when 
we did meet by accident the other night, 
I saw genuine tears in those eyes of yours, 
and I do believe that you had a grateful 
sentiment towards the man who helped you 
out of an awkward scrape ; for Captain 
Hayman uttered no vain threat when he 
swore to throw the stowaways overboard 
to drown ; and I have known him do as 
much to a poor devil of a mulatto deck- 
hand, who fell ill from hard usage, and 



At Pirates Post. 87 

whom the skipper called a malingerer. 
You recollect ?" 

" Yes, I recollect," said Craney, in a sub- 
dued voice, and with a shudder that was 
real enough. ' " How could we help it, ^ir, 
we two poor, starving, shoeless creatures, 
Joe and self, lurking about the New Or- 
leans quay; or how could we guess that 
the schooner we crept on board of after 
dark would turn out to be a craft of such a 
character, and commanded by such a wretch 
as that slaver captain ! Why, Mr. Lar- 
pent, but for you, we'd never have lived to 
go ashore again ; but you did stand by us 
like a good one, and Fm not likely, bad as 
I am, to forget to whom I owe my life. If 
you want a proof, try me." 

" My good friend," said Bruce, " I ask 
nothing from you excepting silence and dis- 
cretion. My name, which, save to your- 
self, is known but to one man in England, 
must be kept dark, you understand, what- 
ever be the upshot of this affair ?" 



88 Lacfy Livingstones Legacy. 

. 

Craney nodded assent 

"And now," pursued the young clerk, 
"matters are ripe for action. Whatever 
can be readily converted into cash will be 
the well-earned recompense of the ^ 

" Of the operation, if you please, sir ; 
we need not be too explicit," chimed in 
Craney, rubbing his hands and ducking his 
head "Ah, sir, I had an education, as 
you have probably perceived, and didn't 
think, when I took prizes at school, I should 
ever take to my present profession for a 
livelihood; but that is an old story now. 
Would you like to see the Ugly One ? 
He is here now." 

"Here? Where?" exclaimed Bruce Lar- 

« 

pent, looking around in some surprise, for 
nothing was visible save the solitary stump 
of the old gibbet, and, a hundred yards 
away, the glimmering lights of the tavern. 
" Not very far off, noble sportsman, my 
gallant sportsman!" said Craney, with a 
chuckle; and immediately afterwards the 



Ai Pirates Post. 89 

mewling cry of a cat, so accurately imitated 
that Bruce was himself for a moment de- 
ceived, resounded through the marshy mea- 
dow. At the third repetition of the cry 
the sound of oars was heard, and very soon 
a man came scrambling up the bank, drag- 
ging with him the chain of the small boat 
from which he had just emerged, and which 
he proceeded to fasten to an iron peg which 
he drove into the ground, and then, still 
stooping, drew near. 

" All right, all fly, Craney ?" hoarsely 
whispered the new comer: "this is our 
new companion, eh ?" 

The man, who was about thirty years of 
age, was short of stature, but with unusually 
broad shoulders, and a resolute, low-browed 
face, somewhat akin in the massiveness of 
the jaw, and the hold stare of the round, 
bloodshot eyes, to that of a peculiarly 
vicious bull-dog. He was clad in a non- 
descript fashion, not uncommon among 
those who pick up a precarious living be- 



90 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 



low bridge, his jacket of dark-blue Guern- 
sey cloth, and bandana neckerchief, con- 
trasting oddly with the coarse slop-clothes 
and nailed shoes and cap of brown woollen, 
that completed his costume. 

" There's a bunch of fives for you !" cried 
Craney, admiringly pointing to the extended 
digits of his friend. " No deception there, 
sir, . but an article equal, any day, to the 
clutch of an iron vice. You Ve a strong 
gripe, sir, as most seafaring gents have, but 
you'd hardly like to try squeeze for squeeze 
with my mate here. He can smash a 
Brazil nut with his fingers, and crack a 
coco on his head, the Ugly can ! A better 
partner in his own line couldn't bq." 

The subject of these commendations 
uttered an amicable growl, which was cut 
short by a sudden exclamation from his 
oratorical friend. 

" Here it comes, flish-flash down the lane 
. a police bull's-eye, that is," exclaimed the 
latter. . " Jump in, Ugly, and catch hold of 



At Pirates Post. 9 1 

the oars. Fm after you. . It would never 
do, sir, for us to be found here ; but any 
time after four to-morrow well be at the 
* Birdcatcher's Arms,' Chelsea, the lot of us. 
The Philistines can't say anything to you ; 
but with us 'tis different." And without 
further ceremony, he followed his comrade 
into the boat, which instantly pushed off. 
The red gleam of the bull's-eye lantern 
came nearer and nearer, and as Larpcnt 
left the field, he encountered the policeman 
who carried it, and who took a long and 
steady survey of his personal appearance- 

" This is but a queer neighbourhood," he 
said, civilly: "be careful, sir, I advise you." 

The dark young clerk thanked him for 
the warning, and striding rapidly on, was 
soon lost in the shadow of the night 



CHAPTER V. 



WHAT THE BEHEMOTH MEANT, 




AJOR RAFFINGTON was ac- 
curate in declaring that the Behe- 
moth's invitations, like those of 
royalty, admitted of no denial. Indeed, 
Baron Swartz shared this privilege of 
issuing an imperative summons, not merely 
with her Majesty's judges learned in the 
law, but also with the rank and file of 
that accommodating profession of which 
he was an ornament Many a stately 
gentleman who would scarcely deign to 
hurry his steps indecorously to elude a mad 
bull, or a Hansom cabman the worse for 



What the Behemoth Meant* 93 

liquor, will meekly dance attendance for 
days in the month, and hours in the day, 
at the abode of some fourth-rate usurer 
who renews his overdue bills at fast re- 
curring intervals. As yet, the monarch of 
money-lenders had treated Dashwood fairly 
well, as Sir Frederick himself was con- 
strained grudgingly to admit. But this 
very forbearance had its terrors for the 
insolvent baronet, who had more than once 
imparted in confidence to Major Raffington 
his opinion that this state of things was too 
good to last, and that the Baron was too 
civil by half. " If I could see what he got, 
or what he expected to get out of me, Td 
feel happier in my mind !" had been Dash- 
wood's own words, oft repeated ; and it 
would certainly have been a great relief to 
his mind had he been able to account for 
the long-suffering behaviour of his acquaint- 
ance in Pitt Street. Now he was going to 
learn, no doubt, the motives of the Behe- 
moth ; and somehow the idea was scarcely 



94 Lady LivingstofC s Legacy. 

a pleasant one to him. So, although he 
would sooner have ridden at the most im- 
practicable fence in Northamptonshire, he 
was early in Pitt Street on the day ap- 
pointed. 

The little green-Hveried page came 
promptly to answer to the harsh beating 
of the rusty knocker, and Dashwood almost 
fancied that there was a sinister expression, 
as of malicious triumph, on the urchin's 
keen, white face, which he had never before 
seen there. 

The ante-room in which Dashwood was 
ushered was well known to him . a mere 
closet, as far as space was concerned, but 
sumptuously furnished, in silk velvet and 
maple- wood, with some French toys, clock and 
vases of a fantastic pattern on the chimney- 
piece, and a few gaudily coloured pictures, 
which some of those who inspected them 
honestly preferred to the dusky Old Masters 
in the chamber of reception, on the walls. 
The party- wall whichdivided thissmall room 



What the Behemoth Meant. 95 

from the hall of audience was thin, so that 
it was possible to hear much that was said 
in the larger apartment, if only the tones of 
those conversing there were raised above a 
low conventional pitch. Such was the case 
now. 

" I do implore you, sir, really implore 
you, not to be so hard with me," said a 
voice tremulous with emotion ; the voice . 
so Dashwood readily conjectured . of a 
man advanced in years. " What you ask 
for would be ruin, positive ruin. I should 
have to withdraw my youngest son . as 
good and studious a lad as ever lived . 
from the university, and to blight his 
prospects, because of his brother's extrava- 
gance." 

Then succeeded the bland, cooing accents 
of the Baron, quite undistinguishable, so far 
as words went, but apparently employed in 
a gende monotone of polite remonstrance. 

" The boy has paid you hundreds 
already!" broke in the voice again, "inte- 



96 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 



rest, charges, and the rest of it If only 
you knew, sir, with what a pang of regret 
I decided myself to make you this final 
offer of the two thousand pounds, his sister's 
little fortune, and how poor and straitened 
we all are, I think that in mercy you would 

not ^" And then again was heard the 

Baron's soft rejoinder, a little louder this 
time, and almost immediately afterwards 
the bell rang ; and as the disappointed sup- 
pliant withdrew, the page announced to Sir 
Frederick that the Baron was ready to 
receive him. Not greatly inspirited by 
what he had overheard, Dashwood com- 
plied with the summons. 

The Behemoth was in his accustomed 
place, his several packets of carefully ar- 
ranged papers within reach, and he rOse to 
greet the baronet with his usual air of easy 
courtesy. No one, to look at him, would 
have imagined that he had been one of the 
interlocutors in such a conversation as that 
of which Dashwood had listened to a por- 



What the Behemoth meant. 97 

tion, so jperfectly calm and unruffled was the 
aspect which he presented. 

" Sir Frederick," said the baron, as soon 
as his visitor was seated opposite to him, 
"our relations to one another have been, 
up to this time, of a very pleasant descrip- 
tion. I have had the happiness to render 
some slight services to you, and there has 
been no difficulty as to the trifling form- 
alities which I have proposed for your 
signature. This memorandum will show 
you how we stand, and in what sums you 
are indebted to me." And so saying he 
handed a balance-sheet to Dashwood, who 
took it with manifest reluctance, and ran his 
eye hastily over the figures. 

" I suppose it*s all right : indeed I'm sure 
it is," he answered half sullenly. 

" It is, as you say, all right," rejoined the 
smiling baron ; " the vouchers are here, of 
course, for I do not let paper, with signa- 
tures so valuable as yours, pass out of my 
own possession : you may rely on the cor- 

VOL. II. 7 



98 Lady Ltvingstott s Legacy. 

rectness of that statement The sum-total 
has grown, you perceive, to really quite an 
imposing amount ; has it not ?" 

"Why, yes," said Dashwood ruefully; 
" it is a lump of money. You are not in a 
hurry for it back again, I hope, baron ?" 

" Not in a hurry ; certainly not ; I never 
am in that," said his host, as he laid his 
plump white hand upon the green morocco 
of the writing-table, and slowly twisted his 
signet-ring; "but I like to keep things 
orderly, and to see my way. I have had 
Mr. Longtick here ; that is no novelty, for 
many of his customers are clients of mine, 
and he has been talking very much to me 
about you." 

" About me ! and why ?" asked Dash- 
wood, whose heart throbbed quick and 
hard. 

" Or, perhaps, rather about the money 
you owe him, and the various methods to 
which you have resorted for staving off the 
day of payment," explained the Behemoth* 



What the Behemoth meant. 99 



^* I am afraid you have not quite kept faith 
with me, Sir Frederick." 

" What do you mean ?" asked Dashwood, 
flushing to the roots of his hair, and smooth- 
ing back his heavy moustache. Bad as he 
was, and low as he had fallen, a charge of 
falsehood made directly to his face did rouse 
in him some spirit of manliness. 

The Behemoth waved his white hand. 
*' I mean," he said quietly, " and you must 
pardon a poor foreigner who speaks your 
language imperfectly, that I find there are 
discrepancies between the documents signed 
by you to content Longtick and Sons, and 
certain assurances which you gave me when 
first I had the gratification to make your 
acquaintance. It appears" . and here he 
fluttered over first one sheet of paper, and 
then another . " that you have signed bills, 
bonds, and so on, for the firm in question, 
although your memory did not remind you 
of the circumstance at the period of our 

7.2 



loo Lady Livingstons Legacy. 



earliest dealings, and that you have signed 
others since." 

"I never pretended," said Dashwood 
boldly, " to remember all I had ever done,, 
or thoroughly to understand my own affairs. 
I told you, I think, that I owed a heavy 
bill to those infernal tailors." 

" Yes, my good sir ; but there are bills 
and bills. These people have lodged a 
detainer, or caveat, or whatever is the word 
in your insular law, against the price of 
your commission," returned Swartz, tapping 
his spotless teeth with a paper-knife ; " and 
had all sorts of other liens upon your 
property. Well, Fm not in the least angry 
with you for little inaccuracies of that sort 
My own experience shows me that, of ten 
men in difficulties, nine understate their 
cjebts, I have no right to expect you to 
be an exception to the rule. But Simon 
Longtick said he could put an end to your 
career ; * Snuff you out ' (forgive my re- 
peating an expression so coarse), was the 



What the Behemoth meant. Tor 

word, and I saw no reason to doubt it 
Well, Sir Frederick ?" 

Sir Frederick said nothing, however, but 
sat scowling and silent. It was coming, 
then, was it ? The gaunt presence of the 
wolf that had whined and snarled around 
his door so long was upon him at last . ^the 
wolf that besets the domestic castle of 
many a worthier Englishman than he, and 
whose name is Ruin ! Could not this grin- 
ning Jew hunks (it was thus irreverently that 
he now thought of the fresh-faced, smiling 
baron) get his writ oifiere facias^ put in his 
bill of sale, and have done with it ? It 
may be doubted if the baronet had ever 
heard of the typical negro whose protest 
has become proverbial, but at that moment 
his feelings must have been identical with 
those of that coloured person. The com- 
bination of present " preachee " with future 
" floggee " was almost intolerable. There 
was balm, however, in the next words of 
the Behemoth. " Well," said that amiable 



I02 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

capitalist, leaning back in his chair, after 
vainly waiting for Dashwood's reply, "it 
has never been agreeable to me to hear of 
a friend of mine on whom the extinguish- 
ing process can be performed, except by 
myself, and so, after a little discussion, Mr. 
Simon and I came to terms. You owe 
nothing now to Longtick and Sons. A 
glance at these papers " . offering them as 
if they had been something good to eat . 
"will convince you that your liabilities have 
changed hands, and that I am now, with 
some exceptions as to book-debts, your sole 
creditor." 

Dashwood seemed to breathe more freely 
as he heard this. It was inconceivable that 
the baron should have incurred such heavy 
expense as a mere preliminary to setting 
into action the machinery of the law against 
his needy debtor. And he was rid, at 
least, of one tyrant, that insufferable tailor^ 
whose memory was tenacious of many a 
bygone insolence, and who found revenge 



What the Behemoth meant 103 

to be a toothsome morsel when the tables 
were turned upon a member of the Gilded 
Youth, by ministering to whose weakness 
he fattened. At any rate, the baron could 
have no rankling grudge, no personal ani- 
mosity, against one who had never made 
him the butt of clumsy light-cavalry wit, 
or rated him for lack of punctuality in 
sending home the new dress-coat, without 
which the finest rout was weariness to the 
budding subaltern. 

Swartz, as he sat opposite to Sir Frede- 
rick, read his client's thoughts as easily as 
a practised Orientalist extracts the pith 
from a page of flowery Persian poetry or 
of crabbed Talmudical lore. He was in 
aspect not at all like the Mephistopheles of 
Goethe, but such sorry Fausts as came in 
his way he could plumb to the very bottom 
of their shallow natures. After a brief 
pause, he went on : " Of course. Sir Frede- 
rick, a man of the world like yourself can- 
not suppose that what I have done was 



I04 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 



prompted entirely by a desire to relieve 
you from embarrassments. I never pro- 
fessed to be disinterested. I should very 
much prefer to do business with you in our 
old pleasant style, on velvet, as it were ; 
but in justice to myself I must not n^lect 
to recoup myself the considerable outlay 
already incurred. Why don't you marry. 
Sir Frederick T 

This last question was propounded in 
precisely the same tone of semi-paternal 
benevolence as that in which a wealthy 
uncle might have put it while passing the 
claret jug to a wild young nephew, for 
whose reformation a family council had re- 
commended the panacea of matrimony. 

Sir Frederick started and reddened, but 
not so much as before. " I have other 
things than marriage to think of," he said, 
almost sheepishly ; and then added : " be- 
sides, it's not so easy for a broken-down 
beggar like myself" 

" Perhaps not. Sir Frederick ; and yet 



What the Behemoth meant. 105 

rt would be an experiment worth trying," 
said the Behemoth, with his imperturbable 
good-humour. " I will put a case hypo- 
thetically. We can imagine a gentleman 
of your rank and antecedents, unfor- 
tunately very much involved, but whose 
good stars have given him a compensation 
in the shape of a young cousin, very pretty, 
amiable, and easily managed, and who is 
notoriously the heiress of a very rich and 
childless old lady of rank. We can fancy, 
also, that this young cousin is of a sensitive 
spirit and truthful nature . such things 
are . and feels herself bound by a promise 
to marry, obtained from her by " 

" Are you a witch, or what ?" cried 
Dashwood, jumping from his chair. " I 
mean," he made haste to say, "how on 
.earth did you " 

" Did I know that ?" rejoined the Jew. 
" Excuse me if I complete your sentence. 
My very dear sir, it is a part of my busi- 
ness to know something about the past 



io6 Lady Livingstoiis Legacy. 

life of those with whom I deal. Little 
birds whisper in my ear . the queerest 
things. By-the-by, that was a fortunate 
accident that made you heir to the baro- 
netcy . ^about the poor little boy, I mean." 

" Fortunate, do you call it ? I don't say 
that myself," answered Dashwood, with a 
slight change of colour . this time from 
red to pale. 

"Perhaps not," said the baron airily; 
" but . forgive the apparent want of feeling 
in my remark . you must have thought 
it. They do so, even in the best families. 
When old Lord Crustham (what port he 
had, and what a temper !) was taken with 
his last fatal attack of apoplexy, Tom 
Crumpwise, the eldest son, happened, for 
a wonder, to be in the house at Crustham, 
to give, or sell, his signature for cutting off 
the entail of some portion of the property. 
Tom and his noble papa were not on what 
is called good terms, the heir leading a 
scrambling life in London on the strength 



What the Behemoth meant, 107 



of post-obits ; and the owner manifesting 
some desire to knock his own son down 
with his gouty crutch, or to fling footstools 
at him, when they did meet However, in 
so urgent a case as this, of course filial 
duty prevailed, and the Honourable Tom 
' sent off a mounted groom to gallop for 
Dr. Flebotham, the nearest medical man. 
The horse which the servant took was a 
spavined brute . they had the stable in a 
wretched state at Crustham, at that time ; 
it is better now . ^which fell lame on the 
macadamized road; and, to cut short a 
long story, when the doctor did come, he 
might as well have brought the undertaker 
along with him. * I sat watching at the 
window,' Tom said to me when we settled 
scores, as he described his sensations while 
the old lord lay battling feebly between 
life and death, *and I felt it was a race 
against time.' And so it was." 

Dashwood made no comment on this 
agreeable anecdote, and the Behemoth 



io8 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

lightly glided from the subject " Why, as 
I said before^ not marry ?" asked he again. 

"If you know so much, you must know 
more," was the reply. " Lady Livingston 
never liked me. She has been a trifle 
more civil since I came home from Canada 
than ever she was before ; but for some 
short time past I have met black looks 
whenever I go down to that dreary jail of 
hers ; and as for her approval of my mar- 
riage with Beatrice " 

" If / take so much risk on myself," 
burst in the baron, in a higher key, as he 
laid his forefinger on the papers, "you 
might be less faint-hearted. What ! king, 
queen, and as many trump cards as you 
could wish for, dealt to you, and fear to 
play! My experience tells me that the 
young generally get the better of the old, 
nowadays, and you have the young lady 
for a sure, if reluctant, ally already. It 
may be that the dowager would prefer to 
select another husband for Miss Fleming, 



What the Behemoth meant. 109 

another master for Heavitree Hall. What 
of that ! Press your advantage ; marry 
your cousin, without a penny, if need be ; 
and see if yonder doting old dame disin- 
herits her darling because she has wedded 
a prodigal like yourself*' As he ceased 
speaking, he touched a spring in the table 
before him, and out flew a secret drawer, 
from which he selected two or three slim- 
looking documents neatly tied with red 
tape, and formally endorsed. "You will 
be so kind, Sir Frederick," he said, " as to 
sign this, having reference to the purchase- 
money of your commission ; and this, 
which gives me a lien on certain securities 
that belonged to Sir George, your grand- 
father, and of which you gave me a list at 
the commencement of our dealings. In 
return, here are two hundred pounds in 
money, and your dishonoured acceptances 
redeemed from Longtick and Sons. Mind, 
you only mortgage your securities, and, on 
certain terms, can redeem them. If you 



no Lady Livingstotis Legacy, 

would like your solicitor to look over these 
papers . Ah, well ! You would not, I 
think, have been informed that the condi- 
tions were too onerous, under the circum- 
stances. Here is another bond, somewhat 
more [speculative ; it engages you, under 
heavy forfeiture, to repay to Jacob, Baron 
Swartz, for value received, within twelve 
calender months of the decease of the 
Dowager Lady Livingston, sixteen thou- 
sand pounds sterling. You see I count 
very much on your success with Miss 
Fleming." 

For a while Dashwood demurred. The 
magnitude of the sum staggered him some- 
what " It's more than three years' rental 
of the Heavitree property," he blurted 
out 

" Yes, my dear sir ; but you forget the 
sum in the funds, in those delicious Eng- 
lish three per cents., the stability of which 
we aliens envy," said the baron. " It is a 
point on which I admit of no compromise. 



What the Behemoth meant. 1 1 1 

Come, sir, peace or war ? Will you sign, 
or shall I ring the bell, and decline furthur 
negotiations except through Mr. Levi of 
Cursitor Street ? . I thought so. Here is 
a pen." And Dashwood signed his name 
wherever the Behemoth's finger pointed. 

** Now, dear friend," said the money- 
lender, " a bit of advice at parting. Press 
your suit. Remember your English adage, 
that faint heart never won fair lady. And 
now, good-bye. Sir Frederick, and good- 
luck to your wooing !" 




CHAPTER VI. 

MIL GOODEVE's return HOME. 

HE senior partner in the very 
eminent firm of Goodeve and 
Glegg was, it has been previously 
mentioned, entering on a period of intel- 
lectual decadence, and by no means as 
good a man of business as he had been. 
No expert would, of course, be unreason- 
able enough to expect those family soli- 
citors whom all ladies regard as mines and 
marvels of legal learning, to know much 
of law. They do know, however, all sorts 
of things that it is very useful to know . 
when terms begin and end ; what goes 



Mr. Goodeve's Return Home. 113 

before a Vice-chancellor, and what before 
a judge in chambers ; and all about filing 
bills in Equity and putting in pleas at law ; 
and which are the serviceable functionaries, 
masters, chief clerks, referees, and so on. 
In Mr. Glegg's view of the matter, old 
Mr. Goodeve occasionfilly made slips in 
these particulars, though at the same time 
continuing to appropriate the lion's share 
of the profits. There was also an imputa- 
tion that Mr. Goodeve was unreasonably 
avaricious, considering the means at his 
disposal. The old gentleman was no 
doubt very well off; but, then, a man must 
be singularly fortunate, or unfortunate, if 
he does not find some one ready and 
willing to spend his superfluity for him. 
Such was the case with the attorney, who 
was a widower, living in an old house in 
or near Kensington, with an old maiden 
sister to keep house for him. ' His two 
daughters were married, and to husbands 
who had nothing beyond their pay, and 

VOL. II. 8 



114 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

sundry olive-branches to provide for ; and 
Samuel Goodeve, who had been an in- 
dulgent father, and was now a doting g^nd- 
father, had plenty of employment for his 
spare cash. 

Then, according to Glegg, his respect- 
able partner was a trifle too saving . a 
species of crime and ground of offence to 
those who are apt to exceed in point of 
stylish expenditure Mr. Goodeve was 
fond of walking. It did him good, he 
said, braced his nerves, and kept him from 
going too fast down the hill of time. In 
truth, the worthy man had still retained 
a share of personal vanity of a harmless 
kind ; and being tall, and having been 
considered well-looking and somewhat of 
a dandy in his youth, he yet affected some- 
what of the air and bearing of a young^ 
man. You could see in the care with 
which he dressed himself, in the jauntiness 
of his walk, and the liveliness of his dis- 
course when emancipated from the tram« 



Mr. Goodevis Return Home. 115 

mels of the office, that he still fancied him- 
self Beau Goodeve of the pre- Reform 
Bill epoch ! There was nothing wrong in 
this; and after all, the aged beau, after 
walking part of the way, occasionally made 
out the journey from Bedford Row to Ken- 
sington with the aid of a cab. 

The yellow sky had faded already from 
golden orange to a pale tint like that of 
the tawny wild cattle of our British breed, 
and was losing the last flush of its after- 
glow, when Mr. Goodeve found himself 
slightly fatigued, and still at some distance 
from his own abode. He began to hesitate 
as to whether he should or should not per- 
form the rest of the distance on wheels, 
and ended by walking on, pausing at in- 
tervals to look into this 'or that shop- 
window, and always starting with renewed 
activity after each of these halts. 

Behind him, at a considerable distance 
indeed, was a dark-featured young man, 
strong, swift, and as firmly bent upon his 

8.2 



1 16 Lady Livingston! s Legacy. 

purpose as the sleuth-hound on the trail 
of a deer. Now and then, when some 
favourable opportunity occurred of looking 
ahead from amidst a knot of the foot-pas- 
sengers, Bruce Larpent ventured to step 
forth and satisfy himself that the feeble 
figure of his employer was still visible in 
front of him ; but so soon as this inspec- 
tion was over, he fell back as before. It 
would have been a grievous blunder to 
have allowed some accidental turning of 
Mr. Goodeve's head to enable that gentle- 
man to recognize his faithful clerk, Daniel 
Davies, who had ostensibly gone home 
from the office hours since. Nearer by 
far to Mr. Goodeve was a loosely-hung 
young fellow in the attire of a stable- 
helper, and wearing a round cap of that 
pattern so much affected by the hangers- 
on of liverymen and horse-dealers, and he, 
too, regulated his pace by that of the emi- 
nent solicitor. Some paces ahead there 
slowly trudged along a couple of men, the 



Mr. Goodeves Return Home. 117 

sturdier of whom, a light bundle flung 
over his shoulder, and clad in a suit of 
light-coloured^ slops, resembled a railway 
navigator on his way to begin a job ; while 
the taller and slighter in build was in 
working-clothes, and, by the smears on his 
elbows, was probably a house-painter or 
whitewasher. On the opposite side of the 
road walked a shambling figure in rusty 
black, and carrying an umbrella, and this 
last-mentioned personage never once 
glanced ostensibly at Mr. Goodeve, at 
Bruce, at the stable-lad, or at the broad- 
shouldered "navvy" and his companion, 
the whitewasher, yet never once relaxed his 
stealthy vigilance as he pressed on. 

It was growing dark. Mr. Goodeve was 
obviously getting weary, and he had cast 
more than one inquiring glance towards 
some passing omnibus, the conductor of 
which hailed him with upraised finger and 
sharp voice. But there was every prospect 
of his getting a cab that was crawling for 



1 18 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

custom, and which might set him down 
before coming to his own door, by which 
he might save his character as a pedestrian. 
It was an unwise peace of vanity. Bruce 
Larpent, still heedful not to be seen, grew 
visibly anxious as he watched the irregular 
movements of his employer ; and the man 
in rusty black stepped briskly out, shot 
ahead, and let his umbrella fall, stooping 
instantly to recover it 

Just abreast of the spot at which the man 
in rusty black had dropped his umbrella 
there was a narrow opening, as of a lane, 
court, or alley, where two dead walls 
swallowed up the yellow light of the street- 
lamp, and where no windows looked blankly 
out upon the passers-by. Farther on, 
doubtless, dwellings were to be found ; but 
the mouth of the alley gaped, dull and 
blurred, as the half-open jaws of some 
monstrous alligator, seen in twilight among 
the cane-brakes, without a sign of life or 
movement within. Down this by-place, 



Mr. Goodeve's Return Home. 119 

the two men walking in front; the white- 
washer and the bundle-bearing excavator, 

unhesitatingly dived. So soon as they 
were well within it, the latter broke 
silence. 

" Well, here it is at last You get along 
as far as the comer there, and if a child 
<x)nies, or a woman, try to scare 'em back. 
If it's men, give the office . d'ye hear ? 
This'U serve my turn." 

And so saying, he squeezed his brawny 
person into a narrow doorway that pro- 
bably communicated with some rarely 
visited garden, about six paces from the 
mouth of the alley. Almost at the same 
moment the man in black came quickly 
across the street, and, shambling up to Mr. 
Goodeve, said, in a tone of respectful 
earnestness : " I beg your pardon, sir, for 
this freedom. . No, I'm not a beggar," he 
added hastily, for in London this form of 
address is usually the mendicant's prelude ; 
*' but I have followed you for some time, 



I20 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

without daring to address you, although I 
have that to say which is important to us 
both, I do assure you, sir." 

" What can you possibly have to say to 
me, my man . of a nature, I mean, to inter- 
est me?" asked Mr. Good eve, incredulously. 
Th^ greatest city in the world is the one in 
which men come to be the most distrustful 
of strangers ; and Mr. Goodeve was a 
Londoner of the pure breed. 

" It concerns others, sir, than you and 
me," said the shabby man, with meek per-- 
sistency, "and a client of yours, sir, most 
of all. You would be sorry afterwards, if 
you were to refuse to hear me." 

The stable-lad was gazing admiringly at 
the blue crimson, and emeraldine bottles in 
a chemist's window, softly whistling as he 
gazed. Bruce Larpent, who had pulled 
out his watch, was comparing it with the 
clock conspicuous over the counter of a 
baker next door. 

"You should come to my office, my 



Mr. Goodeves Return Home, 121 



friend, if you really have anything to com- 

« 

municate," rejoined the lawyer, very stiffly. 
" You know me, of course ?" 

"Yes, Mr. Goodeve, well do I know you," 
exclaimed the shabby man; "and often, little 
as you noticed me, have I been to your 
place in happier days, with blue bags, and 
red bags, and forms of process. I was a 
quill-driver, though now obliged to get a 
living by odd jobs, and known to most 
about Gray's Inn Lane . Tooter by name, 
sir . and my employers once went so far as 
generously to promise me my articles. And 
I have been at your office, sir, two or three 
times ; but, bless me ! those young gentle- 
men wouldn't take in my humble name. 
It was : ' Oh, you wait till Mr. Glegg 
comes out !' or : * Mr. Glegg, perhaps, will 
hear what you have to say.' Now, I do 
like to deal with principals, sir, and not 
understrappers. " 

A year or two before, had Mr. Goodeve 
heard his partner, Mr. Glegg, described by 



122 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

the highly ignominious epithet of an under- 
strapper, and by such a one as the audacious 
speaker, he would have administered his se- 
verest rebuke to the offender. But vanity 
is very potent, and Glegg had snubbed his 
senior sorely, and Glegg had done his best 
to supplant him in the position of working 
head of the firm ; so it was music to his 
ears to hear his officious colleague thus con- 
temptuously spoken of, even by such lips as 
those of Tooter, whilom of Gray's Inn 
Lane. 

He did not care then to take up the cud- 
gels for Glegg the absent, but mildly re- 
marked : " Perhaps your best plan would 
be to send me a written statement of the 
case, whatever it is." 

" I'm afraid, Mr. Goodeve, sir, I'd make 
a poor hand of that," said the other ; " but 
if you'd condescend to step aside with me 
one moment . just a step or so down this 
alley here, as it might be . to be out of the 
pushing street, I'd answer all your ques- 



Mr. Goodeve s Return Home. 123 

tions, and rely on your well-known sense 
of what's right to do the liberal thing by 
me when all is substantiated and cleared 
up. 

Mr. Goodeve hesitated, as a good many 
thoughts passed through his head. Should 
he bid this man call at his house ? No ; 
for that might alarm Sister Hannah, and 
gossip among the servants . the stranger's 
outward aspect being such as is commonly 
associated with private inquiry offices, not 
with the residences of family solicitors. 
And at Bedford Row, the obtrusive Glegg 
might burst in upon him, and perhaps in- 
sist on lecturing his senior as to the eti- 
quette of the very select branch of the pro- 
fession to which they belonged. It was 
irregular . very irregular. But this long- 
necked, shambling person in mouldy black, 
and a wisp of dubious white about it, was 
very like a good many confidential clerks 
out of place . and confidential clerks some- 
times have things worth hearing to tell ; 



1 24 Lady Livingstoris Legacy. 

and if Samuel Goodeve could steal a march 
on Glegg, and astonish him, why, matters 
might go more pleasantly in working hours. 
And the man was very well spoken and 
deferential, and he had called Glegg an 
understrapper. It would never do to show 
a want of energy before one who so well 
knew the difference between the head of 
the firm and his junior partner. 

" I will hear, if you will be quick, and 
not dwell on irrelevant matter, what you 
have to say," was Mr. Goodeve's gracious 
announcement 

" Thank you, sir! If I do travel out of 
the record, I must rely on your superior 
legal experience to keep me to the point," 
returned the shabby applicant : and the 
two passed into the darkling mouth of the 
alley, and were swallowed up, as it were, 
by the gloom within. 

Bruce Larpent had pocketed his watch, 
and was now somewhat at a loss for some 
ostensible occupation, when he saw the two 



Mr. Goodeves Return Home. 125 

figures disappear within the shadow of the 
walls; and immediately afterwards the 
stable-lad sauntered forward, and stood at 
the entrance of the alley, chewing his straw 
with the same languid air of satisfaction as 
before. The dark young clerk could hear 
the low hum of voices for, perhaps, the 
third of a minute, from the gloomy space 
within the shelter of the walls ; then they 
ceased. What was that ? A cry . stifled 
in the very moment of its utterance, and 
succeeded by a gurgling moan, a sound of 
scuffling, the stamping of feet, and a crash. 
Then a dead silence . a horrid stillness, that 
contrasted painfully with what had gone 
before. Larpent's heart gave one great 
bound, and then so intently did he listen, 
that his very breathing was suspended. 
But no sound reached his ears. The 
stable-lad had shrunk back, as if to avoid 
observation, into the lane, and nothing was 
to be seen except a pair of Irish basket- 
women, with their heavy load of oranges, 



126 Lady Liiringstofis Legacy. 

plodding back from the suburbs of gen- 
tility to the brisker market afforded by the 
vicinity of the theatres, and the cabs and 
carts that rattled by at irregular intervals. 
The suspense grew to be almost more than 
the listener could endure. 

" A cowardly business at best !'' he mut- 
tered. " I wish, for my part, I were well 
out of it Old, and sickly, and always 
kind, in his odd way, to me. But self-pre- 
servation is a law that overrides all others, 
and better as it is, than to stand in the 
dock." 

He ceased speaking, for now forth from 
the alley came a lean, loosely-built figure in 
dark clothes, shambling rapidly along to- 
wards him. 

" No questions," hissed out Craney, as 
he ran past ; " off to the * Birdcatchers,' 
but not by the same road as I take. 
Go by Sloane Street . I know a shorter 
cut" 

And he was gone, darting up the nearest 



Mr. Goodeves Return Home. 127 

by-street with the alacrity of a rabbit diving 
into a burrow. Bruce was, as it has been 
said, swift of foot ; but when he beheld the 
lamp of variegated glass shining in front of 
a villanous-looking Chelsea public-house, 
that bore the apparently innocent title of 
the "Birdcatchers' Arms," the many-coloured 
light fell upon the thin white face of the 
man in shabby black, the treacherous Tooter 
of Gray's Inn, and stained it with unnatural 
blotches of red, and blue, and orange. 

" Hist ! there are too many chance cus- 
tomers inside here for any safe conversa- 
tion," said Craney, panting, as he rubbed 
his heated brow : " come round the cornen 
There isn't a soul in sight" 

And accordingly Larpent followed into 
a dark and deserted by-lane, where the two 
seemed as much alone together as if they 
had been in a desert 

" Is it done ?" asked Bruce, hoarsely, 
after two ineffectual attempts to speak. " I 
hope he's not dead ?" 



128 Lady Livingston! s Legacy. 

" No, no . certainly not," coolly re- 
plied the more hardened miscreant before 
him; "but his doctor will have a tidy 
bill against him before he's patched up 
again." 

There was a pause Craney was the 
first to break it 

" We had better separate," he said ; 
"we've been seen here together already; 
and there's a lot of half-bred young thieves 
here would sell their own fathers for half a 
crown. If you want me, a line to the old 
address will do. You'd better get home 
yourself, unless you like to drop in at bars 
and theatre half-price, first, and manage to 
make the people remember you. I can 
shift for myself And now, sir, I'm a man 
of my word ; and here's the banker's pass- 
book, and here's every scrap of paper . ^bar 
two flimsies for a fiver apiece . that we 
found in our man's possession. Good-bye 
to you, Mr. Larpent; and the best thing 
that can happen to you will be never 



Mr. Goodeves Return Home. 1 29 

to see this precious countenance of mine 
again." 

The pair of confederates then parted, 
the shabby man in black slinking through 
endless thoroughfares, where, beneath the 
blinking gas-lamps, he became but a unit 
in the congeries of shabby men in black ; 
while Bruce Larpent, disregarding the re- 
commendation to visit theatres and houses 
of entertainment, walked quickly home- 
wards to Great Eldon Street. The work 
of that night weighed more heavily upon 
him than did the memory of that violent 
deed, which had made him, like Cain, a 
wanderer. That might be called wild jus- 
tice, but this was blackest treachery. 

Meanwhile, there was quiet . the quiet 
of the grave . in that sequestered alley 
whither Mr. Goodeve had in evil hour been 
induced to follow the too persuasive Tooter 
of Gray's Inn. It was not a place of much 
resort ; but the police did occasionally visit 
it, and presently B 42, going his customary 

VOL. II. Q 



1 30 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 



round, stamped into the alley, and seeing a 
sort of elongated black bundle lying, with 
a white face upturned, upon the flags, drew 
his lantern, and turned the red lens of his 
bulls-eye on the prostrate form. 

" Drunk and incapable," were the words 
which rose to his lips, and such was indeed 
the primary inference. Every person who 
has dropped down from the effects of sun- 
stroke, fits, or fatigue, is drunk and inca- 
pable, according to Scotland Yard philo- 
sophy, until the divisional surgeon and a 
coroners inquest prove a shaking and a 
cell to be improper cures for apoplexy or 
asphyxia. But as he stooped over the sup- 
posed votary of Bacchus, B 42 caught 
sight of a long smear of something dark,, 
and wet, and red on the wall beside which 
lay the helpless figure. 

"Robbery from the person with violence!'*^ 
exclaimed the policeman, brightening up 
immensely, as might a doctor who found a 
case of pitiful nettle-rash develop itself into 



Mr. Goodeves Return Home. 131 

a spotted fever of the rarest and most 
medieval type. At once he stepped forth 
into the street, and, by signals, presently 
Invoked the aid of a sergeant and three 
brethren of the belt and bracelet, by whom 
a stretcher was procured for the convey- 
ance of Mr. Goodeve. 

That luckless solicitor was picked op, 
a mere crumpled wreck of a man, a smear 
of blood on his right temple, little clots of 
gore staining his immaculate shirt-front, 
and marring the symmetry of his trim iron- 
gray whiskers. His pockets were turned 
inside-out ; and his hat, which lay at some 
distance, was crushed and broken, but his 
name was written inside it; and his address 
was on the cards, in a plain little case of 
Russia leather, the only article of portable 
property which those who rifled him had 
flung disdainfully aside. He moaned feebly 
as they lifted him, and tried to put his hand 
to his injured head; but his eyes were 
closed ; and though they bore him to the 

9.2 



132 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

chemist's shop close by, and tried to ad- 
minister sal- volatile first, and then brandy, 
they could not get a drop of either stimu- 
lant to pass his firmly-clenched teeth. 
. "Watch, purse, papers, handkerchief, no 
doubt all gone !" said the sergeant, as he 
closed his note-book ; " and that's an ugly 
knock on the head ; while you can see the 
blue prints of fingers on his throat, poor 
gentleman. Regular garrotting case, and 
old hands at it, no doubt. Let us get him 
home at once." 

Home they bore him then, and he was laid 
on his own bed, amidst the exclamations 
of his weeping household ; and there he 
lay, breathing heavily. 

"He won't die, doctor, will he ?" asked 
his haggard sister, hours after, when the 
surgeon came, with thoughtful face, down- 
stairs, after doing all that skill could sug- 
gest 

" No, Miss Goodeve ; I hope . I think 
that he will live," answered the doctor. 



Mr. Goodeve^s Return Home. 133 

" It is rather for his memory that I fear. 
A man of his time of life can hardly bear 
with impunity such a shock as this has 
been." 




CHAPTER VII. 



SIR Frederick's wooing. 



OURTSHIP is, no doubt, an ap- 
propriate occupation for that sea- 
son of leaf and bud, of green 
grass and peeping floweret, which we call 
the spring, and during which, according to 
the poet, a young man's fancy lightly turns 
to thoughts of love. Sir Frederick Dash- 
wood was still young ; yet, as he repaired 
to the railway station for the purpose of 
urging his suit to his pretty and prospectively 
well-endowed cousin, his feelings were none 
of the most enviable. Perhaps love-making 
is one of the things which cannot conveni- 



Sir Freaeruk's Wooing. 135 

.ently be done under the stimulus of that 
compulsion to which Sir John FalstaiF, 
when likening himself unto a lion in the 
immortal tavern of East Cheape, so forcibly- 
objected as a motive for less sentimental 
proceedings. To kneel at a young lady's 
feet because a man has debts that he 
cannot discharge, is not a resource likely 
to raise the suitor, in his own eyes, to any 
very lofty level ; and to make proposals of 
marriage at the bidding of a money-lender, 
is surely ignoble. There are men whose 
dispositions lead them, when a course of 
conduct is inevitable, to devise all manner 
of excuses for what they are compelled to 
do ; and so, by the time Sir Frederick had 
reached Richmond, he had worked him- 
self up into a satisfactory belief that all 
must yet go well. Beatrice Fleming would 
never go back from her word. 

" It*s a mere mariage de convenance," he 
repeated to himself over and over again, as 
if, by incessant iteration, he could make 



1 36 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

sure that Miss Maybrook would take what 
he called the " sensible " view of the posi- 
tion in which he found himself. As for 
Beatrice's happiness, or for the wrong done 
to her, he thought of it no more than some 
sportive child thinks of crushing the gold 
and azure wings of some gorgeous butterfly, 
the object of its chase among the flower- 
beds. He certainly did not intend to wan- 
tonly ill-treat her, and that, in his estima- 
tion, was enough for her. 

He was ushered into the drawing-room 
. ^not the yellow drawing-room, but that 
larger saloon, with blue hangings, which 
Lady Livingston preferred to inhabit when 
the winter seemed to be fairly at an end . 
and there, to his great relief, he did not 
find Violet The dowager was there, how- 
ever, in company with Beatrice, and a glance 
was sufficient to inform her what was his 
errand. Perhaps no man ever yet came to 
a house with the deliberate intention of 
proposing marriage to some one dwelling 



Sir Frederick's Wooing. 137 

there without his purpose being instantly 
known to every female who beheld him^ 
from the housemaid peering over the mus- 
lin-blinds above, to the grandmother awak- 
ing from her doze in the chimney corner. 
Proposals of this sort are solemn things; 
and a little extra care in dress, stiffness of 
bearing, and anxiety of aspect, reveal the 
bashful swain's secret before he has uttered 
a syllable of his painfully prepared speech. 
The dowager saw plainly enough what was 
the object of Dash wood's visit, and it soon 
became apparent to him that she was not 
disposed to facilitate his having any private 
conversation with her young relative. 

" I came here to-day," said Sir Frederick, 
making a virtue of necessity, " expressly in 
the hope that I might find my cousin Bea- 
trice at liberty to walk out with me . round 
the garden would be enough, or the terrace, 
or the fountains, or anywhere . and chat 
for a little time. I have something that I 
particularly wish to say to her." 



138 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 



"Indeed!" returned the old peeress, in 
her coldest and proudest tone. " You and 
Beatrice walked out together not so long 
ago, and I did not see that my dear girl 
looked the happier for it when it was over. 
Anything that you wish to say to her, Fred 
Dashwood, may as well be said here, and 
in my presence." 

Dash wood's face darkened. He set his 
teeth hard together, his breathing was short 
and quick, and the veins on his broad, low 
forehead, and the muscles of the strong but 
well-gloved hands that he clenched so in- 
stinctively, swelled like so much knotted 
cordage. We do not know . and it is well, 
perhaps, that we do not know . how often 
and how fiercely the Old Adam reasserts 
his savage animalism in those with whom 
we have dealings. Do you suppose that 
John Thomas, the footman . that big, tame 
man, that comely, well-whiskered fathom of 
strapping humanity, whom we buy in the 
flesh for board, lodging, liveries, powder- 



Sir Frederick's Wooing. 139 

tax, and fifty annual sovereigns . ^never 
longs to fling his noble employer, Lady 
Knagglebury, into her ladyship's own orna- 
mental lake, beneath the plate-glass window 
of Rowtow House ? Women are possibly 
of milder mood; but Abigail Pinworthy, 
lady's-maid these fifteen weary years of 
Italian ironing and hair-brushing, has been 
heard to express a burning desire to wring 
the neck of Miss Diggs, only daughter and 
heiress of that eminent colonial capitalist, 
playfully styled Old Diggs in Melbourne 
society, and who founded his fortune on 
gold, and completed it with wool. Some- 
times, these unexpected effects, in the very 
best regulated families, are nearer to 
passing from theory into practice than is 
dreamed of by the object of so much 
smothered fury, and the would-be rebel 
gets no credit for an amount of self-control 
that would have done credit to a Stoic. 
Sir Frederick Dashwood, by an effort, 
kept down his /ising wrath, and made up 



140 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

his mind that since he must speak, if at all, 
with this imperious old dame for an audi- 
ence, he might as well do his best, and re- 
press every symptom of irritation. 

" This is, to me, rather a formidable 
notion," he said, with that smiling urbanity, 
neither self-assertive nor unduly deferential, 
which women commonly find it so hard to 
resist " I came down here to-day bent on 
telling Beatrice something that lies very 
near my heart, and I find myself refused a 
half-hour's conversation with her. How- 
ever, you, Lady Livingston, are the oldest 
friend I have in the world, as well as my 
relation ; and as I should have come to you 
the moment I had spoken to my cousin, I 
may as well lose no time in taking you also 
into my confidence. It is an old story, 
after all, that I have to tell. I love Bea- 
trice. I have told her as much. It was 
her mother's dearest wish that we two 
should marry ; and I have come to ask her 
to be my wife." 



Sir Frederick's Wooing. 141 

The dowager smoothed out her rustling 
silks, and prepared to do battle ; but she 
felt what the brave have often experienced, 
a not unbecoming reluctance to fire the 
first * gun and begin the action. Deter- 
mined as she was to repel the wolf from 
the fold, she found her task less easy when 
the lupine intruder presented himself as 
fraught with the most tender sentiments 
towards the lamb within. 

" Nonsense, Fred ! You are too poor to 
marry, and you know that as well as I do," 
she said magisterially ; and then she stole a 
glance at Beatrice, whose eyes were down- 
cast, and whose slight tinge of colour was 
fading rapidly. That was all very well; 
but then Miss Fleming's lips were quiver- 
ing more than Lady Livingston liked to 
see, and her small hand had grasped the 
arm of her chair, as though in need of 
its support. This was a bad sign. The 
dowager knew that she must fight the 
matter out singlehanded, only hoping that 



142 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

her principal might not end by disavowing- 
her assertions. 

" I am poor enough, I know ; that is no 
secret, and now no novelty, Lady Living- 
ston," replied Dashwood, with seeming 
frankness ; " but I have thought over very 
often, that idea that I must renounce matri- 
mony by reason of my poverty, and I have 
made up my mind to ask Beatrice here to 
share with me the little I have. I shall 
not be the worse husband to her, or the 
less kind, because my home will be but 
humble, and my wife not a leader of 
fashion." 

" I don't know that," exclaimed the 
dowager ; hut she was ashamed of the rude 
words before she had well uttered them. 
" I mean," she added hastily, " that this is 
the veriest folly. You are not a boy now, 
Fred, to imagine that a mutton-chop and a 
cottage represent an earthly paradise for 
two young people who never knew what it 
was to want for anything. And I am sure 



Sir Fredericks Wooing, 1 43: 



that I do not see where you are even to find 
the means to pay for a cottage and a chop. 
Beatrice has nothing, or so little that it 
wouldn't clear your bill for cigars. You 
are sadly in debt . you have told me so 
twenty times; it would be sheer staring 
madness for you to dream of such a thing. 
. There, there! See, you have startled 
your cousin, taking her and me so com- 
pletely by surprise as you have done, and 
made her cry " (and, indeed, the big tear- 
drops were slowly falling from Beatrice's 
eyes, still downcast). " Be reasonable . 
there is a dear, good boy, and promise me 
to say no more of this, at any rate for the 
present, and we will go into luncheon, and 

. ^and " And here the old lady paused. 

She had formed the sudden project of re- 
munerating the obedience of her graceless 
relative should he prove docile, by penning 
him a cheque for a comfortable amount ;; 
and it was on the tip of her tongue to say 
so ; but she did not quite like to tell even 



144 Lady Livingston! s Legacy. 

such a man as Sir Frederick that she would 

r 

give him money for desisting in his suit 
Dashwood, however, had no notion of being 
put off with fair words and a glass of the 
old Madeira ; and it may be doubted if any 
pecuniary gift would, under the circum- 
stances, have bought him off just then. 
The recollection of his last interview with 
the Behemoth nerved him to pursue the 
contest, and he was, besides, of too manly 
a nature to drop his pretensions at the 
mere dictate of an old woman, even though 
she was wealthy and high in the world's 
esteem, and he disreputable and needy. 

" I am afraid, my Lady Livingston," he 
said, setting his lips very firmly together, 
and speaking in measured accents, " that 
this courtship, of mine must be treated a 
little more seriously than it is your lady- 
ship's pleasure to do. After all, my refer- 
ence to you was a simple act of politeness 
to an old friend and relation, and the mis- 
tress of this house. It is to my cousin 



Sir Fredericks Wooing. 145 

Beatrice . ^to Miss Fleming . ^that I now 
address myself, and it is from her that I 
must receive an answer. Some short 
time since, I spoke earnestly to her on 
this subject, and have only delayed the 
renewal of my claim on her, founded on 
her positive promise, because the abrupt- 
ness with which I spoke, appeared at the 
moment to distress her. I was in great 
difficulties . of course I mean about money 
. ^at the time, and " 

"And so you are still, unless you have 
found a gold mine," interrupted the dowa- 
ger, who felt that her strong point of van- 
tage was Sir Frederick's notorious insol- 
vency. But Dashwood went on unruffled. 

" Pardon nie ; such is not precisely the 
case. Matters are very much simplified of 
late; troublesome claims have been paid 
off, my affairs have been got into something 
like order, and it really seems as if brighter 
prospects were opening out before me. I 
don't mean that I shall ever be rich ; but a 

VOL. II. 10 



146 Lady Livingston's Legacy, 

modest competence does seem within my 
reach. . Beatrice, I ask you if you will share 
it with me ? You know it was the dearest, 
the fondest wish of " 

" For shame, Frederick Dashwood !"" 
broke in the old lady, now in a glow with 
anger. " You know and see that the girl 
does not care one straw for you ; and yet, 
because your poor aunt expressed some 
feeling on the subject, you torture her with 
appeals to her sense of honour to compel 
her to marry you ! It is a shame ! It is 
unworthy of a man to persecute a poor 
young thing in this manner." 

" That is one way of putting it," said 
Dashwood, with heightening colour and 
dogged resolve: "the other is, that Bea- 
trice is my betrothed bride, bound to me 
by a solemn and deliberate pledge . ^a 
pledge which she did not venture, when 
last we spoke together, to repudiate. If I 
am to hear that promise declared to be 



Sir Fredericks Wooing. 147 

binding no longer, I must hear it from her 
own lips." 

" I cannot . I cannot say so !" cried 
Beatrice in a low, sad voice, that sounded 
like a wail, as she clasped her hands to- 
gether and averted her face. " I have not 

the courage, even to save myself from 

No, dear Lady^Livingston, it is useless. If 
he chooses to take me, I am his. My word 
was given, as]^he says." 

" Dearest Beatrice," said Dashwood, and 
as he spoke he rose, and took her passive 
hand in his, " I don't want to make you 
unhappy . on my word, I don't And I'll 
try and be a good husband to you, what- 
ever opinion you may have been taught to 
form of me. I have been wild and extrava- 
gant, of course, and I have had to pay the 
penalty; but what I have done to incur 
Lady Livingston's enmity, and to be an 
object of dislike to you, is more than I can 
telL I am cruel, very likely, because I 
insist on what cannot be denied to be my 

10 . 2 



148 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

rights ; but I cannot let the hopes of a life- 
time be blighted for a mere whim." 

But Beatrice, with an indignant cry, tore 
away her hand from his, and sprang to her 
feet, confronting him with a courage new to 
his experience. 

" That you were hard and heartless, I 
knew already," she said, looking him fear- 
lessly in the face for the first time ; " but I 
scarcely realized till now to what misery 
my poor fond mother had consigned me 
when she joined our hands in token of 
betrothal. You might have been content 
with what you had already secured, with 
my unwilling, most unwilling, acknowledg- 
ment of your claim, and have spared me 
that sneer." 

The anger of a gentle spirit has in it 
that which affects us more, from its very 
rarity, than the loudest outbreaks of those 
who are easily moved to wrath. And this 
was felt by Sir Frederick, who now began 
to regret his own imprudent speech. 



Sir Frederick's Wooing. 149 



" I didn't mean any harm, nor did I 
wilfully offend," he stammered out awk- 
wardly enough. " It is my misfortune that 
I am compelled to appear in an odious 
light, dear Beatrice, before you. You have 
heard my name traduced '' 

" Not so, Sir Frederick Dashwood !" said 
Beatrice, interrupting his bungling effort at 
apology. " The opinion which I have of 
you is founded on what I have seen with 
my own eyes and heard with my own ears. 
As for your well-known recklessness . 
about money, I mean . that would never 
have weighed with me, had I cared, really 
cared for you. It is not your poverty that 
repels me ; it is the hard and cruel heart 
which cannot forbear from taunt and insult 
levelled against the woman whom, with lip- 
service and studied hypocrisy, he pretends 
to love . ^to love ! Surely that holy word 
was never so desecrated before, as it has 
been to-day !" 

She looked far prettier, speaking thus, in 



T 50 Lady Livtngstofis Legacy. 

her newly roused passion of scorn for him, 
than Dashwood had eyer seen her look 
before, and he could not help admiring her, 
now that her eyes were sparkling, and there 
was an angry flush on her usually pale 
cheek. He had regarded her as a tame, 
spiritless slave, whose will would bend, 
reedlike, before his, and whose inclinations 
weighed for little or nothing in the balance. 
He now perceived that there was a fund 
of strength, undreamed of by him, lying 
hidden beneath that soft exterior, and that 
Beatrice, when she felt herself to be in the 
right, might not turp out to be the all- 
submissive wife on whom he had reckoned. 
She resented injustice now ; she might one 
day resent neglect But none the less was 
he resolved to hold her to her word. 

" I will talk this matter over with you 
when you are calmer and more disposed to 
listen to reason," he said, taking up his hat ; 
" at any rate, I do not relinquish one iota 



Sir Fredericks Wooing. 151 

of the rights which your pledge to me 

confers. I came down to-day " 

" You came down to-day, Frederick 
Dashwood/' said the old peeress, in a high 
shrill voice that trembled with anger, " to 
do a thing that you well knew to be mean, 
and base, and cowardly! Had this poor 
^rl, who is dear to me as my own daughter, 
had a brother to protect her, you would not 
have dared to press this claim of yours 
upon her with such cruel effrontery as you 
have shown ! Do you think that I am de- 
ceived by so transparent a trick as your 
counterfeit adoration or your mock-love for 
Beatrice ? No, Fred Dashwood ; it is my 
property which is the real bait for a needy 
fortune-hunter like yourself You think 
that my affection for your cousin insures 

But hear me when I solemnly 

swear that no penny of my money, no 
hand's - breadth of my land, shall ever 
50 to supply the wants or foster the 
vices of such a man as Sir Frederick 



152 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

Dashwood ! . ^You smile, do you ? You 
confide in the old woman's doting folly to 
forgive the wrong you would do to Beatrice 
here, whose only fault is the blindness of 
her self-sacrifice to honour and truth, and 
the memory of her mother. You may 
compel her to marry you, and you may 
break her heart, but never, living or dead, 
will I enrich '' 

She ceased speaking, for now Violet 
Maybrook's tall and graceful form ap- 
peared on the threshold. If she had 
overheard the dowager's last words, her 
power of comm^ding her own features 
must have been very great, so absolute 
was the graceful calm with which she en- 
tered. There was a moment of dead 
silence. Violet looked from one face to 
another, and the evident agitation of all 
present seemed for the first time to impress 
itself upon her. 

" I beg your pardon, Lady Livingston/' 



Sir Frederick's Wooing. 153 

she said, " for what I fear is an intrusion, 
I had better go." 

And she turned to withdraw, but with 
a quiet dignity of demeanour that might 
have graced a princess. Lady Livingston's 
nerves, however, had by this time been 
strung to such a state of tension that she 
broke through that icy crust of social de- 
corum which imprisons us all more or less, 
and spoke her mind. 

" Don't go, my dear. We have not 
been talking secrets. At all events, I, for 
one, do not care how many know the truth. 
Here is Sir Frederick Dash wood, your old 
acquaintance in Canada, my kinsman, to 
my sorrow . you know what he is . in debt 
to whoever is fool enough to trust him, 
picking up what he can anyhow, without 
caring whether there are tears or blood on 
the gold he pockets at the play-table, . ^yes, 
Fred Dashwood, I have heard of your 
cheating and robbing of beardless boys, 
though never did I * traduce ' you to Bea- 



1 54 Lady Livingstotis Legacy. 



trice, as you falsely said . and bad and 
black as badness and blackness can be. 
Well, it seems Beatrice Fleming's poor 
dear mother had a wish that her g^rl and 
her sister's boy should come together ; and 
so . and so . in fact there was an engage- 
ment and a promise that binds Beatrice, as 
a steel handcuff might do, but sits very 
lightly on yonder gentleman, I will be 
bound. Why, Violet, now I think of it, 
it is as likely as not he may have offered 
marriage, or something of the sort, to your- 
self across the sea there. You are a pretty 
girl, and it is possible." 

" Possible !" Violet said no more ; but 
her tone and the light in her kindling eye 
were such as awed the old peeress into 
momentary silence. Dashwood broke in 
with an oath and a stamp of his foot 

"In the fiend's name, madam," he said 
to Lady Livingston, "have you not done 
mischief enough ? Was ever man worse 
treated when he came, honestly, to ask for 



Sir Frederick's Wooing. 155 

his own ? You always hated me . hated 
me when I was a boy no higher than that 
table, though I own I am under money 
obligations to you, and be hanged to them ! 
Tm not ashamed of what I have done to- 
day ; and since you choose to take Miss 
Maybrook into your counsels . ^well, all I 
can say is, you shall not have a monopoly 
of outspeaking. There is an old engage- 
ment between Beatrice and myself . that's 
true. It was her mother's wish that we 
should marry . that's true too. I have 
come to claim the fulfilment of the promise, 
and I find myself received as if I were 
suspected of an intention to steal her lady- 
ship's spoons. I'll be bound that I should 
have met with a different sort of greeting 
if I had been a smooth-faced, mealy- 
mouthed hypocrite like her ladyship's 
favourite, the model, the faultless man, 

that Oswald Charl " 

But now Beatrice, whose strength of 
nerve had been sorely tried, sank back, 



156 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

half-swooning, in her chair, and her deathly- 
white face and her emotion were as a reve- 
lation to the baronet 

" That shot went home, did it !" he cried 
in coarse exultation. " This, then, explains 
the meaning of this delicate creature's 
shuddering repugnance, forsooth, to i 
man whom handsomer women have not 
thought quite so badly of! So, she was 
philandering with yonder fellow, was she, 
when she pleaded to me so prettily to 
release her from her solemn promise ! I 
see it all now." 

" So do I," said Violet Maybrook, step- 
ping proudly forward. " Sir Frederick 
Dashwood, I congratulate you on the ex- 
quisite delicacy of your sense of honour, 
and on the exhibition of your noble nature 
with which you have kindly furnished us. 
At present, however, my best attention 
is due to Miss Fleming. You have 
reduced her to a fainting state, I see, and 
when she shall be fortunate enough to be 



Sir Fredericks Wooing. 157 



Lady Dashwood, we can imagine, I should 
say, what sort of wedded happiness will be 
hers." 

And without another word or look, she 
tunned away, and took Beatrice's cold 
hands in hers, chafing them tenderly as 
she bent over her. Lady Livingston rang 
the bell sharply. 

" Show Sir Frederick Dashwood to the 
door !" she said ; " he must never be 
allowed to pass it again ; do you hear ? 
He has insulted Miss Fleming . insulted 
me; and the servant who admits him 
forfeits his place as , the penalty of dis- 
obedience. . I wish you. Sir Frederick, 
good-morning and good-bye ;" and the 
dowager swept a courtesy in the grand old 
fashion of her youth. " While I live, you 
shall not cross this threshold." 

" While she lives !" snarled the baronet, 
as he strode savagely down the carriage- 
drive. "That would not be overlong, I 
Icnow, if a wish could kill !" 



CHAPTER VIII. 



IN JEKYL STREET. 




HE house which Sir Frederick 
Dashwood had inherited from his 
grandfather stood, it has been 
said, in Jekyl Street, and was a goodly 
mansion, though somewhat of a gloomy 
order of architecture. Jekyl Street itself 
once the favourite with men of rank and 
fortune, has sorely fallen from its high es- 
tate, nor do the bulk of its present in- 
habitants bear names familiar to the student 
of Dod or Debrett. But the houses re- 
main, and they are spacious dwellings, 
with an allowance of elbow-room in their 



In Jekyl Street. 159 

broad staircases and ample drawing-rooms 
that might provoke the envy of many a 
resident in districts sacred to the newest 
fashion. 

Sir Frederick passed very much of his 
time at his club, and certainly his induce- 
ments to remain at home were few, but it 
so happened that on the morning of the 
day following Sir Frederick's visit to the 
Fountains, and his formal proposals to 
Beatrice, the master of the house in Jekyl 
Street found himself at home. He was 
in low spirits, and " soda and brandy," 
though the soda-water was Schweppe's, 
and the brandy of the finest French vintage, 
had failed to drive dull care away. He 
had been trying to write ; torn letters, or 
the commencement of letters, petulantly 
torn to shreds before six lines had been 
traced, strewed the table. He had been 
thinking, and that was worse, for there was 
little that was pleasant in his thoughts, 
whether of the past or of the present; 



i6o Lady Livingston! s Legacy. 

and as for the future, that lowered blackly 
before him. He had brought down his 
pistols, oiled them, and cleaned them, and 
felt the occupation to be some relief from 
brooding meditations. Was there not 
some surer relief to be drawn from the 
same source, he bethought him, as, click, 
click! he tried the mechanism of the re- 
volver in his hand, and then glanced down 
at the neat row of cartridges waiting in 
their compartment of the baize-lined maho- 
gany case ! One touch of the trigger, and 
debts and duns, the Behemoth's tyranny, 
the avoidance of his worldly ex-associates, 
the pinch of poverty, would be as if they 
had never been! It was a temptation; 
but he would not yield to it The leap in 
the dark was so terrible. The vague, un- 
defined dread of an unseen world kept 
him from rushing into its unexplored do- 
mains. No ; he must live while he could, 
and get on as best he might, but it was an 



In yekyl Street. 1 6 1 

awk^O^ard position in which he found him- 
self. 

Surely all would be right in the end. 
The dowager had been very positive and 
very peremptory; but had he not often 
known instances when the most loudly 
avowed resolutions had come to nothing ? 

Yes; there must be some available 
method of turning the enemy's flank, and 
of becoming ruler, in right of his wife, 
over Heavitree and all its adjuncts. Bea- 
trice had admitted his pretensions too 
often, and too explicitly, to go back from 
her word now. Perhaps the intervention 
of a third person would have efficacy with 
the old peeress. There were certain friends 
of his mother's yet alive, and who gave 
him from their carriages a cold bow of re- 
cognition when he rode in the park. Of 
these, the most distinguished was the Mar- 
<:hioness of Blunderbore, at whose house 
he had been a frequent guest, until he got 
to vote her parties slow ; and she, the mar- 

VOL. II. II 



1 62 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 



chioness, was a soft-hearted woman, with 
the ordinary instincts of a matchmaker. 
Should he go to Brobdingnag Square, and 
enlist Lady Blunderbore on his side ? 
With her for an ambassadress, he might 
bring the autocrat of the Fountains to 
hear reason. And she would help him, if 
he went frankly to her. He was sure of 
that The marchioness was of more malle- 
able stuff than was the Duchess of Snow- 
don. Her Grace of Snowdon was of 
another mould. Her, he would not have 
dared to approach. On his return from 
Canada, she had cut him dead, once and 
again, not in the nervous manner in which 
matrons of inferior station feign elaborately 
not to see a man whom they will know no 
longer, but without any sign of doubt in 
those cold, clear eyes of her. No; the 
duchess and some other dames had weighed 
him, and condemned him, and nailed him, 
morally, to the social counter, as a bad 
shilling, a dull, useless, leaden impostor. 



In Jekyl Street. 1 63 



whose base metal should pass current no 
longer. But good-natured Lady Blunder- 
bore would give him another chance. 

" A lady, Sir Frederick !" murmured the 
old butler, breaking in upon his master's 
reverie. 

"A lady, you fool ? What lady, and what 
does she want with me?" snapped out 
Dash wood. He was often rough with the 
old servitor, who had drawn so many corks 
for his grandfather, the founder of the 
Dashwood family, although it must be re- 
membered that, through the race of Flem- 
ings to which his noble mother had be- 
longed, Sir Frederick could count kindred 
with many magnates who would scarcely, 
under the severest cross-examination, have 
been induced to own him as a cousin. But 
at this moment the lady entered, throwing 
up her veil as she did so. It was Violet 
Maybrook, whose stern beautiful face was 
revealed. 

" Oh, all right . didn't expect," said 

II . 2 



164 Lady Limngstatis Legacy. 

Dashwood, hurriedly rising . "You may 
shut the door, Buzwing." 

But Violet did not take the chair which 
the baronet offered her, and put aside his 
proffered hand with a gesture of quiet 
contempt Then she cast her eyes around, 
taking a cool and composed survey of every 
object in the room . ^the pictures, the well- 
worn Turkey carpet, the heavy furniture, 
the cumbrous clock ticking on the black 
marble of the chimney-piece, the incredible 
monstrosities of Georgian porcelain that 
flanked it . ^a brace of Arcadians in china 
tending impossible sheep in ridiculous atti- 
tudes, but which had once been lauded as 
"equal to anything those French fellows 
could turn out from that Sevres they brag 
so about" . ^the vat of an inkstand, the 
gllt-handled fire-irons, the Books of Beauty, 
the pistol-case, the torn letters. "It is 
natural," she said bitterly, " that I should 
like to make myself acquainted with what 
should have been my home. The house 



In Jekyl Street. 165 

may be shut against me, very probably, 
when Miss Fleming is your wife and its 

mistress. This is Pray enlighten my 

colonial ignorance . it is not a library, and 
hardly a drawing-room." 

" It's only the room in which the governor 
. Sir George . used to see his patients," 
he replied, reddening, for he was not fond 
of being reminded of the medical origin of 
his title ; " and I sit here merely because I 
must be somewhere in this old prison of a 
house." 

" It is not a cheerful dwelling-place," 
said Miss Maybrook, continuing her sur- 
vey ; " a very Temple, I should say, of 
Ugliness. Here, then, you and your cousin 
are to play at love in a cottage ? May I 
be occasionally admitted to witness your 
domestic felicity ?" 

" Violet !" he exclaimed, fixing his eyes 
full upon her face. " What could I do ? 
Put yourself in my place for one instant 
What could I do ?" 



1 66 Lady Livingstones Legacy ^ 

" You could keep your word, perhaps," 
answered Miss Maybrook with cruel com- 
posure. " You have had a lesson read to 
you on that point Here is Beatrice shud- 
dering at your very touch, yet ready to go, 
like Iphigenia, to the sacrifice, from pure 
unselfish inability to face the consequences 
of a lie. Have you no pledge to bind you ? 
Do you, in truth, belong to yourself ? Is 
there in the world no woman who has 
bartered every hope of heaven for your 
love and your plighted faith, and who is 
scarcely one to allow herself to be cheated 
out of the price of what she has given 
up ?" 

" Be rational, Violet !" Dashwood began; 
but she silenced him by a wave of her 
hand. 

" Be rational !" She repeated his words 
scornfully. " Never does a man tender 
that advice to a woman save in extenuation 
of his own selfishness. It is not to our rea- 
son that you appeal when you would win us. 



In Jekyl Street. 167 

The jilted love, the -cast-off mistress, are 
bidden to be rational, to take a sensible 
view of the conduct of him who has grown 
tired of his toy, and would fling it behind 
him for ever ! What is it to me that you 
would find Miss Fleming's fortune, when 
she gets it, a convenient life-buoy to which 
to cling after the wreck of your own pros- 
pects ; or how can you expect me grace- 
fully to withdraw from the scene in your 
favour ? It is . for you. Sir Frederick, to 
speak your mind upon these points. Mine 
you know already." 

" And you are welcome to the truth, if 
you will hear it," said the baronet, walking 
slowly to and fro, with downcast eyes and 
knitted brow, as is the wont of many men 
when some unwonted emotion masters them. 
" Fm bad enough, and too bad ; but you 
are harder with me, Violet, about this mat- 
ter than is quite fair. You don't suppose 
that I would not sooner marry you, if only 
I could, than fifty such girls as that pale 



1 68 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

little thing at the Fountains ! It is sheer 
beggary, the worst beggary of all, that of a 
gentleman who never in his life learned to 
earn an honest sixpence, which goads me 
on. I sell myself for a maintenance. Wo- 
men do that every day, and you don't judge 
your own sex so very harshly when they 
marry to secure a roof over their heads 
and bread to eat It is only when a man 
does the same thing that you call him vile 
and mercenary. As for. my promise to- 
you, how am I to keep it ? The announce- 
ment in the Morning Post of * Marriage in 
High ' . ^no, but ' Fashionable Life,' as I 
am only a baronet . ^yes, of a wedding in 
which the principals were Fred Dashwood 
and Violet Maybrook, would be as fatal as 
a death-warrant I do believe the Behe- 
moth . ^you don't know of whom I talk, a 
money-lending Jew baron, to whom I be- 
long as completely as this flower in my 
button-hole belongs to me . ^would have me 
arrested as we walked out of church, oa 



» 



In yekyl Street. 1 69 

^. ^ , - . . . 

the very steps of St George's, Hanover 
Square. Fellows can be tapped on the 
shoulder and clapped into gaol on mesne 
process yet, in the old way, if a creditor 
chooses to swear that they are likely to flee 
the kingdom. And, grant that I am left 
at liberty, how would you enjoy your life 
as Lady Dashwood, without credit for a 
gown-piece or a hired brougham, dunned 
at one moment, denied at another, until 
you came at last to feel every * No, my 
lady,' or ' Sorry to refuse your ladyship,' as 
a distinct insult, and grew to loathe the 
jingle of your useless title ? / do, I know 
that Nobody addresses me as Sir Frede- 
rick without something of a covert sneer at 
the pranked-out pauper whose very ser- 
vants are his creditors, and who eats, drinks, 
and sleeps on sufferance." 

He was very much in earnest now, and 
his very voice gave evidence of his sin- 
cerity. 

"You should have thought of all this 



1 70 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

long ago," she said, reproachfully, but in a 
voice that was perceptibly softer than be- 
fore. 

" How could I ?" retorted Dashwood, 
sullenly. " How could I guess that the 
doting old miser would leave nothing worth 
mentioning behind him ? If I had only 
looked forward to this one short year ago, 
I should not have been quite so eager about 
the succession, and Charley might " 

" Hush ! There are names that must 
not be spoken, lest they wake the dead !" 
interrupted Violet, so wildly that Dashwood 
stared at her aghast, as if doubtful whether 
her reason remained unshaken. " You had 
better let me forget, if I can, the innocent 
face of the boy that loved me well ; the 
sunny eyes that laughed as they met mine; 
the golden curls that lay, all drenched and 
wet, upon the pillow, when the searchers 
came home at last to lay their light burden 
in the little cot where he had slept in life ! 
Your careless words, Frederick, conjure 



In Jekyl Street. 171 

up more visions before me than it is good 
to remember." 

" You are agitated, Violet, and hardly 
know what you say, my girl," said Sir Frede- 
rick, whose bronzed cheek had blanched to 
an unusual pallor. " I beg your pardon, I 
am sure, if I was inconsiderate in my 
speech. But I can't . no, hang it ! I can- 
not pick my words at such a time as this, 
and baited and harried as I am. You see 
that pistol-case ? Well, five minutes ago I 
sat hesitating, with a revolver in my hand ; 
and, on my word, I think I was a fool not 
to end my troubles by a touch of the trig- 
ger. What have you come here to do "i 
Not, surely, to upbraid me ? I am miser- 
able enough without that Or, perhaps, it 
was to threaten ? You can ruin me, of 
course, and might not care very much for 
consequences; but I am getting so weary 
of my life, that I might as well lose it in 
one way as another." 

"As if the loss of life were all!" ex- 



1 72 Lady Livingstotis Legacy. 



claimed Violet, with glittering eyes. "How 
would you confront the ordeal that goes 
before death . ^the horror, the hate of all 
men ; the pitiless stare of a crowd greedy 
of a new sensation ; the curses of the mob, 
as a surging sea of himian beings boils and 
seethes around the " 

" I cannot bear this !" burst out Dash- 
wood, with an oath. "Do you want to 
^ force me to marry you, under a direct 
menace to drag me down with you to de- 
spair and death, unless I yield up my own 
free choice in the matter ? I may as well 
know it at once if this be so. You have 
my promise . . " 

" Your written promise, Sir Frederick,'^ 
said Violet, more composedly than before ; 
"worded, as you know, at my dictation, and 
which is the talisman by which I can mould 
you to my will. If I like to hold you to 
your bargain, I can, by a fearful forfeiture, 
compel you to fulfil it. Why should I be 
content to wait, to remain what I am, Miss 



In Jekyl Street. 173 

Maybrook, companion to the right honour- 
able old woman by whose kind permission 
I have leave of absence for a few hours ? 
You would fail to understand me, Fred, if 
I told you that it was my womanly pride 
that proved your stanchest safeguard, after 
all. I won't drag a husband to the altar. 
I will not say to a man . ^at least to-day, 
for women are variable in their moods, you 
know," she added, with a laugh, of which 
the tone was not a mirthful one . " you 
must own me as your wife, or die upon the 
scaffold. I hardly know now what was my 
purpose in coming here to-day. Had I 
found you as you once were, with your old 
air of languid, high-bred indifference to all 
earthly considerations but your own com- 
fort, I might have been irritated into doing 
what I should afterwards have been sorry 
for. I do care for you a little, yet . often 
as I have striven to tear the imprint of 
your false, fair face from this ungoverned 
heart . often as " 



1 74 Lady Livingstaris Lega^cy. 

She said no more, but there were bright 
tears shining in her proud eyes, and Dash- 
wood felt some sparks of the old love 
rekindle in his own heart as he saw 
them. 

" Look here, Violet, my darling !" he 
said, springing to her side, and passing his 
arm around her waist ; " if youll take me 
as I am, Til be as good as my word. The 
dowager, and the dowager's property, and 
Beatrice, and the Behemoth, may all be 
whistled down the wind, my girl, for aught 
I care. Come, we'll be married, and go 
abroad before the thing is blown, and trust 
to better luck and our own wits for the 
future. Who knows but . such things might 
be . I might not become a decent fellow, 
with your help, at the last !" 

Why did not Violet's good angel, if, in- 
deed, as Asiatics dream, such a spirit were 
whispering in her ear, give her counsel that 
should override the advice of that other 
angel, armed by her pride, to whom she 



In Jekyl Street 175 

hearkened, or why did she not take the 
man at his word ? 

For the moment, he was sincere. For 
the moment, he was scarcely selfish. Later 
on, no doubt, he would have repented of 
his sudden choice of poverty, and the com- 
panionship of this beautiful and daring girl, 
who had given such terrible proof of her 
fondness for him ; but for the moment he 
was ready to give up all for her sake. But 
she was angry with him, angry with herself 
for the weakness she had displayed ; and 
with the waywardness of her sex, she shook 
herself free from his hold. 

" I came here for no dalliance," she said, 
" no love-passages. I meant to assert my 
rights, and to remind you of my power; 
and I have done both. Whether I shall 
exact the fulfilment of the bond, or release 
you from it, and leave you to ignoble ease 
as Beatrice Fleming's mate, and king-con- 
sort of the Heavitree estate, rests with 
myself, and with me alone. And now I 



1 76 Lady Livingstotis Legacy. 

. I 

must go back to my dull round of dafly 
duties." 

And with scant ceremony of leave- 
taking, she departed. When she got back 

* 

to the Fountains, she found a strange 
bustle and agitation prevailing in the old 
house, commonly so peaceful and well or- 
dered. The door stood open ; the ser- 
vants' voices were loud in the halL 

" Something must have happened T she 
said, as she hurried in. 



CHAPTER IX. 



IN WHICH THE BLINDS ARE DRAWN DOWN. 




ADY LIVINGSTON, it may be 
remembered, had the reputation 
of being eccentric, and was beyond 
doubt capricious, as ladies of her age, and 
in the uncontrolled enjoyment of ample 
means, are apt to become. Consistent as 
she was in her unswerving affection for 
Beatrice, she was none the less prone to 
take fancies, as the colloquial phrase has 
it, to strangers, and to be pleased for a 
time with new faces and modes of speech. 

She had at first shown a marked partiality 

* 

for Violet Maybrook, and now she was 

VOL. XL 12 



178 Lady Livingstotis Legacy. 

disposed to think favourably of a very 
different person . Aphy Larpent This 
young lady had for some little time past 
been accepted in the character of Miss 
Fleming's music-mistress, and she had 
spared no pains and neglected no artifice 
whereby to ingratiate herself with the old 
peeress. Hence, it came about that when 
the piano was closed and the morning's 
lesson over, the little girl from Canada, 
who sang like an angel, and whose deport- 
ment was always simple and modest, was 
invited to remain for some hours as a guest 
in the house which she frequented profes- 
sionally. That Miss Larpent should be 
included in the dowager's domestic circle, 
was in the highest degree distasteful to 
Violet, her former friend ; but to remon- 
strate would have been useless and imper- 
tinent, nor was it safe to arouse suspicion 
by any hint as to the antecedents of Lady 
Livingston's new favourite. The elf her- 
self felt a thrill of secret triumph as she 



The Blinds are drawn Down. 1 79 

took her seat at the dowager's table, and 
was permitted to associate with those who, 
had they known the truth, would have 
shrunk from her contact as if she had been 
plague-stricken. She had little fear lest by 
some untoward accident her history should 
.one day be revealed. The two who knew 
it, Dashwood and Violet, had sufficient 
motives for their silence, nor was it pro- 
bable that any one conversant with colonial 
scandal would enlighten Lady Livingston's 
ignorance on that head. 

It is uncertain what motives predominated 
in inducing the sister of Bruce Larpent 
to exert herself, as she unquestionably did, 
to conciliate the aged and wealthy kins- 
woman of her gentle pupil. Something 
was due, no doubt, to the gratification 
which she experienced in thus forcing her 
company on Violet, on the early friend 
whose avoidance had humiliated her, and 
of whose superiority she had been jealous 
since the days of their childhood. But 

12 . 2 



i8o Lady Livingstotis Legacy. 

this was not the only impulse. Her native 
cunning, sharpened by the difficulties of 
her position, had urged this little Ishmaelite 
to neglect no opportunity of learning a 
secret or of winning the conlSdence of 
those above her in social standing. There- 
fore, she voluntarily discharged, for Lady 
Livingston's behoof, many of the duties, 
which ordinarily fall to the lot of a salaried 
companion, writing letters at her dictation,^ 
examining accounts, and executing scraps 
of necessary but monotonous background 
in some gorgeous piece of Berlin wool- 
work, the credit of which would belong to 
her noble employer. 

It fell out, not unnaturally, that on the 
day which succeeded that stormy scene 
which had ensued on Sir Frederick's formal 
proposal for the hand of Beatrice, the music- 
mistress found Miss Fleming in no mood 
to profit by her instruction. Her head- 
ache, which she pleaded in excuse for a 
day's idleness, was more genuine than the 



The Blinds are drawn Down. 1 8 1 

conventional migraine of fashionable society 
often is, and the very sight of her pale, 
sad face proved to the observant elf that 
something of note had occurred ; nor was 
it very difficult to form a conjecture which 
at any rate came near to the truth. Violet, 
who had obtained permission to visit 
London, was at that very moment on her 
way to Jekyl Street, and Aphy willingly 
undertook to be Lady Livingston's atten- 
dant sprite until her return. The dowager 
was herself in a condition of nervous ex- 
citement, which only work could appease, 
and had persuaded herself that it was of 
immense importance that she should be 
portentously busy in clearing off an arrear 
of correspondence. 

The dowager's custom was to write, or 
to cause to be written, such letters as she 
despatched, in her own room, so-called, in 
the west wing of the nabob's stately man- 
sion. There was so much of unused space 
in that great house, that had its mistress 



1 82 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

been so minded, she might have had a 
half-dozen of studies or libraries wherein 
to pen her epistles. But women, of what- 
soever rank, have a preference for the 
chamber that is their own peculiar realm,, 
and Lady Livingston conformed uncon- 
sciously to the practice of the medieval 
dames, the best part of whose life was 
passed in that " bower " which we moderns 
should unpoetically designate as a bed- 
room. Where does Clorinda indite those 
gushing epistles to dear, darling Araminta,. 
and those others, on scented pink paper, 
to Captain Spurrier, whose betrothal ring 
. he is a sad Bluebeard, in his platonic 
fashion, that Spurrier, and has given away 
turquoise circlets by the dozen . shines on 
her " engaged " finger ? Where does 
Ethel pour those delicious confidences, 
into the sympathetic ear of Rose (christened 
Rose Matilda, but who has modified her 
name, by the same right innate which 
caused Ephraim Bugg to blossom into 



The Blinds are drawn Down. 183 

Norfolk Howard) ? Women are not quite 
as men are, despite the shrieks of mal- 
content Amazons, and it is not, therefore, 
wonderful that Lady Livingston should 
have preferred her own especial room. 

It was a pretty room, large, if low, and 
with flowering-plants clinging to the bricks 
outside, and pouring their fragrant breath 
through the open window. It was furnished 
in a more cheerful style than was old Sir 
George's house in Jelcyl Street, and it 
opened into a dressing-room almost as 
large as itself, and which contained many 
and many a quaint relic of the days of 
Lady Livingston's youth. There were the 
antlers of a highland stag that " my lord's" 
rifle had laid low in days before no gentle- 
man's education was considered perfect 
until he had " done " his deer-stalking, and 
piled up hecatombs of slaughtered grouse 
on the purple heather of the North. 
There were presents given to her long ago 
. marbles from Florence, mirrors from 



184 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 



Venice, tinted glass from Prague ; here a 
matchless carving in old oak, stolen from 
some Flemish church in the Revolutionary 
wars, and sold for a handful of five-franc 
pieces to some English "milor" on the 
grand tour ; there a jar of such ancient 
porcelain as Tae-pings and gunboats hkve 
hardly left unbroken on all the seaboard of 
China, sent " with respectful compliments " 
by some first-officer of an Indiaman who 
owed his appointment to " my lord's " in- 
fluence. There, too, stood a grand struc- 
ture, a cabinet of tortoise-shell and ivory 
and satin-wood, mounted in gilded brass, 
and in excellent preservation. This had 
been a post-nuptial gift on the part of " my 
lord " himself, and his relict prized it 
highly ; and to that hour used it as the 
hiding-place of her very choicest posses- 
sions, the letters of dear friends, the old, 
old trinkets, each perhaps with its own as- 
sociations, that spoke only to herself, and 
other treasures. 



The Blinds are drawn Down. 185 



Lady Livingston was very busy. She 
not merely dictated, but actually wrote, 
letters to several persons . ^to her steward, 
for instance, at Heavitree, to Goodeve and 
Glegg, of Bedford Row . her ladyship 
being as yet quite unaware of the serious 
mishap which had befallen the elder of 
those eminent solicitors, and which had, 
through the exertions of Mr. Glegg, who 
dreaded the circulation of reports damaging 
to the firm s prosperity, been kept from 
newspaper publicity . and to other persons. 
The elf, on the other hand, was kept well 
employed in balancing sundry complicated 
accounts. The dowager, like many people 
of abundant fortune and leisure, paid her 
tradespeople but at long intervals, although 
it would have been equally convenient to 
her to have drawn a cheque weekly to 
defray her expenses. On this occasion she 
showed an odd eagerness to clear herself with 
the world, sending the ready Aphy on em- 



1 86 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

bassies to Mrs. Hart, and signing first one 
order on her bankers, and then another. 

" I must be ready . I must be ready !"^ 
she repeated to herself, under her breath,, 
although she had no need for such anxiety,, 
having a large balance of available money> 
and none but the usual liabilities of a large 
establishment 

Miss Larpent, who watched her stealthily, 
could guess that she was under the in- 
fluence of some haunting thought, that she 
was [intent on exorcising by the spell of 
active employment. It was evident that 
she was ill at ease. Hers was an unnatural 
briskness for a woman of her years. Her 
eyes were bright, and there was a flush on 
her wrinkled cheek, but she looked ill and 
harassed. 

" I wish, my dear," said the old peeress 
suddenly, addressing Miss Larpent . "I 
wish, my dear, that you would fetch me 
from the tortoise-shell cabinet a packet that 
you will find . let me think . in the second ; 



The Blinds are drawn Down. 187 

no, in the third drawer on the right-hand 
side, below the large inner compartment 
where the jewel-case is kept I have not seen 
it for years and years; but you will know it at 
once . a packet of letters tied up with a 
broad blue ribbon. Here is the key," she 
added, " of the cabinet ; and here" . select- 
ing another glittering morsel of steel, with 
an ivory label attached to it, from amidst 
the heap of keys which lay upon the desk 
before her . " is that which unlocks the 
drawers. Would you mind the trouble of 
giving me, in that glass, fifty drops from 
the bottle ? . Thank you. What set my 
head running on those poor old letters, I 
wonder ?" she added ; but now she was 
communing with her own thoughts, not ad- 
dressing the young teacher of music, who 
continued to pour out the medicine, as 
desired, with a steady hand. The fifty 
drops fell one by one into a modicum of 
water at the bottom of a wine-glass ; and. 
Lady Livingston, taking the glass from 



1 88 Lady Livingston! s Legacy. 

Aphy's hand, swallowed the contents. "It 
always does me good," she said, with an air 
of satisfaction; " more good than I ever de- 
rived from any prescription of Doublefee's. 
It is very well for men like Sir Jbseph to 
call these people quacks. They do some- 
thing for us, doctors or no doctors ; while 
the Faculty only watch us as we die by 
inches, in the regular way." 

From which it may be opined that the 
phial on the table was prepared according 
to the recipe of some irregular benefactor 
of suffering humanity. 

"Shall I go for the packet now, Lady 
Livingston T asked the smiling elf; and 
receiving a nod by way of reply, as the old 
lady dipped her pen in the ink, and recom- 
menced her self-allotted task of writing, she 
went on her errand at once. The tortoise- 
shell cabinet stood, it has been already ex- 
plained, in the adjacent dressing-room, and 
the door between the two rooms was 
partly open. Both the keys being labelled, 



The Blinds are drawn Down. 189 

and one of them larger than the other, 
Aphy Larpent found no difficulty in open- 
ing the miniature double doors, and in in- 
serting the key in the third of the small 
lower drawers, on the right of the central 
compartment, where stood a large case of 
crimson morocco leather, with silver mount- 
ings; doubtless the jewel-case of which 
mention had been made. But the third 
drawer, when opened, proved riot to con- 
tain anything but some old trinkets, broken 
or obsolete, an amethyst cross, a necklace 
and bracelets of Maltese filigree- work, 
some dozen rings and brooches of small 
value, a watch set with small diamonds, a 
string of pearls yellow with age, and a gold 
chain, to which was attached a locket. 

" She spoke of the second drawer ; let 
me try that," murmured Miss Larpent to 
herself, as she closed the one drawer, and 
applied the key to the other. What was it 
that met her gaze, causing her eyes to flash 
and glow with an unholy eagerness, and 



190 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

her fingers to contract themselves crisply, 
like the claws of a bird of prey about to 
pounce upon the quarry ? Why did her 
sallow cheek redden, and her vulpine mouth 
become compressed, as she hovered around 
the open drawer, where, however, there 
was nothing which at first sight appeared 
very tempting to be seen ? She was still 
gazing, when Lady Livingston called out 
impatiently : " You are a long time about 
it, Miss Larpent ; surely you can tell one 
key from the other." The young music- 
mistress withdrew a step or two from the 
cabinet, and stood in the open doorway, 
looking into the other room. 

" I beg your pardon," she said ; " but I 
think there was some mistake. I tried the 
drawers on the right side" 

" But I told you the left side, distinctly 
told you the left," cried out Lady Livingston, 
irritably. " You young folks are all alike, 
with no more memory than if you were so 
many wax dolls. There, there, my dear. 



The Blinds are drawn Down. 191 

I did not mean to scold; but please be 
careful now, while I finish this note. The 
third drawer, mind, to the left ; I told you 
so before." 

The dowager like many of the aged, was 
tenacious on the subject of her own memory, 
and sometimes unjust to those whose more 
accurate recollections jarred with her own ; 
but Aphy Larpent knew her habits too 
well to contradict her ; and with a mere, 
** Very well. Lady Livingston," she turned 
to fulfil her senior^s behest. As she did so, 
with a covert smile on her lips, she looked 
back. There sat the old peeress, stiffly 
erect, writing at her huge old-fashioned 
desk of ebony, with her black lace lappets 
falling beside her gray hair, her dress of 
rich brocade, in some pattern of black and 
lilac, the diamond rings flashing on her soft 
old fingers . ^stately to look upon. Miss 
Larpent never afterwards forgot that sight 

The third drawer on the left being 
opened, disclosed to view a miniature in 



192 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

its case, a broken fan, some ivory tablets- 



such as were used in bygone ball-rooms, 
by beauties long departed, to register the 
names of partners no longer in the flesh . 
a few dried flowers, and some eight or ten 
old letters, the ink of which was faded, and 
the paper discoloured by age, but which 
were tied carefully together, as the dowager 
had said, with a broad blue ribbon. The rib~ 
bon . it had lain long in the drawer, and was 
itself a faded thing, the ghost of a blue ribbon 
. ^was tied in what is called a true-lovers^ 
knot ; nor was it hard to guess the nature 
of the correspondence which it enclosed. 
Love-letters, doubtless, and probably not 
penned in his bachelor . days by the Right 
Hon. the Lord Livingston; to whom, 
nevertheless, their recipient had been a 
true wife. There is some romance, perhaps, 
in all lives, prosaic as they may appear; 
and perhaps the miniature, and the dried- 
up flowers, and the shattered fan, and the 
tablets, and the letters, were all relics of 



The Blinds are drawn Dawn, 193 

certain early days when her ladyship had 
dreamed of happiness with him, never des- 
tined to be more to her than a half-forgot- 
ten shadow of her girlish life, and budding 
sentiment. Aphy took out the letters, and 
turned back to re-enter the other room. 
There sat the old lady, the pen in her hand, 
and her face bent down, apparently writing. 

The old peeress must have been intent 
upon her task, surely, for she paid no atten- 
tion to Miss Larpent's entry, or to the . " I 
have brought the letters. Lady Livingston," 
with which the girl announced the execu- 
tion of her errand. Aphy, who had now 
reached the middle of the room, suddenly 
started back, with dilated eyes, gazing on 
the seated figure in the arm-chair. The 
figure had fallen forward a little, and the 
pen, still held between the fingers, had 
slipped awkwardly across the sheet of letter- 
paper, making a long irregular mark, like an 
inky furrow, but not a straight one. The 
weight of the body seemed to be supported 
VOL. II. 13 



194 Lady Livingston! s Legacy. 

by the other arm, and as Miss Larpent 
gazed, it gave way, and dropped forward, 
the down-turned face resting on the 
desk. 

" You are ill f In the name of Heaven ! 
what is this ?" exclaimed the elf, startled 
into momentary sympathy with the sup- 
posed sufferer, to whose assistance she 
sprang forward. But the hand that held 
the pen was nerveless ; there was no beat 
of pulsation in the wrist on which the girl's 
grasp closed; and when she lifted the 
heavy, helpless head, involuntarily she re- 
coiled, for the glassy eyes, the awful gray- 
ness of the blanched face, the parted lips, 
the motionless features, told their own tale. 
There was to be no more suffering, na 
more care, no more anxiety for Susan Bea^ 
trice. Dowager Baroness Livingston, on 
this earth of ours. And Aphy Larpent 
knew, and shuddered to know, that she 
was alone with the dead. 

It may have been five minutes later than 



The Blinds are drawn Down. 195 

the instant of making this discovery, or 
possibly the interval may have been some- 
what longer, before Miss Larpent took 
measures to spread through the house the 
alarm of the sudden death of its mistress. 
Perhaps, with all her audacity and her re- 
sources, the shock had overpowered her 
nerves, and she had needed a brief breath- 
ing-time before she was capable of thought 
or action. As it was, after a pause, which, 
after all, was of brief duration, the sharp 
and repeated sound of the bell brought 
hurrying feet along the corridor of the west 
wing, and in the doorway, the servant who 
first arrived was met by the young teacher 
of music, who was very pale and trembling, 
with tearful eyes and uplifted hand, that 
told its own tale before a word had been 
spoken. 

" Very ill . ^her ladyship . ^very ill indeed 
. the nearest doctor," said the elf, gasping; 
and there was hurrying to and fro, and 
shrieks and sobbing of women, and the 

13.2 



196 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 



loud exclamations of men ; and in an in- 
credibly short space of time a messenger 
returned with Dr. Eccles. His examina- 
tion did not last long, and every one knew 
the verdict before he uttered it. " It is all 
over, and I can do nothing : the heart, of 
course ; I always feared as much," said the 
young doctor. "You had better lay her 
on her bed, poor thing, and darken the 



room." 



And that was why the blinds were 
already drawn down when Violet returned 
from London. 



CHAPTER X. 



DUST TO DUST. 




|HE grim visitor, Death, throws a 
tinge of solemnity over surround- 
ings that would otherwise be little 
else than frivolous or commonplace. The 
few poor yards of thin black woollen stuff, 
nailed around the door of some French 
cottage-home, plead quite as pathetically 
for the respect due to the mourners within, 
as do the costly draperies, gorgeous with 
coronets and armorial bearings wrought in 
gold thread, and studded with ostentatious 
tears embroidered in silver, which the rich 
and noble hang around the church-porches 
of Paris. 



1 98 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 



A philosopher might have denied that 
there was ground-work for any especial re- 
pining at the obsequies of the Dowager Lady 
Livingston, which were duly performed at 
Richmond, on the day dictated by custom, 
by a corpulent undertaker who had buried 
many of her ladyship s kith and kin. Here, 
it might have been said, was a person of 
ripe, nay, of over-ripe years, who had en- 
joyed, more or less, the good things of this 
world so long as it was possible to retain 
them, and had met with a painless death in 
the fulness of time. There was no reason 
for taking a sentimental view of the matter. 
The tenancy-for-life was over, the ban- 
quet-board swept clear ; it was the turn of 
another now, and that was all. Nevertheless, 
there were tears shed for this rich old 
matron, who, in spite of occasional ill- 
humour and spasmodic imperiousness, had 
yet found out the way to win the hearts of 
her dependents. The old coachman, who 
had growled out, scores of times, his caustic 



Dust to Dust. 1 99 



.comments on her fickleness of purpose and 
sturdy determination to be obeyed, now 
led the chorus in her praise. " Though 
she was dead," he declared, surprised into 
quotation for, perhaps, the first time of his 
life, " her name would never die ;" and he 
was very severe with helper and stable-boy 
for whistling irreverent nigger melodies 
while his and their good mistress lay in 
in her shroud within the' house. Of the 
other servants, half were really sorry ; and 
the other half, led away by the infection of 
grief, mourned for their lost lady during all 
that interval between the death and the 
burial. There were pensioners of the old 
peeress, too, who had good reason to grieve, 
but whose regrets were not purely selfish. 

Beatrice Fleming it was on whom the 
blow fell the most heavily. For days she 
sat in her room, as if stunned, so sudden, 
so cruel, had been the stroke which Fate 
had dealt her, as she deemed, when her 
protectress, her best, truest, dearest friend, 



200 Lady Livingston's Legacy*. 

she who had been to her as a mother, was 
snatched away. She hardly had realized 
what Lady Livingston had been to hery 
how the spontaneous affection of that child- 
less old woman had shielded her from the 
rough storms of the world, until the kind 
old hand that had given so much was for 
ever powerless. Beatrice reproached her- 
self, though without reason, as we all are 
apt to do, of not having been more tender^ 
loving, thoughtful, in her intercourse with 
her who now lay hushed and still on the 
couch whence her own strength should 
never raise her. She took blame to herself 
that in her natural unhappiness, when per- 
secuted by Dashwood's unwelcome suit, she 
had not marked the signs which should 
have told her how near her benefactress 
was to her end. But in very truth the 
blame was undeserved. Only the eye of 
an expert, sharpened by deep anxiety, could 
have detected the secret approaches by 
which the citadel of life was undermined. 



Dust to Dust. 20 1 



That Lady Livingston had died, with 
fearful suddenness, of heart-complaint . 
that Miss Larpent had been, not precisely 
in the room, but in that adjacent, executing 
some wish of the dowager's, when the fatal 
seizure occurred, was well ascertained. 
There was mute evidence, no lack of it, 
that the mistress of the Fountains had 
been cut off whilst in the midst of her 
ordinary occupations. The letters, the 
accounts, remained on the table just as the 
writer had left them. The very ink in the 
pen which the dead fingers held was 
scarcely dry ts^hen the servants had been 
called into the chamber of death. And when 
the outcries and the frequent iteration of 
" Who would have thought it ?" had ceased, 
it appeared that the lamentable event which 
had just occurred was exactly what every 
one, with unanimous prescience, had always 
expected. 

A good many people took thought of 
Beatrice Fleming and of her prospects. 



202 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

What would she do with Lady Livingston's 
money, now that it was hers ? That she 
should live in single blessedness at the 
Fountains or at Heavitree Hall, was, of 
course, out of the question. But where 
would be her residence until the day of her 
marriage, and who would be the fortunate 
winner of such a prize matrimonial ? 

" She is very nice and pretty, and the 
Heavitree property is quite unencumbered," 
said the Most Noble the Marchioness of 
Blunderbore ; " and then she has birth too, 
not that men seem to care a straw for that 
nowadays, when there is money or noto- 
riety, and she ought to do exceedingly well 
with herself I did hear some ridiculous 
rumour that she was engaged to that bank- 
rupt baronet, a cousin of hers . I forget 
his name. Oh, Dashwood. Yes, yes ; that 
is it : a handsome, good-for-nothing young 
fellow, grandson to the old doctor. Sir 
George. But I am sure dear good Lady 
Livingston would never have tolerated 



Dtist to Dust. 203 



such a preposterous love affair as that. 
The man is hopelessly involved, and 
<:an't show his face in society, and who 
set such a mischievous report afloat, I 
cannot tell." 

It was the Behemoth who had circulated 
the particular report which had reached 
Lady Blunderbore's ears. Rumour seems 
:generally, like the thistle and fungus, to be 
self-sown; but in this instance Baron Swartz 
had condescended to propagate in London 
circles the true story, with which he had by 
5ome mysterious means become acquainted, 
of Beatrice's betrothal. There were many 
who did not believe in an anecdote which 
it was to the Jew's interest to spread abroad, 
and among them was the Duchess of Snow- 
don, who regarded it as simply incredible, 
that a young woman who had seen some- 
thing of London should throw herself away 
on a suitor whose only recommendations 
were his good looks and the bloody hand 
in his escutcheon. 



204 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 



" A baronet is all very well when he 
happens to be rich," her Grace had said, 
when she was informed of Miss Fleming's 
supposed promise to her disreputable kins- 
man ; " but she can be called * my lady ' 
on less ruinous terms. It is a pity, of 
course, that she will be in crape for some 
time to come, because she loses the best 
part of the season, but I shall make it a 
point to invite her to stay with us in Scot- 
land afterwards, and I dare say something 
satisfactory will occur." And the duchess 
was warranted in her vaticinations by the 
fact, that not a few brilliant marriages had 
resulted from such visits to Inverinch Castle, 
N.B., the northern palace of the Duke of 
Snowdon, where eldest sons and young 
men of fortune were to be flushed as readiy 
as the close-packed broods of grouse 
nestling amid the adjacent heather. 

Among those whose interest in Beatrice 
was the keenest was, as was but natural, 
Sir Frederick Dashwood. But as, when 



Dust to Dust. 205 



he sent in his name, Miss Fleming "re- 
gretted that she was not equal " to the 
ordeal of a personal interview, and as he 
received no reply to his clumsy letter of 
condolence, the sympathetic baronet was 
compelled to postpone his intended conso- 
lations to his cousin under her present 
affliction until the day of the funeral. In 
the meantime, it was profoundly irritating 
to him to overhear, as he so often did, the 
babble of the young subalterns at his club, 
some of whom " happened to know " that 
Beatrice's heritage was about fivefold in 
excess of the amount first stated, the Hea- 
vitree rent-roll being roundly summed at 
twenty thousand a year, with "another 
tenner " of annual thousands from the Con- 
sols ; while others freely gave and took the 
odds that the sorrowing heiress would 
marry, and into the peerage too, before 
Ascot in the following year. Any event 
will serve as a peg on which bets may 
hang, and a young lady's wedding may be 



2o6 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

as fair a subject for a sporting wager as 
any other; but the chatter of these pink- 
faced boys drove Sir Frederick to the 
limits of his patience. He had not asked, 
when he drove down to the Fountains, to 
see Miss Maybrook, being exceedingly 
dubious as to the reception which he might 
expect from her. She was capable, as he 
well knew, of acting with forbearance and 
generosity on occasion. But there was at 
least an equal probability that her fiery 
spirit might lead her to disregard all con- 
sideration for her own security, should he 
test her endurance too severely. It would 
be better to wait, and if she chose to be a 
calm and contemptuous spectator of his 
union with another, to accept the position 
with the best grace possible. He should 
at least have a sufficiency of solid pudding 
to compensate for the lack of praise, and 
could bear the scorn of the only woman he 
had ever loved, and the aversion of his 
wife, for the sake of an assured income. 



Dicst to Dust, 207 

He was quite willing to reconcile himself 
to the stalled ox, even with the bitter 
seasoning of domestic hatred, rather than 
to continue his present life of shifts and 
expedients. 

Very busy was Mr. Glegg, of Goodeve 
and Glegg, family solicitors, of Bedford 
Row. He and a steady old confidential 
clerk were daily for hours at the Fountains, 
searching into the contents of all manner 
of receptacles for documents, docketing, 
comparing, inspecting, putting seals on 
desk, press, and drawer, and being strangely 
busy and silent By this time it had oozed 
out into print that Mr. Samuel Goodeve 
had been the victim of a " violent and out- 
rageous attack " in the public streets, and 
was still very ill in consequence of the 
brutal treatment which he had received. 
At any rate, all the work of the firm de- 
volved upon his partner, who was not 
unnaturally testy at the sudden strain upon 
his powers, so that he was barely civil to 



2o8 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

bland Mrs. Hart, the housekeeper, and 
promptly silenced the old butler's deferential 
speeches. In truth, the whole household 
burned with a blameless curiosity as to the 
contents of "my lady's will." Of course 
everything went to " Miss Beatrice ;" but 
that cardinal rule once established, there 
was room for doubt as to the testamentary 
provisions. Was there a clause forbidding 
Miss Fleming's marriage with the obnoxious 
Sir Frederick, under pain of being disin- 
herited ? Would the property be vested 
in trustees, or go " out and out," to borrow 
the language of the tallest plush -clad 
Mercury, to the heiress ? That there would 
be gifts of money and raiment to the denizens 
of the basement story, was reasonably held 
as assured. That annuities would be be- 
queathed for the maintenance of the oldest 
servants, was deemed more than likely. It 
was a disappointment when Mr. Glegg's 
gruff reticence cut off all information on 
these heads. As for the confidential clerk, 



Dust to Dust. 209 



when the butler did once succeed in inviting 
him into the commodious pantry, where a 
cobwebbed bottle and large glasses were in 
readiness, even the mellowed fire of that 
royal old Madeira, once laid down by Lord 
Livingston defunct, failed to loosen the 
tongue of that smoke-dried subordinate of 
the Law. " The green seal was thrown 
away on him," so the butler declared, almost 
with tears ; " four glasses . for the fellow 
sucked in four of 'em, mute as an oyster . 
didn't warm him up one bit." 

There were other mutes ere long in atten- 
dance at the nabob's red-brick mansion, which 
had been stealthily pervaded, of late, by the 
satellites of that fashioner who purveys for 
us the last of our earthly requirements. 
There had been creeping and whispering, 
and smothered noises as of muffled tools 
cautiously at work, and all the hush and 
suppression that usage prescribes, until the 
preparations were complete for burying the 
dead out of sight Then at last came the 

VOL. II. 14 



2IO Lady Livingston's Legacy, 

black horses, prancing in their decorous 
sleekness and strength, beneath their dismal 
load of sable finery, and the hearse with 
nodding plumes, and the black coaches, 
and the well-trained men in Death's black 
uniform, whose practised grasp is so familiar 
with the embossed silver handles of coro- 
neted velvet-covered coffins. And so did 
they bear away, in decent pomp and staid 
ceremony, the body of the late mistress of 
the Fountains to its long home beneath a 
marble monument, in a flower-planted in- 
closure well railed in ; and the chaplain of 
the cemetery yielded precedence to a more 
dignified clergyman than he, one of the 
noble family of Fleming, who had come 
down to read the burial-service over " our 
dear sister departed." 

The last honours had been duly rendered 
to the dead. It was time, now, for the 
arrangement of the affairs of the living. 
Wherefore, the reading of the will at the 
Fountains was awaited with a very real 
anxiety. 



CHAPTER XL 



CONCERNING THE WILL. 




H E reading of the will, in the case 
of a rich and childless testator, is 
in itself a subject so dramatic, 
that it is by no means surprising that more 
than one powerful pen, more than one deft 
and dexterous pencil, should have embalmed 
for pictorial or literary immortality a scene 
so worthy of the limner's or the narrator's 
art. In some cases, the wishes of a wealthy 
miser, of a petty tyrant at enmity with his 
children, or of a fanciful spinster, are so 
little known, that the ceremony partakes of 
the character of an actual Wheel of For- 



14. 



212 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

_^ .. 

tune, of a lottery, wherein the great golden 
prize may fall to some humble Cinderella, 
to some clownish Cymon, as yet of no ac- 
count in the world. There are instances 
in which the last will and testament tells 
no more than the so-called Queen's Speech, 
which is the formal prelude to a parlia- 
mentary session; where Amurath and Amu- 
rath succeeds, as the merest matter ot 
course, and the only concern of anybody 
is, as to the pitiful little legacies that, like a 
comet s attenuated tail, are tagged to the 
foregone conclusion that the bulk belongs 
to the expectant heir. 

The company of mourners gathered to- 
gether in the. great solemn dining-room of 
the Fountains was not at all such as a 
skilled playwright would have placed upon 
the stage. If there was Avarice present, 
it was not embodied in the form of a sour 
old bachelor kinsman, or a rat-eyed female 
cousin, wealthy already, and ravening in 
ghoul-like greed for legacies to swell the 



Concerning the Will. 213 

hoard. Luxury was not there, incarnate in 
the shape of a rakish young gallant, con- 
fident that his luck must change this time ; 
nor were the rest of the seven deadly sins 
as prominently sponsored as they some- 
times are. Even Sir Frederick Dashwood, 
who was there, with crape hatband and 
mourning attire, like the others, expected 
nothing, unless it were some trifle to buy a 
ring. There was one first favourite, and all 
the rest were dark horses, as he put the case, 
in thefreedom of social life, to Major Raffing- 
ton. It was a comfort that the old dame 
had not had time to frame a codicil barring 
Beatrice from taking him, Fred Dashwood, 
as her husband. He had not the least ob- 
jection to leading an indolent life thence- 
forward, on the ample income of his future 
bride. 

There were, in addition to the clergy of 
the parish, to the doctors, and to the law- 
yer, sundry others, more or less akin, for 
the most part, to the stock from which the 



Concerning the Will. 215 



:r to associate with the handsome, 
-yed spendthrift, whom the dow- 
rumoured to have turned out of 
e the day before she died, but 
iiventional right to follow her to 
, and to hear the announcement 
^t wishes, none cared to dispute. 
^^g%y followed by his confidential 
latter being laden with papers, 
tling into the room, and rubbing 
s together, took his place at the 
very one expected him, in com- 
Ith established usage, to make a 
.ark or two, before opening the 
then to unfold the potent docu- 
:lf. But Mr. Glegg appeared to 
lervously ill at ease than became 
- of his standing. He cleared his 
peatedly, shuffled with his feet, 
V er the papers which his sedulous 
ced before him, and finally said, 
pishly : " Gentlemen, I am afraid 
ave not the power of performing 



2 1 6 Lcidy Livingstatis Legcuy. 

what I had anticipated as part of my . ^yes, 
my regular duty on this . ^ahem ! melan- 
choly occasion. I see you are impatient, 
and naturally so, and I will not, therefore, 
detain you longer. I cannot read the will, . 
since, up to this moment, there is no posi- 
tive proof that any such will exists." 

There was a murmur of incredulous as- 
tonishment, swelled by the respectful, but 
distinct murmurs of the servants clustered 
near the door of the great ghostiy room. 

" No will !" cried the Hon. and Rev. 
Augustus Fleming, he who had read the 
service over the dowager s coffin, and who 
readily undertook to become spokesman 
for the rest " Why, the thing is impos- 
sible." So said the looks of the spectators, 
as clearly as looks could speak. 

" I am sorry, gentlemen," said Mr. Glegg, 
looking about him, " to be compelled to 
repeat my previous assurance. I have 
searched, and so have the clerks, every- 
where at Bedford Row, but in vain. The 



Concerning the Will. 217 

most minute scrutiny here has led to no 
better result. I do not in the least mean 
to deny that a will was, very recently, exe- 
cuted by our deceased client, and I have 
no doubt in due legal form. Mr. Goodeve, 
my partner, saw to the drawing of it, and 
superintended its signature . thus much his 
day-book proves. But there is no discover- 
able trace of the will itself" 

Then there was a babel of uplifted voices, 
where all seemed to speak at once, and 
none to listen. It was terminated by the 
butler^s coming forward to the table to re- 
late, with respectful firmness, all that he 
knew, that is to say, the approximate date 
of the arrival of Mr. Goodeve and his 
clerk, their being closeted with Lady Liv- 
ingston, and the presumed signature of 
what the household had never hesitated to 
pronounce a will. This narrative bore 
with it the stamp of truth, yet Mr. Glegg 
smiled faintly, as he shook his head. 

" I am sure you are convinced of the 



2 1 8 Lady L ivingstorCs Legacy. 

accuracy of what you relate, my worthy 
friend," he said magisterially ; " and yet 
the account, however morally convincing, 
merely serves to show what loose ideas of 
evidence take possession of the popular 
mind. My partner, a clerk, and some 
papers, arrive here ; a statement which is 
important, certainly, but which offers per 
se no tittle of proof that a will was signed 
and witnessed. Jumping at a conclusion 
is not a logical process, though laymen 
argue daily as if it were. Now, it un- 
fortunately happens- that Mr. Goodeve, 
whose failing health and impaired powers as 
a business man had for months been a source 
of no light anxiety to me, did not make a 
formal entry of the particulars, but merely 
jotted down one or two disjointed me- 
moranda, barely intelligible. From these 
I gather that a will was drawn up, and 
signed ; and I conclude that it was of a 
short and simple character, and for this 
reason ; no barrister, contrary to our custom. 



Concerning the Will. 219 

seems to have sketched it ; and indeed the 
entire instrument was probably prepared 
by Mr. Goodeve himself, from which cir- 
cumstance I gather that its provisions 
were not elaborate, as they must have 
been had trusts and contingent remainders 
formed any part of it." 

"Well, but where is this will . long or 
short ?" demanded Dash wood, almost 
fiercely. "If it is not here, it must be at 
your office, Mr. Glegg, and it is for you to 
produce it" 

" That is very easily said. Sir Frederick,*' 
coolly returned the lawyer ; " but I cannot 
be responsible for the safe custody of a 
document which I have never seen. You 
may be sure, gentlemen, that I have not 
come here to-day to make the disagreeable 
communication which I have made, without 
having used every proper effort to discover 
the missing will. All Mr. Goodeve's 
papers, whether at his private residence or 
in Bedford Row, have been examined with 



220 Lady Livingstons Legacy, 



the utmost care ; nay, every box of title- 
deeds and bundle of leases belonging to 
our other clients have been ransacked and 
tested, in the vain hope that my partner 
may have inadvertently placed this impor- 
tant paper in some one of them. Here, at 
the Fountains, the same care has been dis- 
played, and again without result" 

There was a fresh chorus of exclama- 
tions, more or less suggestive. 

" It is considered more regular, is it not," 
said the Hon. and Rev. Augustus, " that a 
will should be kept at the offices of the 
solicitor who drew it ? I have always 
understood this to be the case." 

" There is no binding rule where wills 
are concerned . as to their keeping, I mean," 
replied Mr. Glegg; "though, no doubt, 
they are more secure when in professional 
and disinterested custody. But etiquette 
does not, as in the case of marriage settle- 
ments, dictate their being consigned to the 
care of a third party. My own impression 



Concerning the Will. 22 1 

has always been that Mr. Goodeve left 
the signed will in Lady Livingston's hands, 
but I admit that this is not based on any 
testimony." 

" But you have searched here, and care- 
fully too ?" said another member of the 
family, a distant kinsman, who had nothing 
to lose or gain by the result of the quest, 
be it as it might. 

" I have done so, with the assistance of 
my clerk," said Mr. Glegg emphatically, 
" placing seals on every receptacle that 
contained papers, which seals remain . as 
I have this day satisfied myself . intact, 
and which, I may mention, also secure 
some valuable jewels and other portable 
property. I found everything apparently 
in good order. I have investigated every 
scrap of writing that belonged to the testa- 
trix, and I can make affidavit that the will, 
unless concealed in some hiding-place so 
unlikely as to elude conjecture, is not 
under this roof It is not at Mr. Goodeve's 



222 Lculy Livingstons Legcuy. 



house. It is not in our offices in Bedford 
Row. My partner is not, as you are per- 
haps aware, in a condition to give coherent 
answers on any ^*' 

" But the clerk," said Dashwood, striking 
his hand upon the table, and lifting his 
voice, . " the fellow he brought down here 
with him ! why on earth don't you get the 
truth out of him ? He must know all 
about it" 

"Your tone and manner are offensive. 
Sir Frederick Dashwood," answered Mr. 
Glegg, reddening ; " and if you had had 
the patience to wait till the conclusion of 
my few remarks, you would have been 
spared the trouble of putting the question 
which you have asked. That the clerk in 
question witnessed the old lady's signature, 
I believe. I believe, too, that he can be 
identified. The butler has spoken *of him 
as a dark young man of somewhat short 
stature. We had such a clerk, until two 
or three days since, in our employment, 



Concerning the Will. 223 

and he was often in attendance on Mr. 
Goodeve. His name was Daniel Davis, 
and he lived in Great Eldon Street. He 
has disappeared, both from Bedford Row 
and from his lodgings. There can be no 
moral doubt but that he has absconded." 

" Then he has taken the will with him ; 
that's plain !" cried half-a-dozen voices at 
once. 

" Pardon me," said the solicitor, with an 
incredulous movement of the shoulders; 
'* I very much doubt that, and for the 
simple reason, that I do not believe he 
could have got it into his possession. 
Documents of that importance are kept 
by us in fireproof boxes, with Bramah or 
letter locks to fasten them, nor do any of 
these appear to have been tampered with. 
And we can account for the flight of this 
Davis without any such far-fetched suppo- 
sition. He had been trusted by Mr. 
Goodeve . then in declining health . ^to 
pay away and to receive moneys to a very 



224 I^culy Livingstofis Legacy. 



injudicious extent, and there are proofs 
that he has scandalously abused my part- 
ner's over-confidence. It is probable that 
the apprehension that, since Mr. Goodeve s 
late accident, his papers and accounts 
would pass under other eyes, has been his 
real motive for taking himself off. I do 
not think we need suppose him to have 
burdened himself with booty so useless to 
him as this will would be" 

There was a pause. Every one stared 
blankly in the face of his neighbour. The 
lawyer, after a moments breathing-time, 
went on : " If Davis could be found, and 
if he could be induced to speak, no doubt 
he could establish the facts as to where the 
will was bestowed after its signature. As 
yet, the police have no clue to his retreat, 
nor are we at present in a position to apply 
formally for a warrant, if they had." 

" I think," said Oswald Charlton, break- 
ing silence for the first time, "that two 
things, and two only, may be considered 



Concerning the Will, * 225 

to be proved. A will was very recently 
executed, and we cannot reasonably doubt 
that it was in Miss Fleming's favour. 
That is one point. The other is, that this 
will has disappeared in a very singular 
manner, when we couple its disappearance 
with the street-attack on Mr. Goodeve, 
and the absconding of the clerk. Mr 
Glegg will excuse me if I suggest that 
the presumption is against the hypothesis 
of this document's having been left at the 
Fountains, and that very grave suspicions 
rest upon this person Davis, or whatever 
his name may be, however slight may 
appear to have been the motive for pur- 
loining the will." 

Then again did everybody speak at 
once. There was scarcely one present who . 
was not able to aver that the dowager had 
made no secret of her intention to leave 
her property to Beatrice. The old servants 
could speak to hints innumerable on this 
subject. The steward of the Heavitree 

VOL. II. 15 



226 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 



estate, who had travelled to Richmond to 
attend the funeral, loudly declared that he 
" had it in black and white, under her lady- 
ship's own hand, that Miss Beatrice was to 
come after her " in the enjoyment of that 
compact estate. Doctors, friends, and kins- 
folk were all in the same tale as regarded 
the testamentary intentions of the old 
peeress. But still the prudent Glegg 
demurred. 

" Pray don't misunderstand me," he said; 
" I quite agree with you up to a certain 
point ; but as, unluckily, we are not able by 
acclamation to put Miss Fleming in the 
position of residuary legatee, we are obliged 
to take, as the law does, a cold and practi- 
cal view of the affair. There was a will, 
and we all believe that we know its general 
purport, but it has not yet been proved to 
be still in existence. Mr. Charlton has seen 
enough of litigation to enable him to bear 
me out when I say that the caprice, the 
fickleness, and the dilatoriness of testators 



Concerning the Will. 227 



keep the hands of those who administer 
justice pretty full. Unless we can find this 
will, it must be concluded that Lady- 
Livingston herself destroyed it, probably 
with the design of making another of a 
somewhat different nature, and that death 
surprised her before she could carry out her 
scheme." 

" And in that case ?" gasped Dashwood, 
on whose forehead a dark frown had 
gathered, 

" In that case, legally speaking," re- 
turned the solicitor, "our client has died in- 
testate, and everything goes to the personal 
representative and heir-at-law." 

" And that is John Fleming!" exclaimed 
the Hon. and Rev. Augustus, in dismay, 
and his remark was echoed by several 
voices in such a tone as to indicate that the 
said John would not be by any means a 
popular selection for the vacancy. After 
this, there was an end of any coherence in 
the assembly, which broke up into knots, 

15.2 



228 Lady Livingstotis Legacy. 

sipping wine moodily, and enunciating 
opinions of more or less pungency on the 
event of the day, and so by degrees dis- 
persed. The servants were almost in a 
state of mutiny against that impassive 
abstraction called the Law, and which, to 
members of the class from which they 
sprang, assumed the character of a distinct 
antithesis of Justice. That "Miss Bea- 
trice" should lose the fair inheritance which 
had been so notoriously designed to be 
hers, was in itself sufficiently monstrous; 
but it was an aggravating circumstance that 
this should redound to the benefit of John 
Fleming, "which my lady always hated, 
the covetous, creeping creature!" said in- 
dignant Mrs. Hart the housekeeper ; "and 
to think that he should come to be master 
here is enough to make her turn in her 
grave, poor dear !" 

But Dashwood's anger was fiercer 
and more unreasonable than that of any 
there. " It's a rascally plot !" he said aloud. 



Concerning the Will. 229 

after tossing off glass after glass of sherry; 
"and if you think, Mr. Glegg, that the 
matter is to end here, you never were more 
mistaken in your life, that's all !" But 
though he had insulted the attorney, and 
had passed scowling through the company 
gathered in that banqueting-room, cheerless 
enough now, he had Black Care to sit be- 
hind him on his road back to London, and 
fury, remorse, despair, gnawing like vul- 
tures at his heart. To have thrown the 
dice once again, and lost ! It was almost 
more than he could bear. What mattered 
it though Beatrice were faithful to her word, 
when this fatal disappearance of the will 
made her no longer a prize worth the 
winning ! 




CHAPTER XII. 

A CHAPTER OF POLICE. 

3R. GLEGG'S announcement to 
the assembled mourners at the 
Fountains had been, as regarded 
the continued illness of his partner and the 
disappearance of Daniel Davis, substan- 
tially true. Samuel Goodeve lay helpless 
and useless in his bed at Kensington, while 
the dark young clerk had ceased to occupy 
his accustomed seat in the office, and Bed- 
ford Row knew him no more. That he 
had abused the confidence of his feeble em- 
ployer, seemed tolerably certain : but then 
Mr. Goodeve's memoranda had been left 



A Chapter of Police. 231 

in so dislocated a condition, and his atten- 
tion to business had of late been so lax and 
irregular, that it was hard to say where 
carelessness ended, and where fraud began, 
The most damaging circumstance that 
could be adduced against the clerk was his 
absence. Had he presented himself as 
usual at his desk, and met Mr. Glegg's in- 
vestigations in a spirit of apparent candour, 
that gentleman could not easily have done 
more than dismiss him from his situation. 
Even as it was, the detectives with whom 
Mr. Glegg took counsel quite coincided 
with the irate solicitor as to the necessity 
for caution. 

" We must give him plenty of line, sir," 
said Sergeant Flint, who was reputed at 
Scotland Yard to see somewhat farther into 
the metaphorical millstone than most of 
the Force. " An action for false imprison- 
ment wouldn't suit your book, Mr. Glegg, 
would it, now ? We may think that some 
of those signatures . the endorsements, I 



2^2 Lady^Livingstofi s Legacy. 

mean . ^are forgeries, but how are we to 
prove It to the satisfaction of a jury ? Mr. 
Goodeve can't step into the box to swear 
to his own pothooks and hangers, and be- 
tween you^and me, a verdict can't be looked 
for on the evidence of experts. Bless you ! 
if one of those professional pensters comes 
forward to testify to the up-stroke of a /, 
another of the lot is ready to stake his 
fifty years' experience that it is the down- 
stroke of a g. They are like the mad 
doctors, and have got themselves a bad 
name by being too clever by half Tm 
afraid there is but one chance. If we 
could mix him up with that garrote busi- 
ness, then we could put salt on the bird's 
tail, and no mistake." 

But Mr. Glegg was lukewarm respecting 
the assault which had been committed on his 
senior partner, and by no means shared the 
eagerness of Sergeant Flint, the cause of 
which he was quite able to comprehend. 
The newspapers had been very severe in 



A Chapter of Police. 233 

their strictures on the police for not having 
prevented, or promptly avenged, the auda- 
cious attack of which Mr. Goodeve had 
been the victim. The police are pretty 
well used to sharp criticism, whenever an 
evil-doer eludes detection, but this had 
been a very glaring offence, and the "Daily 
Lime-light" had come to the front with 
more than one so-called slashing article, 
calling on ancient Rome or modern India 
to lend Londoners a vigorous administrator 
for a day, and demanding wherefore British 
Thugs were permitted to ply their calling 
in the Brompton Road. There was wrath 
beneath braided surtouts, and anger among 
those who had stripes on their sleeves, and 
ponderous boots encasing their protective 
feet Our blue-coated guardians, Argus- 
eyed and Briarean-handed as we expect 
them to be, are, after all, but mortal men. 
It is highly creditable to their sagacity that 
some suspicion should have fallen on the 
Ugly One, but then the person concerned 



234 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

shared that honour with a good many 
others "known to the police." There was 
nothing to connect Craney's accomplice 
with the actual assailant of Mr. Goodeve 
There were other members of the body- 
politic as ruffianly as he. But there was 
an ardent desire in Scotland Yard to serve 
up some sacrifice at the altar of Justice, 
and hence the inclination to connect Daniel 
Davis with the attack on the eminent 
family solicitor. 

Mr. Glegg's view of the affair was of a 
common-sense, commonplace sort His 
partner was a moony, maundering old fool, 
who had somehow mooned and maundered 
himself into the clutches of one of those 
gangs of prowling miscreants ever on the 
watch for the unwary. No particular trap 
had been laid for Mr. Goodeve . merely 
some snare adapted for the confusion of a 
rich and silly wayfarer. Davis was simply 
a rogue, who had taken advantage of the 
credulity of his weak employer, but who 



A Chapter of Police. 235 

had made off as soon as he perceived that 
a more vigorous and vigilant administra- 
tion of the business of the firm would jeo- 
pardize his security. To have punished 
the fellow would have been well, and a 
good example to other hirelings; but it 
was absurd to mix him up with the garrot- 
ing adventure, or to countenance the mono- 
mania of the police for seeing in the most 
unlikely people the perpetrators of every 
undetected crime. 

X)etectiveshave this much in common with 
the demons which medieval sorcerers were 
wont to invoke by unholy incantations, that 
it is easier to summon than to lay them to 
rest The sergeant and his brethren were 
by no means satisfied to gauge their views 
of duty by Mr. Glegg's standard, and ac- 
cordingly they persisted in prying into all 
imaginable nooks and corners, conversing 
with the most incongruous persons, and 
beating any and every covert where they 
conceived the game to lie, as yet without 



236 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

any very notable result Sir Frederick 
Dashwood presently became conscious that 
his movements were liable to an amount of 
observation that was anything but flatter- 
ing or agreeable. When he descended the 
club-steps, he could not help remarking to 
himself that the fellow lounging and chew- 
ing the stalk of a flower beside the stately 
portico of the opposition club, two doors 
off", had been lounging and chewing there 
with equal placidity two hours ago. The 
same faces were very often to be met with 
as he walked the streets. Near his house 
in Jekyl Street there seemed to be always 
some slinking figure at the comer of the 
approach to the Mews. By gaslight or by 
daylight, eyes appeared to be continually 
taking note of his actions. And, before 
long, a card was brought in to him as he 
sat smoking his cigar in the old consulting- 
room, where Sir George would as soon 
have indulged in opium or bhang as in that 
tobacco the use of which, in his young 



A Chapter of Police. 237 

days, was voted vulgar and degrading, save 
in the form of snuff. The card was thus 
inscribed . " Mr. Sol. Starkey, Supt^ 

" Who is the fellow, and what does he 
want with me ?*' demanded the baronet, 
loftily; but in truth he guessed readily 
enough the calling of his visitor. 

" I do think, Sir Frederick, he comes 
front the police," said the butler, dropping 
his voice, and turning up the whites of his 
expressive eyes ; for the police, and those 
who seek them, or are sought by them, are 
objects of suspicion and mysterious hprror' 
in every civilized land. 

" Dash his impudence! what can he want 
with me ? . Show the man in, will you, 
gaby ! FU make short work of him," was 
Dashwood's rejoinder ; but in spite of the 
swaggering air that he assumed, he felt by 
no means at his ease as Superintendent 
Starkey came clanking into the room, made 
his stiff semi-military bow, and took the 
chair to which Dashwood pointed. 



238 Lady Livingston* s Legacy, 

" And what, pray, may be your business 
with me, Mr. . Mr. " began the baro- 
net, glancing at the card that he held be- 
tween his thumb and finger. 

The visitor merely made another wooden 
bow, and chuckled behind his stock. He 
was in person a tall man, much taller than 
Dashwood, and had a high head, sloping 
upwards to a point, shaggy eye-brows, a 
long upper-lip, and restless eyes of a gray 
colour. His blue surtout was accurately 
fitted and well brushed, and, indeed, from 
head to heel he was the perfection of 
neatness. 

" You know. Sir Frederick. Don't tell 
me ! A man of the world like you !" he 
said, as if in explanation of the chuckle 

" I can make a good guess at your pro- 
fession, my worthy friend, if that is what 
you mean," he said ; " but what you can 
possibly have to say to me, is more than I 
can conjecture. I haven't lost a pet terrier, 
nor has any area-sneak stolen my spoons, so 



A Chapter of Police. 239 

I have yet to learn to what rm indebted for 
your visit." 

" If it had been as you say, Sir Frede- 
rick Dashwood, baronet," returned the visi- 
tor, " you would have had a look-up very 
likely, but on the part of quite another class 
of officer. My time is considered too valu- 
able to be squandered on spoons, let alone 
dawgs." But still he did not seem in any 
hurry to elucidate the object of his coming, 
but sat chuckling, and with the forefinger 
of one glove rubbing the crown of his hard 
and heavy hat, with his mobile eyes now 
resting on Sir Frederick's watch-guard, 
now lifted to his face. Habit is, as we 
know, a second nature ; and the police of 
all countries come to imbibe a certain 
Orientalism of deportment, as adapted to 
their imperative mandate. They like to 
talk in parables, to speak by winks and 
nods, to do anything rather than say in 
plain language who they are and what they 
seek. A French gend'arme, in reality as 



240 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 



simple-minded a giant as ever wore jack- 
boots, yet practises a mysterious frown and 
sidelong leer that indicate a subtle know- 
ledge of something to the discredit of every 
stranger he meets. F 93, young man from 
the country though he be, assumes oracular 
airs as he stands on the door-mat, lantern 
in hand, and would prefer to communicate 
with Paterfamilias himself on the subject of 
front doors left ajar by night. The stars 
of the profession outdo their tacit assump- 
tion of importance, and Superintendent 
Starkey, who was an orb of the first 
brilliancy, prided himself on his diplomatic 
skill, and usually appeared as if to have 
been Capidji Bashi to the Sultan, and gone 
about with bowstrings and death firmans in 
his pocket, would have been his true vocation. 

" You'll save your time, if it's worth 
what you say, by not wasting any more of 
mine, Mr. What's-your-name," said Dash- 
wood roughly. 

" Solomon Starkey, your most obedient, 



A Chapter of Police. 241 

Sir Frederick," said the detective, who was 
not easily offended. ** I must ask you, 
though, Sir F., to show a little indulgence, 
just a little, for the difficulties we meet with. 
You see. Sir P., whatever happens, we are 
blamed . ^we are. I do believe some people, 
especially in the daily press, take us for a 
kind of nuss-maids that ought to prevent 
the public from coming to any sort of grief. 
. ^they do. And yet, if elderly gentlemen 
will go and get throttled and robbed, and 
documents get lost, nobody guesses how, 
-and queer folks come over . ^from Canada, 
or where not . to play their little games 

^You know something of Canada, if no 

liberty in asking. Sir F. ?" he added more 
abruptly, for he had noted that Dashwood 
winced slightly, but perceptibly, at mention 
of the Dominion, and he was quick to score 
a point against a possible adversary. 

" I was quartered there with my regi- 
ment, as I daresay you have heard," replied 
Dashwood with a yawn ; " and what you are 

VOL. II. 16 



242 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 



talking df, unless it be about the assault on 
the old lawyer, Mr. Goodeve, is Greek to me.'"" 

" But that was an odd business, wasn't it,, 
sir?" put in the detective. "An orderly,, 
methodical gentleman like Mr. Goodeve, a 
LiOndoner bom and Iwred, to be trapped aa 
if he were a yokel out of Somersetshire, 
that happened to make friends with some 
generous-hearted chap, who' stood glasses 
of ale and showed a fistful of sovereigns to 
all he met What made him go out of his 
regular road, I wonder ? It does loc^ 
' put up/ don't it ? You knew diat young 
man Davis^ or Larpeiat, very well, out in 
America, I believe^ Sir F. ?" And again 
the conduding words were rapidly uttered. 

"Knew him well! Not I, by Jovef 
mere casual acquamtaoce/' r^jumed Dash- 
wood; and thea his colbur deepened as he 
regretted the unguarded adnnssicm. " What 
have I to do with this inatt^ ? I suppose 
you do not s«is|>ect me of garroting the old 
attorney, do you ?" 



A Chapter of Police. 243 . 



Superintendent Starkey was immensely 
tickled by this idea. " No, no, Sir Frede- * 
rick," he answered : " that job was too neat 
for any but professionals, though there may 
have been an amateur in it, along with the 
regulars, too. But it was uncommonly 
kind of you, knowing so little of this clerk 
of Mr. Goodeve's, to take the trouble to 
hand over such a lump of money to his 
sister . ^wasn't it. Sir F. ?" 

" ril tell you what it is, Mr. Starkey, or 
whatever your name may be,*' said Dash- 
wood, rising wrathfuUy to his feet, " 111 not 
submit to espionage and impertinence of 
this sort If I am to be badgered and 
cross-examined, let it be done in a court, 
and by a lawyer. I am not accustomed to 
be persecuted by the police, and, except 
under legal compulsion, will not endure it" 
And so saying, he rang the bell violently. 

"No compulsion, no compulsion at all, 
Sir Frederick Dashwood, baronet,*' said the 
detective, ver>' mildly; "we only hoped 

16 . 2 



244 Lady Livingstotis Legacy. 

you would be willing to do what you could 
to further the ends of justice . that is all. 
Good-moming, Sir F." And he followed 
the butler out of the room, and left the 
house without more words. 

Yet Solomon Starkey, superintendent, 
and, in his own branch, a man of much 
renown, was satisfied with the result of his 
well-spent half-hour. To be dismissed as 
an intruder, is, to a veteran protector of the 
public, merely a trivial instance of the 
general ingratitude. He knew, and all 
policemen know, that half their work is 
done in virtue of the ignorance, the folly, 
and the timidity of those with whom they 
come in contact. An Englishman's house 
is so far his castle, that the veriest burglar, 
without a ticket-of-leave, could drive forth 
from his attic the smiling man in plain 
clothes before whose minatory forefinger he 
sits shaking in his highlows. The detective 
had no writ of summons, that could compel 
Sir Frederick to enter an invisible witness- 



A Chapter of Police. 245 

box, and yet he had succeeded in extract- 
ing from him two or three admissions of 
considerable import 

" Started, first of all, like a jibing horse, 
when I named Canada," said Superinten- 
dent Starkey, telling off the points on his 
own large-knuckled fingers. " Two roads 
go, I reckon, from that post Was it be- 
cause of Davis, alias Larpent, and his 
sister ? Or was it on account of something 
he has been up to over there ? Well, well, 
I must not draw it too fine. Anyhow, he 
knows a sight more of that brother and 
sister than he cares to tell. He gave her 
the money, a heap of it, as I learned ; and 
why T Landlady couldn't say. I don't 
for a moment believe that he gave it for 
the sake of that sallow little creature with 
the odd-coloured eyes. She's no great 
shakes for looks ; and the baronet has got 
two flames already, as I gather, one with 
property . one, from Canada too, without 
Yet, he as good as owned to it that Mrs. 



246 Lady Livingstons Legoiy. 

Gulp was correct as to what she saw through 
the keyhole. Not bad, to be screwed out 
of a tetchy, ill-conditioned chap like hini» 
yonder." And he jerked his thumb towards 
Jekyl Street, which was by this time left 
behind, as the active and intelligent officer 
passed on northwards. 

Superintendent Starkey was bound for 
Great Eldon Street He was not seldom 
in Great Eldon Street just then, and the 
brass-plate inscribed with the name of Gulp 
was as familiarly known to him as is the 
facade of St Peter's, at Rome, to a builder 
of churches. Maria Gulp, with her brevet 
rank as Mrs., the better days that she had 
seen, and the degradations which she daily 
underwent on account of the truant proclivi- 
ties of her undisciplined maid-of-all-work, 
had become as so much plastic dough in the 
hands of the police . a lump of soft material 
that would take any impress. " Give her 
liquor, and mix it with peppermint for the 
spasms, and listen, stirring her up with a 
leading question when she woolgathers, and 



A Chapter of Police. 247 

you may get anything out of her," had been 
the joint verdict of Sergeant Flint and his 
.colleague, Mr. Starkey. And indeed Maria, 
under such influences, bleated out all that 
she knew or imagined concerning her 
lodgers. It is true that she said three words 
of the noble Downies and the past glories 
.of Hardup for every one which she uttered 
concerning Bruce and his sister ; but police- 
men are patient, and there was some gold 
in the dross. Mrs. Gulp had acquired, 
whilst at Hardup Hall, an amiable custom 
.of making herself acquainted with the 
private affairs of her betters ; and though 
there is a prejudice against information 
acquired by applying the ear and eye to 
keyholes, or by investigating the contents 
of unemptied pockets and unlocked dress- 
ing-cases, perhaps such irregular proceed- 
ings may be pardoned to the unpaid servants 
of that slippery peer, Lord Diddleham. 

There was small encouragement to pry, 
in Great Eldon Street, into the concerns 



248 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

of people so insignificant as an attorney's, 
clerk, and his sister, who taught music. 
But then there had suddenly dawned on 
that cramped horizon a vision of splendour. 
A live baronet, whom the landlady could 
remember as hunting with the Hardup 
hounds, and tossing off foaming bumpers 
of the dry champagne which the Earl of 
Diddleham economically preferred, for con-^ 
tinual consumption, to the country ale for 
which it was harder to get credit, had come 
to visit Miss Davis, whose personal ap- 
pearance and claims to the possession of 
beauty Mrs. Gulp rated as only one woman 
can estimate those of another. " There's 
no sweethearting in this case !" had been 
Mrs. Gulp's comment, as she kept surrepti- 
tious watch on the interview. The ex- 
4)erienced eavesdropper was perhaps some- 
what out of training, or spirituous conso- 
lations, too often resorted too, had joined 
with age to deaden the keenness of her 
organs, but so it was that she learned little.. 



A Chapter of Police. 249 



The good sound grain to be sifted from 
Mrs. Gulp's chafT came simply to this : 
She had seen, "with her own eyes" . ^a 
detail on which she laid much stress . ^a 
number of crisp and rustling bank-notes 
change hands, passing from the possession 
of Sir Frederick into that of Miss Davis. 
If ever she saw hush-money paid and re- 
ceived, she saw it then. Sir Frederick 
had come no more, nor had he written. 
To this Maria could swear with a clear 
conscience, for, as she blushingly admitted, 
curiosity had prompted her to take *'a 
peep" at her lodgers' very scanty corres- 
pondence. Perhaps Messrs. Flint and 
Starkey, whose avocations often led them 
into the basements of the great, were aware 
of the wide latitude to be used in constru- 
ing " a peep " at some one else's letters, 
and knew nearly as much as did Lady 
Diddleham's former maid, as to bread-seals 
and the softening effects of steam, and the 
other treacherous traditions of servants 



250 Lady Limngston!s Legacy. 

whose scruples are few. But that both 
Violet Maybrook and Lady Livingston 
had written, the one to " Miss Davis," and 
the other to " Miss Larpent, care of Miss 
Davis," Mrs. Gulp was certain. That the 
young teacher of music had gone repeatedly 
to Richmond to give lessons at the Foun- 
tains, was no secret. That the brother, 
never addressed by his sister otherwise 
than by the name of " Bruce," had abruptly 
departed, without good and sufficient cause, 
and that Maria would wager her existence 
that the elf was no more entitled to the 
name of Davis than to that of Mont- 
morency or Bourbon, summed up what 
Mrs. Gulp could impart 

But when the detectives began to deal 
with the elf herself, superintendent and 
sergeant were compelled to admit that they 
had met with their match in a young woman 
so self-possessed, cool, and fearless. They 
could not, with all their conversational arts, 
elicit from the little girl from Canada one 



A Chapter of Police. 2$r 

statement that could be employed against 
her. Yes ; she came from Canada. Yes ; 
her name, which, for family reasons, had 
been shelved in favour of that which had 
belonged to her mother, was Larpent 
Both these facts, discovered by contemptible 
means, signified nothing, she boldly declared 
to British justice. Of her history beyond 
seas, she would tell nothing, and this be- 
cause she did not choose to gratify vulgar 
inquisitiveness. She was not her brother's 
keeper. Did she know his address, she 
was not bound to furnish it, but she did 
not know it He had not explained to her 
his motives for suddenly leaving London. 
So far as she knew, he had been intrusted 
with some mission on behalf of Mr. Good- 
'Cve. He had hinted as much. He was 
not so communicative with her as had once 
been the case. He was often absent from 
home, and might have associates of whom 
she knew, for good or evil, nothing. Her 
brother found himself dull and lonely in 



252 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

London, and his work was monotonous^ 
and the confinement irksome. 

For the rest* the girl held her ground 
boldly. Whatever she may have knowa 
or guessed as to Bruce Larpent, his hiding- 
place, or his actions, she was too firm to be 
scared or wheedled into revelations. She 
had done nothing, she said, nor, to her 
knowledge, had her brother, contrary to 
law. Leave the lodgings ! Certainly not, 
until the expiration of her term. Besides, 
where should she go? She would stay,, 
till Bruce came back again. In the mean- 
time. Aphrodite warned sergeant and super- 
.intendent to be careful as to what they did. 
If they caused her annoyance, she should 
appeal to the police, or to a magistrate 
Now, there is nothing which the police, 
acting unofiicially, so much dislike as an 
official appeal to the police to put a stop 
to what is easily made to look like persecu- 
tion, unless it be an application to one of 
those stipendiary cadis who exercise sum- 



A Cfiapter of Police. 253 

mary jurisdiction in the metropolis. Where- 
fore, the matter lay much in the hands of 
Mrs. Gulp the landlady, who now made 
her daily report of all that she could dis- 
cover concerning her lodger. 

" The will ! the garroting ! the baronet's 
bank flimsies ! . all hanks of the same 
hemp, I reckon," said Superintendent 
Starkey as he plodded on. 



CHAPTER XIIL 



HEIR-AT-LAW. 




[HERE is in all countries a brief 
and anxious interregnum between 
the death of one sovereign and the 
recognition of another. When the herald 
breaks his wand, and the biggest bells in 
minster towers shake the air with solemn 
tolling, the new monarch, in very much the 
plight of a freshly-hatched birdling not 
quite extricated from the shell, passes some 
hours of discomfort It is all very well for 
a few great officers of state to hurry pant- 
ing into their princess presence, and to vie 
with one another in their eager bestowal of 



Hdr-at'Law. 255 



the title of Majesty, But for awhile these 
fire-new honours are but awkwardly worn. 
Lord Chamberlains, Palace Marshals, and 
Bishops, high dignitaries as they are, do 
not constitute a people. The huzzas of 
the streets, the salvoes of cannon, the sea 
of bared heads, the waving handkerchiefs 
in casement and balcony, the deep roar of 
the populace, the more decorous salutations 
of the notables of the realm, all these are 
needed before the new ruler feels at home 
in his royal saddle. As with a kingdom, 
so with an estate, and especially when the 
right to its fee-simple is liable at any in- 
stant to be disputed or denied. 

John Fleming, Lady Livingston's heir-at 
law, had been duly notified of the singular 
accident by which he found himself the suc- 
cessor of a relative between whom and him- 
self there had been scanty sympathy, and 
had lost no time in hastening from Lincoln- 
shire to London to attend to his own in- 
terests. He had indeed, as people averred> 



256 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

been engrossed in that occupation through 
life, and was one of those men whom no- 
body loves, and who probably fare worse 
in the general estimation than hundreds 
who are worse than they. He had steered 
his course, ever and always, by the beacon- 
light of strict legality, taking little heed of 
that immense unwritten jurisprudence of 
custom and tradition that with us in Eng- 
land so often override the dry letter of the 
law. We have heard Mrs. Hart, the 
housekeeper, describe him as " a covetous, 
creeping creature," and although servants 
are apt to exaggerate our salient points, the 
verbal caricatures which they draw are 
often speaking portraits. A parsimonious 
gentleman was John Fleming, one who 
never, if he could help it, gave away a 
shilling, and who strove very hard to beat 
out every sixpence of his expenditure into 
a ninepenny power of purchasing. His in- 
come, mainly derived from land, was but a 
moderate one, yet he saved each year a 



Heir-at-Law. 257 



satisfactory margin in ready cash. Per- 
haps no landowner in the county was more 
cordially detested by his tenantry. Those 
who tilled his small farms, rackrented, and 
let at yearly tenure, and the more depen- 
dent class that dwelt in the rows of cot- 
tages which he had built beside the fen- 
ro^d, abhorred their prudent landlord more 
than they would have done some reckless 
spendthrift who drew all he could out of 
the shire for metropolitan consumption. 
" Sentimental considerations," such was his 
favourite phrase, "ought not to interfere 
with what was really a purely commercial 
transaction ;" and accordingly it fared ill 
with those who were behindhand with the 
world, worse with the fever-stricken wretches 
who asked " Squire Fleming " to banish 
ague and typhus from their damp and 
malarious abodes. It was but a Liliputian 
property in that province of many-acred 
magnates, but its proprietor squeezed the 
sponge hard, and made the most of it 
VOL. IL 17 



258 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

It might, at first sight, have appeared as 
if John Fleming, being a bachelor who 
saved for the sake of saving, and who was 
self-denying in his habits, would scarcely 
have appreciated the windfall which had 
come in his way. Assuredly, the notion 
that he might succeed to Heavitree had 
very rarely crossed his mind. To whom- 
soever old Lady Livingston might bequeath 
her Warwickshire lands, it was certain that 
her cousin John, of Pinchbeck Priory, co. 
Lincoln, would not be the lucky legatee. 
He had arrived at a time of life when the 
character is formed, and was not likely to 
prove more indulgent to himself or others 
because eight or nine thousand a year had 
suddenly dropped into his lap. " He'll 
make no difference, Til go bail," had been 
the comment of his old cook, when the 
purport of " master's " journey to London 
had become the talk of the neighbourhood. 
Nevertheless, no young heir of many wants 
and wishes could, in the heyday of hot- 



Heir-at'Law. 259 

blooded youth, be more hungry for an in- 
heritance than was this cold, frugal, elderly 
expectant, whose meagre face and trim 
gray whiskers were soon familiar sights at 
Richmond. 

He . John Fleming, lord of Pinchbeck 
. was very busy. He haunted Bedford 
Row, sending in his card perpetually to 
Mr. Glegg, and waiting with meek deter- 
mination, among the clerks, until the 
eminent family solicitor was at liberty to 
see him. He had his own lawyers, of a 
very different stamp to that of Goodeve 
and Glegg, Messrs. Ferret and Pounce, of 
Thavies Inn, but though they were active 
in the matter, their activity was subdued 
by the caution of their principal. Hard 
men are not always hard with the useful 
attorneys who attend to their foreclosures 
and draw their covenants. Mr. Fleming 
was so. Never a six-and-eightpence went 
into the bill of costs without his full know- 
ledge and consent. He kept his legal 

17 . 2 



26o Lady Livingstons Legacy, 

hounds lean and fit to run, and never 
foi^ot to impress on them the advantage 
of having in him, despite his rigid economy, 
at least one respectable client, good to brag 
of among smaller fir}-. The one thing 
which John Fleming dreaded was, that 
Beatrice should go to law with him in de- 
fence of her rights under Lady Li\'ingston s 
missing wilL He should win . ^j'es, of 
course he should win . ^but then the glori- 
ous imcertainty and delays of the law, and 
the fearful costs of court and costs in the 
cause, and Ferret and Pounce with their 
swingeing bill, scared him. The news- 
papers would get hold of him too, and he 
was averse to have the lurid glare of the 
" Lime-light" leading articles turned on him 
and his quiet, prim, blood-sucking ways. 
Something sensational would be made out 
of the well-bom usurer from the Eastern 
Counties, coming up to assert his extreme 
claims against a girl, who would have on 
her side the sympathies of the very judges 



Heir-at'Law. 261 



who ruled against her ; and as for costs as 
against poor Beatrice, why, Ferret and 
Pounce could hardly find the wearer of a 
wig brazen-faced enough to ask for them. 

Mr. John Fleming, then, was very ur- 
bane to Beatrice his cousin, when he came 
down to Richmond. He took out his 
handkerchief, and snivelled, when he spoke 
to the tearful girl of her good friend de- 
parted. Lady Livingston, he said, had 
never quite understood him ; he regretted 
it, but so it was; not but that he had 
always strongly desired that concord and 
amity should reign between his unworthy 
self and one so noble and excellent as was 
the dowager. Her property had now de 
volved on himself, her natural and nearest 
heir. But he begged, he did earnestly beg, 
that Miss Beatrice Fleming would consider 
herself, for the present, as much at home 
at the Fountains as during the lifetime of 
her benefactress. Pray, let her take her 
own time, and consult her own convenience, 



262 Lady Livingstons, Legacy. 



as to her plans and her future place of re- 
sidence ! His only wish was to lighten, so 
far as he could, the affliction under which 
she, very naturally, suffered. Perhaps she 
would think the matter over. Till she had 
come to a decision, by all means let her 
consider the house as hers. 

The heir-at-law was more peremptory, 
although scarcely less soft-spoken, in his 
intercourse with the dowager's old servants. 
He had not, as yet, taken out letters of ad- 
ministration, and could not exercise full 
power in the mansion. But he was a thorn 
in the domestics' flesh, and a vexation to 
their spirits. The butler had a bad time 
of it over the cellar-book, finding himself, 
for the first time since he drew corks, con- 
fronted by an authority who boggled over 
every gap in the bins, who was incredulous 
as to the drafts on the contents of the sherry- 
crypt, and who instituted cold-blooded cal- 
culations as to the time in which ale-casks 
should be emptied, and as to the number 



Heir-at'Law. 263 



of bottles laid down from a pipe of claret. 
" Mr. John " pored over the accounts, dis- 
allowing, by anticipation, many an item. 
He gave provisional warning to every one ; 
docked the fat horses of their oats ; put the 
servants on board wages ; and gave it 
clearly to be understood that all would be 
paid up to the day of legal notice, but that 
pensions and gratuities were wholly beside 
the mark. 

Sadly changed was the hospitable man- 
sion in those days. The ghost of the na- 
bob, flitting about the house that he had 
planned to build for years and years, among 
the sweltering heats on the yellow Indian 
plains, must have been doubly discontented 
to behold the alteration. It was as if the 
life-blood of the place was congealed by 
the chill touch of frost. The Fountains, 
from which the house took its name, no 
longer spouted into the air their glancing 
columns and clouds of sparkling spray. 
John Fleming had " spoken " to the water 



264 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

company. No more did the gas-lamps in 
the lodge-gates and carriage-drive ' bum 
brightly at eve. Almost every ounce of 
the massive silver-plate had been locked 
up in cupboards, under the seal of Ferret 
and Pounce. The cellar was locked too. 
No gardeners worked in the grounds. The 
old carriage-horses vainly pricked up their 
ears, and whinnied deprecatingly when 
some one approached the empty corn-chest. 
Men in rusty black went from room to room, 
cataloguing, with noisy pencils, in metallic 
note-books, every saleable scrap of portable 
property. Never a basin of soup, never a 
scuttle of coals, never a weekly half-crown, 
nor a bunch of grapes, went to even the 
poorest, or the most ailing, or the most 
aged of kind Lady Livingston's army of 
pensioners. The footmen had brushed the 
powder out of their ambrosial hair, and 
merely wore their livery to save wear-and- 
tear to their private suits of mufti. 

Very sad was the life which Beatrice 



Heir-at-Law. 265 



now led, and the continued residence at 
the Fountains would have been irksome to 
her, even had Mr. Fleming's polite 
anxiety to get rid of her been less trans- 
parent But then there arose before the 
bereaved girl the ugly problem . whither 
should she go ? Poor as she was now, 
with some pitiful 'seventy pounds a year of 
her own, what could she do ? Her reliance 
upon her late dear friend had been abso- 
lute; and now she found herself almost 
literally without shelter. Beatrice had not 
been accustomed to pass the whole of her 
time, certainly, beneath the dowager's roof; 
but she was now to learn the bitter lessons 
of actual misfortune, and to find for how 
much she had been indebted to the good- 
will of her who was gone. No invitations 
reached her now. Of old they had been 
plenty. Not, let me hasten to say, that 
Miss Fleming's acquaintances, like some 
ruined gamester's friends in an eighteenth- 
century comedy, turned their backs on her 



266 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

in her adversity. The wearers of purple 
and fine linen are not devoid of hearts, 
only a little thoughtless, by reason of their 
being lapped warmly from rough blasts of 
evil fortune. Had it not been "the season," 
Beatrice might have had the eight months' 
run of a dozen country houses. But no- 
body wants visitors in London. Where- 
fore, her Grace of Snowdon, and twenty 
other ladies belonging to that social pyra- 
mid of which Snowdon's duchess was the 
apex, penned very kind notes to Miss 
Fleming, but did not ask her to come to 
them in Belgravia. The Hon. and Rev. 
Augustus Fleming and his wife, struggling 
people, who could ill afford the rent of 
their house and the jobmaster's charge for 
their horses, had been used to receiv^ Bea- 
trice for a few weeks during the summer 
carnival of London, and to take her with 
them into " society," at the dowager's re- 
quest. But the dowager's request had 
been backed by the dowager's cheque- 



Hezr-at'Law. 267 



book; and now that Lady Livingston's 
purse could no longer be made available, 
the Hon. and Rev. Augustus, and his 
painstaking spouse, and his two rawboned 
girls, made no sign as of giving houseroom 
to their orphan cousin. 

Yes, she must go forth from her old 
home ; but whither ? She almost envied 
Violet Maybrook, who was of course to go 
too, but whose strong and self-reliant nature 
fitted her by far the best of those two for 
taking an active share in life's battle. 
Violet was accomplished and well instructed, 
and with the recommendation of Mrs. 
General Buckram and the other lady-fossils 
of Hampton Court, could not long be with- 
*out an engagement as governess or com- 
panion. With Beatrice the case was widely 
different There are young women, as 
there are young men, of whom we feel 
assured that, in case of pecuniary mishap, 
they will fall, somehow, on their feet 
There are others for whom we predicate the 



26S Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

worst ills of poverty, shorn lambs all too 
tender for the bleak hillside. 

" I don't think, if I tried to be a 
governess, that any one would have me," 
Beatrice had said, more than once, since 
she had realized what her prospects really 
were. And, indeed, she was but a luckless 
outsider in that race in which highly certifi- 
cated teachers, elaborately trained for the 
profession, demure Minervas reared at col- 
leges, and steeped in ologies to the very 
rims of their blue spectacles, enter for the 
hundred guinea Nursery Stakes. 

Towards Beatrice, the respect and the af- 
fection of the angry servants remained un- 
wavering Mutineers as they were in their 
demeanour towards the hateful heir-at-law, 
and chronic as was their grumbling at the 
stinted housekeeping, they waited on the 
adopted daughter of their generous old 
mistress with a zeal that was to the tredit 
of human nature. Sorely disappointed as 
they were that the dowager's presumed 



Hdr-at-Law. 269 



intestacy cut them off from their legitimate 
hopes of pay and pension, they were reverent 
and tender in their mention of the dead. And 
it is a fact that they were more perturbed at 
Miss Fleming's being " kep out" of what 
they firmly believed to be her rights, than 
at the loss of that annual gift on which 
some of them, grown frail in service, looked 
as to a crutch for decrepit age. Mr. Glegg,. 
who now " acted," as he called it, for Bea- 
trice, came down once and again to see 
her ; and it may have been due to the bold 
front which he presented to the common 
enemy, that John Fleming's hints regarding 
the propriety of his kinswoman's departure 
were not more pressing. He was sorry 
for her, and said so. Mr. Glegg even 
offered, at his own costs and charges, to 
commence proceedings in a court of law^ 
the result of which would be to postpone 
for months Mr. Fleming's assumption of an 
owner's claims over the heritage. 

" Of course, my dear young lady, it's 



270 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

only a question of time," the lawyer had 
said ; " he must beat us in the long run ; 
but we can traverse every plea, and with 
counter-affidavits, and a demurrer to the 
main issue, can throw the thing into a 
future term ; ay, and cost the mean hound 
a trifle of his darling money too." 

But of this, though grateful to Mr. Glegg 
for his championship, Beatrice would not 
hear. There was no will forthcoming, nor 
would she avail herself of any legal chi- 
canery to hamper the wheels of Mr. John 
Fleming's triumphal chariot. 

Yet her mind must be made up, and that 
speedily. The old ladies at Hampton 
Court, Mrs. General Buckram and the rest, 
would have shared their crust with her, say 
for a fortnight apiece ; and Mr. Glegg did 
induce his buxom red-faced wife to write 
to Miss Fleming, asking her to spend a 
month at the " Lodge ;" but she was in no 
mood for a peripatetic existence of this sort, 
and all these well-meant offers were thank- 



Heir-at'Law. 271 



fully declined. Dashwood*s sullen silence 
remained unbroken. Even Oswald Charl- 
ton, who had once visited the Fountains 
since the memorable occasion of the funeral, 
now seemed, so Beatrice thought, to have 
forgotten her. Well, well ! It was better, 
perhaps, that it should be so. No happiness 
could accrue from any renewal of their 
former intimacy. She was still bound by 
her promise to Dashwood, and even were 
that barrier no longer in existence, she 
could not expect her former lover to sacri- 
fice his ease and his prospects for the sake 
of taking to his home a penniless bride. 
Yet it was with joy that she at length 
received a letter from Oswald, announcing 
that he should be at Richmond on the 
morrow, and expressing a strong desire for 
some conversation with her. She wrote 
her answer, and despatched it. Worldly 
prudence, self-depreciation, were forgotten. 
She should see him, at any rate, once 
again. 




CHAPTER XIV. 

TWO FAIR OFFERS. 

^ LADY, miss, wishing tx) see 
you, please !" said a voice, the 
owner of which wore a cap^ 
trimmed for the nonce with black ribbons, 
and a spotless apron over a frock of that 
peculiar-like print which seems to be manu- 
factured expressly for the wear of the 
English female servants. 

" A lady ? What lady ?" asked Violet 
wearily. She was growing very weary, in 
these latter days, of the world, not, indeed^ 
with the thorough weariness that weighs 
down the old and the worn-out, but to as 



Two Fair Offers. 273 



great an extent as was compatible with her 
youth. 

" I think, miss, it is her as came down, 
formerly, to give the music-lessons,'* an- 
swered the girl, who was a raw, new under- 
housemaid, one of the recruits who from 
time to time were sent up from the Heavi- 
tree estate to be drilled and taught by Mrs. 
Hart the housekeeper. 

" Miss Larpent ? Certainly, I will see 
her," said Violet, after a moment's reflec- 
tion : " in the library, Susan, if you will 
say so." 

But the girl shook her beribboned head. 
" Those lawyer gentlemen are a-writing 
there, miss," she said : " he as they call 
Ferret, and acts up to it, poking about with 
his ugly face all over the house; and a 
clerk of his ; and Brickman the auctioneer. 
And Mr. John . though he be no master 
o' mine, for all he orders and nags . is 
writing in the blue drawing-room along 

VOL. II. 18 



2 74 Lady Livingston! s Legacy. 

with t' other 'torney. But there's no one in 
the dining-room just now." 

Wherefore, Violet Maybrook gave audi- 
ence to the companion of her infancy, Aphy 
Larpent, in the great room where the 
nabob's feasts had been spread in the old 
days of hard drinking and heavy feeding, 
and where of late the mourners at Lady 
Livingston's funeral had assembled. To 
witness the meeting, it might have been 
thought that the two had exchanged 
characters ; for Violet's rare beauty and 
stately presence were clouded by the lassi- 
tude which had of late crept over her, 
whereas the elf's eyes sparkled as with the 
hidden fires that glow beneath the surface 
of the opal, and her gliding movements 
were quicker and more assured than was 
usual with her. 

" Your hand burns, Vi, like fire : you are 
not ill ?" asked the young music-mistress 
as she touched the palm which Miss May- 
brook mechanically laid within her grasp. 



Two Fair Offers, 275 

" 111 ! No ; Fm well enough," answered 
Violet, with indifference. 

Was she one to complain, and to such a 
one as the false creature before her, of the 
long, long watches of the night, spent in 
sleepless feverish unrest, of the haunting 
past, the brooding future, the intolerable 
present, the weight of care, of rage, and of 
regret, which are for those who do wrong 
on earth what were the fabled Eumenides 
of old Greece! Nor, in very truth, was 
she ill. These rich natures, full of life, 
fraught with a potency of enjoyment or of 
suffering, can bear a very great strain 
before the chain snaps. 

" You did not come here, old friend, to 
inquire as to my health, did you ? I must 
wait until it pleases you to explain what 
you would have of me," she added coldly, 
as she signed to her visitor to be seated. 

" Upon my word, your reception is not a 
very encouraging one, and some people 
would take huff, and go as they came," 

18.2 



276 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

returned the elf, with her hard mocking 
little laugh ; " but we have known one 
another a very long time, and are privileged. 
I merely ran down to-day, my dear, to say 
how glad I should be, as, of course, you 
cannot stay in these diggings . can you ? . 
if you would come to me. Fm lonely since 
Bruce went, as you may guess ; so it is half 
selfish, after all, is my errand." 

" Half selfish !" Violet repeated those 
words, unconscious that she did so, and 
tried, with some success, to shake off the 
languor that dulled her usually clear brain. 
When had she known, since the early days 
of dolls and sweetmeats, Aphrodite Larpent 
to be actuated by any motive that could 
not be directly traced to some mean im- 
pulse ? But what, in this instance, could 
be her object? That was not so plain. 
" You know, I suppose, Aphy, that I have 
but my small savings, and shall be very 
poor," said Violet at length. 

" Poor ; and so am I," answered the 



Two Fair Offers. 277 

other promptly : " but then two women 
can live on what a man would fling away 
on cabs and cigars. There is Bruce's old 
room at your service. You and I will live 
as frugally as a couple of country mice that 
have strayed into this great splendid capital 
of London, to make money if we can, not 
to waste it. I shall teach music to any one 
who will be good enough to patronize me ; 
and you will give morning lessons to pupils, 
I dare say, until you can hear of something 
better If I were to say how pleased I 
should be to set up housekeeping with a 
very old friend like yourself, you wouldn't 
believe me. And yet, Vi, dear, it is true." 
This was very well said, well and 
naturally, and it would probably have ob- 
tained credence from nine men out of ten. 
But one woman does not see another 
through the illusory haze of sentimental 
preference which dims the perception of 
either sex where the other is concerned. 
Violet Maybrook was not one fraction 



278 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

nearer to putting trust in the disinterested 
affection of her early playmate than she 
had been before Aphrodite s pretty speech 
was so prettily spoken. But, after a 
moment's thought, she decided within her- 
self what her answer should be. What 
possible harm, after all, could such neigh- 
bourhood do to her ? The hold which 
Aphy had upon her would be as efficacious 
for harm, perhaps more so, at a distance 
than when they two should be together. 
And the instinct that had formerly made 
her shrink from Bruce s sister had gradually 
become very much weakened. 

" Come . it's a fair offer," said Aphrodite^ 
who watched her narrowly. 

" And I accept it, Aphy," returned Violet, 
slowly ; " accept it, I am sure, in the spirit 
in which it is made." As she spoke, a 
figure passed the window towards which 
her face was turned. She started. " Mr. 
Charlton again !" she said ; " I thought he 
would come no more. People, except birds 



Two Fair Offers. 279 



of ill omen, like the busy instruments of 
the new owner who now pervade the house, 
seem to keep very much aloof from the 
Fountains now. Yet it was Lord Livings- 
ton's nephew, I am certain." 

Oswald Charlton it was whose figure 
had in passing the window attracted the 
notice of Miss Maybrook, and we may as 
well follow him to the small yellow drawing- 
room, which had been the dowager's 
favourite apartment during the winter 
months. The rest of the house was de- 
livered over to an incursion of Goths from 
Thavies Inn, and of Vandals from the 
auction-mart, cataloguing, appraising, in- 
specting, whatsoever might appear likely 
to bring a good price by public competition. 
But the yellow drawing-room had been one 
of the earliest rooms to be subjected to 
this invasion of " Mr. John's " satellites, 
and there Beatrice Fleming was able to 
receive Oswald without much prospect of 
their conversation being interrupted by the 



28o Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

rush of greasy Hebrews with patent pencils 
and bulging pocket-books. 

" I am very glad that you could see me 
to-day," said Oswald, making up his mind 
to break the somewhat awkward silence 
that prevailed after the first commonplace 
words of greeting had been said ; " and 
the more so because, as I suppose, you will 
not remain here, now, very long." 

** It was very kind of you . to . to think 
of me," returned Beatrice, shyly; and, in 
spite of herself, her lip trembled a very- 
little, and there were tears in her eyes. 
Up to that moment, there had been be- 
tween these two young persons an embar- 
rassing consciousness of the restraint of 
their present position. True-lovers, for- 
bidden any longer to speak on the topic of 
love, are wretched conversationists, each 
knowing that from his or her lips mere 
platitudes sound doubly trite. But now, 
as he noted the suppressed signs of the 
emotion which Beatrice could not quite 



m 

Two Fair Offers. 281 

hide, he found his tongue at last, and spoke 
out boldly enough. 

"To think of you!" he exclaimed. 
^*When do I not think of the prize I hoped 
to win, and lost, of what I loved so dearly, 
but that was beyond my reach ! Do not be 
alarmed, I beg of you," he added, more 
gently, as he saw that Beatrice was startled 
by his vehemence ; "I did not come to 
disturb your grief by dwelling on my own 
selfish sorrows. But remember that I 
never promised not to love you, dearest . 
that would have been beyond my power. 
What I really did engage to do was, to 
keep aloof, and that I have done. I should 
not have been here to-day, were it not for 
the great and sudden loss which you have 
had to bear, and to which ought not to be 
added that lesser loss, the deprivation of 
what is justly yours." 

" Nothing is mine," said Beatrice, with 
an unsuccessful attempt to smile, " nothing 
now. I never knew how rich I was until I 



282 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 



found myself alone in the world. But, in- 
deed, it is not the money that I regret" 

" No ; it is natural," answered Oswald, 
" that while the smart of your recent grief 
is still fresh, your thoughts should dwell 
solely on the memory of her whom you 
have lost Young as you are, and free, 
hitherto, from sordid thoughts and cares, 
mere poverty seems dwarfed by the anguish 
that has gone before. And yet, believe 
me, many as are the temptations that ener- 
vate the rich, it is not always well to be 
poor. There are natures that grow sour 
and hard in adversity, and others, of a 
more gentle stamp, that fade and wither in 
an uncongenial atmosphere of anxiety and 
want It is no light thing for you, young, 
well nurtured, and delicate, to be flung thus 
unprotected among strangers ; for, so far as 
I know, your own resources must be indeed 
small." 

" How can I help that ?" said Beatrice, 
this time smiling through her tears. " I 



Two Fair Offers. 283 

mean to be very brave, and to make myself 
useful, if I can. I have something of my 
own, a little, and perhaps, if I am not 
thought clever enough to teach, I might 
still do something to eke it out I can 
draw and paint, not very well, I dare say, 
but I should be contented with very humble 
gains. And I do not want very much." 

Oswald Charlton shook his head very 
sadly. " You scarcely know, I fear," he 
said, ** what difficulties await the poor lady 
who tries to turn her accomplishments into 
bread-winning arts. I have seen, unfor- 
tunately, only too much of these experi- 
ments : the pretty sketches sold for what 
barely paid the cost of colours and Bristol- 
board ; the dainty lace, over which its 
maker had half-blinded herself, purchased 
at a price so low that its offer appeared an 
insult ; the illuminated book, the gay em- 
broidery, vainly hawked from shop to shop. 
All honour to those who try to work, and 
to live by work, in the hour of affliction. 



284 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

but the market for such wares as these is 
terribly overstocked. But I did not come 
to prove myself a croaking prophet of 
evil," he added, more cheerfully ; " I came 
to say that I have turned the matter of the 
disappearance of the will over in my head, 
and am quite convinced that it is in exist- 
ence, and that it is in the hands of this 
Davis, or Larpent, or whatever the man's 
real name may be." 

" But Mn Glegg was certain it had been 
. destroyed," pleaded Beatrice; "and I 
think so too. Had it been in the house 
here, it must have been found." 

"Mr. Glegg," answered Charlton, "though 
a shrewd solicitor, is not infallible, and the 
less so, because his habitual turn of thought 
disposes him to accept the most ordinary 
and prosaic solution of every one of those 
riddles which life presents us. And even 
he was staggered, and admitted himself to 
be so, by some of the arguments which I 
advanced when we yesterday discussed the 
question. I need not weary you with my 



Two Fair Offers. 285 

reasons. I have only come to say that I 
will spare no toil, no trouble, no cost, within 
the limits of a poor man's purse, to bring 
that missing will to light, and to right the 
cruel wrong under which I firmly believe 
you to be suffering." 

" But your profession, your prospects '^ 

Beatrice began ; but the young man, half- 
playfully, cut short her expostulation. 

" My profession, as you are aware," he 
said, " is not my sole means of support. 
And as regards my prospects, why, I am 
young enough to afford to be put back, as 
it were, for a space in the race of life, and 
to allow myself to be outstripped by my 
juniors of a year or so. I must work 
doubly hard, later on, to make up for lost 
time. But of one thing I am resolved r 
Heavitree Hall and its acres, and the rest 
of the property, shall go to the true ownen 
And the true owner is not Mr. John Flem- 
ing. The will exists. It has been stolen. 
And I will find it, and reinstate my good 



286 Lady Livingstons Legacy, 

aunt's lawful heiress in the position that is 
justly hers." 

" But granting that you prove successful," 
rejoined Beatrice, timidly, " have you con- 
sidered the results of your very success ? I 
should be still bound, still betrothed, to 
Frederick Dashwood. Nor is it in his 
nature not to claim a rich wife. He would 
come to demand the fulfilment of the 
pledge, and I could not gainsay him. 
Would it not be better, far better, to let 
the property go, and to leave me quiet in 
my obscurity ?" 

The young barrister rose from his chair, 
walked to the window, and stood gazing 
out for some moments. And yet he did 
not see the driving cloud-rack, nor the rose- 
trees in their wealth of bloom, nor the 
green of the tall grass that flourished, un- 
mown, on the once trim lawn. Might it not 
be true that in seeking the restoration of 
Beatrice Fleming's rights, he was really 
working for the man to whom he felt so 



Two Fair Offers. 287 



rooted an aversion, for Sir Frederick Dash- 
wood ! No doubt but that the mercenary 
baroneit would be deterred by no scruples 
from claiming Beatrice as his bride. To 
recover the fortune which, by fraud or ac- 
cident, had been lost, was to condemn the 
girl he loved to a life of wedded misery. 
His own chance, too, poor and feeble as it 
was, would then be utterly extinguished. 

But there was too much nobility of soul 
in Oswald Charlton to permit him to weigh 
his own hopes, his own longings, in the 
scales wherein he sought to strike the 
balance of Beatrice Fleming*s welfare. He 
had no security that, even now, Dashwood 
might not persist in his design. And the 
idea of that tender girl as the ill-treated 
wife of a needy and fierce profligate, as the 
victim of his savage or sullen humours, and 
a target for the insolence of incensed cre- 
ditors, all but maddened him. Better than 
such a lot as that would be gilded chains, 
such as polite Hymen occasionally forges 



288 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

for civilized wear. Should the property be 
recovered, and should the baronet prove 
intractable, it would be easy for judicious 
friends to prepare such settlements as 
should render Miss Flemings fortune- 
hunting cousin dependent on his wife's 
good-will for the supplies which his extra- 
vagance required. This was but a dismal 
form of relief, but it was better than the 
too probable alternative. It would be very 
bad that Beatrice should become a gover- 
ness, exposed, it might be, to the caprice 
or tyranny of purse-proud employers. It 
would be worse to contemplate her becom- 
ing the nominal mistress of a bankrupt 
establishment, and the joyless slave of a 
bad husband. He thought over all these 
things, and his mind was made up. 

"Come what may, dear Beatrice," he 
said, aloud, " I will loyally do my duty by 
you. Consider what my poor aunt would 
feel, did she know that that precious kins- 
man of hers, now engaged in calculating 



Two Fair Offers. 289 

the utmost profit that he can make by sell- 
ing to the highest bidder every object that 
was to her as a dumb friend, was able to 
turn her chosen heiress out of the mansion 
that is hers of right ! The wishes of the 
dead should be held sacred, surely, in this 
case, as in others. Lady Livingston's in- 
tentions on your behalf were matter of 
public notoriety, nor ought they to be frus- 
trated, while I, at any rate, have health 
and strength to carry them out . ^What is 
that ?" 

For at that instant there was a tap at 
the door, and the old butler, who had com- 
mitted the solecism of knocking, came 
gliding into the room, with his impassable 
face and noiseless tread, bearing, on a salver 
chased with the Livingston arms and coro- 
net, a letter with a deep black edge. Long 
after the old servant had withdrawn, Bea- 
trice remained with this letter in her hand, 
unopened, as if she feared to break the seal. 
When she did do so, she read as follows : 

VOL. II. 19 



290 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 



" Dear Cousin, . I never wrote to you 
before, nor have we ever met, so that the 
face, and the handwriting, and the very 
name, perhaps, of your present correspon- 
' dent are likely to be equally unfamiliar to 
you. The signature of Catherine Dash- 
wood might not at once introduce me as 
what I am, the widow of Philip Dashwood. 
My poor husband, you may have heard, 
was the eldest son of old Sir George, and 
would have been now the baronet, but for 
his early death in Canada. You may pos- 
sibly have heard something of my story, 
and of the loss of my dear little boy, a 
year since, by drowning. He was all I 
had left in the world, and I am a desolate, 
heart-broken woman, and, I am afraid, but 
dull company. I mention this, not to 
parade my own sorrows, which are, after 
all, of a character every day to be met with, 
but to prepare you for a very quiet and un- 
eventful routine of life, should you accept 
my invitation. And now for the invitation 



Two Fair Offers. 291 

itself. Had you been, as was at first sup- 
posed, the wealthy and envied heiress of 
my old friend, Lady Livingston, I should 
not have cast the black shadow of my 
mourning across your joyous and prosperous 
young life. As it is, grief naturally feels a 
fellowship with grief, and in the belief that 
you are now for the moment without a home, 
I write to ask you to share mine. To come 
to me will be to confer, not to incur, an ob- 
ligation. Although far from being rich, I 
am fairly well provided with worldly goods, 
and, excepting some old relations who had 
grown almost to forget me during the years 
I spent out of England, I have none to 
love me. It should not be my fault if I 
did not earn some little liking on your part. 
" We are, as you know, connected by 
affinity, if not by blood, and I have re- 
ceived old kindness from some of your race 
and name, which may, I trust, serve as an 
excuse for the liberty which I, a stranger, 
presume to take. I make you my offer, 

19 . 2 



292 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

such as it is, frankly and freely, not dis- 
guising from myself, or from you, that life 
beneath my roof may prove to one like 
yourself to be monotonous and melancholy. 
I own that I should be sadly disappointed 
should you refuse me, and yet I am not 
selfish enough to regret it, should your re- 
fusal be prompted by the fact that brighter 
prospects lie before you, and that I have 
been misinformed. And remember that if 
you decide on coming to me here, you re- 
main free as air, to stay, or to leave me 
when you will, in the very probable case of 
your becoming tired of me, although, if you 
are what I remember you in childhood . 
you have forgotten, of course, seeing Mrs. 
Philip Dashwood, on her only visit to her 
native country for long years . I should not 
easily grow tired of you. Your room . you 
see I have taken possession of you by an- 
ticipation . is ready, and at any rate there 
is nothing gloomy about it, or about the 
externals of the house, whatever its mistress 



Two Fair Offers. 293 

may be. From your windows, through the 
screen of the rose-creepers, and between 
the trees, you can see the blue waves break- 
ing in a long line of foam on the sunny 
beach. If you will come at once to occupy 
it, you will greatly please your sincere well- 
wisher and friend, 

" Catherine Dashwood." 

This was all, with the exception of a 
postscript sending a kind message of re- 
membrance to Miss Maybrook, and of the 
date and address. The latter was that of 
Whitborne, one of the prettiest and least 
frequented watering-places on the south 
coast 

" I never," said Oswald, as he folded and 
laid down the letter, which Beatrice, having 
first read its contents, had handed to him 
for perusal, "heard anything but good of 
this Mrs. Philip Dashwood. Sorrow, at 
all events, has not made her selfish. But 
as regards this offer of hers " 



294 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

" I shall accept it," answered Beatrice, 
whose eyes were again swimming in tears. 
^' I have not so many friends left to me, 
that I can afford to reject the kind hand 
held out to me in the very moment when I 
seem most to need it. Yes, I will go; and, 
if she will let me, we shall be very dear 
friends. I am sure I shall not feel myself 
a stranger there. And it is time that I 
should go, for this dear, dear old house is 
no longer a home for me, and I am daily 
made to know that I am a trespasser 
here." 

** Not for long, however," said Oswald 
Charlton, affecting a cheery confidence 
which he was far from experiencing, as he 
rose to say farewell. " Wrong, as the nur- 
sery saw says, will come right, be sure, one 
day. I wish I were as certain of being 
Lord Chancellor, as I am that the missing 
will exists, and can be traced out, if only 
the seeker holds to his quest tenaciously 
enough. Whitborne is not very far off, 



Two Fair Offers. 295 

too, and I shall crave Mrs. Dash wood's 
permission to come down, now and then, to- 
report progress. And now, though it is 
hard to say it . ^good-bye, dear, dear Bea- 
trice ; good-bye !" He pressed her hand 
in his, turned quickly away, and he was 
gone. 



END OF VOL. II. 
LADY LIVINGvSTON'S LEGACY. 




CHAPTER I. 

THE FINDING OF THE CLUE. 

]SWALD CHARLTON, on reach- 
ing London after his farewell 
visit to the Fountains, felt him- 
self by no means disposed to re- 
turn to his lonely chambers and his law- 
books. He was thoroughly in earnest as 
to the task which he had voluntarily under- 
taken, and which he was resolved, at any 
cost, to accomplish, if only its accomplish- 
ment lay within the compass of a man's 
power. It was a theory of Oswald's, that 
no man or woman can, while living, so 

VOL. III. I 



Lady Livingstones Legacy. 



utterly blot his or her identity out of the 
great social register as to elude discovery, 
if only the searchers do not permit them- 
selves to be disheartened by the failure and 
delay which are inseparable from the earlier 
stages of their work. Where a successful 
disappearance has been carried out, its 
success, so he argued, depends less upon 
the adroitness of the person self-concealed 
than on the lack of perseverance on that of 
the pursuers. The fleet greyhound may 
overshoot the flying quarry, but the slow, 
relentless chase of the weasel never fails at 
length to come up with the swift hare of 
the moorlands. Not that the young bar- 
rister was so wedded to his own ideas as 
to neglect the use of ordinary means of 
success. 

" You'll have to employ the detectives, 
of course," had remarked Mr. Glegg, whom 
Oswald had spoken with more than once 
on this matter ; " you can't do better than 
take Flint, and I should say, Starkey also, 
into your pay. They hunt well in 
couples." 



The Finding of the Clue. 



"Yes, and I shall go with them my- 
self," Lady Livingstones nephew had re- 
plied. 

" Ah, well ! you will please yourself about 
that," returned Mr. Glegg, who had no very 
high opinion of amateur police, and who 
adhered doggedly to his old hypothesis, 
that the will had been burned by the 
dowager herself, who had died before she 
had time to make a new one. Attorneys, 
and family solicitors in especial, get to re- 
gard their clients as nurses regard fractious 
children, as a set of semi-responsible beings, 
who need to be closely watched, lest they 
should do mischief to themselves or others. 
But Oswald's conviction was, that his aunt 
had not destroyed the missing document, 
while suspicion pointed to Bruce Larpent 
as its purloiner, linking the loss of the will, 
as was but natural, with the brutal assault 
of which Mr. Goodeve had been the victim. 
To discover the dark young clerk was his 
great object, and in this the emissaries of 
Scotland Yard heartily concurred. Oswald 
was now on his way to keep, at the corner 

I . 2 



Lady Livingston's Legacy. 



of Corunna Street, St. James's, an appoint- 
ment with Sergeant Flint. 

Corunna Street, with its old houses, the 
red brick fronts of which are gradually 
changing to a rich maroon tint, its air of 
sleepy quiet, and its freedom from bustle, 
more resembles some fragment of a dull 
and sober cathedral town, than an integral 
part of roaring London. And there, lean- 
ing against some rusted area railings, stood 
a sturdy man in a loose brown coat, and 
wearing an old white hat, decorated with a 
hat-band, once black, but now embrowned 
with age, puffing at a short pipe of com- 
mon clay. There was nothing very note- 
worthy about this lounger, who was pre- 
cisely the sort of person who might have 
been expected to accost a stranger with 
a hoarse "Wish to buy a little dawg, 
governor ?" and to produce from his baggy 
pocket some black-and-tan toy terrier of 
preposterous littleness, or some pink- eyed 
and white-wooled lapdog adapted for femi- 
nine proprietorship. But he turned his 
head, and Oswald then caught sight of 



The Finding of the Clue. 



Flint's well-fed weather-beaten face beneath 
the ancient hat. 

" True to time, I see, sir, and that's a 
good beginning," said the sergeant cheerily, 
as he put up his expressive forefinger to 
call attention to the striking of a neigh- 
bouring church-clock. *' Not that Fve 
been idle, since we met" 

" Have you found out anything ?" asked 
the young barrister, with an eagerness that 
made the detective smile, as some tough 
veteran, hardened to danger, might smile 
at the impatience of a young soldier. 

" I rather think I have," returned the 
sergeant modestly; '* but we must not count 
our chickens before they chip the shell, 
must we } Starkey keeps an eye on the 
baronet, in case there's anything to be 
picked up in that quarter ; but mine, as he 
says himself, is the likeliest lay. Now 
Mrs. Gulp's Betsy Jane has changed 
mississes, and so far, so good. You don t 
know whom I'm talking of, sir, do you ?" 

" No ; but I can guess," returned Oswald, 
after a moment's consideration. "You 



Lady Livingstons Legacy. 



allude, probably, to the maid-servant at the 
missing man's lodgings in Great Eldon 
Street, do you not ?" 

" Ah, well, yes," said the sergeant, let- 
ting his words drop one by one, and very 
slowly. ** So long as she was Mrs. Gulp's 
maid-of-all-work, nothing could be got out 
of her, and that, as I believe, out of pure 
contrariness, as the old women call it. You 
see her missis was always wrangling with 
her, and that, as many who ve been ser- 
vants do, when they come to have a slavey 
of their own ; and the girl held to it, she 
knew nothing, out of opposition to her em- 
ployer, who told all she knew, and a little 
more, to the back of that. For a regular 
sieve, nothing like an elderly spinster with 
a taste for gin and peppermint/* 

" And now ?" said Oswald, fearing lest 
his ally should become too discursive in his 
philosophy. 

" And now,'* resumed Sergeant Flint, 
" she has found her tongue. She is in a 
lodging-house in Clarges Street, that's 
where she is, and it is there I am to look 



The Finding of the Clue. 



for her when she's sent on an errand . not 
long to wait for that, if she is to be de- 
pended on, for the house is full, and some 
one IS always wanting beer, or soda-water, 
or the evening paper, or the like. I can 
tell you the rest, Mr. Charlton, as we 
walk." 

In any other city, the incongruous asso- 
ciation between a gentleman such as Os- 
wald, and so very dubious a parasite of 
civilization as his companion appeared, 
would of itself have attracted unwelcome 
notice and remark. But London is deaf 
and blind to odd or singular sights not 
heralded by the million-tongued news- 
papers, and Sergeant Flint was careful to 
avoid the i^isk of personal recognition. 

" I thought," said Oswald good-hu- 
mouredly, **that I could find my way 
fairly well about town, but this is a puzzle 
to me." 

" We are obliged," replied the sergeant, 
with a low inward laugh, " to learn more 
roads to a place than one, we are. It 
really wouldn't hurt us, Mr. Charlton, to 



8 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

run against some swell of your acquaint- 
. ance, who would look at me as if you were 
bound to explain why you walked alongside 
of such a shady customer as Self. But the 
chances are, you would be annoyed at it. 
And the fewer annoyances the better.*' 
And, softly whistling, the detective walked 
on. It was not without some little trouble 
that his temporary patron succeeded in 
eliciting from this professional man-hunter 
the desired information. Unless in the 
witness-box, a policeman is coy about the 
revelation of facts that he has toiled to 
glean as the pearl-diver labours for the 
tiny globules of moonshiny whiteness which 
he seeks below the blackness of the shark- 
haunted sea. When he did speak, it was 
thus : 

" You see, Mr. Charlton, sir, the job was 
a slippery one from the first, just the sort 
of case to come to nothing, and perhaps 
get into the " Lime-light" as a proof of the 
inefficiency of the police, Starkey and I 
take no credit, not we, for moulding that 
poor helpless Mrs. Gulp, of Great Eldon 



The Finding of the Clue. 



Street. Any fingers can leave their mark 
on a pat of butter. And miss " . with a 
jerk of his pliant thumb . " the sister, is 
one of those hard-bitten parties of the op- 
posite sex that we don't often meet with, 
but that mostly, when we do, give us a 
mint of vexation. The way I hung.about 
that house, all for no good ! At last I put 
on my uniform, and went down, bold as 
brass, and tackled the postman, on his 
rounds. Bless you ! I know a thing or 
two about the little weaknesses of letter- 
carriers, and I was down upon him pretty 
sharp. How about this ? says I, and how 
about the other } No great harm . little 
games contrary to regulation, .done for a 
trifle of loose silver, and winked at, mostly, 
by the authorities . but no tampering, mind 
you, with money-letters and that. Well, 
my man held out tolerably, but at last I 
found where the shoe pinched. He breaks 
down, and begins to whimper. ' For God's 
sake,' says he, * have a little compassion 
on a man with a wife and four children, 
and one in arms,' says he, ' and who never 



lo Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

wronged nobody of ninepence, nor thought 
he was a doing wrong/ he says. Such a 
game ! If it hadn't been in the open street, 
he'd have gone on his knees, he would. 
So I tell him / don t want to hurt him,- not 
I, unless he drives me to it ; though, mind 
you, I says, you'd get the sack to-morrow 
if I dropped in at St. Martin's to let the 
Controller know your carryings on ; but 
'tis not in my way to harm one that be- 
haves decently to me. I've other fish to 
fry, I tell him ; and then I ask what he 
knows about that house of Mrs. Gulp, and 
her lodgers. 

"Well, Mr, Charlton, he didn't know 
much. He'd smack calfskin, any day, he 
said, that nothing whatever had arrived, 
lately, for Miss Davis, or Miss Larpent ; 
and there the landlady bears him out ; and 
so does Biddy, the new Irish maid-of-all- 
work. But once, on a special pouring wet 
day, he came with something for Mrs. 
Gulp, when downstairs comes miss . the 
chap's sister . and asks him, the postman, 
to clap a letter into the nearest box for 



The Finding of the Clue. . 1 1 

her, in time for afternoon despatch, and 
gives him a shilling for his trouble. Now, 
he took notice of this, because, as he said, 
she didn't treat him liberal at Christmas, 
and he wondered at her giving him money 
now to do what the servant-girl would have 
done for nothing, for there's a pillar-post 
two streets off. So he did give a look at 
the letter, he did, and saw it was directed 
to initials, and to a place in the country." 

'* Did he remember the address ?" asked 
Oswald, whose interest was now thoroughly 
awakened. 

** Well, he did, and he didn't," rejoined 
the detective, with provoking composure. 
" It was directed to D» D. He'd take his 
'davit of that, the postman would, and to a 
post-office, to be called for. But the name 
of the place . ah ! there was the rub. It 
had slipped his memory, and so had that 
of the county. But he was all but certain 
that the one began with an S, and the 
other with a Y. There's but one English 
shire begins with a Y. But Suffolk, Sus- 
sex, Somersetshire, Surrey, all begin with 



1 2 Lady Livingstoris Legacy. 



an S, so it may not be Yorkshire, you 



see." 



** Then beyond the fact that Miss Lar- 
pent is in cdmmunication with her brother, 
I do not perceive that we have learned 
much,'' said Oswald, with an air of evident 
disappointment. 

" So much for the postman V returned 
his auxiliary ; " now for the girl. This 
Betsy Jane, you see, sir, is neither better 
nor worse than the rest of them . six or 
seven pounders, and find their own tea and 
sugar, in the lodgers' caddies, mainly, I 
suspect . but what I mean is, she's not a 
thief, but a trifle light-fingered when some- 
thing not likely to be missed lies in her 
way ; while, as for falsehoods, I do believe 
she tells fibs just as she draws breath, with- 
out knowing it. Poor creatures . poor 
creatures . they've all the vices, sir, that 
slavery breeds, and we shouldn't be over- 
severe in judging them. Now, three half- 
crowns, given at separate times, and the 
promise of a sovereign, and the getting a 
new place, and away from her old missis, 



The Finding of the Clue. 1 3 

have brought round Betsy Jane, who was, 
in Great Eldon Street, as sullen a young 
woman as ever stuck to it that she had no- 
thing to tell. Now she has promised to 
hand over something . she didn't say what 
. that Larpent left behind him by accident, 
and to say what she saw. It's odd if, 
piecing one thing with another, that don't 
help us." 

And a few minutes' walk, lengthened by 
the detective's prudent preference for back- 
lanes and darkling alleys, brought them to 
Clarges Street " That's the door," said 
the sergeant, pointing to a cane-coloured 
one at some distance : " a large lodging- 
house, where three servants are kept, and 
Betsy Jane, being lowest, naturally takes 
the rough of it, errands included. We are 
in luck, so far, for here she comes." And, 
sure enough, there appeared on the Clarges 
Street pavement the figure of a red-haired 
slipshod girl, whose straggling curl-papers, 
apron of dubious cleanliness, and muslin 
cap, that fluttered in the breeze, might well 
be supposed to appertain to Mrs. Gulp's 



14 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 



late hand-maiden. She had a bottle of 
soda-water in one hand, and a large door- 
key in the other, and when the detective 
stepped forward and confronted her, she 
gave a little start and a little scream. 

" Oh, Mr. Flint, how you come upon 
one !" exclaimed the Iris of the lodging- 
house. 

" Now, Betsy Jane, is the time to keep 
your promise, it is, and to earn your re- 
ward too, says you," rejoined the police- 
man, with a shake of the forefinger, half- 
minatory, half-encouraging. " Step up 
here, one moment, out of sight of the win- 
dows, and tell this young nobleman and 
me all about it." 

Drawn as by a magnet, Betsy Jane fol- 
lowed the forefinger between two stone 
posts, and into a narrow by-street strongly 
perfumed by the West India pine-apples, 
the asparagus, and the early strawberries, 
piled upon the shop-board of a green -grocer 
who vended his fruit in that unsunned 
nook. On catching sight of Oswald, Betsy 
Jane, who was of an impulsive disposition, 



The Finding of the Clue, 1 5 

flung her apron over her head, and pro- 
tested, in smothered accents, from beneath 
it, that she had nothing to say before a 
strange gentleman. It was not without 
some trouble that this slovenly daughter of 
servitude was induced to allow her apron 
to fall to its normal position, and to relate 
the little which she had to tell, and which, 
when stripped of the incoherent redun- 
dancy of Betsy Jane's diction, was briefly as 
follows : 

The surprise of Mrs. Gulp's by no means 
neat-handed Phillis had been excited, one 
morning. that of the last day on which 
Bruce Larpent had been observed in Great 
Eldon Street . by seeing him descend the 
stairs at an unusually early hour, equipped 
as if for a journey. He was dressed with 
more care than had of late been customary 
with him, and carried over his arm a rough 
greatcoat or pea-jacket of sh'aggy blue cloth. 
He had also with him a bundle, or what 
appeared to be such, tied up in at silk hand- 
kerchief, and this he did his best to conceal 
when he met the maid-servant, who was 



1 6 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

standing, in her own words, " promiscuous" 
on the door-step, and beguiling the incle- 
ment morning hour by some conversation ' 
with an appreciative baker's boy. On 
seeing Betsy Jane, or on being seen by her, 
Bruce Larpent had not been able to repress 
an impatient movement and an angry ex- 
clamation, though he immediately after- 
wards recovered his composure, and passed ' 
on into the street. As he did so, a small 
parcel, which had been thrust into one of 
the pockets of the greatcoat that he car- 
ried, fell to the ground, and opened as it 
fell, disclosing its contents, which had 
already been examined by curious eyes and 
inquisitive fingers, before Bruce, discover- 
ing his loss, came back to reclaim his pro- 
perty, which he thrust hastily back into his 
pockets, and then strode off once more. 
From that day since he had never returned 
to Great Eldon Street. 

" It was no great things, after all,'' said 
Betsy Jane, '* what was in the parcel, as 
Tim Rogers, the baker, could bear me out, 
if asked . only a razor, and a hairbrush, 



The Finding of the Clue. 1 7 

and a black silk neck-scarf, and one or two 
trumpery bits of articles of that sort, and 
a little yellow leather writing-case, with a 
brass lock to it, all wrapped up in part of a 
newspaper. The big bundle was under his 
arm, and he held that tight enough, I war- 
rant you. Then he comes back again, at 
a run, cursing his own clumsiness, and us 
for a brace of prying magpies . that's Tim 
and me . ^and he pushes into the passage, 
and snatches up all he could see lying on 
the door-mat, and crams it into his pockets 
as he starts off, and so round the corner, 
and never set eyes upon till this blessed 
moment since then. But what he didn't 
notice, nor we, we was so flustered at his 
arbitrary ways, was a little book in a green 
binding, as had got kicked aside, and was 
hid by the door being ajar. And when I 
came to dust and sweep, half an hour later 
on, I found it, and a poetry-book it was, 
with a little picter in front of it, inside the 
binding ; and I showed it to Tim Rogers, 
the baker, the same day, when he came by 
with the evening batch ; and he can wit- 

VOL. III. 2 



1 8 Lady Livingston! s Legacy. 

ness for me that it's just as I've told you, 
Mr. Flint" 

It required diplomatic talents of no mean 
order on the sergeant's part to induce his 
slippery confessor to admit that this 
volume, thus picked up, was still in her 
possession. The finding, she was willing 
to describe ; but to nail her to the point as 
to the retention of this literary treasure- 
trove was not easy. Denial on oath had 
been with Betsy Jane, in common with 
many of her drudging and ill-educated 
caste, so long a sort of defensive armour, 
that it was hard to draw from her an 
affirmative answer as to the custody of 
anything which did not strictly belong to 
her. And, oddly enough, she betrayed 
more distrust of Oswald than of Sergeant 
Flint She was used, by this time, to the 
policeman, and besides, he spoke her own 
language, in every sense the vulgar tongue ; 
whereas, a strange gentleman . the mem- 
ber of a class born to be lied to . was no 
fit confident At last, worked upon by the 
persuasive eloquence of the sergeant, and 



The Finding of the Clue. 1 9 

stimulated by the sight of a golden 
sovereign which Oswald produced, Betsy 
Jane was brought to avow that she had 
seen the book more than once, that she 
had seen it that very day, that it was not a 
hundred miles off . not a mile off, not 
remote beyond the distance of a minute's 
walk, that it was in " her box," and that 
when she had done her ministering office, 
and carried the soda-water to a lodger with 
an aching head, in consequence of lobsters 
and whiskey-toddy over-night, and whom 
she curtly specified as the " parlours," she 
would watch her opportunity to fetch it 
out to Sergeant Flint. 

And presently Betsy Jane was as good 
as her word, for, after a quarter of an 
hour's sojourn within doors, her fluttering 
cap-strings were seen once more, as she 
darted across the street, and into the 
passage where Oswald and the detective 
stood. 

" Here it is, Mr. Flint.just as he left 
it," she exclaimed, panting, as she pro- 
duced a small volume bound in faded 

2 . 2 



2o Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

green ; ** only, I must get in again before 
missis comes up out of the kitchen, 
please/' On receiving the golden guerdon 
from Oswald's hand, Betsy Jane winced, 
and for the moment made as though she 
would again throw the apron over her 
head, but thought better of it, and with a 
" Thank you, sir," to Oswald, and " you'll 
hold me harmless, Mr. Flint," to his com- 
panion, fled fleetly back to the scene of her 
labours. 

" Poetry, so it is," said the detective, as 
he opened the book, " More in your line 
than mine, Mr. Charlton, I dare say," he 
added, as he put it into Oswald's hands. 
Nevertheless, Sergeant Flint stood very 
close to Oswald's elbow as the latter 
turned over the pages, and kept a keen 
eye on the margins, as if in hopes of ob- 
serving annotations more interesting than 
the letter-press. 

*' It seems," said Oswald, after a brief 
inspection, "to be a book published at 
Boston long ago, and to contain ballads, 
along with a collection of extracts from 



The Finding of the Clue. 2 1 

more pretentious poems . just such a book 
as schoolboys love ; and to judge by the 
B. L. and Bruce Larpent, written in half a 
dozen places in pencil and in ink, on fly- 
leaf and binding, the volume belonged to 
the man we are looking for at an early 
date. Here, you see, is another scrawl 
beneath the frontispiece, which represents, 
I think, a scene from the " Tempest" But 
why the runaway should think this old 

book worth carrying off with him " 

" Ah, sir," interrupted the sergeant, 
*' that's one of the ins and outs of human 
nature, that is. We see, in our line, a deal 
of that People who bolt, don't always 
take with 'em what's most useful. Queer 
lumber they collar hold of sometimes. 
Why, if I haven't arrested a fraudulent 
bankrupt, with nineteen hundred pound in 
notes, stitched into the lining of his coat, 
and among other luggage, you'd never 
guess what . just a bird-cage, if you'd 
believe me, that had belonged to his little 
daughter who was dead. Some men get 
to be that fond of a dumb thing they can't 



22 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

endure to give it up. . But what's that ?" 
he added, in quite another tone, as, in- 
turning over the pages, Oswald came upon 
a piece of printed paper, roughly folded, that 
had been placed between two of the leaves. 
The policeman's excitement had in it 
something that was contagious ; and the 
young barrister's fingers literally trembled, 
as he unfolded the paper. It appeared at 
first sight to be nothing remarkable, no- 
thing but a leaf torn out of some Railway 
Guidey presumably Bradshaw's. " Trains 
from London to Leicester, Derby, Crew,. 
Chester, Liverpool, That won't do,"^ 
muttered Sergeant Flint " We'll try the 
other page, sir, if you please." The page 
was turned. " Trains to Peterborough,. 
York, Ripon, Slingsbro'," read out the 
detective rapidly ; and then, with a sup- 
pressed cry of triumph, smote the book 
with his broad hand, and exclaimed : 
" Now we've got it, Mr. Charlton : cheap 
too. It was worth its weight in gold, that 
book was, for now we are on the scent, and 
no mistake." 



The Finding of the Clue. 23 

" I see !" said Oswald, as the importance 
of the discovery forced itself upon his 
mind. " Slingsborough is certainly in 
Yorkshire, and its initial letter is S. un- 
doubtedly. This may be a coincidence, 
but I hope it is something more than that. 
Stay : here is a pencil-mark, star-shaped, 
against the 8.50 morning mail train. It is 
very small, but, in a good light, quite per- 
ceptible." 

" Right you are, sir !" said the sergeant 
approvingly; "and I begin to think you 
would not have done so badly in our branch 
if you'd taken to it. Yes," as he inspected 
the minute mark in question ; '' that tells 
us the hour he left London quite as well 
as if he had written it on his visiting card, 
along with a P.P.C, and dropped it at our 
doors. Now for the next step. I ought 
to see Starkey : yes ; and then there's the 
make-up and the packing. Train at 6.40 ; 
but that's slow. Better take the express, 
sir, at 7.25, if you can conveniently be 
ready by that time," concluded the detective, 
whose memory seemed a mine as referred 



^4 Lady Livingstones Legacy, 

to railway arrangements. Oswald, elated 
by this early success, cheerfully pledged 
himself to meet the sergeant at the ter- 
minus before the appointed time, and the 
two strangely assorted confederates se- 
parated for the moment, Oswald return- 
ing to his chambers ; while Sergeant Flint, 
who appeared to live anywhere and every- 
where, walked briskly away in an opposite 
direction. For awhile, as he passed on 
through the streets, still giving an in- 
stinctive preference to crooked ways and 
routes screened from observation, his 
exulting mood endured, but presently his 
spirits appeared to subside, and his face 
grew graver and more stern. 

"It isn't the first trick that wins the 
game," he muttered, as if taking himself to 
task for his late exuberance of self-confi- 
dence : " Fve known, before this, things 
look so clear, you'd say the veriest booby 
out of the provinces, could run the fox to 
earth as well as the best of us, and how 
has it ended ? Why, by the scamp getting 
clear away, and we snubbed by the com- 



The Finding of the Clue. 25 

missioners, and slashed up by the * Lime- 
light ' and the ' Piccadilly ' as a set of blind 
buzzards not worth our pay ! It's a bad 
sign, often, when matters are too easy at 
the start." 



CHAPTER II. 




THE START FROM SLINGSBRO . 

'LL take the odds, or give the 

odds, or what you like for the 

sake of sport Seven to five 

against the field, bar two, in 

fivers, won't make you a man, nor yet a 

mouse, I suppose, for the Cup. Or, for 

the Leger, if you'll put the " 

Thus rang a voice, husky, importunate, 
monotonous, in Oswald Charlton's ear, as 
he stopped before the bookstall on the 
platform of that London terminus whence 
Slingsborough can be most conveniently 
reached. The station was full of different 
varieties of the genus Turfite . "horsey" 
men in Newmarket coats and conspicuous 



The Start from Slingsbro\ 27 

jewellery; tight-trousered stablemen ; corpu- 
lent horse-dealers in green; flat-faced ruffians 
whose .aspect suggested the Ring rather 
than the Course ; lean touts in sodden suits 
of black ; " fast " young gentlemen, with 
weak lungs and tremulous hands, intent on 
" another brandy-and-soda" before starting; 
the whole Happy Family of sporting owls, 
hawks, and pigeons, bound for some racing 
fixture in the north or midland counties. 

" You waste your time on me, my 
friend," said Oswald, with some impatience, 
as he turned to confront the obtrusive bet- 
ting man, who had thus broken in upon his 
reverie. Yes; there was the long white 
box-coat, the " bird's-eye " cravat of blue 
and white, the quaint hat, the heavy golden 
horse-shoe for a breast-pin, the whip-stock, 
the buck-skin gloves, of the superior order 
of professional frequenters of races; but 
the face was the face of Sergeant Flint, 
detective policeman. 

" A very complete impersonation it was^ 
and fairly took me in!" said Oswald^ 
smiling. He had by this time learned that 



28 Lady Livingston's Legacy, 

even the craftiest have their weak points, 
and that valuable peace-officers such as 
Mr. Flint love a disguise for its own sake, 
and would, were the Treasury less parsi- 
monious, change coats and characters and 
complexions every day or so. As it was, 
after the first grin of genuine pleasure at 
the implied compliment, the sergeant began 
to apologize for the garb in which he had 
arrayed himself. 

" So many race meetings about just now, 
I thought Fd come the sporting-man dodge, 
which has stood me in many a capture be- 
fore this, I can tell you, sir. Bless you !" 
(these frequent benedictions being tra- 
ditional with the secret police, were often 
on the lips of both sergeant and super- 
intendent), ** I don't know any more of 
horses than if they were roaring lions, not 
L But then half those young fellows yon- 
der, with the whip-stocks, and the tight- 
fitting cords, and the stirrup breast-pins, 
are as ignorant as I Can be; while I can 
patter their slang as if Td been a welcher 
from my cradle. You can travel as a 



The Start from Slingsbro\ 29 

gentleman, sir ; but if I go anywheres, 
simply in plain clothes, I am spotted at 
once as belonging to the Force. We'd 
better not seem too thick together as we 
spin down." 

Nor did much conversation take place 
between Oswald and his wily mentor during 
the journey to Slingsborough, at which 
notable seat of industry they arrived with 
due punctuality, taking up their quarters, 
by the sergeant's advice, at a second-class 
hotel of decent repute, the ** Blue Lion." 

" The swell houses, the * Royal,' and the 
* Regent,' and so forth, wouldn't do for a 
chap like me," the sergeant explained, when 
he and Oswald found themselves, next 
morning, the sole occupants of the coffee- 
room, haunted by greasy odours, like the 
ghosts of a million of mutton-chops; *Vhile 
the * Grinders' Arms ' and the * Wheel of 
Fortune ' would be too noisy for you, sir. 
The * Lion ' here is one of those inns that 
have had a come-down in the world, and 
are glad of a customer, without going in for 
one style or another overmuch. It is not 



30 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

my first visit to the town ; so, if you please, 
rU show you the way to the post-office by 
strolling on a few yards ahead." 

However, on reaching the post-office, 
which at that time was thronged by»people 
jostling one another to despatch their 
registered letters by the outgoing early 
mail. Sergeant Flint went in alone ; while 
Oswald Charlton chose rather to return to 
the hotel, and to leave the initiatory steps 
as regarded the correspondence of the 
missing man to the experience of his fellow- 
traveller. The " Blue Lion " was indeed a 
tolerable specimen of that class of English 
inn which has, like some decayed gentle- 
woman, seen better days. It had low- 
ceiled rooms, heavy four-post bedsteads, a 
sepulchral coffee-room, and the most irra- 
tionally contrived passages, now with two 
meaningless steps to ascend, now with an 
equally purposeless scrap of stair down 
which lay the stranger's devious way, where 
huge eight-day clocks, ticking furiously, lay 
in wait for the explorer in unexpected cor- 
ners, and where at intervals the glass eyes 



The Start from Slingsbrd. 31 

-of a stuffed fox or badger glared upon him 
from a recess in the wall. Its paved yard 
was a world too wide, and its stabling too 
spacious for the requirements of the present 
period, and all its aspect told a tale of that 
zenith of bygone prosperity when " first and 
second turn-out " were in hourly demand, 
and when a score of chaises, green or 
yellow, crowded the grass-grown inclosure. 
" A nice, quiet old hostelry," was Os- 
wald's unuttered remark, as he glanced up 
at the impossible azure animal from which 
the house of entertainment took its name, 
" and one that looks as if Slingsborough, 
with its tall chimneys, and rattling ma- 
chinery, and clanging steam-hammers, were 
a hundred miles off. If I were in conceal- 
ment now, this would tempt me. It would 
be curious, but not impossible, if the same 
idea should have occurred to Mr. Good- 
eve's suspected clerk. At any rate, I will 
make an inquiry or two, by way of com- 
mencing my apprenticeship to the occupa- 
tion that I have selected." So saying, he 
.entered the hotel ; but here a disappoint- 



32 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

ment awaited him. He had been received^ 
when arriving late on the previous night, 
by a landlady whose buxom countenance, 
glib good-humour, and iron-gray hair, neatly 
arranged beneath a gay cap, pointed her 
out as a hostess likely to prove both ob- 
servant and garrulous. But there was no 
one now save a ringleted barmaid within 
the glazed partition. " Mrs. Boys " was 
out. Mrs. Boys and her two daughters 
had gone over to the flower-show at Nail- 
sham. But Mr. Boys was in his private 
parlour, and, if awake, would be happy to 
speak to any gentleman. The landlord 
proved to be a bull-necked, elderly man,^ 
with a fat head, a large white face like that 
of a very dim moon, and with his gouty 
feet encased in carpet-slippers. His recent 
nap did not appear to have had the effect 
of brightening his wits, and at first he 
stared at Oswald with stony discourage- 
ment. 

" I never," said the " Blue Lion," " take 
notice, that is, notice to call notice, of my 
chance customers. A dark young chap,^ 



The Start from Slingsbrd. 33 

. 

you say, name of Davis or Larpent, and 
looks like a foreigner ? If Mrs. Boys 
were at home, she might tell you if we've 
had such here, but I haven't taken parti- 
cular heed." 

It was difficult to extract more than this 
from the host of the " Blue Lion," who 
was unsympathetic to a disheartening 
degree; when his youngest son, a quick- 
eyed boy of twelve, who had come in from 
his day-school, satchel in hand, during Os- 
wald's interview with his dull-witted sire, 
and sat listening with juvenile interest, ex- 
claimed : " Father, I'd bet that's Number 
Nine, that went off, yesterday, when I was 
back from afternoon school. He was a 
dark, French-looking sort of gent, and he 
was in a mortal hurry to catch the 'bus 
and the train, warn't he, after he got the 
telegraph message ! Looked quite scared, 
he did." 

The gouty landlord slowly turned his 
round dim eyes from his son's face to that 
of Oswald, and then said, with a fat chuckle 
of sincere admiration : " You hear him, 

VOL. m. 3 



34 Lady Livingston's Legacy, 



sir. Our young Slingsborough blades are 
sharp ; ain't they ?" And sharp enough 
the boy certainly approved himself, for the 
facts which Oswald drew from him were 
as follows. There had been staying for 
two days at the " Blue Lion " a young 
man whose personal appearance seemed 
closely to correspond with that of Mr. 
Goodeve's truant clerk. He had not ar- 
rived in the usual manner, by the railway 
omnibus, or in a cab, but had reached the 
hotel on foot, attended by a porter with 
his luggage. His manner had been un- 
accountably nervous, and had been the 
subject of some joking among the servants 
of the inn. He had given his name at 
the bar as Davis, expressing some anxiety 
on the subject of letters which might arrive 
for him, and for which, although usually 
averse to conversation, he repeatedly in- 
quired. He spent most of his time in 
reading or writing, and seemed to be in a 
dejected frame of mind. No letter ever 
did arrive for him ; but immediately before 
his departure he had received a telegram, 



The Start from Slingsbro. 35 



and had hurried off to catch the next train, 
although he had previously ordered dinner. 
Thus far had Oswald proceeded in his exa- 
mination of this willing witness, when 
Sergeant Flint appeared in the hall, with 
such evident marks of chagrin on his * 
countenance that the young barrister broke 
off from questioning the boy, and went 
out to meet him. 

" Made tracks, as the Yankees say," 
said the detective, in a low but earnest 
voice ; " and now the question is, where 
to ? Easier asked than answered, Mr. C. 
I could get no satisfaction from the clerk. 
They are rough with a stranger, some- 
times, in the hardware country here; and 
it was some time before I could get a 
private talk with the postmaster himself, 
show him my staff and credentials, and 
bring him round to my side. There lies a 
letter for D. D. sure enough. I was al- 
lowed to see it; but it would require a 
Secretary of State's warrant before I could 
be allowed to touch it. There it had lain, 
by the date of the London stamp, three 

3. ^ 



36 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 



days, unclaimed. Former letters had been 
fetched away, or so the clerk believed^ 
though he did not in the least remember 
by whom. Couldn't be got to recollect, 
even, if D. D. were a man or a woman. 
There were lots of letters addressed to 
initials, and those who asked for them, and 
gave correct answers as to the place whence 
they had been despatched, got them. But 
as for saying who came for what, business 
was too brisk for that It's a pity we're 
not in some sleepy town in the south, 
where the very dogs lying in the sunshine 
prick their ears up when they sniff a stranger; 
but here it is different." 

However, as soon as Oswald had im- 
parted the information which he had just 
received, the sergeant's face brightened 
considerably. " You've hit the haystack 
this time, sir," he said gleefully : " we'll 
try a little more pumping, though, to make 
sure." And so saying, he hurried Oswald 
back to the " Blue Lion's " own particular 
parlour. ** Now, mind you, Mr. Boys," 
said the sergeant in his blandest tone, as 



The Start from Slingsbrd, 37 

his quick eye perceived that the face of the 
host was overclouded . " mind you, we 
wish no harm, not we, to this young gent 
that we're looking after, the squire and me 
. only just to settle matters quietly, and 
keep whatever little liveliness he may have 
been led into as dark as possible ; don't 
you* see ? So you needn't have any fear 
of a fuss, not you, nor the name of your 
hotel . as nice and genteel a house as ever 
I put up at . ^getting any sort of slur upon 
it, or the like. You Ve done the honour- 
able thing, that's what you've done, and 
you've no right to be blamed for it ; more 
likely to receive the thanks of the family, 
with, maybe, a testimonial, such as a teapot, 
or salver, whichever might be most agree- 
able to your good lady, when all is snugly 
arranged. Bless you, there's many a game 
we have to see after, just to spare, the 
feelings of relatives, you understand. And 
if this fine lad of yours . and well you 
may be proud of him . will answer another 
question or so, why, we can run over at 
once, and make things comfortable for all 
concerned." 



38 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

The " Blue Lion," whose slow mind had 
been at first somewhat dubious about 
possible injury to the good name of his 
establishment, gradually became mollified 
as the detective rattled on, and gave a 
gruff permission to his son to " speak out"^ 
The sergeants queries, under this en- 
couragement, received prompt replies, and, 
indeed, it almost seemed as if that talka- 
tive officer had furnished both questions 
and answers, so glib was his tongue. "And 
who drove him to the station, then ? 
W2xry Taylor, was it ? Of course ; and 
there's Harry in the yard, isn't he, polish- 
ing that pole-chain ? Any one go up to 
the railway on account of luggage ? Boots 
did . and there is Boots ! as intelligent a 
young fellow as need be, coming across 
from the knife-board yonder. What lug- 
gage had the gentleman, now ? A blue 
bag, had he ? Yes, and a new portman- 
teau . name of Davis on it Now, I do 
wonder if the bag was new too ; but that s 
more than you can be expected to tell, after 
all. Surprising memory ! Eyes wide open 



The Start from Slingsbro\ 39 



too. Shouldn't be a bit surprised to see 
him make a figure in the world, Mr. Boys, 
not I. If only any one had heard the 
gentleman say anything about the telegram 
that called him off, now ?" said the sergeant 
suggestively. 

" Well," returned the boy, cudgelling the 
memory which had just received such praise, 
" he did say something when he asked for 
the bill ; Miss Wells must have heard him 
say it" ^ « 

"So I did," put in the ringleted bar- 
maid, who had been hovering about the 
open door. " Tm nearly positive he said : 
* No time to be lost \ and then : * He s 
going.'" 

** Coming," interjected the boy . .'" not 
going. * He's coming,' and something 
about * time,' were the words." 

Two minutes later on. Sergeant Flint 
had extracted from the omnibus-driver and 
the Boots all they knew as to the details 
of the stranger's departure, had called for 
the bill, and had ordered something to eat, 
while scrutinizing the railway time-tables 
that hung against the wall. 



40 Lady Livingstons Legacy, 

'' Gone to Filey, has he ? And the next 
for Filey starts at 2.15, does it? Why, 
that will do famous." /Vnd when the train 
rushed shrieking out of the Slingsborough 
station, making its way across brown 
moors and green corn-fields and marshy 
pastures, seaward, Oswald Charlton and 
Sergeant Flint were among the number 
of the few passengers that it contained. 
The detective leaned back in a corner of 
the compartment, with his hat pulled over 
his eyes, his lips firmly compressed, and 
his brow puckered into wrinkles, thinking 
deeply, as some long-headed chess-player 
might do, over the series of moves to be 
expected. 

'* It's not on the square, somehow," he 
said, doubtfully, to Oswald, as they both 
alighted at a junction where a change of 
carriages occurred. " Why should an artful 
youngster like that go to Filey, of alf 
places ? Why didn't he try the Isle of 
Man, or something on the Wye, or perhaps 
Hayling Island, sooner than a watering- 
place in the very same county ? The job's 



The Start from Slingsbro\ 41 

being made too easy for us, and I, for one, 
can't guess why. However," he added on 
touching the platform at Filey, " stay here 
, a moment, and if you occupy yourself with 
claiming the luggage, and are rather slow 
about it, so much the better. If Fd time 
to spare, I would find out what I want to 
know without anybody's being the wiser. 
But as we are pressed, all I can do is to 
tackle the station-master." 

That dignified official soon appeared 
upon the platform. " There were only 
three or four passengers by the 8.55 train 
yesterday evening," he called out to an 
obsequious chorus of porters ; " who got 
the fares, do you know ?" 

Gradually the recollections of the porters 
took verbal shape. " Two or three walked 
. them as had little to carry. One old 
lady, and her maid and niece or daughter, 
drove in Slings fly to Marine Crescent 
Parrot in a cage, three boxes done up in 
canvas, and a heap of parcels. Then the 
* York Hotel ' omnibus had two, in white 



42 Lady Livingstoris Legacy, 

chokers. A commercial gent went to 
' Radley s/ And that's all." 

** No ; there was another," remarked a 
young Colossus in corduroys, leaning on 
his uplifted barrow ; ''a young tyke, black- 
looking, and grave as a lord mayor. It 
was Gould took him and his traps." 

The fly-driver in question was called 
from where he sat half-dozing on his box, 
and readily admitted his having, on the 
previous evening, " taken up " a gentle- 
man, young, dark, and well-spoken, with 
his luggage. His fare had been desirous 
to avoid going to any hotel, and he had 
conducted him, accordingly, first to one 
lodging-house and then to another, until 
he had engaged apartments to his taste. 
That was at Mrs. Kings, in Fitzwilliam 
Terrace, No. ii. He, Gould, had helped 
to carry the baggage upstairs. The young 
gentleman had returned with him to the 
station, and he, Gould, had pointed out to 
him the telegraph-office. A few minutes 
later, his former fare had '' footed it " back 
towards Fitzwilliam Terrace. 



The Start from Slingsbro\ 43 

To Oswald's surprise, instead of express- 
ing pleasure, Sergeant Flint's countenance 
lengthened considerably, and he softly 
whistled to himself a few bars of a lively 
tune before speaking, and when he spoke, 
it was to say : " Then we'll go with you, 
Gould, to Mrs. King's. Never mind about 
the luggage. Clap it in the cloak-room^ 
one of you ; we'll want it again, mayhap. 
Much obliged for your attention, Mr. 
Station-master. Jump in, squire." And 
no more did he say until he and his travel- 
ling companion alighted at the door of 
No. II. 

" Front room, second floor, eh ?" said 
the sergeant in reply to the maid-servant's 
statement. " And at home now, is he ? 
Thank you, my dear; we'll run up and 
announce ourselves. He expects us." 
And he dashed upstairs, followed, more 
slowly, by Oswald. The instant that he 
reached the landing-place, he seemed to 
know, as if by instinct, which was the 
room he sought. With a quick, imperative 
tap, tap ! of his iron knuckles, he anti- 



44 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

cipated the hesitating summons to enter, 
and threw open the door. A dark young 
man, who had been writing at the table, 
turned to confront the intruder. 



CHAPTER III. 



TRYING BACK. 




ERGEANT FLINT, holding the 
door-handle, stood still for a few 
seconds, during which his prac- 
tised eyes took in every detail of 
the furniture, from the brigand and shep- 
herdess in Staffordshire china which flanked 
the glass case with its stuffed seagull on 
the chimney-piece, to the tea-things, the 
open books, the writing-materials, the litter 
of crumpled shirts, brushes, tobacco- 
pouches, blue and white socks, meerschaum 
pipes, and fishing-tackle, which strewed the 
oilskin-covered top of the round loo-table. 
In the comer of the room stood a port- 
manteau of shining span-new leather, open^ 



46 Lady Livingston* s Legacy. 

and half-emptied of its contents. A bag, 
a slim umbrella, and a fishing-rod in its 
white canvas-case, were visible through the 
partially opened door of the adjacent bed- 
room. The tenant of these airy apartments 
had started to his feet, and stood staring 
at the invader of his privacy. 

" I beg your pardon, I am sure, but . " 
he began ; when the sergeant, with his 
accustomed volubility, broke in with : 

" I beg yours, I am sure, and so does 
the squire here. Name of Davis, I believe ? 
Not long here, eh ? Now, if we talk 
matters over in a quiet, amicable way, like 
all friends round the Wrekin, since Tm by 
birth a Shropshire man . come in, squire . 
well, sir, I do believe we'd arrive at some- 
thing satisfactory. We don't want to hurt 
a hair of your head, indeed not." 

The legitimate occupant of the rooms 
had changed colour more than once, and 
now stood looking first towards Oswald, 
and then towards the sergeant, with a 
surprise which, if not genuine, was 
admirably counterfeited. 



Trying Back, 47 



" I think it right to tell you/' said 
Charlton, compassionating the evident 
embarrassment of their interlocuter, " that 
we obtained some clue to your movements, 
and have followed you here . " 

" Not, surely, from . " burst out the 
young man, frowning and reddening . 
" from that place !'' he .added, in a more 
constrained manner ; " and, if so, may I 
ask why ?" 

"Considering the circumstances under 
which you left," said Oswald, somewhat 
nettled, " you need hardly be astonished if 
those who have a deep interest in the 
matter have taken some pains to discover 
the place of your retreat. You may, per- 
haps . ^and, for your sake, I sincerely trust 
that it is so . be able to explain your share 
in what has occurred ; and I believe that 
perfect frankness will prove your best 
policy. To make amends for the past . " 

" Upon my word, sir !" exclaimed the 
dark-complexioned young man, who was by 
this time very red and very angry, *' you 
are either a couple of escaped lunatics, or 



48 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

your impertinence is . is ! !" He broke 

down here, as if for want of an adequate 
epithet, and then resumed : ** What on 
earth can it signify to you whether I was 
plucked or not, I should be glad to know ? 
My family may say what they please, 
personally, but I will not submit to have 
strangers sent to persecute me in this un- 
warrantable fashion." 

" Sold !'* muttered the sergeant, leaning 
back against the door-post. " That's the 
chat. I was afraid of it before." But it 
was not in his nature to be seriously dis- 
concerted, so in the next instant he struck 
in : " Now, governor, there's no good in 
being out of sorts, is there ? if there has 
been a little mistake, as there clearly has 
been in this case. We're very far from 
wishing to give offence, Mr. Davis, to you 
or to anybody ; but I may as well mention'^ 
. and out came the little staff, with the 
crown-shaped brass head, that had approved 
itself a talisman on more perplexing 
occasions than the present . "that I am 
Sergeant Flint from Scotland Yard, and 



Trying Back. 49 



that we are wanting a party last known to 
te at Slingsborough, name of Davis, dark, 
and of about your age and height When 
you once see that weVe no desire to pry or 
to intrude, but merely to do our duty, why, 
-says you, any little explanation I can make 
is due to this officer, and the squire along 
with him, as between man and man, says 
you, we on our part apologizing for trouble 
given. So, if you would so far oblige us, 
we won't keep you up one minute later 
than necessary, not we." 

Thus adjured, the tenant of Mrs. King's 
lodgings proceeded, somewhat stammer- 
ingly, but with evident truthfulness of 
diction, to give the solicited information. 
He had really not much to telL How his 
name was Davis ; how he was an under- 
graduate of Brasenose College, Oxford ; 
how he had been unable for the second 
time, he was sorry to say, to satisfy the 
examiners of the university ; how his trades- 
men had simultaneously pressed for a settle- 
ment of their little bills, as if to illustrate 
the truth that misfortunes seldom come 

VOL. III. 4 



50 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

singly ; how his tutor had advised him to^ 
" go down and read ;" and how his familjr 
had been equally irate and annoyed at his. 
liabilities and his lack of learning, he told^ 
reluctantly indeed, but truthfully. Further, 
he related how he had written to propose 
to a college chum, the Admirable Crichton.^ 
of his set, Bob Baker by name, just then 
a brother in adversity, to share his lodgings 
at some quiet Yorkshire bathing-place, and 
plod through the classics in company ; how 
there had been some doubt and delay asr 
to this friend's procuring the funds necessary 
for the trip, and how he, Walter Weatherby 
Davis, had made a halt for a day or two at 
the manufacturing town of Slingsborough. 
while awaiting his friend's final decision, 
which had been suddenly announced by 
telegraph. 

"And here, gentlemen, if I have not 
mislaid it, is the telegram," added the 
luckless student as he rose to examine the. 
pockets of his loose overcoat, and presently 
produced a crumpled scrap of paper, which^ 



Trying Back. 51 



being unfolded and made smooth, proved 
to contain these words : 

** Squared it with the governor. In for 
a punisher through the Long. As you 
leave it to me, I choose Filey. When you 
have got lodgings, wire me up word, and 
rU be down by Thursda/s express, with 
all the new cribs and lots of Caven- 
dish.'' 

Appended to this was the signature of 
the redoubtable Robert Baker. 

" And I am afraid, sir," said the Oxonian, 
addressing himself to Oswald, " that my 
unfortunate nervousness of manner, due in 
this case to all I have had to go through 
since my breakdown in the schools, has 
contributed to attach some suspicion to my 
conduct. If you are still dissatisfied, you 
have but to wait until to-morrow to see 
Mr. Baker ; and I am sure you will find 
that his statements confirm mine in every 
particular." 

But Oswald was quite satisfied ; and so, 
for that matter, was Sergeant Flint; and 
after a few words of polite apology, they 

4.2 



52 Lady Livingston! s Legacy. 

left the late victim of the examiners to 
pursue his classical studies undisturbed. 
It was with somewhat blank faces that they 
looked at one another when they stood 
once more upon the pavement outside. 

*'We must try back, that's all, Mr. 
Charlton, sir," said the sergeant with a cheer- 
fulness that was not quite so spontaneous 
as was usual with him. " I began to feel 
uneasy when I saw the fruit ready to drop, 
dead-ripe, in that sort of style. Nothing 
worth having to be got, sir, without hard 
work; so we had better get to Slings- 
borough again/' 

" I suppose you are right," said Oswald. 
" If we were on a false scent, it certainly 
must be our next step to return and draw 
for our fox afresh." 

And, accordingly, the earliest train that 
left Filey on the following morning landed 
the searchers once more on the Slings- 
borough platform. This time, by the 
detective's advice, they separated, Oswald 
returning to the ** Blue Lion," while 
Sergeant Flint repaired to a house of far 



Trying Back, 53 



humbler pretensions, and which bore the 
rollicking appellation of the " Jolly 
Sawyers." 

" You see, squire," said the sergeant in 
explanation of his choice, '* every big town 
has got some public which is what news- 
papers call * known to the police,' and 
this is one of 'em. Not that it's a thieves' 
crib, bless you ! It's just a house where 
some very queer clubs and sub-committees 
hold their meetings ; and if a rattening job 
is to come off, it has mostly been settled, 
be sure of that, in one of the back parlours 
of the * Sawyers.' The Blades are curious 
customers to deal with ; and, between you 
and me, the Slingsborough police have to 
wink at a deal that in London wouldn't be 
left a day without interference. But it's 
one thing to chuck a tin canister of gun- 
powder down a chimney, or to blow up the 
hull a dry fork-grinder works in, and 
another to rob ; and the very fellows who 
are hired to take a shot at some obnoxious 
mate, would scorn to screen a common 
rogue ; and so the Force get the population 



54 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

pretty much on their side whenever society 
rules are not broken. At the 'Jolly 
Sawyers' I shall be sure to meet inspectors 
and sergeants of the local police on duty 
in plain clothes, and some of the hands 
may be able to point out our man's place 
of concealment." 

The sergeant had by this time com- 
pletely recovered from the temporary mor- 
tification caused by his ill success. The 
exercise of his profession furnished him 
with a brisk repetition of a game at hide- 
and-seek, wherein the players were fettered 
by few or no formal restrictions, and in 
which the balance of victory inclined im- 
partially to either side. But Oswald began 
to feel the wearing effects of his man-hunt . 
the feverish unrest, the keen disappoint- 
ment, the tremulous eagerness, which, to 
a highly . educated and sensitive nature, 
were the inevitable consequences of such a 
task as that which he had voluntarily under- 
taken. The skill with which his ally had 
discovered the first link in the chain had 
given him perhaps an over-confidence in a 



Trying Back. 5 5 



speedy and triumphant result, and now he 
was forced to admit that the chances of 
failure predominated. His return to the 
hospitable shelter of the " Blue Lion " was 
unattended by any remarkable incident The 
-drowsy landlord was, as usual, ensconced in 
the recesses of his private parlour ; but 
busy, buxom Mrs. Boys, on receiving a 
hint from the ringleted barmaid, showed a 
disposition to overwhelm the stranger 
with questions. She hoped . she did hope 
. that Mr. Charlton had succeeded in find 
ing what he was in search of, and her sym- 
pathy was evidently mingled with an itching 
curiosity to know the whole history of 
Oswald's quest. The young barrister was, 
however, in no mood for idle conversation, 
so, merely rejoining that he was anxious, 
from family reasons, to find a person sup- 
posed to be at Slingsborough, and that he 
had mistakenly followed a former customer 
of the hotel to Filey, he passed on up the 
the broad and shallow stairs to the room 
which had been allotted to him, and which 
was situated in a different part of the house 



56 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

from that which he had inhabited on the 
occasion of his previous visit. 

Mention has been made of a certain 
shady garden, well stocked with old-fash- 
ioned flowers, which was at the back of the 
" Blue Lion," and which was overlooked by 
the open window at which Oswald now 
stood, thoughtfully gazing out at the weed- 
grown and mossy paths, the lichens on the 
gray stone sun-dial, the little fish-pond, 
where a few great carp led their slow life 
beneath the shelter of the mantling duck- 
weed. The sight of those quaint old blos- 
soms, that bloomed unheeded below, diver- 
ted his meditations for a while from the 
present and his own affairs to the dead 
past to which .they seemed to belong. 
What was there left of the generation that 
had sniffed contentedly at those red and 
white roses that bore the significant names 
of York and Lancaster . that had plucked 
little sprigs of that fragrant sweet-brier, 
and had made up homely posies of yonder 
pinks and pansies and lilies as they awaited 
the squeak of the fiddles in the assembly^ 



Trying Back. 57 



rooms where the county ball should be 
held ? It was easy for fancy to people the 
now neglected garden with short-waisted 
ladies, whose leg-of-mutton sleeves, porten- 
tous bonnets gaudy with floral display, and 
sandalled shoes, are known to us merely by 
a few surviving caricatures. It was easy 
to conjure up the beaux of the period in their 
bell-crowned hats, their gorgeous under- 
waistcoats . blue, green, scarlet . over- 
lapping one another, their tight swallow- 
tailed coats of cerulean blue, and the 
strangling cravats of stiff white muslin 
around their poor throats. They, and the 
dances that they loved, and the sentimental 
songs they prized, and the witticisms that 
they pronounced to be " mons'ous clever,'' 
were gone, swept down by Time's scythe ; 
but yet the old flowers gave forth their for- 
mer sweetness in a perfumed youth that 
was constantly renewed. 

With somewhat of a sigh, Oswald 
Charlton turned away from the window, 
for the first time to examine the room in 
which he was. It was a somewhat smaller 



58. Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

chamber than that which he had previously 
occupied, but was neat, and not uncomfor- 
table; although the ponderous bed, with 
its watch-pockets sewn firmly to the cur- 
tains that draped the back of the huge 
sleeping-machine, gave evidence of a con- 
siderable antiquity, and the furniture of 
faded chintz had certainly not been manu- 
factured at a later date than that of the 
reign of the First Gentleman in Europe. 
There was for the central ornament of the 
chimney-piece a grotto, cunningly built 
with small sea-shells cemented together, 
and on either side of it was a large glisten- 
ing pear, carved in Derbyshire spar, and 
gaudily painted ; and beyond these, again, 
at either angle of the red marble mantel- 
piece, a large cavernous vase of blue Dutch 
porcelain, admirably copied from Japanese 
models in the days when Amsterdam and 
Jeddo were nearer together than they now 
seem to be, and which would have been 
worth a round price to any collector of 
ceramics. Of small account, in number 
forty-three of the ** Blue Lion," were those 



Trying Back. 59 



ancient Dutch imitations of far Eastern art. 
They had been made receptacles, not 
merely for withered petals of long-dead 
roses, but for cigar-ends, torn bills, and 
jniscellaneous scraps of paper. One of 
these, black-edged and partly burned, as 
if it had been hurriedly thrust into the 
flame of a candle, and then tossed into 
the vase, protruded a semi-calcined corner, 
and, scarcely aware of what he was doing, 
Oswald drew it forth and cast a glance 
at it, carelessly enough ; but in the next 
.instant he started, and with infinite care, 
and fingers that trembled with anxiety, 
smoothed out the charred scrap of black- 
ened manuscript, and began to read with 
such avidity as might be shown by the de- 
cipherer of some rare and priceless palimp- 
sest of the earliest centuries of our era. 

He read and re-read the words still 
traceable with breathless interest, and then, 
carefully locking up the half burned frag- 
ments of the letter in a drawer, he seized 
his hat, and hurried to Old Mill Street, 
where stood the " Jolly Sawyers/' There, in 



6o Lady Livingstones Legacy. ^ 

the fine dry skittle-ground attached to that 
establishment, he found the sergeant . not 
himself indulging in early potations, save to 
moisten his lips for the semblance of good- 
fellowship, but the cause of beer as related 
to others . offering eleemosynary pewter,, 
crowned by tempting froth, to sundry side- 
long-looking men who had somewhat of the 
bearing of artisans, and still more of attor« 
neys' clerks, and whom Oswald conjectured 
to be the members of some sub-committee,, 
caucus, or other Vehmgericht, potent over 
the limbs and eyes of offending operative 
cutlers. But a single whisper was suf- 
ficient to induce the detective to abandon 
his office of conciliating these influential 
auxiliaries, and to hurry towards the " Blue 
Lion " without the delay of a moment. 

" It's one of those starts," observed the 
sergeant, rubbing his heated brow with a 
red handkerchief as he hastened onwards 
. \' it's one of those starts that wouldn't 
seem true in print, but we do drop on them 
too in flesh-and-blood life. Ah, well ! 
Solomon was a wiser man than any of us,. 



Trying Back. 6 r 

squire, and he said truth was stranger than 
fiction ; didn't he ?" 

Without stopping to discuss the authen- 
ticity of this remarkable quotation, Oswald 
pushed on, accompanied by Sergeant Flint, 
to the " Blue Lion." Once safely back in the 
room where he had left the morsel of pre- 
<:ious paper, he unlocked ,. the drawer, and 
spreading it with nice care on the table, ex- 
hibited it for the inspection of his colleague- 
Flint's excitement was soon equal to 
Oswald's as he perused the fragmentary- 
document, reading as follows : 

" Never safe so long as . ^police prowling 
. suspect . landlady a spy, but a fool . ser- 
vant . remember . threw out hints . regret 
not having . pounds . her silence, which . 
only hiding-place . foreign, and you . will 
write to Paris . where you . political events 
which . doubly safe, whatever . Commune, 
or Versailles . French fluently, as you . 
English protect . easily pass, if necessary, 
either for . your letter, as before, to the 
Library I . on no account . nor delay an 
hour . money inclosed, which . safer than 



62 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

. better bargain, while you . Violet, whO' 



is '' 



This was all. The scorched and torn 
fragment contained no other legible words ; 
nor did the most careful scrutiny bring to 
light any other scraps of the same letter 
from the depths of the vase. 

Having heedfully pored over every dis- 
jointed sentence which the pen had traced 
on the discoloured paper, the sergeant 
walked to the window, and there relieved 
his feelings by whistling, with very fair 
execution and perfect accuracy, no lively or 
jocund air, but the Dead March in " Saul." 
Then he came softly back again to the 
table, and cast another and a more critical 
glance at the manuscript lying there. 

*' Well !" said Oswald, almost im^ 
patiently; "what have you to say to 
that ?" 

" Just this, squire," answered the imper- 
turbable detective : '* I had almost made 
up my mind, once or twice, that we were 
going on a wild-goose chase, for the second 
time, on the strength of this hand-breadtk 



Trying Back, 6 j 



of burned paper that a breath would blow 
into tinder. You see, Larpent, or Davis, 
is not the only person that the police are 
looking after. We might shoot at the 
pigeon, mightn't we, and not care to bag 
the crow we had hit ? Once I followed a 
Bank forger, as I thought, all the way to 
the north of Ireland ; and when I took 
him, easy as a lamb, at the Giants' Cause- 
way, he turned out to be a defaulting parish- 
officer, not worth powder and shot. If we 
go knocking about France after the wrong 
man, we shall lose the right one. A week 
would blind the trail, as an American 
inspector I once worked with used to 
say." 

" And yet," said Oswald, marvelling at 
the sudden caution of his companion, " the 
purport of the letter is quite clear. Every 
word fits " 

** As if it had been made to measure. I 
grant that,'' put in Sergeant Flint ; " but,, 
then, we were in a humour, squire, you and 
I, to make anything a peg to hang the dis- 
covery of our man upon. There is but one 



64 Laky Livingstons Legacy. 

strong point. It's, not the hand-writing. 
I have got here a bit of Miss Aphy's ; but, 
then, all women write alike. There are 
four or five schools of penning, but the in- 
dividual hand is not to be sworn to. I'd 
really like, squire, to hear what you think 
the point is.'' 

" The mention of Miss Maybrook's 
Christian name ; not a doubt of it," 
answered Oswald without hesitation. 
" That, at least, can be no accidental in- 
stance of similarity." 

" Hit the bull's-eye, by Jove !" exclaimed 
the detective with manifest delight. " I 
only wanted to know if you saw it too, 
that's all. Shake hands on it, squire, if 
you'll condescend so far ; I feel as if I'd be 
the better for it. Now we must not sell the 
bear's skin, must we, before we hunt him 
down .'* There's a deal to do. We must 
swear informations, get a state warrant, 
have it backed properly at the Foreign 
Office and the French Embassy ; and I'm 
not at all sure Starkey ought not to be of 
the party. He's a better Frenchman, in 



Trying Back. 65 



the lingo, than I can pretend to be, the 
superintendent is ; though, as for knowing 
Paris in a general way, we are both tarred 
pretty much with one feather." 

" But the Paris you and your comrades 
have known,'' rejoined Oswald, who sud- 
denly became grave and thoughtful, " was 
a very different place from the blood- 
stained, war-plagued city which this vaga- 
bond has selected as his appropriate refuge. 
The Germans are still encamped before it, 
while the troops of the Versailles govern- 
ment besiege it from the west ; and, grant- 
ing that we contrive to gain admittance, 
and that this Larpent is really there, his 
arrest will be no easy matter. You will 
not find, as formerly, the sleek and fair- 
spoken imperial police to lend their neigh- 
bourly help. It will be hard to find him . 
harder to take him into custody. And we 
ourselves shall run some little risk of being 
shot as spies by one party or the other." 

" It'll be rough, rough and irregular," 
said the sergeant, again whistling, but this 
time, as an appropriate tune, the ** Point of 

VOL. III. 5 



66 Lady Livingstoris Legacy. 

War." "But I am ready, and so would 
Starkey be, in the way of duty, to take it 
as it comes. Let us ask a question or two 
as to the late occupiers of this room, just to 
be quite sure before starting, and then we 
can catch the up-train." 

Yes. There could be no doubt of it. 
Bruce Larpent, under the name of Warbur- 
ton, and giving himself out as the first 
officer of an American merchantman . a 
character which he could well maintain . 
had been domiciled for some days beneath 
the roof of the " Blue Lion." 

" We were right this once, squire, to try 
back!" said Sergeant Flint, rubbing his 
hands together as the train sped on towards 
London. 




CHAPTER IV. 

OVER THE WATER. 

ARBLEU ! You are extraordi- 
nary people, you other English. 
If I had to seek a malefactor in 
your foggy capital, Ik has, it is not 
precisely the moment when London was in 
flames that I should care to select. Know 
you that Paris burns . ^that there are six 
conflagrations visible from the outer 
enceinte for the fortifications ? Know you 
that the gutters run red, red with blood, 
monsieur, while yet the cannon thunder, 
and yet these desperate madmen hold their 
barricades, and stand to their guns, and to 
enter is a double danger ? Yet perhaps 

5.2 



68 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

your insular eccentricity is attracted by all 
this that I tell you now." 

The speaker was a little old man, whose 
thin white hair hung down from beneath a 
cap embroidered with golden oak-leaves, 
and from beneath whose tightly-buttoned 
frock-coat, which had also more oak-leaves 
on its stiff official collar, peeped out a mor- 
sel of the broad tricoloured scarf which 
denoted his position. The scene was the 
well-known junction of Creil ; but how 
changed, by the baleful breath of the necro- 
mancer. War ! from that smug and smiling 
Creil that touring Britons, bent on a 
pleasant continental holiday, regard as in 
some sort the ante-chamber of gay Paris. 
The bridge had been blown up long since, 
and iron girders, bent into fantastic shapes, 
and pillars of shattered masonry, projected 
over the crumbling banks of the river. The 
station had been in part converted into an 
hospital, it seemed, for a few tottering con- 
valescents, with heads bound up, or bear- 
ing a disabled arm in a sling, and clad in 
the loose gray gown of the infirmary 



Over the Water. 69 

patient, showed their blanched faces and 
large wistful eyes at the doors. Here lay 
a broken gun-carriage, there a tumbril or a 
wagon, overturned long since, and which 
no one had had time or forethought to clear 
away. It scarcely needed the sight of the 
helmeted German sentinel on the opposite 
bank to prove how sore was the trial 
through which France and Frenchmen had 
passed since the piping times of peace. 

Oswald Charlton and Sergeant Flint 
had been almost the only first-class passen- 
gers in the train that, having journeyed 
slowly from the coast, had now come to a 
compulsory halt at the spot where the iron 
road was interrupted. They had under- 
gone, as a matter of course, the usual ques- 
tioning which in times of foreign war and 
domestic discord afflicts the traveller, and 
had come well out of the ordeal. The little 
old commissary of police was compelled to 
admit that their papers were quite regular, 
and that Oswald's replies were perfectly 
satisfactory. But when official formalism 
was contented, the chief authority at Creil 



70 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

was still reluctant to consent to the English- 
men's prosecution of what he not unreason- 
ably regarded as a kind of tempting of 
Providence. 

" It is all very well," he said irritably, 
" to talk of duty, and I hope I would do 
my own in case of urgent need, but surely 
a man should think twice before he risks 
his skin in such a hornets' nest as ce cher 
Paris has become. I know that to be Pre- 
fect of the Seine, I would not enter the 
great town now . for what ? to hear some 
miserable gamin in tattered vestments cry 
' Mouchard !' and to be shot with one's 
back to a wall, like a dog. Well ! go, if 
go you must. The proverb says that a 
Breton is as obstinate as a mule, and, from 

Breton to Briton Tiens ! I have failed 

to make a pun there 1" 

And the old man took a copious pinch 
of snuff from a little silver box, and became 
quite good-humoured on the strength of his 
own wit. 

" The Englishmen," he said, " could only 
enter Paris on one side, that of St Denis, 



Over the Water. 7 1 

occupied by the German troops. The 
other roads were all bloqu6s by the army 
of Versailles. As the Englishmen's pass- 
ports bore the stamp of the Prussian em- 
bassy in London " (and so saying, the com- 
missary shook his fist, stealthily, at the 
sprawling eagle in blue official ink), " the 
enemy would grant a free passage through 
their lines. So far, so good. If the voy- 
agers came back no more, it was not for 
want of a seasonable word of good advice 
from M. le Commissaire de Creil." 

Ten minutes later, the improvised ferry- 
boat was wafting the two adventurers across 
the narrow river, on the farther bank of 
which they were hailed by the German 
sentry. 

" Stand, friend ; the countersign-not- 
with-acquainted 1 Rounds-for-relief even 
now, by sergeant commanded, are, as we 
speak, this way coming," called out the 
gentleman in the spiked helmet, in reply to 
Oswald's address in German. The ser- 
geant, on arriving with the fresh barenhau- 
ter, to replace the one whose turn of 



72 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

guardianship had now expired, proved 
reasonable enough. 

"You must come to the guard-house, 
Englander," he said, after a glance at the 
passport which the young barrister pro- 
duced ; " and no doubt my high-and-well- 
bom Herr Ober Lieutenant on duty will 
report you to the Platz-major, who will 
authorize you to continue your journey. 
Fall in ; right ; march !" 

And carrying as best they might their 
light baggage, Oswald and the detective 
followed to the guard-house, and after be- 
ing conducted, under escort of a corporal, 
from one officer to another, at length 
received the visa necessary to enable them 
to pursue their way to St. Denis, whither a 
train of snail's pace and frequent stoppages, 
crammed with Prussian soldiers and French 
market-people, conveyed them by dusk. 
So far, their route, though wearisome, had 
been neither perilous nor exceptionally 
difficult. 

" Look, squire, at the red yonder ; that's 
an ugly sight 1" exclaimed Sergeant Flint, 



Over the Water. 73 

touching his companion's elbow as they 
alighted on the brick platform, encumbered 
by lounging military, and by stores which 
fatigue-parties were toiling to carry away in 
various directions. Sure enough, in the 
south-western sky there hung an angry 
light of a ruddy colour, like the glow of a 
monstrous furnace, while the smell of burn- 
ing came faintly from afar. 

" They have fired the Tuileries,'* was the 
gruff rejoinder of a brawny Landwehrsman,. 
to whom Oswald applied for information, 
" and the H6tel de Ville, and the big 
Dom-kirche, I believe, for we can't see it 
for the smoke, and there won't be much of 
their city left if they go on at this rate, 
Teufelsbrod! Well, a good riddance! 
Better they make an end of it that way, 
than bring honest men from home to knock 
them on the head, Herr Englishman." 

It was soon clear that, before the morn- 
ing, it would be impossible to comply with 
the preliminary formalities without which 
none could hope to cross the German lines. 
There was the Polizei-bureau of which to 



74 Lady Ltvingstofts Legacy. 

. 

run the gauntlet, then the Platz-command- 
ant to satisfy, then the indispensable signa- 
ture of the Deputy-adjutant-general to 
procure. At seven in the morning, the 
early-rising Teutons would begin to be 
ready for business ; but so late in the even- 
ing, a refusal would await even a Serene 
Highness who should desire to proceed to 
Paris. There was nothing for it but to 
spend the night in St. Denis. 

A strange evening it was, the few inns, 
and hotels which the little town possessed 
were crowded to suffocation by well-to-do 
fugitives from Paris ; while impromptu 
bivouacs, where furniture, wearing-apparel, 
and carts, were mingled pell-mell with men, 
women, and children, had been formed in 
the more open spaces by those too poor or 
too thrifty to avail themselves of the costly 
hospitality of the townsfolk. On every 
side resounded in the French tongue loud 
lamentations over ruined homes, or per- 
chance the passionate outburst of grief of 
some mother whose son had been torn from 
her to bear a musket in the Communist 



Over the Water, 75 

ranks. The wildest and most exaggerated 
reports were circulated as to the horrors of 
which the doomed city was now the scene, 
and feelings which we only know from the 
mimic presentment of the stage, were now 
freely evinced at every corner, and before 
the door of every petty wine-shop, where a 
knot of eager talkers could collect. Wher- 
ever a mound or terrace offered itself, it 
was certain to be occupied by groups of 
French, wildly gesticulating as they turned 
their terror-stricken gaze towards the ill- 
omened glare that overhung Paris, and 
listened, fearfully, to the boom of the sullen 
cannon. 

Mingling with the Prussian soldiery who 
thronged the more elevated spots of ground 
whence could be obtained the best view of 
the burning city, the two Englishmen 
almost forgot the errand which had brought 
them to Paris in their breathless interest in 
the great and terrible spectacle before 
them. It was not easy for a stranger to 
remember his own individual stake in the 
great game that was brought so vividly 



76 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

into notice by the lurid glare that over- 
spread the fair capital ; by the black smoke 
that in places floated over the city like 
the flapping wing of some giant raven 
come to batten on carnage ; and by the 
occasional leaping up of yellow flames and 
the whirling shower of fiery sparks, which 
told that the roof of some burning building 
had fallen in. And all this time went on 
the hoarse roar of the besiegers batteries 
to the south and west, answered, but feebly 
and at irregular intervals, by the artillery 
of the defenders ; while the incessant peal 
of the tocsin, rung from belfry and church- 
tower, mingled with the sharp crackling of 
musketry, now taking the form of dropping 
shots, now of a platoon volley, and again of 
the regular roll of file-firing, and the dull 
beat of drums, and the vague noise of 
shouting and trampling, or what seemed to 
be such, faintly audible. 

" They are rum beggars, Mr. Charlton, 
very much so. There's never any know- 
ing what new whims they'll be following,'" 
said the sergeant, as he contemplated the 



Over the Water. 77 



.vil glow which hung like an enchanted 
atmosphere over Paris, and his unadorned 
words represented the substance of a thou- 
sand leading articles in English newspapers, 
with a thousand to the back of that. 

" No," returned Oswald, with a some- 
what sad smile ; " we cannot understand 
them, Sergeant Flint The truth, or one 
truth among many, is that these French 
are distressingly in earnest, and translate 
political theories into grape-shot and gun- 
powder. We English argue as loudly, but 
we always contrive to leave a weak place 
in our logic, through which plain common- 
sense can creep. I must admit that this 
Larpent has chosen a hiding-place where 
he was not over-likely to be disturbed. 
Yet find him we must, if we have to search 
every garret in the Marais, and every 
swarming rabbit-warren of the He St 
Louis. The firing is getting fainter now, 
although it remains uncertain whether the 
troops have effected a lodgment or been 
repulsed." 

" Get home, Herr Englander, get home!" 



78 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

said a good-natured voice, in German,, 
spoken with a strong Polish accent, hard 
by. " The bugles have sounded the re~ 
treat these ten minutes ; and if the patrol 
comes across any civilians without lanterns 
after tattoo, they get a lesson by being 
marched off to the post, that's all. You 
are a stranger here, count, aren't you ?" 

" Indeed, I am," answered Oswald, turn- 
ing towards the speaker, a tall, trim-waisted 
young corporal in the dark-blue uniform of 
Prussia ; " and I am much obliged for the 
hint . Come, Mr. Flint; I see that four- 
fifths of the spectators here have melted 
away ; and there, sure enough, are the 
lanterns beginning to glimmer, as if every 
one in St Denis were looking for an honest 
man, after the fashion of Diogenes. Our 
destination is Rue de la Paroisse, but I 
hardly know, in the dim light, in which 
direction it lies." 

" I can tell you," answered the Polish 
soldier ; " indeed, I am going past it, on 
my way to the commissary - general's 
quarters, and will point it out with pleasure. 



Over the Water. 79 

, . Yes, I am from Posen," he added, in 
answer to a question of Oswald's, as they 
walked on side by side ; " and if I chose 
my own colours in this war, gentlemen, 
should not be ranged beneath the standard 
which bears this ugly fowl you see in brass 
upon the front of my helmet, I can tell 
you. The best banner for a Pole to fight 
under is the white one, with the dear old 
horseman and red eagle, count. Well, 
well ; in ten months my three years of ser- 
vice finish, and I shall see the wild pear- 
trees growing in the sandy fields, and the 
green birchwoods, and Varnitz church- 
steeple, and my uncle's stone tower, again." 
And he went on to impart a good deal 
of his personal history to his new-found 
friend, relating with perfect frankness his 
own early adventures when he had joined 
the insurgents in Russian Poland, where he 
had relatives by the score, and had only 
been spared the alternative of hanging, or 
Siberia, on account of his being recognized 
as a Prussian subject; how he was be- 
trothed to his pretty cousin Maria, over the 



8o Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

border ; how his father, who had died as a 
political prisoner, in a fortress, had been a 
blacksmith, like many of the minor Polish 
nobles ; and how his uncle, who owned five 
ploughs, and three thousand head of geese, 
had adopted him, and would doubtless 
leave him the acres and the live-stock, and 
the gray castellated house ; but how he 
was in no hurry to stand in the old farmer's 
shoes, if only the weary war were over, and 
Maria his wife. 

"That's the Rue de la Paroisse," he 
said in conclusion ; " and there, on the 
opposite side, where the even numbers are, 
is your No. 24. . No ; thank you, count," 
as he proudly put back the money which 
Oswald offered ; ** one gentleman is glad to 
oblige another. So, good-night, and good 
luck be with you !" And with a gracefully 
performed salute, the young Sarmatian 
swaggered off. 

No. 24 was one of those houses, all too 
large for the occupation of their owners, 
which had suddenly proved mines of wealth 
to the prudent French bourgeoise to whom 



Over the Water. 8 1 

they belonged, and where every available 
chamber was competed for at prices that 
would even in Exhibition-time have stirred 
the envy of an ordinary lodging-house 
keeper. A German captain was quartered 
in the appartement du premier, and he, of 
course, paid nothing ; but all the rest of 
the house, save the nook which the q^reful 
proprietresses, two ancient maiden sisters, 
reserved for themselves and their grumbling 
bonne, was let to fugitives whose hearts and 
hopes were in Paris, and who could not 
bear to lose sight of the only city in the 
world which habit rendered tolerable to 
them. It had only been by dint of lavish 
payment and judicious persuasion that 
Oswald had secured accommodation for 
Sergeant Flint and himself beneath that 
roof, where the very vegetables drying 
beneath the sun-heated tiles had been dis- 
placed to make space for human tenants, 
and where the wailing of children, the com- 
plaining sound of female voices, and the 
banging and slamming of doors, were in- 
cessant 

VOL. III. 6 



82 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

*' I know Paris, for an Englishman at 
least, pretty well," said the young barrister, 
as he re-opened the window to listen to 
the deep, boding sound of the renewed 
cannonade ; '* but, except the Rue Jean 
Jacques Rousseau, I can conjecture no one 
place where we are likely to encounter the 
runaway. For his letters, should the Post- 
office have escaped the general conflagra- 
tion, he must inquire, of course, and that 
seems our one chance." 

" I don't know, sir . I don't know," re- 
turned the detective, with twinkling eyes. 
** Of course, Tve read in the papers, and so 
have you, how they shot the gend'armes, 
and chased the police like so many mad 
dogs through the streets. But they have 
nine lives, I reckon, my old friends in the 
Rue Jerusalem, and it's odd if I don't light 
upon some acquaintance or other who can 
give a helping hand for the sake of com- 
radeship and a couple of hundred francs. 
Why, there used to be fellows at the Pre- 
fecture who would find out at a day's notice 
not merely where a stranger lived, but what 



Over the Water. 83 



brought him to Paris. It was the screw 
they put on, sir, that made every concierge, 
and tout, and petty innkeeper, useful. We 
can^t do it. Against our principles, I am 
sorry to say. . But here comes supper," as 
a knock resounded on the worm-eaten panels 
of the door, and a white-aproned boy from 
a neighbouring traiteur's made his appear- 
ance with a basket 

" Yes ; you can set the basket down, 
young man, and let us see what your master 
has done for us. . Ah, well," continued the 
sergeant, as he whisked away the snow- 
white cloth, and revealed the treasures be- 
neath ; " not so bad, considering. There's 
the Lyons sausage, that is the pate ; here's 
the chicken ; yonder is the cudgel of a loaf; 
and this must be salad, in the bowl. A 
little fruit, a screw of salt, four knobs of 
sugar, and a bottle of wine. I suppose, 
with all those hungry soldiers about, he 
couldn't well spare us more ; but we may 
escape starvation, after all." 

Oswald, however, had little appetite, nor 
was his sleep of the soundest. His dreams, 

6.2 



84 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

when he fell into an uneasy slumber, were 
troubled and confused, and ever and anon 
he started from his pillow as the distant 
booming of the artillery, which never seemed 
absolutely to cease, came with renewed 
vigour to his ears. Nor was the house of 
which he was an occupant by any means a 
place conducive to unbroken repose, for the 
babel of sounds which echoed through it 
from attic to cellar, seemed to be hushed 
for only two brief hours of the darkness. 
And then, stealing in, wan and pale, came 
the sickly light of early morning, and there 
was noise within doors and without, the 
clang of bugles and the roll of wheels. It 
was day already, and before the sun had 
risen high in heaven, came the report that 
the troops had forced an entrance, and 
that several fresh fires had broken out in 
Paris. 




CHAPTER V. 

OVER BLOOD AND ASHES. 

OT a Step nearer, messieurs, not 
if you paid me five napoleons 
an hour, with a pour-boire de 
prince at setting down !*' said 
the coachman of a hackney-carriage whom 
Oswald and the sergeant had bribed to 
convey them to Paris, but who had sud- 
denly pulled up his lean horses as the 
sharp sound of a fusillade rang out from 
behind the green mound of the inner ram- 
part, and a ball whistled through the open 
gateway, and flattened itself against the 
front of a half-ruined house that stood 
without the walls. " No, no !" and as he 
spoke, he flung down his whip. " Tve a 



86 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

wife, see you, and five children ; and it 
does not suit me to be pulled trigger upon, 
like a duck tied by the leg to a post at the 
fair of Bougival. So pay me what you 
like, and let me turn my beasts' heads 
back, and be off beyond the reach of harm. 
Peste ! I don't like the sugarplums they 
pelt us with at this camaval de malheur. 
Quick, gentlemen, if you please," as an- 
other spent ball dropped harmless on the 
dusty pavement. " I have been a fool to 
accept such a fare as this." 

So saying, the timorous knight of the 
whip pocketed his gratuity, climbed to his 
box, and flogged his meagre steeds into a 
hand-gallop on the stony road that led to 
the suburbs and safety. The two English- 
men, rather amused than annoyed at this 
incident, determined to push on, on foot, 
taking their chance of discovering some 
conveyance when once within the walls. 
There was no guard at the gate to demand 
their passports ; but as they passed beyond 
the shadow of the fortifications, they met 
four fugitives advancing at a run. The 



Over Blood and Ashes. 8 7 

first three wore the blue uniform, with 
epaulets of red worsted, of the National 
Guard, disordered and torn. All had 
thrown away their arms ; but their hands 
and faces, smeared with blood and black- 
ened with powder, told of the desperate 
character of the affray from which they 
had freshly come ; while the fourth, a tall, 
well-built young fellow, was arrayed in the 
scarlet woollen shirt and brigand's hat af- 
fected by the Garibaldians, and had a re- 
volver still in his crimson sash, on the 
handle of which he placed one hand as he 
turned his head to take note as to whether 
the pursuers were yet in sight, while the 
other hand was pressed firmly to his side, 
whence the dark blood welled in heavy 
drops from a gunshot wound, while his 
pale face looked the more deathly white 
from contrast with his coal-black hair that 
hung around in elf-locks. Scarcely had 
the last of these gone panting past, when 
the head of a small column of infantry 
came in view, hurrying swiftly on in the 



88 Lady Livingstotis Legacy. 

straggling order habitual to French sol- 
diers. 

" Les voila ! the scoundrels ! Down 
with them !" cried a dozen voices, instantly 
followed by an irregular discharge, the 
leaden hail rattling against the walls of the 
abandoned houses. Oswald and his com- 
panion had but just time to throw them- 
selves into the friendly shelter of an arched 
carriage-entrance as the balls hissed by; 
and as the smoke of the volley cleared 
away, they could observe that one of the 
Nationals had fallen on his face, and lay 
motionless, while the other three were van- 
ishing through the gateway. 

** Here are two more !" exclaimed a 
young soldier, whose beardless face was 
flushed, and his gestures wild and angry, 
with the excitement, doubtless, of the 
bloody work from which he came. " Tiens ! 
I have a leaden plum for this one ;" and he 
levelled his rifle at Sergeant Flint; but 
some one in the next rank seized his arm 
before he could fire. 

" Not so fast, Petit Jean," cried the man 



Over Blood and Ashes. 89 

who had so opportunely intervened. " Our 
orders are to hurt nobody not caught red- 
handed and in arms. Gently, my son ! 
I'm much mistaken if these two are not 
mere innocent travellers . English, I should 
say." 

And an officer who now arrived breath- 
less, to overtake the detachment, readily 
admitted, on the production of the inevitable 
papers, that the Englishmen were free to 
pursue their way. 

" At the same time, monsieur," said the 
lieutenant to Oswald, " you must permit 
me to say that you have chosen an ill- 
advised moment for your arrival, mille 
bombes, but you have ! I had better send 
back a corporal and two men with you as 
far as the Marchd aux Grains, for fear you 
should come to harm. On a day like this, 
accidents are likely to happen, and, by the 
Blue Death, we don't want to be embroiled 
with the cabinet of St. James's because a 
brace of wandering Englishmen have been 
mistaken for these scoundrels of the Com- 
mune." 



90 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

.* ' . 

Thanking this far-sighted patriot for his 
polite attention, Oswald Charlton and his 
travelling companion pressed on under 
escort. The signs of fight were now more 
numerous, for shakoes, muskets, and 
cartouche-boxes strewed the ground ; while 
in a corner, at the angle where two walls 
met, lay, huddled together, five or six dead 
bodies, four of which were clad in the 
uniform of the revolted Nationals, while 
the other two were in the garb of civil life. 
An old woman, one of those female rag- 
pickers who gleam a precarious livelihood 
as they range the streets with wallet and 
iron hook, was stooping over the fallen 
men, and rifling their pockets as they lay, 
while from the heap there trickled, serpent- 
like, along, thin stream of yet warm blood, 
that overflowed the asphalt of the footway, 
and reached the kennel beyond. 

" Ah, to be sure . the brigands !" said the 
corporal, in answer to the unspoken question 
which Oswald s look conveyed. " Yes, 
there they lie, till somebody has leisure to 
fetch a spade and some quicklime, and put 



Over Blood and Ashes. 9 1 

the carrion out of sight. They surrendered^ 
this lot ; but we could not be burdened 
with prisoners ; so we just drew them up 
in line, with their backs to ,the wall, and 
then !" . the description being emphasized 
by bringing the musket-butt to the shoulder, 
as if in the act of firing. ** You see that 
fellow in the black coat . he with the red 
sash round his waist," pursued the corporal^ 
pointing to a corpse that lay a little nearer 
than the others : *' he was their captain ; 
and though his breast was riddled with 
balls, he tried to crawl off on his hands 
and knees. Joseph, here, gave him the 
coup de grace behind the ear . there where 
you see the brains; and that youngster 
with the blouse went on his knees, and 
begged mercy for his mother's sake. 
Pressed into the Communist ranks, he said 
he was. Tonnerre ! but we pressed him 
out again, the good-for-nought." 

Disgusted as Oswald was with the boast- 
ful talk of his loquacious custodian, he yet 
saw reason to be glad of the protection 
which his presence afforded; for they 



.92 Lady Livingston's Legacy, 

frequently encountered small parties of the 
victorious troops in hot chase of the routed 
insurgents, now rushing into a house where 
some informer had declared a Communist 
to be concealed, now searching every lane 
and nook where it was possible that the 
wounded might have taken refuge ; but in 
each instance the clamours and curses of 
the pursuers told that the direst spirit of 
hatred . a passion such as civil war alone 
can evoke . was let loose. Some of the 
younger soldiers in especial, on whom 
bloodshed seemed to produce the madden- 
ing effect of strong drink, brandished their 
bayonets before Sergeant Flint's unwinking 
eyes, and were only pacified by the re- 
monstrances of the sous-officier, under 
whose charge the Englishmen had been 
placed. Some hundred yards off they 
came to the ruins of a barricade, strongly 
constructed of paving-stones, barrels filled 
with earth and timber, but which had been 
breach'ed by cannon and carried by assault, 
the bodies of several of the defenders 
lying tumbled about among the splintered 



Over Blood and Ashes. 9 3, 

planks and heaped-up rubbish ; while a few 
paces off, dressed in the fantastic fashion 
of a vivandidre, lay a dead woman, her 
long dark hair streaming loose, and her 
white face upturned. 

" Pity her !" exclaimed the inexorable 
corporal, in reply to Oswald's exclamation 
of involuntary horror. *'Why, monsieur, 
if she had had as many lives as a cat, they 
were justly forfeit to the law. A pdtroleuse,. 
that, who bragged of having helped to 
kindle the blaze at the H6tel de Ville, 
besides fighting like a tigress when we 
stormed the work. No, no; one can't 
make an omelette without breaking eggs ; 
and that was a good riddance to Paris and 
France. Dreadful wretches these, comrade \ 
and I only hope to finish with them once 
for all, and root out the whole wasps' nest. 
You've heard, surely, how they murdered 
the priests, archbishop and all, vile 
miscreants as they are . I'm a Breton my- 
self, sir; and sacrilege drives me frantic 
when I think of it . ^and how, after that, 
can you care if the puddle-blood of these 



( 



94 Lady Livingston! s Legacy. 

unpraying pigs runs faster than ever the 
Seine ran !" 

Soon afterwards, the great corn-market 
was reached, were a full battalion was 
halted, with stacked arms for the most 
part, keeping watch over a number of pri- 
soners, all of whom were bound, some with 
<:ords, others with belts or scarfs torn from 
their own uniform. A nondescript horde 
they were . ragged, mischievous striplings, 
who kept up their gaiety of spirit in the 
very jaws of death, as the Parisian gamin 
alone can do ; gray-bearded elderly men, 
with haggard eyes, and faces lined and 
seamed by care and dissipation, mute and 
sullen as trapped foxes, but with yet a 
certain savage dignity of bearing ; old foes 
of society, who had broken all laws, and 
borne all punishments but the last and now 
scorned to plead for pardon; intelligent 
young men in blouse or military tunic, 
superior workmen these, and rather artists 
than artisans ; students in rusty black ; 
political enthusiasts, with white hands and 
well-brushed hair, who had given up home, 



Over Blood and Ashes. 9 5 

and wife, and comfort to fight for a dream 
of universal equality, and who were ready, 
now that they had lost, to pay the stakes, 
and die like men. There were men and 
lads, too, loud in their unheeded vocifer- 
ations that they were no Communists, but 
forced into the ranks of the Nationals by 
hunger or threats, and of these not a few 
were obviously deserters or stragglers from 
the army ; while there were women, louder 
and fiercer than the men, answering the 
taunts of the scoffing soldiery with furious 
jeers and curses, and calling to them, 
mockingly, to fire, and complete their 
work. 

*' A nice time I have of it here !" grum- 
bled out the major in command, as he 
lifted his shako and wiped his heated 
brows. " I can just keep my men from 
cutting the throats of these noisy wild 
beasts, and only just, when two rosbifs are 
brought to me to dry-nurse. . I don't mean 
to be rude, monsieur,'* he added ; ** but it's 
hard to put down a revolution with rose- 
water, and the devil's work of these last 



96 Lady Livingstotis Legacy. 

days would try the courtesy of a saint 
. and I'm none. On important business^ 
are you ? Well, you had better get as 
best you can to some hotel or other, shut 
the window-shutters, and never budge out 
for the next eight and forty hours. Til 
give you a pass ; or stay. . Capitaine 
Lemarchant, haven't you got a man at- 
tached to your company who talks English 
and knows their ways ? Yes ; the Zouave,, 
who escaped from Sedan. Let him go 
with the Englishmen here, and see them 
to a place of safety." 

The new guide, a tall man, with bare 
neck, loose red trousers, and turban of 
dirty white, and who was almost as proud 
of his dozen English words, learned by 
rote, as of the Crimean medals that glit- 
tered on his breast, proved a good- 
humoured veteran enough, and seemed to 
regard the business in hand as almost un- 
worthy the attention of one who had 
roughed it in the trenches of Sebastopol, 
and crossed bayonets with the Russians at 
Inkermann. He was quite willing to be 



Over Blood and Ashes. 9 7 

the strangers' safeguard wherever they 
might wish to be conducted ; and on Os- 
wald's mentioning the name of an hotel in 
the Rue de Rivoli, he shrugged his shoul- 
ders, and said that he should be glad to be 
so long in company of his old friends the 
islanders. 

"But you can't load yourselves with 
these bags of yours any more," he said, as 
he noticed how the explorers were laden ; 
^* while J have enough to carry, what with 
knapsack, blanket, and greatcoat, to say 
nothing of the cooking-tins and the two 
days' rations in my haversack. Here is a 
lad who will relieve you of the weight for 
the price of a meal, I should say." 

And, indeed, the tattered scarecrow of a 
boy, slinking about them, his bright eyes 
and hollow cheeks telling tales of the siege 
and its privations, gladly snatched at the 
occasion of earning some small silver, and 
plodded, bearing the light loads, at the 
heels of the party. Still the sound of 
heavy firing resounded from many quar- 
ters, and it was evident that the victory of 

VOL. III. 7 



98 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

the Versailles Government was far from 
cemplete. 

" Hark ! do you hear the cannon ?" the 
talkative guide once exclaimed. " That 
must be in the street of La Roquette^ 
where the great barricade is, with six guns* 
TheyVe a young sailor there, the nationals 
have, that never misses his aim when he 
points a cannon. It was he who beat off 
the Prussians, after Ducrot's sortie, and he 
who kept our people from the Porte Maillot 
for whole days . the best gunner in the 
fleet, they say. But ifs all of no use. The 
game is played out Look at the towns- 
people waving handkerchiefs from the bal- 
conies, and hear them cry, * Vive la ligne !' 
There's many a one who flattered these 
Commune fellows when they were in 
power, who's ready enough now to point 
the way to where the poor devils are 
trembling in their attics ; and we shall be 
masters here before night." 

Meanwhile Sergeant Flint had drawn- 
from his breast pocket a photograph which 
he carried there, carefully wrapped in silver 



Over Blood and Ashes. 99 

paper, and proceeded with deliberate care 
to divest the tiny portrait of its flimsy en- 
velope, and to contemplate it with the 
earnestness with which an archaeologist 
might inspect some long-buried master- 
piece of Etruscan goldsmith's work. 

" To refresh my memory,'' he said, as 
he held the card up before Oswald's eyes ; 
** and you may as well take another look, 
in case of accidents, squire. ,Mrs. Gulp did 
us a good turn when she put this into my 
possession, for, without it, we might rub 
shoulders with the vagabond, and be none 
the wiser. But as soon as things quiet 
down a little, we will make our way to the 
neighbourhood of the old police Prefecture, 
and see whether I can't get a helping hand 
from one of the knowing ones of the Bri- 
gade of Safety, as they call them. No fear 
of Larpent's getting out of Paris unob- 
served. I kept my ears open while we 
were waiting for that commandant's signa- 
ture, and I heard the soldiers say that what 
the government are most anxious about is 
that no Communist should slip out of the 

7.2 



lOO Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

city, and that every one, native or foreign, 
must have a special permit to pass the 
gates. Now a word at the embassy, and a 
word at the consulate, and a representation 
to the French governor of Paris, will make 
it awkward for our man to get clear through. 
We know the name he goes by, thanks to 
your inquiry at the F. O., Mr. Charlton, 
and we'll see if he don't prove to have 
walked into a trap with his eyes open." 

Their passage was now slower, and by 
no means so easy as before, for although 
not a cart or carriage could be seen, and 
the middle of the street was only used by 
the squadrons of dragoons who went clat- 
tering by at a hard trot, the horse-tails on 
their brass helmets waving in the freshen- 
ing breeze ; or the artillery, that ever and 
anon came crashing down the street with 
grinding of heavy wheels and rattling of 
chain-bridles, the broad asphalt of the foot- 
way was crowded. Melancholy proces- 
sions of prisoners, tied together by twos 
and threes, came straggling past, escorted 
by cavalry with pistols ready for immediate 



Over Blood and Ashes. i o i 

use, each little knot of captives being at- 
tached by a cord to the saddle-bow of the 
trooper who rode nearest. Some few of 
the vanquished held their heads erect, and 
braved disdainfully the execrations of the 
fickle populace, while the majority seemed 
doggedly dejected, or sunk into a condition 
of abject terror. Already, as if by magic, 
gendarmes and police agents had reap- 
peared in those streets where, a few short 
hours since, any one of them would have 
been put to death as pitilessly as if he were 
a wolf, and assuredly there was no lack of 
zealous volunteers to guide the researches 
of vindictive justice. 

''Come with me, MM. les gendarmes, 
only two steps . Rue de la Cr6maillere," 
cried one toothless old hag ; " TU show 
you where three of them are hiding, and 
one of them a colonel, too, forsooth ! The 
rascals ! they have been living on the fat 
of the land, drinking the good wine, and 
inhabiting the fine rooms, that poor M. 
Grosjean, the banker, left under my charge; 
and there they are yet, the poltrons ! lurk- 



I02 Lady Livingston's Legacy, 



ing behind the fagots of the wood-cellar, 
and ril lead you to the very door." 

" Monsieur the agent of police," ex- 
claimed another applicant, a well-dressed, 
matronly woman, " there are five of these 
canailles skulking in an abandoned apparte- 
ment in our house, hard by, and two of 
them are wounded, and one is an officer. 
I got the concierge to turn the key softly, 
so there they are ready for killing, the mon- 
sters." 

Through all this scene of turmoil and 
confusion the Zouave approved himself an 
efficient pioneer, since, more than once, the 
travellers were brought to a stand by some 
group of excited soldiers, smarting under 
the memory of defeat and captivity, and 
resentful of the popular outbreak which 
had compelled them to force their way into 
Paris. In those days . which now seem so 
remote . French mobs were not over- 
tender with the foreigner, and a score of 
loud voices were quickly raised to de- 
nounce Oswald and his companion as " in- 
stigators of revolt . delegates of the Inter- 



Over Blood and Ashes. 1 03 



national " . and to demand their suriimary 
punishment ; but a word from the gaunt 
old warrior, and the sight of his tanned 
face and medalled breast, turned aside the 
coming peril, and they passed on again. 

As they gained the Rue St. Honors, the 
sharp sounds of firing made Oswald turn his 
head, and immediately afterwards two guns, 
supported by a detachment of foot and a 
squadron of lancers, poured into the cross 
street to the right, one of those dark and 
tortuous thoroughfares which yet, in spite 
of Baron Hausmann, survive. The cannon 
went jolting swiftly along, the drivers lash- 
ing the wearied horses, while the infantry, 
heated and breathless, advanced at the pas 
de gymnase to keep up with the trotting 
cavalry. 

" En avant ! en avant ! mes enfants !" 
cried the mounted officer who led them on. 
^' Let us make an ending, once for all, with 
-this insolent scum !'* 

" Diable I it grows warm there, Rue du 
Petit Sablon," remarked the Zouave, shrug- 
ging up his shoulders. ** But bah ! 'tis not 



I04 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

war, that ; some hotheads who want to get 
bled, that's all. Yet, if monsieur has never 
seen men fight, and would trouble himself 
to step a little way down the street, he 
would have something to talk of in London." 

Some impulse of curiosity seemed to 
draw both Oswald and the detective to- 
wards the spot whence came the crackling 
sound of the fusillade ; and without giving 
heed to the risk, they pushed on to a point 
whence, through the blue smoke of the 
miniature engagement, they could see the 
barricade, the dark forms of its defenders, 
the street blocked by horse and foot, and 
the artillery in the act of unlimbering their 
guns. 

** The second round fired, if they get the 
range, will knock a hole clear through 
those miserable casks and planks, and piles 
of furniture!" observed the Zouave con- 
temptuously. " And see ! already half of 
these fellows are deserting their posts. 
Keep back, though, gentlemen, and flatten 
yourselves against the wall, so as to pre- 
sent as few inches as you can to stray balls. 



Over Blood and Ashes. 105 

WeVe not in first-floor apartments here^. 

you see, and Why, Heavens! what 

does the insulary do there, unless he wants 
to be killed ?'' For Sergeant Flint had sud- 
denly darted out from his place of compara- 
tive security, and crossing the street, down 
which the bullets were whistling, rushed 
towards a solitary figure, who stood partly 
sheltered by a projecting archway. So 
quickly was it done, that before Oswald 
could recover from his surprise, the ser- 
geant had whipped out his talismanic brass- 
headed staff, and had fastened his grasp 
on the collar of the person whom he had 
singled out " My prisoner, in the Queen's 
name I" he hurriedly exclaimed. " No, no ; 
it's no good." 

But here, and before Oswald or the 
Zouave could render any assistance, the 
would-be captor and his recalcitrant pri- 
soner were locked in a desperate struggle. 
A moment more, and the policeman fell 
heavily on the pavement, -while Bruce Lar- 
pent . for it was no other . sprang past 
Oswald and the soldier guide, who were by 



io6 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

this time hastening to the rescue, and fled 
down the street with the speed of a deer 
before the hounds. But it was a fatal 
error. The loud shout which the Zouave 
set up instantly attracted the notice of the 
rearward rank of soldiers, and the flying 
form which met their eyes as they turned 
seemed to dispense with explanation. Four 
of them fired, and missed. The fifth dis- 
charged his rifle with a steadier aim, 
for the fugitive staggered and fell, then 
rose, reeling, to his feet, and after a feeble 
effort to continue his flight, dropped to the 
ground, just where the charred fragments 
of wood, the scraps of blackened wall- 
paper, and the scraps of scorched hangings 
torn away, indicated that the neighbouring 
house had been set on fire some hours 
since, as its front, partially laid open to the 
view, plainly proved. There, in the midst 
of ruin and wreck, lay the man whom they 
had come to seek amongst scenes so 
perilous. 

Oswald, the sergeant, and their guide, 
hastened to the spot where the runaway 



Over Blood and Ashes. 107 

lay. " How are you, my poor fellow ?" 
demanded the former gently, as he bent 
over the prostrate form, and knelt to raise 
the helpless head that rested so heavily on 
his supporting arm. 

" There is one who has got his billet," 
said the Zouave coarsely, as his practised 
eye noted the pinched and suffering ex- 
pression which the face of the wounded 
man had already assumed, and the haggard 
wildness of the glance he cast around him. 

" Perhaps a surgeon's help " Oswald 

tegan ; but the grim veteran, who was now 
holding the sufferer's wrist between his 
bony fingers, shook his head. " Not the 
help of all the doctors in France,'' he said, 
gruffly, ** could avail here. Inward bleed- 
ing, and the ball lodged ! It is the almoner 
that's wanted here, not the surgeon." 



CHAPTER VI. 



HALF TOLD. 




[RUCE LARPENT. lying amidst 
the heaped-up rubbish from the 
half-burnt house, gasped painfully 
for breath, but was evidently con- 
scious of what was passing around him. 
He tried to speak, but as yet his voice 
failed him ; and by this time, to the din of 
voices and the crackling of musketry, was 
added the deep roar of the artillery, making 
every window rattle and quiver throughout 
the street. Then before the echoes of the 
cannonade had died away, there came the 
quick menacing roll of the drums beating 
for the charge, and the assault of the barri- 
cade began in real earnest 



Half Told. 109 



"We must get this poor wretch away 
from this, and try, at any rate, what medical 
assistance can do," said Oswald, in a low 
voice, to Sergeant Flint ; but, to his sur- 
prise, it was the wounded man himself who 
answered : 

" Tm afraid, sir, that the soldier spoke 
truth : the ship's past calking this bout ; 
but if you don't mind the trouble of picking 
me up, Fd rather die within doors. Fm 
getting faint; but, if you feel . pocket . 
flask of . '- . " His voice grew husky here; 
but Sergeant Flint, kneeling beside him, at 
once proceeded to extract from one of the 
coat-pockets of the dying man a small 
leather-covered flask, and to pour between 
his lips a portion of the contents. " Better 
now," murmured Bruce, feebly ; " but it is 
only a flicker of the lamp before it goes 
out. Anyhow, Fd like to be away from 
this hell that rages so near us." 

They bore him into a ruinous house, in 
front of which he had fallen ; and placing 
him on a sofa in one of the rooms which 
overlooked the courtyard at the back, and 



no Lady Livingston! s Legacy, 



where the hideous noises of the street were 
but faintly audible, they contrived to per- 
suade the portress, a wrinkled old dame,, 
whom they found with her palsied old hus- 
band, cowering in one of the deserted 
apartments which had escaped being 
harmed by fire, to go in search of the 
nearest doctor. 

The man of healing came, a jovial 
army surgeon, temporarily attached to 
one of the great Paris hospitals, and 
who roundly declared that he could spare 
but a short time away from his ward of 
fifty patients, but that he would endeavour 

to look in again that evening, if . if 

He did not- conclude the sentence, other- 
wise than by a speaking glance at the 
wounded man, who had now closed his 
eyes. The surgeon carefully inspected the 
hurt, and then drew Oswald aside. 

"A friend of yours, monsieur? a relation, 
eh ?" asked M. le Docteur, blandly. 

" No ; only a countryman." 

"Well, then, I shall not be considered 
brutal if I tell you it is a question of minutes,. 



Half Told. Ill 



and that little short of a miracle could pro- 
long life for above an hour. These inward 
wounds, sir, beyond the reach of tourniquet 
and styptic, are a standing puzzle to the 
Faculty ; and besides, the ball, with that 
curious rotatory movement which such pro- 
jectiles from a grooved barrel possess, has 
clearly injured some large blood-vessels in 
its passage. You had better be liberal with 
stimulants, and so keep off syncope until 
the system is totally exhausted ; but if all 
my colleagues were assembled in this room,, 
they could do nothing to defer that evil 
quarter of an hour that must come to us 
all, monsieur, some day." 

And with a promise to call again at a 
late hour, " given by way of formal cour- 
tesy," the surgeon departed. 

A second dose of brandy enabled Bruce 
Larpent to speak, though in a weak, low 
tone. 

" Who are you, sir ?" he asked abruptly, 
as Oswald knelt down beside the couch on 
which he lay ; " and how came you to be 
in company, as I gather, with the police- 



112 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

man who arrested me ? I have never 
wronged you." 

" Nor had I any wish to do you injury, 
Mr. Larpent," said Oswald, earnestly. 
"Your . disappearance compelled me to 
employ energetic means of tracing you, in 
order to obtain information respecting a 
lost will . ^that of Lady Livingston. I am 
a nephew of her late husband, and my 
name, which may, or may not, be familiar 
to you, is Oswald Charlton. I have fol- 
lowed you to Paris simply in the hope of 
recovering the lost will, in default of which 
Miss Beatrice Fleming, the dowager's ward 
and heiress, is unjustly deprived of the pro- 
perty which should be hers." 

"And you think that I . stole it?" re- 
turned Bruce, half defiantly. 

" I cannot take upon myself to say that 
this is so," said Oswald, in a gentle tone ; 
" but circumstances pointed you out as the 
person most likely to be able to reveal the 
place where this important document now 
IS, a document to the signing of which you 
were witness, and which is not known to 



Half Told, 113 



have been seen since the attack in the 
streets on Mr. Goodeve, who . 



>» 



"Who had it in his pocket, I suppose 
you to imply," interrupted the dying man, 
with a hollow laugh. 

Sergeant Flint, whose heart had not 
been hardened in the practice of his pro- 
fession, made answer in his most honeyed 
tone : " Duty, Mr. Larpent, is duty, or 
else I would have preferred to have avoided 
disagreeable topics until you felt fitter to 
discuss them ; but if you will have it, there 
are one or two queer little games, that the 
law calls forgery and embezzlement, let 
alone the garroting job, in regard to which 
my brother officer, Superintendent Starkey, 
has spotted evidence sufficient for a jury, 
he has. You can't have forgotten a man, 
real name Isaac Bond, better known to you, 
I dare say, as the Ugly One. He's in cus- 
tody for something else, and is quite ready 
to swear that he had a meeting at Pirate's 
Post, in the marsh down by the river, with 
somebody it's needless to mention ; and that 

VOL. IIL 8 



114 Lady Livingstotis Legacy. 

the same party, on the night of the garrot- 
ing, was ^" 

" Enough!" exclaimed Bruce, turning un- 
easily on his pillow ; " you have done your 
work well, and earned your hire. Yes ; it 
would be possible, I suppose, to procure a 
conviction, and to send me to Portland 
breakwater. I'd not own as much, though, 
if it were not that I am to pass so soon 
before another tribunal than that of the 
Old Bailey, and that subterfuge and silence 
will go for nothing there." His voice died 
away in gasps, and presently when he spoke 
again, it was thin and reedy as the far-off 
sound of a flute. " 'Whoso sheddeth man s 
blood,' " he began thus, " ' by man shall his 
blood be shed :' there you have it, and I'm 
not the first, by millions, to prove it true. 
Give me some more of the spirits. I want 
to keep strength to speak till all's over." 

Again the dram served to produce a par- 
tial revival of the wounded man's energies. 
He did not immediately speak again, but 
glanced around him. The Zouave had 
lighted his pipe, and sat at the window. 



Half Told, 115 



ivaiting, with soldierly philosophy, till the 
present episode should end with the life of 
the principal performer. The detective had 
withdrawn himself, perhaps wisely, a pace 
or two, and Oswald was alone beside the 
sofa. From a half-unconscious impulse of 
compassion, the latter stooped forward, and, 
with a handkerchief, wiped away the blood 
and froth that were gathering about the 
corners of the sufferer's mouth. It was 
but a trifling act, yet, somehow, Bruce Lar- 
pent's voice was much softened, as he 
said : 

" Thank you, Mr. Charlton. You see 
me lying here before you, and though you 
know me only as the scamp I have of late 
become, you won't let me die like a dog, as 
I deserve. Now, tell me true : is the find- 
ing of this will of very great moment to 
you ? Does the restoration of the pro- 
perty to Miss Fleming mean the enabling 
you to marry the girl of your heart ?" 

" No, indeed," answered Oswald, sadly ; 
" I see no reason for denying my attach- 
ment to the young lady you speak of. But 

8.2 



1 16 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

she is pledged to marry another . ^that Sir 
Frederick Dash wood whom you must have 
known on the other side of the Atlantic . 
and I am more likely to help than to hinder 
the match should I succeed. Still, justice 
ought to be done." 

" And so let it be !" rejoined Bruce,, 
making signs for the flask to be again put 
to his lips. " I have done wrong, and very 
wrong," he resumed, when he had swallowed 
another portion of the brandy, "and Fm 
scarcely sorry that I lie where I do, never 
to rise until the judgment-day. Yet, though 
youll doubt me, I was an honest man but 
some few months ago, and, wild as I was, 
had wronged no one of a quarter-dollar,, 
not I. You won't harm Aphy . ^that's 

my sister . if . if" And he stopped,. 

breathing with difficulty. 

** Indeed, no," replied Oswald, bending 
over him. "If the will be recovered 
through any information supplied by you^ 
she shall never be disquieted as to the 
means by which she became possessed of 
it, should it, as I conclude, have been 



Half Told, 117 



lodged in her hands by you. If you will 
only . 



» 



" He's going, squire !" exclaimed the 
.detective, springing forward, as he noted 3 
sudden and ghastly change in Larpent's 
wain face ; but it was too late. The head 
fell heavily back, and one quick convulsive 
shudder ran through the limbs. Then all 
was still. 

"He has got the routes comrades !" said 
the Zouave, taking the pipe from between 
his bearded lips. " I hope you screwed 
the truth out of him, whatever it was, for 
it's too late now." And so it was. The 
dead man's lodging was in a street hard by, 
and the address was found clearly written 
in his pocket-book ; but when they brought 
him home, the landlady of the slovenly h6tel 
garni was unwilling to give admission to 
the lifeless form of her late guest 

" It gave a house," so she said, " a bad 
name, to have the commissaire in it, and the 
agents, and so on. She might lose half 
her clients, honest bourgeois who abhorred 
violence in any shape. Little did she think. 



1 1 8 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 



when she let her room to that unhappjr 
Englishman, that he would play her such 
a trick as to come back feet foremost, and 
necessitate a perquisition, an autopsy. All 
her customers were decent quiet folk, and 
now she should be accused qf harbouring^ 
Communist ruffians, and her establishment 
would be eternally disgraced, and her good 
name in the quarter would never be as it 
had been." All of which Oswald perfectly 
understood to mean that the eloquent 
speaker wished for compensation ; and 
certainly a few napoleons worked a won- 
drous conversion, and changed the voluble 
virago into the most accommodating of 
householders. 

A long and arduous task yet remained 
to be performed. Nothing could legally 
be done without the sanction of the nearest 
commissary of police, and those serviceable 
functionaries, as yet but half installed in the 
bureaux which a few hours since had been 
occupied by revolutionary officials, were all 
too few to cope with the multifarious duties 
of their position. At last, after much im^ 



Half Told. 119 



portunate bribery, a secretary in shabby 
black was induced to draw up a hurried 
procds- verbal, to receive depositions, and to 
sign, in his chiefs stead, the necessary cer- 
tificates. The undertakers in the gore- 
stained Paris of that 'day had nearly as 
hard a time of it as even the subordinate 
magistrates; but here again money and 
persistency prevailed, and proper arrange- 
ments were made for Bruce Larpent's 
decent, if hasty, burial. The few effects 
which he had with him were handed over 
to Oswald, who acted as spokesman, in 
consideration of the warrant of which 
Sergeant Flint was the bearer ; and these 
accompanied them when, late in the day, 
worn and weary, they arrived at their hotel, 
and dismissed the friendly Zouave with a 
donation which made him vaunt the wealth 
and free-handedness of Englishmen, in 
wine-shop and tavern, for a month to 
come. 

Long ere this, all resistance had ceased. 
Barricade after barricade had been turned 
or taken ; every post of any strength was 



1 20 Lady Livingstons Legacy, 

in the hands of the troops, whose imposing 
numbers awed into submission the few 
malcontents not in hiding . while long 
strings of prisoners, recalling to mind the 
chains of galley-slaves that formerly tra- 
versed France, were hourly driven like 
cattle along the dusty road to Versailles 
and the camp at Satory. 

" It's not so very much, squire," said the 
sergeant, after he had concluded his minute 
survey of poor Bruce's scanty possessions ; 
" but such as it is, we have proofs enough 
here to enable us to make our own terms 
with the sister. She set him on, I very 
much suspect, in all he did, and I should 
say he would have, kept on the square, 
fairish, if it hadn't been this Miss Aphy 
wanted a cat's paw to rake the hot chestnuts 
out of the fire. We'll be off to-morrow, sir, 
if you are willing. I feel as if I should 
never know what sound sleep was until we 
tread on English ground again." 



CHAPTER VII. 



GONE. 




OU threaten, then ? Do your 
worst! I would sooner bear all 
that men's wrath can inflict, than 
I would'be as I have been of late, 
the daily, hourly companion of one whom I 
despise as much as I despise myself for 
the weakness that has made me purchase 
safety at such a price." 

It was Violet Maybrook who spoke, and 
as she did so, her lustrous eyes flashed, and 
her beautiful face might have served a 
painter for a model for the passion. Scorn. 

" You are foolish, Vi, dear . foolish and 
rash as well !" answered Aphrodite Larpent, 
with a malignant glance that belied the 



122 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

studied calm of her skilfully managed 
voice. " Remember, it will be too late, 
when once you are known for what you are, 
to come back to the quiet home and the 
poor little friend of whom you speak with 
such superb contempt. Pride is ja danger- 
ous counsellor, Violet, my love, and if you 
are wise, you will grow humbler. You 
saw how much more reasonable a view of 
his position was taken, but half an hour 
since, by your fine London dandy, your 
lady-killing sabreur. Sir Frederick Dash- 
wood." 

" Dashwood is a coward," returned Miss 
Maybrook, haughtily; "he can cringe before 
the uplifted hand that threatiens to strike. 
There are trees that bend, but there are 
others that break sooner than bow to the 
storm." 

There was a moment's pause, during 
which these two, playmates in infancy, 
companions in youth, friends never, looked 
into each other's eyes, like duellists who 
ponder where best to plant the mortal 
thrust. 



Gone. 123. 

It may be conjectured that little concord 
was likely to prevail in a household com- 
posed of such widely different natures as 
that of the elf . shrewd, malicious, jealous 
of all superiority . and of Violet, whose 
fiery spirit abhorred the dissimulation to 
which circumstances . so she held . had' 
compelled her. Since the first hour of 
their residence together, Miss Maybrook 
and her hostess had been on those more 
than half-hostile terms on which women can 
endure to live, not seldom, but which would 
be intolerable to men, and at length a visit 
from Sir Frederick had fanned the smoul- 
dering embers of hate into a flame. Dash- 
wood, who felt that Violet was not one 
whom he could safely neglect, but who, in 
giving himself the trouble to call in Great 
Eldon Street, had, most unfortunately for 
himself, selected Aphy Larpent as a butt 
for his ill-humoured sarcasms, had depre- 
cated the stinging words by which his inso- 
lence was repaid. A bad man will often 
put up with affronts not bruited abroad, and 
Dashwood, whose physical courage re-^ 



124 Lady Livingston! s Legacy. 

mained unshaken, had yet become morally 
a dastard, and quailed before the bitter re- 
torts of the humbly born music-mistress. 
Nor, while his stay lasted, did Violet betray 
by word or sign the annoyance which all 
women experience when they witness the 
humiliation of the man they have loved. 
It was not until the baronet had taken his 
hangdog, handsome face out of Great 
Eldon Street, that the suppressed quarrel 
between Violet and her old acquaintance 
rose to a white heat 

" Why did you ask me to come here ?" 
asked the former, breaking silence, and 
speaking in the direct and fearless fashion 
which belonged to her. It was a cruel 
little laugh with which her entertainer 
preluded her answer. 

" Fie, dearest, what an unmannered 
question ! Can you wish me to tell you a 
score of neat fibs about old associations, 
childish hours of sport and study, yearning 
tenderness, and so forth ? Take the truth, 
since nothing else will serve you. I wanted 
to have my slave, as it were, within hearing 



Gone, 125 

of the crack of the whip and the call of 
the voice. I wanted to fit the chains upon 
^those stubborn wrists of yours, link by link. 
I wanted to make the girl whom I always 
hated . for I did detest you, Vi, dear! 
since you and I first plaited wild-flower 
crowns beneath the maple trees . feel that 
it was for me to command, and for her to 
obey. It did not suit my whim that you 
should soar out of my reach, and make, as 
your beauty might enable you to do, a 
marriage that would raise you high above 
my level. That was why I asked you 
here, Violet, darling !" 

Violet, with her pale, beautiful face set 
and rigid, and her eyes absolutely blazing 
with wrath, looked terrible indeed, as she 
rose from her seat and advanced towards 
her enemy. Aphrodite Larpent was not 
naturally timid, yet she sprang to her 
feet and laid her hand upon the bell-rope, 
as if to summon aid. 

" You need not fear that I should harm 
you," said Violet, calmly, but with an ex- 
pression in thejstudiously modulated tones 



126 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

of her rich voice that the other had never 
before heard. " You have been very frank 
with me, and I am glad to know on such 
good authority what I have merely suspected 
until now. Were we alone together in the 
woods we both remember, among the silver 
pines and the forked hemlocks, far from 
this brick-and-mortar wilderness, far from 
the million eyes and ears that keep watch 
over us here, I would kill you." 

" I do not doubt it in the least," re- 
turned Aphy, with an insolent gesture of 
the shoulders, but growing perceptibly more 
pale and sallow. 

" No ; and you are right not to doubt it," 
said Violet Maybrook, with her coldest 
smile. " But do not think that because we are 
both of us units in the crowded civilization 
of the Old World, it is safe to deal with 
me as you have' done . safe to rely, con- 
stantly, on my fears and my forbearance." 

" I thought you never knew fear. Ru- 
mour said so. When was Vi Maybrook 
afraid of a half-broken horse, or of crossing 
a sheet of flawed ice, or of any of the risks 



Gone. 127 

of our rough colonial life ?" returned Aph- 
rodite tauntingly. " It was one of your 
titles, that courage of yours, to be our 
queen and leader when we were half-grown 
slips of girls, and many a proof you gave 
of it Has the English air, or the hum- 
drum routine of Lady Livingston's house, 
turned your old dauntless spirit into 
cowardice at last ?" 

"You shall see!" said Violet, with a 
gentleness unnatural at such a moment 
^' Do you remember, years ago, on the Sas- 
quemantock, how the canoe was staved in 
by the sunken rock, and the Indian guide 
was drunk and drowsy, and, but for me, 
the little, sodden bundle of dripping gar- 
ments and drenched hair that they called 
Aphy Larpent, would have gone over the 
Falls to perish ? Do you remember, long 
before that, how the children, our young 
playfellows, ran shrieking away from the 
one child that remained seated by the fallen 
tree, crouching in panic terror, because of 
the rattle-snake that had reared his mena- 
cing head, and with deadly jaws apart, and 



128 Lady Livmgstoris Legacy. 

bright, cold eye fixed on his destined victim, 
poised himself ready for his spring? There 
was one other, though, of that childish 
company, a young girl but a few months 
older than the frightened little creature that 
fear seemed to have slain before the snake 
stooped his graceful head ; and she fronted 
the reptile, with no weapon but a switch, 

and But you know the rest of the 

story, Aphy, as well as I do." 

"I do ; and you saved me then, and 
again that other time, without a thought of 
your own danger," exclaimed Aphrodite, 
flushing to the roots of her hair, and with 
tears, real tears, standing in those hard, evil 
eyes of hers ; " and I was a wretch to for- 
get it, and to hate you, and envy you, and 
plague you, as I have done. Come, Vi ; I 
beg your forgiveness. Come, let you and 
me be friends. I mean it By my very 
soul, I swear to you that I do mean it" 

And for once she was sincere. Perhaps 
no one can be all bad, and for the time the 
soft spot which lurks undetected in even the 
hardest heart had been touched in the case 



Gone, 1 29 

of Aphy Larpent But Violet Maybrook 
proudly put aside the offered hand of her 
former friend. 

" Chance, since then," she said, sternly, 
" has given you a power over me, to which, 
all unwillingly, I have submitted, loathing 
myself that I held my life by such a tenure. 
Your malice, and the base self-seeking of 
the man for whom I have sacrificed the 
right to good men's esteem, have made 
that life as bitter and worthless to me as 
the fruit that strangers gather beside the 
sullen waters of the Dead Sea, and your 
power, early playmate, early enemy, is on 
the wane. I am very young yet, but I 
have grown weary of life, and would rest 
As for amity between us two, let fire and 
water first coalesce ; their alliance would be 
likelier than ours. You may, for a moment, 
be softened towards me. Incarnate false- 
hood though you be, it is possible that for 
an hour, or a day, you might be as good as 
your word ; but to-morrow would bring 
back the old jealousy, the old dislike ; and 
even if you could learn not to hate me, I 

VOL. HI. 9 



130 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

could not forgive ^t?/^. . Do not smile, or fancy 
that my hostility is of no account I know, 
or can divine, your schemes of self-interest, 
and I will tear them to shreds as easily as 
I could tear the flimsy web of a spider." 

With the step and bearing of an angry 
queen, Violet moved towards the door. 
Aphrodite made a second attempt to inter- 
cept her. 

" Take my hand, and let us be friends," 
she said, pleadingly; "youll never repent 
it; indeed, indeed you will not I could 
help you, that I could, about Dashwood, 
and in other matters, and '' 

" What need have I of your services V 
haughtily rejoined Miss Maybrook. " Let 
me pass, dupe or temptress, for I think that 
both parts suited equally well with your 
character, of the man whom you egged on 
your brother to kill. Let me pass, I say . 
your very touch is pollution." 

And this time Aphy Larpent made no 
effort to detain her guest The elf threw 
herself, so soon as the door had closed, 
upon Mrs. Gulp's hard square sofa, and 



Gone. 131 

hot tears, very different from those which 
a momentary sentiment had wrung from 
her, fell like rain upon the faded cushion on 
which she had laid her head. It is very 
likely that Violet was accurate when she 
said that relenting on the part of Aphy 
Larpent could be but of ephemeral dura- 
tion ; but the revulsion of feeling was now 
very abrupt, and it seemed to rend her, as 
evil spirits rent the demoniacs of old. No 
woman can be indifferent to another 
woman's contempt, and, for the time, Aph- 
rodite almost forgot, in the poignant an- 
guish of her shame, the ample means of 
vengeance that lay within her grasp. 

'' She shall pay dearly, ah ! dearly, for 
this," murmured Bruce Larpenf s sister, as 
she tossed restless on the sofa-pillows ; and 
yet, as she spoke, she felt as if she would 
willingly have exchanged places with her 
late antagonist. " Above me, from the 
first, always, ever above me; even with 
the shadow of death tracking her, she keeps 
her boasted superiority to the last I can 
ruin, but not humble her. That accursed 

9.2 



132 Lady Livingstoris Legacy, 

pride of hers remains beyond my reach. 
Well, well ! we shall see ! It may be your 
turn, Violet, before long to crave pardon 
from the despised Aphy Larpent, and to be 
denied." 

Hours passed away before the slight, 
lithe form that lay upon the sofa ceased to 
writhe and to change its position, while all 
the time bitter thoughts went whirling 
through the busy brain. She had never, in 
truth, quite made up her mind, this Aphro- 
dite Larpent, as to the actual use to which 
she should ultimately put her power over 
Violet She had looked on it as on a talis- 
man which might be made profitable and 
pleasant By the aid of the secret which 
she knew, she had extorted money, had ex- 
ercised influence, had repaid tenfold, in 
suffering, the contempt which Miss May- 
brook had been too proud to dissemble It 
was Aphy's nature to revel in intrigue and 
mystery, to compass selfish ends by crooked 
ways. But she had never been quite certain 
as to what she should do at the last She 
thought now, for the first time, that she 



Gone. 133 

was certain on that subject There was a 
dangerous glimmer in her shifting eyes, and 
two scarlet blotches burned on her usually 
sallow face. And at length she rose, ad- 
justing her hair before the mirror over the 
mantel-piece, and effacing as best she might 
the traces of recent tears. The hour of 
dinner was approaching . dwellers in Great 
Eldon Street, especially such dwellers as 
belong to the female sex, dine unfashionably 
early, and the slipshod maid-of-all-work> 
who might have been twin-sister to the 
Betsy Jane to whose duties she had suc- 
ceeded, came to lay the cloth in lodging- 
house fashion, as a preliminary to that meaL 
But the dinner itself arrived, and still 
Violet came not, and Mary Ann being 
questioned, declared that Miss Maybrook 
had left the house long ago, and had not 
returned. 

" Left the house !" exclaimed Aphrodite, 
as a sudden idea suggested itself to her. 
" She took nothing with her . no luggage, 
I mean ? No, of course not, or I should 
have heard the noise." 



134 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

The girl replied in the negative. Miss 
Maybrook, so far as Mary Ann knew, had 
taken nothing with her. She had simply 
gone out on foot, " as it might be, for a 
walk," and had not as yet come back. That 
was all. 

Time went on. It was long since Aph- 
rodite's solitary meal had been concluded,, 
yet Violet Maybrook came not, and her 
hostess sat in the window, watching, with 
an anxiety and an impatience that surprised 
herself, for the return of her avowed enemy. 
Still, seconds growing into minutes, minutes 
expanding into hours, the time went on. 
A wild idea arose once in Aphy Larpent's 
brooding mind. " Not . not dead !" she 
muttered, with white lips, to herself . " the 
river !" And then there passed before her 
mental vision the phantom of Violet, not, as 
she had last seen her, proud and contemptu- 
ous in her fierce beauty, but cold and 
motionless, with the long dark hair defiled 
with mud and tide- weed, the lustrous eyes 
hidden for ever beneath the heavy white 
lids. " Can I have driven her to that ?"' 



Gone. 135 

Aphy asked of herself, almost quailing be- 
fore the thoughts which her words evoked. 
It was not pity that she felt, but a formless 
horror that she longed to shake off, and be 
free from. At length she decided on going 
up to Miss Maybrook's room, the same 
which had formerly been occupied by her 
own brother, Bruce. No ; nothing, appa- 
rently, had been disturbed since last she 
entered that dingy chamber. In her walk- 
ing-dress, as usual, Violet had gone out, 
and there were no signs of packing, or of 
any preparation for departure, visible. 

Stay ! What was that ? Merely a scrap 
of paper, which had probably been placed 
upon the dressing-table, but which by some 
accident, had fallen on the floor, and had 
been swept aside by the skirt of Aphy's 
dress in passing, and so lain until now un- 
seen. But the scrap of paper had writing 
upon it, and to the following effect : " War, 
then, let it be ! You have defied me, and 
must thank yourself for the result. Before 
you read this, I shall be on my way to 
But no matter. It is enough for you 



136 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

to know that the fabric of deception which 
you have so cunningly built up is shattered 
at a blow. . V. M." 

What the threat portended, Aphrodite 
could not guess. It was the threat 
itself that angered her, coupled as it was 
with Violet's abrupt departure. To whom 
had this wayward, headstrong girl gone ? 
And what was the meaning of her menace ? 
Bruce Larpent's sister ground her teeth 
together with fury at the thought that 
through the agency of her whom she had 
regarded as a useful instrument, her shame- 
ful history might be published throughout 
London, and her painful struggles to lead a 
new life, free from the taint of disgrace, be 
in vain. Yet Violet was no ordinary tale- 
bearer. She might have the means of a 
nobler revenge than this. Be it as it might, 
it must be war now, and war to the knife, 
without pity or mercy. Aphrodite's face 
grew grim and resolute, and she knit her 
brows and compressed her lips for a few 
instants, then rang the bell, sharply, once 
and again. "Get me a cab!" she said, 



Gone. 137 

when the lagging hand-maiden appeared ; 
" and ask Mrs. Gulp to let me have her bill 
for whatever I owe her. I am going away 
. only for a day or two, most likely . ^but I 
am going at once. Don't stare at me, but 
do as I tell you to do." 

Hastily she attired herself for a journey, 
hastily she threw into the smallest of her 
trunks a few necessary clothes, and, after 
impatiently awaiting the slow completion 
of her little account by the spasmodic Mrs. 
Gulp, she stepped into her cab, and was 
driven swiftly off towards the railway station 
which she had indicated as her destination. 
She had been gone perhaps for an hour, when 
another cab dashed up to the door in Great 
Eldon Street which bore the conspicuous 
monosyllable of Gulp, and Oswald Charlton 
alighted, followed by Sergeant Flint " Miss 
Davis . or Larpent, it's all the same, at 
home, my dear ?" said the sergeant, jauntily. 
" We must see her, the squire and I, on a 
litde matter of business that cannot wait, 
so show us up at once, please. . ^What! gone 
. gone by railway !" and the detective gave 



138 Lady Livingstones Legacy, 

a long whistle at the news. " We may as 
well look round the rooms, anyhow, as the 
search-warrant entitles us to do, squire, but 
I am afraid the bird has not left much 
behind her in the empty nest" 




CHAPTER VIII. 

TO SCOTLAND YARD. 

[OTHING, nothing at all, except 
this," said Sergeant Flint dis- 
consolately, as he entered the 
tiny sitting-room in which Os- 
wald had awaited the termination of the 
search among Aphy Larpent's effects; 
" which could scarcely have come honestly 
into the young woman's keeping ;" and as. 
he spoke he opened his broad hand and 
disclosed a diamond cross, with a large 
sapphire set in the middle of it ; " and 
which must be taken care of until she proves 
her right to its possession. If ever her 
brother wrote to her, she has burned the 
letters, or has them about her person ; and 



I40 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

the same may be said, no doubt, of the 
will. It's a hard nut to crack, squire, for 
all that it seemed so easy at the outset'* 

" Our wisest plan will surely be to follow 
Jier without delay," returned Oswald. " It 
seems most probable that if the will be in- 
deed in her hands, she has withdrawn to 
some place of concealment, whence she may 
make better terms. As for the jewel you 
shew me, it is odd, but I seem to have a 
faint recollection of having seen it before 
. of having admired it, when I was a 
boy." 

" I daresay you have, squire," remarked 
the sergeant dryly ; and then re-opening the 
door, he addressed himself to a policeman 
standing on the landing-place without, who 
had aided in the late perquisition amidst 
Miss Larpent's boxes and drawers, and 
bade him send up the maid-servant at 
once. 

Mary Ann s answers to the detective's 
queries were explicit enough. She had 
herself called the cab from the nearest 
stand. The number of that vehicle she 



To Scotland Yard. 141 

did not know, but with the driver of it she 
had a casual acquaintance, made up of oc- 
casional nods and winks of jocose recogni- 
tion when she went by on errands ; and that 
he was a regular frequenter of the cab-rank 
in question, she could testify. He was a 
stoutish-built young man, with a red face 
and a drab great-coat The horse had two 
white feet, and the cab had of late been 
newly painted. Was certain that she could 
point out cab and cabman out of fifty 
others. Miss Davis, or Larpent, had bidden 
the man to drive quickly to the Silcheshire 
. yes, Silcheshire railway . ^and the cab had 
gone off at a brisk pace. Which was all 
that Mary Ann knew. 

" Silchester, I suppose ?" said Oswald ; 
and the sergeant, with a nod of assent, 
produced a Railway Guide, atid read as 
follows : " London, Silchester, Helmsea, 
Docktown, and Whitbome Railway '^ 

"Whitbome!" exclaimed Oswald, sur- 
prised. " Why, that is where Mrs. Philip 
Dashwood is living, and Miss Beatrice 
Fleming is now on a visit to her. Of all 



142 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

singular selections for a hiding-place, that 
would appear the most extraordinary." 

The sergeant did not seem to see this in 
the same light as his non-professional com- 
panion. He tapped his forehead once or 
twice, then shook his head, and smiled 
slightly. " What a game that would be !" 
he muttered; "and yet the odds are against 
it Educated young women are the most 
.difiicult of all to make out . ^they are." 
Then, addressing himself to Oswald, he 
suggested that they should repair at once 
to the proximate cab-stand, and, guided by 
Mary Ann, endeavour to get speech with 
the cab-driver who had conveyed Aphy 
Larpent to the terminus. There was only 
one cab, as it turned out, left upon the 
rank, a confirmed crawler, drawn by a slow 
and heavy-heeled horse, and driven by an 
elderly and gin-perfumed person, who, in 
defiance of the warmth of the weather, ad- 
hered obstinately to his thin and weather- 
stained coat of many capes, such as hack- 
ney-coachmen wore in the Tom and Jerry 
days that are departed. 



To Scotland Yard. 143 

" Why, it's old Nick. . How are you, my 
l)uck ?" called out the sergeant, in his cheery 
fashion, as he caught sight of the grog- 
blossomed countenance of this veteran of 
the cab-rank. The owner of the diabolical 
sobriquet awoke from his nap, to cast rather 
a perturbed glance at the detective. 
. " Nothing up, sure-ly," was his rueful 
ejaculation. " A poor cove can't so much 
as lay the silk over his nag, or touch his 
hat to a fare, without being pulled up for it 
nowadays. But youVe above them lags, 
ain't you, sergeant ?" 

*' Don't you be afraid, Nick," answered 
that ofiicer genially ; " nobody wants the 
pleasure of your company now, as the Bow 
Street magistrate did last year, when you 
forgot to give notice of the bracelet left in 
your cab. And you must admit we drew 
it mild for you about the previous good 
character, and so saved you the other six 
months' oakum-picking. No malice, eh, 
old boy ?" 

" No malice on my side," grumbled out 
Nick, still in evident distrust of the motives 



144 Lady Livingstoti s Legacy. 



of his questioner. When, however, he was 
made to understand that the sergeant was 
merely desirous of information respecting 
the cab wherein Aphy had been conveyed 
to the terminus, his vigilance relaxed, and 
he became sufficiently communicative. 
" That was Bill Barnes," he said gruffly ; 
" he as was in the public line as barman, 
and couldn't quite square it about the 
money taken over the counter, at the 
* Friend in Need,' Camden-Town way, as 
got the Great Eldon Street job. Paints, 
regular, every spring, and goes in for ro- 
settes in the ears of that screw he drives, 
Bill does, and so gets picked off the rank 
oftener than is fair to his mates. How- 
somedever, it so happens I can tell you 
where he drove to, anyways first, when 
he'd got his fare inside, and the trunk on 
the footboard alongside of him. He was 
a-driving past, and he'd just given us the 
office, by sloping his whip-^ou know, Mr. 
Flint . in the way that says I'm for such or 
such a railway station, when the lady tugs 
at the check-string, and as that don't pay> 



To Scotland Yard, 145 

puts her head out of window, and tells him, 
loud enough for us to hear, that she's 
changed her mind, and that Bill was to go 

You'd never guess where, sergeant, 

not if you went on from now to Christmas." 
And the old man paused, evidently delighted 
at the idea of having presented the too- 
knowing sergeant with an enigma beyond 
his powers of solution. 

" No ; I give it up," said the detective, 
after pondering for a few seconds, with 
much real or assumed perplexity in his 
face. " I thought, once, I had it ; but it 
wouldn't work. Out with the answer, 
Nick/' 

The provoking charioteer merely coughed 
huskily behind his mittened right hand, and 
murmured something about the ** uncom- 
mon dry " character of the weather. 

"Not good for your complaint, eh, 
Nick ?" said the sergeant, smiling, as he 
produced two half-crowns and chinked 
them together, meditatively. " Let's know 
what the lady said, and then try the old 

VOL. III. 10 



146 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

prescription . ^Jamaica rum, hot, with cloves 
and sugar . at my expense, Nick." Either 
mollified by the prospect of this as a sea- 
sonable refreshment for early summer, or 
not caring to keep so influential an ac- 
quaintance as Mr. Flint too long on the 
tenter-hooks of suspense, the old cabman 
made up his mind to comply. 

" You won't have me in the box, sir, to 
take davy to it, will you ? It would break 
my heart, I think, to be put there!" he 
said deferentially. 

" You are better acquainted with another 
part of the court, Nick, we know," returned 
the sergeant, with a sawing movement of 
his forefinger ; ** but make your mind easy. 
We'll do without you as a witness." And 
again he softly chinked the half-crowns to- 
gether. 

" And you can't guess it ?" repeated the 
old man, with a grin. 

'* Not if I were to addle my brains over 
the thing I" answered the sergeant petu- 
lantly, but gently touching Oswald's elbow, 
as if to indicate that his impatience was but 



To Scotland Yard. 147 

counterfeit. " Can't you collar your cash, 
and let us have it as you heard it !" 

" Well, then, she told him to drive her 
to Scotland Yard," returned Nick, but re- 
luctantly, as is the wont of one who grudges 
to the world at large the co-proprietorship 
of a transcendent joke, lately his sole and 
secret possession. 

" To Scotland Yard, did she T blithely 
responded Sergeant Flint. '^ Then Til tell 
you what it is, Nick, you shall have a 
handsel, and the squire and yours to com- 
mand will go to Scotland Yard too. Jump 
in, sir; and you, Nick, be free with the 
whipcord . in a merciful way, of course.'* 

" What conceivable object can she have 
had for such an expedition ?" said Oswald, 
five minutes after the cab had begun to 
rumble through the stony streets. Sergeant 
Flint, who had sat until now absorbed in 
his own thoughts, with his eyes fixed on 
vacaney, started, and presently broke into 
a low laugh, as if the humour of the situa- 
tion were too much for his gravity. 

" If I were a bit of a humbug, sir, as 

10 . 2 



1 48 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 



some of my betters are, Fd look wise, and 
hold my tongue. The doctors do it, don't 
they, when they stand round the bed of a 
sick swell, and pull solemn faces, and give 
Latin names to what they can't cure, for 
want of knowing how ? And the City 
Dons, they do it when there's the toss of a 
halfpenny between them and bankruptcy ? 
But ril be honest with you, squire, and 
own that I am nonplussed. I know no 
more, sir, what that aggravating young 
female party may mean, than if I had just 
come up from Devizes or Taunton to join 
the Z division as a second-class constable. 
My first idea was, that her move was ta 
give herself up. They do it, sometimes, 
when there's something on their minds, at 
least men do, for I never knew a woman 
do it ; but, bless you, she's too artful and 
too hard-bitten for that. So, unless it's a 
blind, it is quite beyond me." 

Having said which, the sergeant beguiled 
the remainder of the route by whistling the 
most lugubrious airs in his collection. He 
became active again, if not confident, when 



To Scotland Yard. 149 

they reached the somewhat uninviting nook 
where Justice keeps her staunchest blood- 
hounds ready to sHp upon the traces of 
'Guilt. " Wait for me one minute, squire," 
he said, and disappeared. The minute ex- 
panded to exaggerated proportions before 
he returned, wiping his heated brow, on 
which the beads stood thickly. ** Seems 
to me Td better resign, and try for a 
country situation," he said excitedly, but 
with genuine mortification in voice and 
mien. " Stoke Pogis, I think, would be 
about my mark ; or, perhaps, if I were the 
one policeman at Little Pedlington, I might 
not find the duties too bewildering. Pride 
will have a fall, they say, and I was proud, 
I will admit, of knowing a trifle more than 
my neighbours. I didn't think there was 
a game in London, of a shady sort, that I 
couldn't have told you about, more or less ; 
and here I am . beaten, at my time of life, 
by a little sallow chit from Canada. 
Starkey will have the laugh against me, 
won't he, after our wild-goose chase over 
to Paris, and all we have done ?" 



150 Lady Livingstotis Legacy. 

" But what has she done ?" asked Oswald^ 
smiling to see that emulation can exist even 
among thief-takers. 

" She has done this," said the inconsol- 
able Flint : " she came, as bold as brass, 
and asked for Superintendent Starkey. He 
was expected, and they asked her to wait. 
In ten minutes, in he came, and preciously 
surprised he must have been, for before 
that, long as he had hung about Great 
Eldon Street, she had seemed to hate him 
as if he were poison. Nobody knows what 
she told him ; but he got very serious, and 
after a word with the assistant-commis- 
sioner, off he took her to the private resi- 
dence of a police magistrate. And what 
for, says you, squire ? Well, unless it was 
to give in her depositions, swear to her in- 
formation, and get a warrant in some case 
unusually pressing, I can form no notion. 
She may have gone to confess ; but I sus- 
pect, if so, her penitence could have been 
kept till morning. All Starkey said, going 
out, was, that it would prove a heavy busi- 
ness. No more, and no less.'' 



To Scotland Yard. 151 

" She would not, this Miss Larpent, have 
taken luggage with her, had not her inten- 
tion been to travel. Rely on it, she is not 
in London now," said Oswald, after a mo- 
ment's consideration ; " and I really think 
our best plan will be, to go to Whitborne 
at once, and to inform Mrs. Dashwood and 
her guest. Miss Fleming, of the steps which 
we have taken, and of what we have ascer- 
tained concerning the lost will. There is a 
prospect, too, that in or near Whitborne we 
may discover the person we seek." 

Sergeant Flint assented, and they drove 
off once more. But the streets were choked 
with the overgrown traffic of plethoric 
London, blocks were frequent, and when 
the station was reached, it was found that 
the train had started some minutes before, 
and, as Sergeant Flint soon elicited from a 
railway policeman. Superintendent Starkey 
and Miss Larpent had been among the 
passengers for Whitborne. 



CHAPTER IX. 



HUNTED DOWN. 




N all Whitborne, itself one of the 
prettiest and dullest watering- 
places on the English south coast, 
there was perhaps no house so 
prettily situated as that of Philip Dash- 
wood's widow. There were other man- 
sions more pretentious, no doubt, but none 
prettier than the Dingle, with its high 
banks draped by the greenest turf, its 
garden glorious with fuchsias, and roses, 
and myrtles, its miniature dells full of 
graceful fern, and the grateful shade of its 
spreading sycamores. There was a steep 
descent, clothed with hazel-trees, from the 
western boundary of the little demesne, to 



Hunted Down, 153 

where the clear swift Whit babbled and 
tinkled in the ravine below, on its passage 
to the sea. And of the sea itself there 
were glorious glimpses visible between the 
high banks and the leafy boughs. The 
peaceful quiet of the place was well suited 
to a wounded spirit ; and Mrs. Dash wood, 
a childless widow, for whom social life had 
lost its zest, had felt her grief gradually 
lose somewhat of its first poignancy under 
the soothing influences of the spot which 
she had selected for her home. 

Early on the afternoon of the day which 
had witnessed the decisive quarrel between 
Aphy Larpent and Violet Maybrook, a 
housemaid of Mrs. Philip Dash wood's 
going on some errand to the little town, 
observed a lady, a stranger to her, and ap- 
parently to the place, hovering about the 
limits of her mistress's little territory, and 
glancing, as if in hesitation, at where the 
white cottage, overgrown with ivy and 
blossomed creepers, was visible between 
the trees. Housemaids, very naturally, 
seldom care very much about any female 



1 54 Lady Limngstofi s Legacy. 

face excepting that which the looking-glass 
shows them as they adjust their coquettish 
caps; but Mrs. Dashwood's Sarah was 
often heard afterwards to say that she had 
never before seen any one half so lovely 
as was the strange lady in question, though 
there was something in her look which, so 
Sarah averred, made her blood run cold. 
But this may probably have been an im- 
pression due to after-events. Certain it 
is that when the girl returned from her 
mission she was surprised to see the 
beautiful lady still hanging about the in- 
closure, until, becoming conscious of the 
hand-maiden's observation, she abruptly 
rang the bell at the wicket-gate, and asked,, 
first for Miss Fleming, and then for Mrs. 
Dashwood. 

Mrs. Dashwood, it so happened, was 
from home, and her visitor was with her ; 
in fact, the beauty of the day had tempted 
the widow and her young friend to drive 
over to the ruined castle of Greystoke, 
which, as every one knows, is the chief 
lion, archaeologically, of that country-side. 



Hunted Down. 155 

" Then, if you please, I will wait Mrs. 
Dashwood has known me for a long time, 
and my name is Miss Maybrook," said the 
stranger; and she was forthwith inducted 
into the cool drawing-room of the cottage,, 
where, through the open windows, came 
the drowsy hum of the bees that were 
busy among the blossoms of the creeper 
trained over the flower-embosomed veran- 
dah outside. 

A long time . some ninety minutes, per- 
haps, of our mortal division into measures 
which we call days, hours, and so forth, of 
what is our only real worldly possession . 
existence . did Violet pass, unmurmuringly, 
in that shaded drawing-room of the Dingle. 
There she stayed, patiently. We are often 
patient, when quickest action is demanded. 
Violet Maybrook, sitting quietly there, 
under the roof of her former friend and 
patroness, was at least full of strong young 
life, daring, beautiful, winning; not fit to 
die. Yet there she sat, mechanically 
hearkening to the ticking of the clock, but 
never once reflecting that every beat of 



156 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

the pendulum, every advance of the slow- 
moving dial-hand, might bring nearer and 
nearer yet the final moment of despair. 
Flight, prompt, well-planned, boldly exe- 
cuted flight, would have been her truest 
wisdom. She was young and fair, and 
life should have been dear enough to her 
to make her a careful steward of that price- 
less boon which we lavish so freely. But 
there she stayed, waiting, waiting, while 
nearer and nearer, surer and surer, crept 
on the destined hour of misery and of 
doom. Violet Maybrook should at least 
have had the instinct of the hunted 
creature that cannot rest when the hounds 

« 

are plunging into the brushwood, and that 
sniffs the tainted wind, and flees. Yet 
there she sat, waiting. 

At last came the roll of carriage-wheels, 
and then the tread of feet and the sound 
of voices, and Mrs. Dash wood and Beatrice 
Fleming came into the room. " Miss 
Maybrook !" " Violet !" said the two voices, 
in accents of surprise, and she who was 
addressed started as from sleep to return 



Hunted Down. 157 



the greeting. Beatrice did but extend her 
hand ; but the widow came warmly for- 
ward and kissed Violet on the cheek, 
twice. " You dear, good girl !" she said : 
** this is kind indeed !" Violet Maybrook, 
as she felt the touch of Mrs. Dash wood's 
lips upon her own soft cheek, flushed 
crimson, and a sharp shuddering thrill ran 
through her, and then she grew pale again, 
and leant heavily on the back of the chair 
beside her, as if for support. "It is 
nothing," she said faintly, in answer to 
Mrs. Dashwood's inquiry as to whether 
she were ill ; " a mere nothing. Perhaps, 
as the old saying is, some one was walking 
over my grave." And she smiled, but not 
in mirth, and her strength seemed to return 
to her. " You wonder to see me here, un- 
asked," she said ; " nor must I take credit 
for having come here solely to see my old 
friend and kind employer. It is on Miss 
Fleming's account that I have thought fit 
to present myself at Whitborne. Mrs. 
Dashwood has heard, I have no doubt, 
sufticient of the lost will . Lady Living- 
ston's, I mean," she added. 



158 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

"Has anything come to light concerning 
it T asked Mrs, Dashwood eagerly. " I 
wrote to Mr. Glegg, three days since, and 
had his answer this morning to the effect 
that he " 

" Mr. Glegg, dear Mrs. Philip Dash- 
wood, knows no more about the matter than 
does the coachman who drove you to-day 
to Greystoke Castle," interrupted Violet 
'* There is only one person, besides my- 
self, who does know anything of the will's 
being in existence, so far as I can tell. 

And that person Were you not 

surprised, Mrs. Dashwood, perhaps a little 
shocked, too, to hear that I had set up 
housekeeping in London with an old ac- 
quaintance of both of us . Aphrodite Lar- 
pent ?" 

" I was surprised, as you say, Violet," 
returned the widow gravely : *' grieved too, 
my dear. I h^e not long been aware 
that Miss Davis and this wretched girl, 
Aphy Larpent, were one and the same. 
I had indeed written a letter of remon- 
strance to you, Violet, dear, and there it 



Hunted Down. 159 

lies in my desk ; but, knowing your pride, 
my dear, as well as I know your purity 
and your noble, unsuspecting nature, I felt 
a little nervous about sending it So now 
you know the truth, and, after all, I am 
sure your motive in taking so singular a 
step was a good and generous one." 

She was not given to harsh judgments, 
this widow of Philip Dash wood. Her 
very aspect . soft, kind woman that she 
was . ^told of a spirit that woe had sad- 
dened, but not soured. No doubt but 
that she had been pretty in youth, and 
even now she was comely, though the last 
year had scattered many a streak of white 
hair among the dark, glossy braids, which 
time had left unchanged until her grief 
grew to be well-nigh more than she could 
bear. It was a very pleasant face still, in 
spite of the traces of care . one of those 
faces that it is good to see beside a sick- 
bed, and that are scarcely less welcome in 
their unselfish sympathy with our pros- 
perity. She was attired in the deepest 
mourning, but hers was a chastened sad- 



i6o Lady Livings t oris Legacy. 

ness, and the smile that occasionally played 
about her lips was very gentle. Oddly 
enough, after one keen glance, Violet had 
preferred to look at the wall, at the pictures, 
at Beatrice Fleming, at anything but the 
face of worthy Mrs. Philip Dash wood. 

"The person,*' resumed Violet, "who 
shares my knowledge of the existence of 
the document is, in all probability, the 
person who stole it If not the thief, 
which I strongly suspect, she was at least 
the receiver of what was thus stolen. 
You know that Aphy Larpent was in the 
room with Lady Livingston when she 
died, engaged, as she declared, in sorting 
papers. The death was sudden, and the 
alarm was given by the one person present 
when it occurred. A very short delay 
would have given time to rifle some desk 
or drawer in which prying eyes might have 
discovered that the will was lodged. There 
is no need to recur to the theory that the 
street robbery of Mr. Goodeve, the lawyer, 
had anything to do with the matter. But 
be that as it may, the will passed into the 



Hunted Down. 1 6 1 



keeping of Aphrodite Larpent I, her 
guest, perceived that she had something . 
what it was, I speedily guessed . to conceal. 
It was the very feverishness of her anxiety 
that first aroused my suspicions. She was 
constantly assuring herself of the security 
of her hidden treasure. As often occurs^ 
her cunning and her care served to over- 
reach herself I found out the drawer in 
which the precious packet was deposited, 
and by the help of false keys . 



» 



" You, Miss Maybrook !" exclaimed Bea- 
trice incredulously. 

" Of false keys," repeated Violet with 
cold persistency, " I obtained, when a final 
quarrel between my old schoolmate and 
myself seemed imminent, possession of this 
valuable paper. Does not the end justify 
the means ? To you. Miss Fleming, it 
means the restitution of the inheritance 
wrongfully snatched away. To myself, it 
implies the punishment of her whose 
greed is baffled now, and . Did you not 
hear wheels coming towards us, very 
fast ?" 

VOL. III. II 



1 62 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 



But neither Beatrice nor the widow had 
heard the wheels, nor could they with- 
draw their thoughts from the astounding 
news they had just heard. 

" Then, if so, where is the will ? And 
why, if you suspected in what keeping it 
was, Violet," said Mrs. Dash wood, " did 
you not adopt more creditable means 
to " 

" To get the document out of the clutch 
in which it was, you would say ?" broke in 
Violet scornfully. "Yes, I might have 
applied to the attorney; and the proba- 
bilities are that, at the first intimation of 
mischief, the paper on which hangs so 
much would have been burned into a mere 
feathery heap of ashes. I acted, instead 
of talking, and the property is saved. . I 
was certain I heard wheels . they are 
nearer now." So they were, but yet so 
distant that none but an ear sharpened by 
nervous tension to an unnatural pitch could 
have caught the sounds when Violet's 
senses had first become cognisant of 
them. 



Hunted Down. 1 63 

"Then what," Beatrice began timidly, 
'* have you done, since you '' 

" Since I robbed the robber, you imply ?" 
returned Violet impatiently. " My single 
action has been to hasten here. They are 
coming now, in that carriage, whoever they 
may be. Remember this, and this only . 
that I came to-day to do justice, and that 
without reward, or hope of reward. I 
have restored Heavitree and its annual 
thousands to the proper owner. Bear that 
in mind, whatever you may hear of me, 

whatever " She ceased speaking, and 

seemed to listen. 

" You talk wildly, dear Violet," said the 
widow, looking anxiously in the pale beauti- 
ful face. " And where is the will ?" 

" It is here," answered Violet quickly ; 
and as she spoke, she threw upon the table 
a weighty packet, still in its outer wrapping 
of thick bluish paper, and with the seal 
intact There could be little doubt about 
its character, for the envelope bore, con- 
spicuously, the endorsement : " Last Will 

II . 2 



164 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

and Testament of the Dowager Lady 
Livingston," with the date of its execution. 
The wheels were very near now, coming 
furiously on. 

" And now I go," said Violet abruptly ; 
but even as she turned towards the door, 
the carriage without seemed to come to a 
sudden stop ; there was the sound of voices 
in the garden, of hasty feet upon the gravel 
of the path, the clang of the gate-bell, 
and the hurrying of servants, who seemed 
to feel, as if by instinct, that something 
different from the quiet monotony of every- 
day life was about to occur. The steps 
were in the passage now ; there was a low 
hum of talking, and almost immediately 
afterwards the door of the drawing-room 
opened, and a maid-servant thrust in her 
white, frightened face : " Oh ma'am, here 

is " Sarah began thus, when she was 

gently, but irresistibly pushed aside by a 
strong arm, and the tall, rigid form of 
Superintendent Starkey of the detective 
police appeared on the threshold. What, 
too, was the slight, elfish figure that fol- 



Hunted Down. 165 



lowed ? . worlds of malignant triumph in 
the cruel smile, in the glowing eyes, in the 
steady fixity of gaze, as if Aphy Larpent 
had been no creature of flesh and blood, 
but the goblin gnome that she looked to 
be. The instant that her eyes rested on 
Violets impassive beauty, she had laid 
her hand upon the detective's arm, and 
whispered in his ear. And Superinten- 
dent Starkey, with a stiff bow, and a mut- 
tered sentence of apology for his intrusion, 
strode across the room. 

" Miss Violet Maybrook ?'' he said, 
somewhat less glibly than usual. " Yes ; 
I thought so. My prisoner, then, by virtue 
of this warrant, in Her Majesty's name; 
and pray, remember, as it is my duty to 
inform you, that whatever you say will be 
used against you on your trial." And he 
stood very close to Violet, not touching 
her, but in evident watchfulness of her 
every movement 

** Of what am I accused ?" asked Violet 
boldly, but after a dreadful pause. 



] 66 Lady^ Livingston's Legacy. 

%m-w 1- - I .-1.'^ 1 

"Of wilful murder," was the answer. 
"A painful thing to say it, miss; but 
right's right, and I must do my office. 
Whatever you say will be used against 
you." 




CHAPTER X. 

APHRODITE TELLS THE STORY. 

URDER! the grim name for a 
grim deed, has a ghastly fasci- 
nation in its very sound that few 
other words in our language pos- 
sess. This crowning crime, like Milton's 
bad archangel, stands apart from all the 
baleful sisterhood of sins, and those who 
lie under the ban of it appear to the fancy 
of the spectators to be invested by a lurid 
atmosphere of their own, a blood-red 
haze that cuts them off from wholesome 
humanity. But such an accusation, brought 
against one so bright, frank, and fearless 
as Violet Maybrook, could not readily 
obtain credence, and after the first moment 



1 68 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

of speechless surprise, incredulity suc- 
ceeded to astonishment. 

" It is impossible ; I do not believe it/' 
exclaimed Beatrice ; while the widow was 
even more indignant at such a charge 
against her young friend. 

" This must be some dreadful mistake/' 
she said, coming round to Violet's side, and 
taking her cold hand between her own ; 
" either that, or a base and wicked calumny, 
such as might be looked for," she added, 
with an angry glance towards Aphrodite 
Larpent, " from such a quarter. . My dear, 
poor darling !" she went on tenderly, *' it is 
no wonder that she should be thunder- 
struck at such an infamy as this/' 

And thunder-struck indeed did Violet 
Maybrook at first appear to be. She had 
rehearsed, in thought, many a time, such a 
scene as this, and considered how she 
should act, how speak, in certain contin- 
gencies. But now the actual hour had ar- 
rived, the reality was so much more ter- 
rible than the anticipation of it had been, 
that she was quite silent and passive. 



Aphrodite Tells the Story. 169 

" Speak, Violet, and tell them . tell us 
that you know not what they mean !'* said 
Mrs. Dashwood, passing her arm round the 
girl's waist, as if to assure her of her sup- 
port. " This person is, I suppose, an officer 
of justice ?" 

'* Superintendent Starkey, of the de- 
tectives, madam," answered the tall man in 
the tightly-buttoned surtout ; " and I have 
authority for what I do . a painful duty, I 
assure you. If you will take the advice of 
a man who has had twenty-five years' ex- 
perience of family affairs, you will rather 
persuade this young lady to come quietly 
along with me, and reserve her defence, 
than to say what must come to be repeated 
at the Central Criminal Court. That's 
always the proper plan . reserve your de- 
fence . if you'll believe me." 

"Such counsel may be good for guilty 
wretches who seek to elude deserved pun- 
ishment," cried Mrs. Dashwood, all her 
woman's nature in a glow of indignant 
sympathy ; " not for a girl like this, whom 
I have loved as my own daughter almost, 



1 70 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

and who has been justly esteemed and 
prized from childhood upwards by those 
who knew her. She is a stranger here in 
England, but I can vouch for her inno- 
cence. Innocence! it is an outrage to 
question it when such a charge is brought 
Am I to understand, by Miss Larpent's 
intrusion here, that she is the ac- 
cuser ?" 

" She is the witness, certainly. We don't 
look to her to prosecute, but she furnishes 
the evidence on which the crown will rely," 
answered the policeman, with an awkward- 
ness not usual with him, as if his mind were 
preoccupied by some anxiety which he 
could not readily relieve. 

" This must be some horrible deception^ 
or some extraordinary error, I am sure of 
it," said Beatrice, looking from one face to 
another. "No one could have led a more 
harmless, quiet life, since she came to 
England, than Miss Maybrook's, to my 
knowledge, has been." 

'*Tell them," said Aphy, harshly, and 
pointing with her finger towards Violet, 



Aphrodite Tells the Story. 171 

who remained marble-white and mute, as 
if frozen into ice. 

" The charge concerns 'what was alleged 
to have been done in. Canada," said the 
detective, reddening, and shuffling with his 
large feet. "Now, indeed, Mrs. Dash- 
wood, you had better leave us to settle it 
without you . indeed you had." 

"In Canada ! Violet accused of such a 
crime there 1" exclaimed Mrs. Dashwood. 
" This is a mere impudent fabrication. It 
must be due to spiteful anger at Miss May- 
brook for restoring the stolen will." 

" The will !" almost shrieked Aphrodite 
Larpent, as her pale face changed to a livid 
hue, and her restless eyes roved from face 
to face, as if to seek an explanation. 

" The will ! ah, true ; I had forgotten 
that," said Violet, breaking silence for the 
first time. " Yes, I restored the will, and 
the result is, as you see, that she who pur- 
loined it brands me as a murderess." 
There was something unnatural in the 
calm, passionless tone in which these words 
were uttered, more as if they had been 



1 72 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

spoken by a sleep-walker than by a sentient 
human being face to face with so horrible 
an accusation, which painfully impressed 
the bystanders. 

" You are not yourself at this moment, 
dear Violet," said Mrs. Dashwood, apolo- 
getically, as it were, for the strange stoicism 
of her whose cause she was defending; 
"and can hardly realize the full bearing 
of this shameful charge. . Yes," she con- 
tinued, turning to the policeman, " Lady 
Livingston's will, of the loss of which you 
have very likely heard, is here/' And she 
lifted the heavy packet from the table 
where it lay, that the detective might read 
the endorsement. With a kind of cry like 
that of a bird of prey, Aphy Larpent darted 
forward, as if to snatch the document from 
the widow's hand ; but with a rapid revul- 
sion of feeling, she checked herself, and 
with a vengeful glance at Violet, resumed 
her former attitude of expectancy. 

" This is a find !" said the superintendent, 
excitedly. " Well, well ! after all our pains 
and all our search, to light upon it here, of 



Aphrodite Tells the Story. 1 73. 

all places! It is worth taking care df, 
ma'am, now you have got it ; and if you'll 
permit me to suggest, I should say that 
Mr. Glegg ought to be communicated with, 
by the wires, this very day. Not a moment 
should be lost, with so much money turning 
on it Why, that very will my brother- 
officer has been tracing high and low, down 
Yorkshire way first, then across the Her- 
ring-pond, and now, lo'and behold! the 
game is over, and there is nothing left but 

to I forgot !" And indeed, in his 

surprise at the discovery of the will, the 
honest detective had allowed the actual 
object of his presence in that place to escape 
his memory. He winced as he remembered 
the work in hand, and his voice was not so 
steady as usual when he resumed : " But 
duty must be attended to. . Now, Miss 
Maybrook, you are a lady of education, and 
sense, and spirit, and don't need to be re- 
minded by a half-taught man like me that 
circumstances often look suspicious enough 
to warrant investigation, and yet afterwards 
are cleared up to the satisfaction of alL 



1 74 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

That's the use of lawyers, to piece and 
patch together this little thing and that 
little thing, and get date and place right ; 
and they can do it, being cool about it, 
much better than principals can. So, if 
you'll come with me. Miss Maybrook, and, 
as I said, reserve your defence until you 
have professional advice, it will be much 
the best. You have no harsh treatment to 
apprehend, and liothing arbitrary. It's 
your right, if you choose, to be taken before 
a county magistrate, who will examine my 
warrant, and back it if he thinks fit ; but if 
you'll believe me, to come quietly back to 
London will be your wisest plan and the 
pleasantest." 

It was plain that the superintendent was 
exceedingly desirous to get Violet away 
from the room and the house without pro- 
longing the conversation ; and it was evi- 
dent, too, that his purpose was not unkindly. 
It was absolutely an imploring look which 
he addressed to Aphrodite as the latter 
raised her forefinger and shook it tauntingly 
at Violet Maybrook, saying, in a voice that 



Aphrodite Tells the Story. 1 75 

sounded like the croak of a raven : ** Tell 
her . tell them, who was the victim, and 
what the crime, or I must." 

These words produced a fearful effect on 
Violet, who recoiled a pace or two, shaking 
herself free from Mrs. Dash wood's en- 
circling arm. The dead could scarcely 
have bieen more death-like in their pallor 
than was her beautiful face now, and it was 
in a broken and hollow voice that she said 
to the superintendent : " Yes, lead me 
away. See, I will go quietly ; I am ready. 
Chain me, if you will" . and she held out 
her clasped hands as if to receive the steel 
manacles . "but spare me . spare her^ 
And her haggard gaze turned furtively 
towards the widow, who trembled, without 
knowing why, as did Beatrice Fleming. 

" You are driving the poor thing mad, 
and she wanders in her speech," said Mrs. 
Dashwood; for the first time admitting 
within herself that the hideous accusation 
might be true. Aphrodite Larpent, intent 
upon the scene before her, laughed . such 
a laugh as fiends might utter when thdiv 



I *]6 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

tempted succumb to their evil influ- 
ence ! 

" Will you tell her, sir, or shall I ?" she 
demanded, inexorably. 

The superintendent answered by an oath, 
which we will hope shared the fate of Uncle 
Toby's honest expletive, and was not regis- 
tered against him by the recording angel. 

" ril do it,*' he said, with a groan, " since 
needs must, and better it should come from 
my lips, after all, than that of yonder jade," 
jerking his elbow towards Aphrodite. . 
" Mrs. Dashwood, Tm compelled to speak 
out, though, Heaven knows, I sought to be 
tender with your feelings, though, of course, 
the bad news could not be long concealed. 
Your poor little boy, that was accidentally 
drowned *' 

" Charley, my boy ! My dead, only dar- 
ling 1*' exclaimed the widow, scarcely able, 
with her white lips, to frame the words. 
**What can you have to tell me of him, 
cruel that you are ?" 

** Well ! he didn't come to his death by 
fair means . that is alleged, at least, not 



Aphrodite Tells the Story, 177 



proved, of course !** added the officer, 
rapidly. " The charge against Miss May- 
brook is that of murder, since she, being 
his governess, and alone by the river-bank, 
out in Canada there, is said to have " 

" To have thrust him from the bank to 
perish. These eyes saw it done !" hissed 
out AphrcKJite Larpent. " I was near 
enough, unseen myself, behind the green 
sumach bush(*s, to see yonder cold- blooded 
murderess do the deed. Oh, it was hor- 
rible ! I am bad enough, but I could not 
have found it in even my heart to be the 
butcher of that pretty lamb, that clung to 
her, screaming in fear and wonder, and beg- 
ging her, with a babble of loving words . 
for he loved her, as you all did . * not to 
be angry with Charley, not to hurt Charley, 

not to kill ' That was the last word 

that reached me, and it was spoken as she 
forced him down, for the second time, into 
the cruel flood below ; for he had struggled 
hard for his little life, poor child, and his 
golden curls were all wet and draggled as 
he clung to the bank, and tried to grasp 

VOL. III. 12 



178 Lady Livingstotis Legacy. 



.w>.« 



the dress the murderess wore . his blue 
eyes wild with terror, and his innocent face 
upturned. I ran forward, calling to my 
brother, Bruce, who was walking somewhat 
behind me ; but I was not in time to obey 
my first impulse, and to save him. No ! 
When I came up aid was of no use. The 
little corpse was already the sport of the 
rapids, as the swift water swept it swirling 
among the eddies and the shoals, and was 
found far down the river, as you know. A 
black, base, cniel deed ! To harm that 
pretty boy was what the worst ruffian from 
the frontiers would scarcely have done ; 
and yet he was murdered, wilfully, coldly, 
and of set purpose, and that by the dear 
teacher, thg dear friend, whom, next to his 
mother, he loved ! That I made a wicked 
barrain to conceal the murder, in con- 
sideration of Violet Maybrook's lavish 
promises of money, influence, help through 
life, is true. I am not here to defend 
myself, or to gloss over my own conduct 
Bruce had been attached to the girl, who 
never had deigned to smile on him, and he. 



Aphrodite Tells the Story. 1 79 

too, was urgent with me not to bring her 
to disgrace and punishm'^^.nt. The inischief 
was done. To denounce yonder monster 
would not have brought Charley Dachwood 
back to life ; and it behoved lost Aphy 
Larpent, shunned and flouted by the re- 
spectable a'^.d virtuous, to make for herself 
what friends, or rather what instruments, 
she could. I repeat, the murder was a de- 
liberate one. There was no accident, no 
suddv^n impulse of anger ; all was coolly 
planned. The Irish nurse, on whom the 
blame fell, did indeed indulge in liquor at 
the farmhouse, but her drink, thanks to the 
adroitness of Violet Maybrook, was drugged, 
and her lingering to sleep off its effects on 
the verj^e of the forest, was calculated 

beforehand. Never yet " 

A shriek, long, wild, J^eart-rending, burst 
from the unhappy mother as she heard 
these last words, and realized their full 
import. As the dreadful narrative pro- 
ceeded, she had li:;tened, speechless with 
agony and half-incredulous horror, still 
hoping, with the hopefulness which some- 

12 . 2 



i8o Lady Ltvi7tgston' s Legacy. 



times dulls the edge of great suffering, that 
the shocking story might be untrue. But 
gradually the details had shaped themselves 
too accurately for unbelief to be prolonged. 
Yes, it must be true. If she had doubted 
yet, one glance at Violet's face was enough 
to carry conviction home to the heart of 
the bereaved mother. It was terrible, that 
face, in its haggard, despairing beauty, with 
its unearthly pallor, its dilated eyes, the 
lips slightly parted, the brow borne erect, 
as if reckless, now, of men's hate or earthly 
chastisement. No wonder, if at length the 
widow's pent-up anguish broke forth into 
that one cry of passionate woe, and that 
then she sank down, senseless, happily for 
her, on the floor. 

Then came a time of hurrying feet and 
ringing of bells, and the sound of excited 
voices, and poor Mrs. Philip Dash wood was 
huddled away, and laid on her bed, to re- 
cover, alas ! only too soon, and to feel the 
old wound opened ; the grief for her irre- 
parable loss made into one of tenfold bit- 
terness. That bright, fair boy, loved and 



Aphrodite Tells the Story. 1 8 1 

loving ! he to be the price, coldly paid, of 
a compact of marriage ; and his destroyer, 
that seemingly noble girl, the dear, true- 
hearted, elder sister, to whose cruel hand 
he clung so trustingly ; good, beautiful 
Violet! When the widow regained her 
powers of thought, the while that Beatrice 
Fleming watched beside her couch, it 
seemed as though her burning forehead 
could scarcely bear the throbbing of the 
overtasked brain. Violet, a murderess! 
Violet, the proud, pure, stately maiden, on 
whom all Montreal had looked as on some- 

r 

thing fairer, nobler, more gracious, than 
the crowd of pretty damsels that fre- 
quented the ball-room and the skating-rink. 
She had been poor, and Mrs. Dashwood 
had been foremost in striving that she 
should be kept from the ills of poverty, 
from its enforced self-denial, its narrow 
cares, its carking anxiety, the gloom that 
it often casts over the outset of a joyous 
young life. And how had the frozen 
snake rewarded the kind hand that tended 
it I It was all the more sad and strange 



1 82 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 



that Violet M;^ybrook's name had been 
not undeservedly coupled with [raise for 
good deed^ done. She had nursed the 
sick, when some fell nicJady made hireling 
attendants flinch from the contagion to be 
dreaded. She had saved lives, and no- 
toriously, on two occasions, that of her 
enemy and accuser, Aphy Larpcnt, such 
saving beinr more common in the wild,. 
fre^\ colonial mode of living, where nature 
is yet but half-tamed, and virgin, forest,, 
and lake, and miglity river woo the adven- 
turous, than on our nide of the Adantic. 
No one had ever known her to tell a false- 
hood, or to be treacherous, false, or crueL 
Children came clustering roimd her with 
their loyal love, and it is said that those 
whom the young and stainless trust and 
admire, must be worthy of the citlmiration 
and the faith. 

Yet it never came, for one instant, into 
Mrs. Dashwood's head to doubt that the 
fearful truth had been spoken. She had 
seen it written on Violet's marble cheek 
in her haggard eyes, in her blanched lips.. 



Aphrodite Tells the Story. 183 



True, too true! Her very silence was 
eloquent. The manner in which she had 
endured the accusation was of itself equi- 
valent to a confession. She had not wept, 
or crouched, or owned her guilt. All the 
common signs of penitence or panic had 
been absent. But neither had she been 
able to brazen out the matter as vulgar 
criminals do. Speech had failed her from 
the first. Not naturally a dissembler, she 
had ill-played her part when taxed with 
the enormous wickedness, the horrid crime, 
for which her life was justly forfeit. But 
the boy ! the boy ! That he, of all chil- 
dren, should have been thus cut off! It 
was as though he had died again, as though 
the little grave were but freshly dug, the 
flowers lying unwithered on the tiny coffin, 
the old gnawing pain, still new and bitter 
at the mother's heart. Foully done to 
death, and by whose contrivance ! Slain, 
and by whose unpitying hand ! vShe re- 
membered . it was a renewed pang to the 
lonely widow to remember it . that :-he 
had encouraged the boy to call his gover- 



184 Lady Livingston s Legacy. 



ness by the fond name of sister ; that his 
high spirit and hers had seemed to be in 
some sense akin; that Charley had been 
sometimes wayward and rebeUious with 
his mother, but with Violet never; that 
the girl had once sat all night long beside 
his little bed in sickness, patiently holding 
the clinging, feverish fingers in hers as he 
slept, and she kept vigil, uncomplaining ; 
that in convalescence the boy would accept 
food from no hand but that c^f " Sister Vi ;" 
and that she had murdered him. It was 
like the shadowy, shapeless horror of an 
evil dream. 

Meanwhile, the sound of another ap- 
proaching carriage, coming fast on through 
the twilight, had been succeeded by that 
of steps on the smooth gravel of the gar- 
den-path, and Oswald Charlton, accompa- 
nied by Sergeant Flint, had entered the 
house. The Dingle, usually the abode of 
peaceful order, was by this time in a state 
of complete confusion. The mistress of 
the house lay ill in her darkened chamber 
upstairs. There had been an interchange 



Aphrodite Tells the Story. 185 



of messages between the quiet cottage and 
the police station nearer to the sea-beach, 
ending in the arrival of two constables, 
one of whom patrolled the garden without, 
while the other had entered, and with him 
a hard-featured woman, with bony fingers 
that were well experienced in searching 
among the garments of what newspapers 
technically describe as female prisoners. 
Into this dismal category had Violet May- 
brook now passed. From the moment 
when Mrs. Dash wood had fallen swooning 
to the ground, and had so been borne from 
the room, a change had appeared to come 
over the accused. Her pride and her self- 
possession seemed to return to her, and as 
she drew herself up to her full height, and 
looked down upon the puny form of her 
denouncer, somewhat of her old haughty 
loveliness came back, like the mellow 
gleam of sunshine at the end of a dying 
day. 

" The story has been artfully prepared,** 
she said boldly, "and well rehearsed, I 
have no doubt. It is not here that its 



1 86 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 



truth is to be tested, or that I am to be 
judged. A more impartial audience will 
decide, hereafter, between my version of 
the depKTable accid^^nt, and that which 
you have just so greedily drunk in. With 
the person before me, I will not argue, or 
bandy words, nor will I, unless under c( im- 
pulsion, remain in her presence. For the 
rest, you will find me an obedient prisoner;, 
and I intend. Superintendent Starkey, to 
take your well-meant advice, and, in your 
own words, to reserve my defence." 

Then, without deigning to notice Aph« 
rodite Larpent, she allowed herself to be 
led away, and conducted, under custody, ta 
another room. 

*' As regards you. Miss Larpent," said 
the superintendent, on returning to where 
Aphy was still standing, " you had better 
sit down and make yourself as comfortable 
as you can, for a bit, until I receive instruc- 
tions, for which I have just telegraphed. 
After what has occurred 



I 



** Do you mean that I, too, am a priso- 
ner F asked Aphy Larpent, savagely.. 



Aphrodite Tells the Story. 187 



** Even if I were the jaclo that you so 
politely called me, surely you dare ncjt 
detain me here against my desire." 

" I dare not, miss," returned the man,, 
seriously, "take it on my own responsibility 

after what has come out " 

, " Aboiit the will, do you mean ?" inter- 
rupted Aphy. 

" About the will, which is safe nowl' re- 
plied the dv-^tective, tapping with his strong 
fingers the place where it lay tightly but- 
toned in beneath his dark-blue surtout ; 
" with respect to the concealment of which 
. if no guilty knowledge . some explana- 
tion is necessary. Now, must I call in the 
constable you see from the window, to 
remain here during my absence, or may I 
rely on your being tractable ?" 

" Tractable !" Yes, Aphrodite would 
be tractable. It must be understood, and 
clearly, that she must be exonerated from 
any criminal charge, or at I'-^ast fr«jm its 
consequences, before she would consent to 
give her testimony in open court ; but so 
far as present submission went, she was. 



1 88 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 



ready \,o comply, only hoping that Mr. 
Soirkey would have the grace not to test 
her patience too severely. So saying, she 
sat herself down, sullenly enough, in a 
corner, and taking up a book from the 
table near her, read, or feigned to read. 
Superintendent Starkey highly commended 
his troublesome witness for her very sen- 
sible resolve ; but, nevertheless, when he 
left the room, he thoughtfully took the pre- 
caution of turning the key in the lock. 
And, an hour or so afterwards, Oswald 
Charlton, in company with Sergeant Flint, 
arrived at the Dingle. 

It was nearly dark when the doctor who 
had been in attendance on Mrs. Dash- 
wood came downstairs, to report, before 
leaving the house, that the widow had fully 
regained consciousness, and that the first 
outburst of her renewed sorrow had spent 
itself without, so he hoped, any permanent 
injury to her health or reason. He readily 
consented to be the bearer of a message 
from Oswald, entreating Beatrice to see 
him for a moment ; and soon those two, so 



Aphrodite Tells the Story. 189 



drawn to one another by sympathy and 
love, so strangely separated by circum- 
stances, met to hold a brief colloquy nut- 
side of Mrs. Dash wood's chamber door. 
Beatrice Fleming looked pale and agitated, 
and the traces of recent tears were glisten- 
ing on her young cheek, but it was happi- 
ness to her to feel the pressure of Oswald's 
hand, and to hear his voice once more. 

" We must speak low," she whispered ; 
" for this poor lady is awake now, though 
all but speechless with sorrow. Yoj. have 
heard the dreadful history! Oh, it was 
horrible ; and to think that this unhappy 
girl was an inmate of the dear old house 
at Richmond, and constantly in our com- 
pany ! It seems like a horrid dream, too 
frightful to be true. Had she but denied 



it " 



" She could not, I fear," answered Os- 
wald, sadly. " Truth has a power of its 
own, even when it speaks by such vile lips 
as those of the accuser in this case. That 
Miss Larpent's motives were base and 
selfish throughout, none could doubt. But 



I go Lady Livingstones Legacy. 



I am afraid that the hideous narrative is 
substantially true, however we might wish 
it to be proved false. I have not seen 
Miss Maybrook, who is shortly to be re- 
moved to safe keeping in London ; but I 
have had a short interview with the other, 
who was, I have no doubt, the person who 
purloined the will from Lady Livingston's 
room, immediately after her death. And 
then, wonder of wonders ! I find the will 
here . the very paper that I have hunted 
for, almost without rest, since I undertook 
to trace it out Mr. Glegg has been com- 
municated with, and I shall not be content 
until it is in his hands. You are rich now, 
Beatrice." 

" I had not thought of it," rejoined 
Beatrice, with a gentle smile. " I was 
never, as you know, very covetous of 
money, and these terrible events have 
made me quite forgetful of my own in- 
terests. It was the lawyer's clerk, I 
thought, who was suspected." 

" Wronij^fuUy, as it seemed," said Os- 
wald, " although he was clearly an accom- 



Aphrodite Tells the Story. 19 r 



plice of his sister's, and was implicated in 
the affair of the garrotin^ of that iinfortu 
nate attorney. But he is dead, poor fellow; 
shot like a dog, before my eyes, in Paris. 
You need not start or grow pale, Beatrice, 
for the sergeant ar\d I are safe back now 
fr< )m the shambles that evil strife has made 
of the fair French capital, and our task 
was not quite fruitless. Yes, he died, and 
not impenitently ; and I think the tidings 
of his death, which she learned for the 
first time from Sergeant Flint, my trusty 
comrade in the adventure, have affected 
his wret :hed sister more powerfully than I 
could have conceived possible with such a 
nature as hers. It will be but a sad journey, 
that one to London, which remains to be 
taken by the night mail-train, for it is 
painful, even to the captors, to see two 
young lives like those of Violet Maybrook 
and Aphrodite Larpent end in disgrace 
and punishment, however merited. But 
my own quest is still but half-performed 
until I shall have met with Mr. Glegg, and 
arranged for the reading of the will." 



' i 



CHAPTER XL 




THE READING OF THE WILL. 

N the cool and shaded drawing- 
room at the Dingle were collected 
several of those who had been 
assembled together in the ban- 
quet-hall of the dead nabob after Lady 
Livingston's funeral. The doctors, to be 
sure, were not there, nor the parochial 
clergy; but the relatives had hastened c^n 
the first summons to be present at the 
reading of the will. Mr. Glegg, as he 
took his place beside the table on which 
lay the recovered document, was full of 
bustle and self-importance. That Honour- 
able and Reverend Fleming, who had offi- 
ciated at the dowager's obsequies, was there; 



The Reading of the Will. 1 93 

and so was Sir Frederick Dashwood, his 
worn, handsome face lit up by ignoble 
hopes of easily got wealth ; and there was 
Oswald Charlton ; and not far from him ap- 
peared the stooping form and anxious 
visage of the heir-at-law, John Fleming, 
who had come in hot haste from the 
Fountains to keep a jealous watch upon 
the proceedings that were to oust him from 
the inheritance which had been so rich a 
windfall. He stood a little apart from the 
other cousins, speaking little, save to his 
solicitor, a member of the Thavies Inn 
firm, whom he had brought down with him 
*' to protect his interests," as he said. And 
Sergeant Flint, having been conversant 
with the various steps taken for the re- 
covery of the will, was also of the company. 
So, at Oswald's wish, was Beatrice Fleming 
herself, although Mrs. Dashwood was far 
too ill and too unnerved to be by the side 
of her young guest. 

All manner of wild reports were in circu- 
lation as to the adventures of the lately 
missing testament, and yet it occurred to no 

VOL. III. 13 



194 Lady Livingstotis Legacy. 

one to question its authenticity. Even 
John, the heir-at-law, who had so much at 
stake, did not venture to express a doubt, 
but contented himself with whispering to 
his attorney, who stood at his elbow like a 
familiar spirit at that of a medieval necro- 
mancer, to keep his eyes and ears open for 
flaws, and to assure himself that the will 
was not one of those which will not, in 
technical phraseology, hold water. 

"You will observe, gentlemen," Mr. 
Glegg had said by way of exordium, " that 
the envelope of the document is in the 
same condition as when closed by my part- 
ner, Mr. Goodeve ; that it is regularly en- 
dorsed ; and that the office seal, which my 
partner carried with him to the Fountains, 
has left an impression on the wax which 
has not been tampered with. That Lady 
Livingston had it among her papers, and 
that it was thence purloined at the moment 
of her sudden decease, is sufficiently proved 
by the logic of circumstances ; and I have 
no hesitation in saying that I could establish 
this by viva voce evidence, were it necessary. 



The Reading of the Will. 195 

I will now, with your permission, execute 
the duty which, when last we met in the 
dining-room of the Fountains, I had scanty 
hopes of being enabled to perform, that of 
breaking the seal, and of reading the 
will." 

The seal was broken, and the Last Will 
and Testament of the Right Honourable 
Lavinia, Dowager Baroness Livingston, 
was withdrawn from its envelope, opened, 
and smoothed out by the lawyer's practised 
hand. The very rustling of the paper, so 
different in degree from the rustling of 
other paper, caused all hearts to beat and 
all eyes to be attracted to the document 
before Mr. Glegg. Then the attorney, 
himself slightly agitated . for was not this 
a will exceptional and peculiar above all 
those with which he had had to do ? . read 
aloud the following provisions on the part 
of the testatrix. The bequests and gifts 
were many, but none were of great value. 
Certain jewels, pictures, and old china went 
to various old friends. Five hundred 
pounds, with a diamond brooch, went to 

13.2 



1 96 Lady Livingston! s Legacy. 

console Mrs. General Buckram for the loss 
of her liberal neighbour ; and similar lega- 
cies and mementoes were bestowed on two 
or three others of the elderly recluses at 
Hampton Court The old servants, with 
several aged and infirm pensioners of Lady 
Livingston's, received annuities. All the 
members of the establishment at the 
Fountains were more or less remembered 
in that substantial form of recollection 
which is the most appreciated. To Violet 
Maybrook was allotted a sum of two 
hundred pounds, free of legacy duty, " to 
provide for her return home to Canada,, 
should she be unmarried and desirous of 
quitting England, otherwise, to be disposed 
of at her pleasure ;" and with this gift of 
money, an emerald ring which the dowager 
often wore. Beatrice Fleming's name was 
set down in connection with a pearl cross 
and gold chaip, "given me by her dear 
mother long ago, and which I know she 
will value for the sake of the associations." 
But five or six thousand pounds repre- 



The Reading of the Will. 197 

rented the whole amount of the bequests, 
so far as money was concerned. 

Now came the moment of real interest, 
as the lawyer, clearing his voice, com- 
menced the recital. " All my real and 
personal estate" . ** to wit, Heavitree Hall " 
. '* hum, hum, arable, coppice, pasture, 
fields, tenements, and messuages " . ** in 
the Three per Cent. Consolidated, ahem" 
. " after payment of my just debts and the 
above-mentioned legacies " . were run over 
in the midst of breathless silence. Then 
came the words, " heir and residuary lega- 
tee," and all listened for the name that all 
expected to hear, the name of her who was 
well known to have been the dowager^s 
favourite kinswoman and destined heiress. 
But to the wonder of all who heard it, and 
of the reciter himself, the name read out 
was that, not of Beatrice Fleming, but of 
" my late lord's nephew, Oswald Charlton, 
Esquire, barrister-at-law." 

Then arose a clamour of voices, Oswald's 
being the loudest in the utterance of the 
.surprise which he, in common with the rest 



198 Lady Livingstotis Legacy. 

felt at this unlooked-for climax to the dis- 
position of the dowager's effects. 

" There must be some mistake in the 
wording of the will," said the young man^ 
rising from his chair, and coming up ta 
where the lawyer was seated. " It is per- 
haps as trustee, or as executor, that I am 
set down." 

" Excuse me, but there is no mistake at 
all," persisted Mr. Glegg: " you are, indeed, 
executor, but it is no sinecure office which 
is thus assigned to you. Under the will,, 
which is carefully drawn and clearly worded, 
Heavitree Hall, and all the property real 
and personal, charged with the legacies I 
have mentioned, go to you in absolute pos- 
session and fee-simple. There is no trust, 
no condition. The dowager, our esteemed 
client, has left you all as unreservedly as if 
you had been her own and only son." 

Dashwood now strode forward, and with 
his features distorted by passion, furiously 
struck the table with his clenched hand. 

"This is some infamous trickery," he 
cried aloud . "some rascally juggle! If 



The Reading of the Will. 1 99 

the old witch really was in her right mind 
when she signed that trumpery jargon, 
there must have been undue influence em- 
ployed to cause it Why, her intentions 
towards my cousin Beatrice were known as 
if they had been gazetted. . Don't suppose, 
Mr. Charlton, or whatever you call yourself, 
that I am the dupe of your pretended 
astonishment, well as you enact your part 
It is not the first time that a smooth-spoken 
hypocrite '' 

"For shame, Sir Frederick!" exclamed 
three of the cousins with one breath; 
while Oswald drew himself up to his full 
height and looked his insulter calmly in the 
face. 

" Your irritation is natural. Sir Frederick 
Dashwood," he said, quietly, "although 
your mode of expressing it is unjust as 
well as offensive. I think no one here will 
disbelieve me when I say that this most sin- 
gular will has been fully as great a source of 
astonishment to me as to any here. 
Heaven knows, I never harboured a 
thought of inheriting my aunt's property. 



200 Lady Livingstoti s Legaxy. 

I expected, as all expected, to hear Miss 
Fleming's name read out as " 

" By Jove ! I see it now !" interrupted 
Dashwood, his voice quivering with anger. 
" To spite me, by Heaven ! the old woman 
has done this. If Beatrice had but had 
the sense to keep silent as to the engage- 
ment ! But no ! She has ruined us both 
by her insisting on telling all to the capri- 
cious " 

" It is my turn now, Sir Frederick, to 
bid you be silent," said Beatrice/coming 
forward with a firm but gentle dignity of 
bearing, before which the baronet stood re- 
buked. "If no consideration towards the 
dead restrains you, I must at least insist 
that in my presence you do not wrong the 
memory of her who was to me, left mother- 
less, all that a mother could have been." 

" And who has now left you a beggar," 
said Dashwood, sullenly. 

" Her money was her own, and she was 
at liberty to bestow it on whom she would," 
replied Beatrice, with fearless composure. 
" I do not love her the less, or pay less 



The Reading of the Will. 201 

honour to her dear memory, because she 
has thought fit to leave the property else- 
where. Yes, I shall be very poor, as you 
have said, cousin. Nevertheless, if you 
hold me to my word, I am still ready to 
keep my promise, and " 

"And marry me . that's your meaning, 
is it ?" broke in Dashwood, with a second 
blow upon the table that made the writing 
materials and Mr. Glegg's spectacles leap 
uneasily up . "and let us starve together? 
No, by George! I'm out of that trap, 
anyhow." 

"Am I to understand, Frederick Dash- 
wood, that . you . relinquish " Beatrice 

began, but her voice and her courage both 
failed her, and she clung for support to the 
chair beside her, and left the sentence in- 
complete. 

The baronet merely answered by a brutal 
laugh. " You, Mr. Glegg," he said, turning 
to the lawyer, " are you sure there's no co- 
dicil, or whatever idiotic name you call it 
by, tacked to the will, which alters matters ? 
. You shake your head. And is the thing 



202 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 



witnessed and dated, and the rest of it, so 
as to be binding ?" 

" Signed, sealed, and delivered, in due 
and proper form," returned Mn Glegg, 
distantly ; " as your man of business, Sir 
Frederick, will doubtless inform you, should 
you desire to have the document profession- 
ally examined. There never was a will 
that left fewer loopholes for litigation." 

" So I see," acknowledged John Flemings 
with a groan. To the last, he had hoped 
for some informality to be detected, for 
some ambiguity of expression, something 
that would leave an opening for a triangular 
duel in the Court of Chancery, in which 
the Lord of Pinchbeck's weighty purse 
might perhaps outlast the resources of other 
claimants. But now he saw that resistance 
was hopeless, and his legal adviser from 
Thavies Inn saw it too. So John Fleming, 
heir-at-law, and who had forty-eight hours 
previously exercised all the rights of owner- 
ship, now came cringing up to Oswald, to 
deprecate any anger on his part as to cer- 
tain cuttings-down of timber, serving no- 



The Reading of the Will. 205 

tices of ejectment, and other unpopular 
measures which he had already taken at 
Heavitree, under the belief that all there 
was his very own. But Oswald was in no 
mood to discuss with the dispossessed in- 
heritor of the Warwickshire property the 
details of its management. Turning to 
Dashwood, he addressed him in a tone that 
admitted of no denial : " Sir Frederick, I 
take the company here to witness that Miss 
Beatrice Fleming, your cousin, has most 
honourably offered to fulfil her engagement 
of marriage, of long standing, as all well 
know, with yourself. You have yet to give 
your answer." 

" I know no right which you have to 
champion my cousin's cause, or to interro- 
gate me," answered Dashwood, gruffly, 
but with less insolence of manner than be- 
fore. " But since you seem so interested 
in the subject. 111 tell you that I have no 
more intention of marrying the young lady 
you speak of than I have of cutting my 
throat . not so much, perhaps. Fm a poor 
man, and could not afford the luxury of a 



204 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

wife, unless she had enough for both. I 
have waited, and hoped, for the chance of 
the dowager's fortune for years, and now it 
is lost, I cry off! and there's an end 
of it" 

" You give me back my promise ? you 
release me from it ? Say so. Sir Frederick, 
and be generous for once !" said Beatrice, 
imploringly ; and then she covered her face 
with her hands, and sank sobbing into a 
chair. 

" I release you, if that's what you want 
me to say," replied Sir Frederick, impa- 
tiently. " I hate a scene, and I have 
nothing to keep me here any longer ; so, 
good-bye to you all;" and he turned to look 
for his hat, when the sound of Violet May- 
brook's name struck upon his ear, and he 
turned towards a knot of the bystanders 
which had gathered around Sergeant Flint, 
and the members of which were eagerly 
discussing in an undertone the circum- 
stances of the late arrest 

"What's that you say ?" asked Dash wood, 
bluntly ; and then added : "I beg your 



The Reading of the Will. ^ 205- 

pardon. I am excited, and that sort of 
thing. But what was it you were saying 
about Miss Maybrook having been here ?" 

" We were merely saying," returned the 
Honourable and Reverend Fleming, "how 
distressing a thing it was for poor Mrs. 
Philip Dash wood. Good heavens ! In her 
very house, before her very eyes, a young 
person, for whom, as I understand, she had 
always shown the greatest affection, to be 
arrested for the murder of the poor lady's 
own child, a crime so cruel and cause- 
less " 

" Murder ! You must have been misin- 
formed, Mr. Fleming, if it is of Violet . 
of Miss Maybrook . that you speak !" 
gasped out Sir Frederick, his dry lips 
having some apparent difficulty in forming 
the words, but his manner instantly attract- 
ing every eye towards him. 

The Honourable and Reverend Fleming 
shook his head. 

" Unfortunately, I am not in error," he 
said, with some real feeling ; " were it so, 
poor Mrs. Philip would have been spared a 



2o6 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 



cruel stab to a heart that had suffered 
enough already; and that unhappy girl, 
who, as I am told, scarcely attempted to 
deny her guilt when taxed with it by the 
eye-witness, Miss Larpent, would have a 
less awful reckoning to face before human 
and divine justice. The motive, indeed, 
is as yet mere matter of conjecture ; 
but '' 

" She could have had no motive. If she 
did it, she must have been mad; but I, 
for one, do not believe the story. It was 
an accident. Every one knew " 

Here the baronet faltered in his speech, 
and looked uneasily around him. His face 
was blanched, suddenly, to an ashen pallor, 
and his very lips were white, and he seemed 
to shrink into himself, as if he had lost 
some inches of his tall stature, while his 
bloodshot eyes met, resentfully, every in- 
quiring glance that was bent upon him. 

" I do not wonder you are shocked, Sir 
Frederick," said some one near him. ** You 
were in Canada, I think, at the time '' 

" I Vras. And what of that T demanded 



The Reading of the Will. 207 

Dashwood fiercely ; and then bit his lip, as 
if in anger against himself for the impru- 
dent words. " I beg your pardon," he 
added . " this dreadful news . yes, the poor 

little boy " 

He snatched up his hat and pulled out 
his watch, muttering something about busi- 
ness in London, and shook hands with two 
or three of those nearest to him, and so 
edged his way towards the door. Sergeant 
Flint, narrowly observing him, dropped his 
hand into a side coat-pocket, and seemed 
to finger something there concealed, some- 
thing that opened softly, and shut with a 
sharp snap, as if its steel jaws had hungered 
to inclose a pair of manacled wrists. But 
Sir Frederick left the room without hin- 
drance, and his departure was an evident 
source of relief to all present. Beatrice 
Fleming had gone also, resisting Oswald's 
whispered request that she would remain, 
and was weeping upstairs in Mrs. Dash- 
wood's chamber. Nor did the assembly 
continue very long in session, the business 
of the day being done. There were re- 



2o8' Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

freshments laid out for them in another 
room, and of these they partook ; and there 
was clinking of wine-glasses and rattling of 
forks, while the two chief topics of conver- 
sation were, naturally, the unexpected dis^ 
posal of Lady Livingston's property, and 
the strange behaviour of the baronet The 
former of these two subjects had necessarily 
to be discussed with some degree of re~ 
ticence, owing to the presence of the new 
owner of Heavitree, and of the late one 
in the person of the heir-at-law. But 
no such reason seemed to bridle men's 
tongues as related to Dashwood's remark- 
able agitation on hearing of Violet's arrest. 

" I suppose the explanation simply is, 
that he was in love with her," said some- 
body : " he was quartered for a long time in 
Montreal, which was her native place." 

" I can scarcely suspect Sir Frederick of 
a disinterested attachment," sententiously 
rejoined the Honourable and Reverend 
Fleming. " If ever I saw Fear written on 
a man's face, I Sctw it to-day. If he had 



The Reading of the Will. 209 

been going to be hanged, he could scarcely 
have been more pale." 

Sergeant Flint, who was eating at a side- 
table, overheard this remark, and again 
lovingly fingered the handcuffs in his 
pocket And soon afterwards the party 
broke up, Oswald lingering the last, and 
endeavouring, but in vain, to obtain a few 
moments' speech of Beatrice before leaving. 

" Tell Miss Fleming that she shall hear 
from me from London," was the simple 
message which he sent before quitting the 
house. 



VOL. ra. \/^ 




CHAPTER XII. 

GIVEN AND TAKEN. 

S Miss Fleming at home ? Ah ! 
and Mrs. Dash wood ? better in 
health, but not recovered, eh ? 
Well, don't disturb her on my 
account Tell Miss Beatrice Fleming that 
Mr. Glegg . Goodeve and Glegg . is here 
on business which concerns her . ^business 
of great, of ve-ry great importance." 

It was Mr. Glegg who spoke at the door 
of Mrs. Philip Dashwood's pretty residence, 
the Dingle, and it was now precisely one 
week, day for day, since Mr. Glegg^s last 
visit to Whitborne, on the occasion of the 
reading of the will. He had not to wait 
very long before Beatrice, looking sad, pale, 



Given and Taken. 211 

and fair, like ia sweet, pure lily, came into 
the drawing-room, wherein so many events 
had of late taken place, of a nature quite 
foreign to the peaceful antecedents of that 
hitherto quiet nook. The windows were 
open, and the fragrant creepers still formed 
a screen through which the sea-breeze was 
filtered, and whence still came the busy 
hum of bees, making the most of every 
shining hour for the emolument of the 
winged commonwealth. What, to flower, 
or bee, or to the thrush that showed his 
speckled breast, and poured forth his clear, 
fresh carol, on the lawn beyond, signified 
human cares and passions, Violet's imputed 
crime, Mrs. Dash wood's sorrow, Sir Frede- 
rick's despairing fury, or the pang with 
which the dowager's heir-at-law resigned 
the fat heritage that he had clutched so 
readily ? 

" Miss Fleming, your most obedient ! 
This poor Mrs. Philip . ^better, I gather, 
but far from well ! yes ; that was to be 
expected," began the lawyer, rubbing his 
hands together, so that the rings he wore 

14.2 



212 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 



tinkled faintly as they met " But my 
business to-day is with yourself, and permit 
me, Miss Beatrice, to say, that in the whole 
range of my professional experience, I have 
never undertaken to execute a similar 
errand to that with which my client,. Mr. 
Oswald Charlton, has this day charged me.** 
At the mention of Oswald's name a slight 
tinge of colour rose to Beatrice's pale cheeky 
but she merely bowed, and allowed Mr. 
Glegg to continue. " The document which 
I have brought with me is one of great, 
nay, of the greatest importance. It is not, 
as you see, very voluminous," and suiting 
the action to the word, the solicitor laid 
upon the table a thin blue packet of folded 
paper, endorsed in legal copperplate ; " but 
it has been well drawn and carefully re- 
vised, and I may add that it has been more 
rapidly prepared, in consequence of the 
urgency of my client's pressing request, 
than any settlement or mortgage deed that 
ever left our office. The character of its 
contents. Miss Fleming, I can briefly indi- 
cate. You are aware, as we all are, that 



Given and Taken. 213 

under the late Lady Livingston's will, so 
marvellously recovered, Mr. Charlton takes 
the whole property." 

" Yes ; I know that it is so," said Bea- 
trice smiling; "but I cannot see what 
I " 

" Have to do with the matter," put in 
Mr. Glegg ; " and, indeed, you must be 
surprised at my coming here to recapitulate 
what is already known. This is a deed of 
gift, by which Mr. Oswald Charlton at 
once makes over Heavitree Hall and its 
acres, the money in the funds, and, ahem ! 
all real and personal property accruing to 
him in virtue of Lady Livingston's will, 
freely and unconditionally, to yourself" 
And the lawyer leant back in his chair, as 
if to enjoy the amazement of the listener. 

" To me !" said Beatrice, with the simple 
wonder of a child. 

" To Miss Beatrice Fleming, her heirs, 
executors, administrators, and assigns," read 
out Mr. Glegg, with his eyes upon the 
folio sheets now open before him. " Mr. 
Charlton earnestly begged me to remind 



214 Lady Livingstoris Legacy. 

you, should you feel any delicacy as to the 
acceptance of so magnificent a present, that 
in doing as he does, he is merely fulfilling 
what were unquestionably her ladyship's 
intentions during the last years of her life ; 
that she was in the habit of describing you 
as her heiress, and the future mistress of 
Heavitree, to all with whom she conversed 
in a confidential manner ; and that, in 
undertaking the search for the stolen will, 
he was acting solely with a view to your 
benefit, and in no sense for his own. To 
receive the gift in the same frank and loyal 
spirit in which it is made, is what he 
entreats you to do, firmly resolved as he is, 
never to profit by the unlooked-for liberality 
posthumously evinced by Lady Livingston 
towards himself." 

" Is that. all . that Mr. Charlton has 
asked you to say to me ?" asked Beatrice, 
speaking very slowly, and after a pause. 
The lawyer replied in the affirmative. 

" Nothing," he said, " prevented my 
client, immediately on the reading of the 
will, from publicly renouncing the rights 



Given and Taken. 215 

thus acquired in favour of Lady Living- 
stones natural heiress, save the fear that he 
should thus expose you to a renewal of Sir 
Frederick Dashwood^s mercenary courtship. 
That danger, however, was averted. We 
all heard the baronet distinctly release you 
from your promise, if, indeed, any such 
pledge would be held binding to a man 
whose only alternative has been between 
the disgrace of flight and the ignominy of 
a felon's death." 

" How !" exclaimed Beatrice, starting as 
she heard these ominous words ; " what has 
he done so dreadful as to bring upon him 
consequences such as these of which you 
speak } I knew him to be wild and reck- 
less, but " 

"Ah, my dear young lady," intervened 
the more worldly-wise solicitor, " when you 
come to be as old, and to have seen as 
much of the shady side of human nature 
as I have done, you will be better able to 
understand the potentiality of mischief that 
exists beneath a showy outside. But at 
any rate, some paper was found artfully 



2i6 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

concealed, which it appeared that Miss 
Maybrook always carried about her person, 
and the contents of which were a formal 
promise of marriage, in the handwriting of 
Captain (not then Sir Frederick) Dash- 
wood, and signed by him. This, of itself, 
would be nothing, but the wording of the 
compact is compromising in the highest 
degree, for it goes on to say : ' Should I, 
through her act, become heir to my grand- 
father's baronetcy;' and the meaning of this, 
when read by the light thrown upon it by 
Miss Larpent s revelations, ^ is only too 
clear." 

"Horrible! most horrible !" said Beatrice, 
shuddering ; " tnis will be a new grief to 
poor Mrs. Dash wood, who never thought 
worse of Sir Frederick than that he was 
indolent and wasteful, and even to me, 
little cause as I had to like or to esteem 
him, it is sad to hear it . if it is really pos- 
sible that he could have plotted against the 
life of a poor child. But it is too mon- 
strous to be true, surely, surely, Mr. 
Glegg ?" 



Given and Taken. 217 

" Unluckily, Miss Fleming," answered 
the lawyer, " your cousin has made a vir- 
tual confession by absconding ; though, 
indeed, by so doing, he has up to the 
present time, eluded arrest. I, for one, 
should not be sorry were he never to be 
brought to the bar of human justice ; not 
from any sympathy with such a wretch . 
quite Richard III. over again . but then, 
the disgrace to the family ! Nor is it likely 
that if he gets clear of England, and of 
British law, he will escape the punishment 
that must follow a needy, broken fugitive, 
skulking on the frontiers of the civilized 
world, and ever fearful of being recognized 
and brought back under some treaty of 
extradition. As for Miss Maybrook, she 
has been taken before a magistrate, but the 
crime of which she is accused comes under 
the jurisdiction of a colonial court, not an 
imperial one. So soon as certain formali- 
ties have been complied with, she is to be 
sent to Canada, there to take her trial. 
Hitherto, there has been some difficulty 



2 1 8 Lady Livingston! s Legacy. 



as regards the evidence But I don't 

think you quite follow me, Miss Fleming." 

" No. I was thinking," said Beatrice^ 
looking up, " what an escape from worse 
than death had been mine !" 

" Indeed it has," returned the lawyer^ 
cordially ; " though I admit that none of us 
suspected Sir Frederick to be quite so 
black as he has since been painted. But 
with respect to the business in hand, what 
answer may I take back to my client . as 
refers, I mean, to the deed of gift ?" 

" The gift ! I accept it," answered Bea- 
trice, simply. 

" I am very glad to hear it," said the 
solicitor, "and so will Mr. Charlton be, I 
am sure. I never knew any man more 
eager to acquire a property than he has 
been to get quit of this one. So if you 
will kindly sign this acknowledgment, my 
work will be complete, and you shall be 
placed in possession of your rights without 
an instant's unnecessary delay. The will 
was proved, I may as well mention, with 
unusual expedition ; but then there was no 



Given and Taken. 219 

one to oppose probate, since Mr. John 
Fleming preferred to make a virtue of 
necessity, and the proctor did his work 
quickly. So if you will kindly sign here, 
where you see the red wafers and the pencil 
marks, and again here, and here, I shall not 
have to trouble you any further." 

" Took it," said Mr. Glegg to himself as 
he looked from the window of his first-class 
carriage, in the up-train that bore him back 
to busy London . " took it, as a child takes 
a raspberry-jam tart, and apparently quite 
as much as a matter of course. No doubt, 
no hesitation, none of those delicate scruples 
of which my Quixote of a client was so 
much afraid. After all, who could have 
the stoicism to refuse the snug place in 
Warwickshire, with its meadows and its 
fields, coal-pit, coppice, hedge-row timber, 
and park of fat fallow deer browsing so 
contentedly beside that reedy, swan-haunted 
mere that they call the lake ?" And then 
Mr. Glegg fell to speculating on the proba- 
bilities of Beatrice's future life. Would 
she marry ? Of that there was, he thought. 



220 Lady Livingstotis Legacy. 

but little doubt. And would she, or her 
husband, whoever he might be, put faith in 
another attorney, or continue to manage 
the property and to receive the rents per 
Goodeve and Glegg, as had for years been 
the habit of the dowager ? The firm would 
still go on under the old flag, even though 
poor Mr. Samuel Goodeve should never 
again darken the doors of the Bedford Row 
office with his bodily presence. The un- 
fortunate senior partner had somewhat im- 
proved in health since the miserable night 
when he was brought helpless home, but 
he was very feeble and childish, mentally 
considered ; and one of his daughters was 
already on her way, overland, from Luck- 
now, to assist in tending " poor papa." 

It was late in the evening when a com- 
missionaire showed his medalled breast 
and empty coat-sleeve on the stairs of 
Oswald's chambers, bearing a note from 
Mr. Glegg, informing the unwilling heir 
that his proffer to cede Lady Livingston's 
bequest had been immediately accepted, 
and the acknowledgment signed. It would 



Given and Taken. 221 

not be accurate to assert that Oswald^s 
feelings, on perusing this missive, were 
those of unmixed pleasure. It was quite 
true that his chief fear had been lest Bea- 
trice, through reserve or pride, or a not 
unnatural reluctance to be enriched through 
his divesting himself of the fortune which 
had so strangely descended to him, should 
decline the great gift which he had urged 
upon her. Over and over again did he tell 
himself that he was unfeignedly glad that 
no such impediment had occurred, that he 
was well rid of Heavitree and its belongings, 
and that what he had done* was but an act 
of simple justice, calling for no peculiar 
gratitude. Yet, somehow, Mr. Glegg's 
note seemed unsatisfactory, and Beatrice to- 
have been perhaps over ready to take the 
splendid present, without apparently much 
thought of the bestower. Then he chid 
himself for this feeling of groundless dis- 
content, averring that lawyers' epistles were 
always dry and ungracious in style, and 
that he was wrong to expect that Beatrice 
should see, in what he had done, anything 



22 2 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

beyond a restoration to herself of what was 
fairly hers. " I should not wonder," he 
said, as he threw away the end of his cigar, 
" if my poor old aunt really intended this 
bequest to be a sort of secret trust, for 
Beatrice's benefit, since Lady Livingston 
must have had a shrewd guess that this 
leaving the property away from her would 
serve to free her from that luckless pledge 
to Dashwood. What a Machiavel, in her 
proper sphere of marrying and giving in 
marriage, the dear old woman must have 
been 1 Why, if the baronet had not been 
blinded by his own short-sighted selfish- 
ness, he need not have fallen so readily 
into the trap. He had but to hold Beatrice 
to her word But then, again, he pro- 
bably judged of my conduct by his own : 
and, besides, the fellow must have been 
miserable indeed, always, waking or sleep- 
ing, with a rope around his guilty neck. I 
don't wonder that he was not as ready- 
witted at an emergency as he might other- 
wise have been. And Beatrice . yes, she 
will be rich now, and, I hope, happy." 



Given and Taken, 223 

In the morning, however, the postman 
on his early rounds brought him the follow- 
ing letter, bearing the Whitborne post- 
mark : 

" Mr. Glegg will have told you, I dare 
say, how I accepted your generous . your 
more than generous proposal to give me 
all that our dear, dear old friend left by her 
will to you. And I am afraid, too, that he 
has reported my behaviour as that of a very 
graceless and ungrateful little creature, be- 
cause I did not even ask him to thank you 
for your great goodness to me. I do so 
now, from my heart ; and I am not proud 
enough or foolish enough to feel any false 
shame at taking, from your hand, such a 
gift On one condition, however, do I 
agree to this ; and as I could riot bring my 
self to speak of that to the lawyer, I pre- 
ferred to say nothing . but my mind was 
made up at once. I am free now, and I 
accept, along with your splendid present of 
the inheritance, that other offer which you 
formerly made to me, beside the fountains 



224 . Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

in the dear old garden at Richmond. If 
I were to add the conventional words, 
* should you still be of the same mind/ I 
should be self-convicted of a bit of silly 
affectation, and you would have a right to 
scold me for it. But I know you love me, 
dear ; know that your brave, true heart has 
not cooled towards me, although it is pos- 
sible . we women are taught from child- 
hood to conceal our feelings . that you may 
be less certain of my regard for you. If 
so, doubt me no longer. You never, never 
can guess the bitter, bitter pang with which 
I submitted to give you up, in obedience to 
my dead mother's wish, and in fulfilment of 
a solemn pledge, now happily at an end 
I owe it to you, dear Oswald, to tell you 
that, of my own free will, I accept both 
your offers ; and my acceptance of one is 
conditional on the other's being still your 
wish, as it is that of 

"Beatrice Fleming." 

The note qided almost abruptly, as it 
had begun without the customary prefix. 



Given and Taken, 225 

We may safely conjecture, however, that 
more than one sheet of paper had been 
spoiled in the vain attempts of the writer 
to content herself by commencing with 
"Dear Mr. Charlton," "Dear Oswald,'' 
and the like. And Oswald guessed some- 
what of this, as he pressed the letter to his 
lips again and again. He was happy now. 
Strange magic of the pen, when a few lines 
of black and white can make all the dif- 
ference between rapturous joy and brood- 
ing care ! 



VOL. III. 15 



CHAPTER XIII. 



ESCAPE. 




HEN Dash wood left the pretty- 
house by the sea-shore, where the 
tidings of Violet Maybrook's ar- 
rest had so suddenly reached him, 
he had need of all his self-command to 
preserve the steadiness of brain, and the 
firmness of nerve which, as he instinctively- 
felt, could alone save him at this pass. It 
was characteristic of the man that, after his 
brisk walk to the station, and although the 
glasses and decanters glittered teniptingly 
on the refreshment counter, he abstained 
from the. stimulants which habit had ren- 
dered all but indispensable to him. At 
another time, under any pressure of annoy- 



Escape. 227 

ance, he would have tossed off glass after 
glass of fiery brandy, and have felt the 
stronger and the cooler for the dose of 
burning alcohol. But there are two classes 
. not of drunkards, but of drinkers . ^the 
abject slaves of Circe's cup, who could not 
pass it by were death the penalty ; and the 
men to whom " nips," and " pegs," and 
"pick-me-ups," and all the modern euphem- 
isms for drams, are as mother's milk, but 
who have sufficient moral fibre to grow 
wary in the hour of danger, and to eschew 
what our men-of-war's men once knew as. 
" Dutch courage," at the very moment 
when the exhausted system most craves 
for its support. 

" Not a drop, if I know it, until I am 
clear out of this !" muttered Sir Frederick, 
as, with his hat pulled over his eyes, he 
paced the platform, tramping to and fro, 
until the train should arrive. 

On his way up to London, he thought 
more deeply and persistently than was his 
wont, weighing the chances for and against 
his security. Time was to him life. He 

15.2 



228 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

had sense enough to know that But for 
all else, the tact which he displayed was 
merely that of the fox that hears the fences 
crack, and sees the gorse shiver as the 
mottled hounds burst in upon the covert, 
and steals away down-wind towards the 
distant earths, leaving younger members of 
the vulpine family to be torn by the white 
fangs. Violet, he thought, would not be- 
tray him. But then there was the promise 
of marriage, drawn up at her dictation, and 
which he had been fool enough to write 
and sign ; and there was Aphy Larpent to 
figure in the witness-box, and there was 
the motive, palpable to all. Why had not 
that sallow little imp. Aphrodite, mentioned 
his name at the first ? Had she done so, 
he would have been behind iron bars long 
before. She had no friendly feeling to- 
wards him, but she might have desired to 
extract more money from his fears. She 
had had hundreds from him already, and 
to kill the goose that lays the golden eggs 
might not appear to Aphy Larpent to be 
sound policy. But the absence of a reason 



Escape. 229 

for the astounding crime laid to Violet's 
charge was certain to set many a mind at 
work to solve the dark enigma, and who 
could profit by the boy s death, but his 
cousin and successor ? Then, too, the writ- 
ten promise . ^how lucky that it had not 
been instantly found . must sooner or later 
turn up, for that was not the kind of docu- 
ment which women destroy, and were it 
once produced in court, Aphrodite would 
have no further restraint upon her tongue, 
and could tell all she knew, and perhaps a 
little more. 

But he could not fly, save on wings of 
gold. Once the fugitive from justice relied 
mainly on a fleet horse and a fair start. 
Let him gain some dozen leagues at the 
outset, and it would go hard if he could not 
cross the border, and be safe. But rail- 
ways, newspapers, the wires of the tele- 
graph, the camera of the photographer, the 
treaties that link the police of distant realms 
into a mutual assistance society for the con- 
fusion of evil-doers . these things throw 
fearfully heavy odds against the outlaw of 



230 Lady Livingstoris Legacy. 

modem days. Before he has covered a 
fifth of the distance that lies between him 
and his city of refuge, a legion of enemies^ 
who now hear his name for the first time^ 
prepare to beset his path. Every outlet is 
stopped, every movement anticipated ; and 
wheresoever he may turn his hunted head, 
fresh bloodhounds follow hotly at his heels, 
fresh curiosity sets a snare for him, in every 
town and seaport, among lone moorland 
farms, in out-of-the-way villages, till the 
whole world seems in league to drag him 
back to punishment. Escape, then, even 
with the command of money, was very 
difficult, as he knew ; but without it, im- 
possible. Under the most favourable cir- 
cumstances, every day, every hour, was of 
vital importance. 

It was a relief to Dashwood that no one 
seemed to take any particular notice of him- 
when he alighted at the terminus, and that 
he was allowed to step into a cab, and rattle 
off, unquestioned, and apparently unob- 
served. He had given in a loud voice, the 
address of his club ; but before he was half 



Escape. 231 

a mile from the station, he called to the 
driver to set him down at the comer of 
Pitt Street It was not until he had 
watched the man climb to his box, gather 
up his reins, and go clattering off, that he 
ventured to knock at the door of the 
baron's place of business. It was, how- 
ever, too late, and Baron Swartz was gone 
from the hive where he made his money. 

Mention has been made of a certain 
suburban villa, palatial in size and splen- 
dour, where the Behemoth, out of office 
hours, dwelt, and where he dispensed, ac- 
cording to Dashwood's club friend, the 
major, a princely hospitality to a select few 
Thither Sir Frederick now repaired, and 
after much importunity and some bribery, 
induced a servant to take in his card, with 
an earnest request for an interview pen- 
cilled upon it, to his master. 

" I should think it as much as my place 
was worth, so strict as master is about being 
not at home to gentlemen without an ap- 
pointment," said the footman, who relented, 
as he pocketed Dashwood's two sovereigns ; 



232 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

" but it so happens my time's up on Wed- 
nesday week, and as I am going into the 
publican line, Fm not anxious for a cha- 
racter. FU do it, sir!" 

And he went; the other liveried me- 
nials, whose tenure of service was too 
permanent to have permitted them to dis- 
obey orders, hanging about among the yel- 
low marble pillars of the huge hall, and 
betting beer on and against the probabilities 
of the visitor's admission. But the beer 
had to be paid for by those who, on the 
strength of precedent, had been the most 
confident of success, for the answer was a 
request that Sir Frederick would " step in" 
to a room adjoining the billiard-room and 
conservatory. " The baron would see him 
directly." And the baron was as good as 
his word. 

When the Behemoth came into the room 
where Dashwood awaited his audience, he 
gave a little start at the sight of his visitor's 
face. 

"Ah! it has come, then !" he said quickly, 
but in a low voice. 



Escape, 233 

. 

" I don't think I quite understand what 
you mean," faltered out the baronet, in 
whose projects the design of reposing con- 
fidence in another person had certainly no 
share. 

" Pardon me ! you underrate your per- 
spicacity . and mine," rejoined the money- 
lender, coolly ; " look in the glass there !" 

The haggard, careworn countenance 
which Dashwood beheld in the mirror told 
tales. He scowled at the reflection of his 
own handsome, desperate face, and fixed 
his eyes, not on those of the baron, but on 
the baron's embroidered shirt-front and 
gleaming studs. " You know of it, then T 
he asked, in a low, hollow voice. 

" Partly I know and partly guess," said 
the Behemoth, with his faultless but pains- 
taking pronunciation of the English tongue, 
and his habitual smiling serenity of aspect : 
" I make it my business to know, where my 
clients are concerned. Yes, I always ex- 
pected this. It has come a little earlier 
than I had calculated, it is true ; but then 
social problems cannot be solved with 



234 Lady Livmgstotis Legacy. 

mathematical closeness, after all. So you 
wish to leave London, then ? Wish to- 
travel ? Your health demands it, does it 
not ?** 

Dashwood ground out an oath between 
his set teeth. " I never know," he said, 
doggedly, " when you speak seriously^ 
Anyhow, you have guessed rightly. Will 
you help me . yes or no ?" 

" That is entirely a question of terms," 
answered the baron, composedly : " I will 
give you your answer as soon as you have 
replied to a question or two of mine. That 
the old lady's will was found, and that you 
went to the reading of it to-day, I am of 
course aware. A little bird whispered as 
much as that to me. You take nothing by 
it ? No, no ! And the pretty cousin " 

" The pretty cousin, as you call her, gets 
nothing either. All goes to that fairspoken 
nephew of the old woman's husband, Os- 
wald Charlton," interrupted Dashwood, 
peevishly ; " not that it matters now." 

" So I conclude," chimed in the Behe- 
moth^ with an amused interest. "So so. 



Escape. 235 

that was the old lady's game ; neat play^ 
for the spindle side, but not without risk . 
well, well ! Now, Sir Frederick, what sum 
do you require ? This is the wind-up, you 
know !" 

Dashwood made answer, sullenly, that 
he wanted a thousand pounds. It was little 
enough, heaven knew, he said, wherewith to 
begin the world. It was little enough, as 
compared with the value to be ultimately 
realized from the fragments of his grand- 
father's inheritance. But he would take it,, 
if he could have it at once, and be gone. 
The baron laughed, not coarsely, but with 
a little silvery laugh that was apt to grate 
on the ears of those who, under peculiar 
circumstances, listened to it. 

** You must not tell me," he said, as he 
watched the baronet wincing under its in- 
fluence, " anything which I do not wish 
to know. You must not talk to me of be- 
ginning the world. Bah ! You have been 
hard hit on some of your English racing 
engagements, and you would redeem your 
fortunes by a glorious coup at Homburg ; 



236 Lady Livingstotis Legacy. 

is it not so ? But you must be moderate. 
Considering the advances I have made, 
and the loss of interest, a thousand pounds 
would be preposterously too much, too 
much by the half. And another member 
of my profession would compel you to 
accept three hundred in cash, a hundred 
in wine, and a hundred in, say cigars. 
Again, the banks are closed for the 
day, and it might be inconvenient to 
an impatient man . you men of pleasure 
are always impatient . ^to await their re- 
opening to-morrow that he might cash a 
cheque. Now, if, to oblige you, I were to 
say five hundred pounds, what you call on 
the nail, rubis sur ongky as our French 
neighbours say, would you thank me for 
my good nature ?" 

"Really, Baron Swartz " began Dash- 
wood, in an expostulatory tone ; but the 
Behemoth cut him short. 

" Really, my very dear Sir Frederick," 
he said, blandly, " it is to take, or to leave. 
I have made a great concession, already, in 
consenting to deviate from my rules, and 



Escape. 237 

to discuss business at my private residence, 
and in my hours of recreation. One word 
more, and you must call in Pitt Street if 
you desire to come to terms. . ^What is it 
you mutter ? That I take advantage of 
your necessities ? Why, of course I do, 
my very good friend, of course I do. I 
have Benthan, and Smith, and all the 
authorities on my .ide. I am buying you, 
dear sir, in the cheapest market, consistent 
with buying you at all, and I will not de- 
viate one fraction from my offer. There 
are very few men in London, let me tell 
you, who could pull so much out of a 
drawer at a moment's warning." 

And the result of the colloquy was that 
Dashwood, after half an hour's delay for 
the preparation of the needful bills of ex- 
change and memoranda, passively signed 
his name where the baron bade him, and 
thrust the notes and gold into an inner 
breast-pocket 

" You will write to me, may I venture to 
hope, from abroad ?" said the smiling Be- 
hemoth, as he held out his ringed hand in 



238 Lady Livingstones Legacy, 

sign of parting salutation : " or, when you 
are back in town, call on me . always in 
Pitt Street Nay, nay, you must not tell 
me that the time will be never. You will 
grow tired of the continent, and return. 
Of course you will. So now, adieu !" 

It was evident, even to Dashwood, that 
Baron Swartz utterly declined to compre- 
hend anything which it might be disagree- 
able to recapitulate in a witness-box. In 
spite of the very hard bargain which had 
been driven with him, Dashwood left the 
Behemoth's stately portals with a lighter 
heart than that with which he had gone in. 
Half a loaf is proverbially better than a 
cupboard wholly bare ; and small as was 
the sum in hand, it was larger than any of 
which he had lately enjoyed the use, and 
he hugged the thick roll of notes to his 
heart as he moved eastward. Life is 
strangely sweet, even to a tracked and 
branded felon. Dashwood was full of 
readiness and resource, now that it was a 
question of saving his skin. U had not 
always been sb. But a danger from out- 



Escape. 239 

^ide stimulates vitality, while distress within 
puts us out of love with life. 

It was twilight, when a mounted patrol, 
slowly riding along the Great North Road, 
took some notice of a stalwart fellow with 
an ash-stick, and a red bundle, and a fell of 
dark unkempt hair hanging from beneath 
the slouched cap he wore, and a shabby 
suit of frayed velveteen, trudging sturdily 
away from London. Stalwart tramps, 
usually with ash-sticks, and often bearing 
bundles, red or blue, are such very common 
objects of the metropolitan highways, that 
this one would have attracted no observa- 
tion, had it not been that the man, close 
shaved as he was, had somewhat of that 
nameless bearing which a soldier finds it 
hard to shake off. But a deserter would 
scarcely be seen leaving London ; while if 
the solitary traveller had been lately an in- 
mate of one of her Majesty's prisons, it 
was clear th^t his hair would have been of 
shortened proportions. More likely was 
he a "bonnet," or confederate of some 
thimble-rig or wheel-of-fortune gang, bound 



240 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

to a distant race-meeting. "After no good^ 
rU warrant him !" grumbled the policeman^ 
and then forgot him, and went on. 

Much the same face, but this time sur- 
mounted by short-cut hair of a tawny- 
reddish tint, crisply curling beneath a billy- 
cock hat, belonged to a drover-like per- 
son, rough and taciturn, who smoked a 
blackened stump of a pipe, while leanings 
against a tree just beyond the reach of the 
railway company's counterblast (rigidly en- 
forced against third-class customers such 
as he), outside a station in the Potteries^ 
while waiting for a train to convey him, at 
parliamentary pace and fare, to a cattle- 
market on the Welsh borders. It was a 
fair-haired, strong-limbed man, with some- 
what of the sailor in his speech and garb, 
who trudged patiently along the Cornish 
roads, past brown moor and gaping mine- 
shaft, on his road to Falmouth. For well- 
made wigs are to be had in London back 
streets at short notice, and slopsellers in 
every large town have on hand an assort- 
ment of garments adapted for nearly every 



Escape. 241 

rank in life. The sleepy old Cornish sea- 
port is not the place that it was when fleets 
of outward bound West Indiamen lay 
there, waiting for the tardy convoy that 
should guard them from French sea-wolves 
and Yankee privateersmen, or when shat- 
tered men-of-war, each with a leash of 
riddled prizes in tow, put in to refit before 
obeying the order to "join, off Ushant/^ 
But there is still traffic between the Spanish 
Main and the Antilles and Falmouth, and 
the good ship " Nancy Norris," bound for 
Demerara, presently called at the far- 
western port for the tin that was to com- 
plete her cargo, and there took on board 
some steerage passengers, miners, smiths, 
carpenters, such as are in demand in equa- 
torial America, and among these the sailor- 
fellow with the fair hair, to whose embarka- 
tion no impediment was offered, either by 
health officers or the local police. And 
thus Sir Frederick Dashwood left his native 
country . for ever. 



VOL. III. 16 



CHAPTER XIV. 



OFF ANTICOSTI. 




UTWARD bound, the good steam- 
ship " Quebec " went gallantly 
cleaving the waves of the At- 
lantic. Hers had been no fair- 
weather passage, no holiday-trip, such as 
those quick summer runs between the Old 
World and the New, that form the delight 
of tourists, and win the eulogies of those 
to whom a cabin is a torture-chamber, and 
Neptune a grand inquisitor, fertile in de- 
vising torments for his sea-sick vassals. 
In mid-ocean, the " Quebec'' had had to do 
battle for her life against an enemy power- 
ful enough to test the toughness of her 
build, and the skill and daring of her cap- 



Off Anticostu 243 



tain and her crew. Caught in the wide- 
sweeping net of a giant cyclone, she had 
undergone such a buffeting as old sailors 
see but rarely in their seafaring career ; 
and for many hours it had seemed as if 
the existence of vessel and ship's company 
hung by a thread, but she had struggled 
through the tempest without foundering. 
Then it was, with an ink-black sky above, 
with the deafening roar of the great storm, 
filling the murky air with a sound which 
superstition might easily liken to the rush 
and flapping of monstrous wings, as if 
some demon-brood were at large upon the 
deep, that it was seen of what quality men 
and women were. 

On board of the " Quebec" were sundry 
persons of both sexes . of the masculine 
gender mostly . who kept up a goodly 
appearance before the world. There were 
fine old men ; vigorous, argumentative per- 
sons in the prime of life ; slapdash young 
fellows who doffed the world aside, and 
bade it pass. There were also dashing 
specimens of the girl of the period ; iron- 

16 . 2 



244 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

bound, tight-jawed old maids, encyclopse- 
dias of knowledge ; matrons puffed up with 
social dignity and moral pride, unconsciously 
imitating the frog in iE sop's vulgar fable. 
It was not these, among the passengers^ 
who bore up the best in the hour of danger. 
Nor, among the forecastle Jacks, the fire- 
men, deck-hands, and stokers, was it the 
brawling braggart, always in hot water 
when ashore, and whose fines for assaults 
and damaged glass were a heavy tax on 
his monthly wages, who was readiest to 
reduce sail, or to bear a hand at the wheel, 
when the decks were deluged by the clear 
green water breaking over rail and bulwark, 
and when boats were torn from the davits, 
and hen-coops full of cackling poultry, spars, 
rope-coils, and miscellaneous lumber, washed 
out to sea. Does any one suppose that in 
India, when the hostile cannon are nimbly 
served, and the horsehoofs of the enemy's 
cavalry raise a miniature dust-storm, 
through which are dimly visible turbaned 
heads and glinting spear-points, and the 
foe come swarming in their strength, and 



Off Anticostu 245 

the fire is hot, and the odds fearful, that it 
is the loud, dissipated young officer, or the 
pompous, red-faced oracle of the mess- 
table to whom the men turn for guidance ? 
No ; the true captain, the born leader, 
turns out to be some quiet, thoughtful fel- - 
low, of no account at ball and race- course, 
who springs forward when seniors fall or 
flinch, and whom, as if by instinct, the 
soldiers follow, modest, and unassuming 
though he be, into the very jaws of 
death. 

No one on board of the " Quebec " gave 
proof of a more impassible courage than 
did a young passenger, going out, under 
custody of the police, to take her trial at 
Montreal on a charge of murder. How 
had times changed with her since, less than 
a year ago, she had crossed to Europe in 
the same ship in which she was now a dis- 
graced captive ! Under the dreadful cir- 
cumstances of her position, she demeaned 
herself as few others could have done, 
almost winning belief in her innocence 
from those who marked her simple dignity 



246 Lady Livingstons Legacy, 

of bearing. When first the hideous charge 
was brought against her in England, she 
had scarcely made so much as a protest 
against its truth. It was different now. 
Calmly and firmly she had made her stand 
before the magistrate's petty tribunal in 
London. The Treasury lawyers, while 
agreeing that they had no choice but to 
send her for trial to the Dominion, had 
been staggered in their suspicions of her 
by the noble gentleness with which she 
endured the venomous verbal assaults of 
her foe and accuser. Aphrodite Larpent. 
There was now no petulance, no terror, 
nothing such as we are all prone to associ- 
ate with the idea of a detected criminal. 

Before Violet had been long at sea, the 
opinion of the little public on board of the 
steam-packet had undergone a considerable 
change. At first, none would eat at the 
same board with a suspected murderess. 
Mothers almost shrieked as they tore away 
the children who were attracted by her 
sweet face . children had always loved her 
. and came sidling shyly up to the beauti- 



Off AnticostL 247 



ful lady who sat all alone, as if forsaken of 
all. The virtuous shrank from contact 
with her, as though she had carried the 
contagion of the plague in the hem of her 
robe. But soon there were two parties in 
the ship . the champions of Violet, and the 
partisans against her; and anon most of 
these latter lost the rancour of their hos- 
tility to her, and wavered in their minds as 
to her guilt. The worst that could be told 
of her had been told. But the first shock 
and horror of the accusation spent, some- 
what of a reaction set in. Suppose, so 
men and women said, the charge were 
false . the mere product of obvious malig- 
nity and of baffled greed ; suppose Dash- 
wood's written promise to have been a 
forgery, or if not so, to have borne a diffe- 
rent construction from that damning one 
first put upon it : or, again, presume that 
the captain's intentions were evil, but not 
understood by this pure, simply nurtured 
girl, and that what seemed to others a 
fiendish compact appeared to her as a mere 
pledge to marry, the condition being over- 



248 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

looked. An unfortunate accident . that 
was what she had called it from the first . 
den)^ing, too, her own presence on the 
scene, until the boy was already beyond 
reach, in the swirling waters towards which 
his drunken attendant had permitted him 
to stray alone . suppose, and it well might 
be so . that the catastrophe were no more 
than this, how cruel, how undeserved, was 
Miss Maybrook's present position ! 

Had Violet said more in her own defence, 
the disputatious element which lurks in us 
all, to a greater or less degree, might have 
become aroused. But she said very little, 
and those who took up the cudgels in her be- 
half did not, as often occurs, find their chief 
hindrance in her rash assertions or impru- 
dent admissions. What was positively 
known of her antecedents was all good. 
Her reputation was without stain. She 
had tended the perishing poor in a time of 
selfish panic. In misadventures by flood 
and field, she had saved lives at no light 
risk to her own. Mrs. Philip Dashwood, 
of whom she spoke in terms of affection. 



Off Anticosti. 249 



had been deeply attached to her; Lady 
Livingston, whose purloined will she had 
given back into proper keeping, when 
snatched from the hands of the thief, had 
bequeathed her money ; little Charley had 
been her loyal, tiny friend. The telegraph 
had already wafted from each side of the 
Atlantic much information which had 
found its way into print, but although 
gossiping tongues had been let loose, 
nothing to Miss May brook's discredit had 
been elicited. On the contrary, her former 
schoolfellows, her former patronesses, were 
up in arms, and could the old English 
ordeal have been revived, Violet need 
have had little fear of walking barefooted 
and blindfold among the red-hot plough- 
shares, so many compurgators would 
have started forward to share her 
trial. Whose memory could rake up 
cruelty or baseness against her ? She was 
Truth itself . free from all that degrades, 
all that soils a reputation. Honest as the 
day, she had given good counsel to many 
a flighty young belle of the Canadian ball- 



250 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

rooms ; and twenty tongues could avouch 
that she had striven to save even Aphy 
Larpent from her liaison with her be- 
trayer. 

Then came the storm. There was, as 
the song says, work for the men, weeping 
for the women. The male passengers 
were compelled by the urgency of the 
common peril to bear a hand, for hours 
together, at the pumps. Seams had opened,, 
rivets started ; there was more water in 
the hold than a careful ship*s carpenter 
likes to gauge with line and plummet ; the 
engines strained their steel thews and 
sinews in fighting against the mountain 
waves and raging wind ; the vessel groaned 
and quivered like a sentient thing in pain ; 
six strong arms were not too many at the 
wheel ; the canvas spread was but a storm-^ 
jib and storm-sail of the stoutest web and 
scantiest surface ; it was hardly possible to 
keep the .* Quebec*' under steerage- way ; no 
idlers could be spared. Cook and steward 
had to toil with the rest of the crew. There 



Off A nizcosiz. 251 



was no time to nurse sick passengers, or to 
. allay the fears of the timid. 

In that emergency, Violet Maybrook 
had won golden opinions from all. Her 
spirit had actually appeared to rise at the 
imminence of the danger, but hers was the 
self-imposed task of soothing the terrified, 
and ministering to such as lay ill and 
helpless, in the state-rooms which they 
never thought to quit alive. More than 
one of her own sex, who had been severe 
in judging her, was smitten to the heart at 
the sight of her frank and gentle kindness, 
and clung, shuddering, to her firm hand, as 
the tumult and the cries on deck seemed 
to indicate the nearness of the final 
disaster. The frightened children could 
be comforted by her, when they paid little 
heed to the feeble exhortations of their 
alarmed parents. But what she liked best 
was to be on deck, where no woman, save 
her, was seen throughout that terrible 
weather, her dark hair blowing wildly to 
and fro in the gale, and the drenching 
clouds of white spray flying around her. 



252 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 



She was a favourite with the old com- 
mander of the ship. the very captain who 
had taken charge of her on the vo3^ge to 
England the year before . and he had not 
the heart to send her below in the un- 
ceremonious fashion in which he would 
have ordered another to get out of harm's 
way. " All I bargain for, my dear," he 
said gruffly, " is, that when the sea comes 
aboard of us, you*ll remember to get hold 
of a shroud, or a ringbolt, or something 
that will bear clinging to ; and keep your 
grip until the water runs off again. You're 
not a chicken-heart, I know that well 
enough, but keep cool when we ship more 
brine than is good for us." 

Nor was Violet a drone in the hive. 
Her strength allowed her to be of no use 
where hard labour was in question, but the 
rugged forecastle men more than once set up 
a cheer of hearty admiration as they saw her 
fearless face and graceful figure amongst 
them, and worked the more valiantly, 
because their toil was done beneath the 
eyes of one so lovely and so insensible to 



Off Aniicosti. 253. 



danger. " Have a care, miss ; for the 
love of Heaven, have a care !" was the 
cry, more than once, when some curling 
giant of a wave arched his foamy neck, 
like a wrathful serpent, over the ship's 
bows, and sent a very mill-race of seething 
water from stem to stern along the deck,, 
washing away with it every loose object. 
But the sailors found before long that 
Violet's activity and presence of mind 
were safeguards that never failed her, and 
in their rough approval of her brave 
spirit and rare beauty, they gave her the 
name of the " Luck of the Ship." Nor 
was she less popular when she voluntered 
to serve out the rations of hot grog, for 
the distribution of which a man could ill 
be spared, to the passengers and seamen 
on duty at the clanking chain-pumps ; with 
a kindly word of encouragement for those 
who were beginning to despair of keeping 
the leak under and the vessel afloat. 

The storm was over now. The cyclone 
had gone whirling on to strew the seas 
with havoc elsewhere, and the " Quebec," 



254 Lady Livingston! s Legacy: 

plugged and stopped, and bolted afresh, as 
to the damaged portion of her hull, was 
able to complete her voyage, with smooth 
water and light breezes. Cape Race, with 
its cap of cloud and mantle of fogs, that 
grisly sentinel that is thrust out so far, as 
the out-post of North America, was safely 
passed. So was Cape Breton. Those 
were the savage cliffs of Anticosti that 
frowned, to the right, across the Gulf of the 
St. Lawrence. To the left lay the shores of 
New Brunswick. The weather was clear ; 
the engines worked well ; yet a little, and 
the steamer would be breasting the swift 
stream of the mighty river that afforded a 
broad highway for the sharp keel to 
traverse. But what Violet had done, 
while yet the tempest strove for the 
mastery with all that centuries of patient 
progress have enabled weak man to con- 
struct, and almost conquered, was not for- 
gotten when the haven was near, and the 
perils of the voyage at an end. An illogi- 
cal half-belief in her innocence had grown 
up, and she was treated with a strange 



Off Anticosti, 255 



blending of pity and respect by young and 
old. It would have been well for Miss 
Maybrook if the living freight of the 
^* Quebec " had been there and then impan- 
nelled as a jury to decide upon her case. 
The praise she had deservedly won, went 
far to prove to those around her that she 
was wrongfully accused of that great and 
heinous crime for which she was soon to 
take her trial. 

From the first, she had been allowed 
almost entire liberty on board. There was 
a detective officer on board . no other 
than our old friend Sergeant Flint . whose 
errand would not be discharged until he 
should hand over the person of his priso- 
ner to the colonial authorities. But, be- 
yond keeping an eye upon her movements 
during the earlier portion of the voyage, 
the policeman in no way attempted to 
place her under any species of restraint; 
nor would the tough old skipper, naturally 
the autocrat of his own craft, have sanc- 
tioned any unnecessary harshness towards 
a passenger in Violefs position. A ship 



256 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 



IS, indeed, of all jails, the most difficult to 
escape from, and hence the comparative 
liberty granted to Miss Maybrook. It so 
happened, too, that poor Sergeant Flint 
was as abject a sufferer from sea-sickness 
. that capricious malady, which often 
spares the frail, to fasten its fangs on some 
robust victim whose bodily vigour contrasts 
oddly with the prostration which accom- 
panies the complaint . as the feeblest 
woman on board. He had taken his spell 
at pumping with the rest, but was scarcely 
fit for the labour, or to keep his footing on 
the slippery slope of the wet and heaving^ 
deck, and altogether cut as poor a figure 
during the storm as Robin Hood, in the 
old ballad, is rhythmically reported to have 
done as a fisherman on the gray waters of 
the North Sea. And when the fine wea- 
ther returned, and the American shores 
were visible, the sergeant made no effort 
to reassert his authority over so popular a 
prisoner as Violet, who was free to do as 
she pleased during the short remainder of 
the voyage. 



Off Anticosti. 257 

The " Quebec " was now sailing past 
Anticosti, a favouring wind aiding the 
-engines in forcing her along, swiftly and 
smoothly ; overhead, a sky of unclouded 
splendour. It was Sunday, and the cap- 
tain, in accordance with the good old sea- 
going custom, had read aloud the service 
for the day to crew and passengers. There 
was something unusually solemn in the 
performance of this simple religious duty, 
when all hearts were as yet softened by the 
remembrance of the great peril so narrowly 
eluded, of having been snatched, as it were, 
from the brink of the ever-yawning grave 
that hungers for the bodies of shipwrecked 
men. There was no lack of reverence 
among the motley congregation on deck >' 
and once or twice, when the old skipper's 
voice trembled a little in repeating the 
word§ of some prayer or thanksgiving easily 
applicable to their late situation, the sobs of 
kneeling women could be distinctly heard^ 
This brief ceremony took place in the 
morning ; but in the evening, as the pas- 
sengers gathered in the cabin, the grateful 

VOL. m. IT 



258 Lady Livingstoris Legacy. 

breeze blowing freshly in through the open 
skylights, it occurred to some one to re- 
quest the captain to read a chapter of the 
Bible aloud ; and with this petition he com- 
plied with a good grace, simply opening the 
volume that lay on the table beside him^ 
and reading the portion of the New Testa- 
ment on which his eyes fell. 

This lecture . a real lecture, not the ora- 
tion which we know by the name . did not 
last very long. It comprised, amongst 
other details, the succinct and enthralling 
story of the miserable ending of Judas 
Iscariot. Those few lines, coupled with a. 
few earlier lines in the sacred history, 
served to present such an historical portrait 
of the recreant apostle as is rare in its 
completeness. The shrewd, mean, false 
man of the world ; he who " bore the 
bag, and kept what was put therein;" 
the greedy dissembler, the traitor cheaply 
bought when treason commanded a bet- 
ter market-price than lip-service, must yet 
have had a heart beneath the sad-coloured 
gabardine in the ample bosom of which. 



Off A nticosti. 259 



he wrapped his thirty pieces of IdIoocI- 
bought silver. Either a genuine remorse, 
or the spiritual fear to which a Jew of old 
Jerusalem was especially liable, must have 
wrought powerfully upon a nature intrinsi- 
cally base, perhaps, but not wholly har- 
dened ; for . " he went out and hanged 
himself," leaving the silver coins, on which 
his haggard eyes beheld the rust of inno- 
cent blood, a shining heap on the floor of 
the Sanhedrim council-chamber. " He 
went out and hanged himself." Softly 
Violet's lips murmured the words, long 
after the book was closed, and the reader 
had gone to attend to his duties. " He 
went out and hanged himself." She was 
strangely silent for some time after this, 
sitting a little apart, as her custom was, 
from the rest of the company, and saying^ 
little in answer to what was addressed to 
her. And presently she went on deck. 

The ship was going steadily and well 
upon her course, but by no means so 
rapidly as in the forenoon. The chief en- 
gineer had reported that some part of the 

17 . 2 



26o Lady LivingstotCs Legacy. 

machinery, strained in the recent hurricane, 
when fires were piled up to their fiercest, 
and every ounce of available work, so to 
speak, screwed out of the mechanism that 
was the heart of the vessel, stood in need 
of careful management At half-speed, 
therefore, the " Quebec" pressed on, and still 
it was darkling Anticosti, always Anticosti, 
that loomed upon the starboard bow. The 
stars were shining white, and the moon, a 
thin silvery crescent, glimmered in the 
violet sky. Below, millions of phosphores- 
cent sparks, each with a life, each eager to 
devour some microscopic prey, each itself 
the food of mightier creatures of the deep, 
turned the tiny wavelets to ripples of lam- 
bent flame. Now and then the splash of 
a flying-fish, that had ventured far north 
that summer through the warm waters of 
the Gulf Stream, or the dash of a bonito 
amidst a glittering shoal of little fish, broke 
the silence. The foam swirled away from 
beneath the vessel's counter, a long white 
line that might be traced far ofiF upon the 
sparkling, softly swelling sea. 



Off Anticosti. 261 



** He went out and hanged himself." A 
third, and yet a fourth time, did Violet re- 
peat these words. They seemed, for her, 
to possess some singular fascination. 

The ship glided on. To-morrow she 
would sight the estuary of the great river ; 
and in a day or two, passing between bluffs 
and forests, between wheat-field and pas- 
ture, between town and village, would 
thread her way up stream, past the for- 
tress-city that Wolfe died to win, and 
Montcalm to defend, past islet and farm, 
to Montreal itself. How had the world 
changed towards Violet Maybrook since 
the same vessel bore her, last autumn, 
Europewards! Her venture was made, 
the game lost, the penalty to be paid. 
" And he went out and hanged himself." 

She was almost alone, now, on deck. 
There were two or three knots of pas- 
sengers aft of the mast, and, forward, some 
of the crew were collected on the forecastle. 
There were the look-outs and the helms- 
man, and the men of the watch, and their 
officer; but they took no heed of her. 



262 Lady Livingston's Legacy. 

Standing beside the bulwarks, she looked 
across the stretch of sea to where lay the 
rugged coast of Anticosti, black, inhospit- 
able, abhorred of mariners. There it lay, 
the giant island, cold, pitiless, barren, with 
its rocky verge against which so many ships 
have been beaten to splinters, its frozen 
highlands where life is not, its hungry wil- 
derness where many a wrecked sailor has 
stretched him out to die. Anticosti ! one 
of those untamed, incurably savage spots 
of earth of which men make no profit. 

" Yes ; it is better so," murmured the 
girl, bending over the side-rail, and smiling 
at the gently swelling waves that rose up, 
as if to meet her ; " far better so." And 
she raised her head, and fixed her eyes, 
first on the gaunt cliffs and foam-flecked 
shoals of Anticosti, then on a white, sinu- 
ous streak of swiftly flowing water, like a 
silvery path that twisted, serpentine, through 
the phosphorescent azure of the sea. 

" I have thought of this place," she said 
dreamily, " ever since I passed it before." 
Then she smiled again. 



Off Anticosti. 263 



** Sleeping and waking " . such were her 
whispered words . " I have seen what I 
see now, often, and have felt, I knew not 
why, that here should be my grave . not 
under the grass and the daisies, where the 
white headstone should tell my name to 
those who have heard my story ; and not, 
oh, not among the mildewed stones of the 
prison, where they would lay me. Whither, 
I wonder, would yonder eddy carry a 
drowned wretch ? To some gaunt, shingly 
beach, no doubt ; or perchance some rock- 
screened cove, on yonder cruel shore of 
Anticosti, where the screaming sea-birds 
should pipe their shrill requiem over their 
prey ; and strange uncouth creatures should 
crawl forth from under beetling wave- 
washed stones to claim their share of the 
prize. What, to them . to the grim things 
of claws and teeth, and quivering feelers . 
to their monstrous brethren with long loose 
arms that twine around captured wreck, to 
crab, and cuttlefish, and sea-urchin, and 
medusa, are white limbs, and eyes that 
were bright once, and the dead daintiness 



264 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

of a rounded cheek, and the wild tangles 
of streaming hair that mingle with the sea- 
weed, as in mockery, at every heave of the 
wave ! Yes ; it is better so. It is fittest 
this way. * And he went out and hanged 
himself.' '' 

She bent far over the side-rail as she 
spoke those last words. 

"A man overboard !" shouted the helms- 
man, whose quick ear had caught the 
heavy splashing sound, and the sailors of 
the watch started forward in a moment, at 
the call. 

" Back the engines there !" commanded 
the officer in charge of the deck. " Quick, 
give her a turn to port, you at the wheel ; 
and see to clear away the life-buoy, some 
of you ! Can you see anything, Jem ?" 

This last question being addressed to 
one of the look-out men, who had sprung 
with cat-like agility into the rigging. 

" Ay, ay, sir . ^yonder, where the eddy 
is. I think it's a woman," answered the 
sailor. 

" A woman ! . it must be the lady wha 



Off Anticosti. 265 



was alone here . Miss Maybrook, if I mis- 
take not!" cried one of the passengers, 
hurrying up, and there was a shriek of 
female voices. " Yes, the poor unhapyy 
girl . ^yonder ; see where her light-coloured 
dress shows just above the water. 0\ 
save her, save her !" 

The captain was on deck now, and most 
of those below came rushing up, with loud 
outcries and exclamations of horror. 

" Yes. Lower away a boat there ! 
Quick, you lubbers ! Pitch over another 
life-buoy, and another ; and you, Mn 
Jones, keep her a point nearer shore, d'ye 
hear.*^ The current runs like a mill- 
sluice." 

The skipper's orders were obeyed 
promptly, willingly. Scarcely had the 
boat, swinging from the fall-tackles, touched 
the water before the ready volunteers had 
dropped as by magic into their places. 

" Give way, boys !" exclaimed the officer,, 
as he grasped the tiller-lines, and the pliant 
ash-staves went feathering and flashing 
through the waves, the oarsmen bending 



266 Lady Livingstofts Legacy. 

to their work as if their thews and sinews 
were of steel.' Four life-buoys were dancing 
on the surface of the water, the blue light 
attached to each irradiating the sea with a 
ghastly flare that lit up the darkling stretch 
of sea. 

With engines barely pulsating, the 
steam-ship glided towards the place where 
Violet's floating form had been last seen, 
white and indistinct, like a dead swan 
borne by a swirl of eddying water, her light 
dress supporting her for a moment 

It was all in vain. In vain they called 
her name ; in vain they burned fresh lights, 
and threw out fresh life-buoys, and brought 
the steamer nearer and nearer in, while the 
sound of lamenting voices grew loud on 
board, and a second boat, at the urgent 
entreaty of the passengers, was manned 
and lowered. But though the boats were 
pulled hither and thither, the sailors eagerly 
scanning every foot of the phosphorescent 
water that might afford a diver a chance, 
should a submerged human form be seen 
<iimly through the waves, nothing was 



Off AnticostL 267 



found ; and at a late hour they rested, 
baffled, after their fruitless search. As the 
old captain had said, the current set strongly 
in towards Anticosti . strong, swift, pitiless, 
as the Necessity or Destiny in whose in- 
exorable mandates the all-doubting Greeks 
believed. After a long delay, the "Quebec'* 
pursued her voyage ; but there was to be 
no trial at Montreal, no prisoner for Ser- 
geant Flint to surrender to colonial justice. 
It was a higher tribunal before which Violet 
Maybrook would have to plead, and before 
its eternal bar she had hurried, poor, way- 
ward rebel that she was. Lost ! lost ! and, 
until the Judgment Day, to be seen no 
more of men. 




CHAPTER XV. 

BROUGHT TOGETHER. 

f|HITBORNE, always pretty, looked 
its best when Oswald reached it, 
towards noon, on one of those 
days when the bright south coast 
of England is seen to the best advantage : 
a blue sky mirrored in the blue sea; a 
sparkling flood of sunshine pouring down 
among the green nut-boughs and trailing 
wild-roses of the deep lanes, lighting up 
every variety of tint among the coloured 
pebbles of the beach, and rendering trans- 
lucent the gold-green oak-leaves of the 
coppice in the hollow of the bleak down. 
There was a brisk breeze, too, mottling the 
wide-spread water with pearly flecks of 



Brought Together. 269 

foani) and fanning the cheeks of the loiter- 
ers who were enjoying the pleasures of 
their hard-won indolence as they basked 
upon the shingle, and concentrated the re- 
sources of the lately overtasked intellect on 
the blameless pastime of flinging smooth 
stones into the sea. There was a holiday 
aspect even in the red or brown sailed fish- 
ing-smacks that beat up against the wind, 
and the revenue vessel in the offing had 
quite a romantic air, with her taut rigging 
and spotless canvas, like a white- winged 
bird of prey. 

When Oswald approached ^^the Dingle, 
he thought that he had never yet done 
justice to the beauty or the peaceful in- 
fluences of the place. On the occasion of 
his previous visits, he had merely regarded 
the widow's house as a sea-side residence in 
an out-of-the-way situation, and the jar and 
conflict of human passions and human in- 
terests had rendered him insensible to the 
quiet loveliness of that sweet retreat which 
Mrs. Dashwood had elected for her home. 
But now he was happy, and in a mood to 



_ * 



270 Lady Livingston! s Legacy. 

be pleased with everything, and it seemed 
hard to him to believe that this fairy-like 
little domain, where it appeared as if no- 
thing that was evil could enter, could have 
been the scene of Aphrodite Larpent's 
bitter accusation, of Violet Maybrook's ar- 
rest, of the stormy scene at the reading of 
the recovered will. Surely, such events 
must have partaken of the nature of a bad 
dream, of some vision of the night that, 
when we wake, leaves a chill in our veins,, 
a vague terror in our bewildered minds, 
but that a few minutes of healthy waking 
life suffice to dissipate. 

" Beatrice !". " Oswald !" It was all they 
said, for Beatrice who had watched for 
his coming, had hurried down to meet her 
lover at the garden-gate, and their hands 
were linked together, and their eyes met. 
Whose memory cannot call back those deli- 
cious moments that might have been vul- 
garly measured as seconds, or as hours, or 
as aeons of ages, when space was of small 
account, and time annihilated, and it seemed 
as though the gazing eyes could never take 



Brought Together. 271 

their fill of looking into the love-light 
shining from those other dear eyes oppo- 
site! Ah, well! this is a work-a-day world, 
after all, and as it has been truly said . ^to 
the confusion of the simple Epicureanism 
of some British lotus-eaters . ^that life can- 
not be all beer and skittles, so it cannot 
consist wholly of love-making. Even the 
wild birds sing their little hearts out in 
tremulous, quivering, crowded melody but 
once a year, when the spring plumage 
is new, and food and shelter are plenty, 
and the anxious parents of last season are 
free to mate again, and eager to undertake 
the cares of nest-keeping. " Beatrice !" . 
" Oswald !" How little it was to say, and 
yet how much may be conveyed by the art- 
less intonation of so few syllables! No 
shorthand writer would indeed presume 
to give a verbatim report of the conversa- 
tion of lovers; and if he did, the talk 
would poorly repay the stenographer's toil, 
so much is implied, so little spoken, in that 
curious language which they alone can. 
use. 



272 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 

Then they remembered the world once 
more, and that thy were not Ferdinand and 
Miranda on Prosperous enchanted island, 
and Beatrice blushed, and Oswald looked 
embarrassed, and their hands separated 
again, and Oswald opened the gate, and up 
the smooth garden-path they walked to- 
gether to the house. They talked, but it 
seemed to both as if the true eloquence 
had been expended at that almost mute 
meeting of theirs. It had been one of 
those moments to which fond husbands and 
wives look back now and then, along the 
vista of years of wedded happiness, each 
to ask each that question . " Don't you re- 
member?" which old schoolfellows, old 
friends, ay, and old sweethearts, are so 
ready with. They were happy now, those 
two, but not in that serene fashion that be- 
longs only to secure possession. They had 
been parted long, and as it had seemed, 
hopelessly, and theirs were still the doubts 
and shapeless fears and sense of uncer« 
tainty, which make up much of the sum- 
total of the bliss of those who love. But 



Brought Together. 273 

the mention of the widow^s name recalled 
Oswald Charlton and Beatrice Fleming to 
the fact that there were others near whose 
troubles and trials were by no means over. 

" Mrs. Dash wood is not ill now . or so, 
at least, she thinks," said Beatrice, sadly, in 
answer to the new-comer's inquiry. " But 
I sometimes fear that she will never quite 
recover the blow; her former grief has 
been so cruelly renewed, poor thing, that 
she weeps for the child as if he had been 
taken from her but yesterday; and, besides, 
she had such a high opinion of Miss May- 
brook, and so beautiful a trust in her affec- 
tion for the child, and for her. I do not 
believe that she will ever smile again, but 
she is too good and gentle for sorrow ever 
to render her selrish." 

"It was a sad and terrible affair from 
first to last," said the young barrister, 
lowering his voice as they drew near the 
door. " I cannot say that I ever liked 
Miss Maybrook when I met her at the 
Fountains. There was something un- 
natural, to my fancy, in seeing so remark- 

VOL. HI. i& 



274 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

able a person filling the duties of so trivial 
a position, and her presence seemed to in- 
troduce a tragic element into the household. 
Still, she had rare gifts of courage, grace, 
and beauty, and dreadful as was the crime 
laid to her charge, I can imagine her, under 
a different set of circumstances, acting 
nobly and well. There is an opinion 
afloat that the evidence against her may 
break down ; although Sir Frederick s 
flight has confirmed the impression against 
both." 

" Yes, I never thought of it from then 
till now," exclaimed Beatrice, suddenly ; 
" there must have been a secret under- 
standing between my cousin and Miss May- 
brook from the first. Poor Lady Living- 
ston once thought so, although her suspicions 
were easily lulled to rest." And she related 
to Oswald the history of the casual glimpse 
which she had had of Violet and Dash wood 
standing together, by the boat-house, be- 
side the river at Richmond, and how the 
dowager*s attempt to detect the double- 
dealing of her young dependent had been 



Brought Together. 275 

frustrated by the ready wit and prompt 
activity of the latter. Oswald shook his 
head. 

" I have little doubt," he said, " that the 
informer's narrative is essentially true. 
Still, were it not for this poor lady, I could 
find it in my heart, for the sake of others, 
that the guilty should be left to the ven- 
geance of Heaven . not punished here." 

" She has no vindictive feeling," whis- 
pered Beatrice, as they passed in. "In 
her abiding sorrow there seems no room 
for hate against the wicked doer of that 
evil deed, or against the treacherous kins- 
man who abused her hospitality as he 
planned it. I have not heard her use one 
word in all her weeping which implied a 
longing to be revenged for her great loss. 
But she is here to meet us." 

And indeed it was the widowed wife, 
the bereaved mother, in the mournmg 
attire which since the child's death she had 
never ceased to wear . but looking strangely 
aged since first she offered a home to Bea- 
trice on the dowager's death, and with a 

18.2 



276 Lady Livingston s Legacy. 



face that was waxen white, and thin hands 
that trembled. She was calm, now, how- 
ever, although her voice shook a little as 
she said to Oswald : 

" I have come, you see, to bid you wel- 
come here, and to wish you joy. Dear 
Beatrice has told me everything. I am 
sure I hope, with all my heart, that you 
two will be happy. You may be thought 
fortunate, Mr. Charlton, in having won the 
love of one of the sweetest, truest wives 
that ever man had, and if . my prayers . " 
She stopped, and pressed her hand to her 
side, as if a sudden pang had recalled to 
her the irreparable loss that for an instant 
she had seemed to forget ; but in a mo- 
ment more she resumed : " I hope you 
will be married from my house . and soon. 
Beatrice, in her tender sympathy, was for 
staying here to nurse and care for me for 
a long time . the rest of the year, I think 
. before forming other arrangements ; but 
I must not allow my misfortunes to cloud 
the innocent happiness of my young friends 
. for I trust to have your friendship too. 



Brought Together. 277 

Mr. Charlton . so I shall claim to have a 
voice in your plans. Now, I will leave 
you to talk them over, for a while, but 
Remember, let there be no sacrifice made 
for me !" And as she spoke, she clasped 
her thin hands together, and her lips moved 
silently, as if in the act of blessing, while 
she looked on them with her pure, gentle 
eyes, and then turned and walked slowly 
and feebly away. 

" She looks sadly ill and altered," whis- 
pered Beatrice; "but how good and 
thoughtful she is ; there is no repining 
aroused in her wounded heart by the sight 
of our happiness, for we are happy now, 
dear." 

" Yes, darling," answered Oswald, as he 
drew her towards him and stooped to kiss 
her cheek ; " and she was right, too, to 
say that I had reason to be proud of the 
prize which I, unworthy as I am, have 
drawn in the lottery of life." 

Little remains to be told. The succes- 
sive deaths of Bruce Larpent and of Violet 
Maybrook removed from human punish- 



278 Lady Livingstons Legacy. 

ment two of those implicated respectively 
in the assault on Mr. Goodeve, and in the 
suppression of the heir to the Dashwood 
baronetfy. The senior partner in the 
eminent firm of Goodeve and Glegg has 
never recovered from the rough handling 
and the heavy fall which he sustained 
when garroted, yet his name still heads the 
bills of costs which clients receive; while 
the gray-haired child that it belongs to sits 
nodding feebly in his easy-chair . sur- 
rounded by the musical instruments on 
which at intervals he makes a feeble feint 
of preparing to play, and immensely in- 
terested by the newspaper paragraphs 
assiduously read out to him by his affec- 
tionate daughters, both of whom are at 
home, disputing the inheritance for the 
division of which they will not long have 
to wait. 

Aphy Larpent paid the penalty which in 
this world sometimes attaches to being too 
clever. Had she come frankly into the ar- 
rangements of the Treasury lawyers, she 
might have earned, by her evidence against 



Brought Together, 279 

Violet on the charge of murder, practical 
impunity for her own lesser misdoings. 
But she stood out for better terms, hag- 
gling for compensation and expenses before 
she would consent to embark for Canada, 
and thoroughly disgusting the police and 
the Crown solicitors by her pertinacity 
in bargaining, and the jealous animosity 
which she betrayed against Violet, her early 
friend. The news of Violet's death, coupled 
with Dashwood's disappearance, turned the 
tables, and Aphrodite Larpent, no longer 
needed in the witness-box at Montreal, was 
placed in the dock of the Central Criminal 
Court, and there arraigned on an indict- 
ment of which the principal count was the 
unlawful possession of the diamond and 
sapphire cross found among her effects, 
and which was proved to have been the 
property of the Dowager Lady Livingston. 
She was sentenced for a term of seven 
years, and has as yet the larger portion of 
her sentence to work out before she again 
issues forth into the world. 

Oswald and Beatrice are married long 



28o Lddy Livingstons Legacy. 

since, and they live, loving and beloved. 
The poor of Heavitree have reason to 
bless the day that delivered them from 
their short subjection to the squire of Pinch- 
beck, which close-fisted person retired dis- 
comfited to Lincolnshire ; while Mr. and 
Mrs. Charlton have since then contrived to 
make themselves friends to small and great 
in that country-side, and are reckoned, both 
in Warwickshire and at Richmond, as the 
very type of a good and graceful lady, and 
a generous, true-hearted gentleman. 

So brief a time has elapsed since the 
date of these events, that it is still possible 
to borrow money from the Behemoth, to 
lose a little of it at cards or billiards to 
jovial Major Raffington, to have one's pulse 
felt by smooth old Sir Joseph Doublefee, 
or to be semi-strangled in a dark corner by 
the Ugly One and Craney. If we break 
the law. Sergeant Flint and Superintendent 
Starkey, stanch lime-dogs of Scotland 
Yard, are still ready to be slipped on our 
traces. Should we be lucky enough to be 
invited, we may still be crushed and trodden 



i 



Brought Together, 281 



on in the attempt to ascend the crowded 
stairs of Snowdon or Blunderbore House, 
when her Grace or the Marchioness are 
hospitably at home to half-fashionable Lon- 
don. Mrs. Gulp yet spasmodically lets 
lodgings in Great Eldon Street ; and Mrs. 
General Buckram, at Hampton Court, is 
always happy to receive a visit from any 
one armed with the necessary introduction, 
and to discuss the newest gossip and the 
alarming degeneracy of "society." 

In Whitborne churchyard, a white head- 
stone bears the name of Mrs. Philip Dash- 
wood. 

And in the Far West of that wilder 
America that lies beyond the Rocky Moun- 
tains, wanders a desperate, broken man, 
whom some take to be of English birth, 
though of no credit to the land of his 
origin, since a fiercer or a more profligate 
scoundrel does not range those regions. 
He is known by several names . was called 
Gibson in Arizona, Cook in California, and 
by many another alias at the mines or in the 
cities, where he roves, restless, as if he 



282 Lady Livingstones Legacy. 



were pursued by the furies ; and when he 
has drunk more deeply than usual, mutters 
of ugly secrets that even his unscrupulous 
associates do not care to hear. Knave, 
duellist, gambler he is known to be, and 
suspected to be worse, and therefore looked 
askance upon as his handsome, reckless 
face appears in a new town. Some day 
his sin will find him out, and, shot like a 
dog in some ignoble tavern brawl, or hanged 
like a dog on a tree of the lynchers' choosing, 
there will be an end of Frederick Dash- 
wood. 



THE END. 
