CRUEL LONDON. 



BOOK I. 



CHAPTER I. 



HARVEST HOME. 



" Jennie, I have never told you how much 
I love you until to-night.'' 

"Not in words, uncle Martin, but in 
deeds, dear, in many a kindly act, and 
in a thousand different ways." 

The speakers were an old weather-beaten 
man and a young and beautiful woman. 
They might be typified by a gnarled oak 
and a budding ash ; the one crooked 

VOL. I. B 



*^ CRUEL LONDON. 

and knotted with age, the other soft 
and tender and fall of life's youthful 
vigour. 

Squire Martin was a rugged, hard-look- 
ing man, with strong lines in his face, 
and bony, neryous hands. 

Jane Crosby was a hearty English g^l 
of three or four and twenty, a fresh, happy- 
looking, well-built woman, with brown hair 
braided close to her head, which was 
planted clean and firm upon a pair of 
handsome shoulders that sloped down and 
gave graceful contour to her well-developed 
bust* 

There was no nonsense about Miss 
Crosby. Nature intended her for a fine 
woman, and Nature had had her way. 
Beneath Jane's light cotton gown there 
was no suspicion of stays. She had a 
soft grey eye, and a firm mouth, with 
just sufficient prominence of lip to in- 
dicate love of life, generosity, friend- 
ship, and all that is genial and good. It 



HARVEST HOME. 6 

was a face made for happiness, but full of 
tender patience ; a face that would liglit 
up with pleasure or reflect the lower- 
ing clouds of trouble. In short, Jane 
Crosby was a true woman . just such a 
woman as most men admire, but whom 
the majority of her sex would charge with 
a want of refinement ; just such a woman 
as Mayfair might turn up its nose at, and 
pronounce fat and provincial ; just such 
a woman, however, as would turn the 
heads of the men at a Belgravian recep- 
tion; though my Lady Fashion insists 
upon declaring slender figures to be the 
height of beauty. 

Uncle Martin sat by the first fire of the 
autumn, after Harvest Home had been 
celebrated, with Jane Crosby's head upon 
his knee. 

Jane liked to nestle by the inglenook on 
a hassock suflBciently low to enable her to 
caress Shep, the favourite sheep-dog, or to 
lay her head upon uncle Martin's knee. 



4 CRUEL LONDON. 

and look alternately into his face or into 
the fire, where she would picture her des- 
tiny in a vague, shadowy way, with 
nothing certain in the imaginative story, 
except the face of John Kerman, her uncle's 
right hand in the harvest fields, and her 
constant companion. 

" It come over me to tell you to- 
night, lovey, how my poor old heart 
warms to you. I think it is because this 
is the last harvest I shall gather in, 
because, lass, I feel that it 's my Harvest 
Home." 

*^ Don't say that, uncle ; you never 
looked better, and I 'm sure you never 
spoke nicer than you did when the lads 
drank your health, and you thanked 
them." 

^^ I was looking back, lass, and wishing 
I 'd been kind to 'em ; wishing I hadn't 
lost my temper so often ; wishing I hadn't 
been hard to them, hard and brutal, 
lass." 



HARVEST HOME. O 

The old man's hot tears fell upon the 
girl's hand. She brushed away her own 
and looked up at him, smiling like the sun 
through a summer shower. 

^^No, no, uncle, you have always been 
good ; they have never wanted their wage 
for an hour. When the crops failed, and 
our neighbours discharged their servants, 
you kept men on ; and nobody speaks of 
you without respect." 

^^ I kept them on ; yes, and I did it with 
a curse. If I 'd my time to come over 
again, and knew what I know now, I 
would be kind as well as just ; kind like 
thou art, lovey ; I 'd try and walk, if it 
was a long way off, in the footsteps of 
Him who was the kindest gentleman that 
ever trod the earth. It come to me to say 
this to-night, Jennie, and I am not 
ashamed. I think I Ve been too proud 
and too shy to be kind to people, somehow 
as if my heart had got crusted over, lovey, 
and couldn't work rightly." 



6 CRUEL LONDON. 

The firelight played lovingly upon the 
two figures, Summer and Winter, Hope 
and Despair, the Past and the Future, the 
gnarled oak waiting for the axe, the young 
ash-plant waiting for the sun and rain to 
fashion it into a tree, that shall bend grace- 
fully before the wind, and lift its tender, 
loving branches towards the sky. 

The flickering beams wrapped the man 
and maiden in their ruddy embrace, hover- 
ing about them, playing in the folds of the 
girl's dress, turning her brown hair into 
threads of red gold, and softening the 
rugged lines of the old man's wrinkled face. 

It was a touching picture ; a picture for 
joy and sorrow ; a picture to be sad over, 
a picture to rejoice at ; a picture of human 
life, so real that the joy of it was heart- 
aching. 

It was Life and Death, May and Decem- 
ber, the violet and the withered leaf, the 
song of joy, the dirge of despair. Spring 
Leaves and Harvest Home. 



HARVEST HOME. 7 

The firelight seemed to know the quality 
and character of the picture, lingering 
fondly about it, touching gently the old 
man's face, caressing his hands^ and dwell- 
ing lovingly upon the brown hair of the 
head that nestled upon his knee. 

"But I have never been unkind to 
Jennie," he continued, this time as if 
answering his thoughts or responding to the 
quiet upbraidings of his conscience. ^ ' I don't 
remember ever saying an angry word to 
Jennie, and I think I always loved my 
sister, who died when Jennie was bom . 
died a widow, bless her dear heart, as good 
a woman as ever breathed ; but I Ve been 
a brute to Jack Kerman. Nay, it's no 
good saying I haven't. I have been a 
brute, just as I have to others, for that 
matter, the Lord forgive me ! I think it 
was because I was jealous of him, afraid 
that Jennie had got to think too much 
about him ; afraid some day that he might 
ask me for her, and then I think I could 



8 CRUEL LONDON. 

have killed him. When I 'm gone . when 
the last load is stacked . when we Ve said 
our last say, and the gleaners are in the 
stubble, then maybe I could bear to think 
that somebody claimed her for his own ; 
and what 's more, that she had a strong 
arm to lean on when she wanted to be 
taken care of. Where are you, Jennie?" 

" Here, uncle dear," said Jane, rising, 
and putting her arms around his neck, 
while Shep started to his feet to Kck his 
hands, and then He down again once more 
in the firelight. 

^^ You love this Kerman," said the old 
man, taking her hand in his, and looking 
into her face. '^ I think you do, and I 
think he may be a good fellow in his way, 
for his father was straight and honest as 
daylight, fair-dealing and true to his word, 
and lent me five thousand pounds once 
when I needed it/ . aye, so much that I 'd 
have broken without it; and to-night I 
like to tell you all this while there 's time, 



HAEVEST HOME, 9 

to-night when the wheat is all in. But I 
don't know whether Jack's his father's 
son or his mother's. He 's flighty a bit in 
his ways, and proud, and thinks he knows 
best, and wants to be a great man, and 
all that; but anything that you look 
tenderly on, anything that you love, 
must be good, Jennie, though I cannot 
altogether trust him." 

^^ You love me too much to do justice to 
John," said Jane Crosby, kissing the old 
man's forehead. *^ He 's always, been my 
friend, and kind to me, and always faith- 
ful to you, uncle dear, always." 

^^Yes, yes, faithful, yes, that's some- 
thing ; kind to you 's nothing. You might 
as well say the earth is kind to the sun 
when it lies soddened and the sun smiles 
on it, and the seed grows, and presently 
the wind bends the tall, filling ears of 
grain. I wish I were young again, Jennie. 
You never saw me in my prime, before 
she was faithless. I was once in love^ 



10 CRUEL LONDON. 

Jennie, and a thief stole her bom me . a 
thief, Jennie, a wily thief, and she died 
abroad . died, and I never saw her again ; 
and I think that made a brute of me, a 
hard, morose man, a money-grubber ; but 
we ^1 not talk of that, it is so long ago, I 
sometimes think it is only a dream. We 
will not talk of it. Let the past go. It is 
the future we have to deal with, Jennie, 
. your future, my dear. If you were your 
own mistress to-morrow, Jennie, with 
broad lands, and money in the bank, what 
would you do ? " 

^^ Whatever you asked me, dear," said 
Jennie. 

" And what would you like me to ask 
you to do ? Give it all to Kerman, and 
you along with it ? " 

Jennie pressed his hand, and hid her 
face even from the firelight which came 
prying round her warm and ruddy. 

^^ Ah, we are all slaves, Jennie; slaves 
to some hidden master, who leads us at 



HARVEST HOME. 11 

will. But it is all one at last; though 
I 'd like you to have happy days, Jennie 
.a life without care, with nothing to do 
but look beautiful, and have your heart 
full of content and pleasure ; a good time 
from now all through the long summer of 
your life, and a Harvest Home rich and 
rare, and full of gathered joys. But a 
man, I 'm thinking, does not always like 
the money to be on the woman's side, 
Jennie ; it takes his pride out of him . it 
saps his independence, and it sometimes 
makes a man vain and arrogant, instead 
of submissive and gentle. I have seen to 
it, Jennie ; I have seen to it. Jeremiah 
Sleaford made me a will a year or so 
back, but I Ve altered it. I was wrong 
in having a secret from my own lawyer, 
Jabez Thompson, and got nearly punished 
for it ; but that 's all over now ; you may 
trust Jabez. Perhaps he 's a bit too fond 
of horses for a lawyer, though I never 
knew a man who was downright fond of 



12 CEUEL LONDON. 

horseflesh that was a bad un. Be wary 
of Mr. Sleaford; he calls himself my re- 
lation. Mayhap he is, I don't know: a 
cousin ten times off, or something like that. 
I hope I've saved him from the neces- 
sity of being a rogue, but I don't know. 
Only you take none of his advice ; stick to 
dear old Jabez. He 's got a heart as well 
as a head. Don't cry, my darling ; don't 
cry. When the grain is ripe it must be 
reaped, and it is a quiet time after harvest; 
a time to sit by the fire, and think of the 
summer that is gone, and the winter 
that is coming in. You have been my 
summer, Jennie, and the comfort of 
my harvest home is that I have never 
said an unkind word to you, . ^never^ 
never once." 

Again the hot tears filled the old 
man's eyes, and the firelight crept about 
him, mingling its embraces with the 
maiden. 



HARVEST HOME. 13 

And when the night was almost spent, 
they carried the old man out of the fire- 
light into the cold shadow of the waning 
moon. 



14 CRUfJL LONDON 



CHAPTER II. 



THE SLEAFORDS. 



Jeremiah Sleaford, Esq., of Fitzroy 
Square, London, was one of those pheno- 
mena of the English metropolis who have 
practically no profession, no property, no 
income, and yet contrive to live in a 
semi-fashionable house, iri good style, and 
to support a family that goes into society. 
Jeremiah Sleaford was one of those crea- 
tions of an aristocratic system of govern- 
ment that over-estimate the necessity of 
keeping up appearances, and do not 
sufficiently value the old-fashioned prin- 
ciple of being honestly what you are and 
living your own life. Mr. Sleaford had 



THE SLEAF0BD8. 15 

continually discounted the future, and, if 
he ever condescended to argue the point, 
he would prove by the clearest logic that 
only on his system could men of brains 
without money hold their own against the 
brutal tyranny of capital. 

Commencing life in the city of Lincoln 
as an articled clerk to a local solicitor, he 
had been industrious enough to obtain his 
articles, and had actually commenced to 
practise on his own accomit, not in the 
city of his birth, but in the great metro- 
polis, where he had considerably supple- 
mented attorneyship with financing, 
money-lending, and journalism. 

Finally, Mr. Jeremiah Sleaford had 
studied for the Bar, and in the midst of 
his dinners he had married the comer 
house in Fitzroy Square, with 5,000Z., 
which had practically ruined him ; for his 
sanguine temperament had led him into 
the reckless investment of house and 
money, and had left him with an extrava- 



16 CRUEL LONDON. 

vagant son (whom he loved with all the 
strength and weakness of his nature) of 
five-and-twenty , two interesting daughters, 
and a wife a little older than himself, all 
dependent upon his successes ajs a hanger- 
on of public companies, and a promoter 
more particularly of gold and silver mines, 
in which he had sunk name, fame, and 
cash. 

Happily, the comer house of Fitzroy 
Square was settled upon his wife, and 
settled in such a way that neither he, she, 
nor they (her trustees) could touch it. 
And when the great panic stalked through 
London and swept all before it, some 
friends in the City who had escaped the 
financial whirlwind bought the contents 
of the corner house in Fitzroy Square, 
and settled the family goods upon Mrs. 
Sleaford, as hard and fast as the house 
itself, so that Jeremiah, with his bald 
head and his bushy whiskers, could not 
throw the fine old house into a gold mine, 



THE SLEAFORDS. 17 

even if lie found * it difficult to keep the 
fine old house going in the way of 
butcher's meat and servants. 

Two years prior to his death, uncle 
Martin had sent for Sleaford to make his 
will. 

He did not, he said, want any of the 
Lincolnshire folk to know how he had 
left his property. Local solicitors were 
too fond of leaving their papers about, 
and their clerks cackled and let out 
secrets. So he had bethought him of his 
old friend and distant relation, Mr. Jere- 
miah Sleaford, and after some trouble had 
found him out, and brought him down 
from London, without any one being the 
wiser; for uncle Martin had met him at 
the White Horse Hotel, in the old city, 
and had there and then instructed him. 

Mr. Sleaford had brought down the 
papers, and uncle Martin had executed 
the will in the presence of his banker and 
Mr. Sleaf ord's clerk ; and the document had 

VOL. I. c 



18 CRUEL LONDON. 

been there and then sealed, and deposited 
at the county bank. 

The London attorney had protested 
that he would rather the will had been 
prepared by a stranger, inasmuch as Mr. 
Martin had left him 3,000Z. ; but the old 
farmer had smiled, and said that was no- 
thing ; and the banker did not think Mr. 
Sleaford need have the slightest scruple 
when he compared that small sum with 
the large property bequeathed to others. 

Two years had passed away, and the 
business was only significant, Sleaford 
would say, when the matter was men- 
tioned, from the fact that it was almost 
his last purely professional act in the law, 
though the will had a not uninfluential 
clause or two in reference to the house of 
Sleaford. Beyond this he would not 
speak of the contents of Squire Martin's 
last testamentary commands. They re- 
presented the Lincolnshire farmer's secret. 
^^The time would come," he would say 



^.1 



THE SLEAFOJRDS. 19 

with an air of mystery that irritated 
Mrs. Sleaford to madness. But the 
financier was firm in the maintenance 
of his secret . the only thing in which 
he really was firm. Squire Martin 
had sent to London for a solicitor on 
the ground of secrecy; and, though 
that attorney had practically retired from 
practice, he nevertheless had not given up 
the habit of respecting the confidence of 
those few men who, until they were dead, 
might still be regarded as his clients. 

If you had seen Sleaford go out in a 
morning to the City you might have mis- 
taken him for the happiest and most pros- 
perous of men. He was a round-faced, 
florid-complexioned; beaming gentleman, 
with a smile upon his lips, and a sentiment 
always bubbling up to them. 

He wore scrupulously clean linen, a 
black velvet waistcoat and tie showing 
a set of diamond studs, grey trousers, 
a black fi'ock-coat, a hat with a band 



20 CRUEL LONDON. 

round it, because hatbands have a sym- 
pathetic appearance, and he carried a gold- 
headed cane. 

He was fifty years of age; he looked 
forty, and walked with the jaunty air of a 
youth. 

He could never forget that he once 
owned a hundred thousand pounds, and 
was Chairman of the Kamtschatka Gold 
Mining Company, Limited. 

It is true the hundred thousand pounds 
were in the scrip of that company, and that 
they had been reckoned at half-a-crown a 
share by the official liquidator. 

Still, Mr. Sleaford only remembered his 
wealth as it was originally set down ; and 
he would tell you how during the panic 
he had lost hundreds of thousands of 
pounds, and that he never expected to be 
as rich again as he had been, but, never- 
theless, that he would not complain ; no, 
he would not complain ; and he had some 
schemes in hand which must turn out well, 



THE SLEAFOEDS. 



21 



and which positively might even retrieve 
all his lost fortunes. 

It was a pleasant sight, as I said before, 
to see Mr. Jeremiah Sleaford start for the 
City. His faded wife, with her grey curls 
and black lace mittens, would kiss his 
wide and manly forehead; Patty and 
Emily would kiss his dear, whiskered 
cheeks; Tom would say, "By-bye, gov.; 
shall see you in the City"; and Tim 
Maloney, the man-of-all-work, who had 
been with the family all through the 
panic and since, would brush his hat, and 
turn him out into the street with admiring 
words, that would have been resented as 
too familiar if Tim had not been a faithful 
servant, not to say a useful ally ; for the 
servant was somewhat of the master's 
nature, and had in him a spirit of brag 
and adventure which linked the two 
together in a bond of sympathy, which 
Jeremiah Sleaford, Esq., was always 
ready to acknowledge in a patronizing 



22 CRUEL LONDON. 

kind of way that was eminently satis- 
factory to Tim's sense of humour, and did 
not in any way outrage his national pride- 
In his own heart Tim believed his master 
to be a rogue, but that opinion was a 
secret which Tim held as dear as his life ; 
for he was hiuiself but indifferently honest, 
and he had a sympathetic admiration for 
Jeremiah Sleaford, Esquire. 

" Tim," said the master, on a dull, foggy 
morning, two days after the death of the 
famous Lincolnshire farmer, ^^ Tim, when 
a man dies his secret is out ; at least the 
one in question is no longer a secret, and 
I commit no breach, Tim, now, in saying 
that the fickle goddess of fortune has a 
really good thing in store for us at 
last." 

'^ Indade, and Heaven send it betime," 
said Tim, brushing his master's hat while 
they stood in the hall of the family 
residence. ^^ Be jabers, an' I thought 
there was bad news, as the missus and the 



THE 8LEAF0RDS. 23 

girls haven't come out to kiss yer honour 
on the step." 

" Grief, Tim, the natural grief of tender 
hearts. It 's a death in the family, Tim, 
a death,'.' said the master. 

^* A death, is it ? A death with 
money in it ; and I 'd loike to attind 
the wake if the body's left ye a fur- 
tune," said Tim, giving the finishing 
touch to the shining hat, which his master 
looked into solemnly, and then pressed 
gently upon his white and shining brow. 

" There will bono wake, Tim, but there 
will be a funeral, and you shall accompany 
Mr. Tom Sleaford and myself to that 
solemn ceremony." 

" Ah, by my sowl, and I '11 accompany 
you to the divil if ye ax me ; and it 's a 
joy to know that at least the hatband 
yeVe had such a fancy for will be a 
genuine bit of furniture after all ; and if 
there's money in the funeral, be jabers 
I 'd have a hatband to the top of my hat, 



24 CRUEL LONDON. 

like old Flippers, the baker, when Lord 
Timbuctoo, his forty-ninth cousin, died 
and didn't even mention his name in the 
will." 

*^ Don't damp the legitimate hopes of an 
honest man by such unhappy references to 
the weaknesses and misfortunes of others^ 
Tim," said Jeremiah the Magnificent; 
*' but consult your mistress as to the course 
to be pursued in regard to the funeral of 
our relative. Squire Martin, and say that 
I think Smith Brothers, of Regent Street^ 
the famous mercers in black, will be only 
too happy to open a quarterly account 
with her, especially on so auspicious . I 
mean on so melancholy an occasion." 

"I will, yer honour. Good-morning, 
sir," said Tim, as he closed the door, with 
an air of demonstrative respect, upon the 
gentleman who was off to the City, and 
upon the fog that was not off anywhere, 
but had made up its mind to be on hand 
all day in City and suburb. 



THE SLEAFORDS. 25 

The dining-room of No. 1, Fitzroy 
Square, served as breakfast, dining, and 
drawing room for the Sleafords, except on 
company days, and once a month, when 
Mrs. Sleaford was ^^ at home." 

On this memorable morning in ques- 
tion, Mrs. Sleaford, the two girls and 
Tom, took counsel together over the 
fire, while Tim removed the breakfast 
things. 

Tom was strongly of opinion that, if 
old Martin had left them anything, his 
death would have been announced to 
them by some member of the family. And 
what did the governor mean by saying 
that one member of the Sleaford family 
in particular would be glad ? Mrs. 
Sleaford really did not know what the 
relationship was. She had never heard 
Jeremiah talk of Squire Martin as his 
cousin before, except on one occasion 
when the poet Tennyson was mentioned ; 
he said he had distant relations in the 



26 CRUEL LONDON. 

county which gave the laureate birth. 
Patty and Emily thought it would be a 
pleasant change to go into mourning, 
especially just as the winter was coming 
on. 

*^ But how is it to be paid for ? " asked 
Mrs. Sleaford, looking round upon her 
thoughtless family. 

^* Oh, the master 's arranged that," said 
the privileged servant, Tim, as he was 
carrying off the last article of domes- 
tic economy connected with the recent 
repast. 

"Has he?" said Mrs. Sleaford, inter- 
rogatively. 

" The great mourning house of Smith 
Brothers will open an account," said Tim ; 
" and if you '11 go there at once, I '11 
attend ye, ma'm ; and it will be best to 
have a brougham, and I '11 be sitting on 
the box to give importance to the event, 
anyhow." 

" Very well, Tim," said Mrs. Slea- 



THE SLEAFORDS. 27 

ford ; ^ ^ fetch the brougham in an 
hour, and lliliss Emily and myself will be 
ready." 

" Thank ye, ma'm," said Tim, as respect- 
fully as if he had received his wages 
regularly, and had no knowledge what- 
ever of the impecuniosity of the family, 
to whom he had become an absolute 
necessity. 

*' Tim 's almost as clever as the 
governor," said Mr. Sleaford, jun., 
toasting his slippered toes on the 
fender. 

" I wish he were not so familiar," said 
Patty, a young lady of eighteen, with 
blue eyes and a delicately fair com- 
plexion. 

Patty, to all appearance, was a pale 
pinky nonentity, who spent her life in 
copying water-colour studies of impossible 
sunsets. 

Her sister Emily had all the brain of 
the family, and most of its good looks, too. 



28 CRUEL LONDON. 

She was three years older than Patty, and 
twenty shades darker; slight in figure^ 
hazel eyes, dark-brown hair, and a touch 
of obstinacy in her moral composition. 
That was indicated in a well-shaped, deli- 
cate mouth, and a firm, steady eye. She 
was not pretty, but she was certainly 
interesting, and she nursed in secret 
something like a contempt for father, 
mother, brother, and sister, and that 
was the one great trouble of her 
life. 

" Tim has the privilege of an old and 
tried servant," said Mrs. Sleaford, who 
noticed a not altogether complimentary 
expression in Emily's face in reference to 
Tom's remark. 

" The privilege of a fellow-conspirator,'' 
said Emily, not angrily, but with some- 
thing like a sneer. 

'' Emily, why will you make yourself so 
disagreeable ! " said Mrs. Sleaford. ^^ You 
ignore the little fictions of life, as if they 



THE SLEAFORDS. 29 

were not a necessary part of one's exist- 
ence, and you despise what is equally 
important, a reasonable amount of keep- 
ing up appearances. I can't think where 
you get your absurd notions from." 

" What is the good, mamma, of going 
into debt for this mourning ; you will only 
be worried to death for the money ; and 
father and Tim will have to lie against each 
other to the man who, six months from 
now, will come every day for weeks to 
serve father with a writ," said Emily, 
placing upon a file several accounts which 
had come by post. 

^^ You are so disgustingly prosaic, and 
you have no hope in the future," said Mr. 
Sleaford, jun. 

" I am the domestic book-keeper; I know 
how much we owe, and how little we can 
pay, and I am wearied of a hollow pre- 
tence of prosperity which brings its daily 
humiliations." 

" What do you mean ? " asked Mrs. 



30 CRUEL LONDON. 

Sleaford, in a tone a little higher and 
quicker than her customary drawl. 

"I mean exactly what I say, mamma. 
The butcher has threatened to stop sup- 
plies ; the gasman told Tim he would cut 
off the gas to-morrow if the last half-year's 
account is not paid to-day ; the regimental 
tailor of Captain Tom Sleaford, of the 
Tower Hamlet Volunteers, has served 
papa with a County Court summons ; and 
now you are going to prepare a greater 
worry than all to succeed these troubles, 
when we have got through them, as I 
suppose we shall, with the usual noise 
and fluster, like a cat getting through a 
skylight." 

Emily hung the file in a corner of a 
bureau devoted to the financial affairs of 
the household, locking it with a smart 
click, and was about to continue her re- 
marks, when Tom Sleaford looked up 
from the Times^ which was borrowed 
for an hour for a penny every morn- 



THE SLEAFORDS. 31 

ing, and asked what Emily was ^^ rowing 
about." 

" I am not ^ rowing,' " said Emily. 

" Yes, you are," said Patty, with her 
white, doughy arm round her mother s 
waist, for Mrs. Sleaford had begun to 
cry. 

'^ Now look here, Em, I won't have it," 
said Tom. ^^ This would be the happiest 
family going if you didn't always break 
in on its peace with your matter-of-fact 
saws and maxims." 

"Peace," said Emily, "may be too 
dearly bought; we have had enough of 
what you call peace, which simply means 
letting things drift into a war, to be 
fought at a disadvantage when the time 
comes." 

" Go it, Em ; but don't expect me to 
stop and hear you. Fred Tavener may 
like that kind of amusement : I don't, so 
I 'm off," said Tom, proceeding to pull on 
his boots. 



32 CRUEL LONDON. 

" There is no need to say anything 
against Mr. Tavener," said Mrs. Sleaford, 
languidly ; *Mie is a very kind and gentle- 
manlike person." 

'^ I Ve nothing to say against him." 

^ ' When you have, Tom, say it to his 
face," said Emily. '^ He is not particu- 
larly clever, but he does work hard, Tom, 
and.'' 

*' I don't, I suppose you mean ; all right, 
Em, I 'm going to be a schemer like the 
governor. Work 's a mistake ; wit 's the 
thing, Em, wit." 

*' Then I 'm sorry for you, Tom," said 
Emily. 

"Thank you," replied Tom, drawing 
himself up. 

" There, donH be angry," said the girl, 
quickly, and putting her arms round his 
neck ; " it is not your fault if you are an 
idle, good-for-nothing fellow." 

" Shan't make it up ; you 're always 
going on at a chap," said Tom ; " luckily 



THE SLEAF0RD8. 33 

Fitzroy Square isn't the only comer in the 
world, and I know half-a-dozen places 
where they don't tell me I'm a brate, 
and then try to make things straight 
by pretending they mean it kindly." 



VOL. I. 



34 CRUEL LONDON. 



CHAPTER III. 

GOING INTO MOURNING. 

9 

Tom walked out of the room, and 
presently the hall-door banged, and his 
tall figure, with its light moustache and 
its brown ulster coat, could be seen stalk- 
ing past the window and disappearing in 
the fog. 

"It is really unkind," said Mrs. Slea- 
ford; "very unkind to send the dear boy 
out to walk about the streets of London 
on a day like this." 

' ' Just because Emily can't control her 
temper," remarked Patty, in a calm aside. 

" I was not out of temper," said Emily ; 
^ ^ and that idea of walking the streets of 
London is too absurd. Why, Tom has a 



GOING INTO MOURNING. 35 

dozen places to go to. Men are never at 
a loss . bars, clubs, billiard-rooms, . ^there 
is no end to the seductive amusements 
that make it easy for Tom to resent the 
slightest discomfort at home, and pretend 
he is driven out." 

Emily was quite right. Tom's life out- 
side Fitzroy Square was to him full of 
pleasant incidents. 

He knew four barmaids by their Chris- 
tian names. They always put themselves 

* 

out of the way to humour his whims. 
The best of everything was at his com- 
mand at four of the finest bars in London. 
Not that he traded upon the complaisance 
of these pleasant ladies. He paid his 
score. Some men who condescend to cap- 
tivate the Bacchanalian graces forget to 
pay for their drinks. At present Tom 
was not quite a sneak ; he was only vain 
and idle, but he only wanted the opportu- 
nity to be a villain. 

^^ Walking about the streets of London, 



36 CRUEL LONDON. 

mother ! . why, Tom has a club on Adelphi 
Terrace far better furnished than his club 
in Fitzroy Square.'^ 

" What club in Fitzroy Square ? '^ 

"This house: home is only a club to 
Tom. I wish I could take things as 
coolly." 

"Emily hears all about these things 
from Mr. Tavener," said Patty. 

"Never mind how Emily hears, dear; 
Emily knows that Tom has a club where 
he can eat and drink, and smoke and order 
the servants about ; where he meets other 
Toms, who talk over the scandals of the 
day, and enjoy themselves to their hearts' 
content. Talk of women ! . why, men are 
as frivolous and as full of gossip and scan- 
dal as the tabbies at a West-End kettle- 
drum." 

"Oh, you spiteful thing! " said Patty, 
looking up out of her doll's eyes, and 
rubbing them the moment Emily looked 
towards her. 



91ViManHS59BSRI^^^^ 



GOING INTO MOURNING. &7 

 

Mrs. Sleaford burst into tears. 

" Why, mamma ! why, mother ! " ex- 
claimed Emily. 

" Why, what?" murmured Mrs. Sleaford. 

" Why are you crying ? " 

" Because you are quarrelling." 

" We are not doing anything of the kind, 
dear," said Emily. 

^^ No," said Patty, " we are not." 

^^ I don't like to hear you say things 
against Tom." Mrs, Sleaford dried her 
eyes as she spoke. 

' ^ I only speak for his own good. I 
wish he would do something," said Emily, 
leaving the room. 

Tom^had been unlucky. His father had 
obtained appointments for hijn in several 
City houses. He had been unable to keep 
them, because his pride would not endure 
the demands which mercantile rules made 
upon it; and in one financial house, he had 
been charged with trading in scrip on the 
strength of information, the secret of 



38 CRUEL LONDON. 

which he was bound in honour, as an 
official of the establishment, to maintain 
and respect. The dear boy was now 
waiting for the development of a company 
of which he was to be appointed manager ; 
and as his father would be chairman of the 
Board, his duties would be such as a gen- 
tleman could perform. 

Mrs. Sleaford had talked this matter 
over with Emily only the day before, 
and had begged her not to wound poor 
Tom's feelings by references to his being 
out of a lucrative position ; and Mrs. Slea- 
ford felt that her taunts were, therefore, 
doubly hard, and more particularly when 
they were all doing their best to keep up 
a respectable appearance, so that when 
good fortune really did come back again 
they would be in a position to receive it, 
and hold their own in society, as they 
always had done. 

" Yes, dear mamma," said Patty ; 
^^ don't cry any more ; it is very naughty 



^^^^^^^^^^."....^^...^.^^......^......^......I 



GOING INTO MOURNING. 39 

of Emily, but she 's only in one of her 
tempers, and it will soon be all over, and 
you know what a dear 'girl she is when 
she 's not put out." 

" I 'm sure I wish she would marry." 

^^ So do I." 

" Some rich man." 

"Yes." 

" Not Mr. Fred Tavener ? " 

"No, because he's poor. That's the 
reason Emmy ^s cross, I think." 

" He 's a very nice young man, if he 
were only well off." 

" But what should we do without 
Emmy?" 

"I don't know. We shouldn't have 
these continual scenes, at all events." 

"We should have nothing, I fear, 



mamma." 



" The carriage will be ready in ten 
minutes," said Tim, entering the room in 
his neat livery of chocolate and gold, and 
retiring without waiting for a reply. 



40 CRUEL LONDON. 

" Go, dear, and ask Emily if she will 
come with me, or leave me to give the 
order myself. She knows how ignorant I 
am about the quality of things, and how 
easily I am imposed upon," said Mrs. 
Sleaiord, wiping her eyes, and kissing 
her youngest bom. 

^ a will make her go," replied Patty, in 
her slow, unimpassioned manner; and, 
sure enough, she returned with the good 
news that Emily would be ready in ten 
minutes. 

A brougham drove up to the door. 
Tim was on the box in his livery. His 
gloves were white, and his eye was full of 
sly mourning. He had already spoken of 
the sad news which had come by post. 
The driver, while the horse was being put 
in, had reported to the owner that Mr. 
Sleaford had been left twenty thousand 
pounds by a distant relative. 

Tim stepped down and opened the door 
for his mistress and her eldest daughter. 



GOING INTO MOURNING. 41 

" An' it 's sorry I am this day," he said, 
in a respectful whisper, as he turned the 
handle of the brougham and touched his 
hat with an air of solemnity that made 
Miss Emily Sleaford laugh. 

"Eeally, Emily, if you did not know 
uncle Martin, his death need not make 
you merry." 

"No, mamma; it is Tim who makes 
me merry." 

"Then I would try and discover a 
more refined object for mirth." 

"There is no fun in refinement, 
mamma." 

" You are the strangest girl!" said Mrs. 
Sleaford. " I sometimes wonder whether 
you are my daughter or not." 

"Yes, you have a curious choice of 
subjects to wonder about, dear, silly 
mamma. Don't you wonder how we are 
going to get Smith Brothers to trust us 
with all this mourning which you are 
going to order?" 



42 CRUEL LONDON. 

" No, because you are with me. If I were 
alone, that would be a different matter.'^ 

^' Then let me go home, dear." 

*^No, you have taken everybody and 
everything into your hands to manage, 
Emily ; and I have got to rely on you so 
much that I declare I feel quite foolish by 
myself, and I 'm sure you wouldn't like 
the material I should select for you." 

" Ah, well, hero we are, dear. I 'd just 
as soon be a forlorn hope facing a battery 
of guns as toll that wretched shop-walker 
to book our order," said Miss Sleaford. 

As if Tim had heard the remark he 
came to the door, and, looking knowingly 
at her, said, . 

*^ Excuse me a minnit, mem. 1 11 pave 
the way for ye, and make things as 
smooth as a greased rainbow. Please to 
wait till I come back to ye." 

Tim entered the imposing warehouse of 
Messrs. Smith Brothers, and returned 
beaming. 



GOING INTO MOURNING. 43 

"Faith, and ye '11 forgive me, Miss 
Emmy. I just whispered in the long ear 
of that baste as walks about the shop that 
I 'd expect a good tip for bringing of 
you to give them an order, seeing as your 
uncle, the great squire, had died an' left 
ye half a county, and a fortune in goold 
as was too big to count ; an', be jabers, 
he said I should be paid 'andsomely." 

Presently Mrs. Sleaf ord and her daughter 
were sitting in the most solemn of the 
heavy mourning departments of Smith 
Brothers, whose assistants waited on them 
with bated breath and whispering hum- 
bleness. 



y 



44 CRUEL LONDON. 



CHAPTER IV. 

SCHEMES AND SCHEMERS. 

Meanwhile the head of the house of Slea- 
ford had reached the scene of his business 
hopes, the offices of the Financial Society, 
which occupied a suite of three rooms 
on the third floor back of a palatial 
building in Birchin Lane, the company- 
consisting of Mr. Maclosky Jones and his 
two clerks. 

The most imposing room of the three 
was the waiting-room, which was hung 
with maps of estates, plans of collieries^ 
sketches of mining-shafts, and a fancy 
picture of a proposed cemetery in the 
neighbourhood of Blackheath, together 
with a still more florid picture of an aqua- 



r^!Sis9m^rm^mvmmf99mm 



SCHEMES AND SCHEMEBS. 45 

rium and concert-room on the Thames, at 
Kichmond. 

On the marble mantel-piece were sun- 
dry specimens of lead, gold, and silver 
ore, and in a recess near the window, was 
a handsome desk, at which a clerk sat 
addressing envelopes. 

This anteroom was the rendezvous of 
Mr. Maclosky Jones's friends and hangers 
on, and here came every day Mr. Jere- 
miah Sleaford, one of his most influential 
confederates in the art of promotion. 

Mr. Sleaford was always received with 
great respect by the humble clerk of the 
outer room, and with equal consideration 
by Mr. Fitzherbert Robinson, a gentle- 
man of distinguished manners, and with 
friendly cordiality by the other City 
gentlemen who formed the financial circle 
that revolved upon the managerial axis of 
Maclosky Jones. 

These lights of the outer room were 
always talking of mines, foreign loans. 



46 CRUEL LONDON. 

and industrial enterprises in a large and 
magnificent way ; and though they could 
not sometimes have mustered a sufficient 
sum of money among them to pay a cab 
fare to the West End, yet they spoke of 
hundreds of thousands of pounds with an 
air of confidence that might have led a 
stranger to suppose them to be all million- 
aires and in the thick of the world's 
business. 

Mr. Fitzherbert Robinson was a gentle- 
man of peculiarly varied experience. 
He had been twice married, and once 
divorced, his last wife having been the 
third daughter of an Irish earl. 

It was understood that he had run 
through two fortunes ; and this must have 
been true, because he continually spoke of 
the occurrence. 

He had intimate relationship with the 
Press, and had, indeed, for years past, 
been the most anonymous of the leader- 
writers in the Times . so he said. 



SCHEMES AND SCHEMEKS. 47 

He was a calm, self-possessed gentle- 
man of five-and-thirty, well dressed, well 
shaved, and well buttoned up. You might 
have mistaken him for a military officer in 
undress, his scrupulously brushed frock- 
coat was so tightly buttoned, and his 
slight, black moustache was so neatly cut 
and waxed. 

One of those daring weekly journals 
which had recently sprung up in the City 
had called him a guinea-pig director, and 
a swindler, in an article on the Persian 
Gold Mining Company's prospectus, and 
had charged him with being the life and 
soul of the Financial Society, which had 
attempted to palm off upon the public for 
one hundred thousand pounds property 
not worth five ; but Mr. Jones Maclosky, 
the manager of the Syndicate, had written 
and denied all knowledge of Mr. Fitzher- 
bert Robinson until he was introduced to 
him in connexion with the scheme in ques- 
tion ; and Mr. Fitzherbert Robinson had 



48 CRUEL LONDON* 

served the journal in question with a writ 
for libel, which he intended to carry no 
further ; and so the financial critic had not 
done the damage he hoped to do, although 
the Persian scheme had fallen dead, and 
left Mr. Jeremiah Sleaford and his ante- 
room friends jointly responsible for a 
large advertising and printing bill. 

" Let us hope we shall have more suc- 
cess with the graver scheme,'^ said Robin- 
son, between the whiffs of a cigarette, on 
this particular day. 

'' The public must die," rejoined Slea- 
ford, " the public must be buried, and a 
cemetery at Blackheath should be indeed 
a go ; and I think it will, I think it will." 

^*We have got the concession of the 
land, and we are assured of Parliament- 
ary sanction; we have secured a young 
gentleman who has consented to pay five 
hundred pounds towards preliminary ex- 
penses on being guaranteed the secretary- 
ship ; and to-day we are to have an inter- 



SCHEMES AND SCHEMERS. 49 

view with a gentleman from Paddington, 
whom we propose to appoint our mural 
sculptor, and grave-digger-in-chief. It is 
through his influence that we have obtained 
the concession of land, and he will agree 
to give the company a share in the profits 
of his cohtracts." 

At this moment, there arrived the very 
person of whom they were speaking, Mr. 
Harry Brayford, a hearty, genial-looking 
fellow, of middle age, with a pair of 
mutton-chop whiskers, a pair of ruddy 
cheeks, and a smack of country life in his 
manner, toned down by a black suit of 
clothes, and a pair of black kid gloves, 
very thick, and much too long. 

^^ Mr. 'Brayford, I am glad to see you," 
said Eobinson; '^ allow me to introduce 
you to my friend, and your friend I hope 
from this day, Mr. Jeremiah Sleaford, of 
Fitzroy Square." 

^' Good morning, sir," said Brayford, a 
little disconcerted at finding himself in the 

VOL. I. E 



50 CEUEL LONDON. 

presence of so stately a personage as Jere- 
miah, who gave him a solemn and dignified 
recognition. 

" I will go and see if Mr. Maclosky Jones 
will be long before he is disengaged," said 
Robinson, and he disappeared behind the 
green-baize door that led to the shrewd 
Maclosky's room, where the shrewd Mac- 
losky had been engaged for at least two 
hours, five deep, as the outer clerk said, but 
really with no other companions than the 
morning papers, which he was reading in 
a quiet, leisurely way. 

" Yours is a somewhat melancholy pror 
fession, Mr. Bray ford," said Sleaf ord, when 
he was left alone with the new-comer, and 
the humble clerk who addressed envelopes, 
and who enjoyed the elevated style of Slea- 
ford's conversation, "though I suppose we 
can get used to death, and indeed may 
come, so to speak, to take a friendly 
interest in the ^ all-conquering monarch/ 
as he has been not inaptly termed." 



SCHEMES AND SCHEMERS. 51 

" Yes, I suppose so," said Mr. Brayford, 
good-humouredly. " Death is a larky 
cove sometimes . beg pardon, I was think- 
ing of something else . ^I mean, certainly, 
by all means." 

'' I gather by your manner that custom 
is really second nature, and that success in 
any profession depends on taking to it in 
earnest." 

^' Success depends on plenty of rehear- 
sals," said Brayford. *^ I mean in atten- 
tion to your business with punctuality and 

despatch, and upon the refined character 
of your epitaphs. Did you ever write an 

epitaph, Mr. Sleaford ? " 

" Never, sir, though I may say that I 
have contributed with more or less success 
to the literature of my country, and added 
not a little to the development of a true 
appreciation of gold, from a metallic, 
moral, natural, and financial point of 
view." 

"Yes, no doubt," said Mr. Brayford; 



52 CRUEL LONDON. 

^' I have not done anything in that line, 
though I do dabble a little. Not to speak 
of that, but to keep to the business in 
hand, I think epitaphography is a great 
art. I have been insisting lately on min- 
gling modem poetry with Biblical lore. 
Now, sir, I think a three-act epitaph . as I 
call it . is the most successful of all." 

Mr. Jeremiah Sleaford looked surprised, 
and nodded encouragingly to Br ay ford. 

"That's my patent . my own idea . a 
three-act epitaph ; what I mean is, that it 
should be on this principle . three ideas in 
prose or rhyme . and I call the first a 
sigh, the second a tear, the third a sob. 
That's reducing the thing to a science, 
and what I tell all my customers, whether 
I write the epitaph or not, is, let there be 
a sigh, a tear, and a sob in it, and you'll 
bring the curtain down with a round . no, 
that is not exactly what I mean . but the 
sob is the idea to conclude with." 

Mr. Brayford's face grew red with the 



'^^^'^^^'Ki^i'm^^mmm^mtmmmmmmmtFsrvm^mmfmmmammmmi^Kmmmi 



SCHEMES AND SCHEMERS, 53 

excitement of this professional conversa- 
tion, and he smiled blandly upon Mr. 
Sleaford, who looked more puzzled than 
before, not only because he was a little 
at sea owing to Mr. Brayford's mixed 
metaphors, but furthermore on account of 
this quiet-looking, country-mannered gen- 
tleman taking the entire conversation into 
his own hands. 

^^ To come to business, Mr. Brayford. 
You are, perhaps, not aware that I am to 
be the chairman of this Cemetery Com- 
pany. Pardon me, sir, don't interrupt me 
for a moment. (Brayford was just going 
to dash in and carry off the conversation 
again.) I am glad to have met you, and 
there is a peculiar appropriateness in the 
encounter, for only this morning I was 
made acquainted with the death of a rela- 
tive of mine in Lincolnshire." 

^^ What part of the county, may I ask ? " 
Mr. Brayford was a Lincolnshire man, 
and could not resist this interruption. 



54 CRUEL LONDON. 

*. The Marsh," said Mr. Sleaford. 

" Pardon me again," rejoined Brayford, 
rising from his seat ; " the name ? " 

" Squire Martin," said Sleaford. 

^' Good gracious! you don't say so," said 
Brayford, his face positively beaming; 
" why, I knew him, sir, well when I was 
a boy, . used to go down there with my 
father to shoot snipe; and my father 
hoped to have buried him, but no such 
luck. Fact is, I have only recently come 
into the mural and cemetery business ; my 
father was in it, I was not ; but the dear 
old boy, after burying all his friends, had 
to be buried himself at last, and I was his 
heir, do you see, and he was proud of his 
profession, and he bound me to carry it 
on ; so here I am, or here we are again, to 
quote a familiar line. Well, dear me, dear 
me ; and I suppose Miss Crosby, his niece, 
will come in for the chink, and she'll 
marry John Kerman, and . ^well, bless me, 
this is news. this is news ! They 'U bury 



.^..MWiiBiVBiVaHPWaHWBHH 



SCHEMES AND SCHEMERS. 55 

him at the old churcli in the Marsh. It 's 
not been in the TimesJ^ 

"Was in this morning's paper," said 
Sleaford, now more surprised than ever. 

" Then The Wonner missed it ; that 's a 
shilling off your pocket money, old hawk- 
^ye, and no pit ticket for the pantomime. 
Mr. W. is my chief clerk, does no- 
thing but examine the obituary notices 
and circularise. A pretty Wonner to have 
missed Squire Martin ! The proverb is 
. indeed true, that one goes from home to 
hear news. I '11 make an example of you 
this once. Excuse me, sir (addressing the 
humble clerk), have you any telegraph 
forms ? " 

"Yes, sir," said the youth, delighted to 
get down from the desk ; " Here y' are. 



Sir." 



"I hope you'll pardon this little wait, 
sir," said Mr. Brayford, adding in a 
whisper to himself, "Interval of five 
minutes for refi:eshment," and rapidly 



56 CRUEL LONDON. 

writing a telegram to Manor Farm, stating 
that he would arrive there by mail train, 
hoping to be honoured with instructions 
to carry out the last mournful offices for 
his late father's late friend. 

"You will pardon me, Mr. Brayford, 
when I venture to observe that you are a 
most singular person; I had quite ex- 
pected to find a gentleman in your pro- 
fession imbued with its gloom, touched 
with its woe, enduring with a sigh its sad 
surroundings ; but I suppose it may be in 
your case as Watts so tenderly puts it . 

*^ * Not seldom is the soul depressed 
While tearless is the eye ; 
For there are woes that wring the breast 
When feeling's fount is dry.' 

'^ We are continually learning in this world, 
and I am really delighted to be made 
acquainted, through you, with another 
phase of industrial society ; and the more 
so that you were acquainted with my de a 



SCHEMES AND SCHEMERS. 57 

and esteemed relative, the great landowner 
of Lincolnshire." 

Mr. Brayford was just calling Jeremiah 
Sleaford, Esquire, an old fool under his 
breath, as a prelude to some flattering re- 
mark aloud, when Maclosky's private secre- 
tary announced that Mr. Maclosky Jones 
was now disengaged, and would like to see 
Mr. Sleaford and Mr. Brayford; where- 
upon these two gentlemen, after the usual 
courtesy of offering to each the precedence, 
entered the private room of the Financial 
Society, Mr. Brayford bringing up the 
rear, and executing, to the utter amaze- 
ment of the humble clerk outside, the last 
steps of a fandango so lightly that he did 
not attract the attention of Sleaford, or 
the inner clerk, who entered the financial 
sanctum with more than usual solemnity. 



58 CRUEL LONDON. 



CHAPTER V. 

"ashes to ashes." 

Autumn lay low on the Lincolnshire 
marshes. The mists of October paraded 
in ghost-like battalions to the sea. There 
was no wind, though the sedges in the 
dikes murmured to each other in saddened 
whispers. Autumn brooded over the broad 
flats, and all the land was sad and silent. 

That sombre procession, winding through 
the reeking landscape to the old church 
between the Manor Farm and Skegnes, 
might have been set down as part of the 
season's tokens of decay and death. 

It was a funeral . a black, unpicturesque 
funeral . at which the mourners walked; 
and the least interested of the bodies pre- 



"ashes to ashes." 59 

sent rested under a pall on the shoulders 
of six stalwart yeomen. 

The single bell in the square church 
tower, which, in the old days, had, with 
the now disused lantern, served as a 
warning and a beacon to mariners on the 
German Ocean, sobbed aloud. Presently 
the mists of autumn solemnly took posses- 
sion of the funereal cavalcade, and it dis- 
appeared in the distance ; but the bell still 
tolled on in dull, mournful tones that 
could be heard at Manor Farm, where 
the baked meats already awaited the 
return of the procession, when it had 
finished burying old Squire Martin, the 
hardest, shrewdest, most tyrannical and 
best respected farmer between Lincoln 
and the coast. 

It is a blessing that they build good, 
solid houses in the sombre flats of Lincoln- 
shire ; square, flat, broad-spreading houses, 
with thick walls and great wide fireplaces. 
It is a joy and a blessing on autumn days 



60 CRUEL LONDON. 

and winter nights to see the fire blaze and 
hear it crackle on the broad hearth-stone ; 
to see the red light fall upon the old oak 
settle in the inglenook ; to see the glare rest 
upon shining dish covers, upon brass sauce- 
pans, upon the polished clock case, upon 
the white-scrubbed deal dresser, and upon 
the blinking sheep - dog that dozes by 
the fender. Autumn may sigli without; 
winter may beat against the windows ; 
but there is a summer of comfort in the 
old kitchen of the Manor Farm, which 
defies wind and weather ; and the odour 
of the wood logs, as they crackle and 
smoulder in the grate, is equal to the per- 
fume of ^^ Araby the blest." 

Manor Farm was a wide old straggling 
house, built of stone, and thatched as 
closely and as well as the great wheat 
stacks that towered up over the farm 
buildings close by. Manor Farm did not 
appear to be affected in any way by the 
dark, autumn weather. Indeed, Manor 



"ashes to ashes." 61 

Farm looked more clieerful than usual. 
The blinds were all drawn up ; some of 
the bedroom windows were open, and in 
the darkness of the autumn twilight the 
fire could be seen flashing beneath the 
kitchen door. Inside they were preparing 
a feast. Mrs. Kester, the housekeeper, 
had not been so busy for years as she was 
on this day, when our history commences. 
Old GoflP, the shepherd, who had grown 
grey in Squire Martin's service, sat by the 
fire in speechless wonder at Mrs. Kester's 
activity. 

" Come, bustle about, lad," she said, as 
she placed decanters of port and sherry on 
1;he great white dresser, among sirloins 
of beef and fat hams, "thou's done 
nowt this mornin' but sit there and 
mope." 

"It's the grief, Kester, the grief," said 
GoflF, looking into the fire, and shading his 
eyes from the glare with a broad, bony, 
wrinkled hand. 



62 CRUEL LONDON. 

*^ More like it 's the drink," said Kester, 
turning her hard face upon him with a 
cynical expression about the mouth and a 
look of pity in the eyes. Kester was noted 
for her sharp sayings and her kind heart: 

^'No, it ain't that/' said Goff, reflec- 
tively, as if answering his own thoughts 
rather than the sour remark of Kester, 
whom he had seen daily since she came 
there a child to help in the dairy, and 
whose cutting tongue had been familiar to 
him as the bleating of his sheep. 

" What 's thou got to be grieved about ?" 

" Why, beant the oud measter dead, and 
beant this his funeral ? " 

" And what of that ? " said Kester, still 
busy with her meats and pies and drinks. 
" Thou 'rt r eight glad I reckon to get thy 
whack of grub and ale for once without a 
growl and a curse. Grief ! I should 
think so, when thou art goin' to change 
thy hard measter for the kindest and best 
missus that ever drew breath." 



"ashes to ashes." 63 

" But he weren't such a bad measter after 
all," said Goff. "He were a brute like, 
but he were a farmer, and that 's sayin' 
summat in these days, when shopkeepers 
from Lincoln and Burgh think they can 
come and till the soil reight off, and foine 
gentlemen do it by deputy, and think it 's 
to be done by readin' books and speechify- 
ing at meetins." 

"Well, come, that's a pretty long 
speech for thee, howsumdever,"said.Kester, 
" and thou shalt have a drink to stop thy 
mouth at any rate." 

Kester poured from a big, stone jug a 
mug of foaming ale, which Goff put 
steadily to his lips. 

While he drew breath for a second and 
last draught, he twirled the mug artistically 
round, so that the liquor became a whirl- 
pool with dancing heads at the top, and 
when the swing of the ale threatened to 
hurl the foam over the edge of the cup, 
he gulped it down and smacked his lips. 



'64 CRUEL LONDON. 

'^ Well, Squire weren't as good as his 
ale, Kester," lie said, as he handed her the 
empty mug. 

^^Good!" said Mrs. Kester. ^^ Who 
were he good to ? " 

" I dunno exactly, but I likes to speak 
well of them as is dead." 

^' Speak truth on 'em, Goff ; speak truth, 
dead or alive." 

"Yes, that's reight; but if measter 
were a bit of a tyrant like, a dammin' and 
goin' on at least thing as went wrong, why 
he were good as th' world goes to young 
measter John." 

" You think so ? " Kester replied, inter- 
rogatively. 

" He gave him a hoame and his cloathes, 
find pocket money.'* 

"And made him work like a farm 
labourer to pay for them." 

" But John were not his own kith and 
kin, Kester, and it wor only right he 
should work." 



'* ASHES TO ASHES." 65 

^ ^ John wur son of his only friend in the 
world . a friend as did Squire Martin a 
service once when he needed it, and he 
promised to bring up his friend's lad 
when father died, and he has brought him 
up wi' a vengeance.'* 

Goff argued more in a spirit of opposi- 
tion than from principle or conviction, 
unless the proverb, "Say no ill of the 
dead," was moving him to dispute with 
Kester, who liked a wrangle, and who had 
beaten the old Squire in many a battle of 
words, at the end of which she had always 
given notice to leave her place, and never 
once attempted to carry her warning to 
completion. 

" But, come now, Kester, you mun own 
he wur kind to Miss Jane." 

Goff thrust his hands into his corduroy 
breeches and looked up defiantly. 

" Kind ! I should think so. And who 
could help it ? " 

" Not me, nor nobody as I know on," 

VOL. I. F 



66 CRUEL LONDON. 

said GofE, cowed, and now resolved to 
give in. 

^^ If lie loved anything, he loved Mis 
Jane. Perhaps she took after him in his 
looks, perhaps because she tended him and 
coddled him and saved him expense, and 
kept things straight, wrote his letters, kept 
his books. And, what 's more, 'cos she 
was the only relation he had in the wide 
world as I ever heard on, except some 
stuck-up folk in London as claimed to kin- 
ship wi' him last Christmas, when they 
wrote and was sorry he was ill, they said, 
and sent that barrel of oysters as none of 
us could open, and which Squire smashed 
with the coal-hammer." 

Goff laughed at the memory of that 
famous scene with the oysters, but before 
his guffaw was well out another memory 
of the absence of its proper exercise 
troubled him. 

"Hey! Howd hard, Kester! I've 
forgot to teU thee. Talking o' them rela- 



'^ ASHES TO ASHKS." 67 

tions, that's what I ha' been trying to 
think on ole th' day. They 've come ! " 

'^ Who 's come ? " exclaimed Kester, 
smoothing her apron, and sitting down for 
the first time since breakfast. " Who 's 
come ? " 

She sat opposite Goff, and looked him 
full in the face. 

He slowly buttoned his velveteen coat 
and stood up. 

" Why, dang it, I must be soft to ha' 
forgot. Why, them Lundon folk ; they 
cum to the Crown at Burgh by Lundon 
train last night . a whole heap on 'em, wi' 
rugs and luggage enough to stock ole the 
Marsh ; and they were a-talking so fine as 
nobody could make out what they were 
a-sayin' on." \ 

At this moment there appeared on the , 

scene an apparition which startled both I 

Goff and Kester. 

1 



68 CRUEL LONDON. 



CHAPTER VI. 

TIM MALONEY INTRODUCES HIMSELF TO 

MBS. KESTER. 

The apparition was a pair of twinkling 
eyes, a shock of brown hair confined 
under a tall hat with a black cockade, a 
black coat adorned with livery buttons, 
and a smile that was as defiant as the 
flourish with which Tim Maloney took ofE 
his hat and saluted Mrs. Kester. 

" And who are you, and where do you 
come from, and what do you want?" 
was the explicit and complete inquiry of 
Mrs. Kester, as Tim advanced to the 
centre of the room. 

"I'm Tim Maloney, the confidential 
man of Jeremiah Sleaford, Esq., Fitzroy 






MALONEY INTRODUCED TO MRS. KESTER. 69 

Square, London, and I want you, if you 
are, as I conclude, Mrs. Kester, and long 
life to you." 

"Well, here I am, and what do you 
want me for with your Irish blarney ? " 

" My governor, his son the captain, 
and Mrs. Sleaford are coming to rade the 
will, and will you be so kind as to accom- 
modate them as becomes the ouldest 
relatives of the defunct ? I '11 jest help 
myself, if you Ve no objection." 

Tim laid his hand upon a decanter of 
sherry. 

"Let that wine alone, it's for your 
betters," said Kester. 

" Mi betthers ! And who may they be ? 
The illigant family I 've left at the Crown, 
the other side o' this bog-trotting marsh ? " 

Tim drank a glass of wine in spite of 
Kester's protest. 

"I've got no betthers, and why the 
divil I consent to wear this livery i^ a 
mystery to me, seein' as I'm really a 



70 CRUEL LONDON. 

citizen of the United States of America, 
and expect one day to be the President." 

^' I thought you were an Irishman," 
said Kester. 

^' Oirish, is it ? " said Tim, in an un- 
mistakable brogue. ' ' Divil a bit, Ame- 
rican ivry inch of me; I'm only over 
here for political rasons, a mission which 
will be heard of . but no matther, as you 
were sayin', the distinguished family of 
the Sleafords will be here soon, and I 
want to see their rooms, and order dinner 
for them." 

GofF looked at Kester, and the old 
sheep-dog stretched himself, and sniffed 
inquiringly at the ambassador of the Slea- 
fords. 

^^ Why, one would think Manor Farm 
and lands belonged to your mester the 
way he sends his orders," said Kester, 
looking at Tim all over, and taking the 
decanter from his hand just as he was 
about to fill for himself another glass. 



MALONEY INTRODUCED TO MRS. KESTER. 71 

^^ Be jabers, perhaps it does/' said 
Tim. 

^^ What ! " exclaimed GoflF, speaking for 
the first time; "thou'd better keep thy 
jabers for Lundon, my lad, or thou may 
get thyself into trouble." 

Kester nodded approvingly at Goff, 
and put a chump of wood on the fire 
with an emphasis that sent thousands 
of sparks flying up the chimney. 

^^ Now, look here, my friends," said 
Tim, taking a seat, and touching his hat 
thoughtfully, ^'shure an' I've not come 
here to make myself disagreeable to ye, 
but doesn't it seem likely that, my people, 
the Sleafords, bein' related to the de- 
ceased, he may have left them his estates?" 

'^ If you ask me," said Goff, ^^ I should 
think." ' 

^^ But I don't ask you," said Tim, lean- 
ing back, and watching Mrs. Kester, who 
stood eyeing him in no friendly spirit. 
^^ I don't presume to ax ye anything of 



72 CRUEL LONDON. 

the kind; it is simply my intention to 
tell ye that the Sleafords, of Fitzroy 
Square, London, have come down to hear 
the will read." 

"Then they can trapass back again 
for anything they'll get," said Kester. 

" But ye don't bear any malice to me ?" 
cried Tim, with a show of deference, 
which he suddenly found desirable in pre- 
sence of Kester 's threatening glances. 

" Malice ! When we tread on a beetle 
we don't bear any malice ; we just want 
the thiug out of the way, and that 's all," 
said Kester. 

Tim leaped from his seat, and Goff 
laughed aloud, and, hitting his thigh a 
sounding slap, said, . 

" That were a good 'un, and how did 
Mister Fli])bertigibbet like it ? " 

Tim said he hadn't the honour of Mr. 
Flipperty's . what's his name 's . acquaint-- 
ance. 

"Here, sit ye down," said Kester; 



mmmi^i^m^mmmmi^mmmmmmmimmmm^mmmmmmmmmm 



MALONEY INTR(V>UCED TO MRS. KESTER. 7S 

^ ^ Lincolnshire folk weant be inhospitable to 
a stranger, and you can't help it, I reckon, 
that yer mester 's a fool and a grab-all." 

"My sentiments, Mrs. Kester," said 
Tim, re-seating himself, and extending 
his hand towards the sherry, but only to 
make Kester put the decanter further from 
his reach. 

Kester bustled about while she talked, 
cutting thick slices of bread and cake, 
putting artful decorations of parsley on 
the ham and beef, dusting dishes, and pat- 
ting the salt down in the great silver salt- 
cellars. 

She wore a big coarse apron over a black 
merino dress, that fitted her portly figure. 
Her hair was black as night, though she 
was a woman of forty-five, and there was 
hardly a wrinkle in her healthy, olive- 
hued cheeks. Her shapely arms were 
bared to the elbows, indicating a figure 
that at one time must have been per- 
fect. 



74 CRUEL LONDON. 

She had been a widow for twenty years, 
though she might have married half the 
yeomen in the MarsH. 

^' No, she had had one good husband," 
she said, ^^ and she 'd never run the risk 
of getting a bad one, for fear she 'd be 
tempted to kill him." What she had seen 
of married life outside her own experience 
made her come to the conclusion that some 
men had had a narrow escape, because she 
could no more stand to be put upon and 
beaten by a man than she could fly, and 
she thanked Heaven she had had a good 
husband, for whom she would have laid 
down her life, just as she would now for 
Miss Jane Crosby, who was better than 
the best man that ever stepped, and de- 
served a prince for a husband if there was 
a prince' worthy of her, which she doubted 
very much. 

^^ Now, look here, young mister, what's 
your name ? " 

'' Tim Maloney," said Tim, with a fas- 



MALONEY INTRODUCED TO MRS. KESTER. 75 

cinating smile, which spread right across 
his face like a gleam of light upon a 
watery landscape. 

^^Now listen, mister Tim Maloney." 

"Yes, mam," said Tim. 

" Everybody knows how Squire Martin 
has left his property. It's all for his 
niece, Miss Jane, and it 's all to be giv to 
her as soon as folks come from funeral, 
in about an hour from this." 

Goff took his seat in front of tlie fire 
once more, and nodded assent to all Mrs. 
Kester said, while Shep blinked his ac- 
quiescence also. 

"And everybody knows what Miss 
Crosby 's goin' to do with it. She '11 
marry John Kerman and settle down in 
the old house they have helped to keep 
and make sunshine for ever since house can 
remember them.*' 

" Then will ye be after telling me 
that Mr. Sleaford is out of the will, 
and there is no chance of the young 



76 CRUEL LONDON. 

captain marrying the heiress ? " asked 
Tim. 

^^ Young fiddlestick," saidKester, scorn- 
fully ; ^' not the least. She '11 marry John 
Kerman, the son of th' owd squire's friend^ 
and fond on him, as all th' Marsh knows ; 
he 's about the only one as don't see it 
right out, the only one as don't under- 
stand his own happiness, or how well his 
bread is buttered ; though make no mis- 
take, he 's a reight manly fellow, trodden 
down a good deal by a hard master ; but 
he 's got true Lincolnshire spirit, and 
they '11 make the finest couple of any two 
in the whole county. Now you know as 
much as your betters, and if you 're not 
the fool you look, you '11 just behave your- 
self accordingly, for here comes my 
missus . get up on your feet and be re- 
spectful," 



DISCOUNTING THE lUTURE. 77 



CHAPTER VII. 

DISCOUNTING THE FUTURE. 

With the appearance of Miss Crosby in 
the kitchen, carriage wheels were heard 
coming along the drive in front of the 
house, and Tim, touching his red head, 
said, '^ Beg pardon, Miss, my people," and 
disappeared. 

Jane looked at Kester for an explana- 
tion. 

^^It be Sleafords, from London, as says 
they be relations and cum to read will/' 
said Kester, wiping her hands upon her 
apron, previous to taking it off. 

" Yes, I have heard uncle Martin men- 
tion them ; and don't you remember two 



78 CRUEL LONDON. 

years ago, young Mr. Sleaford, the cap- 
tain as lie was called, coming here to 
shoot ? " 

" Think I do remember summat of the 
sort," said Kester. 

A loud knock at the front door inter- 
rupted the conversation. Miss Crosby 
asked Mrs. Kester to go at once and show 
the visitors into the front parlour. 

Mrs. Kester silently obeyed, and Goff 
stood, hat in hand, by the inglenook. 

^^ My service to you, can I do anything? " 
he said. 

^' Yes," replied Kester, returning, '^ go 
and help yon whipper-snapper Irish fellow 
to get the luggage in, for these Sleafords 
have enough to fill best bedroom." 

Jane was not accustomed to receive 
strange company, and she felt consider- 
ably embarrassed for the moment. It was 
a sufficient tax upon her that she held the 
chief position as mourner and manager of 
the house on so solemn an occasion. She 



DISCOUNTING THE FUTURE. 79 

had been the only person in the family or 
in the parish who had felt the death of her 
uncle as a subject for sorrow ; and even 
she had found consolation in the fact that 
he was a very old man, and had lived, as 
the parson said, beyond the allotted age. 
Moreover, the duties of her new and re- 
sponsible position had prevented her from 
dwelling too much upon the melancholy 
event, and the secret whispering of her 
heart told her that there was no longer a 
barrier between her and the man she loved. 
John Kerman had had a hard life. He 
should be miserable no longer. When the 
proper period of black was over, and she 
could put on half mourning, the day might 
be fixed, and John should be master of the 
Manor Farm and all the land which uncle 
Martin had left her. All this was in Jane 
Crosby's mind, not quite as clearly as we 
have put it, but it was there, and the feel- 
ing that she had the power to compensate 
Jack for all the troubles of his life, and the 



80 CRUEL LONDON. 

happy consciousness of her deep and sin- 
cere love for him, surrounded her with an 
atmosphere that did not belong to the ge- 
neral gloom attending a funeral. Not that 
Jane was insensible of the sadness of 
death, come it soon or late, for she had 
wept bitter tears over the old man ; she 
had sat alone in the quiet room upstairs 
where he had lain ; sat alone in the moon- 
light and prayed by the side of the great 
white bed where they had placed him, 
with his poor arms humbly folded across 
his breast. But she was young, and her 
time had to come; he was old, and his 
day was over; and now he had gone. The 
room where he ha4 been, the room which 
she crept by at night, the room which 
people entered on tiptoe, the room which 
had begun to be ghostly, was once more 
open. The blinds wfere drawn, and all the 
neighbours were coming back from the 
funeral to eat and drink, in a solemn kind 
of way it is true, but the change from the 



mum 



DISCOUNTING THE FUTURE. 81 

first awful surprise of death was great, 
and occupation had lifted a load from the 
mind of the heiress, to whom everybody 
now paid an excess of respect and atten- 
tion. 

When she entered the front parlour or 
drawing-room, shefound Jeremiah Sleaford, 
Esq., Mrs. Sleaford, and Mr. Tom Sleaford, 
all attired in the most scrupulous black. 

" Miss Crosby, I presume,'' said Slea- 
ford, in a suppressed voice of sympathy 
and admiration. "We are your relations 
from town, your only relatives in the 
world, I believe, though distant . twenty- 
fourth cousins or something of that kind ; 
but no matter, blood is thicker than water. 
Permit me, Mrs. Sleaford, my wife, and 
Captain Sleaford, my son, who has, he 
tells me, had the honour of a previous intro- 
duction." 

"I think we have met once," said Jane, a 
little confused by the solemn pomposity 
of Mr. Sleaford. 

VOL. I. G 



82 CRUEL LONDON. 

3Irs. Sleaford bowed, Captain Sleaford 
bowed, Jeremiah Sleaford, Esq., continued 
to talk. 

" Melancholy event that brings us here, 
but melancholy events of this kind knit 
the living still closer together ; in this case 
the deceased, as you will find, was most 
anxious that it should be so . most anxious, 
my dear Miss Crosby. We have been to 
the church, but we did not stay to witness 
the ceremony at the grave. Mrs. Sleaford 
is peculiarly sensitive, and I thought it 
best to come on to the farm and see you, 
for naturally you may require advice at 
such a time, and as our dear deceased re- 
lative insisted upon me drawing his last 
will and testament, I am here in double 
trust as it were." 

Mr. Sleaford rubbed his hands and 
sighed. 

^' You didn't visit uncle Martin during 
his lifetime ? " Miss Crosby remarked. 

^' Not lately, not lately," said Sleaford; 



DISCOUNTING THE FUTURE. 83 

'^ always on the best of terms, but moving 
in different spheres, yet the observation is 
merited as a commentary on our present 
grief, but we could not well come without 
being invited. My son, the captain, was 
down here tlu'ee years ago, and I had 
the pleasure of carrying a gun on this 
estate before you were born, my dear . 
before you were born. And as for Tom, 
he would have only been too delighted to 
come again, for he has done nothing but 
talk of yjou ever since, the rogue." 

A politic falsehood. Jane was on a visit 
at Burgh during Tom's visit, and she only 
met him at the railway station as he was 
leaving for London. Jeremiah Sleaford, 
Esq., had often tried to make Tom talk of 
the girl, but Tom had not remembered 
much about her, and his father had always 
held forth her chief attraction to be her 
inheritance of her uncle's money. 

'^ Will you take anything ? " asked Jane 
in her homely way, seeing no other retreat 



84 CRUEL LONDON. 

from compliments that gave her no plea- 
sure, and not caring at the moment to 
enter into the question of a relationship 
to herself, however remote, seeing that this 
was the first time it had been seriously 
mentioned in her presence. 

"Thank you, no," said Mr. Sleaford. 
" If you will allow the maid to show 
me to my room, I shall feel greatly 
obliged.'* 

An inquiring look was Jane's only 
reply. 

"We propose to remain here until to- 
morrow," said Mrs. Sleaford. 

" Yes, certainly, my dear Jane," said 
Jeremiah, smiling benignantly on Miss 
Crosby ; "we may have more important 
and interesting business to settle than you 
dream of." 

" I will send Mrs. Kester to you, 
madam," said Jane ; " she will attend to 
your wants.' 

" Tnank you very much," said Sleaford, 



^ DISCOUNTING THE FUTURE. 85 

nudging Tom, who rushed to open the 
door for Jane as she left the room. 

"A fine young woman . a splendid 
young woman," said Sleaford ; " no idea, 
I expect, what is in store for her ; great 
mistake in the testator if he has not con- 
fided everything to her. Are you in love 
with her, Tom ? " 

" No," said Tom, superciliously. " She's 
a stunning girl, however." 

'' Too fat," said Mrs. Sleaford. 

"No, my dear, not at all ; she's a ripe 
specimen of Lincolnshire beauty, and I 
shall be proud to have her for a daughter- 
in-law. I expect you to fall in love with 
her at once, Tom." 

'^Anything else to oblige, governor ?" 

" Yes ; if it be possible for you to pro- 
pose to her before the will is read, do it." 

" What ! make love at a funeral ? " 

" Richard the Third did it," said Slea- 
ford pSre. " I don't see why you should 
object. Hush ! and I 'U tell you a secret 



86 CRUEL LONDON. 

. ^the secret . so that you may frame your 
conduct accordingly. Squire Martin, our 
dear deceased relation, has left the bulk of 
his property to you, Tom Sleaford, the only 
son of Jeremiah Sleaford, on one condition." 

"Yes!" said Mrs. Sleaford and Tom 
together. 

" The condition ! " exclaimed Tom, 
trembling with excitement. 

^' That you marry Jane Crosby." 

** Good Heavens ! " said Tom. 

'^ And good father," said Jeremiah. '^ I 
arranged the whole thing for you." 

'^And that was the secret," said Mrs. 
Sleaford, rising and kissing her husband 
^ upon the forehead. 

'ilt was," said Jeremiah ; ^4t was." 

For a moment they were all more or 
less overcome by this disclosure of wealth. 
Jeremiah was the first to rouse himself. 

" So now, Tom, you know your cue. 
Fall in love before tlie will is read ; pro- 
pose beforehand if you can. Lucky dog! 



DISCOUNTING THE FUTURE. 87 

If I had only had such an opening at the 
outset of my career ! " 

Mrs. Kester announced that Mr. Slea- 
ford's room was ready, whereupon Jeremiah 
and his lady, as Kester called the origin al 
owner of Fitzroy Square, left the parlo ur, 
and followed the retreating form of the 
Lincolnshire dame. 

Tom strolled into the kitchen, where 
Jane was sitting in the broad window- 
seat looking towards the church. The 
young man obeyed his father at once. He 
commenced to make love to Miss Crosby 
in presence of the funeral baked meats. 

" Glad I 'm not your first cousin, at any 
rate. Miss Jane." 

^^Why?" 

^^ Because marriage between first cousins 
is forbidden, don't you know ? " 

^' I didn't know, sir." 

"It's true ; so that if I were your first 
cousin I couldn't lay my hand and heart 
at your feet." 



88 CRUEL LONDON. 

** I suppose these are London manners, 
Mr. Sleaford ? " 

"Yes; we don't beat about the bush 
in London, and you must have a pro- 
tector ; and I say what I have in my 
heart before I know what the will con- 
tains." 

" In your what ? " 

" My heart." 

" Are you serious, Mr. Sleaford ? " 

" As the grave." 

*^ The grave, cousin ; that word ought 
to recall us to the sad business of the 
day." 

" It does. But the funeral is over by 
this time, and we cannot be always regret- 
ting the dear departed." 

"None of us pretend to regret uncle 
Martin much, and I should hardly be 
believed if I made a fuss, though in my 
heart I do sorrow over him, for he was 
kind and good to me ; and there 's always 
a certain sorrow about death, though he 



DISCOUNTING THE FUTURE. 89 

who has gone might have been unloved by 
all except me." 
. "Yes?" 

"In his latest hours he was a good^ 
true man ; and if he could have seen you 
talking like this to me he would have 
taken you by the shoulder and put you 
out at the door." 

Miss Crosby rose and walked to the 
other end of the kitchen. 

" Now I have offended you," said Tom. 
"I'm awfully sorry; it's my stupidity. 
I don't know any better, Miss Crosby; 
don't be annoyed, put it down to my 
London education; up there everything 
is a matter of business . funerals, wills, 
courtship, marriage." 

" I know nothing of London or London 
ways, so I take your word for it and for- 
give you." 

" And you don't think any the worse of 
me?" 

^' No." 



90 CRUEL LONDON. 

" Not a little bit ? " 
^^No." 

'* You won't treasure it up against me 
in the future ? " 

^^No; and I apologize for seeming 
rough in my answer. Will that do, sir?" 

As she spoke the funeral party bustled 
in. Goff handed the chairs about, Kester 
busied herself at the spacious kitchen 
dresser, Mr. Sleaford pushed his way to 
the head of the table. 

" Zancher Brown, take some cake," said 
Miss Crosby, pushing a plate towards 
Mr. Brown, a stolid, smiling farmer; 
" and, Elijah Ward, help yourself," 
she continued, placing a bottle before 
a stout Marshite, who said certainly 
he would, and hoped she found herself 
well. 

Then Mrs. Kester paid similar attentions 
to Mr. Amos Frith, James Johnson, Luke 
Giles, and half a dozen others; and 
amidst the clash of knires and forks Jane 



DISCOUNTING THE FUTURE. 91 

observed that ^ ' Our John " (as she called 
Mr. John Kerman when she didn't call 
him Jack) was not of the party. Hurry- 
ing into the best parlour, the better to 
command a full view of the country, she 
found Jack standing in the middle of the 
room. 

^^Why, John, you look troubled," she 
said. 

^'I am a bit," said the young man, 
with an expression of pain and defiance 
on his face that was quite foreign to its 
usual expression. 

*^Why what have you been doing?" 
Jane asked, looking into his wondering 
brown eyes. 

" Thinking Jane, thinkin'." 
" What, with that dear old head ? " 
Jane saw that something serious was 
the matter, and she hoped to dispel the 
trouble, whatever it might be, with 
badinage* She had always managed 
John, standing between him and uncle 



92 CRUEL LONDON. 

Martin when to do so was to risk sharing- 
in the blows which more than once the 
old man would have showered upon his 
dead friend's only son if she had not 
stood between them. 

" Well, then, I've been tryin' to think." 
"Don't do it, lad; leave me to think 
for you. Jack, as I have always done." 

"Aye, that's one o' things as I been 
tryin' to think on. It 's time as I were 
out o' leadin'-strings, Jane. I 've been 
thinkin' of owd Martin's miserly ways, 
our hard life here, so narrow-like as com- 
pared with these folks as comes from 
London, with shakin' of hands aud how- 
do-you-do, and such like pleasant ways; 
and I 've been thinkin' of our want of 
education, at least my want of it, and I 
thought . " 

" Yes, John, yes, you thought." 
"Well, now, as owd man's dead and 
buried, and left you his heiress and all the 
brass and lands, I thought as I 'd some- 



DISCOUNTING THE FUTURE. 93 

how become a free man, like other slaves 
in America as was given their liberty, and 
I thought." 

^' Yes. Well, what more did you 
think ? " 

" I don't know as I thought much 
more, for I got choked like, and came in 
here, for this idea of freedom got hold on 
me, and I seemed as if I 'd come into my 
fortune like, just as thou hast." 

'' Why, Jack, to listen to you, one 
would think you had been a prisoner 
here." 

^' And so I have," said the young man, 
quickly, pushing his brown hair from off 
his sunburnt face. 

^' A prisoner to what ? " 

" Duty." 

Jane could only look at her companion 
and friend with surprise. He had never 
talked like this before. Indeed, she 
hardly knew that he had more than two 
ideas in his head : one, a fixed resolve to 



94 CRUEL LONDON. 

be kind to her ; the other, to work as hard 
as he could from morning till night. 

" To duty, Jane. Uncle Martin, as 
you call him . and you had right . took 
us both when we were little better nor 
children ; thee because thou wast his 
sister s child, me because I was no better 
than a pauper lad, left destitute by a 
father who had once befriended Mr. 
Martin. Well, what happened ? We 
both on us repaid his kindness by harder 
work than he 'd ha' gotten out of others. 
You laboured from custom, and because 
it's your nature to sacrifice yourself. I 
did it from duty; accordin' to parson's 
text, to do your duty in that station of 
life as it 's pleased God to call you ; and 
r felt, when I wur old enough to think 
about it, that I owed something to the 
squire, and I Ve paid him back a hundred 
times over. He 's dead, Jane, and I 'm 
free." 

Jack Kerman, stalwart, broad of limb, 



DISCOUNTING THE FUTURE. 95 

and open and frank of face, flung himself 
into a chair, and swung his broad felt hat 
to and fro. 

"Jack, are you mad?" exclaimed the 
girl, her face flushed, tears in her voice. 

" No, lass," said Kerman, with a pal- 
pable effort to be calm. " He 's left you 
the property, and I 'm glad. Nobody has 
deserved it like you. He leaves me the 
world, and I 'm not sorry at that. I want 
to see the world. I want to say good- 
bye, Jane, before I go, and I can say it 
now." 

Jane Crosby staggered for a moment as 
if she were about to fall. 

The man she loved so much that she 
secretly rejoiced in her prospect of wealth 
that she might lavish it upon him rushed 
towards her. She put her hand out to 
avoid his touch. 

"It's nothing, John ; don't mind me, 
you 've only surprised me a bit, and I m 
but a woman after all, though you evi- 



96 CRUEL LONDON. 

dently think I have all the strength of a 
man. There, do as you think best, Jack. 
But out of respect to the neighbours, to 
say nothing of me, perhaps you 11 come in 
and hear the will read." 

She left the room, followed presently 
by Jack Kerman, wlio was known for his 
strength and pluck all through the north. 
He was often called Jack the silent, for 
he was a young man of few words, and 
everybody knew that he was a sort of 
slave to Squire Martin, protected by Miss 
Crosby, who made no secret of her ad- 
miration for him. The restraint of the 
master gone just as the young fellow had 
come to man's estate, John Kerman had 
communed with the soul within him, and, 
after a long and ardent struggle, his 
ambition found utterance ; not that his 
ambition was at all clear or defined ; it 
only meant freedom, the desire to go 
beyond the Lincolnshire marshes, the 
vague wish of the prisoner who wants to 



DISCOUNTING THE FUTURE. 97 

stand on the other side of the iron bars, 
for John Kerman had never been beyond 
Boston in all his life, and there, on 
market days, at the inn, he had heard 
commercial travellers talk of the great 
city of London, and of a world that 
seemed to beckon him the moment Squire 
Martin's eyes were no longer upon him, 
his voice no longer about him, like the 
slave-driver's whip. 

He blundered into the room presently 
to hear the will read, and to discover, 
amidst the general consternation of the 
assembled crowd, that uncle Martin had, 
in his latter days, prepared a surprise for 
The Marsh, which speedily became the talk 
and wonder of the whole county. 



VOL. I. H 



98 CRUEL LONDON. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

A WILL FULL OF SURPRISES. 

The fire leaped up the spacious chimney. 
Shep crouched by the ingle-nook, and 
watched the unaccustomed scene. A 
goodly company sat round the long table. 
The autumn wind had dispelled the fog, 
and you could see from the window a 
wide stretch of flat country. 

^^ Ladies and gentlemen," said Mr. 
Jabez Thompson, of the firm of Thomp- 
son & Foxwell, the local solicitors, ^^ I 
will now, with your permission, perform 
a melancholy but necessary duty." 

" What duty, sir?" asked Mr. Sleaford, 



A WILL FULL OF SURPRISKS. 99 

observing that Mr. Jabez Thompson pro- 
duced a parchment. 

** That of reading the will of the 
deceased Ephraim Martin, sir," said Mr. 
Thompson. 

" Indeed ! I am here for that purpose," 
said Mr. Sleaford, but not with that 
amount of coolness which the situation 
demanded. 

*^Yes, I expected you were here with 
some intention of the kind ; the defunct 
led me to infer that you would be here, 
and he resisted my wish to inform you of 
the date of his latest will and testament. 
He discovered the mistake you had made 
only a month ago, when he took it into 
his head to call at the bank and read the 
will afresh." 

Mr. Jeremiah Sleaford turned pale, and 
looked anxiously at Mr. Thompson. 

''There is no necessity for alarm, Mr. 
Sleaford, rest assured ; my old client was 
so rejoiced to find he had time to rectify 



100 CRUEL LONDON. 

the error, that he desired to have the 
matter rest as concerning no one but 
ourselves." 

*^ Thank you," said Jeremiah. " Will 
you permit me to look at your docu- 
ment for a moment? I am desirous 
that this meeting should be perfectly 
harmonious." 

Jabez Thompson handed the will to Mr. 
Sleaford, who scanned it quickly, and 
noticing that the date was indeed recent, 
and the signature of the testator and 
witnesses evidently in proper order, he 
gave it back to the local solicitor. 

" May I say a word in explanation ? " 

" Certainly, if you please." 

'^ Ladies and gentlemen," said Mr. 
Jeremiah Sleaford, "pardon this little 
delay. The truth is, the defunct made a 
will several years ago, which I expected 
was his last. Since then it appears he 
has made another, and I therefore with- 
draw my pretensions in favour of the 



A WILL FULL OF SURPRISES. 101 

latest will and the deceased's most recent 
solicitor." 

A hum of approval went round the 
table at the frank, honest way in which 
Mr. Sleaford gave in to Mr. Thompson. 
Tom and his mother, however, could 
see that something had gone seriously 
wrong in regard to the arrangements 
which Jeremiah Sleaford, Esquire, had 
been making on the strength of Squire 
Martin's will. At the same time they 
were somewhat relieved when they ^ saw 
the colour come back to Jeremiah's cheeks, 
and felt that confidence was restored, in 
the tone of his voice. Jeremiah alone 
appreciated the importance of Jabez 
Thompson's assurance, that '^ there was 
no necessity for alarm." The head 
of the house of Sleaford felt the full 
force of the escape which the rival 
lawyer's words implied, and for a 
moment he was prepared to go back 
to London contentedly, without being 



102 CRUEL LONDON. 

one penny the richer by Squire Martin's 
death. 

"I, Ephraim Martin," began Mr. 
Thompson, " of Manor Farm, The Marsh, 
in the county of Lincoln, do hereby revoke 
all wills, codicils, and other testamentary 
dispositions heretofore made by me, and 
do declare this to be my last will and 
testament." 

" Are the witnesses alive, sir ? " asked 
Mr. Sleaford, unwilling, even in the pre- 
sence of a possible exposure of his conduct, 
to lose all control over the proceedings. 

" They are. Kester Shaw and William 
Goff are the witnesses." 

'^ They look alive," said Tom, following 
the index finger of Mr. Thompson, as it 
pointed in the direction of the two defunct's 
head servants. 

" It must be a great consolation to our 
dear cousin to know they are alive," said 
Mrs. Sleaford, mildly. 

" Certainly, yes, my dear,'' said Jeremiah. 



A WILL FULL OP SURPRISES. 103 

" If there are no more questions to be 
asked," said Mr. Thompson, looking round 
deprecatingly, "I would again proceed to 
state that . " 

" I beg pardon, sir. It may be as well 
to be informed whether there are any 
surviving relatives of the deceased who 
are not present ? " 

^* All the surviving relatives are present, 
Mr. SleaEord." 

"Thank you; it is always awkward 
when some surviving relative turns up and 
makes claims afterwards, like Enoch Ar- 
den," observed Mr. Sleaford, sighing, 

" Or Robinson Crusoe," said Tom. 

" I am not aware that Robinson Crusoe 
ever claimed anything under a will. Your 
observation is an unnecessary interruption. 
Pray proceed, Mr. Thompson." 

Mr. Sleaford observed an expression of 
annoyance in the local solicitor's eye that 
warned him to be careful, and although a 
score of other questions suggested them- 



104 CRUEL LONDON. 

selves, he waved his hand for silence, 
and the reading of the will went on. 
A thousand pounds each were left to 
Kester and Goff ; a few thousand pounds 
were bequeathed to the county hospital ; 
small legacies were distributed among 
neighbours; and then the will recited 
that Jeremiah Sleaf ord was quite forgiven 
the mistake he had made in drawing a 
former will, '' the said Ephraim, feeling 
that he has not long to live, and desiring to 
do an act of special grace, in the hope of 
wiping out some of the brutalities of an 
embittered life, not only forgives his 
distant relative, Jeremiah Sleaford, but 
bequeaths to the said Jeremiah, his 
heirs, executors, and assigns, the sum of 
ten thousand pounds, that he may have 
no more excuse to make mistakes in wills 
or other documents." 

" Heaven rest his soul ! " exclaimed 
Jeremiah Sleaford. " He was a good and 
just man." 



A WILL FULL OF SURPRISES. 105 

With which remark the head of the- 
household of Fitzroy Square buried his^ 
face in his hands to hide his emotion; 
for he had, by a fraudulent artifice, in- 
serted the name of his own son in the 
place of that of John Kerman, the im- 
portance of which change the reader will 
presently understand. The testator had 
not prosecuted or exposed him on making 
this discovery, but had kept his wicked 
secret and left him ten thousand pounds, 
without which aid at this present moment 
Jeremiah Sleaf ord would have been ruined 
for the third time. 

No one at the table understood Mr. 
Sleaford's trouble except the local soli- 
citor, who only paused for a moment in 
his recitation of the will. 

" To my dear niece, Jane Crosby," he 
continued, " I bequeath the black box 
marked with my initials, and now in the 
custody of my solicitor, Jabez Thompson." 

"Eh, dear, what's in it?" exclaimed 



106 CRUEL LONDON. 

Mrs. Kester, speaking for the first 
time. 

"Here is the key. Miss Crosby can 
open it if she likes." 

Mrs. Kester took the key. 

" Shall I open it, Miss Jane ? " 

" If you please." 

The box was easily opened. Every 
eye was strained towards it. Even Mr. 
Sleaford looked up. 

"A bunch of owd flowers!" said Kester, 
in amazement, turning the box upside 
down, and kicking a withered bouquet of 
violets, which Jane picked up. 

"I gave them to Uncle Martin five 
years ago, on his birthday, with a knife 
that had a corkscrew in it," she said. 

Mr. Sleaford rose solemnly and tapped 
the box with his gold-headed pencil-case. 

"No false bottom, no secret drawers; 
no, evidently an empty box, a very empty 
box. What a strange legacy," he said, 
resuming his seat. 



A WILL FULL OF SURPRISES. 107 

^'Then, who's got the brass?" ex- 
claimed Mr. Shaw, who found his tongue 
now for the first time during the business. 

'^ Listen ; I have nearly finished," said 
Mr. Thompson. *^ And I give, devise, 
and bequeath all the other real and per- 
sonal estate of which I shall be possessed 
or entitled at the time of my decease, 
unto John Kerman . ' 

The remaining technicalities of the will 
went for nothing ; nobody heard them ; 
the whole company stood upon its feet 
with astonishment when Jack Kerman 
was declared to be Squire Martin's heir. 

'^ Miss Crosby retains possession of the 
Manor Farm for three years," said Mr. 
Thompson, when the excitement had 
somewhat subsided; ^^ she cannot be dis- 
turbed in any way until that period is 
concluded; and this, Mr. Kerman, is the 
only condition attached to the bequest." 

In the will which uncle Martin had 
previously made, he had stipulated for the 



108 CRUEL LONDON. 

maiTiage of Kerman to liis niece, each to 
enjoy the revenue of the estate, in pro- 
portion, for three years, at the end of 
which all the property to revert to Jg.ne 
Crosby, unless she had with her own free 
consent married Kcmian ; the old man 
having been long convinced that she had 
made up her mind to that match and no 
other ; and judging, from the character of 
Jack's father rather than from any exhi- 
bition of individuality in the son, that 
a dogged pride might prevent him 
from accepting wealth at the hands of 
his wife. Mr. Sleaford had dextrously 
inserted his own son's name in the place 
of Kerman's, and had contrived to shuffle 
that spurious will under Martin's pen for 
signature ; this will had lain at the bank, 
as arranged, until recently, when the 
squire, being very unwell, thought he 
would ride over to Lincoln and read the 
document, with a view to some changes 
which he had had in his mind to make, 



A WILL FULL OF SURPRISES. 109 

and which changes were to some extent 
indicated in that last conversation with 
his niece. It was then that he discovered 
Mr. Jeremiah Sleaford's sharp practice, 
which he had forgiven with a Quixotic 
generosity that surprised Mr. Jabez 
Thompson, who knew little or nothing of 
the squire's early troubles. The old man, 
when he saw what Sleaford had done, 
remembered his own temptations in a 
serious monetary difficulty, relieved by 
timely aid by Jack Kerman's father. 
Under the influence of those early days, 
brought into strong relief by the presenti- 
ment that his last harvest home was at 
an end, he made that last will, which 
soon became the talk of the county. 

Before Mr. Jabez Thompson left the 
house after reading the will, Jeremiah 
Sleaford learnt from him that no other 
reference could or would be made to the 
document in which the mistake had been 
made. 



110 CRUEL LONDON. 

^^ Indeed," said the local Bolicitor, " I 
have forgotten the error, whatever it was ; 
it is no business of mine to remember it, 
and the deceased did not enter into any 
minute explanation of it. If the defunct 
was content to take no further notice of 
the matter than to covdr it with a legacy 
of ten thousand pounds, and you are 
satisfied, there is an end of the business . 
so far as I am concerned, at all events." 

Mr. Sleaford assured his professional 
colleague that the mistake was not so 
serious as miglit have at first appeared, 
but at the same time nothing could exceed 
the noble, tlie almost Utopian way in 
which his relation, Ephraim Martin, had 
met it. And so for the present, the two 
gentlemen parted, Sleaford beside him- 
self with joy at his wonderful escape, 
and thinking at the moment that ho 
would never again run the risk attending 
a fishy transaction. 

^^ At the same time," he said, as if his 



A WILL FULL OF SURPRISES. Ill 

son Tom had read his thought, ^Uhere is 
no harm in our capturing Mr. Kerman." 

'' Not at all," said Tom. ^^ He 's a jolly 
fellow ; uncouth, perhaps, and his dialect 
is thick ; but he can be cured of that." 

^^ He has enough money to cure him of 
anything," said Mr. Sleaford. 

^' Am I to go in for Miss Crosby now ? " 
asked Tom. ^^ An old box and a bunch of 
flowers don't represent much in the city." 

^^ No, Tom, no," said Sleaford ; '^ though 
she's a deuced fine girl for all that, and 
I'm sorry for her. Extraordinary man, 
old Martin . very extraordinary. Be- 
friends his enemies, cuts off his dearest 
friend with an empty box." 

*' Yes, by Jove! it's the rummest go 
out." 

'^Ask Mr. Kerman to come to town 
with us. It will be a change for him. You 
can show him London. We '11 make him 
a director of the Cemetery Board ; it will 
be doing him a kindness." 



112 CRUEL LONDON. 

" All right : I '11 take him to my tailor's 
and rig him out, put him through as the 
county gentleman, the fine old English 
yeoman . 1 11 take care of him." 

" We will all take care of him, Tom ; it 
is our duty/' 

^' Our duty shall be done." 

" I am in earnest, Tom . in sober ear- 
nest." 

'' So am I." 

^^ If your mother had a head for business, 
she 'd marry him to Emily." 

*^Not while Fred Tavener is above 
ground." 

^^ Confound Tavener! he's no good . a 
butterfly . a fellow who talks of nothing 
but good pictures, and does nothing but 
paint bad ones." 

^^ Let the yeoman have Patty." 

*^ If he will, by all means; talk to your 
mother about it. I hope she has ordered 
some good clothes for the child. Patty is 
never sufficiently well dressed." 



A WILL FULL OF SURPRISES. 113 

^* Here's mother; talk to her yourself, 
governor, while I go and engineer Mr. 
Kerman." 

At that moment the miexpected heir 
was talking to the lady whom everybody 
had settled upon as the heiress. 

"I'm sorrythathe did it, lass; I'msorry.'^ 

" I 'm glad," said Jane." 

" There 's one thing I 'm glad about. 1 
towd you as I meant to go away before I 
knowed what was goin' to happen." 

" You did, John." 

" I said as I meant to see the world; I 
said as I felt like a slave as had just got 
his freedom." 

" Yes, that is true, John." 

" And you won't think now as money is 
takin' me away ; you won't think meanly 
of me as you might ha' done if you hadn't 
known aforehand that I was goin' when I 
only expected to go empty-handed?" 

" I have never thought meanly of you, 
and I 'm not going to begin now." 

VOL. . I 



114 CRUEL LONDON. 

^^ Grive me thy hand on that, lass." 

Jane held out her hand. The young^ 
man pressed it heartily. 

^^I*m not quite my sen yet/' he said^ 
^^but nowt that could ha' happened would 
have altered what I 'd made up my mind 
to do . to see the world, to get out beyond 
this country as I ha' suffered in and 
laboured in ; to see London, and to be 
summat more than a farm labourer." 

*^ You have always been more than that." 

'' You 've thought so, perhaps, but no- 
body else has." 

^^It was not enough for mo to think so. 
No, lad, thou 'rt right I make no doubt ; 
go thy own ways . Uncle Martin is best 
judge. I hope tlioult like the world, and 
be happy in thy freedom." 

A quick and peremptory knock at the 
door interrupted the conversation. 

'' Mr. Tom Slcaford is waiting to speak 
to you, sir." 

^^I'm coming, tell him. Good-bye for 



A WILL FULL OF SURPRISES. 116 

the present, Jane, I 'm going to London 
in the morning." 

^^ Good-bye, Jack, good-bye!" 
The girl pressed her hand upon her 
breast as the door closed and left her 
alon6. It was well for her that tears 
came to her relief. While she sat rocking 
herself to and fro, and sobbing as if her 
heart were breaking, Mr. John Kerman 
was listening to Tom Sleaford's plans for 
showing him London. 

'^ My dear sir," said uncle Martin's 
heir, *^you couldn't do me a greater 
favour. I meant to go to London on my 
own hook ; but to go with you . a gentle- 
man as knows all about it . why it 's the 
first time that I've thought what money 
can do, apd how useful it is ; because you 
wouldn't have asked Jack Kerman, farm 
labourer, to go wi' you." 

^^ I would, indeed. I like you!" said 
Tom. ^'There's no humbug about 
me." 



116 CRUEL LONDON. 

*^ Well, never mind; I'm right glad to 
he one of jrour company to London, and if 
I'm rough, you mun look ower it; I'm 
nowt but a slave that's just gotten his 
liberty." 



END OF BOOK I. 



book: II. 



BOOK II. 



CHAPTER I. 

MR. JOHN KERMAN COMMENCES HIS LONDON 

EDUCATION. 

What a wonderful world it was, this 
London of which Jack Kerman had heard 
so much ! 

The streets were literally paved with 
gold. They were ablaze with shops full 
of wonders of wealth. How splendid it 
is to be rich ! Aladdin did not enjoy his 
newly-discovered power more than Squire 
Kerman did. The Sleafords called him 
Sqidre . ^the Lincolnshire Squire. 

How lucky to have such friends as the 
Sleafords! What a genial, hearty good 



120 CRUEL LONDON. 

fellow Jeremiah Sleaford was, with hi 
breezy manner and his business-like 
habits ! And Emily, she appeared to the 
Squire to be the perfection of a lady. 
Patty was a gentle, doll-like girl, who 
seemed to him bom to be taken care of 
and petted. Mrs. Sleaford was a dear old 
lady. As for Tim Maloney, he was a jewel ; 
and nothing had delighted the young 
Squire more than Sleaford's ready kind- 
ness in transferring Tim's services to him. 
But the whole conduct of the Sleafords 
was goodness itself. He would never for- 
get it; and no sacrifice was sufficient to 
demonstrate his gratitude. 

They had insisted that he should make 
his home at Fitzroy Square. He had his 
own rooms, apart from the family, so that 
he was perfectly free to come and go as he 
pleased. Old Sleaford would have per- 
sisted in his remaining his guest for good, 
without a thought of payment, but Kerman 
was not a sensitive man, and he had no 



KERMAN COMMENCES HIS EDUCATION. 121 

compunction about oflFering to pay for his 
board and lodging. Mr. Sleaford had, 
therefore, consented, under great pressure, 
that his wife should receive a quarterly- 
cheque to cover the cost of Mr. Kerman's 
entertainment. There never was a more 
imited family. The occasion of the Martin 
legacy, and the fortunate launching of the 
Cemetery Company had made the Fitzroy 
mansion happy. The domestic wheels 
ran along gaily. Smith Brothers were 
ostentatiously paid the moment they sent 
in their bill. Emily rarely lost her 
temper now. Patty was no longer cynicaL 
Mrs. Sleaford gave "At Homes." They 
drove and rode in the Park. Tom had a 
lucrative position in an Asphalte Paving 
Company in the city. He had chambers 
in Regent Street, so that Kerman could 
enjoy the exclusive services of Tim 
Maloney. This was an arrangement 
effected by Tom before he left Manor 
Farm. He had long desired a separate 



122 CBUEL LONDON. 

establishment, and it was agreed between 
father and son that Tom, at large on his 
own account, would be likely to impress 
the Squire more favourably than Tom at 
home, living on his family. 

All this was very pleasant. Despite his 
.dialect and his rough ways, the Squire 
found himself the centre of a conspiracy 
to please him. He did not dream that this 
was part of a broader conspiracy to cap- 
ture him body and soul. 

^^He's fair game," Mr. Sleaford had 
said to his son. ^* We must get him into 
our companies, and make the most of him. 
It 's all in his own interest. He had much 
better get twenty per cent, for his money 
ihan five." 

^^You are right, governor," Tom had 
replied ; ^^ he 's the biggest fish we Ve 
hooked for some time." 

^^ Don't speak of him in that cold- 
blooded way, Tom. Regard him as a 
brother. You have a right to consider 



KERMAN COMMENCES HIS EDUCATION. 1 23 

him in that light ; but for him you would 
have been old Martin's heir." 

" Make him useful," Jeremiah had said 

to Mrs. Sleaford. *^ Tom will take him to 

 

his tailor's and have him properly dressed. 
He will look a county gentleman to per- 
fection. Take him about, or let him take 
you about ; show him to our friends, and 
exhibit him to the tradespeopje . in short, 
make him useful." 

" I will, Jeremiah, dear, I will," said 
the faded wife of his bosom, dim dreams 
of splendour flitting through her mild con- 
stitution. 

*' And marry him to Emily or Patty, 
that is your programme. If Emily can 
be got to throw over that painter fellow, 
let Emily have him ; if not, he must marry 
Patty." 

" Yes, certainly love," said Mrs. Slea- 
ford. 

Mr. Kerman could not have fallen into 
better hands for varnishing. Emily, with- 



124 CRUEL LONDON. 

out seeming to do it, began promptly to 
cure him of his dialect. Patty instructed 
him in ices and gloves. Mrs. Sleaford 
went shopping with him. Old Sleaford 
showed him the City, its banks, its finan- 
cial chambers, its thousand and one ways 
of making money. Tom introduced him 
to the best cigar store, the pleasantest bar, 
the finest restaurant, the fastest night- 
house, and the most accommodating 
banker. The clothes, sticks, whips, hats, 
rings, pins, and other trifles that poured 
into Fitzroy Square soon rendered it 
necessary that an additional room should 
be added to the young Squire's apartments. 
In less than a month he was one of the 
best-dressed men in London. Mr. Snip 
had shown a fine taste in the decoration of 
the county gentleman. The make-up was 
perfect. A theatrical costumier could not 
have turned John Kerman out more cha- 
racteristically. A son of the soil, Snip 
had dressed him up to the part of a 



KERMAN COMMENCES HIS EDUCATION. 125 

county gentleman, and he looked like a 
young lord who was too fond of horses and 
hunting, and the other pastimes of a lord of 
hroad acres. Kerman was handsome. He 
had a ruddy fair complexion, bright grey 
eyes, brown curly hair, a broad manly 
chest, and there was a masculine swing in 
his gait. His favourite suit was black and 
white checked trousers, small in pattern, 
and rather tight upon the leg; a black 
shooting coat, a white-spotted blue neck- 
tie, and a tall hat. It was surprising how 
quickly he fell into the habit of his new 
clothes and his new condition. There was 
nobody to laugh at him. London did not 
know of his humble origin. In the Marsh, 
they would have laughed at the grub with 
butterflies' wings. They would have 
roughly criticized his hat, his coat, and 
his clean linen. The Sleafords ignored 
the past altogether. They never seemed 
to remember that Jack had been any other 
than a fine gentleman. 



126 CRUEL LONDON, 

As for London, it was delighted with the 
newcomer. He was rich. What did it 
matter that he pronounced his vowels full 
and round. London liked it. London 
was charmed with the north-country 
dialect. A liberal order given in the 
Lincolnshire vernacular had a special 
grace of its own. How kind everybody 
was ! No heir just come into his heritage 
had ever enjoyed possession more than Mr. 
John Kerman. No stories he had heard 
of London came up to the reality. Milk 
and honey ! . it was a land flowing with 
champagne, musical with fun and frolic. 
It was a world of delight, a city of 
theatres, clubs, hotels, music halls, 
smoking saloons, and beautiful women. 
If he had only obtained his first experi- 
ence of it as Jack Kerman, the ambitious 
farm labourer bent on seeing the world 
and winning his own independence in it, 
that would have opened his eyes,, and 
enabled him when he liad earned the 



KEEMAN COMMENCES HIS EDUCATION. 127 

right to have luxurious tastes to. discover 
a real basis of pleasure. As it was, he 
was a fish who never suspected a hook or 
an artificial bait ; a bird innocent of 
springs and lime ; a man with his heart 
on -his sleeve, and his purse unlocked and 
wide open. 

No wonder the cruel city was delighted 
with Mr. John Kerman. It set traps for 
him at all points. It smiled and cheated 
him. It conspired against him in every 
way. It traded on his generosity ; it 
coined his tenderest feelings; it turned 
his vanity to account ; it made money out 
of his pride ; it flattered him and robbed 
him ; it captured his senses, and plundered 
him even while he slept. It smiled on 
him with the wiles of a harlot, and it 
fleeced him as heartlessly. But it was all 
brightness and sunshine and gaiety to 
the young Squire, just come into his title, 
his money, and his new clothes. He 
never suspected the cruel, stony-hearted 



128 CRUEL LONDON. 

jade, London, wlien she caressed him and 
vowed he had won her heart, and that she 
loved him. 

" Will you come to the Footlights Club 
to-night," said Tom, after a little dinner 
at the Soho cafe^ which had suddenly 
become famous for its special French cwmVie. 

** Yes, anywhere you like," said the 
squire, ^^only I hope it's English; I 
doan't care much for these French kick- 
shaws and things." 

"Oh, it's English enough, the Foot- 
lights ; a dramatic and literary club. I 
gave a fellow a fiver to write me a farce 
and put my name on it just to admit me. 
You have to do something of that sort, 
you know ; queer dogs ! I got in through 
a man who wiitcs leaders on a financial 
paper ; he gave us a lift in cemeteries and 
asphaltes." 

"Ah, I see. You know a sight of rum 
spots and folks," said the Squire. 

" Yes, I 've seen a thing or two, and so 



^ 



KERMAN COMMENCES HIS EDUCATION. 129 

shall you, Jack, my boy, before I 've done 
with you." 

Twelve o'clock was the time when the 
Footlights began to be lively. 

It was situated down one of those long 
Strand passages which, in the old days, 
looked upon the river. They had almost 
to grope their way along the narrow 
descent, amidst miscellaneous odours that 
would not have disgraced Cologne. 
Presently they entered another passage, 
climbed up an ill-lighted staircase, and 
found themselves in the murky quarters of 
the Footlights. The room was neither 
spacious nor imposing. It was full of 
people and full of smoke. 

" All celebrated in their way," said 
Tom. ^^Not exactly shining lights in 
their several professions, but distinguished 
once, and likely to be to the fore again at 
some future day." 

The Squire took a seat beside the pre- 
sident, a pale, intellectual looking young 

VOL. I. K 



130 CRUEL LONDON. 

man, who was supposed to be the most 
humorous of the clever writers on the 
Cricket^ a satirical journal which kept 
dramatic art in its proper groove, and 
influenced the destinies of political parties 
at St. Stephen's. 

** The melancholy looking gentleman in 
paper collars, is one of the comic artists of 
the Cricket J ^ whispered Tom ; " and that 
noisy fellow who is talking while he eats, 
is the critic of the Pandemonium^ a jolly 
fellow, a member of bigger clubs than 
this, but he likes the Footlights, it's so 
genial and homely." 

Some of the Footlighters were eating 
tripe and onions; others were devouring 
chops; some were smoking pipes, some 
cigars. Beer and spirits were the popular 
drinks. Everybody was talking to every- 
body else. Presently Mr. Brayford ap- 
peared upon the scene. 

" Wayho ! Hurrah ! " shouted the entire 
club. "WayhoforBrayford! TheChaunt!" 



KERMAN COMMENCES HIS EDUCATION. 131 

^^Waylio," said Tom, ^^is the watch- 
word of the club. You know, Brayford. 
The Chaunt is the club song and chorus." 

While Tom was speaking the club, as 
if in one voice, sang the refrain of ^^ Old 
Brown's Daughter," in which, as one 
man, the club declared that old Brown's 
daughter was a proper sort of girl. They 
wished they 'd been a lord mayor, a mar- 
quis, or an earl, then blow them if they 
wouldn't have married old Brown's girl. 

Mr. Brayford was then conducted by 
the pale, intellectual president to a piano 
but dimly visible through the smoke in an 
obscure comer of the room, whereupon he 
proceeded in the gentlest way to har- 
monize that comical chaunt. The music- 
hall poet who gave " Old Brown's 
Daughter" to the world had contrived 
to wed the words to a delicious melody, 
which Mr. Brayford modulated and varie- 
gated with a quaint, humorous instru- 
mentation that was as novel as it was 



132 CRUEL LONDON. 

fascinating. The lament over the impos- 
sibility, &c., of securing the affections of 
old Brown's daughter entered various 
phases. Now it would be sad and wail- 
ing in a minor key, soft, plaintive, 
tender ; then it would grow defiant in its 
praises of her ; and anon, in loud, thun- 
dering tones, hammered out of a major 
key, it would declaim the club's passionate 
love and its final declaration of its marital 
intentions in the event of its attaining to 
a sufficient dignity of title and wealth. 

When Mr. Brayford rose from the 
piano everybody wanted to know where 
he had been, and what he thought of him- 
self for leaving the club a whole week 
without minstrelsy. 

*^ He is called the aged minstrel of the 
club," whispered Tom, " though he isn't 
forty for that matter.'' 

*^But he's the chap that came down 
about the tombstone ? " 

"Of course he is." 



KER^iAN COMMENCES HIS EDUCATION, 133 

^^ What a rum go." 

**He is the managing director of our 
Blackheath Cemetery Company." 

^* You don't say so." 

^^ And, what 's more, he writes comic 
songs and farces, and is the j oiliest and 
best fellow out. Are you not, old boy?" 

Brayford came up as Tom was speak- 
ing. 

^' Am I not what?" the young-old man 
asked, in a bland, amiable voice. 

^^ An old scoundrel." 

^^ Yes, of course I am." 

^^ Then let me introduce a young scoun- 
drel to you . Squire Kerman." 

^^Why, good gracious! Mr. Kerman, 
how do you do? Welcome to London, 
sir ! Welcome to the great city ! And I 
hope it 11 treat you well. You Ve got to 
keep your weather eye open up here, sir, 
Mr. Sleaf ord will tell you that ; he knows, 
. none better, none better. Welcome to 
the Footlights ! " 



134 CRUEL LONDON. 

*^ Thank you, Mr. Brayford ; you 're 
very good." 

" Have you introduced Mr. Kerman to 
the boys, sir?" 

^^No." 

^^ Will you permit me ?" 

*^ By all means." 

Whereupon Mr. Brayford commenced a 
tour of the club ; and before the night was 
over Squire Kerman made the acquaint- 
ance of a gentleman destined to become 
his agent in transactions of importance 
in the destinies of Fitzroy Square and 
Manor Farm. 



THE FOOTLIGHTS AND THE HABDWICK. 135 



CHAPTER II. 

THE FOOTLIGHTS AND THE HARDWICK. 

The tour of the Footlights Club illustrated 
Mr. Brayford's varied experience. He 
introduced the Squire right and left with 
a peculiar and special frankness. 

" Mr. Snallie . Mr. Kerman, a friend 
of Mr. Sleaford's. If Snallie wants to 
borrow a fiver let him have it; you'll 
get off cheap." 

' ^ Brayf ord. Oh, fie ! " exclaimed Snallie, 
an old gentleman, with a curl on each side 
of his face, and a pair of long hands in a 
pair of still longer gloves. 

^^ Mr. Macjew . Mr. Kerman, a friend 
of Mr. Sleaford's, from Lincolnshire." 



136 CRUEL LONDON. 

" How are you, sir ? Proud to meet 
any friend of Sleaford's/' 

" If Macjew wants you to put a thou- 
sand or two into his new City paper^ 
don't.'^ 

'* Bad advice, believe me," responds 
Macjew, a cleanly-shaven, well-dressed 
gentleman. ^^ A thousand in my new 
City paper would pay you in two years 
five hundred per annum." 

*^ Mr. Brayford is joking, I expect, in 
warning me," said Kerman, anxious to be 
polite. 

^' Quite so," said Brayford. ^^ Hero is 
another gentleman against whom I must 
warn you. Mr. Slowcalm, allow me to 
present to you Mr. Kerman, a county 
gentleman who is doing London, but who 
isn't to be done himself, mind you." 

Slowcalm smiled. 

*^ How do you do, Mr. Kerman ? Bray- 
ford will have his little joke, and it always 
is a little joke." 



THE FOOTLIGHTS AND THE HARDWICK. 137 

" He '11 want you to put a few hundreds 
into a travelling dramatic company," said 
Brayford, as they passed on. *' Dont ; 
Slowcalm is a very nice fellow, but the 
biggest humbug out. We have some jolly 
good fellows in the Footlights, and we 
have also some shabby ones ; we have 
some great good men, and some little bad 
'uns, Mr. Kerman, and you must mind 
your eye." 

Brayford's earnest jesting did not re- 
strain Snallie, Macjew, nnd Slowcalm from 
commencing excavations for Kerman. 
They began to dig pitfalls for him at once. 
Even Sleaford's careful management did 
not prevent Slowcalm from talking to Ker- 
man of the delights of theatrical life, and 
more particularly of the pleasure of 
travelling in the country with an opera- 
houffe troupe . such good company, . such 
delightful dinners, and all the while 
making lots of money. When Kerman 
said he had had enough of the country^ 



138 CRUEL LONDON. 

Slowcalm said Yes, just so ; no doubt the 
country was not equal to London; the 
metropolis was, of course, the place ; all the 
world came to London; an opSrorhouffe 
company at a West End theatre, that was 
the thing; fie had been in management 
twenty years, and had sung all the bari- 
tone music in the leading opera ; and, as 
for money, he made 20,000/. out of 
^ Venice the Beautiful,' ^ The Great 
Mogul,' and *The Delights of Madagas- 
car.' Would he come and see him at his 
little place ? Yes, John Kerman would. 
He was pleased to hear Slowcalm talk. It 
seemed as if he were speaking fairy tales 
or romance, he didn't know what, and 
there was a dazzling confusion about it 
all that gave Jack a vague sensation of 
delight. 

'^ Now, look here, Jack my boy," said 
Tom, as they left The Footlights ; " you 
must be careful, you know, about these 
fellows. It isn't that they're dishonest, 



THE FOOTLIGHTS AND THE HARDWICK, 139 

they are over sanguine ; they believe when 
they borrow your money that they are 
going to pay it back; they feel certain 
when they get you into a little spec that 
you are going to make money by it ; 
there is no harm in your lending a trifle, 
but when you Ve parted with it, think no 
more about it. If you don't altogether 
rely on my advice, ask Brayford, he '11 
tell you ; he 's been through the mill, and 
he is as odd and Quixotic a chap as there is 
going." 

Tom did not mind the boys having some 
of the crumbs that dropped between him- 
self and the rich man ; but he considered 
the Squire his own particular and private 
preserve, over which nobody was to shoot 
without his licence and permission. 
' ^^ All right, Tom. Thou 'rt full of know- 
ledge o' these things ; but it does seem a 
pity that Mr. Siowcalm should be wasting 
his time. And what a voice he has got ! 
Why, he sang that song, ^ The Englishman,' 



140 CRUEL LONDON. 

well. I Vo never heard anything sung so 
well, and a chap like that ought to be 
helped." 

" Well, yes, he 's not a bad sort. Slow- 
calm ; but no matter how much money he 
makes, he always loses it. However, I Ve 
given you the tip. Jack . be cautious, my 
boy. Don't go into any big thing without 
me. If you want to speculate I'll show you 
the way." 

^^ Speculate ! " said Kerman, stopping his 
friend under a lamp-post. " Yes, I do 
mean to speculate, Mr. Tom Slcaford, but 
not in that way . no ; what my mind is set 
on, if I must speculate, is a bit of racin'. 
That 's the thing, lad, for mo. I always 
used to have a shillin' or two on Lincoln 
Handicap, St. Leger, and Derby, and I 
know summat about horses ; 1 'd like to buy 
a horse and ride him myself at a steeple- 
chase . eh, lad ! that's the time of day." 

<^ But think of the risk." 

^^ Blow the risk ! " said the Squire. 



THE FOOTLIGHTS AND THE HAEDWICK. 141 

" Jack, you 're on." 

"On what?" 

" YouVe had one glass too many." 

" What do you mean ? " 

" What I say." 

. "That I am drunk?" 
 

"No, not exactly that." 

" If any man says I am drunk, he's a . " 

" No, no," said Tom, taking the Squire's 
arm ; " nothing of the kind. Come along, 
old boy ; we '11 go and put a hundred on 
the Leger.'' . 

" Right," said Kerman, who by this 
time had begun to stagger in his gait. 

" I don't know much about racing, but 
I 'm willing to learn ; you shall teach 
me." 

" Aye, that 's it, I '11 teach thee. Thou 's 
gotten to make me a fine gentleman, and 
I '11 show thee how to know a horse when 
thou sees one." 

" Here we are, then. We '11 just inquire 
for Mr. Roper, and he '11 put us in the right 



142 CRUEL LONDON. 

way," said Tom, pausing on the steps of 
the Hardwick Club, a quiet-looking estab- 
lishment off the Strand, in the neighbour- 
hood of Covent Garden. 

^^ Yes," the porter said, ^^ Mr. Roper is 
in." 

. 

'' Roper 's a friend of the governor's ; a 
clever young fellow . combines racing with 

the law. He is one of our consulting soli- 
citors in the Asphalte Company. This is 
his favourite club." 

' ^ Mr. Sleaf ord, you 're a right down 
chap," said the Squire, who was soon 
shaking hands with Mr. Roper, a handsome 
well-dressed young man, with the manners 
of a courtier. 

'^ Proud to know you, sir," he said, tak- 
ing the Squire's hand. 

Tom had whispered a few words to 
Roper. 

^^ Waiter, a little supper for three, 
devilled kidneys and a bone," said Roper. 

It was the eve of the Leger. The 



THE FOOTLIGHTS AND THE HARDWICK. 143 

" Hard wick" was crowded with men who 
were all talking at once. They had books 
in their hands, in which they continually 
made notes. In the centre of a large room, 
into which the Squire could catch a glimpse 
from the outer chamber, where Roper had 
received Tom, there were high office desks 
upon which telegrams were fixed. Mes- 
sages continued to arrive from time to 
time. They were surrounded at once by 
the occupants of the room. Silence for a 
moment attended their inspection of the 
flimsy paper. Then the Babel of tongues 
broke out afresh. 

*^ A busy scene, Mr. Kerman. It is our 
Betting Exchange, and to-night is our ex- 
citing time. 

^^Yes, I see," said the Squire rubbing 
his eyes and making an effort to pull him- 
self together. ^^ Reminds me of the ring at 
Lincoln races." 

^* There is a good deal in common be- 
tween the two scenes. This way, gentle- 



144 CRUEL LONDON, 

men ; we will sup away from the noise of 
the saloon. 

'' But are we not trespassing on you at 
a time when you . '^ 

*^ Not at all," said Mr. Roper, stopping 
him in the midst of an apologetic speech, 
^^ not at all.'' 

It was a pleasant little supper. The 
style of it and the superior manner of Mr. 
Roper overcame the Squire. He gradually 
got sober under the Hardwick treatment, 
and became painfully conscious of his dia- 
lect, his natural uncouthness, and his utter 
ignorance of the world. He listened to 
Roper, and tried to speak like him. He 
struggled with his thees and thous, and 
became diffident and embarrassed. He 
made a few remarks about horses which 
Roper declared to be excellent and 
full of shrewd judgment. As a favour 
to Mr. Kerman he undertook to put 
five hundred pounds on the race, out 
of which Tom was to have two ponies, 



THE FOOTLIGHTS AND THE HARD WICK. 145 

otherwise fifty pounds, if the Squire 
should win. 

Early in the morning, when Tom Slea- 
ford bade his friend good night at the 
comer of Fitzroy Square, Mr. Kerman de- 
tained him for a short time with some 
perfectly sober reflections upon his position 
and feelings. 

.^^ I am jolly and all that, but it 's a sort 
of a dream, and I seem out of place, just 
as a fellow does who 's got out of the 
kitchen into the parlour, and doesn't know 
how to take a seat rightly. If I 'd a walked 
into Mester Dymoke's fine house, as was 
member o' Parliament when I was old 
Martin's farmin' man, and had a gone in 
and sat down by pianner, I couldn't a felt 
more out of place than I 've felt to-night." 

'^Nonsense, my dear Jack, you 're out 
of sorts ; you '11 soon be all right.'' 

^^ I know, I know," said the Squire. " I 
mean to be all right ; don't think as I 'm 
giving up; I 'm goin' to learn all these things 

VOL. I. L 



146 CEUEL LONDON. 

9 

that makes the difference between you and 
me ; I 'm goin' to set mysen right down to it ; 
don't you make any mistake, I 'm not a- 
goin' to have folks ashamed of me, as you 
was to-night. I know I was a bit drunk 
at first, but I could hear mysen talkin* 
after that, and it sounded as if a cart-horse 
had got shoved by mistake into the same 
stable as thoroughbreds. Nay, lad, I 
know I'm not a fool; but there, wait a 
bit, I '11 show thee whether I can't mend. 
I 'm groomed up and put into best stall, 
and left to feed till my coat 's smooth and 
shining, and I think I've getten some 
good blood in me, though I don't know 
yet if I be mistaken or not. I 'U tell you 
soon. Good night, lad ; day will come that 
you wain't be ashamed on me." 

"It has come, Jack; I'm not ashamed 
of you." 

"I know . ^money keeps my head up; 
nay, I don't mean as it does with you, but 
I mean to make you respect me as if I 



THE FOOTLIGHTS AND THE HAKDWICK. 147 

had no money. I want folks to shake 
hands and how-do-you-do me as if I had 
no brass to speak on, and they was glad 
to see me all same," 

*^ Good-night, then, unless you want to 
go home with the milk; it's daylight, Jack." 

^^ Well, it don't matter, I Ve got key, 
and I needn't get up till dinner-time. 
However, good night, lad; thou'rt not 
ashamed of Jack Kerman ? " 

^^ Ashamed ! I 'm proud of you." 

'' Good-night, Mr. Tom." 



148 CRUEL LONDON. 



CHAPTER III. 

CARRIAGES AND HORSES, AND PLENTY OP 

MONEY. 

*^ Don't sound your vowels so much/' said 
Patty ; ^^ that is your principal mistake." 

<^My vowels?" 

^^Yes; your a's, e's, i's, o's, u's, and 
sometimes w's and y's." 

^^Yes?" 

^^ Don't say ^ yo/ when you should say 
' you.' " 

'' I see." 

^^ And don't put two vowels where there 
should be only one ; don't say ' doSn't ' 
for ^ don't/ and, for that matter, rather 
say ' do not * than ^ don't.' 



>i >  



CARRIAGES, HORSES^ AND MONEY. 149 

" * Do not ' for * doant ' ; ah, it does 
make a difference." 

" And don't say ^ ah ' when you mean 
^ yes ' ; and ^ make ' is not pronounced 
' mek.' " 

" Good; it's like comin' to schule bein' 
with you." 

" * School,' not ^ schule,' and ^ being, ^ 
not ' bein'.' " 

" Just so." 

Patty, in a pinky-white silk dress, was 
painting a pinky-white water-colour, de- 
lineating the glories of a pinky- white sun- 
set. The Squire, in a brown velvet jacket 
and crimson slippers, was sitting by her 
side and gazing into the fire. The room 
was called the studio. It had an outlook 
into the square, where the autumn leaves 
were blowing about in the wind. 

" Do you know I had got it into my 
head that folk were ashamed on me," he 
said. 

'* ^ People,' not ' folk,' " responded the 



150 CRUEL LONDON. 

artist. " Ashamed ^ of me,' not * on 
me.' " 

She spoke as if she were reading a lesson 
in which she felt no interest whatever. 

" Yes ; well, never mind that." 

"But you told me to stop you every 
time you made a mistake." 

"Well, yes, thank you; ^people,' not 
^folk,' and all that. Don't mind it just 
now." 

" Go on, then." 

"I saw one man' laughin' . I mean 
laughing . at me, and I seemed as if I 'd 
got into wrong box like . a mongrel wi' 
high-bred uns." 

" Must correct you ? " 

"No, no^ now. I just wanted to ax 
you, because you are so kind like, and not 
so proud as some, if you think folk . 
people I mean . are ashamed of me ? " 

" Nobody is ashamed of anybody, if 
they are handsome and have plenty of 
money." 



CABRIA6ES, HORSES, AND MONEY. 151 

f "Handsome?" 

" Yes, I call you handsome. Even 
Emmy said you looked splendid on horse- 
back in the Row, yesterday." 

Patty spoke in measured tones, without 
emphasis, and with a complete absence of 
inflexions rising or falling. 

" Did she ? Ah, that were tailor's 
doing." 

" The tailor did not make your face, 
nor teach you how to ride." 

^^No ; but it were a rare and beautiful 
horse." 

^^ Then you don't think you are hand- 
some?" 

" I wish I could speak fine, as they say 
in Lincolnshire ; though they 'd have a 
great laugh if they heard me a-trying it." 

" You did not answer my question." 

"Oh, if I think I'm handsome?" he 
said, laughing, and looking up at his ques- 
tioner. " I never thought about it." 

" If you had been a fine gentleman, you 



152 CRUEL LONDON. 

would have paid me a compKment when I 
said that." 

^^Ah, yes, I see you were trying me; 
' but I'm not a fine gentleman, you see^ 
and I 'm too shamefaced to pay compli- 
ments to a lady." 

" You should practise . practise on me." 

" What shall I say ? " 

"Just what you think . and a little 
more." 

"I think you are a good-natured, nice 
Kttle lady." 

"Yes; but you should say something 
about my eyes or my expression." 

" I cannot frame it in my mind yet ; 
we '11 leave that till next lesson. Miss Patty* 
You know Mr. Roper ? " 

" Yes ; he 's a darling." 

" You like him ? " 

" Ever so much." 

" He 's got fine manners, if you like." 

" Beautiful." 

Miss Emily Sleaford entered the room* 



CARRIAGES, HORSES, AND MONEY. 153 

^* Good evening, Mr. Kerman." 

" Good evening, Miss Sleaford." 

Kerman rose to his feet. 

" Don't let me disturb you," said the 
new comer. 

^' Tom tells me you have been buying 
some race-horses, Mr. Kerman." 

" Yes, I have ; I like race-horses." 

" I am glad you have bought what you 
like." 

"Yes?" 

" Because you have also, I hear, been 
patronizing art." 

" In what way?" 

" What do you think Mr. Kerman has 
done ? " 

" I don't know," said Patty, still paint- 
ing her pink and white sunset. 

" Tom and he called at Mr. Tavener's 
studio, and Mr. Kerman bought his 
Thames picture, and it has just come as a 
present to mamma." 

" Oh, don't mention it. I could see on 



lot . CRUEL LONDON, 

Thursday at the play that you were fond 
of him like, and it was Tom that put me 
up to buying the picture. Tom always 
knows how to do the right thing." 

" It was very kind of you, Mr. Kerman 
. ^too kind." 

" No, no ; I feel honoured if you are 
pleased." 

" And you said you did not know how 
to compliment a lady," said Patty, as if she 
were reading the sentence out of a book. 

^^ You must know, Miss Sleaford," said 
Kerman, "that yore sister's leamin' me 
how to talk your London lingo, and giving 
me lessons in manners, like." 

" I hope she 's a pleasant schoolmistress," 
said Emtmy, smiling. 

"That's just what I said: it's like 
comin' to school." 

"You said schule before," observed 
Patty. 

" Patty ! " exclaimed Miss Sleaford, 
reprovingly. 



CARRIAGES, HORSES, AND MONEY. 155 

"That^s right, I did; I said schule. 
You'll have me shaking hands, and say- 
ing ^ How do you do ? ' and speaking fine, 
so that they 11 never know me in Lincoln- 
shire soon," said the young man. ^^ Money 
they say 's got its responsibilities, and that 's 
one on 'em, I suppose. You We got to be 
fine as well as look it, though they say down 
in the Marsh as ^ Hansom is as hansom 
does.' " 

"Yes, that's a country proverb," said 
Emmy. " It 's been out of date in London 
ever since I can remember." 

" Still there 's summat in it." 

" Everything, I think," said Miss Slea- 
ford ; " but I don't know anv one else 
who thinks so, except Mr. Tavener, 
perhaps." 

"You must take the world as it is," 
chimed in Patty. "It's no good trying 
to be anybody unless you have carriages 
and horses and plenty of money." 

" That 's where I haven't got bearing of 



156 CRUEL LONDON. 

things yet," said Kerman. " It seems to 
me, as I Ve said before, it's no good taking 
a cart-horse, dressin' him in fine harness, 
and puttin' him into a drag and makin' out 
as he's used to it, and matches t'other 
three of the team." 

*^No," said Miss Sleaford, promptly, 
"but it may be that the cart-horse was 
originally intended for the Park, and was 
made to trudge along the road instead ; 
it may be that the cart-horse, with a little 
training, will prove himself to be quite the 
equal of horses that have never had to 
rough it at all." 

" Thank you," said the Squire, "that's 
me. I know exactly what you mean, and 
you know what I mean ; I 'm tryin' to 
find out what I were really intended 
for." 

"For Patty," Mr. Jeremiah Sleaford 
thought, as he entered the room. " For 
Parliament, Kerman," he said: "we'll 
have you returned for a Lincolnshire 



CARRIAGES, HORSES, AND MONEY. 157 

borough, native and to the manner born, 
and all that kind of thing ; a candidate to 
represent the soil on which he was bom 
goes down wonderfully. Now, Patty, 
away with Art; early dinner to-day, be- 
cause of the opera. Are you dressed, 
Emmy? Kerman, a treat for you to- 
night . Titiens in a new rdle^ 

" Thank yo," said the Squire. " I left 
the City an hour earlier than usual, on 
purpose." 

"Mr. Roper called to ask if he might 
take mamma and me to the theatre," said 
Patty. 

"Mr. Roper!" exclaimed the old man. 
" I don't care for you to be going about 
with Roper. He 's a gentleman, I know, 
and clever at making money ; [and our 
dear friend the Squire likes him; but 
really, you know, Patty . " 

" I like Mr. Roper," said Patty, with a 
pinky- white blush, laying aside her pinky- 
white sunset, and speaking^ in her calm, 



158 CEUEL LONDON. 

unimpassioned way which to Roper was 
80 delightfully distingvJ. 

** Yes, yes ; I know we all like him." 

" And I want to go to the theatre." 

^^ Well, well; see what mamma says." 

"Wilful, you see, Kerman, wilful, but 
a good girl, and, like all good girls, likes 
her own way." 

" But you can't have your own way in 
this life," he said, when Miss Emily and 
Mr. Kerman had left the room, " and you 
can't have your way in regard to Roper. 
Now listen to me. Roper is a schemer ; 
he hasn't a penny, and if he had he'd 
squander it ; he never pays anybody." 

*^ We used not to pay anybody." 

" Will you listen, Patty ? " 

" Yes, father." 

' ^ You know I speak for your own good ; 
you know I would make any sacrifice for 
you." 

" I don't want you to do it." 

"Because you don't understand your 



CARRIAGES, HORSES, AND MONEY. 159 

own welfare. Roper is a spendthrift, a 
blackleg." 

" Oh, don't call names ; I shall cry if 
you do." 

^* Then listen, love, listen to me calmly . 
Mr. Kerman . Squire Kerman as I prefer 
to have him called . is rich, wealthier than 
he thinks ; he is a good-looking young 
man ; he can settle five thousand a year 
upon you, and spend another five 
in carriages and horses and servants 
for you. Do you understand what I 
mean ? " 

" Yes." 

" If he were to die or become bankrupt, 
you would have five thousand a year of 
your own, . perhaps more, do you see ? " 

" Yes." 

" If you married Roper, he would pawn 
your jewels; and if he died you would 
be left to live in a garret, without six- 
pence." 

^^ But you would help me?" suggested 



160 CRUEL LONDON. 

the pinky-white student of Art and 
Nature. 

" If I could. The chances are I couldn't. 
You know what struggles weVe had. 
You know how the bailiffs have been here; 
how your ma has been insulted by the 
tradespeople in her own house; how we 
have had to pretend we 've had a beautiful 
dinner off a bit of cold mutton served up 
by Tim, as if it were a banquet ? " 

*^ Yes ; but that 's all over now." 

" For the present." 

^^ Only for the present?" 

" Perhaps, only." 

"Mr. Roper's so nice, and he dresses 
so well." 

" You wouldn't like him in a workhouse 
suit, I expect ? " 

"No." 

"You wouldn't like when you had 
married him to be turned out of your house 
and home, your diamond earrings and 
your gold watch sold to pay his debts ? " 



CARRIAGES, HORSES, AND MONEY. 161 

"No, no." 

"You would prefer to have a house in 
Mayfair, and be able to go to the 
Academy, and have paragraphs in the 
papers that you had given three thousand 
guineas for a picture by Landseer, and be 
able to receive your ma and pa in grand 
style, and patronize Mr. Tavener, for I 
suppose it 's no good trying to bring 
Emmy to her senses." 

" Yes, dear, yes, I should like that ; but 
why don't you make Emmy marry the 
Squire ? " 

" Because you see . well, the fact is, my 
dear child, 1 don't think he cares for 
Emmy. I know he cares for you, . I am 
sure of it ; and Emmy was not bom to 
take life easy, nor were you, Patty. You 
have always taken trouble impatiently, 
and you would never do to encounter 
poverty ; no, I cannot think of Mr. Roper 
for you. Your mother says she does not 
think you care about him ; do you ? " 

VOL. I. M 



162 CRUEL LONDON. 

" A little." 

" Only a Kttle ? " 

^^ He 's agreeable, and he talks welly 
and he is very fond of me." 

"Yes; but life is real, life is earnest^ 
Patty ; and you must not take husbands 
because they talk well and are fond 
of you. Mr. Kerman will talk well 
enough soon. You must learn to love 
him, to regard yourself as his help-mate 
in the disposition of his property; you 
must consider how you can best spend 
his money for him, how you will have his 
carriages painted, where you will spend the 
autumn, how many parties you will give 
in the season, who shall be your jeweller, 
and all that kind of thing, don't you 
know. There, come along; dress for 
dinner now, and the opera. I told your 
mother I would arrange it all for you ; 
and Emmy will go with her and Mr. 
Roper to the theatre ; you and I and the 
Squire to the opera. That 's a good girl. 



CARRIAGES, HORSES, AND MONEY. 163 

its father's pet, its father's hope, isn't 
it?" 

" Yes," said Patty, submitting to a 
paternal kiss. 

" And you '11 try and give up all 
thoughts of Roper ? Your mother said 
she was sure you would if I asked you." 

" I '11 try," said Patty. 

*^ And you won't be unkind to th** 
Squire ? " 

"No; I '11 be kind to him." 

"Not too kind, of course?" 

"No." 

" Don't let him think we wish you to 
marry him?" 

" No." 

" Your mother will explain; wo should 
like him to propose as soon as possible." 

" Without asking your permission ? " 

"You will tell him to do that. You 
must consult your mother now." 

"Poor Mr. Roper, he will be so un- 
happy!" 



164 CRUEL LONDON. 

" Pooh, pooh, nonsense ! Don't think of 
him ; he won't mind." 

" Won't he ? If he does not I shall be 
very miserable." 

"There, there, say no more about it. 
1 know you will do what pa and ma wish, 
and what is best for all parties. I know 
you will wait, dear. Now, promise me." 

" Yes, I wiU try." 

The clash and hum of the dinner-gong, 
a fine example of Chinese manufacture 
from the Baker Street Bazaar, broke in 
upon the interesting dialogue. 

" Dinner ! Bless me ! There, be quick, 
dear, and we will wait for you." 

Mrs. Sleaford appeared at the door in 
black velvet and diamonds. 

"It is all settled, my love," said Mr. 
Sleaford. " Kiss our dear child ; she has 
consented to all we wish." 

" Bless you, dear!" exclaimed Mrs. Slea- 
ford, in the same measured, neutral tones 
as those which were characteristic of Patty; 



CARRIAGES, HORSES, AND MONEY. 165 

" she is my own child, always ready to 
sacrifice herself for others." 

*^ Just so," said Jeremiah. 

And Mrs. Sleaford took Patty to her 
maternal arms. 



166 CRUEL LONDON. 



CHAPTER IV. 



THE HAND OP FATE. 



Two years pass swiftly in London. To 
Squire Kerman the time had gone Kke the 
wind. 

It is two years since Patty Sleaford 
made that promise to her father, on the 
last night of the Italian Opera. She had 
done her best to keep it, in spite of the 
only feeling of which her heart seemed 
capable, a liking for Mr. Roper. 

Mr. John Kerman had benefited by her 
uncompromising tuition, and had never 
faltered in his task of fitting himself for 
that sphere of life into which his money 
had dragged him. He was known as the 



THE HAND OP FATE. 167 

Squire at Epsom and at Doncaster. He 
was voted a good fellow at the Reform and 
the Rag. He had progressed rapidly in 
all kinds of knowledge. He was an 
authority at the Westminster and at Tat- 
tersall's. Mr. Roper was his agent, and 
the Squire's training-stables were already 
beginning to be talked of, though he had 
only bought out a well-known breeder 
during the previous season. Nobody 
laughed at him now on account of his 
dialect ; he never met men who were 
ashamed of him. He looked like a country 
gentleman devoted to sports, and the rdle 
suited his inclinations. 

The Sleafords were very proud of the 
Squire. He continued to dine several 
days a week at Fitzroy Square. His 
friends wondered that he was contented 
there. They did not know how politic and 
clever Jeremiah could be. The Squire 
would not have been as happy anywhere 
else. It was home to him ; and he had the 



168 CHUEL LONDON. 

use of Tom's rooms in Regent Street, 
besides a little box down in Surrey, where 
he occasionally spent a day or two. He 
would sit and roar with laughter while 
Patty talked about his vowels and the mis- 
takes of his first days in London. Some- 
times he would rehearse them. Indeed, he 
liked the northern dialect, and he would 
often use it for amusement or in the way 
of badinage. He wondered if they would 
know him down in the Marsh, and, if they 
did, what they would think of him. It 
did not occur to him now that they might 
laugh at him for ^^ talking fine." The old 
simile of the cart-horse and the thorough- 
bred was at last used up. He had demon- 
strated to his own satisfaction that he had 
become quite equal to the best stable. He 
no longer needed the social help of Tom 
Sleaford ; indeed, he had gone far ahead 
of Tom. He belonged to clubs where 
Tom could only be admitted as a visitor. 
Tom was glad now and then of the pro- 



I 



THE HAND OP FATE. 169 

tection of the Squire. For although 
Asphaltes had prospered, and Tom was 
his own master, and lived in good style, 
he was still only ^^ somebody in the City," 
while Jack Kerman was known to be a 
landed proprietor, and, indeed, was be- 
lieved to have a sufficient territorial 
influence to make him a catch for the 
Reform. 

London was still a delightful place to 
Kerman, though he had experienced 
certain and sundry exhibitions of its 
cruelty. Perhaps he had no right to lay 
his financial misfortunes at the great City's 
door. He had been fleeced by Macjew, 
Snallie & Slowcalm, of course. That was 
nothing; a few thousands covered their 
defalcations. Mr. Fitzherbert Robinson had 
in the most considerate way relieved him of 
ten thousand pounds ; but the speculation 
looked so promising, and Robinson was so 
very pressing. He had a considerable sum 
locked up in Asphaltes and Cemeteries ; but 



170 CRUEL LONDON. 

Ms dividends came in regularly, and that 
was all right. Mr. Jeremiah Sleaf ord had 
introduced him into mining, for it is 
pretty well known that, however much a 
man may have suflFered in this kind of in- 
Testment, he never leaves it. Mining is 
like gambling; the taste for it is never 
wiped out. The example of men who 
have made large fortunes is always before 
the dupe who has lost. Mr. Sleaford's 
fatherly interest in the Squire had been 
the cause of some of the Lincolnshire 
money being invested in mines. 

If Squire Kerman had a large property, 
his money was pretty well circulated : it 
was not allowed to lie idle. Mr. Sleaford 
iook care of that. The Squire himself 
was not economical, either in his tastes or 
his investments. He had the reputation 
of having won largely on the turf. But 
Mr. Roper could have told the world a 
different tale. Roper was his agent . ^his 
steward ; he had become his second self ; 



THE HAND OF FATE. 171 

and Roper, while he served his chief to 
the best of his ability, did not like him, 
and on many occasions when he should 
have combated some mistaken idea of the 
Squire's, he preferred to let him have his 
own way. Roper was a man of the 
world, and yet he had a weakness that 
men of the world would regard as utterly 
unfitting him for the hard business rela- 
tions of life. He loved Patty Sleaford. 
His love was not a passion : it was some- 
thing between liking and admiration. 
From his point of view, Patty was the 
beau ideal of a girl to be moulded into the 
perfection of a wife. Calm, passionless, 
almost languid in her movements and ex- 
pression, she would develope into one of 
those distinguished wom.en whose digni- 
fied repose was in Roper's eyes the one 
thing desirable in woman. No gush, no 
enthusiasm, taking the world calmly for 
what it is, never getting out of temper 
with it, and looking at life from a busi- 



172 CRUEL LONDON. 

ness standpoint, . ^that was Roper's idea of 
a woman ; and Patty had captivated him. 
He could lose her without a pang, it is true, 
but he would have liked her and ten thou- 
sand pounds a year vastly well. Sleaford 
had been frank with him in explaining his 
views for Patty ; and that young lady had 
fallen in with the paternal arrangements 
so quietly, that Mr. Roper had long since 
ceased to advance his suit. Not that he 
loved Patty the less for permitting hei'self 
to be treated as a chattel ; on the con- 
trary, he thought there was something 
Spartan-like in a nature that could sacri- 
fice its own inclinations and acknowledge 
the justice of paternal policy. Some- 
times, however, he felt a little jealous of 
the Squire. There are men who would 
have taken a sweeping revenge upon a 
rival, placed in Roper s position ; but 
Roper was fond of speculation, and liked 
to win even for others as well as himself. 
Once or twice, if Kerman had not stood 



THE HAND OF FATE. 173 

between him and Patty, he would have 
resisted his decisions in matters of busi- 
ness more earnestly ; but that is all. Roper 
would do nothing wilfully to injure his 
rival, though he had a secret hope that 
some day he might make a big coup on 
his own account, and then challenge the 
Squire's pretensions to the hand of Miss 
Patty Sleaf ord. 

Lately, however, racing events had not 
worked out at all to his satisfaction, 
neither had the new stables come up to 
the hopes of Mr. Kerman; and though 
the Squire was flourishing in the opinion 
of sporting and financial London, Manor 
Farm knew that all this sunshine was not 
without its clouds. Old Jabez Thompson 
had his eyes upon Kerman ; not that the 
astute lawyer often went to London, but 
he had agents in town, and the Squire's 
closest financial secrets were somehow 
gathered together from time to time 
under Mr. Thompson's spectacles in the 



174 CRUEL LOXDOH. 

little Lincolnshire town* Jabez came and 
went regularly once a week between his 
office at Burgh and Manor Farm, and 
Jane Crosby had looked particularly grave 
over the lawyer's most recent piece of 
news. 

It was immediately after this incident 
of the lawyer's visit that Tom Sleaford 
called at Manor Farm. Tom was now 
frequently absent from London for a day 
or two at a time, and it had occurred to 
him, after his regular Saturday to Monday 
holiday from business, which he observed 
with notable exactitude, to make a detour 
and drop in at Manor Farm. He found 
Miss Crosby in far more comfortable 
circumstances than he had expected. The 
farm had all its customary air of pros- 
perity, and Miss Crosby did not talk as if 
the future presented any difficulties. He 
noticed that she blushed when he spoke of 
the Squire, who had become quite a 
London swell. It also occurred to him 



THE HAND OF FATE. 175 

that, while Jack Kerman had progressed 
in the art of politeness and good manners, 
Miss Crosby had gone back. Not that 
she was rough or vulgar, but she seemed 
to speak with a broader accent than usual. 
She received him, without ceremony of 
any kind, in the kitchen, where the old 
sheep-dog was sleeping on the hearth- 
stone as of yore. Mrs. Kester was as 
plain and outspoken as ever, though she 
only shook her head knowingly when he 
made pointed inquiries about Miss Crosby's 
position and prospects. She* asked after 
*^ Flibbertigibbet, that Irish manikin," at 
which Goff set up a loud guflfaw. Miss 
Crosby would not talk about Kerman, but 
Tom Sleaford saw that her reticence was 
the result of pride, rather than want of 
inclination. 

^' We knaw all about him," Mrs. 
Kester said, when Jane had taken leave 
of Tom, ^^ we knaw the ungrateful beggar, 
an' if the missus were of my mind she 'd 



176 CEUEL LONDON. 

niver have his ugly name mentioned in 
her hearin'. But wait a bit, yo'U see; 
ivery dog 'as his day, and if my missus 
wanted a husband, there 's his betters as 
would jump at her." 

*^I'm sure I admire her very much," 
Tom had said. 

*^ Do you ? Well I doan't know as she 
cares whether you do or not, though she 
was civil enough to you ; but man as gets 
her will have nowt to complain on, I can 
tell him, Mister Londoner, tak' my word 
for that." 

Tom had gone home thinking of these 
things ; and, turning in his mind the 
various pictures of womanhood which had 
left more or less transient images in his 
mind, it had occurred to him that Jane 
Crosby was after all one of the handsomest 
women he had ever seen. In two years she had 
passed out of girlhood into that of woman- 
hood, fair, round, dimpled, free of limb, 
T'aceful in carriage, with a frank face, 



THE HAND OF FATE. 177 

and a bright eye that haunted him 
as the train dashed on towards 
London. 

Little did the hope and pride of the 
Sleafords reck of the feminine complica- 
tions that fate was just then weaving for 
him, the first dramatic act of which 
was at that very moment being inaugu- 
rated on the other side of the Atlantic. 
Three thousand miles away, and just 
stepping on board an ocean steamer, a 
woman was coming to change the destinies 
of all the prominent persons in this history. 
The boundless ocean rolled between them, 
but Fate was bringing upon the scene of 
this romance of real life a young American 
girl who had never seen England. By 
her side stood an elderly man, who, in the 
palmy days of the South, had owned five 
hundred slaves and lived in luxury and 
ease. Born in affluence, his child had 
now only one ambition in life, to solace 
and comfort her father, a broken-down 

VOL. I. N 



178 CRUEL LONDON. 

man, on his way to Europe to spend the 
remainder of his days. Wanderers in 
their own land, they had elected to 
bury their sorrows in the land of 
the stranger. Friendless and alone in 
the country where they had once been 
rich and blessed with friends, they left 
America voluntary exiles, without 
adieus. 

How true it is that the future is veiled 
to us in mercy, if it be that we are pre- 
destined to this or to that ! What strange, 
unlooked-for, and fatal passes that old man 
had seen could he have traced the future 
of himself, but more particularly of his 
child, in the land of which they had read 
so much . the old world on the other side 
of the Atlantic ! It seems to pass belief 
that the lives of the Sleafords, the 
history of Manor Farm, the careers 
of Jane Crosby and John Kerman, 
even the fate of so insignificant a 
person as Brayford, were to be in- 



THE HAND OF FATE. 179 

fluenced for ever by that solitary, pic- 
turesque couple standing on the deck of 
yonder ocean steamer, unheeded, un- 
known, exiles, strangers, whose existence 
had not yet\been suggested to a soul of 
them/on'^^tbis side of the ocean, in the 
wildest dreams. 

It is none the less true that the warp of 
this common-place history, the woof of the 
lives whose destinies are growing under 
our eyes, needs, for its completion, the 
weft of romance's silken threads which 
are coming with those unknown wan- 
derers from the distant shores of Manhat- 
tan. On the next railway journey which 
Tom Sleaford takes westward to indulge 
in his weekly holiday from London, he is 
destined, under^ fatal circumstances, to 
meet that lovely victim of a cruel war, who, 
while he is thinking of Jane Crosby, is 
nestling by her father's side under the 
shadow of those stars and stripes, once so 
loved, now hated with the fervour of re- 



180 CRUEL LONDON. 

bellion. Fate is no respecter of persons. 
Standing darkly by the travellers, the 
mysterious presence stretches forth its 
directing arm and lays its shadowy hand 
upon Tom Sleaford. 



KERMAN SEES A FACE IN THE GLASS. 181 



CHAPTER V. 

MR. KERMAN SEES A FACE IN THE GLASS. 

The truth is, Mr. Kerman had not learned 
the ways of the town so well as he thought 
he had. He had progressed apace, there 
was no denying that ; but he credited him- 
self with far greater knowledge than he 
really possessed. From a modest diffidence 
he had acquired a belief in himself. They 
didn't take him in any longer. Oh, no ; 
he had paid for his experience. The Foot- 
lighters had made their little game. Mac- 
jew & Company, acting upon the 
principles of their order, having bled him 
to their hearts' content, had reviled him 



182 CRUEI^ LONDON. 

and persecuted and annoyed him. He 
rarely went into that club now. If he did, 
he had not only to run the gauntlet of the 
upbraiding eyes of the wronged Macjews, 
but he had to submit to the chaff of their 
friends by whom he had been warned of 
the pits they had dug for him. Mr. Bray- 
ford had treated him with gentlemanly 
consideration, for, despite his eccentricity 
of manner and the peculiar combination of 
his business, Brayford was a good fellow, 
and a fellow-feeling had been enlisted in 
Kerman's interest. Brayford was a cynic 
in his way. His best friends suspected 
him of concealing some hidden satire in 
his pretended enthusiasm for a three-act 
epitaph. There was always a humorous 
twinkle in his merry little eyes when he 
talked of the combination of literature and 
tombstones. He didn't like his business, 
and yet he was not ashamed of it ; but a 
careful observer might fairly have sus- 
pected him of chaffing the solemn occupa- 



KERMAN SEES A FACE IN THE GLASS. 183 

tion into which his father's will had forced 
him against his own. 

" They have had me, bless you," said 
Brayford, "the men who have ^limbed' 
you and cursed the hand that fed them ; 
there is this kind of scoundrels in all our 
clubs, more or less . more, perhaps, than 
less." 

Brayford had a habit of stroking his 
chin and pausing when he considered he 
had made a point in conversation. 

" Yes, perhaps more than less," he con- 
tinued ; " but you cannot say you were not 
cautioned." 

"No, that's true; and don't mind it, 
my friend, let it pass ; only it is hard that 
they should write lies about me in their 
rags of papers, and say I 'm running 
through my money and mortgaging my 
property." 

" That is their little pleasant way, 
Mr. Kerman : they try to smother what 
bit of conscience they have left by per- 



184 CRUEL LONDON. 

suading it that you have done them an 
injury; and they avenge the wrong by 
saying hard things about you. My dear 
sir, th6y twit me now and then with my 
business, though tombstones has given the 
brutes many a dinner and lent them many 
a fiver." 

" You are a funny chap," said Kerman, 
looking curiously at his friend. 

"Am I ? The Footlighters think so. 
They don't Hke me to be in trade. Why, 
the future generation of scribblers will all 
be in trade ; at least, those who aren't in the 
gutter. Literature will be the luxury of 
the future ; it won't pay anybody. That 
it is a delightful occupation nobody can 
deny. Why, I feel more pleasure in a 
five-j)ound note made out of a little play 
or a comic song than five hundred pounds 
out of a mausoleum or a monolith. And 
I 'm beginning to experience a real joy in 
my three-act epitaph. Did I never explain 
it?" 



KERMAN SEES A FACE IN THE GLASS. 185 

" No, I think not." 

" Three ideas in prose and rhyme . " 

"Yes, I think I have heard you 
describe it at the Cemetery Board," said 
the Squire, interrupting the epitaph-en- 
thusiast. 

"My own invention. Made it out on 
the principle of a drama . three ideas, or 
three figures, if you prefer that descrip- 
tion. Act I., a sigh; Act 11. , a tear; 
Act III., a sob. Now, whether I write 
the epitaph or not, I tell my customers 
the same thing; let there be a sigh, a 
tear, a sob in it, and the thing is con- 
structed on art principles, which are 
applicable to all kinds of writing, 
pathetic, humorous, dramatic, or other- 
wise. There was a time when I used to 
feel ashamed of my business, often 
addressing myself to myself as the First 
Gravedigger, and all that sort of thing; 
but when I came to inquire into the 
origin of our greatest men, and when I 



186 CRUEL LONDON. 

came to study the true character of 
genius, which dignifies whatever it 
touches, I gradually saw how the literary 
and dramatic instinct which I always 
possessed might be made available in the 
elevation and glorification of the art of 
the epitaph, which, until I took it up in 
earnest, had almost become extinct." 

" Indeed ! " remarked Kerman. 

^^ Don't you believe me? Do you 
doubt the genuine enthusiasm of the 
author of the three-act epitaph ?" 

"No." 

" You should hear me discourse upon it 
to the Wonner. He is a believer, I can 
tell you." 

Mr. Brayford stepped aside as he 
spoke, and, opening what appeared to be 
the design for an Egyptian tomb, dis- 
closed a little office, where a grey, 
shrivelled old man sat at a desk cutting 
up newspapers with a pair of shears. 

" Mr. W. !" said Brayford. 



KERMAN SEES A FACE IN THE GLASS. 187 

A mild old face looked up. 

" My friend here wishes to know if you 
believe in the three-act epitaph." 

The gentle old man smiled benignantly, 
shuffled out of his seat, came up to Bray- 
ford, shook his hand warmly, and, saying 
^^How do you do, sir?" to Kerman, re- 
turned to his work. 

Brayford closed the Egyptian design 
upon him, and, in answer to Kerman's 
inquiring look, said, . 

"My circularizer . a clever old man. 
He cuts the 'deaths' out of all the papers, 
and forwards to the sorrowing families 
the card and business terms of Brayford 
& Co. ; but he positively declines to send 
the synopsis of my trinitarian invention, 
my three-act epitaph . the tear, the sob, 
and the sigh. Obliged to humour him. 
I call him the Wonner. He thinks I 'm 
a genius. That's the peculiarity of his 
form of insanity. 

Brayford rattled on in this fashion for 



188 CRUEL LONDON. 

some time. Kerman found occupation 
meanwhile in looking round the little par- 
lour into which the epitaphist had con- 
ducted him. The decorations of the 
room were curiously suggestive. Pictures 
of tombstones, the Egyptian design afore- 
said, architectural drawings of monu- 
ments, a water - colour sketch of the 
Hampstead Cemetery, a white marble 
Cleopatra's needle on a bracket, and an 
illuminated epitaph in three acts adorned 
the walls on one side of the room. On 
the other were pictures of famous come- 
dians. Mr. Snaggs as the Rum 'Un, in 
Brayf ord's farce of ^ A Good Joke ' ; Miss 
Tottie Spinkie, in Bray ford's comedi- 
etta-burlesque of ^ The Farthing Candle ' ; 
Smiler, the comic singer, in the act of 
singing Brayford's side-splitting song, 
^ I 'm out for a jolly Lark,' . were the most 
notable professional pictures. The furni- 
ture had an ecclesiastical style in its pecu- 
liar carving. In one corner of the room 



KERMAN SEES A FACE IN THE GLASS. 189 

there was an harmonium, and in another 
a figure of Apollo. Several heads of 
cherubim in sculptured medallions hung 
over the mantel-shelf, with a framed copy 
of the list of the Footlights Committee, 
a manuscript address presented to Mr. 
Brayford by the ballet of the Apollo 
Theatre, who had been deserted by the 
management salaryless, and who, but for 
Brayford's imsolicited generosity, would 
have had no Christmas dinner. In the 
midst of all these curiosities Brayford sat 
in a florid dressing-gown, carpet slippers, 
and a Turkish smoking-cap. The window 
of the room looked out on the Regent's 
Canal, lazy barges floating by this quiet 
summer day. Monolith Cottage, the resi- 
dence of Mr. Brayford, was known all 
over Paddington as a dignified feature of 
" The Paddington Marble Works and 
Mausoleum." 

It was singular that Mr. Jeremiah Slea- 
ford should call here while the Squire and 



190 CRUEL LONDON. 

Brayford were talking. The truth is, he 
had been tracking Mr. Kerman in a hansom 
all over London. Mr. Brayford was in- 
terested equally with Kerman in the cruel 
news which had expedited his movements. 
There was a conspiracy to ruin the Ceme- 
tery Company. An adverse operation in 
Cemetery shares was shaking the institu- 
tion to its foundation. Mr. Fitzherbert 
Robinson and others had suddenly flung 
all their promotion and other shares upon 
the market. The only bond fde investors 
were themselves . he, Brayford, and Ker- 
man. They must that very day take 
means to protect their property. He knew 
what to do. He had no fear. They must 
buy up all the shares in the market. 
He did not, however, care to take this 
responsibility upon himsef. He must 
have their sanction. They gave it, of 
course. Further than that, the Squire 
entrusted Mr. Sleaford with his cheque for 
a few thousand pounds. Mr. Brayford 



KERMAN SEES A FACE IN THE GLASS. 191 

looked grave over the business : Kerman 
only laughed. Sleaford shook Brayford 
by the hand, and told him to sleep in 
peace. Jeremiah Sleaford was not the 
man to be beaten by a combination with 
Robinson at its head. 

"By the way, Mr. Brayford, I don't 
know whether you go into society much.'^ 

" No, not much," said the epitaphist. 

" If you will honour Mrs. Sleaford and 
myself at Fitzroy Square, we shall be 
delighted : very short notice, for which I 
apologize ; the recejDtion has been noted 
for three weeks past in the Morning Post^ 
and your name was down on the original 
list, but Mrs. Sleaford said she felt sure 
you did not care for the frivolities of high 
life, and I let the matter pass ; but if you 
will come, I need hardly say that we shall 
feel honoured and delighted." 

Though Brayford felt that this con- 
descension veiled an attack upon his purse, 
he rose, and thanked Mr. Sleaford for the 



192 CRUEL LONDON. 

compliment he had paid him, and accepted 
the invitation. 

In the mean time the comer house of 
Fitzroy Square was having a rare time. 
It had been literally turned inside out. 
The furniture had been packed away 
under a tarpaulin in the garden. The 
fire-places had been filled with looking- 
glass and pans for flowers. Bedrooms had 
been converted into refreshment and 
cloak rooms. Only one apartment had 
been left, in fact, and that was Mr. 
Kerman's room, which was not to be 
touched on any account. 

It is one o'clock on the day before the 
party. The table is laid for breakfast. 
Tim Maloney is reading the morning 
newspaper and soliloquizing. 

" One o'clock, be jabers, and not up 
yet ; it 's wonderful how he 's jest dropped 
into the swell ways of the town. Out 
night after night, nothing that he isn't in 
at, no dissipation too big for him this 



KERMAN SEES A FACE IN THE GLASS. 193 

season; it can't last, that's sartin, divil 
a bit ; he must have dropped thousands on 
the Derby, and Mister Roper would ruin 
the divil himself. Talk of the divil, here 
he is.'^ 

" Good morning, Tim," says Mr. Roper, 
with an air of aristocratic condescension. 
"Sir to you!" 
" Master not stirring yet ? " 
"No, sir; at the opera last night.- 
champagne supper afterwards, when they 
suddenly discovered as it were Mr. Slea- 
ford's birthday, and the Squire come out 
strong." 

" It seems to me, Tim, that it's always 
Mr. Sleaford's birthday, and that Mr. 
Kerman is always coming out strong." 

"No, sir, it's not always the master's 
birthday ; sometimes it 's Miss Sleaf ord's, 
and sometimes it 's Mr. Tom's ; and, savin' 
yer presence, I suppose if the Squire 
loikes to come out strong he can plaze his 
precious self." 

VOL. I. O 



194 CRUEL LONDON. 

" I 'm not so sure of that, Tim, unless 
Mr. Sleaford is his banker." 

"Be jabers, an' if the governor is that 
same, it 's only a deposit account, depend 
on it ; and Master Sleaford 's the man to 
honour the Squire's drafts to any amount.'' 

"Thank you, Tim, you nearly made 
me laugh. I should like to laugh, Tim, 
but things look too serious." 

" Do they now ; and by St. Patrick I 'd 
begun to think so, for I can smell a writ 
before it is issued, bein' so used to them 
in the ould days before the Sleafords em' 
all on us came into our fortunes. What 's 
the matther ? . ^ye may trust me, ye know 
that." 

" I do. You are more in his confidence 
than I am, Tim. How do you think the 
master 's off for cash this morning ? " 

" By my soul, I Ve been drameing of 
thia same black day for the last six months. 
There was a man here yesterday and the 
day before afther him, and I '11 swear he 



KERMAN SEES A FACE IN THE GLASS. 195 

was a process-server ; and I heard Misther 
Sleaford last week tell the missus they 
must be more economical, and Miss Emily 
is gettin' bad-tempered again. By that 
same token I know there 's trouble comin', 
and I rade the verdict in your own face." 

" And how do you think he is off for 
money this morning ? " 

"After two years' friendship, bosom 
friendship, mind ye, with my ould 
governor, speculation in the City, run- 
ning racehorses, losing a heap in that 
forring loan business, a partin' with 
cash to Rooshuns and Turks, and backin' 
an outsider for the Derby as was a 
bad fifth, what the divil is he likely to 
have in his pocket at this same blessed 
minnit? An' the fortun as I see him a 
come into down at that funeral without a 
wake, the saints bless an' preserve us! Ah, 
Mister Roper, a clever agent like yourself, 
it 's not me ye should ax how much the 
Squire 's got in his purse." 



u 



196 CRUEL LONDON. 

Willie Tim is speaking, a gentle tap is 
heard at the door, which at the same time 
is cautiously opened. A cunning face 
peers in. It has a prominent nose^ a pair 
of deeply set, cunning black eyes. 

When the face peered in, there presently 
followed in a faded black satin stock a 
greasy black coat collar, then a waistcoat 
adorned with a heavy gold chain, and 
finally a pair of legs encased in a greenish- 
plaid pair of trousers. It was the comical 
figure of a Jew, fiJl of bending humble- 
ness and suppressed audacity. 

" Well, Mr. Isaacs, what do you want ? " 
asked Roper. 

"Beg pardon," said the Jew, ignoring 
the presence of Roper, and addressing 
himself to the confidential servant, "is 
Mr. John Kerman at home ? " 

" What the divil d 'ye mane by walkin' 
into a gintleman's room like that, as if ye 
were a thaf e or a sheriff's officer ? " 

"Beg pardon, my dear young man," said 



i 



KERMAN SEES A PACE IN THE GLASS. 197 

the Jew, depositing a greasy hat upon the 
nearest chair, and fumbling in the breast- 
pocket of his shabby frock-coat. '^Beg 
pardon, I thought the master would prefer 
that I came in quietly, vich Mr. Roper 
vill tell you I never do these things 
unpleasantly, s' help me Sarah ! " 

^^ What do you want ? " Roper asked. 

^^ Not much. It 's only a small sum for 
a swell, and I wants to do it kind and 
polite." 

"A writ?" 

" That 's the document." 

^^ You can't serve it this morning." 

^'Vy not, Mr. Roper . vy not, my 
tear ? " 

" Better come again." 

" Vat ! now I am in the housh ? " 

^' Yes, be ruled by me ; don't stay this 
morning." 

^'^Pon my soul, ye same to be good 
friends, ye two . if ye 've any sacrets I '11 
just lave the room," said Tim, intending 



198 CRUEIi LONDON. 

to warn his master that something had 
gone wrong. 

"Not at all, Tim," said Roper; "I 
only desire to impress upon Mr. Isaacs that 
he cannot see Mr. Kerman this morning." 

"Why can't he?" asked the Squire, 
entering the room at the moment. 

"Ah, a real shentleman!" exclaimed 
Isaacs, bowing low to the Squire, "a real 
shentleman! A thousand pardons, Mr. 
Kerman ; vill you just cast your eye over 
this leetle bit of paper." 

Mr. Kerman picked up a bundle of 
letters on the table, and, with a brief 
apology to Mr. Roper, commenced read- 
ing them. Betting lists, tradesmen's bills, 
prospectuses, and a very miscellaneous 
correspondence were quickly disposed of. 

" What is there for breakfast, Tim ?" 

" Some birds, sir, and . " 

" Cret me a soda-and-brandy, and some 
anchovy toast." 
" Yes, sir." 



KERMAN SEES A FACE IN THE GLASS. 199 

" How are you, Roper ? " 

" All right, thank yea." 

" I looked in, to . " 

*' Get some money." 

"You are not up to the mark this 
morning." 

" I am not." 

" Veil, I vishes you good day," said 
the Jew, who appeared to have remained 
unnoticed since he placed his missive 
from the Court of Queen's Bench into Mr. 
Kerman's hands. 

"Get out, get out!" said Roper, a 
mandate upon which Mr. Isaacs acted 
promptly, glad to retire without abuse. 

" No, Roper, I am devilish bad this 
morning ; I 'm getting sick of this tight- 
ness of the chest, as you call it. Besides, 
have you not seen the latest betting at 
Tattersall's ? " 

"Yes, that's nothing; the horse is 
all right. They 're only depreciating him 
to get on all the heavier by-and-by. If 



r 



200 CRUEL LONDON. 

you are short of money this morning, that 
little matter of the balance on the Good- 
wood can be paid in a bill, or, if you like, 
I can get your own discounted." 

Roper produced a pocket-book, and 
drew out a slip of blue paper, with a 
stamp on it. 

^^ I won't be bothered this morning," 
said Kerman. 

^^ Won't be bothered !" exclaimed Roper. 
*^ Business, my dear sir, can't be dismissed 
in that way." 

^^ Yes it can, Roper; I'm out of sorts. 
Look in to-morrow. Good morning." 
" If you insist." 
" I do." 

Roper left suddenly, and Tim came in 
with the breakfast. Kerman walked im- 
patiently about the room. He drank the 
soda-and-brandy, and sat down at the 
table. Tim put the toast before him. 
The Squire ate mechanically, and with- 
out relish. How he used to devour his 



KERMAN SEES A FACE IN THE GLASS. 201 

breakfast in the old days of Lincoln-- 
shire! 

'' Don't wait, Tim." 

Tim uttered a '^bedad" and a grunt, 
and left the room, whereupon the Squire 
lighted a cigar, and walked to the fire- 
place, which was adorned with a low 
mirror and a fender full of flowers. He 
looked at them, and reviewed the situa- 
tion. He did not speak. If he had put 
his thoughts into words he would have 
spoken as follows : . 

" I Ve brought my cattle to a rare 
market, after all ! I Ve had politeness 
and shaking of hands enough at last. 
Poor Jane, and all my dear old friends, if 
you only knew what I have suffered during 
the last three months ! If you only knew 
what I 'd give to be back in the old Lincoln- 
shire village ! Well, I suppose they We 
pretty nigh forgotten me now, or tried to^ 
which is all the same. I soon managed to 
forget them. They must have a fi!ne 



202 CRUEL LONDON. 

opinion of Jack Kerman, the Squire as 
ihey call me now. A grand Squire I 
make ! The story of the silk purse and 
the Bow^s ear . the beggax on horseback . 
that 's what old Jabez Thompson says, I 
reckon. To think that I Ve given up aU 
these good-hearted folk for people who 
only care for my bit of brass. Seeing the 
world ! Sitting up all night, and going 
to bed in the daylight, gas and glitter, 
and humbug, gambling, and worse ! To 
be the tool of this man, the butt of 
another, the dupe of a third ! " 

He got up with a sigh, and went to the 
window, flung the remains of his cigar 
among the flowers, thrust his hands into 
his pockets, and muttered the thoughts 
that haunted him this evening with the 
persistence of unwelcome memories. 

"It's no good crying over spilt milk, as 
uncle Martin would have said. He made 
a nice mistake in trusting me with his 
brass. His first opinion of me was about 



KERMAN SEES A FACE IN THE GLASS. 203 

right, I expect. For that matter, I wish 
he 'd taken his money with him, wherever 
he 's gone : it 's been as bad as ill gotten 
to me, so far. I wonder what the right 
thing would have been ? To marry Jane, 
I suppose, and settle down on the old 
farm, and gone jogging to market on 
Saturdays, like the rest. Well, I don't 
know; Patty Sleaford's a nice lass, and 
sings and plays the piano, and it '11 all come 
right, I reckon. But how ? Thirty thou- 
sand pounds to the bad means ruin. Come 
right !. how ? " 

He poured out half a tumbler of brandy 
into his soda, and drank it eagerly. 

"How, did I say? By Rookwood? 
Gone down from first favourite to thirty 
to one. That's bad. She shall go up 
again ! She must go up. By Jove, I '11 
plunge on her ! " 

He took up his letters, and ran his eyes 
over their contents. 

" * Two-fifty to-day, on account,' must 



^ 



204 CRUEL LONDON. 

wait. * Bill delivered.' Yes, all right. 
' Lady Emily at home at ten. R.S.V.P.' 
' Dine with me at Reform ; eight sharp.' 
* May the Miss Flanagans have the plea- 
sure of -Mr, Kerman's company, Queen's 
Gate, dancing at eleven.' Certainly ! Yes, 
you shall have that pleasure. All of you 
while there 's time. Who said Jack Ker- 
man was getting tired of London ? Who 
said he regretted the old home and the 
old friends ? Who said he wEia down on 
his luck ? Who said his last hope had 
shivered on Rookwood ? Wlio said any- 
thing else had a chance for the Leger? 
Show me the man who says it ! " 

He caught sight of his face in the glass, 
pale, anxious, worn, It seemed for a 
moment as if his accuser stood before him. 
His bloodshot eyes were fixed upon the 
apparition, when he was recalled to the 
reality of the pictui-e by the arrival of 
another visitor. 



VISITORS, EXPECTED AND UNEXPECTED, 205 



CHAPTER VI. 

VISITORS, eJ^ECTED AND UNEXPECTED. 

^^ How are you, Kerman ? " 

^' So, so ; not the thing." 

^^ What 's wrong ? " 

" Headache . out of sorts." 

^^ I sympathize with you . ^fellow feel- 
ing; I 'm wretched." 

" You ? Why, I thought everything 
went well with you ? " 

^^ No, you are wrong. I have my trou- 
bles." 

^^ What is the matter now ? " 

^^ Up late last night ; rather, didn't go 
to bed until after breakfast." 



206 CRUEL LONDON. 

'' Is that all ? " 

"No; awfully hit at loo last night. 
The General let me in for a thousand 
pounds. Don't tell the governor." 

" Not I. Who 's the General ?" 

"The old fellow with the stiff cravat 
and the square chin whom you met at the 
club." 

"Oh, yes, I know. He's a good 
general at cards, I should say." 

" Too good. You haven't five or six 
hundreds handy ? I 'm stumped for the 
moment." 

"You stumped! Why, you told me 
you made five thousand last week on 
Chatham and Dovers." 

" True, and lost it on Turks.'' 

" 'Pon my soul, I have nothing handy 
in the way of cash." 

"Why, you haven't been hit, surely?" 

" Well, yes, I have." 

" I contradicted it in the City and at 
the club." 



VISITORS, EXPECTED AND UNEXPECTED. 207 

^^Contradicted what?" 

" The rumour that you have lost largely 
on the turf and in foreign bonds." 

"I'm not exactly stumped, as you call 
it; but I have had some losses. I shall 
soon pull round, don't fear ; I am on the 
right thing now. One can't always win, 
you know." 

"What the deuce shall I do? The 
General is a regular fire-eater; he'll go 
all over the place and say I can't pay my 
debts." 

"I can let you have five hundred to- 
morrow." 

" Never mind, a bill will do." 

Tom Sleaford took from his pocket a 
purse, out of which he produced a bill- 
stamp. 

"Here you are," he said. "I'll draw 
on you at a month. You won't mind, old 
feUow, eh?" 

" I hate bills ; at least I 'm beginning to- 
hate them ; they always make a fuss." 



I 



208 CRUEL LONDON. 

^^ My experience ; but, when one is in a 
hole, a bill is a capital lever." 

Tom sat down, and drew out the note, 
affecting an earnestness of financial trouble, 
which was put on to probe Kerman*s con- 
dition and disguise his own. 

" Yes, no doubt ; but when one isn't in 
a hole, and one signs a bill for somebody 
else, that puts two people in a hole in- 
stead of one. That is my experience. 
My name is on a good many, and I . ^" 

^^ You object?" 

" Not at all ; I was only agreeing with 
your sentiments. Anything to oblige you. 
This is how I object." 

He took the bill and accepted it. Tom 
Sleaford lighted a cigarette. 

^^ Thank you, Jack, you 're a good fellow : 
it will be all right, old man ; I draw my 
directorial and managerial fees, and salary 
at the end of next week." 

"You make a pile of money in the 
City ? " 



I 



VISITORS, EXPECTED AND UNEXPECTED, 209 

" Sometimes." 

" One of your City friends told me the 
other day that you have an establishment 
at Brighton, and another somewhere else/' 

" Indeed ! " said Tom, taken aback for a 
moment, but speedily recovering himself ; 
*^ what sort of an establishment . a bank or 
a discount office ? " 

" Neither ; but there, I don't want to 
pry into your secrets, Tom. Where are 
you going now ? " 

"To get this bit of paper transmuted 
into bank-notes." 

'^ And then?" 

" To the club to hand them over to the 
General, and have another turn at the 
beggar." 

" Where shall you dine ? " 

" At Simmons's. Will you come ? " 

"Yes." 

" Good-bye for the present." 

As Tom Sleaford left the room, Mrs. 
Sleaford, in delicate half-mourning, en- 

VOL. I. p 



210 CBUEL LONDON. 

tered it. The Sleafords never intended 
to go quite out of black for uncle Martin. 
Mr. Jeremiah Sleaford said it would be a 
good thing to keep the memory of the 
man green. It made people remember 
that a rich relative had died and left them 
money. Behind Mrs. Sleaford came a 
maid, almost as calm and demure as 
herself. 

^^ Oh, good morning, Mr. Kerman," said 
madam, as she glided up to the Squire and 
extended her small, gloved hand. " I am 
so glad to see you looking well after your 
visit to those nasty training-stables. I 
really began to think you were never 
coming back.'^ 

" You are very good, Mrs. Sleaford. I 
am quite well, thank you ; but I have only 
been away three days, you know." 

^^ Really ! It seems weeks to us. I am ^ 
sure Patty was continually saying, * When 
is Mr. Kerman coming back ? The house 
is like a desert without him ! ' And it was 



VISITORS, EXPECTED AND UNEXPECTED. 211 

I assure you, so dull, so uninteresting, so 
unlike the house which your presence has 
made happy and genial; always some- 
thing going on, and something to do." 

" How is Miss Patty ?" asked Kerinan, 
not unwilling to put an end to Mrs. Slea- 
ford's compliments. 

^^ Very well indeed, the dear girl," said 
Mrs. Sleaford, simpering. 

^^ And Emily, Miss Sleaford?" 

^^ Oh, quite well. Emily is always well; 
she is not troubled with nerves and sensi- 
bilities. Patty's feelings are soon har- 
rowed ; she appears calm and motionless, 
but she conceals beneath her amiable and 
gentle exterior, a passionate and impulsive 
nature." 

Kerman began to wish Mrs. Sleaford 
would go. The maid stood motionless by 
the door, taking in every word her mis- 
tress uttered. 

'' Where are the ladies ? " 

^^ Didn't Tom tell you?" 



212 CRUEL LONDON, 

" He did not mention them." 
" The cruel boy ! he was to have told 
you that they are going to ride early 
to-day, and they may call as they come in 
to dress for the Row. I heard Patty say, 
^ Tell Mr. Kerman we are gone out shop- 
ping, and ask him if he will make an 
appointment to meet us at the Comer 
hy-and-by." 

^^ Too bad of him to forget." 

" Very much so. I am going into Bond 
Street. The carriage will pick me up at 
the Park end of Piccadilly, I dare 
say we shall meet. I couldn't resist 
the desire to come in and see you 
when I heard you were not engaged, 
Au revoir ! " . 

Mr. Kerman opened the door for the 
gentle mistress of Fitzroy Comer and her 
demure maid. 

"Tim!'' 

"Yes, sir," responded Tim, presenting 
himself on the instant. 



VISITORS, EXPECTED AND UNEXPECTED. 213 

" Order Thunderbolt, to be saddled for 
me at three." 

'' Yes, sir," 

Tim disappeared, almost running against 
the demure maid as she re-entered. 

"Oh, please, sir,'' said the maid, "mis- 
tress sends her compliments and apologies, 
and have you change for a five-pound 
note ? " 

She held the note in her hand. Kerman 
felt in his pocket and produced three sove- 
reigns. 

" That is all the change I have. Will 
that do for the present ? " 

" I dare say ; yes." 

" And that," said Kerman, kissing her. 

"For shame!" exclaimed the girl, 
retreating, and leaving the note upon the 
table. 

Mr. Jeremiah Sleaford appeared on the 
scene inopportunely. 

"I saw nothing. Squire; don't mind 



me." 



214 CEUEL LONDON. 

" I don't," said Kerman. 

" I Ve mislaid my i)urse somewhere. 
Can you lend me a fiver ? " 

"Haven't got one. Oh, yes, here's 
a five-pound note," said Kerman, taking 
up Mrs. Sleaford's scrip and handing it to 
her husband. 

" Ah, thank you," said Sleaford, pocket- 
ing it. "I wanted to see you about the 
Kamschatka Banking Company, Limited ; 
capital subscribed twice over. When can 
we meet for ten minutes ? " 

"Now!" 

" No, not now ; I mean to-morrow." 

" All right ; any time you please." 

"I will write you. Good morning; I 
will fix an appointment for to-morrow." 

" Very well." 

" Good-bye." 

Mr. Sleaford was gone. Kerman rubbed 
his eyes. Tim entered and cleared the 
breakfast things away. 

" Confound it ! '' said Kerman, " I might 



VISITORS, EXPECTED AND UNEXPECTED. 216 

as well keep a broker's office or a bank ; it 
seems as if I 'd nothing else to do but to 
give change or lend money." 

" The comparison don't hould," said 
Tim. 

" How ? " 

"Bankers and brokers have their re- 
-ceiving days." 

As Tim left the room, there was a gentle 
knock at the door. 

"More customers," said Kerman, 
placing his two hands upon the table in 
the attitude of a shopman. " Come 
in!" 

The two Miss Sleafords came in ac- 
cordingly. 

" What can I do for you, ladies ? " said 
Kerman, still standing in his tradesman- 
like attitude. 

" Take us to see the new Picture 
Oallery," said Emily, promptly. 

" Delighted ! I am sure," said Kerman, 
meeting them as they advanced towards 



\ 



216 CEUEL LOMDON. 

bim and shaking hands. " How do you 
do ? How are you, Miss Patty ? " 

" Quite well," said Patty. 

*' Do you want to see the new gallery?" 

"Yes; Emily^s Fred has two pictures- 
there." 

"Ah, then it will be an additional 
pleasure." 

" Everybody has been calling on you 
to-day," Emily remarked. 

" Yes ; I have had quite a gay morn- 
ing." 

" There isn't another room in the house 
with a chair in it, or a carpet on the floor," 
Emily replied. 

"Indeed!" 

" Haven't you heard noises all over the 
place . enough for a general dissolution ? 
We are in the hands of Barston and Mack- 
ling, the decorators. Monday next is our 
great reception." 

" Of course it is. I had forgotten for 
fhe moment." 



i 



VI8IT0ES, EXPECTED AND UNEXPECTED. 217 

" Father says it shall be the most bril-^ 
liant event of the season." 

" The dear fellow ! " said Patty, in her 
unsympathetic, monotonous way. 

" The Marquis of Stoney worth ia 
coming," said Emily, " and Lord Offing- 
ton. Mr. Sleaford is going to astonish 
Fitzroy Square this time." 

" You don't seem to cai'C much about 
it?" 

" I don't, Mr. Kerman ; you are quite 
right." 

" Emily's so prosaic," remarked Patty. 
" I adore a fine reception, and more so- 
when there is dancing : a formal reception 
that is really a baU in disguise is a beautiful 
idea." 

While they were talking, an unusual 
noise of female voices was heard, evi-^ 
dently coming from the haU. Presently 
there was a clattering on the stairs. Tim 
entered unceremoniously, and whispered 
to his master. 



518 CRUEL LONDON. 

"What's the matter?" asked Patty, 
while Miss Emily looked the same ia- 
quiry. 

"Nothing particular," said Kerman ; 
"don't be alarmed, some old friends of 
mine from Lincolnshire. Au revoir ; I will 
be at your service in half an hour." 

The Miss Sleafords, however, would not 
be peremptorily hurried away. While 
Kerman was trying to induce them to 
hasten their departure, the doorway was 
filled with the most unexpected of all Ker- 
man'g visitors this already busy day . Jane 
Orosby, in travelling attire, with a shawl 
on her arm ; Mrs. Kester, in a bonnet of 
a remote fashion, and with a box which, 
though large, was evidently empty and 
easy to carry. The Lincolnshire dame 
deposited her box in a comer of the 
room and sat down upon it. The two Miss 
Sleafords could not restrain a titter of 
fimusement as they left the room, bowing 
to Kerman as they went out. The Squire 



VISITORS, EXPECTED AND UNEXPECTED. 219 

looked confused, and waited for Miss 
Cfrosby to explain. 

" If you are ashamed of us, John, we 

will go home." 

Jane had noticed the difference between 
her own homely dress and the morning 
attire of the Misses Sleaford. 

"Ashamed!" said the Squire, putting 
out his hand. " I am glad to see you." 

Miss Crosby took his hand coldly. 

" And you, Mrs. Kester, how are 
you?" 

"I'm well enough; but don't talk to 
me. Jane 's come to do talkin', and I Ve 
come to look after her ; and a nice time 
we 've had on it. We Ve been an hour or 
two gettin' to inn, and another a-gettin' 
here. We 've been livin' in'* a fly seems 
to me a week, and he 's waitin' outside. 
What Jane will have to pay when ole th' 
ridin' is over I doan't know." 

"We are not used to the ways of 
big towns," said Jane; "and there are 



t^ \T-fTr.iTi : 



. * ri" 



~ K. 



.'~**t.. 



nn i 



unesr 7Z 



. a^ .>a^ ^ -^. Willi  I fc 



rami* 



i^r >r:c-JL jir^ y^ n i *.tnr re zssS: 












ran. T^ 



. 



VISITORS, EXPECTED AND UNEXPECTED. 219 

looked confused, and waited for Miss 
Cfrosby to explain. 

'^ If you are ashamed of us, John, we 
will go home." 

Jane had noticed the difference between 
her own homely dress and the morning 
attire of the Misses Sleaford. 

^^ Ashamed!" said the Squire, putting 
out his hand. " I am glad to see you." 

Miss Crosby took his hand coldly. 

" And you, Mrs. Kester, how are 
you?" 

^^I'm well enough; but don't talk to 
me. Jane 's come to do talkin', and I Ve 
come to look after her ; and a nice time 
we 've had on it. We Ve been an hour or 
two gettin' to inn, and another a-gettin' 
here. We Ve been livin' in' a fly seems 
to me a week, and he 's waitin' outside. 
What Jane will have to pay when ole th' 
ridin' is over I doan't know." 

"We are not used to the ways of 
big towns," said Jane; "and there are 



220 CBUEL LONDON. 

plenty of giggUng ninneys about. Those 
ladies were the Miss Sleafords, I presume^ 
who were just going out as we came in." 

Kerman noticed that Jane had a dialeet. 
He had always thought she spoke like a 
lady until now. 

" They were the Miss Sleafords, yes/^ 
he replied. 

" I 'm afraid we interrupted the conver- 
sation." 

" No, no ; our little interview was at an 
end." 

*^ You had finished your talk 2" 

"Yes; only a morning call before 
going out, just to ask how I was." 

"Politeness, shaking of hands, and 
how ^s weather, I suppose ?" 

" That 's all." 

"May I sit down?" 

"I beg your pardon," said John^ 
placing a chair for Miss Crosby, and won- 
Lng at her aggreire iLne. and 
her homely ways. 



VISITORS, EXPECTED AND UNEXPECTED. 221 

^^Well, and how are you getting on, 
John?" 

" Very well, thank you." 

" Seeing the world ?" 

'' Yes." 

*^ And spending money ?" 

'^ The terms are synonymous." 

'^ You are not making money, I reckon?" 

Kerman was more and more struck 
with the fact that Jane had a decided 
dialect. 

'' Thanks to the munificence of uncle 
Martin that is not necessary." 

"Eh? But I suppose youVe got 
through a good deal among fine folk, 
seeing the world, and all that. How 's 
weather and shaking hands is not all done 
for nothing up here, I 'm thinking." 

" No, my girl, no," said John, assum- 
ing " all the more an air of superiority as 
Jane tried in her pronounced homeliness 
to [bring him back to the time when he 
wiped the dust of Manor Farm off his 



222 CRUEL LONDON. 

feet, and left it to see the world and be- 
come a free man. 

" Liberty, if you 've lots of money even, 
costs a good deal when you have to keep 
up freedom with aristocrats who have 
got none of their own." 

"Well, yes, Jane; but it 's civilized and 
pleasant ; and the wheels of life go easier 
for a little golden grease." 

** Yes ; and it takes a lot of that expen- 
sive stuff to be a grand man in London, 
I Ve heard say." 

"It does; you have not been misin- 
formed." 

"A rich man living in London, when 
he hasn't been used to freedom and fine 
clothes, has to lend here and there ?" 

"Yes, he obliges his friends," said 
Kerman, wondering what the meaning of 
all this could be, and submitting quietly 
to Jane's satirical cross-examination. It 
occurred to him that it was Lincolnshire 
in its frankness, only sounding strange to 



c. 



VISITORS, EXPECTED AND UNEXPECTED. 22^ 

him because he had been away from the 
county so long and had become accustomed 
to a different sphere of life ; indeed, it 
rather flattered him to note how much 
progress he had made in style and man- 
ners as he contrasted himself with Jane, 
although he could not help admiring the 
fair, handsome, womanly face, with its 
flush of health, its bright eyes, its eloquent 
mouth, and the pose of the Hebe-like 
head. 

" Then when the rich man gets poor^ 
and wants money, John, the folks that 
have borrowed from him pay tip and lend 
to him?" 

^^ No doubt." 

^^ They don't turn round on him when 
he's sold his lands for them and got 
through his bit of money and say what a 
fool he's been, and they always knew 
that he 'd come down." 

"Is this what you have come all the 
way from Lincolnshire to ask of me?" 



224 CRUEL LONDON. 

Kerman felt the colour mount to his 
cheeks. He rose angrily to his feet. 

^' Mrs. Kester and me/* said Jane, -with 
calm deliberation, "have come all the way 
from Lincolnshire just as other folks come 
up, to see the sights, but we thought we 'd 
also see how the lad we had known so 
long was getting on." 

" That was very kind of you, then, and 
the lad is glad to see you.'^ 

This almost mockingly, for Kerman 
was rapidly losing his temper. 

" Is he ? I should rather judge that the 
lad is offended at the old plain Lincoln- 
shire way of his friends' inquiries." 

"No, but there are other things in life 
besides money, Jane." 

"Yes, lad, there are lands and pro- 
perties ; you Ve been selling a good many 
acres lately, John ? '^ 

" A few . a few useless acres.'' 

"No more? Only useless acres, lad? 
What about the old place . old Manor 



VISITORS, EXPECTED AND UNEXPECTED. 225 

Faxm? Ah, it were a sore grief for us 
down yonder, when we found Manor Farm 
in the market." 

^^ Yes, Jane, I too was sorry to have to 
do it, but mortgages were worrying me." 

^^ We thought you might have given us 
some notice about it, or come down your- 
self ; we didn't like notion of the old farm 
going into strangers' hands." 

"I hadn't the courage to go down, 
Jane ; it cut me to the heart to have to 
think of selling it." 

The Squire sat down dejectedly ; Kester 
moved sympathetically on her box, heaving 
a profound sigh, and Jane's voice and 
manner softened as she replied, . 

" You did feel sorry, then ? Aye, I 'm 
glad of that. Some folk thought you 
cared nothing about it, but I said I was 
sure you did. I said I was sure your 
heart must have ached to part with the 
old place where you had lived as a lad. 
Don't you remember the May Days, 
VOL. I. Q 



226 CEUEL LONDON. 

the Harvest Homes, the Plough Mondays^ 
and the happy Christmas times ? " 

Jane's voice faltered. 

^* Aye, John, it almost makes me cry to 
think of the days that are gone . gone 
never to come back again." 

Kerman rose, and took her hand in his 
as he said, " It cannot be helped now : I 
wish it could. I wish I could have 
managed without putting Manor Farm 
into the market." 

"You must have been very short of 
money even to mortgage it ? " 

" I was, indeed," 

"Nothing but severe pressure would 
have made you do it ? " 

" Nothing but that." 

" And maybe you are very short at this 
moment ? " 

" Short ? No, Jane, no." 

"Be honest with me, John; tell me 
straight ; I shall tell none of your friends, 
and Kester is as mum as if she were deaf. 



VISITORS, EXPECTED AND UNEXPECTED. 227 

You 're very badly off for money now, at 
this very minute ? " 

" My dear girl, yes, I am, but . " 

'^ You hope to make all straight soon ? " 
said Jane quickly, and confronting him on 
her feet as she spoke. 

^ado." 

'^ By horses! . by St. Leger?" she 
exclaimed, quickly, her face flushing with 
excitement. 

" Yes, since I have said so much I will 
go on for auld lang syne," replied Kerman, 
with a sigh* of relief. " 1 11 make a clean 
breast of it for old friendship's sake." 

''Yes, for old friendship's sake," re- 
peated Jane, a little sadly. 

'' As I stand here at this moment, Jane, 
I am a ruined man ; but next week I shall 
be rich again. Lately everything has 
gone wrong with me. I have had to buy 
my experience very dearly . men have 
always to buy it." 

''Aye, and women too." 



228 CRUEL LONDON. 

" But I have made an excellent position ; 
I have a large circle of friends ; I go into 
the best society . " 

^^ Yes, maybe," said Jane, impatiently, 
*^but what is to set you straight next 
week ? " 

" Rookwood for the Leger." 

^^Rookwood! I'm afraid you haven't 
bought all that experience you talk of yet/* 

^^ Why, Jane ? Explain yourself ; lui- 
ravel this problem." 

*' Unravel this problem ! " repeated Jane, 
with something like a sneer, and raising 
her voice with the earnestness of honest 
anger. '^ Talk Lincolnshire, John Ker- 
man ; I 'm sick of hearing thee talk fine. 
Rookwood 's scratched ! Now is the time 
for thee to talk English and common 
sense, if ever thou art going to make a 
stand for winter; thy summer weather 
is over, lad." 

"Scratched!" gasped the hard-pressed 
gambler. " Rookwood scratched ! Nay, 



VISITORS, EXPECTED AND UNEXPECTED. 229 

then it 's all up with Jack Kerman, and 
time for him to talk Lincolnshire and go 
back to the plough. I don't know but it 
sarves him reight, though thou needna ha 
bin the croakin' raven ; tha needna ha 
come to tell me on it, and gloat over 
me." 

Kerman turned towards the wall, and, 
folding his arms over his forehead, leaned 
upon them in an agony of remorse and 
disappointment. 

"Me gloat over thee in misfortune ! " said 
Jane, again lapsing into the vernacular of 
which Kerman had been so perfect a 
master before he came to London . " me 
that nursed thee through the fever, and 
sat up by thy bedside and prayed for thy 
recovery ? " 

Jane burst into tears. Kester took out 
her handkerchief and sobbed. 

" Me, who would have laid down my 
life to save thine ; me, the raven ? Eh, 
but, John, you Ve stabbed me to the heart 



230 CRUEL LONDON. 

many a time, many a time ; it 's likely 
you didn't know it, and I have forgiven it 
all, and I forgive thee again, now that I 
lioar thee speaking like thyself. But I 'm 
no raven." 

She dried her eyes, and motioned to 
Kester that she should do the same. 

*' And it 's no good all of us crying like 
a lot of bairns ; I bring good news as well 
as bad ; there 's note of the lark as well of 
raven in what I have got to say. I don't 
come to gloat over thee. God forbid, or 
to cause thee pain and trouble ; not I ! I 
come to help thee, John ; to help thee, to 
comfort thee ; to let thee know that thou 
art not forgotten in the old place." 

*' Don't torture me, lass," Kerman 
replied, turning to her an anxious and 
sorrowful face ; " tell me all thou hast 
gotten to tell. I didn't mean to speak 
unkindly. It weren't my fault that uncle 
Martin gied me his money to make ducks 
and drakes with." 



VISITORS, EXPECTED AND UNEXPECTED. 231 

" Read that," said Jane, handing him a 
letter. 

He read it hurriedly. 

It was from the owner of Rookwood, an 
old Lincolnshire friend of uncle Martin. 

" Orily for your own use this newSy . 
remember that, and to save him^ only for 
that . Rookwood will he scratched in the 
morningP 

** When did you get this ? " 

** An hour ago," said Jane, calmly. 

" An hour ! " exclaimed Kerman, look- 
ing at his watch. 

" In time for you to back the Duke for 
a place." 

" You are a wonder, Jane ! Talk of 
the prophets, thou art a . " 

** Lincolnshire lass," said Jane, ^^brought 
up among horses, and farmers, and grazing 
lands. Does thou think we have got to 
come to London to learn about horse- 
racing ? 

" Rookwood was going down in betting 



232 CRUEL LONDON. 

for some reason, it seems. But there 's no- 
time to be lost if news be true; I must 
send for my agent." 

"Roper?" 

" Yes ; how didst know his name ? " 

"Never mind! You must not trust 
him. He 's more fool than knave perhaps 
in this business. Scarlett 's your man . the 
biggest agent in London, does business for 
Yorkshire lords and Lincolnshire folk; 
that 'b his card." 

She took from her purse a square card, 
and handed it to Kerman, who looked at 
her in amazement. 

"He's the friend of the gentleman, "^ 
she continued, " who sent me that note, 
and Scarlett would do anything for him." 

" And who 's the gentleman ? " 

" Jabez Thompson ! " 

"The lawyer?" 

" Lawyer and trainer, didn't you know^ 
that Mr. Jabez was Brook's partner, the 
famous breeder and owner of Scarsdale ? '^ 



I 



VISITORS, EXPECTED AND UNEXPECTED. 23S 

^* No ! Then I 'd better be off and look 
into this affair at once." 

Tim knocked at the door, and entered 
with a telegram. 

Kerman, without apology, opened it, 

and read aloud, ^^ Rookwood 60 ^o 1 ; vrill 

you go any further ? " 

He looked towards Jane, as if for advice. 

"Just say, no; and give instructions to 

back the Duke for 20,000Z., and say no 

more till you 've heard me out." 

" I am in thy hands, lass." 

" Can you trust this Irishman ? " 

Tim grinned at Kester, and touched hia 

forelock to Jane. 

" I can." 

" Be jabers and I can't trust myself, so 

it 's the koinder of you to say so. More 

power to you." 

" Very well, write the telegram." 

Kerman bustled about and wrote. 

"Hadn't I better send a message ta 

Eoper ? " 



234 CRUEL LONDON. 

" Yes ; keep a copy of it, and ask for a 
written reply, and let . ^what 's his name? " 

"Tim, your ladyship, Tim," said Mr. 
Maloney, bowing gravely. 

" Let Tim wait for it." 

Kerman wrote his telegram and letter, 
and Tim was solemnly instructed to take 
a hansom and deliver them. Tim realized 
the importance of the situation, and went 
on his way. 

" That's all right," said Jane ; " and if 
it is not, I We made it so myself. Now, 
sit down and listen to me, quietly, while 
I tell you all about . it. I knew how 
heavily you had put your money on 
this race. All Lincolnshire knew about 
it. Mr. Jabez Thompson talked of it to 
me, just as he had talked over and over 
again about the way you were running 
into debt and getting rid of property." 

Mrs. Kester groaned. 

" Sit still, Kester, we 'U soon get it over 
now. At last he came and told me all 



VISITORS, EXPECTED AND UNEXPECTED. 235 

about scratching Rookwood. There was 
no time to be lost. I made up my mind 
to come to thee, me and Kester, ignorant 
as we are about London.'^ 

Mrs. Kester said, "Aye, lass; aye, 
lass." 

" I was forced to promise that you should 
do nothing on the information till five 
o'clock, when the first news of it would 
be known. When Mr. Thompson saw 
that I was in earnest, he settled what I 
should do. He offered to come up him- 
self, but I thought I 'd like to spare you 
that, and also I felt that it would give me 
pleasure to do the business if I could 
myself. I'm not a fool, as you know, 
John ; and Mr. Thompson soon put it all 
down for me exactly what I was to do, 
and I 've done it, I think, as close to the 
instructions as if I were fulfilling a con- 
tract. I went and hedged the money 
myself, backed the Duke at ten to one, 
and at five to four for a place, deposited 



236 CRUEL LONDON. 

thirty thousand pounds in the bank, and 
took the bank-manager with me to the 
agent, to show that I was good for the 
money. Jabez Thompson had already got 
the agent's references about his capacity 
to pay." 

"What!" exclaimed the Squire, "you 
good for thirty thousand pounds. What 
do you mean ? " 

" This is what I mean," replied Jane. 

She went towards Kester, who arose 
with sudden alacrity; she dragged the 
box upon which she was sitting into the 
front of the room. It was the box which 
Kester had unlocked before the meeting^ 
at Manor Farm, called for the reading of 
the will. 

" Dost thou see that box ? " she asked, 
once more speaking in the dialect of the 
Midlands. 

" I do ; the box thy uncle- Martin left 
thee in the will." 

"Aye, lad, that was my fortune." 



VISITORS, EXPECTED AND UNEXPECTED. 237 

" They thought owd mester were an 
owd fool," remarked Kester. 

'' Be quiet," Kester," said Jane, kindly. 

** Yes, missus, eh dear, eh dear!" said 
Kester. 

^*Aye, Jack, that was my fortune," 
continued Jane, now returning to her own 
natural diction. ** When all the company 
were gone, and you wcto free as you 
said, free to come and go about the world 
as you liked, and when'jyou had taken 
your leave . " 

'^ I was a brute." 

" No, lad, no ; don't say that. When 
you had gone to London with the Slea- 
fords. Lawyer Thompson came and 
said, * Miss Crosby, a word with you 
alone.' * Yes,' I said, ^ certainly,' and I 
made Kester and old Goff go out. * Take 
a hammer,' Lawyer Thompson said, * and 
knock the bottom out of that box.' I 
took it and did so, and there we found 
title-deeds of properties which we never 



238 CRUEL LONDON. 

knew uncle Martin possessed, and all made 
out in my name, deeds [that had been 
drawn months and months back, proper- 
ties that had been bought and conveyed 
in my name; and there was a big roll 
of bank notes and a letter. Here's the 
letter." 

< 

She took it from her packet to show 
him, but not to read. 

" There 's no need to read it now. 
That box was light enough, so light that 
everybody was right to think there was 
nothing in it only that little bunch of 
violets ; but it was heavy enough in pro- 
perty, and, better, full of goodness and 
generosity. Heaven reward the dear old 
man whom none of us understood ! " 

" Ah, I doubt I was not kind to him," 
said the Squire, reflecting upon the old 
man's strange liberality to him. 

*' He was harsh and rough to you, lad, 
but he didn't mean it in his heart." 

^^ Well, I hope he forgave me as I did 



^ 



VISITORS, EXPECTED AND UNEXPECTED. 239^ 

him ; but thou hast amazed me ! I 'm in a 
daze." 

'^ I thought you would.be." 

^' And thou art rich now?" 

" Yes, lad. Ah ! it 's like music to hear 
you say ' thee ' and ' thou ' again.'' 

^^ Eh, but it takes a load off my heart 
to know thou art rich." 

^^ How so, John?" 

' ' When I come to think about it, I 
never felt that it were quite right of 
uncle Martin to leave me all the money." 

* ' You 11 be happier now, then, John ? " 

" A sight happier." 

'' I 'm glad of that ; I 'm glad of that." 

As she said so, Mr. Sleaford knocked at 
the door and entered. He looked around 
in affected astonishment, though he had 
met the girls and they had given him an 
idea who the unexpected visitors were. 

" What ! Miss Crosby, is that you ? " 

^^Yes; it's me." 

Jane looked at him defiantly. Sleaford 



240 CRUEL LONDON. 

found a pair of eye-glasses somewhere in 
his waistcoat pocket, and levelled them at 
the box upon which Kester had been 
seated. 

^* The box which our deceased relative 
left you in that extraordinary will ; I shall 
never forget that box.'^ 

" Yes, the same box," said Jane, " the 
box that had no false bottom in it, no 
secret drawers, nothing but a bunch of 
faded flowers from Daisy Copse Meadow 
on the hill." 

^^Ah, Sleaford," said Kerman, *^we 
were all done . all sold. Lawyer Thomp- 
son is a sly dog." 

*^ Yes, no doubt ; I always thought 
so." 

'^ But you didn't seem to think so at 
Manor Farm." 

Sleaford looked steadily at the box. 

"It was full of deeds and notes and 
money in all kinds of shapes," said Ker- 
man, triumphantly. 



VISITORS, EXPECTED AND UNEXPECTED. 241 

" No. Eh ? What ! " exclaimed Slea- 
ford. 

^^Fact.'' 

*^ For whom?" 

" Jane . Miss Crosby." 

" You don't say so ? " 

" I do." 

^'Then my niece is a rich young 
woman ? " 

'' Who may your niece be ? " asked 
Jane. 

" Miss Crosby is my niece. I never 
denied the relationship. I delight in it . 
I always did," said Sleaford, extending 
his hand to her. 

Jane did not respond, and Mrs. Kester 
turned her back upon the whole company. 
^*Nay, Miss Crosby, don't refuse the 
sincere congratulations of an honest man, 
who has no pride, no feelings but sympathy 
for those who need it, and who only 
desires to congratulate you and welcome 
you to London." 

VOL. I. R 



242 CRUEL LONDON. 

" Oh, bless you," said Jane, " I don't 
object to shake hands." 

Sleaf ord took her hand heartily, and 
kissed it. 

^^ And you, Mrs. Kester, why this reti- 
cence ? . won't you shake hands with me ? " 

^^ If it '11 do thee any good," replied the 
old woman. " There 's my hand ; if Jane 
there has got no objection I can have 
none, though shaking of hands counts for 
nowt when the heart isn't in it." 

" That is very unkind, Mrs. Kester." 

** Then why have you left us all this 
time and never come near us ? " 

A happy thought occurred to Sleaford. 

** Don't say never; my son Tom did 
himself the honour of calling upon Miss 
Crosby only the other day." 

" Yes, that 's true," said Jane. 

** And delighted he was, I assure you, 
to see you looking so well and happy ; he 
did nothing but talk of you when he came 
homo. Fact indeed. But then, you 



VISITORS, EXPECTED AND UNEXPECTED. 24e3 

were always a favourite of Tom's, you 
know ; ah, yes, now don't deny it ! You 
handsome young women in Lincolnshire, 
you have a deal to answer for." 

Jane looked at the Squire and smiled, 
but Kerman looked grave and thoughtful. 

" And how long do you purpose staying 
in town ? " asked Sleaford, turning in a 
propitiatory manner to Mrs. Kester. 

*' The Lord knows ! Till we have news 
as Ledger 's run, I suppose." 

" That 's next week," said the Squire, 
suddenly. 

" Aye, well that 's it ; though why we 
should stay here instead a goin' down 
and seein' race run, I don't know, I 'm 
sure." 

*' Then y ou will be in town on my 
daughter's birthday," said Sleaford. 

" Indeed ! " said Jane. 

" And you must do us the pleasure of 
dining with us on that day ; and we have 
a reception in the evening. Kerman, you 



244 CRUEL LONDON. 

must join me in persuading Miss Crosby 
to come." 

Mrs. Sleaford, finding the door wide 
open, entered the room as her husband 
was speaking. 

"Ah, this is fortunate! " he exclaimed, 
with an aside nod and wink at Mrs. Slea- 
ford which that lady did not quite imder- 
stand. " My dear, this is our dear niece, 
and I want you to join me in pressing 
upon her our united invitation to come to 
dinner, and also to the reception to cele- 
brate Patty's birthday." 

Mrs. Sleaford looked puzzled, and stared 
almost rudely at Jane's dress. 

" Miss Crosby has been travelling. So 
good of her to come here. Family party. 
Patty will be pleased, and . " 

Mrs. Kester closed the lid of the box 
which had caught Mr. Sleaford's eye, 
and sat down upon it with a bang 
that made Kerman laugh in spite of 
himself. 



VISITORS, EXPECTED AND UNEXPECTED. 245 

Mrs. Sleaf ord suddenly understood what 
was expected of her. 

" Certainly, yes. Really I was so taken 
aback, not expecting to see visitors," she 
said, " that you wiU excuse me, my dear ; 
and how are you ? And how long it is 
since we have seen you ! " 

"Kiss her," whispered Sleaf ord. 

Mrs. Sleaf ord kissed Jane with sudden 
fervour. 

"Thank you, I'm very well," said 
Jane. 

" I am sure we are very pleased to see 
you. Miss Crosby." 

"Call her Jane, my dear," said Slea- 
ford, ostentatiously; "Miss sounds dis- 
tant." 

" Oh, it does not matter," Jane replied. 

Mrs. Kester was just saying to herself, 
" This is as good as a play," when in 
walked the two Misses Sleaford. 

"My loves," said Jeremiah, "embrace 
your dear cousin Jane " ; and while he 



246 CRUEL LONDON. 

spoke, Mrs. Sleaford nudged Patty, and 
looked significantly at Emily. 

The girls moved somewhat coldly to- 
wards Jane, who still stood firm, erect, 
and defiant in the middle of the room. 

Patty grasped the situation at once. 
Something had happened which had made 
Jane Crosby's good opinion desirable. 

''Is this our cousin Jane?" she ex- 
claimed. " I am glad ! " 

She flung her arms round Jane, and 
kissed her heartily; while Emily shook 
her hand, and said, . 

" How do you do. Miss Crosby ?" 

''Jane is good enough to accept our 
invitation to dine with us on your birth- 
day, Patty, en famiUe, and to come to the 
reception afterwards." 

"Well, not exactly," said Jane; "I 
don't think I can." 

Kerman caught Jane looking at him as 
if for advice. 

" Do, Jane, do," he said. 



VISITORS, EXPECTED AND UNEXPECTED. 247 

"Would you like me to come?" she 
a^sked, in a softened manner. 

" Yes, I should indeed." 

"I wish Tom was here," said Mr. 
Sleaford. "He promised to call on his 
way from the country." 

" He seems very fond of the country," 
said Kerman ; " but he works hard all the 
week, as he says, and he earns his weekly 
rest." 

"I will come, then, Mrs. Sleaford," said 
Jane, "if you '11 take me as I am . ^plain 
Jane Crosby." 

" Handsome Jane Crosby, anybody else 
^ould say," gallantly remarked Slea- 
ford. 

" That 's London, I suppose," said 
Jane. " Your Southern manners would 
be all very well, if you meant all you 
^aid, Mr. Sleaford." 

" Our Southern manners are at fault to 
let you stand. Pray take a seat. Miss 
Crosby," 



248 CRUEL LONDON. 

" No, thank you," said Jane. " What 
is the time?" Kerman looked at hi& 
watch. '^Your messenger ought to be 
back by now.'* 

" Yes," said Kerman. 

"And you forget, my dear niece," said 
Sleaford, " that I am Lincolnshire born, if 
not Lincolnshire bred. We all pride our- 
selves upon that. By the way, I think I 
hear a cab at the door." 

"Messenger," said Jane, looking at 
Kerman. 

"No, it's Tom, God bless him!" said 
Sleaford, who had walked to the window^ 
" Always to be relied on. Said he would 
look in on his way from Brighton." 

" Is Kerman in ?" they could hear Tom 
say on the stairs, and the next moment he 
was in the room. 

" Hollo ! " he said, looking round, 
"here's a party! Why, it isn't your 
birthday yet, Patty. What ! Miss Crosby ! 
How do you do ? " 



VISITORS, EXPECTED AND UNEXPECTED. 249 

Sleaford pinched his son's arm. 

" Well ? " said Tom, in response. 

** Your cousin, your cousin," said Slea- 
ford, significantly. 

Mrs. Sleaford also nodded at Tom, who 
at once concluded that something specially 
civil was expected from him. 

" This is a pleasure ! " he said. " When 
did you come to town ? How well you 
are looking ! And Mrs. Kester, I declare ! 
Well, Kester, and how are you ? " 

Tom seized Kester by the hand. 

^^Middlin', thank ye, middlin', Mr^ 
Captain," said Kester. 

" How are you, Kerman, my boy, how 
are you ? " 

" Our dear niece has accepted Mrs* 
Sleaford's invitation to the reception next 
week," said Sleaford. 

'^ Indeed ! Ah ! that 's kind ; and how^ 
is Lincolnshire looking ? " 

*^ Pretty well," said Jane. 

'' Will there be any birds ? " 



"250 CRUEL LONDON. 

" Oh, yes; we expect quite a shooting- 
party on the first," said Jane. 

" I should like to come. May I ? " 

Old Sleaford squeezed his son's hand on 
the sly. Tom was in a reckless mood. 
He felt he was in the right track. He 
talked away about town, the weather, the 
'Crops ; referred to the last time when he 
had met Miss Crosby, and generally con- 
ducted himself to the complete satisfac- 
tion of his father, though he finished up 
a little less noisily than when he com- 
menced, at the remembrance of a cata- 
strophe which had occurred on the very 
next journey he had taken northwards 
after his visit to the Marsh. 

Jane seemed pleased to see Tom, and 
aid she was glad to hear he liked the 
country ; and all the time she noticed that 
Patty took opportunities to whisper to 
Kerman, who, every now and then, turned 
to the girl and made sotto voce remarks. 
Jane recognized at once that he spoke 



VISITORS, EXPECTED AND UNEXPECTED. 251 

softly and deferentially to the youngest 
Miss Sleaford, and that there was an air 
of proprietorship in Patty's manner to- 
wards him. Before she had time to 
do more than to notice this, leaving her 
memory to the task of storing it up for 
future reflection, Tim Maloney entered 
hastily, with a telegram in his hand. 

Jane stepped forward, to the general 
surprise of all present, took it from him, 
read it excitedly to herself, and then, with 
a face flushed and a voice full of delight, 
she exclaimed, looking at Kerman, . 

"Rookwood 100 to 1; the Duke 
3 to 2." 

" Hollo, by Jupiter, that is a change ! " 
said Tom. " What 's all this . what is it, 
governor ? " 

" I donH know," said Sleaford. 

*^ Yes, I '11 be at the party," exclaimed 
Jane. " Good-bye for the present. Come 
along, Kester, bring the box." 

Kester got up immediately and followed 



252 CRUEL LONDON. 

her mistress, an umbrella in one hand, the 
box in the other. 

" Good morning, everybody," continued 
Jane, " and three cheers for the Duke ! " 

'^Hmrah!" shouted Kerman, flinging 
himself into a chair and laughing aloud. 

" Hurrah, too! " exclaimed Tom ; "if 
hurrah is the correct thing, and the house 
is off, its head, hurrah let it be.'' 

The Sleafords looked at each other in- 
quiringly, Emily greatly amused, Patty 
and her mother with an expression of 
annoyance, old Sleaford amazed and be- 
wildered. 

The next moment Jane Crosby was 
gone. The rumble of a box dragged 
down the stairs, the banging of a door, 
the grinding of a cab's wheels on the 
gravel outside, a peal of laughter from 
Tim Maloney, in which Kerman joined, 
and the first act of the comedy of Jane 
Crosby's appearance in London was at an 
end. 



book: III. 



BOOK III. 



CHAPTER I. 

CONSPIRATORS IN COUNCIL. 

It is bad enough for his colleagues when 
a financial director is a rogue ; when he is 
a fool as well, the game of company-mon- 
gering is a cruel business. It is no inter- 
ference with the exercise of the reader's 
own judgment to say boldly that Jeremiah 
Sleaford was a rogue. He had been 
brought to moral grief by his excessive 
vanity. His leading ambition in life was 
to be thought clever ; next to this was his 
desire to be rich. Phrenology must have 
belied him, for he had a high, open fore- 



256 CSUEL LONDOK. 

head, about which he brushed his thin 
hair. Perhaps there was nothing behind 
this fine intellectual sign. It might have 
been one of Nature's freaks to put out a 
showy shop-window to an empty store. 
Clever men were taken in by it, for Mr. 
Sleaf ord had quite a reputation in the City 
as a clever business man, in spite of his 
occasional misfortunes. His scrupulous 
linen, his eye-glasses, the strut in his gait, 
his fluency of speech, his broad, open fore- 
head, his punctuality, the neatness of his 
office ("a place for everything, and every- 
thing in its place "), had won him the con- 
fidence of men much cleverer than himself. 
The death of his rich relative, the success 
of some of his latest schemes, and the fact 
that he was known to have been free and 
liberal with his money for at least a couple 
of years, to say nothing of his intimate 
association Avith Squire Kerman, the Lin- 
colnshire capitalist, were guarantees of his 
monetary stability. Therefore he was 



CONSPIRATORS IN COUNCIL. 257 

allowed to go ahead, encouraged to go 
ahead, trusted, flattered, introduced into 
this scheme, bounced into the other, made 
chairman of this company, consulting 
director of that, and generally put to the 
front wherever boldness and a sanguine 
view of the future were desirable. Mr. 
Jeremiah Sleaford thought he was gra- 
dually climbing to the highest point of 
financial power, and he had launched out 
at Fitzroy Square with a liberal and 
ostentatious hand. But for the failure of a 
country aquarium and a steamboat com- 
pany, promoted by the Financial Society, 
he would have purchased an estate in 
Essex a year prior to the incidents we 
are now narrating. These companies had 
been floated, but without any money being 
subscribed by the public, and the attempt 
to keep them swimming had been very 
ruinous. 

Unfortunately for Jeremiah Sleaford, 
the company mania was just at an end 

VOL. I. s 



258 CRUEL LONDON. 

when he went into it. If you had offered 
the pubKc Consols in return for their sub- 
scription to some new limited liability 
scheme they would have hesitated ; and the 
fairest scheme had the least chance of suc- 
cess. Nevertheless the Financial Society 
prospered. At first, this remarkable 
corporation only consisted of Mr. Maclosky 
Jones and his two clerks; but the 
Hampstead Cemetery Company brought 
additional strength. Mr. Sleaford intro- 
ducted that business to the Maclosky Jones 
organization, and placed on the Board, 
Jeremiah Sleaford, Esquire, Mr. Sleaford 
junior, Mr. H. Brayford, John Kerman, 
Esquire, WiUiam Roper, Esquire, and 
several other friends and financial asso- 
ciates. The syndicate became famous. 
The successful launching of the Cemetery 
Company had established its reputation; 
schemes and schemers poured in upon it 
daily. Mr. Fitzherbert Robinson, an out- 
side ally, who had vast parcels of shares 



CONSPIRATORS IN COUNCIL. 259 

allotted to him, was a great person in pro- 
moting the sale of scrip among the clergy 
and nobility, having a useful press in- 
fluence, a lord in his family, a hunting- 
box at Melton, and the proverbial impu- 
dence of that much-maligned individual, 
" the Devil himself." 

It was the week before the great recep- 
tion at Fitzroy Square, in honour of Patty 
Sleaford's birthday, when Mr. Maclosky 
Jones called his intimate financial friends 
together in the handsome offices (which 
now filled the entire Commercial Build- 
ings in Birchin Lane) to tell them they 
were ruined. 

'^ It 's just no gude me disguising the 
facts," he said, in a strong Scotch dialect, 
which he jerked out from a capacious 
mouth; ^^it's nae gude being sophisti- 
cated. Let us look at the difficulty in the 
face." 

He fixed his calm eyes upon Mr. Slea- 
ford, who turned red and pale by tiirns, 



260 CRUEL LONDON. 

and examined the countenances of his 
three friends . Mr. Brayford, Mr. Slea- 
ford junior, Mr. Roper, and Mr. Fitzher- 
bert Robinson. 

^^ But really, Mr. Maclosky Jones, I 
don't understand you. This is very 
sudden-^very sudden, and, considering 
the vast interests at stake, I really, my 
friends, I cannot help thinking that our 
worthy secretary and managing director 
is exaggerating the situation. It is true 
that for the last twelve months the de- 
pression . I may say the stagnation of 
British enterprise . has been such as to 
excite anxiety and careful precaution, but 
if the companies floated by the Syndicate 
have not all been successful, at least this 
financial corporation has made profits." 

" In shares," said Mr. Maclosky Jones, 
interrupting the oracular statement of Mr. 
Sleaford, "in shares, many of which, 
unfortunately, carry a heavy responsi- 
biUty." 



CONSPIRATORS IN COUNCIL. 261 

" And in money, sir, in money, Mr. 
Jones," said Sleaford, striking the table 
with his fist ; " and I say in money ! " 

Brayford said, "Hear, hear!" Tom and 
Robinson remained silent. 

" True," said the Scotchman, adjusting 
his satin cravat, and thrusting a thimble- 
ful of snuff into his capacious nostrils, 
" and we Ve spent it." 

"How, Mr. Maclosky Jones, how?" 
inquired Sleaford. 

Mr. Jones opened his desk and took out 
a very neatly folded statement and handed 
it to Mr. Sleaford, at the same time 
that he consulted a copy himself, and read 
out a few items : . " On the Cemetery pur- 
chase, Sleaford senior, 5,000?.; Fitzherbert 
Robinson, 1,800?.; Mr. Jones, 2,500?." 

" This is a private statement, I take it," 
said Sleaford, looking at it through his 
y^'gls-sses, and not appearing to listen to 
Mr. Jones. 

" It 's private among ourselves. I 



262 CRUEL LONDON. 

thought I'd] ust figure it out for the pur- 
pose of this meeting." 

^' Yes, yes," said Sleaford, ^^ we '11 con- 
sider that presently. The first question 
is, what are our wants and liabilities ? " 

"Our liabilities I am not exactly pre- 
pared with, but as to our immediate wants 
that 's not so difl&cult." 

Mr. Maclosky Jones took from his desk 
a private cash-book. While he jotted from 
it a series of calculations, Mr. Brayford 
asked Mr. Sleaford what was the position 
of the Cemetery Company. Mr. Sleaford 
shook his head and raised his hand re- 
provingly. 

" Let us hear what our secretary and 
managing director of the Syndicate has to 
say about our immediate wants," said 
Sleaford, wiping his eye-glasses. 

" Five thousand pounds before the Bank 
closes," said Jones. 

" How long will that keep us straight?" 
asked Sleaford. 



CONSPIBATORS IN COUNCIL. 263 

"About ten days; after that we 
shall.'' 

" Never mind after that," said Sleaford. 
" Excuse me, gentlemen ; as the principal 
shareholder and director, and as the person 
most interested in all the financial opera- 
tions of the Company, I wish to pull 
you through this difficulty if I can, satis- 
fied that it is only temporary ; and I am 
anxious to organize my own plans before 
submitting them for your approval." 

"Quite right," said Mr. Fitzherbert 
Eobinson, speaking for the first time. 

" Ten days, five thousand pounds ; and 
we have vast interests at stake. The 
Omaha Mining Company alone is sufficient 
to retrieve our losses in Cemeteries, Steam- 
boats, and Aquaria. The telegrams in 
yesterday's papers have sent up Omahas 
20 per cent., and I hold 5,000 shares. 
Send a messenger for my broker, 
please." 

Mr. Jones took up a speaking-tube and 



264 CRUEL LONDON. 

delivered a message, which was answered 
at once. 

" He is in the house." 

*^ Let him come here." 

Mr. Jones once more addressed himself 
to the speaking-tube, and a closely shaven, 
shrewd-looking gentleman entered. 

" Sell one thousand Omaha silver 
mines," Sleaford had written. He 

handed the slip to the broker. " What 's- 
the price now ? " 

^^ Five premium," said the broker. 

" Thank you; good morning." 

As he left the room, Mr. Sleaford drew 
out a cheque-book, and wrote a crossed 
cheque for 5,000Z, which he ostentatiously 
handed to Mr. Maclosky Jones. 

" There, Mr. Jones, pay that in to the 
credit of the Financial Society, and 
credit me with the amount ; call a meet- 
ing of the whole Board for to-morrow, and 
let us discuss the situation free from the 
embarrassment of immediate pressure." 



CONSPIRATORS IN COUNCIL. 265 

Mr. Fitzherbert Robinson rose and put 
out his hand. 

" Let me shake hands with you, Slea- 
ford ; you are a brick ! " 

Sleaford extended his hand with a high 
and mighty air. 

Brayford said "Hear, hear!" aloud; 
and to himself, " What a capital situation 
for ^ play ! " 

Even Tom Sleaford looked at the 
governor with an expression of genuine 
admiration for the first time in his life. 

" Mr. Sleaford, sir," said Maclosky 
Jones, " you are, indeed, the Napoleon of 
finance. It was my intention to tender 
my resignation this day, but in face of 
such a masterly spirit and such facility 
of resource I'll fight the battle through 
wi' ye." 

" That is well and properly said, Mr. 
Jones. The officers who desert their 
ships in the hour of danger are not 

 

worthy of their country ; and with the 



266 CRUEL LONDON. 

port of Omaha on our lee, as a brave 
salt would say, we have a harbour of 
refuge into which we may all fairly hope 
to sail triumphantly. Now, gentlemen, 
good morning. I have several other 
Boards to meet, and I dare say you have 
also other business calling for your atten- 
tion." 

The founders and wire-pullers of the 
Syndicate broke up, Tom and his father 
walking arm-in-arm to Change Alley, 
where Tom had a luxurious apartment as 
Managing Director of the Patent Horse- 
roughed Asphalte Company, just then the 
most popular of street-paving organiza- 
tions, so far as the Stock Exchange was 
concerned, though the system had not yet 
stood the test of time. 

^^Now, look here, Tom," said Jere- 
miah, his father, when the private door 
was carefully closed, "there is only one 
chance for the house of Sleaford ; let me 
45ay two chances. I will not aggravate 



CONSPIBATOKS IN COUNaL. 267 

the situation. You must marry Miss 
Crosby; your sister will marry Squire 
Kerman." 

^^ Indeed ! Easier said than done. Jane 
Crosby is all very well, but . " 

^' Don't tell me you are looking else- 
where for a wife, or I may say something 
unpleasant. I am not ignorant of the fast 
life you have been leading; I am not 
altogether blind to your Saturday-to- 
Monday excursions." 

' ^ What do you mean ? Can't a fellow 
who works hard during the week take his 
pleasure at the end of it ? My humblest 
clerks do that, at all events." 

" I tell you, Tom, you spend a great 
deal more money than your income war- 
rants ; and I heard of you at Brighton, the 
other day, driving a notoriously expensive 
lady along King's Road in the style of a 
duke." 

" Oh, indeed ! Well, you at least don't 
complain of the style," said Tom ; " you 



268 CRUEL LONDON. 

have taught me to have aristocratic 
' ideas.' " 

*^ Perhaps you will say I have set 
you the example of living beyond your 
means ? " 

'^ Well, if I were on my oath, and 
under cross-examination, I should say so," 
replied Tom, thrusting his hands into his 
pockets defiantly. 

"You are an ungrateful and wicked 
young man," said the father. 

" Oh, no, I am not," said Tom; " don't 
talk bosh. You shouldn't show off and do 
the pathetic to me, governor. Give me 
credit for common sense, even if you 
think I'm a scoundrel." 

^ ^ I think you a scoundrel ! Heaven 
forbid ! " 

" It don't much matter whether you do 
or not, governor. I 'm out of leading- 
strings, and I mean to enjoy life a 
much as I can while I 'm young ^nd 
capable." 



CONSPIRATORS IN COUNCIL. 269 

^^A clear conscience and a strict per- 
formance of duty are the proper way to 
enjoy life, Tom." 

The wilful heir of the Sleaf ords laughed 
a hard satirical laugh. 

^^ Now, look here, governor: you can 
tell that to Maclosky Jones and Company ; 
it 's wasted here. What do you want me 
to do ? Let 's come to business.'^ 

^^ Very well, Mr. Reprobate. In ten days 
time I must have twenty thpusand pounds. 
The little drama of this morning was 
simply a ruse arranged between Jones and 
myself, to impress Robinson and Bray ford. 
Robinson has made some thousands out of 
us. We want a little of it back, and his 
energetic influence in raising a loan on 
Omahas and Cemeteries. Brayford can 
raise a couple of thousands on the mort- 
gage of his house and works ; every little 
helps. But, with all my resources, strata- 
gems, enterprise, I am utterly and irre- 
trievably ruined if I can't comipand 



270 CRUEL LONDON. 

twenty thousand in ten days from this. 
There! open confession's good for the 
soul." 

" Well, you are a knowing, clever old 
financier," said Tom ; " and you wanted 
to talk to me like a father ! " 

*' My plan is this. Of Kerman's money, 
a large sum is invested in the Financial 
Society, and he has liabilities in Steam- 
boats, Aquaria, and Cemeteries; that doesn't 
trouble me now, because his winnings 
yesterday on the Leger are something 
enormous, and all through that remark- 
ably clever and wealthy young woman, 
Miss Crosby. Did you see what the Post 
said about her ? '* 

*^No; but I made a good thing myself 
on the Duke." 

" Very well, then, you can contribute 
to the sum I require in ten days." 

" Well, yes, I may be able to help you 
a little." 

" Tom, you talk in a very hazy way 



CONSPIRATORS IN COUNCIL. 271 

about money. I hope you are not running 
into debt ? '' 

"No." 

" I know you speculate a good deal 
without consulting me." 

" A little.'^ 

" I hope, Tom, that you are honest in 
all your financial dealings. Honesty ib 
the best policy." 

"But that is a more convenient proverb 
which you quoted to Mr. Jones once in 
my hearing, and which seemed to please 
him, ^ Gret money, Jones, honestly if you 
can, but get money.' " 

" Tom, you have not the slightest 
respect for me." 

" Oh, yes, I have, but I 'm not a hypo- 
crite." 

" No, I don't think you are." 

" Well, we '11 not complicate matters by 
discussing the question. You want me to 
go in for Crosby ; once you didn't want 
me, and at that time I should rather have 



272 CRUEL LONDON. 

liked her. She *s jolly enough, but I don't 
want a dair3nnaid now. I ^m above daiiy- 
maids." 

" A year's life in London, and she 
would be a lady worthy of a duke," said 
Sleaford. " What a fool I was to make 
inquiries into her monetary resources ! 
That old Martin was as deep and secretive 
as a Lincolnshire bog. Jane Crosby is 
worth no end of money ; and she 's liberal, 
she would part without a pang. Whether 
she would or not you could raise ten thou- 
sand pounds the day she accepted you." 

^' And lend it to you?" 

^^Yes." 

"Well, I shouldn't mind doing that; 
but to be frank with you, governor, I have 
my eye elsewhere . the prettiest woman 
in the world." 

"Rich?" 

"Not a penny." 

" What extravagance ! But you don't 
intend marrying her ? " 



CONSPIRATORS IN COUNCIL. 273 

"Don't ask questions, and you won't 
tempt me to deceive you. If Jane Crosby 
is as rich as you think, and she will have 
me with all my faults, and not expect too 
much, give a fellow a little licence, let 
him have his Saturday to Monday, and 
other reasonable privileges, I don't mind. 
There ! " 

"Good boy," said Mr. Sleaford; "you 
can arrange your privileges after mar- 
riage. Fix her on the night of the party, 
make the running between now and then, 
and settle it before ; but I give you up to 
the night of the reception, which will 
dazzle her; lay down your siege guns 
now, make the assault next Monday night, 
and the fortress is yours. Kerman is your 
only possible rival, and Patty has con- 
quered him, I think. I introduced that 
ass, the impostor Calais, to Jane, to dis- 
gust her and as a foil to you. Now, Tom, 
our fame, our comfort, our very existence, 
not to say your Saturdays to Monday, 

VOL. I. T 



274 CRUEL LONDON. 

are in your own hands ; for if I come 
down, Tom, I shall pull you down with 
me ; Financial Society and all will come 
down with Jeremiah Sleaford." 

"Not Asphaltes?" said Tom, anxiously- 
" Oh, I have touched you, then." 
"Not Asphaltes; this company is out 
of the syndicate's control; this company 
is making money, at all events." 

" Perhaps," said the father, myste- 
riously . "perhaps. Good morning, 
Tom ; we understand each other." 

" Perhaps," repeated Tom, as the door 
closed upon the retreating form of his 
father. "I don't know which is the 
bigger scoundrel, father or son. And just 
as I was thinking of doing the right thing 
by Caroline, declaring my true name, and 
bringing her to London ! Thinks she has 
been in London, poor innocent ! Thought 
I brought her to town to marry her. 
Wonder what possessed me to go in for 
the girl so earnestly ! I needn't have done 



CONSPIRATORS IN COUNCIL. 275 

SO ; there was no absolute necessity. 
Well, I can do as I please. I sometimes 
think she 's a little mad : talks to herself 
continually. Migswood says she has a 
lover on the other side of the ocean. 
She 's a mystery. By Jove, if things go 
well, I think I '11 do the square thing, and 
bring her to London as Mrs. Tom Slea- 
ford. She would make a sensation ; she 's 
as pretty as a picture. Wonder what the 
deuce will be the end of it all. Tom 
Sleaford, you are playing a dangerous 
game ! But there is this to be said about 
it, you only trust yourself, my boy, so 
you have no fear of a confederate splitting 
upon you. 'Pon my soul, if I could feel 
that I am not living over a powder mine 
I 'd settle down to be a respectable man. 
But, by Jupiter, if the governor comes to 
grief, there is no knowing what will 
become of Asphaltes; and I was fool 
enough to lend my name to those Syndi- 
cate bonds. I suppose Miss Crosby would 



276 CRUEL LONDON. 

be a big catch, and, after all, she need 
never know of my private paradise. I 
must stipulate for my little holiday. Ah, 
well, we shall see ; it rests with fate. I 
shall just shut my eyes and drift ; i I am 
drifting to the rapids and the falls, let's 
hope they are a long way off: perhaps the 
pleasant stream will flow on for good. It 
seems too jolly to last." 

As the great tide of human life rolled 
out of the City that day, spreading away 
in every direction, Tom Sleaford was one 
of the units of the mighty crowd. He 
did not halt among the tidal ways of the 
east or the west ; he went on and on far 
beyond London, for it was Friday night, 
and latterly he had made it a rule to go 
out of town on Friday and return on Mon- 
day. Nobody knew where he went. Lat- 
terly he only said generally that he was 
going out of town, except when he said he 
had rooms at Hastings, or that he liked the 
trip to Brighton, or what a jolly place Ryde 



CONSPIRATORS IN COUNCIL. 277 

was for a quiet Sunday, or how fresh and 
breezy it was on the North-east Coast, . 
the truth being that Tom, when he left 
London, went in a direction quite the 
opposite to any of these. He would have 
a cab called, it is true, and tell the porter 
at the oflSce door to drive to London 
Bridge or to Victoria; but finally the 
Great Western Station would be his point 
of departure, except when he selected to 
reach his destination by a roundabout 
route from King's Cross. He had a little 
estate on the Avon, the mystery of which 
fate will unravel and expose in due 
course. 



278 CRUEL LONDON. 



CHAPTER II. 



K ester's waxworks. 



From Mrs. Kester's point of view the party 
at Fitzroy Square was a distinct novelty. 
She had seen nothing like it, though it re- 
minded her of something exactly unlike it. 
Once, when she was in Lincoln, she had 
visited a famous travelling exhibition of 
waxworks. Somehow the Sleaford recep- 
tion and the Lincoln show mixed them- 
selves up in her mind. It seemed as if the 
Lincoln figures had stepped down from 
their pedestals and nodded and smiled, 
and walked about for her edification. 

Mr. Henry Brayford, who was the 
earliest arrival, had found Mrs. Kester in 






kester's waxworks. 279 

a black silk dress and a cap with back 
ribbons in it, sitting in a shady comer of 
the drawing-room, which had been con- 
verted into a paradise of foliage, flowers, 
and mirrors. Mr. Brayford had been 
ushered in by Tim Maloney, who had 
tipped him a wink and nodded in the 
direction of Mrs. Kester. Mr. Brayford, 
with a gay twinkle in his eye, which was 
made the livelier, in contrast with his sad- 
looking black clothes, black watch-chain, 
black studs, and shiny kid gloves, glided 
towards Mrs. Kester, striking the keynote 
of the waxwork idea in her wandering 
mind. 

" How do you do, Mrs. Kester ? " 
said Brayford, putting out his right 
kid glove, the fingers of which had an 
odd look, owing to their unnecessary 
length. 

*^ Very well, I thank you, Mester Bray- 
ford; and who would have thought of 
seein' you here ? " 



280 GRUEL LONDOK. 

" I might say the same to fyou," re- 
sponded Brayf ord. 

^^ Ah ! tha might ; but then it 's no fault 
of mine as I 'm here/' said the old lady, 
shaking her cap. 

ic No ?'' 

" Miss Jane would mak me come down," 

" Indeed ! " 

" Would hev me dressed up in my best 
gown ; as for me, I 'd niwer hev left bed- 
room till thing was ole over; but there, 
we can't always expec to hev our own way 
in this life." 

" No, indeed," said Brayf ord. 

^^ I shall be rare and glad when 
we get home again to the Farm, I 
shall ; for it 's nowt but hurry and flurry 
here." 

" Miss Crosby is quite the heroine of 
the week," said Bray ford. 

"The what?" 

'' The talk of the town." 

" Ah ! I towd her she mun be careful 






ketter's waxworks. 281 

or they'd be saying ole kinds of things 
about her." 

^^ But they are not saying anything un-^ 
kind about her." 

^* Thank 'em for nowt, Mr. Brayford." 

" Excuse me a moment, Mistress Kester/' 
said Tim Maloney, in a new and imposing 
Kvery ; " but there 's a gintleman as is jest 
about coming into the room who has been 
axing me if you are not the confidential 
woman of the Lincolnshire heiress. He 
calls himself the Count de Calais, and he's 
as much a count as Mr. Brayford is ; and 
the governor, it seems, introduced him to 
Miss Crosby two days ago, and be jabers if 
he hasn't the audacity to swear he '11 marry 
the lady, and he 's going to talk to you." 

Mrs. Kester nodded, and looked im- 
portant. 

'^ Is he an impostor, then, Tim ? " asked 
Brayford. 

" Ah, well, by St. Patrick, not more than 
many that figure in what they call society 



282 CRUEL LONDON. 

. foreign counts bom in St. Giles's, cheva- 
liers without ancestors, ginerals without 
regiments, honourables whose fathers were 
tallow-chandlers, authors whom nobody 
reads, and authoresses who are as mythical 
as the Phanix. But here comes the spal- 
peen himself." 

^* But what is he, then, Tim ? I have seen 
him before ? " asked Brayford. 

^' He 's a singer or musician, or some- 
thing in that way, and he wants a wife." 

A foreign-looking gentleman, with dyed 
hair and whiskers, and a fussy imperial 
that bristled over his chin, walked into the 
room and surveyed it through an eye-glass. 
After a general look round, he sauntered 
up to Mrs. Kester. Brayford stood aside. 
The foreign gentleman bent forward from 
the lower button of his waistcoat as if he 
had a mechanical joint there. 

*'Mrs. Kester, I belave?" said the 
foreign count, in an accent almost as dis- 
tinguishable as Tim's. 



kester's waxworks. 283 

Mrs. Kester nodded. 

" Will you permit me to say a few words 
to you ? I came at this early hour on pur- 
pose to have the honour of speaking with 
you. Pardon me, ' sir," bowing to Bray- 
ford. 

**You may say what^s gettin' to say 
before Mester Brayford," said Kester. 

But Brayford was of a retiring disposi- 
tion, and he walked away to examine some 
fine exotics which filled up an adjacent 
fireplace. 

^' How is Miss Crosby ? . well, I 
hope ? " 

" Nimble, thank you," said Hester, still 
seated, her mittened hands upon her 
knees. 

" Lovely creature, lovely creature ! " 

" Aye." 

^^ Likes London, I hope ? " 

" Can't say. Speaking for mysen I 'sll 
be glad to get hoame." 

*^ Mrs. Kester, you are, I 'm tould, her 



284 GBUEL LONDON. 

favourite woman, her confidential friend ^ 
will you aid me ? *' 

"Aid thee! why, what's matter wi' 
thee ? " 

" I 'm in love, madam, in love. I 'm 
not one to beat about the bush ; I come 
straight to the point." 

" I should think tha would," said Kester,. 
eyeing him curiously. "And who may 
the lucky wench be ? not my missus ? " 

" Your dear swate mistress." 

Kester leaned back and laughed. 

" Don't laugh, my dear lady, but help me j 
say something in.my favour; draw attention 
to my appearance, and I '11 reward the 
obligation. I am a count ; if Miss Crosby 
marries me, therefore, you see she '11 be 
a count-ess." 

" Surely, surely," said Kester, " and 
ride in her own carriage, I make no doubt.'' 

"With four horses," said the count . 
four greys. Live where she pleases . in 
Paris, London, Moscow, Dublin, Italy ; 



kester's waxworks. 286 

Tisit the first families; dress in purple 
and fine linen, and wear jewellery galore,^' 
"And pay for it all out of her own 
pocket, eh, your countship ? " said Kester, 
looking straight at his patent-leather 

shoes. 

 

"No, no, believe me," said the count, 
solemnly, " I am not mercenary. I have 
money and prospects; my expectations 
are great, I can assure you, and . " 

The dialogue was interrupted by the 
entrance of Mrs. Sleaford, Mr. Sleaford, 
and the two Misses ' Sleaford, who posted 
themselves within the doorway (shielded 
by an Oriental screen), to receive their 
guests, who now began to arrive by ones 
and twos and threes, and to fill the room 
with trailing dresses and a buzz of con- 
versation. 

Mrs. Sleaford, in half-mourning relieved 
^ith diamonds, posed with a society air ; 
while Jeremiah, the magnificent, with a 
frill in his shirt, and his thin hair brushed 



286 CRUEL LONDON. 

high up over his marble brow, strutted, 
like a pouter pigeon. 

Patty was calm and self-possessed, in 
white silk ; and Emily looked half ashamed 
of the whole business, in spite of the 
successful display of people and flowers. 

Mr. Sleaf ord bestowed a patronizing bow 
upon Brayford, who was duly impressed. 
Mrs. Kester kept near Brayford, but could 
not be induced to speak. Brayford 
addressed her several times, but she only 
retreated with him into the shadiest comer 
of the room and watched the nodding 
and smiling throng. When Mr. Kerman 
lounged into the room with his opera hat 
under his arm and in immaculate evening 
dress, the old woman's eyes followed him 
with increasing wonder. She had in her 
wandering mind two Kermans, Jack the 
Labourer and Jack the Squire, Jack the 
hearty Lincolnshire farmer and Jack the 
Squire in broadcloth. Both of them were 
manly fellows, but the gentleman of the 



kester's waxworks. 287 

two was a waxwork to Kester, a figure 
that had been screwed up and set a-going ; 
and when presently Patty Sleaford, with 
her fair hair and blue eyes, and her pinky 
cheeks, leaned languidly upon the Squire's 
arm, Mrs. Kester smiled at the picture, 
and very nearly made a remark to Mr. 
Brayford, who, finding Tim Maloney 
passing by at the moment, inquired the 
way to the refreshment- room, and offered 
his arm to Mrs. Kester, but the old lady 
declined to play the part of a walking 
waxwork, and so Brayford left her to 
dissipate in claret cup and coffee. 

Mrs. Kester was watching for the latest 
addition to the waxworks, her own dear 
"missus," Jane Crosby, whose appearance 
to-night was a source of great anxiety to . 
Mrs. Sleaford and Miss Patty. They had 
asked Emily to " see to her," and not let 
her come into the room a "dowdy." 
Patty was sure the poor, dear, ignorant 
thing would excite a titter all through the 



288 CBUEL LONDON. 

place, if somebody didnH see that she was 
decently dressed. Mrs. Sleaford, however, 
found comfort in the fact that Miss Crosby 
was rich, and famous too, for that matter, 
since the romantic story about the rescue 
of Kerman had been in all the papers. 
Kerman had not liked the paragraph, and 
he suspected that Roper was the author of 
it. Although he was glad enough to be 
out of his financial trouble, he felt small 
at the recital of the rescue, and under 
such influence it was not a little strange 
that his manner to-night was haughty, not 
to say defiant. Tom Sleaford had said to 
him, " Why you look as if you were wool- 
gathering, old man." Asked what he 
meant, Tom had said, "You seem so 
proud, and grand, and self-satisfied. Jack." 
The Lincolnshire Squire had replied, 
"And, by jove, Tom, that's how I feel 
somehow, and for the first time since I 
<5ame to London." 

Kester had seen the two young men 



kester's waxworks. 289 

talking together, and she made a mental 
note that the Sleaford waxwork was not 
so bad after all, for Tom had an air of gen- 
teel dissipation in his style which seemed 
aristocratic to poor old Kester. Nobody- 
took any notice of her; and she had 
gradually come to a sort of established 
conclusion in her own mind that she was 
really in a show, and that the performance 
now going on was something got up for 
her personal edification. 

Presently, when Jane Crosby came 
sailing into the room on the arm of old 
Sleaford, who had gone out expressly to 
bring in his niece (he had given out that 
she was his niece) Mrs. Kester nearly 
clapped her hands. To her the chief 
waxwork of the evening was now on 
view, and a fine specimen it was. Jane 
Crosby was a picture of health and grace. 
It is true there was a touch of the dairy- 
maid in her appearance, her arms were a 
little redder than was de rigueur^ and she 

VOL. I. u 



290 CRUEL LONDON. 

had not deigned to use powder. But her 
face was almost aggressive in its beauty. 
It was a fair complexion radiant with the 
fresh breezes of heaven. Her brown eyes 
flashed with the excitement of meeting 
fashionable society for the first time in her 
life; and in the expression of her hand- 
some, honest face there was the boldness of 
innocence. She wore a becoming dress of 
white silk. It was fastened at thethroatwith 
a single diamond, set as a brooch, the first 
and only present she had ever received 
from John Kerman ; but she also wore a 
ring which had been somewhat ostenta- 
tiously given to her by Tom Sleaford. 
Jeremiah the PoUtic had intimated to the 
Squire that Miss Crosby had as good as 
accepted his son. " And I hope," he had 
said, ' ^ that the next sensation in Fitzroy 
Square will be the preliminary arrange- 
ments for a double wedding, you and 
Patty, Tom and Jane, after which all 
ambition is over for me, Kerman. I shall 



kester's waxworks. 291 

have reached the summit of earthly bliss." 
Kerman had made no reply, for he had 
not just then quite shaped his course of 
conduct. Mrs. Sleaford and the adorable 
projector and partner of her schemes had 
made up their minds to fix the matri- 
monial arrangements as their interests 
dictated. 

Every eye was upon Jane. The Count 
de Calais, who had slipped a sovereign 
into Mrs. Kester's hand, to the indigna- 
tion of that old lady, who had flung it 
after him as he slipped away into the 
throng, hovered in the train of Jane's 
admirers, and bowed to her with reveren- 
tial admiration. But he had to postpone 
his wooing to some other occasion, on the 
quiet intimation of Tom Sleaford that if 
the governor did choose to have a sham 
count at Fitzroy Square, he would not 
stand the sham count's impertinence. 
This was said in the refreshment-room 
over a split soda -and -brandy, and the 



i 



292 CRUEL LONDON. 

count took it gracefully, and set down 
Tom's anger to jealousy. 

There was no necessity for Tom to 
crush the count in Miss Crosby's in- 
terest; for the Lincolnshire heiress was 
captivating all hearts, not upon financial 
grounds only. She was a genuine triumph 
on her own merits. The slight absence 
of polish in her manners, and her evident 
enjoyment of the unaccustomed scene, 
gave a piquancy to her natural charms. 
Kerman was jealous of Tom; Tom was 
jealous of everybody. She was jealous of 
Kerman, and she flirted with Tom as 
women will flirt, for the purpose of bring- 
ing Kerman to his senses. 

Patty Sleaford saw the situation, and 
took every opportunity to entangle Ker- 
man in unnecessary promenades and 
apparently confidential talks. Mr. Roper 
had not been invited to the party, and an 
alliance with Squire Kerman had become 
more and more desirable during the last 



kester's waxworks. 293 

few days. Patty, though she had a 
childish look, had an air of repose that 
made Jane feel, as she afterwards con- 
fessed, mawkish and out of place; and 
when Kerman conducted her to the piano, 
and she sang to the Count's accompani- 
ment a song full of love and devotion and 
feminine sentiment, Jane felt that she 
could not compete with her, and she 
ceased to wonder that the Squire was 
captivated. However, there was one com- 
fort in her calculations. She was deter- 
mined that all doubts should end to-night ; 
that she would either have him at her feet 
confessing his love, or she would give him 
up for good. She would show him that 
she could do without him ; that she was 
not fool enough to make herself miserable 
for him ; that if he did not think her good 
enough for him there were others who 
could find merit enough in her to be 
happy when she smiled upon them. It 
could not be that he really cared about 



294 CRUEL LONDON. 

her, or the events of the past week, and 
her almost open avowal of her love for 
him, would have brought a declaration of 
his for her. Jane felt humbled when she 
thought of what she had done for him. 
Her pride prompted her to reflect on her 
conduct, and to feel that there was only 
one satisfactory conclusion to her visit to 
London . the announcement of her forth- 
coming marriage with her friend and 
countryman. If that did not come to 
pass it would be said that she had followed 
him to Loncjon, and had tried to buy him. 
Indeed, there was no knowing what people 
might say. One thing she had made up 
her mind about, he should not triumph 
over her. 

In the mean time John Kerman had 
suffered all kinds of new sensations. See- 
ing Jane courted and flattered, discover- 
ing for the first time in his life what a 
beautiful woman she was, he had come to 
the conclusion that his love for her had 



kester's waxworks. 295 

manifested itself to him when it was too 
late. He saw that she walked about with 
Tom Sleaford, and talked to him with 
evident pleasure. He chafed at the fact 
that everybody was talking about the 
paragraph in the papers which showed 
him under an obligation to Jane. It irri- 
tated him to think how he had left this kind- 
hearted creature unnoticed for years, spend- 
ing the money which had by right belonged 
to her; how he had deserted his old 
friends, and when his selfish conduct had 
brought him to grief, how they had saved 
him. It had come into his mind that he 
had played anything but a manly part, 
and he had resolved that this night should 
not pass without an effort to redeem the 
past, and find a new and worthy path for 
the future. An honest word of explana- 
tion, a frank disclosure of his thoughts 
and feelings to his only true friend, would 
have saved him a world of misery ; but 
he was jealous of her, annoyed with him- 



296 CRUEL LONDON. 

# 

self, the victim of a false pride ; he was 
tired of the hollow mockery of London, 
and disappointed that money could not 
buy content and happiness. He wished 
old Martin had not left him sixpence ; he 
wished he had gone out into the world 
without a penny ; he longed for that same 
freedom which had dazzled his untutored 
mind when uncle Martin died ; in short, he 
was wretched, and he could not quite tell 
why he was miserable. 

At the back of the comer house in 
Fitzroy Square there were a small garden, 
a conservatory, and a couple of summer- 
houses. Dimly lighted with Chinese 
lanterns, the space was prettily utilized. 
The paths were carpeted. The flowers 
were all in full bloom, for they had 
been brought in during the day from the 
nurseryman's. Tom Sleaford, who was 
viciously fond of money for the sake of 
the selfish pleasures it could purchase, had 
made up his mind to win and to marry 



li 



kester's waxworks. 297 

Jane Crosby, and she had been so plea- 
sant and agreeable to him during this 
eventful evening, that he was anxious to 
fulfil his father's programme and propose 
for her ; not that he loved her, or any such 
nonsense as that, he said to himself, but 
because she was jolly, handsome, and 
rich, and he thought he could get along 
with her. For the time being, he wiped 
out all the other considerations which 
would have held back an ordinarily honest 
man. He had done a complete tour of 
the rooms with her; they had listened 
to an Italian song and a dramatic recital ; 
they had eaten an ice together ; they had 
looked at some of the best of the hundred 
hired pictures by famous masters ; and at 
last they had found themselves seated in 
one of the dimly lighted arbours in the 
garden. 

^^ Now I think we will go back to the 
drawing-room, Mr. Tom," said Jane. 

^^ Permit me to detain you a moment," 



298 CRUEL LONDON. 

said Tom. ^^ My dear Miss Crosby, permit 
me to recall to you the dear old place in 
Lincolnshire, where we first met." 

^^ Yes," said Jane, encouragingly. 

" If I had had the slightest encourage- 
ment at that time, I should not have to 
repeat solemnly now what you wouldn't 
let me say then." 

" Mr. Sleafqrd," said Jane, about to 
say she hardly knew what, but anxious to 
stop what she felt was going to be a 
formal proposal from Tom. 

" Forgive me, Miss Crosby. Jane . let 
me say Jane . don't put me down as one 
of those mercenary men who have been 
hanging after you to-night. Before I 
knew that you had a penny, when, 
indeed, I thought you a dependent on 
Squire Martin, I loved you for your 
beauty and your goodness." 

"That will do, Mr. Tom," said Jane; 
" that will do. I know you want to 
marry me : you, a fine gentleman ; me, 



kester's waxworks. 299 

an Ignorant country girl, with a dialect. 
Nay, that 's what I am, when all ^s said 
and done. Suppose I consented, and I 
have been thinking about it." 

^^ My dear girl ! " exclaimed Tom. 

" Wait a bit. I have been thinking 
about nothing else for the last hour and 
a half, and I've been saying to myself, 
^ Suppose Tom Sleaford asks me to marry 
him.' " 

" Well ?" said Tom, just a little taken 
aback at her frankness. 

" Suppose I did," continued Jane, 
" where should we live . in London or in 
Lincolnshire ? " 

^' Wherever you desired," said Tom. 

^^ I 'm a practical woman," said Jane, 
^^ and I Ve learned a good deal during the 
last fortnight of my visit to London. I 
feel flattered by your kindness and atten- 
tion, but I don't think I see my way to 
say ^ Yes ' to you. Once to-night I think 
I should have said it ; if you had asked 



300 CRUEL LONDON. 

me an hour ago, I think I should, 
but.'' 

^^ Don't say *but/ dear; say ^ Yes.'" 

^^But look here," continued Miss Crosby, 
disregarding the interruption, "suppose 
we married, and I came to live in London 
with you ; I shouldn't be fit for this kind 
of life. Not that I couldn't smirk and 
smile, and paint my face and my manners 
too, if I tried ; but I shouldn't be happy 
going to bed when one should be getting 
up; simpering at parties like this, and 
pretending you are enjoying yourself; 
looking at pictures, and listening to 
foreign songs that one doesn't understand. 
But that's not in my way, and I don't 
think I 'd ever get used to it. I should 
be tired in a month, and you 'd be 
ashamed of me in a week." 

" Then we will live in the country, at 
the Marsh. I '11 go in for farming, and 
hunting, and shooting." 

"Nay, you'd be just as miserable in 



kester's waxworks. 301 

the Marsh, as my husband, as I should be 
as your wife in London. Lads would 
laugh at your soft manners, and cockney 
ways. You would complain that we get 
up in the middle of the night ; and how 
would you stand Sundays ? Eh, dear, 
twice to church ; dinner at one in the 
day ; a gossip about crops and weather ; 
to bed at ten ; and there isn't a railway 
within ten miles ; and the only decent 
theatre is at Lincoln, open at race times 
and the fair." 

Tom set against this the counter reflec- 
tion, that London was only four hours 
away from the nearest station; and he 
was not without a special experience of 
to him a pleasant combination of London 
and country life. 

^^ And if we go to the theatre once in 
a year,'' she continued, ^^we have to 
make a journey on purpose, and stay all 
night in Lincoln, and, maybe, not like 
the play when we Ve seen it. Nay, my 



302 CRUEL LONDON. 

lad, you would die of the dumps in Lin- 
colnshire, and it would make me miserable 
to see thee unhappy, especially when I 
love the dear old county, every inch o 
it, and all the plain, straight, honest folk 
in it, their homely ways, their country 
manners. I 'm hungering to get back to 
it now." 

" Don't say that." 

" Yes I do say it, and further," she 
continued, rising, and putting out her 
hand in a kindly sympathizing way, 
*^ there 's my hand as a friend, Tom 
Sleaford, but I shall never marry." 

John Kerman and Patty passed the 
house just as Jane was laying her hand in 
Tom's. The Squire watched the action, 
and Jane was saying, " Take me into the 
house," as she brushed by him, leaning 
on Tom's arm. 

*^ It is all over with Tom," said Patty, 
as Jane and her brother walked slowly 
into the conservatory and disappeared. 



kester's waxworks. 30S 

'' Yes," said Kennan. 
^' I wonder when they '11 be married ! " 
" Do you think they will be married ? '^ 
^^ I should think so. Don't you think 

so?" 

" Yes ; of course they will be married,'^ 

said Kerman ; and as he spoke he put the 

last concluding touch to his programme of 

action. 



304 CRUEL LONDON. 



CHAPTER III. 

THE SQUIRE COMPLETES HIS LONDON 
EDUCATION AND DISAPPEARS. 

^^Are you not glad, John?" said Miss 
Patty. ^^I'm sure my brother Tom will 
make her a good husband." 

" He ought to. She '11 be the best wife 
in the world." 

They were seated in the arbour which 
Tom and Jane had just left. 

'^ She is very kind hearted," said 
Patty. 

" Kind hearted ! " responded Kerman. 
^^ That is weak language applied to her, 
Miss Sleaford. She is the best woman in 
the world. You have no idea what she 



THE SQUIRE DISAPPK4.RS. 305 

is. We were brought up together, she 
and I." 

^^Yes, so I understand, in Lincohi- 
fihire." 

^^Yes, lad and lass together, girl and 
boy; we walked together, went to the 
same church, gathered flowers together on 
May day, were like brother and sister . 
more than brother and sister, only I didn't 
know it. I never properly understood her. 
I was a fool, an ignorant dolt, too dull to 
see her good qualities." 

'' No, no, my dear Mr. Kerman, you 
paint them like a poet ; you do yourself 
an injustice." 

'' Patty . Miss Sleaford, you don't know 
how selfish I am. When I got that 
money which she should have had, I 
eame away and left the old place, like a 
brute, came up here and thought myself a 
great swell, got into difficulties, mortgaged 
the old property, never consulted my old 
friends, never went to see them, didn't 

VOL. I. X 



306 CRVKL LONDON. 

even write to Jane; unknown to me she 
buys up the mortgages, watches over my 
affairs, ivith tlie assistance o dear old 
Jabcz Thompson, and at the last moment, 
when I 'm on the brink of ruin, she comes 
up to London, and saves me . rescues me 
just as much as a drowning man is saved 
at his last gasp ; and I was half ashamed 
of her even then, because she wasn't 
fashionably dressed, and didn't talk fine, 
as they say in Lincolnshire. There 's a 
woman for you, Patty ! And here 's a 
man . a coward, a sneak, a fool." 

Kerman stood before Miss Sleaford pale 
and agitated. 

^^ No, no, Mr. Kerman," she said, in 
her calm, measured way, ^^ do not say 
that ; if any one else spoke of you in such 
terms, I would never know them again^ 
wherever I might meet them." 

^* Do you really feel as much interest in 
me as that ? " he asked suddenly. 

^^ Can you doubt it ? " 



THE SQUIRE DISAPPEARS. 307 

^^ After what I have just told you ? " 

" Yes, whatever you might say." 

They were interrupted at this point by 
Mrs. and Mr. Sleaford. 

"Let us go into the conservatory," said 
Patty. 

" Are they coming to make love in the 
arbour ? " asked Kerman, cynically. 

The old birds pretended not to see the 
young ones as they fluttered away in the 
direction of the house. 

"There they go," said Jeremiah; 
"marriage used to be the reliance of 
states and nations. I feel like a potentate 
arranging alliances. These projects are 
just as important, my love, to us, as great 
political marriages to intriguing powers." 

" Yes, dear," said Mrs. Sleaford. 

" Tom has succeeded, that 's pretty cer- 
tain; she has hardly left his side all the 
night ; my only fear was Tom, for I can't 
help thinking that Miss Crosby is fond of 
Kerman ; it was a fortunate thing that we 



308 CRUEL LONDON. 

booked him early. Patty 's a clever girl, 
a dear, good, clever girl." 

^^You owe it to her mother that she 
gave up Roper," said Mrs. Sleaford. 

" My love, you are my own true, sensible 
wife; and I hope you may never know 
how important it is that these young 
people should be meirried." 

^'I have known trouble enough, Jere- 
miah; if there is a fear of any more it 
would be best not to keep it from me." 

*^ Trouble, my dear ; a man with large 
investments, and associated with the 
financial energy of his country, must 
always be full of anxieties ; but I have no 
reason, my love, to anticipate anything 
but prosperity, happiness, wealth; this 
night is a triumph for both of us; we 
have only one drawback, Emily's idiotic 
attachment to Tavener." 

^' But we can afford to look over that," 
said Mrs. Sleaford, apologetically. ^^ He 's 
a handsome young man, and some day 



THE SQUIRE DISAPPEARS. 309 

may be successful ; I 'm sure I hope 



so." 



"Handsome, yes; but art, unless you 
are at the top of the ladder, and can plant 
it against the casement of fashion and 
climb into the society of princes, is no 
good, Mrs. Sleaford, no good. Emily 
ought to know better." 

" It 's no use saying so." 

" I know it, but I can't help regretting 
it. I have only seen Tavener once to- 
night." 

"He has gone." 

" Gone ! " exclaimed Sleaford. 

" He knows you do not care for him, 
and he only responded to our invitation 
for Emily's sake. He came as a matter of 
form. Lord Merry thoght shook hands 
with him, and he looked very well, and 
walked about for a few minutes with quite 
an air." 

"Did he, the upstart!" 

" My love, you must not be severe, for 



310 CRUEL LONDON. 

Emily's sake. Listen, she is singing; 
what a sweet voice it is! Come, let us 
return ; people will think it odd, and we 
have nothing more to learn about our 
darlings." 

"Right, my dear, right. Tom and 
Patty are provided for. Em must be 
treated as a luxury. Let her marry for 
love, as she calls it; we must patronize 
Tavener, and make our friends to buy 
his pictures, that 's all." 

They re-entered the reception-room in 
time for the applause which greeted Miss 
Sleaford's song. The Count de Calais 
then performed a fantasia, which he 
played with all his soul and body, fairly 
leaping at the instrument at one moment 
and seeming to soothe and stroke it the 
next. Mrs. Kester had found a sympa- 
thetic companion in an elderly gentleman 
who had suffered for many years from 
sun-stroke, which nearly cost him his life 
in India. They were both delighted with 



THE SQUIRE DISAPPEARS. 311 

the Count's playing. Before the per- 
former had finished, supper was an- 
nounced, and the guests were hunting up 
the partners who had been allotted to 
them long before by Mr. and Mrs. Slea- 
ford, during their many promenades about 
the room, and by Miss Sleaford, in her 
quiet, unostentatious, and business-like 
way. Though the company was what is 
called in society slightly mixed, there 
were some excellent people at the Slea- 
fords' on this occasion, West End people 
and City people, the former represented 
by the third-rate liobility, which finds the 
City a useful association, and the latter 
by some wealthy and well-known bankers, 
financiers, and brokers. Mr. Sleaford had 
no reason to fell ashamed of his guests, 
and Mrs. Sleaford had every reason to 
feel proud, because she could see that 
some of her most intimate friends were 
full of envy, hatred, and malice at her 
social success. 



312 CRUEL LONDON. 

Jane Crosby and Tom .Sleaford sat 
together, and their manner convinced 
Sleaford that the one question between 
them was when the marriage should take 
place. The two yoimg people, it wa& 
true, quite understood each other. They 
talked and chatted with a familiarity 
never so free as now. Miss Crosby ap- 
peared to be quite happy ; Tom perfectly 
at his ease. John Kerman thought so. 
He was beginning to feel the same kind 
of happiness . the happiness of knowing 
the worst . the happiness of having settled 
in your mind some great doubt, or fear, 
or plan. Jane looked happy, because she 
had refused Tom, and had resolved to be 
a martyr to her love. Tom was uncon- 
strained, because he had done his best to 
carry out the paternal scheme, and had 
failed, not through any fault of his own ; 
moreover, in failing, he had, at all 
events, made a friend of a woman who 
might some day be useful to him. For 



THE SQUIRE DISAPPEAES. 31S 

Jane had said, ^^ Let us be friends, Tom ; 
we are neither of us fools, and we know 
that love can't be turned on to order." 

Tom had also felt after all that he had 
had a narrow escape from a difficulty, 
beyond that simple question of whether 
he would live in London or the country 
for the remainder of his natural life. 

The Squire tried to imitate Tom in his 
gaiety of manner, and at the moment he 
was really not unhappy, for he had resolved 
upon a great sacrifice. 

^ ' Let us slip away from the supper- 
room as soon as we can, Patty. I want 
to finish that conversation we commenced 
a short time since.'* 

Patty nearly blushed. For a moment 
she wished the Squire were Roper; but 
she gulped down a glass of champagne, 
and, looking into a future of luxury and 
ease, of carriages and horses and plenty 
of money, said, . 

'^ I am ready." 



**314 CRUEL LONDON. 

" My dear Miss Sleaford . ^my dear 
Patty," said the Squire, in the shade of a 
clump of white roses by the conservatory, 
"I cannot mistake the true feeling of your 
heart. There are those who think you 
cold and calculating." 

'' Oh, Mr. Kerman ! " 

" I don't think so." 

" Thank you." 

*^ I am sure you are not." 

" Thank you again." 

^* I know you would make sacrifices to 
duty and to love." 

Patty looked up into his eyes, which 
were ablaze with a new light. His face 
was pale. 

'^ How hard he finds it to say the 
word ! " thought Patty. 

^^For some little time I have been 
trying to study your sweet, self-denying 
nature." 

" Spare my blushes," said Patty, not 
knowing what else to say. 



THE SQUIRE DISAPPEARS. 315 

^^ I do not know," continued the Squire, 
^ ^ whether most to admire your self-sacri- 
fice or your devotion. Any man could 
not fail to feel flattered at your con- 
descension. You love Mr. William 
Eoper ? " 

Patty uttered a little scream of sur- 
prise. 

The Squire took her hand, continuing 
his startling speech. 

" You love him for himself ; you would 
marry me for my money." 

Patty, after a fruitless struggle to resent 
the insult, broke down under the earnest- 
ness and truth of the charge. 

" I don't blame you, my dear ; I don't 
blame you, my pretty little London lady. 
You are in the fashion. This Cruel 
London of yours makes matches every 
day on your father's plan. You are only 
dutifully obeying him. Don't cry, my 
dear; don't cry." 

The Squire spoke with tears in his 



316 CRUEL LONDON. 

voice, and put his arm gently round her 
waist. 

" You shall be made happy. Don't be 
put out; dry your eyes. I'll do some 
good before I lay down the part of squire 
and gentleman, and take up my own 
rightful character. Miss Crosby and your 
brother arc coming : they can see us. 
Take my arm, and listen as we walk. I 
must say all I have to say." 

Patty laid her hand upon the Squire's 
strong arm, and they walked to a shadier 
part of the garden ; for now other guests 
began to seek the cooler air of the night 
outside the house. 

^^ I 'm tired of money," continued 
Kerman, ^^ tired of everything, almost of 
life. I only loved one woman, and I have 
found that out too late. God bless her ; I 
hope she will be happy, as she deserves 
to be, with your brother. But I couldn't 
bear to see her another's. I shall go 
away to America, chalk out a new life, 



THE SQUIRE DISAPPEARS. 317 

and try to forget the past. As for the 
money, my poor self-sacrificing little 
London love, you and Roper shall have 
enough to satisfy even your politic 
father." 

^^ Oh, Mr. Kerman ! " exclaimed Patty, 
'^ you don t know how mean and con- 
temptible you make me feel." 

^' I didn't mean to pain you." 

^^I see how despicable I am; I know 
how unworthy I am of a good man's love. 
Pray give me a seat." 

He led her to a garden-chair away in 
the furtliermost corner of the garden, and 
stood silently by her for a few minutes 
while she cried. 

^^ Don't take it to heart so. Tell me 
that I have spoken the truth, and then I 
will proceed to tell you my plans." 

^' Don't ask me to say ^Yes' or ^ No.' 
Let the confession of my shame and 
humiliation suffice." 

"You don't contradict what I have said?" 



318 CRUEL LONDON. 

" Oh, no, Mr. Kerman, I do not, I do 
not." 

" Then say nothing of what has trans- 
pired until you have a letter from me 
in the morning. When your father or 
mother asks you if I have proposed, say 
that I preferred to put it in writing." 

"Yes." 

"You promise?" 

" I do." 

" You shall not regret it, my dear. I 
will give you a dowry that shall satisfy 
you. Though I don't care for Roper, I 
do for you, and I want to feel that I have 
at least done one good thing; and now, 
good-bye ! " 

He took her hand. She stood up. He 
kissed her. 

"My child," he said, "not my wife, I 
will be as good as a father to you." 

The next moment he was gone. 

And for all practical purposes, so far as 



THE SQUIRE DISAPPEARS. 319 

this history is concerned, that was the end 
of the Sleaford party. There was much 
talking and promenading, more singing, 
some flirting, even an impromptu waltz near 
the grand piano. Blue lights and green 
lights were burned in the garden ; cabs and 
carriages dashed in and out of Fitzroy 
Square ; linkmen bawled to each other ; 
a card party was started in Kerman's 
room ; and everybody said that the social 
gathering had been a decided success. 
Everybody was wrong. It had been a 
failure of the direst kind in the estimation 
of the host and hostess ; though Mrs. 
Sleaford found in her motherly heart a 
little corner in which Patty and her true 
lover were enshrined with happy omens. 
Tom confided to his parents, before the 
night was over, the result of his proposal 
to Miss Crosby; all that they could get 
from Patty was that Mr. Kerman would 
write her a letter the next day. Emily 
saw the trouble in Patty's eyes, and went 



320 CRUEL LONDON^. 

to sleep at last in her arms, after a full and 
complete confession of all that had 
occurred. The next day a solicitor waited 
upon Mr. Sleaford and Miss Crosby. In 
due legal form John Kerman had made 
out a deed of gift of ten thousand pounds 
in the hands of trustees to be paid on 
Patty Sleaford's marriage with Mr. William 
Koper, or any other person whom she 
might freely select ; and a deed of gift to 
Jane Crosby of all he possessed besides, 
with a power of attorney for her to act 
for him in any question that might arise, 
assigning to her any interest he might still 
possess in the late Ephraim Martin's will, 
and requesting her to place Mr. Jabez 
Thompson in communication with his 
solicitor. The whole business had been 
put into careful legal shape, and there was 
a private note to Jane, in these words, '^ I 
restore all (but the sum I venture to give 
to poor little Patty) to her who has a right 
to it. God bless you, Jane, my dear 



THE SQUIRE DISAPPEARS. 321 

friend; God bless you and good-bye. I 
am going to face the world in earnest now. 
We shall meet again, I hope, some . day. 
May you be very happy, my dearest and 
only friend." 



END OF VOL. I. 
CRUEL LONDON. 



BOOK IV. 



CHAPTER I. 

MARTYRS AND VICTIMS IN PEACE AND WAR. 

From a luxurious home in the Southern 
States of America, to a fugitive existence 
in a country desolated by war; from 
penury in New York to a happy home on 
the hill-side of a smiling valley in old 
England: these were changes which re- 
presented strange experiences in a young 
girl's lifetime. Caroline Virginia Denton, 
whom two years ago we saw standing by 

VOL. II. B 



i 



2 CBUEL LONDON. 

her father's side, on that ocean steamer 
leaving the harbour of New York, had 
gone through all this in a few short years, 
and we encounter her, still a girl (though 
exercising the duties of womanhood), at a 
picturesc|ue house called " The Cottage," 
overlooking the peaceful valley of Essam 
on the Avon. 

In the rare summer setting of the Eng- 
lish meadows, The Cottage was a gem of 
arcliitoctural simplicity. Sitting on the 
green lawn, Caroline Denton, now Mrs. 
J^hilip Gardner, looked like some Oriental 
flower transplanted into an English garden. 
Loss than the middle height, her figure 
was slim and dainty. She moved with 
an indefinable gracefulness. Her face, 
her hair, were southern in type and cha- 
racter. Dark, with the glowing radiance 
of health, there was a world of softness 
and beauty in her eyes. They were black 
as night, and tender as opening buds in 
spring. I lor hair liad a tinge of raven- 



MARTYRS AND VICTIMS. 6 

blackness, and there was a wavy luxuriance 
in its folds. When she looked at you, 
the dreamy softness, the pathetic happi- 
ness of the face touched you. If you tried 
to read it you would say there was a void 
in the woman's heart ; a sense of a mission 
unfulfilled ; a mind that had its sorrowful 
secret, nursed in musing hours of loneli- 
ness ; a longing for something undefined. 
When she smiled it M'^as the sun breaking 
through a rain cloud; when she laughed it 
was the sun at noon, bright, clear, jocund. 
But she rarely laughed, except at the play 
of an infant, her first-born, which would 
wile away her time by lamb-like gambols 
on the grass. Mrs. Gardner of England, 
the Caroline Virginia Denton of the 
Southern States of America, was a con- 
trast to Jane Crosby, unlike her in every 
feature, as she was different in appear- 
ance, thought, manners, feelings, from the 
Sleaford girls at Fitzroy Square. She 
was * womanly to a fault, . trusting, con- 



J 



4 CRUEL LONDON. 

fiding, self-sacrificing, gentle, made to be 
loved, . a beautiful creation, worthy of the 
Miltonic eulogium. 

Clad in a cream-coloured dress of soft 
linen,, with a bit of crimson ribbon round 
the throat that heightened the rich brown 
depth of her complexion, she was sitting in 
the shade of an elm by the summer-house 
at The Cottage, with a long bend of 
the valley before her, the placid river 
Separating her from the little town of 
Essam, with its lichen-tinted stone houses, 
its church tower among the elms, and its 
ruined abbey in the distance . a crumbling 
reminiscence of mitred abbots, supersti- 
tious kings, and battle-fields long since 
effaced by waving corn and thick green 
grass. 

It was the joyous summer time. The 
valley pulsated with a never-resting but 
peaceful life. The dragon-fly poised its 
shimmering wings on the hedges down by 
the river. The lark was singing some- 



MARTYRS AND VICTIMS. O 

where in the sky. The air was full of a 
mysterious, lulling, somnolent music. A 
thousand bees were busy in the budding 
limes. The perfume of the flowers tried 
in vain to compete with the scent-laden 
breeze that had kissed the swathes of 
newly-mown grass. Beneath the shadows 
of a willow-clad bend in the river, water- 
lilies invited the butterfly to come and 
rest in their yellow bosoms. Now and 
then the murmuring silence would be 
disturbed by the plunge of a rat taking a 
mid-day swim ; or the plash of a fish 
tempted from his retreat by some gaily 
tinted fly. In the hayfields, flocks of 
young birds were trying their newly- 
fledged wings. The swallow sailed in 
cm-ve and circle overhead. The mowers 
were resting in the shade, eating their 
frugal meal of cheese and salad, and 
passing round the yellow cider. The 
merry laugh of children at play came up 
from some hidden copse in the valley ; 



4 



6 CRUEL LONDON. 

and a summer haze hung about Essam, 
giving its gables, towers, and trees the 
deKcate appearance of a soft poetical 
drawing against the sky, unreal in its 
very natural reality, a dream of old 
houses, a passing fancy of elms and 
crows, of ruined abbeys and square 
church towers. 

No wonder the heart of the woman to 
whom all this appealed in a thousand 
sympathetic ways was touched with its 
poetry ; no wonder the soul melted in 
tender thoughts of the past, and in present 
love for the little one that lay asleep in 
her arms. 

^^ Ah, my darling," she said, in a voice 
of musical sweetness, '^ all this is indeed 
beautiful ; you are born in a land of love- 
liness ; not so glorious in its tall grasses 
and its great shadowy leaves, its mighty 
savannahs, as your mother's native land, 
but more beautiful in its sweet repose, 
its calm old ways, iti^ nestling towns 



MARTYRS AND VICTIMS. 7 

on river banks, and its everlasting green- 
ness." 

She was not looking at the child. Her 
eyes rested on the towers and gables of 
Essam. 

^^ It is all like a dream ; I sometimes 
think I am sleeping through a long, long 
fancy ; and that I shall wake again 
in my once beautiful home among the 
cotton-fields, with the songs of the 
negroes coming up from the plantation. 
And then there is a troubled time, the 
tramp of soldiers, the hurrying of feet, 
the roar of cannon ; great fires flash, 
and the clouds of smoke go up to 
the sky ; then a weary flight on horse- 
back, in rattling waggons, in boats at sea ; 
and a time of poverty, of proud starvation ; 
of a widowed father . old, sad, worn . 
longing to quit a land accursed, once so 
sweet and sunny, a country once so beau- 
tiful. 

* Maryland ! My Maryland ! ' " 



 

/ 



8 



CRUEL LONDON. 



She tried to sing the touching lines, and 
burst into a flood of tears. The child 
slept on, though the hot, agonizing drops 
fell upon its face. She bent down and 
kissed the pouting, cherry lips. They 
parted into a smile, as if the mother's 
touch had awakened happy dreams in the 
infant's slumbers. 

^'I'm very wicked, Willie," she said, 

^^ but it is not wrong to wish your 

grandfather could have lived to see you. 

William Grraham Denton! That's your 

name, little one ; it was his. May you 

be as good and fine a man ! May your 

fate be cast in happier lines ! To travel 

all this way in the hope of eventually 

laying his bones quietly and peacefully 

among strangers; and to be killed on 

landing. Oh, cruel, cruel fate ! It makes 

^ ieel wicked, Willie, in spite of that 

^ //jing song the river is singing down 

>^ ^^00^ Tristram Decker would have 

' j^ 4ef^^ to hear that music. Who was he ? 



MARTYRS AND VICTIMS. 9 

Poor Tristram, he was a Federal officer, 
quite young, and altogether unlike the 
others who fought against the dear, 
martyred South; but your grandfather 
wouldn't forgive him. If men who go 
forth to slay each other only knew the true 
and noble hearts first, before they pierce 
them! Sometimes I think it is all wrong; 
that God has left His beautiful world to 
its fate, and no longer lifts His hand to 
protect the good or to punish the wicked. 
Ah, but you should have seen your grand- 
father ! what a fine handsome man he was, 
. tall and straight, with white hair. He 
was a king at home. I have often thought 
he was not himself in these latter days. He 
would talk to me for hours, as I am doing 
now to you, and he came to England, and 
brought me here without an object, with- 
out a plan, without any arrangement of any 
kind. He said we were journeying to the 
new Jerusalem, to a land flowing with milk 
and honey, to the home of our fathers. 



10 CRUEL LONDON. 

where we would find out their memorial 
tablets in grey old churchyards. Ah, 
Willie, he was a great man once, with 
hundreds of slaves, with lands that 
stretched as far as the eye could see, 
with a great house twenty times as large 
as The Cottage, with shady verandahs 
about it ; he was more of a king than an 
English monarch, and I was as gay and 
bright as yonder butterfly, as free and 
joyous as those swallows. They burnt 
that house down, and all the huts and 
cottages. Our servants fled. We had 
nowhere to rest the soles of our feet ; and 
we could never more sing, 

^ Maryland ! My Maryland ! ' " 

A young man, familiar to the reader 
as Tom Sleaford, but only known to 
the woman as Philip Gardner, sauntered 
from the cottage door and stood for a 
few minutes looking at her before she 
saw him. He was dressed in a light 



MARTYRS AND VICTIMS. 11 

boating jacket and trousers. He had, 
sinx5e we last met him, grown a beard and 
started an eye-glass. He put the foppish 
thing to his eye, and looked at the girl- 
like mother and her infant. 

^^ Talking to yourself again," he said 
presently, in a tone of reproach. 

^^Ah, Philip!" she exclaimed, with 
pleased surprise ; ^^ I thought you had 
gone to London." 

^^ I'm not going up till to-morrow," ho 
replied, carelessly. 

^^ Oh, I am very glad. Hush, don't wake 
the baby ; I will take it to Susan." 

She got up, lifting her infant load lov- 
ingly, and went into the house. 

The Cottage was far more pretentious 
than its title would denote. It was an 
old-fashioned house, covered with creepers 
and nestling among trees. It was sur- 
rounded by a garden which, closed in at 
the back, broke away from walls in the 
front, where it ran into lawns, flower-beds, 



A 



12 CRUEL LONDON. 

and clumps of foliage, ending in a sunk 
fence, beyond which, down to the river, 
The Cottage estate stretched in undulations 
of meadow lands dotted with sheep. The 
Cottage, house, farm, and estate, formed 
one of the prettiest little properties in all 
the vale of Essam. It had been purchased 
some three years ago from its former owner 
by a local agent for Mr. Philip Gardner, 
who was understood to be a gentleman of 
means. He had bought it as it stood, 
furniture, stock, and everything, and paid 
cash down on the nail. The curiosity 
about the new owner had nearly died out 
before he appeared. It was nine months 
before he came, and he did not call upon 
anybody. It was understood he had a 
wife. A lady was with him, at all events, 
. a loud, showy woman. They did not go 
to church. The rector called twice, but on 
neither occasion could he see the master 
or the mistress. A gay boat appeared on 
the river, and the loud laughter of more 



MARTYRS AND VICTIMS. 13 

than one vulgar woman was heard in the 
evening as Mr. Gardner rowed them to the 
boat-house which he had built opposite his 
estate. Mr. Gardner was no other than Tom 
Sleaford, and The Cottage on the Avon 
will explain his regular though somewhat 
mysterious weekly absences from town. He 
had invested in this estate during Squire 
Kerman's merry days in London ; he 
owned it before the Cemetery Company 
came to grief ; he was its devil-may-care 
master, with plenty of money at his 
banker's when he used to pretend to Ker- 
man that he was short of cash. 

The Asphalte Company was a flourish- 
ing concern ; so was the Northern Iron- 
works, which he had bought and turned 
into a limited company. Old Sleaford 
had not the faintest idea of the money 
Tom had made ; and Tom had not the 
faintest idea of letting anybody know 
what he was worth. To avoid suspicion, 
and with a view to protection against 



/ 



14 CRUEL LONDON. 

reverses, he had bought The Cottage estate 
in an assumed name. In London he was 
Tom Sleaford; at Essam he was Philip 
Gardner, but he was very rarely seen by 
his neighbours. They did not think him 
worth knowing. The kind of life which 
had inaugurated the Gardner reign at The 
Cottage was not calculated to make a good 
impression on local opinion. Indeed, it 
was whispered over Essam tea-tables that 
the flaunting, vulgar lady they called Mrs. 
Gardner was not his wife at all, and that 
the lady visitors who came there were no 
better than they should be. 

A change had, however, come over tlie 
scene when, some two years ago, a pretty, 
foreign-looking girl began to be seen in 
the gardens, or driving along the highways. 
There had been quite a flutter in the church 
with the old square tower when she aj)- 
peared in The Cottage pew, which had 
been vacant so long. The strict families 
of the town resented the intrusion ; and 



3IARTYR.S AND ^^CmMS. 15 

the rector had been informed that he miu$t 
really inquire into the position and cha- 
racter of the lady. He had done so with 
politic care and discretion. Meeting Mr. 
Gardner at the station, he had entered the 
same railway carriage, and led up to the 
subject with clerical deftness. ^Ir. Grard- 
ner had been perfectly frank with him. 
" Quite right that you ask the question,^' 
he had said; "pray don't apologize. I 
have led a free life, but I have sown 
my wild oats. I am really married, and 
the lady about whom you are so com- 
plimentary is my wife, an American 
heiress. It is verj' good of you to say that 
under these circumstances Essam and the 
county society are open to us ; we don't 
care for society ; we have reasons for liv- 
ing quiet and retired, and I trust you will 
let us have our way, or I shall sell The 
Cottage and go somewhere else. All my 
time is occupied in perfecting an invention 
on which I have spent many years ; when 




16 CRUEL LONDON. 

that is done I shall be rich enough to buy- 
all Essam and the county too, and then, 
Mr. Rector, I hope to be a, worthy and a 
liberal parishioner.'' 

Mrs. Gardner, the pretty American, 
had, therefore, been permitted to go 
about without social molestation, and to 
attend church without comment, except 
as to her bonnets and dress. Not that 
Essam and the county cared to break in 
upon the privacy of The Cottage. They 
did not believe much in Mrs. Gardner. 
She was too pretty to be very good, cer- 
tain of the ladies said. Moreover, the 
Gardners were up at all hours of the 
night, Mrs. Gardner dressed in such out- 
of-the-way style, and all the men who 
chanced to meet her were in such raptures 
about her ! She sang songs on a Sunday, 
and had been seen by people as they were 
going to afternoon service, painting at an 
easel fixed up in the meadows. There 
was something weird and foreign about 



MARTYRS AND VICTIMS. 17 

the woman, and Essam society preferred 
to give her a wide berth; though the 
people whom she had to meet once in a 
way were courteous to her more from fear 
than respect, for she had an imperious 
manner, an air of authority, the habit of 
being obeyed, which quickly put down 
any thought of insolence in man or 
woman. Nevertheless, Mrs. Gardner con- 
tinued to be a mystery to Essam ; and for 
herself it may be said that she lived a 
dreamy life, the reality of which she often 
doubted, sitting, as we see her now on 
summer days, talking to her infant in a 
half forgetful, wandering manner, which 
did not please Mr. Sleaford, alias Philip 
Gardner. 

'' You 're always muttering and talking 
to yourself,'^ said Tom, when she came 
back to him. 

"Am I, dear?" she said, her great 
black eyes turned towards him. 

"Am I, dear? Yes," he said. 
VOL. n. c 



18 CRUEL LONDON. 

** I think I was talking to the baby." 

"It's the same thing. I don't like 
women who talk and mutter to them- 
selves." 

"You said I was not to talk to the 
people at Essam, dear, nor to the doctor, 
nor to the minister ; and as you are only 
here two or three days a week, I suppose 
I have got into the bad habit that way." 

"I didn't mean you were not to talk 
exactly; you ought to know what I 
meant." 

"Yes." 

* * Yes, " he repeated, mockingly. ^ ^ Don't 
say yes in that silly way, as if you were 
a child. You know what I mean well 
enough. I don't want people talking 
about our affairs, gossiping and chatter- 
ing about my business, what I do, where 
I go." 

"Don't be angry," said the woman, 
timidly, linking her arm in his. "I 
never talk about our affairs; and as for 



MARTYRS AND VICTIMS. 19 

what you do or where you go, I can't talk, 
because I don t know." 

" You want to know ; that 's what 's the 
matter." 

" Not if you still object, love. But you 
promised to take me to London this 
summer, and show me the fine English 
ladies riding and driving in the Park; 
and I do so long tp see London." 

"You know what befel Eve. Her 
curiosity ruined both herself and her 
husband." 

" But my curiosity is very mild, Philip, 
I don't want to hear anything more than 
you wish to tell me, and I have never 
seen any more of England than this." 

" And isn't this good enough for 
you?" 

" It is very beautiful, . so may a bird- 
cage be ; but the occupant may get tired 
of seeing the same bars, however beautiful^ 
for ever." 

"Oh, you're tired, are you? Very 




20 CRUEL LONDON. 

well, I will sell The Cottage and we '11 go 
somewhere else." 

"Now, my dear Philip, don't say 
that." 

"I find you a stranger, without a 
friend, without a home; I bring you 
here, I give you all a man can, and you 
are discontented." 

"No!" exclaimed the woman, with 
something like a rebuke in her eyes. 

"You hadn't a penny in the world. 
You have money in your purse, every 
luxury. You repay me with ingratitude." 

She took her arm away from his and 
stood still, her eyes flashing, the colour 
leaving her olive face. 

" Don't say that ; I can't bear it. And 
I was not penniless, Philip." 

" I will say it. I say you refuse my 
kindness with ingratitude." 

" And I say you are cruel to say so." 

"Cruel!" 

He repeated the word with a sneer. 



MARTYRS AND VICTIMS. 21 

" Cruel and unmanly," she said, her lip 
quivering. 

" Thank you." 

"Is this the way English husbands 
treat their wives, in return for love, devo- 
tion, the sacrifice of every thought and 
wish? Do you taunt them with the 
money you allow them, the food they 
eat?" 

" Go on. I thought it would come out 
at last, all this talking to yourself. We 'd 
better have it out." , 

"Yes, in Heaven's name, let us, for my 
heart is bursting. For months past you 
have flung my poverty in my face, not 
openly as you have to-day, but by infer- 
ence in little ways. I can't bear it. You 
will make me hate you." 

"Well, upon my soul, that's nice. 
And is this the way American ladies treat 
their husbands, since you are making 
comparisons between the two countries?" 

She made no reply. 



22 CRUEL LONDON. 



" Go on, say all you think; don't mind 



me. 



She flung herself upon the grass, and 
burst into tears. 

He lifted her up, and carried her to the 
rustic seat where he had found her talking 
to their child. She sobbed bitterly. Her 
delicate frame trembled. She looked at 
him with a face full of passionate upbraid- 
ing. 

"Now, I hope you'll be better. I Ve 
been expecting this for months. I knew 
the storm was brewing when I saw you 
talking to yourself again." 

" There was no storm," she sobbed. 
" My heart was full of love and tender- 



ness." 



'^ Was it ? Then it 's a pity your heart 
should falsify your tongue." 

" Don't talk to me in that cold way; 
you will drive me mad." 

She sobbed between every word, and 
the tears rained down her face. Yet a 



MABTTES AND VICTIMS. 23 

lark was singing overhead, and the sweet 
perfume of flowers played around her, 
breathing of nothing but love and peace. 

" You don't expect me to speak to 
you affectionately after what you have 
said?" 

" Then go away," she exclaimed, leap- 
ing to her feet. ** Leave me, if you have 
a heart that neither tears nor anguish can 
touch." 

She flung back her hair that had half 
fallen upon her shoulders, and stood before 
him with her eyes flashing, her white 
teeth gleaming between her parted lips. 

'^ Philip Gardner, my husband, the only 
person . man or woman . whom I can call 
friend in England, the only person who 
knows me, I have striven to think of no 
one else, I have put all the world aside 
but you, to you and to our little one I 
give the entire confidence of my heart ; I 
want to have some response, some little 
return ; and I am content to live a dream- 



24 CRUEL LONDON. 

less, purposeless life, if that pleases you . 
to live for you only, to be moved only by 
your whims and fancies; but my pride 
will not let me putjup with insult as well 
as neglect. I am content to be your slave, 
but you must not taunt me with my 
dependence, my origin, my poverty. Let 
me be a slave and a creature of your will, 
but don't tell me of it, and let your lip 
curl into a sneer. If you stood there with 
a whip and lashed me you could not hurt 
me so much as you do when you look at 
me as you did just now." 

" All right," said Mr. Gardner, taking 
out a match, lighting a cigar, and turning 
on his heel. 

She watched him with a dull expression 
of surprise. When he had disappeared, 
she returned to her seat, her eyes fixed 
upon the gate which he had closed behind 
him, as he coolly strolled away into the 
meadows that led down to the river. As he 
disappeared, she saw a figure outside the 



MARTYRS AND VICTIMS. 25 

hedge pause and look wistfully at her. It 
was a pale, thoughtful, sad face, and it 
looked at her with unutterable tenderness. 
^^ Tristram ! " she exclaimed, and as she 
spoke the vision faded into the sunny air. 



26 CBUEL LONDON. 



CHAPTER II. 

VISIONS OF FORBIDDEN LOVE. 

^* He is gone now, my darling ; your 
father has gone to London, and I must 
talk to you or I shall go crazy. Kiss 
mamma, love." 

The little one pursed up its chubby lips 
and kissed its mother. It was sitting on 
a crimson shawl in the midst of a hillock 
of hay. Mamma was kneeling beside it. 
They made a beautiful picture in the 
shade of the oak-trees at a bend of the 
hayfield outside The Cottage garden, bor- 
dering the Essam wood that stretched 
away in leafy splendour for nearly a mile 



VISIONS OF FORBIDDEN LOVE. 27 

behind them. The wood was shut out by 
a long, luxuriant hedge-row. 

It was a hot July afternoon. The 
mowers had left the grass to dry. The 
birds were still. Only a purple butterfly 
alighted here and there upon the hay- 
cocks. The wild hop and the white 
convolvulus climbed in and out of the 
hedge. The distant call and clapper of 
the bird-boy came up from the cornfields 
like an echo. 

# 

" Sometimes I think I am a little mad, 
baby, don't you, dear ? Never so mad as 
not to love you. I wonder if you will 
grow up to become tired of mamma ; to 
look at her aside, and say unkind things 
to her?" 

"Coo-coo," said* the baby, stretching 
out its little arms. 

" Bless you, my sweetie ! " 

She kissed it, and filled its lap with 
hay. 

"I am going to tell you something, 




28 CRUEL LONDON. 

Willie ; I shouldn't tell you, only I know 
you can't understand it. I wouldn't tell 
you for the world if I thought you could." 

^' Coo-coo," said Willie. 

" Yes, I know it loves mamma, and it 
likes mamma to say silly things to it, 
doesn't it ? " 

" Coo-coo," replied the baby. 

" Well, then, there was a poor young 
man in New York . I don't mean poor as 
to money, but 1 say poor, because I pity 
him . and his name was Tristram Decker." 

She looked round as if to make sure 
there were no listeners. A solitary peewit 
in the wood seemed to make answer in its 
melancholy way, and assure her of a 
faithful sentinel on duty. *^ Peewit!" it 
cried, and still further away came up the 
hollo of the bird-boy. 

*' I think the birds and things begin to 
know us, Willie ; they think they know 
how lonely mamma is, and they want to 
comfort her." 



VISIONS OF FORBIDDEN LOVE. 29 

A squirrel looked down from the oak 
trees and whisked away, as if to tell his 
companions not to come and disturb the 
pretty people down by the hedgerow. 

^^What was I saying? Oh, I know; 
now listen." 

The baby tossed the hay from its lap 
and laughed. 

"Yes, that's fine! Oh, what a strong 
boy ! " 

She kissed the chubby face, and then, 
re-seating the little one upon its crimson 
carpet, said, . 

" Hush ! Now Fm going to talk. I 
know where I was ; that poor young man 
in New York. He loved mamma, he 
would have died for her; sometimes I 
think he is dying for her now. I saw 
him this very day last week looking over 
the hedge in the garden. Hush ! Don't 
be frightened, and I '11 tell you all about 
it." 

" Coo-coo," said the baby. 



30 CRUEL LONDON. 

" Papa had been unkind again to 
mamma, very unkind; oh, so cruel, so 
cruel! and I wished I was dead but for 
you, dear, but for you ; and when Philip 
turned away as if I had been a black slave 
. yes, worse than mamma ever treated 
the worst coloured woman on her father^s 
plantation, . ^just then, when I thought my 
heart would break, Tristram Decker looked 
at me over the hedge. Hush, dear, it 
wasn't him, it was his spirit ; and I think 
he must have died for me, unless some- 
how his heart felt the ache of mine, and 
he was so sorry that the good angels let 
his soul free for a moment to say it was 
sorry. Do you think he 's dead, baby ? " 

The baby held up its face to be kissed. 

'^You do," said the mother, putting 
her arms round the child and kissing it. 
^^ You do ; then I have no friend in the 
world, Willie. Even if he were alive, he 
could be no friend of mine, dear, because 
he loves me ; it wouldn't be right, dear. 



VISIONS OF FORBIDDEN LOVE. 81 

Strange, is it not ? It wouldn't be right, 
because he loves me so much that he 
would die for me. But you mustn't be 
sorry for him ; he fought in the war 
against us, and your grandfather cursed 
him as he cursed all the North, and so I 
came to be here. Do you think mamma 
really did see that poor young man, or is 
solitude and neglect afflicting her mind ?" 

" Coo-coo," responded little Willie. 

" Are you real ? Or are you a fairy- 
child sent to play with me ? I jbelieve 
you are as wise as I, Willie . ^you may 
easily be wiser. I 'm only a child, a way- 
ward child, and I am naughty too. They 
have given me a new and beautiful world 
to live in, and I was wicked enough to 
call it a cage. But I am a foreigner here 
. a creature who doesn't belong to these 
beautiful woods and fields, though they 
do try to make me welcome; and if it 
weren't for poor Willie, I should wander 
away over yonder hills, or perhaps go 




32 CRUEL LONDON.' 

and lay me down in the river, by the side 
of the lilies. I daren't take you along, 
because you are not all mine, darling, and 
so I stay here to play with you, that 
the good people may not say I am un- 
grateful." 

The baby had looked into its mother's 
oyes, and as if under their loving influence 
had gradually moved into an attitude of 
repose, and slept. 

She lay down beside it, and her voice 
fell into a gentle whisper. 

'' I wonder who you are like, . not like 
Philip, not like me. May you be unlike 
in your heart, unlike in your fortunes ! 
When you grow to be a man, be kind to 
the memory of your mother ; and for her 
sake be gentle and loving to all women, 
they are so weak and obedient ; and, oh, 
may you never know the heart-ache which 
your mother has suffered these last few 
weeks, . if you do, you will hate your 
father, as I am beginning to hate him ! " 



VISIONS OF FORBIDDEN LOVE. 33 

Her voice grew louder. She rose to her 
feet. 

** For these last seven days I have suf- 
fered a lifetime of misery; insulted, treated 
with scorn, sneered at : it is four days 
since he has spoken to me. I have asked 
his forgiveness, I have kneeled to him, he 
doesn't speak. I, Caroline Denton ! Why, 
I don't think my heart stood still as it did 
in presence of Philip, when I fled with my 
father at night, and we stopped to look 
back and saw the house in flames, and 
heard the cries of the men, who neither 
gave nor received quarter." 

A woman entered the field at the fur- 
thermost corner. Caroline saw her, and 
straightway took up the sleeping child. 

" Dorothy is coming, darling, we must 
go ; I don't know whether she is a good 
woman or a bad one, but we must go 
now." 

Nurse and mistress met in the middle 
of the field. Mrs. Grardner laid the chiU 

VOL. XL D 



34 CRUEL LONDON. 

in the arms that were put out to receive 
it. 

^^ Why lor, bless me, missus, you '11 
have a sunstroke if you don't mind ! '" 
said Dorothy, a bony, weather-beaten 
woman, in a lilac print dress and a white 
sun-bonnet. 

<^ Wo were in the shade all the time, 
Dorothy," Mrs. Gardner replied, submis- 
sively. 

^* Master 's been looking everywhere for 
you." 

'' The master ? " 

^' Yes, he 's bin and come back . lost the 
train or something ; and he seems to be in 
a fine way." 

^^What about, Dorothy?" asked Mrs. 
Gardner, increasing her pace towards the 
house. 

*^ Lor bless me, I don^t know, but he 
looked as frightened as if he'd seen a 
ghost." 

" A what ! " exclaimed Mrs. Gardner. 



VISIONS OF FORBIDDEN LOVE. 35 

" A ghost. There, don't stare at me like 
that, missis; I declare you gave me a 
regular start." 

All at once Mrs. Gardner felt as guilty 
as if Tristram Decker had really come to 
visit her, and had been met by her 
husband on the threshold of The Cottage. 
A thousand fears crowded into her heart, 
as if the very ghost of the North American 
could dishonour her fair fame in the eyes 
of her husband. 

** A ghost ! " she said again. *^ Lor, no, 
there are no ghosts in the middle of the 
day, though one 'ud think you'd seen 
one, to look at you." 

" Yes, I feel frightened, Dorothy." 

"What at? your own shadow^ 
mum i* 

" I don't know." 

" There, don't fluster yourself ; don't 
go into the house like that, specially with 
a visitor in the drawing-room." 

" A visitor ? " 



36 CRUEL LONDON. 

^^ Yes, we don't have no visitors as a 
rule, but this is the exception." 

"What's he like?" 

" How did you know it were a he 
mum ? " 

" Is he pale, and has he blue eyes, and 
is he young ? " 

She had the vision-face before her. 

" Pale ! He 's a red-faced, grey-bearded, 
pompous party, and the other 's not young 
either, though he 's dressed up to the 
nines, as they says at Essam." 

" Two visitors ? " 

" Yes, I said there was two." 

"Did you?'' 

"A course I did. And they come in 
with master, and they was a-having 'igh 
words when I thought as I 'd come out 
and see where you was." 

" What were they saying ? " 

" I dunno, except as one of 'em kept a- 
calling master Mr. Slyboots, as he said 
don't expec me to call you Gardner. 



VISIONS OF FORBIDDEN LOVE. 37 

^Nothing of the kind/ he said; ^though 
you does keep a gardener, I expec, and a 
good 'un/ says the other, which he talked 
like a Scotchman ; the very image of 
Scotch Jimmy as keeps a grocery shop 
at Essam." 

^* Friends of your master, I suppose, 
from London," said Mrs. Gardner, not 
willing to learn anything to his disad- 
vantage from a servant. 

^^ Friends, well I should say as they 
was enemies ; and if he owed 'em a lot of 
money or something worse, they couldn't 
have treated him more disrespectful.'^ 

"You have made some mistake," Mrs. 
Gardner said, with dignity. 

"That's what the Scotch gentleman 
said master had made, thinking as he 
could go on without bein' found 
:ut." 

" Silence, woman ! " said Mrs. Gardner; 

don't you see that you annoy me. How 

dare you pry into your master's affairs 



/ 



38 CRUEL LONDON. 

and talk of them to me ! I tell you you 
have made some mistake." 

*^ Thank you, missus; somebody has 
made a mistake, but it ain't Dorothy 
Migswood. Woman, indeed ! I 'd like you 
to remember as you ain't talking to black 
nigger slaves when you 're talking to me, 
mum." 

^* You need not remind me of the fact, 
nurse," said Mrs. Gardner ; *^ they were 
human if they were black." 

** Oh, they was; then carry your brat 
yourself. Miss Slave Driver ! " exclaimed 
Migswood, thrusting little Willie into the 
mother's arms. "If I ain't as good as 
a black nigger slave, I ain't good enough 
to carry this thing." 

Little Willie woke up and cried. His 
mother hastily folded him to her breast, 
and hurried through the garden-gate, 
where Tristram Decker had looked at her 
and disappeared. 

"A parcel of stuck-up minxes; one 



VISIONS OF FORBIDDEN LOVE. 39 

would think they was Queen Victoria her- 
self and all the royal family instead of a 
lot of no-better-than-they-should-be's." 

Dorothy Migswood said this for the 
benefit of the head fly-driver from the 
Lion, who was waiting in the road with a 
cab, and talking to a stranger. 

" You haint in a good temper this morn- 
ing," said the driver, " Mrs. Migswood." 

*^ Don't call me Mrs., I'm Miss, and 
don't pretend to be no more, though I 
have brought up a family." 

The driver leaned back and laughed a 
loud guffaw. 

** Who 's your friend ? " she asked, look- 
ing at a little ugly man who was sucking 
a short pipe and leaning against the gate. 

" Meaning me," said the stranger, wink- 
ing at the driver. " I 'm Bill Smith, and 
when I'm at 'ome, which ain't often, I 
lives in the Ole Kent Eoad." 

He was a small man, with what might 
be called accentuated features. His boots 



40 GRUEL LONDON. 

were down at the heel ; his hat was shiny 
and stuck on one side ; his clothes were a 
dingy black ; the sleeves of his coat nearly 
covered his hands. Two glossy tufts of 
hair were curled and flattened against hi^ 
cheeks. His mouth was an aperture that 
closed tightly, so that sometimes it only 
looked like an indication of a mouth. His 
nose had been broken; and he had a 
wretched squint. 

^* Oh, you are a Londoner, are you,'* 
said Miss Migswood, "like master? You 're 
a gay old lot, you folks in London." 

"We air, we air," said Bill Smithy 
knocking the ashes out of his pipe, and 
putting the black cutty in his pocket. 

" And what do you want down here ? " 

"Come to see you, my dear; that's 
what we 're arter ; that 's our little game." 

Bill Smith grinned a ghastly smile. 

" Well, you arn't much in the way of 
beauty in London if you 're a specimen," 
said Dorothy, sticking her arms akimbo 



VISIONS OF FORBIDDEN LOVE. 41 

her flapping sim-bonnet falling back upon 
her broad bony shoulders. 

The fly-driver roared with laughter. 

"Beauty's only skin-deep . ^we goes in 
for brains in town," said Smith. 

"And where do you carry yours . ^in 
your boots ? They looks as if they waa 
weighted." 

The fly-driver nearly had a fit. The 
horse thought this was a signal to move ^ 
Bill Smith had to take it by the head. 

"I never see such a pair in my life," 
gasped the driver. 

" As his ears ? " asked Dorothy, looking^ 
at Bill Smith's head. 

"Well, you air a caution," was the 
Londoner's answer. "You knows your 
way about. I used to think I was good 
at chaff, but you licks me ; that 's truth." 

" I can't stop a-talking here all day. 
What 's up ? " said Miss Migswood, pulling 
her bonnet over her head ; " and my com- 
plexion will go if I stands in the sun." 



i 



42 CRUEL LONDON. 

^' My sides is regular aching," remarked 
the fly-driver. 

" Oh, you're easily pleased,'' responded 
Migswood; '* every fool in Essam knows 
that." 

The Lion's head driver laughed again, 
and mopped his face with his handker- 
chief; for the sun was coming down "a 
'ot un," as Bill Smith had more than once 
observed. 

" Well, now, look 'ere, Miss Migswood ; 
as you seems the right sort, and as busi- 
ness may bring us together, I don't mind 
telling you a secret." 

*^ Don't bust yourself about it," said 
Dorothy. ^' I don't think business nor 
nothing else will bring you and me to- 
gether ; so if the thought as it will makes 
you free with your secrets, keep 'em, and 
then you won't be disappointed." 

'^Ha! ha!" roared the Lion driver, 
^' trust Dorothy Migswood ; she 's got the 
tongue of old 'Arry hisself." 



VISIONS OF FORBIDDEN LOVE. 43 

^' Oh, come, you 're a presuming on your 
petticoats," said Mr. Smith. *^If you 
don't want to be friendly, why there ain't 
no love lost, and the least said soonest 
mended, and so mum 's the word." 

Bill Smith hit his open mouth with his 
open ;hand. The result was a hollow 
sound, like drawing a bung from a barrel. 

"All right, I'm in no hurry; you arn't 
the first bum-bailiff I 've seen, and there 's 
a chap in Essam as can play the drum on 
his cheeks, and draw corks forty to the 
dozen ; he 'd give you ninety in a hundred 
and jump on you," said Dorothy. 

Turning her back on Mr. Smith, of the 
Old Kent Eoad, she made a face at the 
driver from the Lion, and marched into 
the pretty garden of The Cottage, leaving 
the Londoner staring in amazement, and 
the countryman shaking the cab with his 
laughter. 

"Baint she a clever un?" he said at 
last. 



44 CRUEL LONDON. 

"A clever un," exclaimed Bill Smith, 
contemptuously, " she 's a " 

It was a word we cannot print. 

^' I '11 let 'er see ! A what did she call 
me?" 

*^ A bum-bailifE," said the driver, coming 
promptly to his rescue. 

" She 's a liar ! That ain't my profes- 
sion ; and if I thought I looked like it, 
blame me if I wouldn't chop my 'ed off, 
there now ! " 

He took out his pipe and relighted it. 

^^ A bum ! " he exclaimed. " Why, 
what sort of a bringin' up 'as that woman 
'ad ? " 

^'Bringing hup; why she's the most 
audacious lot in all the county ; she 's bin 
in prison, she 's bin in London, she 's bin 
in the workus, she 's bin had up for 'sault- 
ing a magistrate ; and for all that there 's 
lots a folk as 'ud give anything to hear 'er 
talk, she 's such a witty un." 

" She 's a f ool ! " 



VISIONS OF FORBIDDEN LOVE. 46 

" Not she ! Whatever she may be, she 
balnt a fool." 

"A woman as can't tell a respectable 
sheriff's hofficer, who 's never touched a 
common distress in 'is life, from a two bob 
a day man and his grub, I tell you is a 
fool. Me ! BiU Smith, of the Ole Kent 
Road . me ! as as took possession of palaces 
and bin in fi. fas. and ca. sas. for thousands, 
to be mistook for a man shoved in for rent, 
why, blame 'er, I Ve 'ad the maid of a 
Ihi.gne to wait on me." 

" Come, guvnor, you 'r taking of it too 
much to 'art; she be only a joking of 
you." 

" There's one thing. Mister Coachman, 
as no professional man likes, and that is, 
aspershions on his perfessional position. 
But there, as you says, it don't matter, you 
can't expec more nor a grunt from a hani- 
mal of that sort." 

' ' Shshsh !" said Mister Coachman, ^ ' don't 
you let her 'ear you. She 'd think no more 



i 



46 CRUEL LONDON. 

about a knocking you down than I do a 
whisking them flies ofE that horse's 
back." 

^^ Wouldn't she?" said Mr. Smith, 
quickly. " Do you know what I could giv 
her for that ? " 

^' I don't know, and I'm sure she don't 
care," said the driver. 

"Three months; and s'help me if I 
wouldn't do it, there ! " 

" Are you from the Lion?" said a quick, 
anxious voice, breaking in upon the dia- 
logue of town and country. 

" Yes, sir," replied the driver, quickly. 

The new-comer was Mr. Tom Sleaford, 
pale and careworn. He flung a hand- 
bag into the open fly, and got in 
after it. 

" Drive me to the Penfield Station, and 
come back for the two gentlemen after- 
wards," he said, quickly. " The mid-day 
express stops at Penfield ? " 

" Yes, sir." 



VISIONS OF FORBIDDEN LOVE. 47 

" And not at Essam ? " 

^^No, sir." 

" Catch the express and I '11 give you a 
crown for yourself." 

" Yes, sir." 

Bill Smith watched the carriage roll 
along the road until it was lost in a cloud 
of summer dust. 

"Good-bye, Mister Sleaford, alias Mr. 
Philip Gardner; this 'ere ansum cottage 
estate, in a ring fence, to be sold by 
auction, with all the wery choice and hele- 
gant furniture and heflfects, without reserve. 
Harticles of virtue, hold china, billiard- 
tables, wines of the finest vintages, by 
order of the Sheriff of Middlesex ; and I 
honly 'ope, Mister Sleaford, financer, direc- 
tor, manager, and general swell, that 's 
the worry worst thing as '11 'appen to you ; 
that's all the 'arm I wishes you, sir, and a 
pleasant journey to you. I 'ope the 
sherry wine 's good. Mister Sleaford, 
junior. If there 's anything I 'ates more 



i 



48 CfRUEL LONDON. 

nor another, it is bad sherry wine; but 
give me a good dinner and a bottle of 
old brown, with a Madeiry flavour, and 
I wouldn't call the Queen my aunt . 
s' help me ! " 



THE AWAKENING. 49 



CHAPTER III. 



THE AWAKENING. 



^^ Are you the person they call Mrs. Philip 
Gardner ? " said Mr. Maclosky Jones to 
the southern woman, as she entered the 
dining-room, where that gentleman and 
Mr. Fitzherbert Robinson was sitting ex- 
amining a pile of papers. 

She had laid the baby in its cot. 

" I am Mrs. Gardner," she replied. 

'^ Puir body ! " said Maclosky, looking 
up at the trembling woman; ^^ that man 
has deceived you." 

She stood by the table, her left hand 
leaning upon it for support. 

VOL. n. E 



i 



50 GRUEL liOHDOlf . 

"I don't understand you," she said, 
with an anxious look at Mr. Robinson, 
who laid down a cigar which he had been 
smoking. 

" Don't tell her so bluntly," said Robin- 
son, stopping Maclosky, who was about to 
reply. 

'^ I don't see the gude o' beating about 
the bush," said the Scotchman, tying up a 
parcel of papers with red tape ; " the truth 
is jest the truth, however you may hedge 
it about with fine phrases." 

Mrs. Gardner stood motionless, as if she 
were in a dream. 

"Before you ask us any questions," 
said Robinson, in something like a tone of 
compassion, "you had perhaps better re- 
tire to some other room and read this 
letter which Mr. Gardner left for 
you." 

He held out a sealed envelope. She 
took it mechanically, and went to the bed- 
room where her child was sleeping in a 



THE AWAKENING. 51 

pretty swan cot. The infant lay there 
like a fairy child in a fairy nest, the great 
wings of the bird seeming to shield it 
from contact with the vulgar world. 

The window was wide open. The 
leaves of a luxuriant creeper nodded at 
the casement, and made shadows on the 
linen-covered carpet. 

Mrs. Gardner opened the letter. There 
fell out upon the floor a parcel of bank- 
notes. She looked at them carelessly, and 
then read as follows : . 

^^Dear Caroline, . Our short time of 
pleasure is over. The separation will pos- 
sibly please you, as you have evidently 
ceased to care for me or The Cottage. I am 
ruined in purse and possibly in character. 
I enclose you five hundred pounds, enough 
to take you back to America, and set you 
up in some little business. You are free. 
All is fair in love and war. I deceived 
you. My name is not Gardner, and I 



i 



52 CRUEL LONDOK. 

am not your husband. Good-bye for 
ever. 

'' Phil." 

She read the letter word by word, mas- 
tering its contents wholly, though every 
sentence stabbed her to the heart. She 
put her hand to her head, closed her eyes, 
and opened them again, as if to assure her- 
self that she was not dreaming. She looked 
at the letter in her hand, at the notes on 
the floor. She saw the shadows of the 
leaves trembling on the carpet. The 
sweet breath of the fields came in at the 
open window, and she recognized its per- 
fume. She looked at the cot, and thought 
for the first time how beautiful it was. 
She walked to the dressing-table, and 
looked at herself in the glass. A deep 
sigh seemed to acknowledge the fact that 
her face was very sad. Then she looked 
at the letter again, and finally, breaking 
out into a low moan, she said, "Father! 



THE AWAKENING. 53 

Tristram!" It was a wailing, subdued 
cry . the utterance of a well-nigh broken 
heart. ^^ Father, father ! " and ^^ Tristram, 
Tristram ! " she cried in her agony. 

The child started and opened its won- 
dering eyes. 

" WiUie ! " she said, '' little Willie ! " 

It whimpered. She took it into her arms, 
and pressed it closely to her bosom. 

" Perhaps it is not true. I am his wife. 
That part of his cruel letter must be false. 
God knows I wouldn't have fallen so low, 
and known it." 

She moaned again, and looked vaguely 
about the room. Then she sat down upon 
a chair, and rocked the child, which put 
its arms round her neck. 

"My darling Willie!" she said, "I 
think I am having a bad dream ; let your 
baby heart pray that mamma may wake." 

There was a knock at the door. She 
paid no attention to it. The woman 
Migswood entered. 



A 



54 CRUEL LONDON. 

*^ This is a nice go !" she said. ^^ What 
are you going to do ? " 

Mrs. Gardner made no reply. She 
went on rocking the child and herself to 
and fro. 

'' You '11 have to find another man now, 
and you'll easy do that; many on 'em 
likes a bit of a pretty thing like you, and 
you needn't go far to find a better than 
him as has gone and left yer. They're 
a mean set, men, best on 'em ; only way 's 
to pay 'em out in their own coin." 

The words fell unheeded upon Mrs. 
Gardner. 

" Oh, you're going to sulk. Well, do as 
you likes ; I Ve stood your airs long enough 
not to mind 'em much, and I never treads 
on them as is down; I've been down 
myself too often." 

'' Do you remember the day that I was 
married, Migswood ; when I was ill, you 
know; soon after they buried father?" 
said Mrs. Gardner, looking up inquiringly. 



THE AWAKENING. 55 

" I suppose you didn't hear what I was 
saying on just now ? " 

" I never remembered it myself quite 
clearly." 

" She 's gone daft," said Migswood to 
herself; but in response to the question 
she said aloud, " Married ! Why, lor, you 
never really means to say as you thinks 
you was married ? " 

"Not married ! " exclaimed the American 
beauty, as if realizing the situation now 
for the first time. 

She rose to her feet, laid the child once 
more in its cot, and taking Migswood by 
the arm she drew her aside. 

" You are a woman, whatever else you 
may be," she said, earnestly looking into 
the hard, vulgar face of the servant. "He 
says he is not my husband ; you echo him, 
and say I am not married. What does it 
mean ? What is the matter ? Am I 
dreaming, or am I awakening ? " 

" It depends what you calls dreaming. 



56 CRUEL LONDOK. 

I never thought for a moment as you was 
married^ nor nobody else. Why there 
was two or three Mrs. Gardners afore you 
come to The Cottage." 

" Two or three !" gasped the dupe. 

" How do you think you could be mar- 
ried without knowing it ? " 

" Don't you remember when I got up 
after I had lain ill, and Philip took me to 
the city, and we came home, and you had 
a new gown, and the servants had a 
feast?" 

^^ I remember that," said Migswood, 
smiling a contemptuous but half-piteous 
smile. 

Mrs. Gardner rushed to a cabinet. The 
key was in the lock. She opened the 
drawer. 

^^ Ah, it is gone ! " she cried ; " it is 
gone 1 " 

She opened every other drawer in the 
cabinet. 

^^ What was you looking for ? " 



THE AWAKENING. 57 

" The certificate of our marriage.'' 

" Ah, you may look." 

" It was in that drawer." 

" Was it ? " 

" Don't you believe me ? " 

" Oh, yes, if you say so." 

"I have read it, had it in my hand; 
Philip told me to keep it in that drawer." 

'^I wouldn't bother about it if I waa 
you," said Migswood, watching her in an 
amused and not altogether dissatisfied man- 
ner. '^ What name was he married in ? " 

" Gardner, of course. Oh, what is all 
this mystery ? " 

" No mystery as I see on. What do he 
say hisself ? The gents downstairs tells 
me as he 's writ you a letter." 

"Read it," she said, giving her the 
paper. 

" I can't read," said Migswood ; " what 
do he say ? " 

The servant stooped down and picked 
up the notes. 



58 CRUEL LONDON. 

" Be this the money as he 's left for yer ? 
They said he 'd put some in the letter." 

'' That is your master's money," said 
Mrs. Gardner. 

Migswood laid it upon the table. 

^^ Master's money!" said the woman, 
mockingly. " Why don't you ha' done 
with your fine airs. A pretty master ! I 
ain't got no master and no husband no 
more than you have, and the sooner you 
^ets that into your wool-gathering little 
noddle the better." 

Caroline Denton stood still and looked 
at the woman without seeing her, for her 
.eyes were straining to follow her thoughts, 
which went over all the course of her life 
in England; her father's death; Philip 
Gardner's kindness ; her removal from the 
hotel near the scene of the fatal accident by 
which she lost her father to The Cottage; 
her surprise and fear when she found her- 
self the inmate of her benefactor's house ; 
his respectful kindness, followed by the 



T^E AWAKENING. 59 

offer of his hand ; her gratitude ; her 
struggle to forget Tristram Decker, whom 
she found she had begun to love ; her 
resolve to obey the commands of her father 
even though he were dead ; her marriage 
to Philip at the Proctor or Registrar's 
office as he called it; his strange habits 
since then ; his mysterious comings and 
goings ; and latterly his unkindness to her. 
She sought for a clue to her position. She 

began to doubt and fear. 

" I will go to the place where we were 

married/' she said ; '' that shall be cleared 

for Willie's sake. I must not give way ; 

I must be bold and courageous for Willie. 

This is not the first time I have seen 

trouble." 

" Yes, you '11 want all your wits about 

you, but I wouldn't bother if I were you ; 

none of the other women did. When the 

game was over they just hooked it, and 

made no fuss. But I expect he took some 

trouble with you." 




60 CRUEL LONDON. 

"The other women," repeated Mrs. 
Gardner, " the other women . " 

" 1 told you of 'em just now. None of 
them pretended as they was married." 

In spite of her brave eflforts to stand up 
against the calamity that had befallen her, 
Mrs. Gardner, or Caroline Denton, which- 
ever was her rightful name, staggered 
against the wall, and stood there with her 
hand upon her heart, uttering that cry of 
pain and wailing which had shaped itself 
into two words, " Father ! Tristram ! " 
when first she began to realize her trouble. 

" Don't give way," said Migswood. 

" Tell me all," said Caroline, in a hoarse 
whisper; "all." 

" That 's wot the gents downstairs said 
I 'd better do." 

" Tell me all. I am a poor, weak, 
foolish woman . a stranger ; I know 
nothings . nothing." 

" The gents downstairs 'as took regular 
possession of The Cottage. Mr. Gardner, 



THE AWAKENING. 



61 



as he calls hisself, ain't bin honest, they 
says, and they has warrants to sell up The 
Cottage, and they thinks you'd better go 
into lodgings/' 

"Yes?" 

"And they says as they suppose you 
knows as his name weren't Gardner at all, 
and they has no objections to your taking 
away any little things as you may have 
set your mind on." 

" What do they mean ? " 

"I wish you wouldn't put on so much 
side, as they says at Essam. You can't be 
so awful green as you makes out." 

Caroline looked at her in blank amaze- 
ment. 

" Come now, do you mean to say as 
you thinks he ever took you to London at 
all ? The other women used to call him 
Charlie ; it 's always Charlies with us sort, 
I think, but you preferred Phil. Well now, 
really, is American girls so jolly innocent 
as all that ? " 




62 CRUEL LONDON. 

^^ I don't quite know what you mean, 
but I can see by your face that you are 
insulting me, and that you are cruel. No 
American woman would stamp on another 
in trouble." 

^^ Why, I 've heard you tell that baby 
o' youm of wars and murders as Americans 
done again you. But, there, it 's no 
business o' mine, only you keeps on a axin' 
of me questions, and if you really are so 
blessed innocent as you makes out, why it 
won't do no harm to open your eyes a bit. 
Now, for hinstance, you says Mr. Charlie . 
beg parding, Mr. Gardner . ^took you to 
London and married you, and you had 
the writings?" 

^^Yes.'' 

" Sure it were London,?" 

" Yes." 

" You 'd never seen it before ? " 

" No, nor since." 

'^ My belief is as you never see it at 
all." 



THE AWAKENING. 63 

^^ Why do you say that? I could take 
you to the very hotel where we dined." 

^^Well, I dunno; you started in the 
morning and were back at night. It 
could be donQ, oh, yes. But there, it 's no 
business of mine." 

^^ Yes it is ; don't be unkind. I am sure 
we went to London; I can never forget 
the busy streets, the carriages, the crowded 
stages, the noise and din." 

" Then I 'm wrong. It was London, of 
course ; and why shouldn't it be ? Oh, yes, 
it were London, of course." 

^^ Why, then, do you try to make me 
believe I have been mad or dreaming? 
Why do you like to torture me ? " 

" I baint a torturing of you. I be only 
answering what you axes me. But you 
do act so it sets my teeth on edge. Grood 
gracious, you ain't the first gal that 's gone 
wrong." 

Caroline looked at the savage woman 
out of her sad, sorrowful eyes^ which 



i 



64 CRUEL LONDON. 

would have rebuked any other she-dragon 
but Migswood, who bore the appeal with 
perfect equanimity. She insisted upon 
regarding Mrs. Grardner as a woman who, 
in spite of a show of virtue, had fallen to 
her level ; and it rather rejoiced her than 
otherwise to have so good-looking a com- 
panion in sin and misfortune. 

" You are a hard, cruel woman." 
. '' Thank yer." 

'^ What have I done that you should be 
so pitiless to me ? " 

^^ Oh, well, there, if you're going to call 
names I'll go; mayhap I may lose my 
temper, and then I might shake you." 

Migswood surveyed her victim with a 
calm, cold expression. 

^^ I can't abear to have you a domineer- 
ing over me in your 'igh virtuous way, as 
if I wos dirt. It ain't what you says, it 's 
what you looks. I know what I am, and 
don't set up for ncf better. But . " 

^^ Don't shout at me ; I 'm very sorry ; I 



THE AWAKENING. 65 

didn't mean to be unkind. I ask your 
pardon. I shall not trouble you much 
longer. Are those persons you spoke of 
still in the house ? " 

^^ Yes, and they be going to stay all 
night; and the bum-bailiff he's in the 
kitchen." 

Caroline took her sleeping child out of 
the cot, and went down to the dining- 
room. ^ 

" Is this true that my servant tells me ? " 
she asked. 

" What does she tell you, mam ? " was 
Maclosky's cautious reply. 

^^ That my husband is a fugitive; that 
his name is not Grardner ; that I have been 
duped ; that you are the rightful owners 
of this cottage." 

" I dinna ken about your being duped, 
but the man who wrote the letter you hold 
in yoiir hand, who called himself Grardner, 
is a bankrupt ; he has been living a life of 
debauchery for years, and you are not tho 

VOL. n. p 



66 CBVEL LONDON. 

first, nor second, nor third mistress who 
have lived with him here." 

" Sir, I am no mistress, I am his lawful 
wife, married according to your English 
law, and till to-day I had the record of 
it." 

" What, the certificate ?" 

" Yes, sir." 

^^ Where were you married, mam ? " 
 ^^ In London." 

"In church?" 

"No." 

" Before a Registrar ?" 

"We went to an office, where they 
asked questions, and put our names in a 
book, and gave my husband a docu- 
ment." 

" Did he say his name was Philip 
Gardner ? " 

" Yes." 

" He lied there then, and can be pro- 
secuted for it ; but I dinna think it vitiates 
the marriage." 



THE AWAKENING. 67 

" Will you show me the authority under 
which you act ? " 

" The officer has it; he's down in the 
kitchen." 

"I will go and fetch it/' said Robinson, 
leaving the room, and returning with the 
sheriff's warrant of distress, which Mrs, 
Grardner looked at. 

"If it were not for this letter I should 
think my husband were the victim of a 
conspiracy." 

" Indeed ! " said Maclosky. " Would ye 
like to see what the newspapers say on the 
subject ? " 

He took a paper from his pocket. 

*^ I don't think I would harass the lady 
any further," said Robinson. 

" She 'd better know the truth," said 
Maclosky, handing a newspaper to Caro- 
line, with a marked paragraph to the 
following effect : . 

" The Romance of Fraud. . A gentle- 



A 



68 CRUEL LONDON. 

man, who for several years has been residing 
on a pretty estate in the Vale of Essam, 
where his doings have surprised and scan- 
dalized the respectable families of that 
district, turns out to be the director and 
manager of certain companies now in 
course of liquidation, in which frauds to a 
considerable amount have been detected. 
Mr. Philip Grardner is the assumed name 
of this director, who will, we understand, 
be declared bankrupt to-morrow. His 
delightful retreat on the Avon will speedily 
come under the hammer, and in these evil 
days there will not possibly be wanting 
sympathizers who will regard the down- 
fall of the Essam landowner with some 
amount of sorrow, because he furnished 
his residence with choice pictures and rare 
china, thus redeeming his vulgar crime by 
proving himself to be a man of taste. We 
refrain from mentioning the young man's 
real name out of respect for his father, 
who is known in the city as an upright 



THE AWAKENING. 69 

man, and who is, we believe, a serious 
suflFerer by his son's defalcations." 

"There, mem, that's a clear straight- 
forward statement," said Maclosky, fold- 
ing up the paper and laying it down care- 
fully uporf the table. 

"His father," said Caroline ; "he told 
me his father was dead." 

" And you 'd better jest consider that 
it *s true, for you might as well try to get 
butter out of a dog's mouth,^or justice out 
of a liquidator, as ^anything out of him ; for 
he jest hates ye, woman, . he jest regards 
you and such like as the ruin of his son." 

The woman looked at him. She only 
half understood what he said. 

"Is there anything else I can do for 
ye ? " asked the Scotchman. 

She made no reply. 

" Look here, my dear," said Robinson, 
rising and putting his arm familiarly on 
her shoulder. 

She recoiled from his touch. 



i 



70 CRUEL LONDON. 

" Oh, well, if we stand on our dignity so 
much, I have done," said Robinson, who 
had cast bold and admiring glances at her 
during the painful scene. ^^ I was going to 
give you some good advice." 

She turned away from him Without a 
word, and, addressing herself to Mr. 
Maclosky Jones, said, . 

^^ I 'm a foreigner here, and don't under- 
stand your customs. I am an entire 
stranger; which is the way to Lon- 
don ? " 

'^ The most sensible question ye could 
ask, though I'd take a steamer from 
Liverpool if I were going to America." 

She made no reply. 

" The Essam station is jest close by, 
and I'll order the carriage to take ye 
whenever ye conclude to go. You Ve got 
money, I understand, and we 're not dis- 
posed to tak it away from ye. I dinnat 
hold wi' turning a young person adrift 
without funds." 



THE AWAKENING. 71 

"Good day, sir; I donH think I'U 
trouble you any further." 

Before Mr. Maclosky Jones had time to 
reply she left the room. 

" A pretty impudent baggage ! " said 
Mr. Fitzherbert Robinson. 

"Jest the sairt o' woman to tempt a 
saint. Did ye regard her black 'een ? Aye, 
mon, I've seen the day I could jest o' 
fallen deep in love with a wee bit foreigner 
lassie like that. She didna seem to regard 
your insinuatin' ways, I 'm thinkin'." 

" She 's a fool ! " said Robinson. 



s 



72 CRUEL LONDON. 



CHAPTER IV. 

FALLEN AMONG THIEVES. 

" You want a lodging ? Ah, bless yer swate 
face," said an old woman, pushing her 
way to Caroline's side, as she stood bewil-^ 
dered among the crowd of passengers just 
emptied into the gaslight upon the arrival 
platform of the Great Western Railway at 
Paddington. " A nice clean place as ever 
ye see ; ah, let me carry the baby for ye." 
The passenger . ^yesterday mistress of 
that lovely retreat on the Avon, to-day 
a fugitive and a wanderer . Chugged the 
infant close to her breast, as the woman 
known as Irish Moll put out her arms. 



FALLEN AMONG THIEVES. 73 

"Ah, well, then, I'll not touch the 
darlint. The saints bless and kape it; 
but youVe travelled a long way, and 
you 're a stranger intirely, and what '11 I 
do for ye at all ? " 

" Is this your luggage ? " asked a porter, 
coming up to Mrs. Gardner, with a small 
bag in his hand. 

" Yes," said the woman. 

" Are you expecting somebody to meet 
you, or can I get you a cab ? " asked the 
porter, bent rather upon his fee than upon 
rendering assistance. 

"No," said Irish Moll, promptly, "she 
just wants a lodging for the night, and 
I 'm the woman she 's expecting to get it 
for her." 

Though accustomed to see many strange 
people, it occurred to the porter that there 
was something peculiar in the association 
of these two women . one of them delicate^ 
beautiful, ladylike, for he could see that 
the passenger was all this even in the 



74 CRUEL LONDON. 

gaslight; the other a common, shuffling 
Irishwoman, who might have been a 
huckster, an orange-seller, or the director 
of a low lodging-house. Before he had 
time to do more than let the curious 
contrast of the figures flash through his 
muddled brain, his services were required 
in another direction, and he laid the hand- 
bag from Essam down by its owner and 
disappeared. 

" Ah, give the bag to me ; sure an' I '11 
carry it for ye. Come away with Molly, 
and I '11 get you some tay and a bloater, 
and make ye as comfortable as the fine 
house you 've left." 

Caroline allowed herself to be led away. 
A stranger, bewildered and alone . ^the 
unaccustomed noise, the lights, the cries 
of porters, cabs dashing to and fro, people 
pushing hither and thither . it seemed as 
if this kindly-speaking old woman was 
providentially sent to her help. She was 
ready to lean upon any one, lest the cruel 



FALLEN AMONG TfflEVES. 75 

crowd should sweep over her like a torrent 
and leave her stranded. 

" Let me take hould ov yer arm, darlint," 
said Irish Moll ; "ye are not used to this 
bi^ town. Come away, wid ye, and we 
can find yer frinds in the mornin'." 

In and out between cabs and horses, 
over the road, and into a street of shops, 
with here and there a blaze of light illu- 
minating the two figures, the one grim, 
fawning, shufiling, and leading the other, 
a slight, well-dressed girl, with a child in 
her arms. It was eleven o'clock. The 
heat of the sun had left behind it a clammy 
haze. From streets of shops and blazing 
gin palaces they came to a region of 
houses packed together in rows, with here 
and there groups of men and women stand- 
ing in the doorways, or lolling out of the 
windows to try and catch a breath of fresh 
air, but only succeeding in picking up the 
odours of stale vegetables or whiffs of 
strong tobaqco. 



76 CRUEL LONDON. 

"Ah, ye mustn't mind the looks of 
Porter's Buildings ; we aren't rich any of 
us, but we 're honest and we 're clane ; and 
Molly Maloney isn't the woman to bring 
ye anywhere wheres ye '11 not be comfort- 
able." 

More than once Mrs. Gardner was on 
the point of resisting her guide's well- 
assumed authority ; but it seemed as if the 
woman read her thoughts and combated 
them with reassuring words, and appeals 
to the saints and testimonials to her own 
honesty. 

They reached a narrow passage. 

" There, now, we '11 soon be at home," 

said Irish Moll, " and a cup ov tay will 

cheer ye." 

Irish Moll opened the door of a small 

house and brought the traveller into a 

room furnished as a bed and sitting-room 

combined. The darkness was made dimly 

visible by a lamp which gave forth more 

odour than light. But Molly Maloney, as 



FALLEN AMONG THIEVES. 77 

the old hag delighted to call herself, turned 
the light up, and it fell, as if with a flash 
of surprise, upon the pale face of Caroline 
Denton, seated in a chair, and looking in 
a blank kind of way at nothing. 

It might have occurred to her that the 
change from The Cottage to Porter's 
Buildings was something too dreadful to 
think of; but no such thought troubled 
her. She had a vague desire in her mind 
to find out whether she was legally mar- 
ried or not. And since she had left The 
Cottage this desire had almost given way 
to fear that inquiries would only lead to a 
miserable and unhappy discovery. Her 
leading idea at the outset had been to fly 
from Essam ; to put The Cottage and its 
new possessors behind her; to get away 
from the brutal taunts of Migswood; to 
shut out the scene of her shame. Once she 
had thought of seeking consolation and 
inspiration at her father's grave, and then 
it dawned upon her that she did not know 



78 CEUEL LONDON. 

where he was buried. In that awful hour, 
when he was carried to a wayside hotel 
dead before her face, she had lost all con- 
sciousness of things, and had more or less 
remained in a state of insensibility for 
many days. She remembered, during her 
waking moments, a kind voice, a constant 
attendant upon her, a young man who 
said he was her father's friend, and who 
ministered to her every want, only at last 
to cast her adrift, a waif and stray upon 
the world. She had no papers in her pos- 
session as to her identity, no record of her 
father's death, no certificate of her mar- 
riage, nothing. Mr. Gardner had made a 
clean sweep of all these documents, news- 
papers, and writings before leaving The 
Cottage and the beautiful woman who, for 
a time, had, even in his eyes, converted it 
into a paradise. 

While travelling to London, these facts, 
in a dreamy, uncertain way, had got into 
her mind, and she realized more or less 



FALLEN AMONG THIEVES. 79 

her position. She was a unit in the world 
. a thing without a name, a homeless wan- 
derer, belonging to nobody ; and whether 
Heaven had given her a child in mockery, 
or out of love and mercy she knew not ; 
she only knew that she loved it with all 
her heeirt and soul, and that she would 
never part with it and live. As she sat 
staring at nothing in the parlour of No. 5, 
Porter's Buildings, she saw none of the 
indications of poverty about her. The 
tawdry fire-paper in the grate, covered 
with soot; the torn blind, yellow with 
dirt and age ; the cracked cups and saucers 
that Molly Maloney placed upon the 
rickety table; the kettle she tried to 
boil over a lamp on the mantel-shelf ; the 
wanderer saw none of these things . ^her 
thoughts were far away, and in spite of 
her they were following in imagination 
the fortunes of Tristram Decker. She 
fancied she saw him in some far distant 
corner of America, and it almost comforted 



80 CRUEL LONDON. 

her to feel that he was thinking of her. 
He was the only friend she had in the 
world ; and she had seen him looking over 
the gate in the Vale of Essam. 

At first that vision only impressed her 
with the belief that he was dead ; for they 
were superstitious people in her southern 
home, and the old negress who nursed her 
as a child constantly saw ghosts and 
spirits. Since yesterday, however, her 
troubled mind had put out hands, as it 
were, to feel for something or somebody 
to cling to, and they had brought back 
the thought that perhaps Decker was 
coming to her ; that the vision she had 
seen was the shadow of his coming, the 
warning sent on before. While she was 
regarding this possibility with child-like 
satisfaction, however, the woman's view 
of the situation intervened and made her 
shudder. What could she say to Tristram 
Decker ? If he sought her, it would be 
with his heart full of love for her, full of 



FALLEN AMONG THIEVES. 81 

tender memories. And even the declara- 
tion, ^^ I am married," as if it were not 
bitter enough, might be contradicted in 
his hearing, and he would look upon her 
as an outcast, a thing for scorn and con- 
tumely. 

Irish Moll went on talking to her lodger, 
who made her no answer, but presently 
rose and staggered to the bed. 

'^ Ah, that's right; it's rest ye want. 
Lie ye down and I '11 make the tay for ye ; 
and ye '11 find that bed as soft as a lady 's 
couch, that ye will." 

The baby cried. Mrs. Gardner laid it 
upon the pillow, and, lying beside it, 
soothed it and stroked its head. 

^^ I '11 just go out now and buy ye the bit 
of supper this night, and something for 
the darlint's breakfast. Will ye be giving 
me a few shillings to make the purchases ? " 

" Give me a little water." 

"Sure and the tay '11 be ready in less 
than a minute." 

VOIi. II. G 



82 CRUEL LONDON. 

" A little water." 

Mrs. Maloney found some water after 
much searching. It was warm, but the 
fugitive drank it. 

"Ah, thank the saints you're getting 
better. Did je hear what I said about 
the supper and the few shillings ? " 

" Yes," she answered, taking the purse 
out of her pocket. 

It was in Molly's hand the moment it 
appeared. 

"I'll just take five shillin, darlint, 
that 's all," she said, examining the purse 
at the lamp; "that's enough; sure five 
shillings will get you a mighty fine supper 
and breakfast." 

She handed the purse back, and as she 
left the house impressed upon " the 
darlint " that she would return in a few 
minutes. But she came back no more. 
There were notes and gold in the wan- 
derer's purse. Wicked eyes leered at the 
money: cruel fingers clutched it. Irish 



FALLEN AMONG THIEVES. 83 

Moll was a professional thief, and some- 
thing even worse. One of her favourite 
" lays," as th^ called the cruel business 
in Porter's Buildings, was to pick up men 
or women at the great railway stations, 
unfortunate girls flying from disgrace in 
rural districts, countrymen seeking lodg- 
ings . strangers, in fact, to London, for 
whom armies of plunderers, men and 
women, are continually on the watch. 
The favourite stations are Victoria, Char- 
ing Cross, and Waterloo; but Irish 
Moll varied her operations just as she 
varied her place of residence. She had 
only looked in upon Paddington as a 
speculation ; it was not one of her haunts, 
and it offered less facilities than the other 
big stations for her kind of work. The 
railway police are active men at Pad- 
dington, though Mrs. Maloney managed 
to elude them on this her first important 
stroke of business in that locality. 

Left alone, the mother hummed a 



84 CRUEL LONDON. 

lullaby to the child, and presently both 
slept where they lay. The shout of late 
revellers resounded in the court, and the 
shriek of women. But the Southern 
planter's daughter heard them not. Ex- 
hausted nature was recouping itself. The 
mother lay by her child, with her arms 
under its little head, as calm and still as if 
she were dead. Presently morning, dirty 
and grim, looked in upon them through 
the dusty window. The sun rarely 
deigned to cast even a solitary ray into 
the recesses of Porter's Buildings. The 
first light of morning was bathing Essam 
in a poetic mist, a grey halo, cool and 
fresh; the hedges were decked with 
liquid diamonds, birds were singing on 
every tree; but morning at Porter's 
Buildings was a different thing altogether. 
It seeined to hang about as if it were 
indifferent, if not ashamed of the work it 
had to do ; for it had to reveal to men's 
.eyes the black spots in the world, the filth 



FALLEN AMONG THIEVES. 85 

and degradation of life ; to show the slimy 
depths to which human nature can fall. 
The first beams of morning never fell 
upon so sweet a picture of suffering inno- 
cence as that which they came upon at 
No. 5, Porter's Buildings. Sleep, like his 
brother Death, had smoothed all signs of 
care from the mother's face. There was 
even a smile upon the half -parted lips ; 
the closed eyes spoke of peace and rest ; 
and the little face beside them was rosy 
with health. 

It was hard to wake them so rudely. 
But the woman who came in with the 
morning wanted to know, with many 
curses, what in the name of Satan and 
other demons she was doing in her bed, 
and in her room. The new lodger woke 
with a cry, and, clinging to her child, sat 
up and stared wildly about. The drunken 
owner of the bed said, ^^ Oh, yes, that was 
all very fine, but what was she doing 
there ? " Mrs. Gardner stammered some 



86 CRUEL LONDON. 

thing about an Irishwoman having brought 
her ; whereupon the woman, who had come 
in with ribbons in her bonnet and silk 
upon her back, anathematized Irish Moll, 

and supposed she 'd been at her little 
games again, and said, though she was 
her own mother, she 'd suffer considerable 
torments if ever she should step inside 
that door again. Then she informed the 
infernal interloper and her brat that they 'd 
better get out quick. Whereupon the 
stranger, who had been brought to this 
land flowing with milk and honey by a 
misguided father, slipped out at the door 
into a grimy passage, then into a court 
reeking with foul odours, and finally out 
into a broad deserted street. 

She attracted the attention of a police- 
man, for they were the only persons to 
be seen, though a crowd of sparrows were 
chattering and quarrelling over their 
breakfasts in the roadway. 

The officer said it was a queer kind of 



FALLEN AMONG THIEVES. 87 

time for a person to want an hotel. Where 
had she come from? What was she 
doing ? Where did she live ? He asked 
her many questions, and told her he had 
no idea where she could find a respectable 
hotel that would take her in. A baby and 
no luggage. Oh, she had left her luggage, 
she said, at the house where somebody had 
taken her for the night. The policeman 
said she should keep out of bad company. 

They had turned her out of the house, 
she said. What did she mean? Who 
had she been with ? She didn't know ; 
an Irishwoman. An Irishwoman, the 
policeman said, reflectively. Well, the 
best thing she could do was to go over to 
that early coffee-shop and get some coffee, 
and he would see if they would take her 
in at the hotel next door. He did not 
quite make out to his own satisfaction 
whether he was justified in helping her 
to this extent, but she looked some- 
thing better than the sort of woman he 



book: v. 



i 



ON BOTH SIDES OF THE CHANNEL. 93 



BOOK V. 



CHAPTER L 

ON BOTH SIDES OP THE CHANNEL. 

If not the most luxuriant, it was the 
pleasantest little studio in St. John's 
Wood. A north light, and furnished with 
odd things of all kinds and colours, it was 
sufficiently in disorder to indicate a 
bachelor tenant, and not without equal evi- 
dence of a feminine hand here and there. 
The jars and vases, the picture-frames, 
the screens that seemed to lie carelessly 
about, were clean. The carpet had 
been brushed; there were pipes, spill- 
cases, cards, and cigar-holders upon the 



^ 



94 GRUEL LONDON. 

mantel-shelf. These things were lying 
about in admired disorder, but there was 
no dust. An easy chair near the fireplace 
was adorned with a satin antimacassar. A 
Japanese rug covered the centre of the 
room. The usual lay figure of an artist's 
studio stood in a jaunty attitude, like an 
intoxicated barbarian, and wore a robe of 
Indian silk. A couch where a model had 
been reclining was placed in position, 
commanded by an easel, upon which was 
lying an open book. A vase of roses 
decorated a small cabinet close by, and 
there was something not only in this fact, 
but more still in the arrangement of the 
flowers, that betokened a woman's touch. 

While we are contemplating this abode 
of art, there enters a tall, picturesque- 
looking young man, stalwart, broad of 
chest, his hair cut close to his head, his 
beard hanging in a silken mass upon his 
chest. He wears a suit of grey clothes, 
a white shirt, no waistcoat, his jacket flung 



ON BOTH SIDES OF THE CHANNEL. 95 

back; and upon his feet a pair of thick, 
imtanned shoes. 

"Nonsense, my dear," he was saying 
as he entered the studio, . "nonsense; 
you must shut out all the world when you 
cross the portals of the temple, and only 
think of me." 

The interesting lady who followed the 
artist had a letter and a newspaper in 
her hand. SUght in figure, with bright 
hazel eyes, she had in her face an expres- 
sion of care which was not unfamiliar to 
the reader in the early days of this his- 
tory, when Emily Sleaford had charge of 
the domestic economy of the comer house 
in Fitzroy Square. It was the first time 
that Fred Tavener had seen his wife 
really troubled since their marriage, which 
had taken place some six months prior to 
this summer morning when we meet 
Mr. Tavener for the first time. They 
had been united in a quiet, unostentatious 
way, though Mr. Sleaford had ofiered 



96 CEUEL LONDON. 

Emily an imposing ceremony and break- 
fast. Their honeymoon had been spent 
on a sketching tour in Derbyshire, and 
Frank had been enabled to rent the house 
where Jie had previously lodged, with its 
pretty little studio built off the dining- 
room into the garden at the back. They 
were very happy, having married for love, 
though not necessarily to live in a cottage, 
and think bread and cheese and kisses the 
best of fare. Indeed, Frank always said 
he would not ask Emily to marry him 
until he was making a clear five hundred 
pounds a year, and Emily had always as 
consistently replied that the day he said 
he was ready he might put up the banns. 
She was a determined little lady, as we 

have already seen, Miss Emily Sleaford, 
but she was as good as gold . a great deal 
better than some gold . and her idea of 
keeping up appearances was not to shape 
your life according to Mrs. Grundy, but 
according to the honourable laws of those 



ON BOTH SIDES OF THE CHANNEL. 97 

moral ethics which are the outcome of 
honest hearts and well-balanced minds. 

^* This is my own particular and private 
preserve ; I am monarch here," continued 
the artist, " and a happy face is essential 
to the completion of my picture, which is 
to increase our income this year up to a 
thousand pounds." 

He put a powerful arm round the little 
figure, and kissed his wife upon the lips. 
She affected to rub her face afterwards, 
with the remark that she certainly would 
have him shaved ; she might as well be 
hugged by a bear. Frank went to the 
mantel-shelf, lighted a cigarette, opened a 
window that looked upon a lawn dotted 
with flowers, sat cross-legged upon a 
wooden chair, and contemplated his wife 
through a cloud of white smoke. She was 
a dainty picture in an old-fashioned baby- 
dress, with long mittens upon her arms, 
and bows upon her shoulders. A frill at 
the bottom of her skirt fell short of a pair 

VOL. n. H 



98 CRUEL LONDON. 

of pretty ankles, and feet in silk stockings^ 
and buckled shoes. 

^' You volunteered to sit, my love, and 
you must go through with it; I know 
fellows who make their wives models 
whether they will or no. I don't hold 
with that; but when your wife insists 
upon sending your professional sitter 
about her business, and takes her place, 
why then there must be no shirking it." 

'' If anybody heard you, what a tyrant 
they would think you," said Emily, sitting 
down upon the sofa. 

^'I should think they would," he said, 
flinging the remainder of his cigarette 
into the garden, and closing the window. 
^' I am going to finish this picture before 
the month is out, whatever happens, and 
then I '11 show you the sort of tyrant I am. 
I '11 drag you all over the Continent, 
through Switzerland, Italy, France . ^I 
don't know where." 

He was preparing his palette while he 



ON BOTH SIDES OF THE CHANNEL. 99 

talked ; a blackbird was piping aloud on 
the top of a tree in the garden, and Mrs. 
Tavener was vainly trying to bring back 
to her face the expression which had 
begun to play about the eye, which 
Tavener had transferred to his canvas. 

" When you are troubled, then is the 
time to lose yourself in occupation," said 
the artist. 

^^ Yes ; if you were sitting here, and I 
were drawing your picture, that would be 
a very diflferent thing." 

" A very indifferent one, I should say, 
judging from the attempt you made the 
other day," he replied. 

^' Frank, you are unkind.'' 

" All my models say so." 

" But really, dear, I don't think I can 
sit still this morning." 

The artist laid his palette down, went 
up to his wife, sat by her side, and, in a 
voice of assumed banter, said, . 

** Did it get tired of its work, then ? 



100 CRUEL LONDON. 

Would it be a model, and then want to 
give it up just when it was becoming 
useful ? Did it pretend to be strong- 
minded, and break down over the first bit 
of trouble that overtakes its family ? Well 
then, it shall come for a nice little walk 
round the garden, and have a talk and see 
what 's to be done." 

The newspaper she held in her hand con- 
tained the paragraph which Mr. Maclosky 
Jones had read to Mrs. Gardner. It 
was stale news now, but some friend of 
Emily had sent her another copy, fear- 
ing she might not have seen it. The 
letter was from mamma, who had gone 
to Boulogne with Jeremiah the Good 
to meet and commune with their son. It 
stated that to save Tom from a criminal 
prosecution his father would have to part 
with all their property, and that their only 
hope now was that he would be able to 
successfully renew his suit with Jane 
Crosby. Tom was very penitent, and for 



ON BOTH SIDES OF THE CHANNEL. 101 

all their sakes it was better that they should 
become poor again, rather than suffer the 
stain upon their house of having a son 
sentenced to transportation. Jeremiah, she 
said, had behaved in the most magnani- 
mous and paternal manner, having agreed 
to give up all he possessed, which, with 
the sale of Tom's property, would cover a 
portion of the defalcations sufficient to 
have the whole matter settled. '' But I 

. 

fear, love," the letter continued, '^ your 



father can never again do business in the 
City, and that we must try and make up 
an income by letting Fitzroy Square 
furnished, and living in humble lodgings. 
Your father thinks if we could take a 
little farm somewhere near the Thames, 
and keep fowls and have a boathouse, we 
might get along, and that Mr. Tavener 
could come down and paint there, as he 
is so fond of Thames subjects." 

Emily read this again to Fred as they 
walked round and round the garden, a 



102 CRUEL LONDON. 

square bit of well-cultivated ground, with 
creepers all over the walls, and a grass- 
plot with clumps of verbenas, geraniums, 
and fuchsias dotting it in small beds, that 
looked like splashes of gorgeous colour 
upon a green ground. 

^' Yes, that's kind about the Thames," 
said Frank. 

^^ And so practical, isn't it ? " said 
Emily, with a regretful smile. 

" Very ! They 'd get two or- three hun- 
dred a year from Fitzroy Square, and 
spend six on the Thames.*" 

'^ Just what I was thinking." 

'^But you ought to have married a 
rich man, Em, and then you could have 
stepped in and put it all right." 

'^ Nothing would put them all right, 
Frank ; poor father's fortunes, ever since I 
can remember, have always been going up 
and down like a bucket in a well, and with 
the lively uncertainty of never knowing 
iv^hen it would come up empty or full. 



ON BOTH SIDES OF THE CHANNEL. 103 

I don't know what is to be done. Patty, 
however, is the greatest puzzle. Mamma 
complains bitterly of her, though I really 
cannot see that the girl is to be blamed. 
^If I marry Mr. Roper,' she says, ^he 
shall have the ten thousand pounds ; if I 
don't, it lies in the bank until I marry 
somebody else, and in that case I give it 
to my husband ; therefore it is impossible 
for me to help father with that money ; 
and it is no good being unkind about 
it.' " 

^* Yes ; I wouldn't have given Patty 
credit for so much firmness," said Tavener. 

" She surprises me. I thought I knew 
her thoroughly ; I don't. She offers no ex- 
planation ; she will neither say Yes nor No 
to Roper, now that father has given his 
consent ; she goes on painting her water- 
colour simsets, and nursing her foot at you 
when you sit down and talk to her ; and I 
am quite beaten." 

" That ten thousand pounds will ac- 



104 CRUEL LONDON. 

cumulate and grow," replied Frank; "some 
day, if she does not marry, it will be a 
wonderful sum; it might, if kept long 
enough at interest, become big enough to 
pay off the National Debt. There 's a nest 
egg for you ! " 

"What troubles me most is this pro- 
posed attack on Jane Crosby; there is 
something so humiliating and degrading 
in it that I have been thinking whether it 
is not my duty to write to Miss Crosby, 
or to see her and tell her everything. I 
know she does not dislike Tom ; I fancy it 
is even possible she might marry him ; and 
if she did she would be a wretched and 
miserable woman. What ought I to do ? '^ 

Frank Tavener stroked his beard, and 
drew his wife's arm under his own. 

" You know as well as I do that Tom i& 
a wicked, bad fellow." 

" He is your brother, dear." 

"He is none the less a scoundrel, . a 
heartless, designing, cruel man." 



ON BOTH SIDES OF THE CHANNEL. 105 

Mrs. Tavener quickened her steps, and 
a hot glow came upon her face. 

" It is a bitter thing to say, and the sin 
of the business is heaviest when one look& 
at it from a sister's point of view. It may 
be selfish to say so, but think, Frank, what 
Patty and I lose in having for a brother 
a man like Tom, instead of a man we 
could be proud of. How delightful, for 
instance, if he could come and see us and 
smoke a cigar with you ; but, there, it does 
not bear thinking of : if he does not end 
his days in prison or upon the gallows, I 
suppose we ought to be content.'' 

" I think I should do nothing until your 
father and mother come home," said 
Tavener; ^'perhaps things are not so bad 
as they seem." 

"Your motto is always ^ wait,' Frank,'^ 
replied the wife. 

" Yes, it 's a good old motto. Didn't I 
wait for you, and are you not here with 
your arm in mine, and wouldn't I give 



106 CRUEL LONDON. 

you a kiss and hug you where you stand 
if that wretched Mother Sniggers were not 
watching us from her back window ? She 
has been peeping behind her blind ever 
since we came out." 

*^I suppose I shall have to settle it for 
myself," said Mrs. Tavener; ^^you won't 
help me." 

" I 'm such an ass at family affairs, you 
know ; ask my advice, dear, when you Ve 
made up your mind, and then you ^11 see 
how I shall wake up." 

" I shall caution Jane Crosby." 

^^Very well, show me the letter when 
you have written it ; and, now that burden 
is off your mind, come to work." 

He put his arm round her, in spite of 
Mother Sniggers. She leaned lovingly 
against his great manly figure, and they 
re-entered the studio, which led Mother 
Sniggers to remark to herself that she 
didn't believe any two people that were 
really married would conduct themselves 



ON BOTH SIDES OF THE CHANNEL. 107 

SO disgracefully in the broad face of 
day. 

While Fred Tavener was idealizing 
his wife on canvas, two of the persons of 
whom they had been talking were sitting 
by an hotel window, overlooking the sea 
at Boulogne, after an excellent French 
breakfast, one of them smoking a cigar, 
both of them drinking claret. Mrs. Slea- 
ford had gone out to do a little shopping. 
They were occupying a handsome suite of 
rooms, and were to be seen in an evening 
among the happiest-looking people at the 
Etahlissementj where Tom played billiards, 
and Mr. and Mrs. Sleaford wandered 
in and out of the dancing and reading 
saloons, and otherwise conducted them- 
selves like wealthy English people taking 
their ease. To protect them from the sun, 
which was flashing over the sea and making 
the city dazzling in its white beauty, an 
outer blind was carefully drawn. Tom 
Sleaford was sitting upon one chair, with 



108 CRUEL LONDON. 

his legs oji another. His father was walk- 
ing up and down the room. Although 
they had been together for some days in 
Boulogne, they had evidently not forgiven 
each other, nor had they altogether made 
up their differences. Jeremiah the Politic, 
with his hands beneath his coat tails, was 
walking solemnly to and fro, his bald head 
shining with the dew of summer heat, his 
cravat neatly tied, his bushy whiskers 
bushier than ever, and his eye-glass 
dangling by a broad band of black ribbon, 
that made a long line across his white 
shirt front. 

" It 's no good crying over spilt milk,'^ 
said Tom, contemplating his slippered 
feet and smoking in a calm, deliberative 
way that irritated his father alfaiost to 
madness, ^'have another glass of claret 
and sit down, governor." 

"Spilt milk! If it had been honestly 
spilt," cried Jeremiah, "if the Cow of 
Fortune had lifted her leg and tilted it 



ON BOTH SIDES OF THE CHANNEL. 109 

over, as she has done many a full bucket 
before now, then I could have borne it ; 
but to see my own son take the milk, not 
to say the cream, of a city career and 
literally throw it down the gutter, it is 
wicked, it is slapping Fortune in the face, 
and snapping your fingers at Fate." 

Jeremiah liked metaphors. He caught 
up the idea of spilt milk with avidity. 
He carried it up and down the room. He 
flung it at Tom. He launched it at the 
ceiling. He shook it like a flag. He dashed 
it upon the table. He stabbed the air with 
it. Finally he sighed, and drank a glass 
of claret. 

" Spilt milk ! Only to think what the 
phrase means. Gold, independence, 
luxury, a dignified mind, happy old age. r- 
everything that makes life worth having 
. presented by Fortune to parched lips, 
and wilfully hurled to the ground ; mali- 
ciously poured into the earth, to be swal- 
lowed up by a fleeting palace in a valley, 



110 CRUEL LONDON. 

an alias J a nom de plumey and an immoral 
life. Tom, you will never know how all 
this has cut me to the quick, bowed me 
down, and humbled your mother and 
sister who looked up to you." 

^*Down, go vomer, down," said Tom, 
interrupting his father. 

'^ What do you mean ? " 

'^ Looked down upon me," repeated the 
son. 

^' I say up to you, Tom, and I am 
right." 

" You always are, governor." 

^^No, sir, not always; I am sometimes 
wrong, very wrong. I ought to have 
insisted upon looking into your affairs 
long ago." 

^' We have done those things we ought 
not to have done, and left undone those 
things we ought to have done, and for 
which we have got it hot," said the pro- 
fane spendthrift. 

^' Yes ; you do well to sneer at religion, 



ON BOTH SIDES OF THE CHANNEL. Ill 

at morality, . at everything the human 
heart holds good and pure and noble/' 
said Mr. Sleaford, raising his eyes to the 
ceiling with an air of piety and virtue. 

" If you were a model father talking to 
me like that, governor, . if I believed you 
believed what you are saying, it might 
have some effect on me, but . " 

'^ Honour thy father and thy mother," 
broke in Mr. Sleaford, '' that thy days 
may be long in the land." 

There was something almost pathetic in 

. 

the old man's delivery of the solemn com- 
mandment. 

^^It doesn't say whether thy father is 
good or bad, . the divine law makes no 
qualification ; and so sure as you live you 
will suffer for disobeying it. ^ Honour 
thy father and thy mother !' To the AU- 
seeing eye it is enough that they are thy 
father and thy mother; they are to be 
honoured, and the son who slightingly dis- 
regards it may not cry over spilt milk, 



112 CRUEL LONDON, 

but his day of sorrow and misery is fixed 
as the stars, and his time will come." 

The father stood before the son, who 
simply moved his position, pushing one 
chair a little further off, and lighting a 
fresh cigar. 

" Do you hear what I say ? " 

"Rather." 

" It makes no impression, then ?" 

" Yes; capitally delivered. You might 
have a career in the Church, or in Parlia- 
ment, if you were not too old. I don't 
know which is best, your action or your 
eloquence." 

Jeremiah rarely got into a passion, but 
the cool effrontery of Tom Sleaford would 
have raised the pulse of the meekest father 
in Christendom. 

"Look you, Tom!" shouted Sleaford ; 
^^ if you don't get up and treat what I say 
with at least a show of respect, I '11 dash 
this decanter in your face. Get up, you 
scamp, get up ! " 




ON BOTH SIDES OF THE CHANNEL. 113 

Once moved, the old man grew reck- 
less. He seized Tom by the collar, and 
dragged him out of his chair. It was the 
first time he had ever laid a hand upon his 
son, in anger. 

'' Hollo, govemer, what the devil are 
you doing? Are you going off your 
ehump ? " exclaimed Tom, shaking him- 
self together. 

" You swindling thief ! " shrieked the 
father, '' how dare you sit there and 
sneer at me ? You mean, miserable 
scoundrel ! " 

^^ Go it," said Tom, retreating a few 
paces from the angry man. 

"I brought you up, educated you, 
slaved for you, lied for you . aye, and 
worse," he went on, thinking of his trick 
with the Martin will. '^ There is hardly 
a crime I wouldn't have committed for 
you ; and you reward me with sneers, 
taimts, aflfronts, you damned, conceited, 
thieving puppy ! " 

VOL. II. I 



114 CRUEL LONDON. 

The old man stood up to his son, 
trembling with passion. Tom was silent. 
He laid down his cigar, and looked at his 
father without any attempt to conceal his 
astonishment. 

^' Yes, thieving puppy, I said. Those 
were my words. I disown you ! You are 
no son of mine. You are a base, ungrate- 
ful scamp. I could find it in my heart to 
brain you." 

He took up a decanter and flung it 
down, in his rage, smashing it into a 
thousand pieces, and then rushed out of 
the room. A waiter hurried in as Mr. 
Sleaford went out, and asked if Monsieur 
rung. Tom said no, and requested the 
waiter not to show his ugly face there 
again until he did ring. The servant 
bowed, and retired. Tom relighted his 
cigar, and walked about the room with a 
quiet, steady, contemplative stride. It 
was something quite new for Mr. Slea- 
ford to lash himself into a passion. 



ON BOTH SIDES OF THE CHANNEL. 115 

But Tom had goaded him, and the young 
man began now to wonder that his father 
had stood his taunts and sneers so long. 
ToiQ was one of those born cowards who 
harass the weak and take liberties with 
those who give way to them. To submit 
was in Tom's view an invitation to agres- 
sion. He had not a spark of chivalry in 
his nature. The more Fitzroy Square 
had given way to him in the old days the 
more he had domineered over it. As his 
father consented to be sneered at, Tom 
sneered at him; and the fact that he knew 
his father hadn't clean hands in regard to 
finance and speculation were not tem- 
porized by filial considerations. He would 
not make the sacrifices for his father which 
his father would make for him. His 
father was a rogue, and he was not- willing 
to be lectured for being one himself by a 
confederate, for he insisted upon regard- 
ing his father in that light, though he had 
himself been engaged in dishonest trans- 



116 CRUEL LONDON. 

actions of which his father had not the 
slightest knowledge. 

" I won't have him talking like that to 
me," he said presently to his mother, who 
came to him in tears. 

^' But he is your father, and in trouble," 
said Mrs. Sleaford, laying down a lovely 
specimen of terra-cotta work which she 
had just purchased and carried home, to 
be followed by other parcels of ornamental 
goods which she thought Patty would like, 
and which would look '' so nice" in the 
drawing-room at home, even if they were 
ultimately obliged to let the house. 

*^ If he were my father twenty times 
over I wouldn't stand it," said Tom. " If 
I am in a hole, whose fault is it ? Am I 
not his son, and am I not following in 
his footsteps ? " 

'' No, Tom, you are not," said Mrs. 
Sleaford, with more emphasis than was 
customary with her; '^and if you could 
see your poor father at this moment 



ON BOTH SIDES OF THE CHANNEL. 117 

bathing his dear head with eau-de-Co- 
logne, and sobbing, you wouldn't have 
the heart to say so." 

^^He wants his head bathing with 
something. He must be going mad! 
Look at that decanter, smashed all to 
pieces. Supposing it had hit me in the 
face ! " 

Tom kicked the glass about, and Mrs. 
Sleaford looked at it a little terror- 
stricken. 

^' He 's very sorry that he let his temper 
get the better of him, I 'm sure," said Mrs. 
Sleaford, ^' but you shouldn't say that you 
are following in his footsteps." 

^^I say I am. He let me into the 
secrets of financing and finessing, and I am 
a worthy pupil." 

^'Oh, how can you say so, Tom! 
Whatever your father may be, he has been 
a true and constant husband." 

^^ Has he?" 

'' Yes, he has, Tom. He never kept 



118 CRUEL LONDON. 

a den of infamy and had an aliasy . 
there ! " 

Mrs. Sleaf ord felt herself grow quite cold. 

" Oh, I 've kept a den of infamy, 
have I ? " 

'' I will say, if I am killed for it the 
next minute, that your father was always 
a faithful husband, and never tired of 
scheming for his family." 

The good lady rose, and, stamping her 
foot gently on the floor, she screamed in 
broken falsetto tones, . 

^^ If I were your father, and strong, I 
would show you whether you should dis- 
grace the family and then insult us! 
There ! I have taken your part till now ; 
but to see that dear man sobbing and 
bathing his head, it would make the heart 
of a worm turn. Oh, you unfeeling, 
cruel son ! Oh, you wicked, disgusting, 
young man, with your harems and your 
creatures ! I declare my heart is breaking 
with it all ! " 




ON BOTH SIDES OF THE CHANNEL. 119 

Mrs. Sleaford felt as if she were suflFo- 
cating. She staggered and fell upon a 
couch. Tom dashed water in her face, 
and poured brandy into her mouth. 

^^ Here 's a nice go ! " said the affectionate 
son. " I shall cut this altogether. Here, 
mother, don't be absurd." 

She did not move. He lifted her up 
in his arms and laid her upon the floor, 
near the window, and opened the door, so 
as to produce a current of air. Presently 
she recovered. As soon as she did, Tom 
rang the bell, told the waiter to go and 
tell Mr. Sleaford that Mrs. Sleaford wanted 
him ; and then, saying he would go and 
take a stroll until the storm had blown 
over, he left the room and went out to 
play billiards at the Etahlissement. 



120 CRUEL LONDON. 



CHAPTER II. 

"the trail of the serpent." 

A dishevelled and miserable-looking 
couple, the Sleafords, father and mother, 
sat upon the French sofa and vainly tried 
to comfort each other. Mrs. Sleaford laid 
her faded curls upon Jeremiah's shoulder^ 
and he put his arms affectionately about 
her. It was many and many a long year 
since they had sat in so loving an attitude. 
The tears still stood in Jeremiah's eyes. 
He didn't speak for some time. He could 
see the loungers on the beach, he could 
hear the merry laugh of young people 
bathing, he saw white-sailed craft dancing 
upon the incoming tide ; it all looked so 




" THE TRAIL OF THE SERPENT." 121 

gay and happy outside that the scene only 
intensified his feeling of sorrow and 
misery. 

"I have deserved it," he said, pre- 
sently. ^ ^ I have deserved his taunts and 
his sneers." 

" To live to grey hairs and hear you 
say so ! Don't, Jerry, don't." 

" To live to grey hairs and find your 
entire family against you, Mrs. Sleafordy 
that is the hardest cut of all ; we haven't 
a dutiful child, to say nothing of a loving 
and affectionate one." 

^' Patty is only wilful, my dear. She is^ 
good, I'm sure. Don't let us in our 
sorrow do her an injustice. Ah, Jere- 
miah, we have lived long enough, I think, 
. ^too long, perhaps." 

Jeremiah sighed, and whisked a fly 
away that persisted upon biting his 
hand. 

^^ If Tom had earned the right to speak 
as he has done to-day, that would have 



122 CRUEL LONDON. 

been another matter ; but a young man 
who has been living a life of secret 
debauchery and open dishonesty, and who 
<5omes to us a bankrupt, and really charged 
with being a swindler, it is too much . too 
much ! " 

^' It is indeed ! It is very cruel ! " 

^^I introduced him into finance, it's 
true, and a man who makes his way among 
jackals has to do dirty work. Mining 
itself is not clean . even gold ore dirties 
the hands, and you have to fight with the 
weapons other people fight with in the 
Oity ; and if he combines debauchery with 
it, and the manufacture of illegal scrip, 
is that my fault ? " 

Jeremiah's mixed metaphors rather im- 
pressed Mrs. Sleaford with the truth of 
his remarks, and she was glad that he no 
longer accused himself; though the next 
moment he disappointed her by grovelling 
metaphorically at Tom's feet. 

^^But that is easily said," he con- 



" THE TRAIL OF THE SERPENT." 123 

tinued, with a sigh, "my dear Beatrice 
Maud." 

" Ah, it is some consolation to hear you 
call me by that name, Jerry dear." 

"I am not myself, love, to-day," he 
replied, as if he struggled against an 
exhibition of weakness. "If I were a 
Roman Catholic . which I am not, thank 
goodness, and I will never desert the Pro- 
testant faith, for which our fathers fought 
and bled, but I can now understand the 
use of the Confessional . if I were a 
Romanist, I would seek the nearest priest 
and confess." 

" Open your heart to Beatrice Maud," 
said the faded neutral lady, whose head 
now almost pressed his cheek. 

"Don't be foolish, Mrs. Sleaford, my 
love ; let us consider our time of life : it 
behoves us to be dignified, even in our grief. 
I am not a good man, love ; no, I am not : 
I 'm a time server, and some of my busi- 
ness transactions won't bear investigation. 




124 CRUii^ LONDON. 

As I said before, I deserve the abuse of my 
son; I don't deserve the respect of my 
children; and I have not been always 
kind to you." 

^^ I wouldn't say so; on the contrary, 
dear." 

^^ You are of a patient disposition, love; 
you were made to bend before the storm ; 
but let us hope we may cultivate mutual 
love in our old age, and in the retirement 
of a little house on the Thames, away 
from the excitement and allurements of 
London. I am a beaten man, Maudy dear, 
a beaten, broken man; but it is hard^ in 
the days of our greyness and our sor- 
row, not to have the sympathy of our 
children." 

^' Emily sympathizes." 

^^ Yes, that 's true ; she opposed us in 
our schemes for her. If she had married a 
rich husband things might have been dif- 
ferent, because she is clever and would 
have managed him. But we must not 



'^ THE TRAIL OF THE SERPENT." 125 

altogether despair. I have heard that 
some of these painters make even very 
large incomes, and I saw a paragraph the 
other day which spoke very highly of 
Tavener's work. It was a happy thought 
of yours, love, the little place on the 
Thames ; Emmy would keep it going in 
the summer, no doubt, for Tavener is fond 
of landscape backings for his figure sub- 
jects, they say. He likes to have his 
people in boats fishing or making love 
with swans about. That picture which 
Kerman gave you is worth a lot ofmoney 
now, and I think you would be allowed to 
sell it ; the trustees could manage that for 
you.'' 

^^ Yes, dear; it would help us to furnish 
the farm, and might be turned into 
chickens and things." 

^* Practical as you are fond, my love ; 
with such a dear wife I ought not to re- 
pine. I will not ; I will cheer up, dear ; 
we will both cheer up." 



126 CBUEL LONDON. 

" Yes, dear, we will." 

They did. They cheered up over a 
bottle of champagne. They cheered up 
over a little joint. They went out and 
cheered up on the beach. They cheered 
up in a little sailing boat round the pier. 
They cheered up in the sun. They cheered 
up over imaginary pictures of a retired 
life near Cookham, with a boat and an 
awning over it, a tow-line, and a punt for 
fishing. They cheered up with calcula- 
tions of the ease with which a really 
pleasant house on the river could be kept 
up. A cow or two, to give them milk and 
butter ; plenty of fowls to supply them 
with eggs ; corn to make their bread, and 
mint in the garden ready for the earliest 
lamb. Jeremiah said he didn't care if he 
never went into the City again. The 
Stock Exchange was an unnatural mother ; 
it had behaved brutally to him. He had 
respected all its traditions, and had both 
bulled and beared with fearlessness and 



f THE TRAIL OF THE SERPENT." 127 

daring. If he had taken trifling advan- 
tages of the weakness of some of its laws, 
he had only done what others did and 
would do to the end of the chapter. Let 
him get clear of his liabilities this once, 
and no more City for him. Ambition was 
over for him, since his children no longer 
sympathized with his labours. What was 
gold to him ? His wants were few. His 
wife was a thoughtful, economical woman. 
Did he go to the City every day because 
he liked it ? Was Mr. Maclosky Jones 
dihe sort of man he would select for a boon 
companion except in the >vay of business ? 
Did Mr. Fitzherbert Robinson appeal to 
his sentiments of rectitude on the subject 
of the position which woman should hold 
in the world ? 

It was a delightful relief for Jeremiah 
to sit in the stern-sheets of the little boat, 
gliding away before a gentle southern 
breeze, and talk frankly of the past and 
the future; 




128 CKUEL IX)XDOX. 

City men, after all^ irere not his sort. 
He ought to hare gone to the Bar, or de* 
.oted himself to literature. 

" We all make mistakes,'' Jeremiah con- 
tinued, with a sigh, " all of us, howeTer 
thoughtfully we may consider our course 
in life at the outset." 

He was too sanguine and too trustful 
for the City. Men deceived him. He 
believed in their facts and figures too 
easily. His nature, though he didn't 
want to boast, was naturally confiding and 
honest ; and that was no good in the City. 
At the Bar, dealing with the affairs of 
other people, his only desire would, of 
course, have been to serve his clients. 
That would have suited his constitutional 
liberality. Now, in the City, self is your 
first consideration, and that was the secret 
of his failure as a financier. Yes, he had 
failed ; he was ready to admit it. No, he 
would be frank now. He was not a suc- 
cess as a City man, financier, banker, or 



f< THE TRAIL OF THE SERPENT." 129 

promoter. He had simply mistaken his 
avocation. It was a sad thing when a 
young man took the wrong turning in 
life. But how were you always to know ? 
You stood at the commencement of four 
branching roads . law, literature, art, com- 
merce. You take Law, as he did. Well, 
that might have been well and properly 
followed ; but, as you advanced, you came 
to another turning . a beautiful, flowery- 
looking highway, with luxuriant hedges, 
rosy fruits, a soft, carpet-like flooring. 

'^ To the City, Finance and Fortune ; To 
the Gold Mines. You leave the uninteresting 
path of the law, and take the new turning, 
and what do you find at the end ? " 

^^ A quiet little farm on the Thames," 
said Mrs. Sleaford, for Jeremiah paused 
as if he desired her to reply. 

" Exactly ; you have every right to ex- 
pect a palace, with carriages and horses 
and plenty of money ; you find a cottage 
and a river, a cow or two, and some 

VOL. II. K 



130 CRUEL LONDON. 

poultry. Very well said, my love ; that 
was a bright thought of yours. A cottage 
for a palace is hardly what we had a right 
to expect ; but if we can induce the angel 
Content to dwell with us, and have 
Tavener and our dear Emmy down in the 
summer, we may even yet go gently to 
our last retiring place, hand in hand, 
though our only son strives to bring our 
grey hairs with sorrow to the grave." 

^' Don't think of him any more to-day, 
dear : perhaps he will be penitent ; and if 
he should marry Jane Crosby, I 'm sure 
you would enjoy an occasional visit to 
your native county." 

" True, Beatrice Maud, true ; trouble 
and poverty seem to enlarge your views : 
some poet has said that genius is the 
brighter, like stars on a frosty night, for 
being pinched a little ; you bear out the 
simile, dear. If Tom asks my forgive- 
ness, and Jane Crosby should accept him, 
I will not stand in the way of the 



" THE TEAIL OF THE SERPENT." 131 

Sleafords being once more a united 
family." 

^^ Miss Crosby is proud," said Mrs. Slea- 
ford, gathering courage to talk under the 
influence of Jeremiah's compliments ; " she 
may not like to marry a bankrupt." 

" My dear, Tom is not a bankrupt ; his 
bankruptcy was duly annulled yesterday ; 
the recovery of his estate on the Avon^ 
and the transfer of all his shares in 
Asphaltes and in the Shipbuilding Com- 
pany, enabled my own solicitor to arrange 
that for him." 

'^But there was something else," re- 
marked Mrs. Sleaford, timidly. 

'^ The illegal scrip : as we are alone on 
the ocean, with sailors who do not under- 
stand the English language, I need not bo 
particular, I may call a spade a spade. 
He forged 25,000Z. worth of Roughened 
Asphaltic scrip. My solicitor insisted upon 
merely calling it an over-issue at the 
directors' meeting, and he induced the 



132 CRUEL LONDON. 

financial Society, which had been ex- 
tended in numbers and operations, to giye 
it up in return for the whole of my new 
shares in the Omaha Silver Company. I 
transferred them ; and when my remain- 
ing assets are realized to pay the calls on 
Cemeteries, my Stock Exchange differ- 
ences, and other things, I shall not have a 
penny. I am cleaned out ; and what is 
worse, I am no longer a member of the 
Stock Exchange, nor can I any more do 
business in Threadneedle Street. How- 
ever, I need not go into that, love ; I am 
a failure as a city man, and ambition is 
over for me.'^ 

" Miss Crosby might see that paragraph 
in the papers ? " 

^^ She wouldn't understand it if she did, 
and it only appeared in one journal. It 
was very good of Roper to get a compli- 
ment to me added to the tail of it : that 
was all he could do when he found they 
would not withdraw the paragraph alto- 



" THE TItAIL OF THE SERPENT." 133 

gether. Considering the danger we have 
had to engineer through, we have reason 
to congratulate ourselves; we have even 
got through better than a cat through a 
skylight, to use Emily's favourite phrase. 
And Tom, instead of being grateful to 
me, treats me like a menial, a person to 
be despised . ^liis own father ! If they had 
prosecuted him he would have been trans- 
ported for life ; and now, instead of play- 
ing billiards and smoking cigars in a 
French saloon, with the sea rolling up to 
its very windows, he might have been 
breaking stones with chains on his legs." 

" Don't, love, don't ; it is too dreadful ! 
I don't think he is amusing himself, love ; 
I feel sure he is very miserable, waiting 
for us to return and make it all up." 

But Jeremiah knew his son Tom better 
than his mother did, or affected to do. 
He had spotted his very occupation. Tom 
was astonishing a crack French player at 
the Frenchman's own game, and on his 



134 CRUEL LONDON. 

owii table. When Tom arranged to meet 
his father and mother at Boulogne, it 
was not from any idea that the French 
seaport could any longer give immunity 
to him from debt or fraud. He was 
actuated by a desire for the time being to 
put the sea between himself and the 
woman he had deceived, and to try his 
kand at French billiards. He remembered 
his triumphs during a short tour in 
France, and he had been enabled to keep 
up his practice both in French and English 
billiards at The Cottage, where he had a 
billiard-room containing both kinds of 
tables. He had taught Caroline billiards, 
and had played many a game with her 
during his weekly visits to their pic- 
turesque home. When the last remnant 
of his conscience upbraided him for 
his treatment of the Southern planter's 
daughter, he soothed it by the reflection 
that he had divided his last bit of ready 
money with her. He had a thousand 



** THE TRAIL OF THE SERPENT." 1 5 

pounds; he gave her half of it. How 
bitterly he would have regretted this act 
of generosity, if he had known that she 
left it on the floor where it had fallen from 
his cruel letter ; and that Migswood, after 
laying it down upon the dressing-table, 
and contemplating it there for some time, 
had resolved to consider the money as a 
gift of fortune, in return for all she had 
suffered in and out of gaol. It was quite 
an hour before she made up her mind to 
put it in her pocket and devote it to her 
own use. She weighed the chances of 
detection and punishment. It might be 
^* a lifer" if she was found out. She 
could swear the missus gave it to her. She 
knew the missus had purposely not touched 
it, that the broken-hearted woman de- 
spised it : she knew and wondered at that. 
Then she had reviewed her prospects. 
Once more out of a place, once more cast 
on the world, and not a soul to appeal to, 
nobody to employ her at Essam, for she 



A 



136 CRUEL LONDON. 

was a gaol bird, and the horror of the 
board of guardians who had to keep her 
children, Migswood decided to run the 
risk of detection and imprisonment ; and 
Caroline Denton had gone out into the 
world with her own ten 101. notes, the 
balance, with a few sovereigns, of the only 
money left by her father. How she had 
been robbed of this we have already seen. 
The conclusion of the incident fell under 
Tom Sleaford's eyes, when, after pocket- 
ing his winnings at billiards, he sat down 
to smoke a quiet cigar and read the 
London papers. 

"marylebone police court. 

^ ^ The Night Side of London. . A too well- 
known disreputable woman, rejoicing in the 
cognomen of ^ Irish Moll,' was charged with 
stealing ten 10/!. notes, and 31. 10s. in gold 
and silver, from the person of Caroline 
Gardner, a married woman, who said she 
was an American, and whose appearance 



<' THE TRAIL OF THE SERPENT. '^ 137 

in court excited commiseratioii on account 
of her prepossessing manners and her evi- 
dent mental suffering. She said that she 
had come to London from the country, and 
that the prisoner at the dep6t (she called 
the railway station a dep6t, and could not 
be prevailed upon to say from what part 
of the country she came) had pressed her 
to lodge at her house, and, being a stranger 
and very tired, she had gone with her; 
that she gave her her purse, containing 
the above sum, to make purchases at a 
* grocery store,' and that when she 
wanted some money afterwards the purse 
was empty. ^ Irish Moll' called upon all 
the saints to testify that, beyond taking 
the three shillings for the food she wa& 
going to buy, she had not touched a 
blessed farthing. It appeared, however, 
that Mrs. Maloney, to give the woman her 
own title, went out under the pretence of 
returning to give the lodger her supper ; 
that she never returned; and that the 



d 



138 CRUEL LONDON. 

room, in the notorious region of Porter's 
Buildings, was not her own, but the apart- 
ments of her daughter, known as ^ Tip- 
perary Kate,^ who had returned home 
drunk, and turned the prosecutor (who 
had a baby in her arms) out of the house. 
^Tipperary Kate,' dressed in the height 
of Porter's Buildings' fashion, vowed (in 
spite of the magistrate's repeated request 
for silence) that she was as innocent as the 
babe unborn of going home drunk, not a 
drop having passed her lips for a week ; 
and was it for her to know the respect- 
ability of the lady who was enjoying her 
hospitality unknown to her ? The magis- 
trate tried to induce Mrs. Gardner to ex- 
plain how it was she came to be friendless 
and alone in London, but the prepossess- 
ing though mentally-suffering young per- 
son only said she wished to be allowed to 
go. In reply to the question whether she 
had any money, she said ^ No.' The 
magistrate ^aid he should insist upon her 



i 



" THE TRAIL OF THE SERPENT." 139 

being taken to the Union until the autho- 
rities could make inquiries about her and 
help her. Whereupon the benevolent 
Miss Weaver came forward and volun- 
teered to take charge of the young woman 
and her child until such time as inquiries 
.ould be instituted concerning her. Miss 
Weaver went over to the friendless but 
interesting young woman, and talked to 
her in her benevolent way ; and the prose- 
cutor eventually left the court with her, 
the magistrate ordering Miss Weaver to 
receive ten poundsfrom the poor-box. ^ Irish 
Moll ' was committed for trial. Detective 
Buncher, who had the case in hand, said 
the prisoner could easily convert the notes. 
Unfortunately, there were too many re- 
ceivers in London to leave her any 
diflSculty in this direction. She had 
in her possession, when taken, 14Z. 
The detective said it was quite possible 
the thieves' bankers, who had converted 
the notes for her, had not given her more 



140 CRUEL LONDON. 

than 151. for them. The magistrate said 
he was glad to be able to inform Mr* 
Smithers, who had come to watch this 
case for the Female Protection Society, 
that he had, during the course of this 
morning's business, committed two well- 
known receivers for trial." 

Tom read the paragraph twice over. It 
would even outrage his bit of humanity to 
say that he did not feel sorry for Miss 
Weaver's two new objects of charity. His 
prevailing emotion, however, was one of 
fear. He had quite counted upon Caroline 
going back to America. Latterly she had 
spoken scornfully of England and of Eng- 
lish people. With five hundred pounds she 
could have no excuse for bringing him 
into disgrace. Besides, Migswood had told 
him that she had a lover in America ; she 
had heard her talk of him; she had more 
than once spoken of him when she was 
talking to herself, as was her constant habit, 
Migswood had forced herself somewhat into 



<< THE TRAIL OF THE SERPENT." 141 

his confidence, having seen such varied 
service at The Cottage, and being in a 
position at any time to make startling 
revelations to the latest Mrs. Gardner. 
Caroline in London, however, was a new 
trouble, inasmuch as his comfortable return 
thither, after the settlement of his afikirs, 
formed part of his schemes for the future. 
Sometimes he had thought her a little 
mad, and the police report almost contained 
a suggestion of insanity. It was some 
satisfaction to see that she had declined 
to say what part of the country she came 
from. What a report there might have 
been in the papers if she had spoken of 
The Cottage ! He wondered, as he smoked, 
whether it would be a good idea to go to 
Miss Weaver and " square " her : he had 
no doubt he could. Or whether it would 
not be better for him to " cut England " 
altogether. He knew a fellow who had 
been obliged to go to Spain, and who was 
doing very well there, having learned 



142 CRUEL LONDON. 

the language sufficiently well in twelve 
months to make a business as a broker and 
importer of English specialities. On the 
whole, he came to the conclusion that it 
would be best to see Miss Weaver. If 
there was any truth in the scandalous 
reports that were circulated about that 
charitable person's benevolent operations, 
he would not find it difficult to neutralize 
any action on the part of Caroline against 
him. The missing five hundred pounds 
also troubled him. No mention was made 
of that in the police report. Was it possible* 
that Jones and Robinson had cheated her 
out of it ? Quite. He upbraided himself 
for trusting them. They were equal to 
the villainy of abstracting the money 
from his sealed envelope. If that were 
so, he would recover it. If it were for 
nothing else, it was worth while calling 
on Miss Weaver. In the mean time 
he would write a friendly letter to 
Jane iQrosby, telling her if any of his 



^ THE TRAIL OF THE SERPENT." 143 

jealous friends said anything to her to his 
discredit, not to believe it until she had 
heard him. It had occurred to him that 
Jabez Thompson, who somehow knew 
everything, might be on his track. 

^^Some person published a malicious 
statement about me ; you said we could 
be friends if no closer relationship might 
exist, and I rely upon your kindly regard 
at all events. It is true I have had serious 
losses, and that I must start the world 
afresh. Many an older man than I, and 
many a better, has been commercially and 
financially unfortunate. I am conscious 
of no dishonour, and I begin the world 
to-day with a light heart." 

Pausing to think what else he should 
say, he remarked to himself, ^^It's true 
enough, my first day's business, since my 
unlooked-for and undeserved misfortunes, 
yields me a thousand francs, and I never 



144 CRUEL LONDON. 

played French bilUards better in my 
life." 

He went on with the letter, . 

'' May I hope to be allowed to come 
and shoot on the First ? I know you always 
have a pleasant little party. If Mr. 
Jabez Thompson objects to me, ask him to 
give me a chance of justifying myself in 
his eyes. I know he hates me, but I as- 
sure you it is not my fault. He has 
formed quite an erroneous opinion of me, 
and, above all that, it makes me feel very 
unhappy to think that I am in danger of 
growing out of your good opinion ; and I 
claim the fulfilment of your word on that 
night when I disclosed my heart's best 
hopes to you, that we should always be 
friends." 

Leaning back in his chair and flighting 
a fresh cigar, he said, . 

'^ I think that will fetch her. I should 



" THE TRAIL OF THE SERPENT." 145 

like to lick Mr. Thompson, he 's such a 
sly old fox." 

Having sealed up the letter, he walked 
to the Post-office, and dropped it into 
the box, and then strolled into the hotel to 
dinner. 

^^ Madame and monsieur will prefer to 
dine at ze table dlidte to-day," said the 
landlord. 

^' That will suit me, too," said 
Tom. 

^^They can't bully me there," he 
thought ; " and I '11 do the amiable to- 
night. I was rather stiff on the old man 
this morning, I expect. By Jove ! I never 
saw him in a real passion before ; and 
madame . ma mere . she let me have it, 
too. Ah, well, it 's all in a lifetime, it 
doesn't matter; a very small bit of soft 
sorder will settle them both." 

He went to his room and dressed. He 
always dressed for dinner. It was not only 
an inexpensive luxury, but it was highly 

VOL. II. L 



146 CRUEL LONDON. 

respectable. A man who every day dresses 
for dinner under all circumstances shows 
that ho has been accustomed to good so- 
ciety. Moreover, Tom Sleaford always 
said that ^^ a fellow feels more fit " in his 
dress clothes, especially for billiards. So 
he dressed for table (Thote, and entered 
the room with his mother on his arm, 
looking quite distinguished and wealthy. 
They '^made it up'' over dinner. Tom 
was studiously polite to his father, and 
deferentially attentive to his mother. He 
held a conversation in French with a 
neighbour, and shed quite a halo of fashion 
about the Sleaford party. Over coffee, in 
their sitting-room, Tom apologized to his 
father, and was ostentatiously forgiven ; 
and when he came in early from the bil- 
liard-room to have a chat before going to 
bed, Mr. Jeremiah Sleaford unfolded unto 
his son a new idea he had for a Discount 
and Banking Company, which could easily 
be started with 10,000Z., and, retained ex- 



^< THE TRAIL OF THE SERPENT." 147 

clusively in their own hands, could be 
worked most successfully. 

^^ Unity is strength, Tom,'' said Jere- 
miah, passing his hand ov^er his white 
and open forehead. '^We have never 
worked for our own hands : be true to 
your father, Tom ; listen to his advice, 
and with our united experience, and my 
knowledge of society, our efforts, honestly 
directed, Tom, . no more mistakes, no more 
tricks, honest administration in future, . 
and something tells me that ' The West 
End Bank of Discount and Deposit ' might 
be worked into a great and thriving insti- 
tution." 

^^ But what about the little place on the 
Thames?" Tom asked; ^^ final retirement 
from the City ? " 

^'I adhere to both, Tom; I never go 
from my word. Your mother shall let the 
corner house in Fitzroy Square ; we will 
take the little house on the Thames, and 
an office in some West End thoroughfare. 



148 CRUEL LONDON. 

I would come to town three or four days^ 
a week ; you would be there every day ; 
and in the summer your mother and Patty 
couldn't be dull, because there would be 
Tavener painting his Thames back- 
grounds, and Emily rowing her mother 
on the river ; and with energy and honesty, 
and judicious advertising, I have not a 
doubt that ' The West End Bank of Dis- 
count and Deposit ' would prove to us the 
truth of the axiom, which I always think 
so comforting, that ^ everything happens 
for the best.' '' 

^^ All right, governor, there's no harm 
in thinking it over and discussing it. 
When do you propose to go to town ? " 

" To-morrow," said Mr. Sleaford, with 
a cheerful glance at his face in the mirror 
over the mantel-shelf, . '^ to-morrow, Tom; 
and we 11 sketch out a prospectus ere we 
go. If a few ornamental names are wanted, 
I can get them. A couple of clergymen 
on the direction would be useful ; and we 



^^ THE TRAIL OF THE SERPENT." 149 

might have a touch of philanthropy 
in it." 

^^ Yes; benevolence is a good bait, and 
it pays too," said Tom, stretching his legs 
out in the attitude which had been so 
offensive to his father only a few hours 
previously. 

^'In these days," said Jeremiah the 
Enterprising and Benevolent, as if re- 
Tiearsing a portion of the prospectus, 
^'when the humblest tradesman is com- 
pelled to buy for ready money in order to 
hold his own against Co-operative Stores, . 
when small manufacturers find the neces- 
sity of financial assistance for the com- 
pletion of contracts, . when even the work- 
ing man is compelled to pawn his furniture 
to meet the increasing demands of neces- 
sary creditors, . the promoters have come 
to the conclusion that they can legitimately 
help the needy though honest toiler with- 
out the desire or the necessity of making 
jsl profit on that class of business; con- 




150 CRUEL LONDON. 

tented, while dealing with larger and 
more extended transactions, to stoop, on 
philanthropical grounds, to the aid of their 
humbler fellow-creatures; conscious, while 
doing so, they are helping, if indirectly, to 
advance the interests of the nation at 
large, and thereby, even from a business 
point of view, promoting the increase of 
commercial, banking, and financial trans- 
actions. Upon this industrial class of 
business the directors have entered into 
an agreement under no circumstances to 
charge a higher rate of interest than five 
per cent, per annum ! " 

"Capital!" exclaimed Tom, "worthy 
of your old self, governer ; I congratulate 
you on the return of your business activity. 
A capital idea! I shall say good-night,, 
now : I want to get up early." 

" Good-night, Tom," said the gentle- 
man who had given up finance for ever. 
"Glad you like the scheme. Your mother's 
fast asleep by this time ; I shall sit up for 



^ 



" THE TRAIL OF THE SERPENT." 151 

an hour and make a rough draft of the 
prospectus, so that we can talk it out with 
data before us to-morrow. Eh ? " 
'' All right, sir ! Good-night ! " 
Mr. Jeremiah Sleaford sat far into the 
night inventing his new scheme of bank- 
ing and finance; and in the interest of 
provident and successful toilers in the 
humbler middle class of life, who sought 
in vain for a profitable and safe invest- 
ment of their savings, he fashioned a 
scheme of deposit which should bear a 
secured interest of twenty per cent. It 
was quite a delightful discovery to Mr. 
Sleaford, this idea of the customers of a 
bank sharing in the profits of its business. 
*^ The established institutions of the day,'' 
wrote the new Apostle of Banking, '^ pay a 
small and insignificant interest on deposits, 
and, using the money, make for themselves 
and their shareholders from ten to even 
forty and fifty per cent. The West End 
Bank of Discount and Deposit will accept 



152 CRUEL LONDON. 

deposits for three, six, and twelve montlis, 
and pay an interest on the same at the 
rate of twenty per cent., with bonuses 
from time to time out of the profits made 
beyond that amount, thus giving to its 
customers the full benefit of its successful 
enterprise, the experience of its manager, 
and the unique advantages which it pos- 
sesses for the profitable application and 
use of money." 

It was daylight when he went to bed ; 
and it seemed to him, also, as if the morn- 
ing of his best hopes were also breaking 
bright and promising after the clouds of a 
stormy night. Hope was constant in the 
Sleaford breast. Dimmed for a moment 
by misfortune, it only shone the brighter 
upon the darker background. For Jere- 
miah Sleaford, as he laid his head by the 
side of Beatrice Maud's nightcap, the New 
Bank was as good as in existence. If for 
the time being he seemed untrue to his 
faith in mines, he came back to it in his 



k. 



^' THE TRAIL OF THE SERPENT." 153 

sleep. He dreamed that he was the sole 
possessor of a gold region which was 
bringing him in a thousand a day. Jere- 
miah was very happy in his sleep. 



154 CRUEL LONDON, 



CHAPTER III. 



MISS weaver's retreat. 



The enemies of Miss Weaver said she was 
an impostor. 

It seemed a singular freak of calumny 
to point the finger of scorn at so charitable 
and so beautiful a woman as the lady of 
^' The Retreat." ^^ Carriages and horses 
and plenty of money," to quote a Slea- 
fordism, would surely not be engaged in 
the practical work of charity as a trade. 
Miss Weaver's friends hardly considered 
the charge worthy of an answer. 

Perhaps the persistent, silent contempt 
which the founder of '^ The Retreat " 
meted out to envious detractors and 



MISS weaver's retreat. 155 

libellers rather encouraged than deterred 
vicious criticism. Miss Weaver would 
remark in her patient, self-denying way, 
that while her works were her only 
answers to slander, the armour of a good 
conscience protected her from the personal 
suffering which envious shafts might other- 
wise inflict. If she had any feeling in the 
matter, it was one of regret that her sup- 
porters should have to endure some of the 
odium of attacks levelled at her only. 
She had her own theory about the libels, 
and she might some day explain it, but 
not yet. Major Wenn knew that her 
family were much opposed to what they 
called the sacrifice of her life and prospects 
for creatures who should be left to wallow 
in the gutter. But she had put her hand 
to the plough, and she would go on. 

Miss Weaver's most active enemies found 
a malicious delight in saying that she was 
never known to take a girl or woman into 
her ^^ Retreat," without being sure that the 



156 CRUEL LONDON. 

action would be well advertised. They 
said it was a point with her to take up a 
case in the presence of the public. She 
haunted police-courts, so that when a 
magistrate found himself in a difficulty 
with a female prisoner . too helpless to be 
cast back upon the world, not bad enough 
to be sent to prison . Miss Weaver would 
step in and, with a modest deference to 
the Bench, suggest that she thought the 
ease was peculiary one for " The Retreat." 
Or, in the event of an interesting young 
woman coming to grief through the mis- 
conduct of some perfidious man, or when 
the Society for the Protection of Women 
had stepped between some foreign girl 
and a designing procuress, Miss Weaver 
continually came to the front to relieve 
Justice from a quandary, and to exercise 
the practical benevolence of her well- 
known institution, to which she had 
sacrificed fortune, health, almost reputa- 
tion. 




MISS weaver's retreat. 157 

It was Miss Weaver's mission in life to 
help her unfortunate sisters. When her 
widowed mother turned her adrift, at the 
age of seventeen, to seek a precarious 
living as a ladies' maid, she conceived the 
idea of devoting her life and fortune, one 
pound and five shillings, to the salvation 
of deluded girls and unfortunate women. 
She commenced as a distributor of tracts ; 
and she rose step by step until she became 
secretary to a society for advancing the 
interests of domestic servants out of 
employment. A clergyman, who was 
evidently actuated by spitefulness and 
jealousy, professed to be dissatisfied with 
the way in which Miss Weaver kept her 
accounts. Indeed, he was so malicious 
that, as the chairman of the society, he 
called upon her to resign, under a cruel 
threat of charging her with theft. Anxious 
to avoid scandal, and unwilling to injure a 
most wicked parson, because he had a wife 
and a large family, she resigned, even 



158 CRUEL LONDON. 

enduring the suspicions of the committee. 
Their minds had been poisoned by the 
chairman, who, though he deserved her 
anathemas, she declared her intention to 
pray for every day. 

There is no knowing how much a truly 
charitable heart will bear for the welfare 
of persons with whom it has not the 
slightest sympathy, of whom it has indeed 
no knowledge, when the guiding spirit 
is one of truly Christian benevolence. 
Miss Weaver, after her great act of self- 
sacrifice in connexion with the Domestic 
Servants' Aid Society, found herself 
the possessor of one hundred and fifty 
pounds. With a liberality that even 
touched the heart of tlie Bishop of Took's 
Court, she opened an establishment for 
the purpose of supplying poor women, 
mothers of families, nurses, and respectable 
domestic servants with winter clothing 
and bedding at cost price. The institu- 
tion was managed by a committee, which 



MISS weaver's retreat. 159 

included several gentlemen well known 
for their philanthropical proclivities. Major 
Wenn was the secretary and treasurer; 
Miss Weaver, the manageress. The com- 
mittee sat once a quarter to receive the 
report, and to pass resolutions favourable to 
Miss Weaver and Major Wenn ; eventually 
the society got into financial difficulties, 
the Bishop retired from the committee, 
and certain creditors finding that every- 
thing had been bought and sold in Miss 
Weaver's name, insisted upon making the 
lady bankrupt. Such is the cold, unap- 
preciative conduct of creditors who are 
not philanthropists! The Court found 
that the books of accounts were badly 
kept, and that considerable ^ums of money 
were unaccounted for. Miss Weaver, 
however, appeared before the Commis- 
sioner herself, and made a statement 
which put a different complexion upon the 
case from that which at first it seemed to 
bear. A crowd of poor women, whom 



160 CRUEL LONDON. 

she had helped in sore need appeared, 
several of them in tears, and Miss Weaver 
received protection and a certificate with 
sympathetic promptitude. Her unscrupu- 
lous enemies shook their heads, neverthe- 
less, and said she was a clever woman, 
and that she must have made a clear two 
thousand pounds by the transaction. 

Happily, Miss Weaver had a champion. 
Major Wenn wrote to the daily papers in 
reply to an impertinent criticism which 
had appeared, touching Miss Weaver's 
benevolent schemes. He told her history 
in glowing terms, and promised the public, 
for Miss Weaver, a new institution, which 
would have the support of her former 
committee, who were prepared to pledge 
themselves for her honesty and singleness 
of purpose. Then the selfish opponents 
of Miss Weaver hid their heads; and 
by-and-by there appeared in the Mary- 
lebonc Road '^Miss Weaver's Retreat," an 
asylum for women and children in adver- 



k 



MISS weaver's retreat. 161 

sity. There were two classes of inmates, 
each class carefully separated from the 
other, each class under separate and dis- 
tinct management. One side was for 
respectable women, homeless and friend- 
less ; the other for fallen sisters and 
interesting police-court heroines. 

^^ The Retreat" soon became famous for 
its excellent management. It was visited 
by clergymen, praised by magistrates, and 
described in glowing colours by a smart, 
descriptive writer, who sketched ^^ London 
Life and London Shadows " for a popular 
daily paper. But Satan is a busy enemy. 
He put it in the minds of cynics and 
unbelievers to go about and say that Miss 
Weaver made a profit out of ^^ The Re- 
treat." ^^ And even if she did," said her 
friends, though they denied it, ^^ even if 
she did, surely the labourer was worthy 
of his hire; and if the subscribers who 
kept ' The Retreat ' going had to pay a 
matron to manage it, they could never get 

VOL. IT. M 



162 CRUEL LONDON. 

SO single-minded, so generous, and so 
capable a woman at the head of affairs as 
Miss Weaver." Major Wenn told visitors 
who came to "The Retreat'' from all 
parts of London, told them in confidence, 
that the fact was. Miss Weaver was the 
illegitimate daughter of an earl ; that she 
felt her position so keenly she never meant 
to marry; and that she had, in conse- 
quence, dedicated her life to the work of 
charity. The earl allowed her a thousand 
.pounds a quarter, and this was how she 
spent it. When a clever writer of gossip 
in a society paper got hold of this, and 
made a romantic paragraph about it, Miss 
Weaver's enemies were dumbfounded. 
They were silent for a long time, and Miss 
Weaver was followed by a crowd when- 
ever she made an angelic descent upon 
a police-court, and rescued a victim from 
a cruel cell or, what was still more bitter, 
a cruel and heartless world. 

Miss Weaver put her new charges into 



MISS weaver's retreat. 163 

a brougham and drove them to " The 
Retreat." Major Wenn, like a kind, im- 
pretentious gentleman, rode with the 

driver on the box. Mrs. Gardner took a 

* 

violent dislike to the Major as he handed 
her into tlie brougham. In spite of the 
depression that possessed her, there was 
enough active life in her to shrink at the 
touch of Major Wenn. Miss Weaver, 
however, exercised a pleasant influence 
over her. The founder of '' The Retreaf 
was a fascinating woman of thirty-five. 
Tall, graceful, dashing (but for a certain 
dignified reserve of manner which was 
quite in keeping with Major Wenn's 
account of her origin), she had an air of 
authority, a somewhat distinguished style. 
She was dark, though her complexion was 
inclined to be ruddy. Black, bead-like 
eyes, a square, strong forehead, rather 
prominent cheek-bones, an expansive 
mouth, strong jaw and chin. Her nose 
wa's a trifle weak as to character, but the 



164 CRUEL LONDON. 

general eflfect of the face was handsome ; 
and when it laughed there was sly fun in 
it. If you had examined it closely you 
would have noted a want of repose, a 
twitching of the mouth, a restlessness 
of the eyes, and a sort of active desire to 
keep you occupied, and not give you time 
to think. She dressed well, usually in 
black silk, and wore one ring, a diamond 
set in an ancient fashion, an heirloom 
which the earl had recently sent her, with 
a letter, in which he begged her to come to 
the castle and he would acknowledge her 
as his child, and give her the position 
which her merits might command. But 
the pure, high-minded woman could not 
be turned from her purpose ; for she had 
all her father's obstinacy, combined with 
her poor dead mother's self-sacrificing 
nature. 

The Major was a retired officer of the 
Indian army, said to be a gentleman of 
means ; though there were eyil reports 



MISS weaver's retreat. 165 

even about his financial position. '' Be 
thou as pure as ice, as chaste as snow, thou 
shalt not escape calumny." Here was a 
man who had held Her Majesty's commis- 
sion in the British army ; here was a man 
who had fought and bled for his country ; 
who on the downhill of life devoted him- 
self to the beautiful and holy cause of 
charity ; and there were calumniators 
base enough in London to attribute in- 
terested motives to him! One of Miss 
Weaver's rivals in charity-mongering had 
actually stated that the Major lived at 
'' The Retreat " half his time, and that the 
relationship between him and Miss Weaver 
was not creditable to the institution. But 
Major Wenn was not long in bringing that 
libeller to her senses (shade of charity, the 
scandalizer was a woman!) by a threat- 
ened action for libel. She apologized and 
paid 10/. to " The Retreat Fund," which 
was duly advertised. 

Surely there must have been something 



166 CRUEL LONDON. 

very wicked in the nature of Mrs. Gardner, 
as Miss Weaver observed a few days after 
the woman's admission to ^^ The Retreat," 
for she had actually complained of the 
treatment she had received from Major 
Wenn. No well-organized mind could 
fail to be favourably impressed with the 
appearance of Major Wenn. He was no 
military martinet. There was nothing 
starchy in his style. You would hardly 
have suspected him to have been a son of 
Mars. A smiling, talkative, nervous, 
demonstrative man, he was the life and 
soul of the committee meetings at '' The 
Retreat." He bad. pale eyes, pale eye- 
brows, a puffy face, with a nose a little 
out of the perpendicular, a pale, lank 
moustache, a pale imperial, which he 
pulled with a white bejewelled hand, and 
a bald head, over which he scrupulously 
brushed long whisps of hair. He usually 
wore trousers of the tartan plaid, and a 
dark frock coat buttoned over his chest. 



MISS weaver's retreat. 167 

He spoke in a husky voice, and chuckled 
in a husky voice at his own small jokes. 
Here was a man to respect ! Did he not 
carry honesty in his face? Oh, base, 
unnatural spirit of calumny, to settle 
down upon the amiable and guileless 
Major Wenn, ^;he champion of the lovely 
victim of a cruel world! . a woman who, 
recognizing an unhappy fate in the bar- 
sinister that blurred her escutcheon, said, 
" No ! I will never marry ; I will offer 
up my maiden ' life upon the altar of 
Charity ! " 

It was, at first blush, a pleasant change 
from Porter's Buildings to ^^ The Retreat." 
Miss Weaver herself conducted Mrs. 
Gardner to a clean little bedroom in an 
upper story of the tall house, which had, 
from a warehouse, been converted into a 
retreat for the weary and unfortunate. 
It was a small room at the end of a long 
passage, which seemed to be an avenue of 
bedrooms. After she had shown her this 



168 CRUEL LONDON. 

sleeping-chamber, Miss Weaver took her 
down to her own sitting-room . a cheerful 
apartment, overlooking a few flower-beds, 
shut out from the road by a high wall. 
Baby was asleep, and Miss Weaver per- 
suaded Caroline to lay it upon a comfortable, 
chintz-covered sofa, where Miss Weaver 
covered it over with an antimacassar, the 
weather still being very hot. Caroline 
looked peculiarly interesting. There was in 
her eyes a tired, pathetic expression that 
seemed rather to heighten than otherwise 
the girlish beauty of her face and figure. 
She looked more like an Italian girl than 
an American, and Miss Weaver did not 
require to be told that her new patient 
was no ordinary woman. Miss Weaver had 
laid aside her thin silk paletot, and she 
was now in a plain black silk dress, with 
her hair brushed low over her forehead. 
She had excessively white teeth, and her 
smile was intended to be ingenuous and 
bland. Caroline began to lilvc her at 




MISS weaver's retreat. 169 

once : Miss Weaver was determined that 
she should. When Miss Weaver made 
up her mind to captivate a person, from 
a bishop down to a policeman, from a 
shrewd woman of the world down to a 
waif of the streets, she usually prevailed. 

'' What part of America did you come 
from, dear ? " asked Miss Weaver, sitting 
before Caroline, with her back to the 
light. 

'' The South," said the new patient, in a 
gentle and subdued voice, a contrast to 
the strong but not unmusical tones of 
Miss Weaver. 

'^What part of the South, dear?" 
asked Miss Weaver, kindly but peremp- 
torily. 

^' I would rather not say.'' 

'^ Why, dear?" 

^^ I don't wish any one who knew my 
father to know the condition I am in." 

'^ Your secret is safe with me, whatever 
it is, but I do not wish you to tell me any- 



J 




170 CKUEL LONDON. 

thing you would rather not speak about. 
Of course you are married ? " 

The last question was put insinuatingly, 
as much as to say Miss Weaver would 
neither be shocked nor surprised if she 
were not. 

^' Yes ; and it is to satisfy myself about 
my marriage that brought me to London.*' 

" That's odd ; how do you mean ? If 
you know you are married, I don't see 
how you desire to be satisfied about it. 
Don't tell me if you would rather not, but 
do if you think I can help you." 

^^ I think you can." 

^' Then don't hesitate : I have great 
power in London, and I have the inclina- 
tion to help you." 

^ ^ When my husband left me he took 
away the certificate of my marriage." 

^^You want a copy from the vestry- 
book ? " 

'^ I want to be sure that I am legally 
married." 



MISS weaver's retreat. 171 

" Where were you married ? '* 

" I don't know.'' 

" Don't know ! " 

'' I am a miserable woman," said Caro- 
line, the tears welling up into her black 
eyes. 

Miss Weaver sat down, moved her chair 
nearer to her, and took her hand. 

" Trust me," she said ; ^^ tell me all, . it 
will relieve your mind." 

" When we came to England, I and my 
father," said Caroline, ^^ my father, at a 
depot on the tracjc, got out to have some 
refreshment. In our country we step upon 
the cars while we are moving ; my father 
tried to do so, and was killed. The cars 
stopped ; I thought it was for him to get 
in, but it was to pick up his dead body." 

Mrs. Gardner paused here, and Miss 
Weaver put her arm round her shoulders. 

^^ He was crushed almost out of recogni- 
tion. A young Englishman had travelled 
with us from Liverpool, and my father 



172 CRUEL LONDON, 

and myself had found him very agreeable. 
He had already changed cards with my 
father, though my father was reticent and 
had determined not to make friends in 
England ; but he seemed to take a great 
fancy to Mr. Philip Gardner ; so I felt he 
was a friend when my trouble came, as if 
I had known him for years. It was a 
dreadful shock to me, my poor dead 
father . a dreadful shock ! " 

" There, there, don't distress yourself," 
said Miss Weaver, kissing the girl on the 
forehead. 

'^ No ; you are very kind, and I have not 
been used to much kindness lately." 

^^ It was a very sad accident indeed," 
said Miss Weaver. 

*' I think I became insensible under the 
shock.'' 

^^No wonder, no wonder, poor child." 

'' It only seemed a few hours, but when 
I got better they had buried him, |he poor 
dear . they had buried him ; and Mr. 



MISS weaver's retreat. 173 

Gardner took me away from the hotel. I 
had no other friend in the world except 
one, and my father would not have him as 
a friend, or let me think of him. He had 
fought against us in the war. Mr. Gardner 
was a bachelor, and had an estate in West- 
ernshire, and he took me there. He pro- 
posed to marry me. He had been so good 
I could not find it in mv heart to refuse 
him." 

^' Did you love any one else ?" 

'' No, not quite." 

'' You liked some one ? " 

''Yes, a Northerner, the young man 
whom my father ordered never to 
speak to me. We met him in New York, 
and I only saw him a few times during the 
course of the several weeks we stayed 
there." 

''Well, dear, go on. I won't ask his 
name; you might think me inquisitive. Go 
on, love, go on." 

"He explained to me the marriage 



174 CRUEL LONDON. 

ceremonies and customs of England, and 
said he would prefer the civil contract of 
registration. We went to an office and 
entered oun names, and we were married ; 
he didn't care to make a fuss, and he would 
rather his relations knew nothing about it. 
We went to London, got married, and 
returned the same day. Latterly my hus- 
band was not kind to me ; he left me, and 
the house and everything was seized by 
the law, and when he went he wrote me a 
cruel letter, in which he said I was not 
his wife. I was free, and he wished me 
to go back to America." 

^^Yes?" said Miss Weaver, a little less 
affectionately, now that the story was 
nearly at an end. 

'^ He took with him the registrar's 
paper, and every record about my father's 
death . where it took place, and all letters, 
and everything ; and I want to find the 
office where we were married, and have 
a copy of the entry made out for me; 



MISS weaver's retreat. 175 

not for my own sake, but for his . for 
Wniie's.'' 

She looked at the sleeping child as she 
spoke, and leaned her head upon Miss 
Weaver's shoulder. The lady of ^^ The 
Retreat " rose and moved her chair to its 
former position. 

" That 's easy enough. Where was it ?" 

^^ I don't know." 

*^ What was it like?" 

" An office on a hilly street, with a 
chapel at the top, and a broad avenue run- 
ning below." 

^^ We will drive out to-morrow and find 
it. Major Wenn will help us : he is very 
clever. I think the place is near St. 
Paul's, down a court there where odd per- 
sons, dressed like piemen, with white 
aprons, touch their hats, and ask what you 
require ; we will find it, and then you 
shall tell me all about this Mr. Gardner, 
and we will see if we can't put things 
straight for you." 



176 CRUEL LONDON. 

" Don't tell Major Wenn, please." 

^^ Nonsense, my dear, he is the cleverest 
and best person in the world. What I 

should do without him in this great insti- 
tution I really do not know." 

^^ I would rather you didn't tell the 
major," said Caroline, sitting erect, and 
surprising Miss Weaver with a sudden 
look of firmness and decision, so different 
to her gentle, yielding, submissive manner 
of a few minutes previously. 

'^ Very well," said Miss Weaver, ringing 
an electric bell, which was answered on the 
instant by a hard-faced woman in a cotton 
dress. 

^^ Send Nurse Belper to me." 

The woman left without a word. 

Presently, another hard-faced woman 
entered. 

^^ Belper, carry that child in your arms, 
and sliowtliis lady to her bedroom, No. 40, 
on the upper basement, and see that she 
has everything she requires." 



^ 



MISS weaver's retreat. 177 

^' Yes, ma'am." 

^^I will carry the child, thank you," 
said Mrs. Gardner, rising. 

^ ^ You are not strong enough to carry 
it up all those stairs. Belper will 
take it." 

Caroline did not falter under the glance 
of authority and command which Miss 
Weaver turned upon her, but went straight 
to the sofa and took up the child. 

Belper looked aghast. 

'^ My dear," said Miss Weaver, ^'I ex- 
pect my servants to take their orders from 
me, and obey them. " Give the child to 
Belper." 

'' No," said Caroline, pressing her child 
closer to her breast ; ^ ^ I will carry Willie, 
thank vou." 

Miss Weaver bit her lips ; her eyes 

.flashed angrily. She laid her hand upon 

Caroline's shoulder. It was a hard, strong 

hand. 

. '^ Give that child to the nurse. I am 

VOL. II. N 




178 CRUEL LONDON. 

bound to maintain discipline in this esta- 
blishment. Take it, Belper." 

In an instant Caroline rushed to the 
door, and was out in the passage, followed 
quickly by Belper and Miss Weaver. The 
stubborn young woman was met by Major 
Wenn, who was on his way to Miss 
Weaver's little room. 

^^ Hoity, hoity!" he said in his husky 
though jaunty fashion, while barring the 
way against the woman and child; 
" what 's all this about ? " 

Willie began to cry vociferously. 

Miss Weaver seized the mother by her 
shoulders and literally ran her back into 
the room. Major Wenn and Belper fol- 
lowed. Miss Weaver shut the door, and 
briefly explained what had taken place. 

'' Out of pure kindness, major, I re- 
quested Belper to carry the child for her,- 
and she has turned upon us both like a 
tigress." 

Caroline trembled with fear. 



w 



MISS weaver's retreat. 179 

^^Now I call you to witness, major" (the 
child sobbed and hid its face in its mother's 
neck), ^^ that I only desire her to allow 
Belper to carry the child upstairs for her. 
If it were not for the absolute necessity of 
maintaining discipline in ^ The Retreat,' 
I would give way; but Belper herself 
knows I dare not, and I will have her 
carry that child ! " 

^^What is your objection, young 
woman ?" said the major, going up to her 
familiarly, and taking her by the arm. 

Caroline slunk away, and immediately 
placed Willie in Belper's arms. 

" Number 40," said Miss Weaver. Belper 
went out. Mrs. Gardner followed her 
without another word. 



d 



180 CRUEL LONDON. 



CHAPTER IV. 

A DECLARATION OF WAR. 

The sentiment of sympathy is not more 
quickly excited in the female mind than 
the feeling of aversion. 

Mrs. Gardner had not intended to chal- 
lenge the power of Miss Weaver ; but that 
lady had chosen to see nothing in her con- 
duct but a desire to question her authority, 
or determination to defy it. 

Miss Weaver's instinct had discovered 
in this delicate-looking, pretty, slight 
woman a strength of will which seemed 
to challenge her own. There was an ex- 
pression of determination in the black eyes 




A DECLAKATION OP WAR. 181 

which did not accord with the petite figure, 
the bending, shy manner. 

It was as if the good woman and the 
bad recognized each other ; as if the spirit 
of Virtue said to Vice, ^^ I know you, . you 
are a wolf in sheep's clothing " ; and as if 
Vice said, ^' Theij you shall feel my teeth 
if you are wilful enough to discover them 
to any one else ? " Miss Weaver did not 
feel comfortable in the presence of the 
pure, searching eyes. She affected a calm- 
ness she did not feel. She wished she had 
never touched the woman. It seemed as 
if her presence in ^* The Eetreat" was of 
bad augury. When their eyes met in 
angry controversy. Miss Weaver felt that 
a great battle had begun that might fill 
the whole place, perhaps resound through- 
out the great city itself. 

Two opposite natures had met. They 
were fire and water. Miss Weaver felt 
as if it was necessary at once that one 
should control the other. 




182 CRUEL LONDON, 

Strange that the little, friendless 
Southerner should make such a deep and 
serious impression upon the handsome, 
clever, powerful, and successful Miss 
Weaver. 

It is almost beyond imagination to think 
that this proud, haughty /^ daughter of an 
earl," driving through London in purple 
and fine linen, should condescend to con- 
sider for a moment that poor little woman 
who had been hooted out of Porter s Build- 
ings to acknowledge her homelessness in 
a Police Court. But Miss Weaver was 
always on the watch ; her eyes were always 
busy ; her mind was always at work. She 
saw and noted every straw on the stream, 
which way it went, where it paused ; and 
something warned her that her new 
capture for ^^The Retreat" would give 
her trouble. 

The brave adventurers of old who sailed 
out into unknown seas, and who pene- 
trated into unknown lands, were not more 



A DECLARATION OF WAR. 183 

wary than are the wicked adventurers of 
London, 

The men and women who . live - by 
their wits undertake risks hardly less 
hazardous in their way than the adven- 
turer of the romantic days who committed 
himself to fortune, and sought for wealth 
and fame in unknown worlds. 

Mr. Jeremiah Sleaford, Mr. Philip 
Gardner, Mr. Fitzherbert Robinson, Mr. 
Maclosky Jones, Miss Weaver . they had, 
so to speak, constantly to have their hands 
upon their weapons, ever ready for defence, 
always prepared for aggression. Any 
day, an error of judgment, a slip of the 
tongue, a daring enemy, might pull them 
down. They had to count chances of suc- 
cess and failure as carefully as any true 
and noble adventurer who went forth with 
flags and banners, with drums and trumpets. 
That their cause was bad enforced a more 
careful look-out and more discreet observ- 
ance of omens and warnings. 



M 



184 CRUEL LONDON. 

Miss Weaver was no careless operator, 
such as Jeremiah Sleaford. She was not 
vulgar in her vices like Migswood, nor 
was she a mere picker and stealer of the 
^ ^ Irish Moll '' type. On the contrary, she 
was a feminine Fernando Mendez Pinto . 
a Tartuffe in petticoats, a siren among 
men, a saint among women. She made 
swindling a fine art; trading in charity an 
engrossing profession. If she had chosen 
to operate from a society point of view 
she would have been a princess of fashion; 
she preferred the severe standpoint of 
philanthropy, and the rdle of a vestal 
virgin . so pure, so good, that Satan could 
not touch her. A mystery to women, a 
delightful example of bold charity to men, 
the lords of creation found a charm in her 
innocent daring, her philosophic courage, 
her utter absence of mock-modesty; and 
she had a foot and ankle that were per- 
fectly charming. A lady of charity, she 
had bishops in her train ; a woman of 



V 



A DECLARATION OF WAR. 185 

means, she commanded the sceptical. An 
adventuress of the highest ability, she had 
spies in her pay ; a philanthropist whose 
deeds were before the world, she led bene- 
volent disciples in silken chains, and in 
her '^ Retreat," the lowly, the humble, the 
persecuted, the forlorn of her unhappy 
sex, found a heaven of happiness and rest. 

Nevertheless, Miss Weaver was afraid 
of the most forlorn, most friendless, most 
miserable of her unknown pensioners. 
Such is the influence of truth ; such is the 
instinctive antipathy of the supremely 
wicked for the supremely good. * A devil 
in the presence of an angel might be sup- 
posed to have similar sensations to those 
which afflicted Miss Weaver under the 
personal influence of Caroline Virginia 
Gardner. 

^' A perfect vixen," said Miss Weaver, 
when she and the major were alone; ^'a 
wilful, suspicious, haughty vixen." 

^^ Do you really think so ? " said the 



> 



186 CRUEL LONDON. 

major. " What a contrast to my adorable 
Isy ! " 

He caught Miss Weaver in his arms and 
kissed her. 

''Don't be foolish, Wenn ; I'm not in 
the humour for kissing. I could have 
smacked her." 

'' She 's deuced pretty, though." 

'' Yes, I could see you were admiring 
her at the Police Court, and she has found 
you out already." 

^'How?" 

'' Didn't you see her shudder at you 
when you put her into the brougham ? 
Didn't you see her start back just now 
when you went near her ? " 

' ' No, really, poor little trifler, she is a 
bad judge of character ; well, and what is 
she ? Who is she ? What 's to be done 
with her ? " 

'' She 's to be tamed," said Miss Weaver. 
^'I '11 let her see who is the mistress here." 

'' Is it worth while ?" asked the major. 




A DECLARATION OF WAR. 187 

^^ Yes ; I shall like the work," was the 
quick reply. *^ She has got up a romantic 
story about her father and her marriage. 
I believe she is an artful, designing crea- 
ture. You should have seen her defy me ! 
^ Take the child, Belper,' I said; ^I will 
take the child,' she said. ^ I am usually 
obeyed here,' I said ; ^ take the child, 
Belper.' The next moment the little 
vixen flew to the sofa, took the child, and 
glared at me." 

'^ She has a daring spirit to defy you," 
said the major. ''What a pair of eyes ^ 
she has ! They go through you. She 's 
something like that girl whom Colonel 
Freebottle took into keeping from 
here." 

" Don't make me jealous of her, as well 
as mad with her, Major Wenn, or 1 11 be 
inclined to strangle the hussy." 

'' Come in," said the major, in answer 
to a knock at the door. 

The hard-faced woman entered, and 



s 



188 CRUEL LONDON. 

presented, upon a silver tray, a card to 
Miss Weaver. 

^^ Mr. Fitzherbert Robinson," she said. 

^^ What 'she like, Curtis?" 

^^ A gentleman," said the hard-faced 
Curtis. 

^^ Show him in?" 

The major left the room as Mr. Robinson 
entered. 




THE FIGHT BEGINS. 189 



CHAPTER V. 



THE FIGHT BEGINS. 



^'Miss Weaver, I presume?" said Mr. Fitz- 
herbert Robinson, holding his hat and 
cane in his left hand, bowing deferen- 
tially, and posing with a languid, society 
air. 

The lady bowed and waited. 

" I observe that, with your well-known 
charitable instincts, you received into your 
^ Retreat ' a young girl and her infant 
yesterday." 

''Yes?" observed Miss Weaver, inter- 
rogatively* 

'^ She called herseK Mrs. Gardner? " 

^' Yes. Is she not Mrs. Gardner ? Will 



A 



190 CRUEL LONDON. 

you take a seat Mr. (looldng at his card) 
Fitzherbert Robinson ? " 
. '' Thank you." 

Mr. Robinson sat down, and glancing 
for a moment at his gaitered, patent- 
leather boots, looked into Miss Weaver's 
face, which had assumed a quiet, patient 
expression. 

^^ She is not Mrs. Gardner, then ?" 

" No ; the fact is, the poor girl has 
been deceived." 

'' Indeed ! " 

'^ Thinks she is Mrs. Gardner/' 

^Yes?" 

" I know her history." 

^^ What is it?" 

^^ Well, the story is rather a long one." 

" You didn't come here to make me 
acquainted with it ? " 

^^ Well no, not exactly : I came to see 
if I could be of any service to the girl." 

^^ Has she no friends in London ? " 

'^ She had not until yesterday," said 



THE FIGHT BEGINS. 191 

Robinson, smiling ; '^ but yesterday 
brought Miss Weaver to her side . Miss 
Weaver and Major Wenn . I must not for- 
get the major . and I hope I may add my 
own poor self as another friend." 

The slight expression of sarcasm which 
obtruded itself in Mr. Robinson's manner 
when he referred to Major Wenn did not 
escape the ever-watchful eye of Miss 
Weaver. 

^^I am sure the major will feel proud 
when I report to him, at our next committee 
meeting, the high estimation in which 
(looking again at his card) Mr. Fitzherbert 
Robinson holds him." 

Mr. Robinson rose, smiled, bowed, and 
re-seated himself. 

^^And now, Mr. Robinson, as you are 
evidently a man of the world, and as you 
are certainly speaking to a woman of the 
world, perhaps you will explain your busi- 
ness." 

^' You have described me to the letter. 



192 CRUEL LONDON. 

If you do yourself justice, I may speak to 
you as plainly as I might talk to a man 
under similar circumstances . ^to Major 
Wenn, for example ? " 

'^ Just so ; a woman who holds a 
medical diploma, who has ridden to 
hounds, who has been a prison visitor, 
and who undertakes the care, if not the 
reformation, of unfortunate women and 
criminals, is not likely to be shocked with 
anything a man of the world and a gentle- 
man may have to communicate to her upon 
any subject." 

Miss Weaver looked boldly at her 
visitor, and there was an invitation in her 
eye to talk and fear not. 

'' You place me at my ease. I will 
return candour for frankness. I am a 
bachelor. I have lived in the liouse where 
your now patient, client, or pensioner, 
whatever you may call lier, has lived. I 
know her well. She is a single woman. 
I don't like the idea of her remaining 



THE FIGHT BEGINS. 193 

here ; I would like to induce her to accept 
my friendly protection." 

^^ YckS," said Miss Weaver, unabashed ; 
^^ do you know Major Wenn ? " 

'' Slightly." 

^^ I should prefer your speaking to him 
upon the subject. As secretary and trea- 
surer, he has his own peculiar views upon 
cases of this kind; and he looks for a 
douceur, I believe, to the fund which has 
so many heavy calls upon it. He has 
little or no compunction how he strengthens 
my hands and the power of the committee 
financially. The philosophy that the end 
justifies the means is his religion, and ' The 
Retreat ' has been a holy boon to hundreds 
of poor lost creatures who have been 
restored to honourable and virtuous paths 
by our course of kindly discipline." 

^' May I see Mrs. Gardner before I speak 
to the major upon the subject ? " 

'^ Certainly ; I will send for her." 

^' I would like to see her alone." 

VOL. II. O 



194 CRUEL LONDON. 

"By all means." 

Miss Weaver touched the bell : it was 
answered on the instant. 

" Show this gentleman to the waiting- 
room in Corridor 5 ; and inform No. 40 that 
a visitor has called to see her." 

The attendant conducted Mr. Fitz- 
herbert Robinson to Corridor 5 ; and 
Major Wenn returned to Miss Weaver's 
room. 

"Well," said the major, in his small, 
affected voice, " what did Mr. Pompous, 
with his gloves and cane, want ? " 

" He came about Mrs. Gardner." 

" I thought so. Deuced pretty girl ; no 
doubt about it." 

" He wants to see you." 

" I guessed it. Now I come to think, I 
know the fellow : he is a City adventurer, 
belongs to a good family, writes for 
financial papers, has lots of money some- 
times, and sometimes he has none ; clever 
dog, . we must be careful." 




THE FIGHT BEGINS. 195 

*' You must be careful, you mean, 
Wenn, . you, not us." 

^' Yes, love, I must. Oh, you are a 
clever darling, Isy! . a regular Pompa- 
dour." 

'^ I wish I were, with you for my 
king." 

.^ Ah, what a pair we should be ! But 
really, Isy, my own Isabella with the 
gingham umbrella, you are, don't you 
know^ the cleverest woman in the world." 

*' But not so deuced pretty as that 
minx in No. 40," said Miss Weaver, with 
a smile intended to be fascinating. 

'^ Pretty !" lisped the major, tripping to 
her side and kissing her hand, ^' that is no 
word for your style of beauty ; you are 
simply grand, Isy, you are a queen, a 
Pompadour." 

' ' What is that noise ? " Miss Weaver 
asked, quickly. 

''I don't hear anything," said the 
major. 



196 CRUEL LONDON. 

'^ Yes, a scream ; and somebody is 
coming." 

The major opened the door and went 
out, followed by Miss Weaver. They 
were just in time to obstruct a woman 
with a child in her arms. In another 
minute Mrs. Gardner and little Willie 
would have been in the street. 

^^ Oh, don't stop me ! " gasped the 
woman, as if she were being hunted by 
some wild animal; '' don't, pray, stop me! 
Have mercy ; have mercy ! " 

" What is the matter ? " exclaimed Miss 
Weaver, taking the woman firmly by the 
arm. 

'' That man ! Oh, that cruel 
man ! " 

^ ' What, the gentleman who called to 
see you ? . your friend ? " asked Miss 
Weaver, in a tone of great surprise, for 
an attendant and subscriber to ^^ The 
Retreat " had appeared upon the 
scene. 



THE FIGHT BEGINS. 197 

'^He is not my friend; he is not a 
gentleman ! Oh, let me go ; let me 
go!" 

'^ I fear the poor girl's trouble has 
turned her head," said Mr. Fitzherbert 
Robinson, coming up ; '^ she has been very 
badly used. I don't wonder at her mind 
being influenced by it." 

Miss Weaver put her arm round her as 
if to protect her. 

^' Don't tremble, dear, don't be afraid ; 
they are all friends here," said the angelic 
lady of ^^ The Retreat," whom the vene- 
rable subscriber admired. 

^^ You see. Lord Folly well, it is not all 
sunshine, even here," she said. ^^ Will 
you kindly step into my room, and you, 
Mr. Robinson ; the major will occupy 
you, and I will join you presently." 

For Miss Weaver to ask was to com- 
mand. The men disappeared. 

^^ And now," said Miss Weaver, taking 
Mrs. Gardner by the shoulder and hurry- 



198 CRUEL LONDON. 

ing her back along the passage leading to 
the upper corridors, ^'what do you mean 
by disturbing a respectable establishment 
in this way ? " 

Mrs. Gardner did not speak. She hugged 
her child, and cowered beneath the iron 
grip of Miss Weaver. 

'^ What do you mean by it ? " 
^' You are hurting my shoulder." 
' ' I will hurt you a great deal more if 
you play pranks here. You think you 
can beat me, do you ? It is a fight 
between you and me, is it ? You think 
you can defy me, do you? We shall 
see." 

Along passages, up stairs, through cor- 
ridors, and at last to No. 40. 

'' Now, Mrs. Gardner," said Miss Weaver 
with an offensive emphasison ^'Mrs.," "you 
will be good enough to stay there until I 
come back, and then jou shall explain your 
conduct ; yes, and atone for it, too, madam. 
I '11 show you who is the boss here, as 




THE FIGHT BEGINS. 199 

your vulgar countrymen say ; 1 11 show 
you/' 

She pushed woman and child head- 
long into the room, took a master key 
from her pocket, and locked the door. 



200 CRUEL LONDON. 



CHAPTER VI. 

WOMAN AGAINST WOMAN. 

Henceforth, Mrs. Gardner had a hard Kfe 
at '' The Retreat." The lady of charity 
subjected her to a course of persecution. 
She hated her. The major would have 
let ^' the woman and her brat go about 
their business." Not so, Miss Weaver. Vice 
had Virtue by the throat ; Truth was at 
the feet of Falsehood. Miss Weaver took 
a deliglit in torturing her victim. She 
had her removed into the centre of cor- 
ridor No. 5, so that she could have no 
communication with the outer world. The 
room she had first occupied looked upon 
the street. No. 35, where she now lodged, 



WOMAN AGAINST WOMAN. 201 

had no outlook : it was lighted from 
above. 

'' I think they mean to kill us, Willie," 
said Mrs. Gardner to her infant, after a 
week's entire exclusion from the outer 
world. ^' It is very lonely here ; I only 
hope mamma will not lose her senses. I 
don't know how long it is since we came 
here, love. Poor Willie ! " 

The little one looked pale. Miss Weaver 
had urged Mrs. Gardner to let the child 
be taken out, but the woman had reso- 
lutely resisted all attempts to separate her 
from the child. 

'^ Why are you so unkind to me ?" she 
asked, pitifully. 

" Unkind ! " exclaimed Miss Weaver. 
'' You are a designing, wicked, vicious 
woman ! You thought to usurp my autho- 
rity, did you ? You didn't know the 
woman you had to deal with. You are 
not the first vixen I have tamed, by 
many ! " 



d 



202 CRUEL LONDON. 

" I have only this poor little thing to 
love and be loved by in the world," said 
No. 35. '^ My only resistance to your 
authority has been to cling to my child." 

" Stuff! you opposed me from the first. 
As we left the Police Court you insulted 
Major Wenn. What had he done to you 
that you should, shrink from him ? " 

'' Nothing," said the woman, humbly. 

^^What had I done that you should 
commit an act of insubordination the 
moment you enter ' The Retreat ? ' " 

'' I did not wish to part from little 
Willie." 

^'Was little Willie in question when 
you scandalized the house, and tried to 
disgrace it in the presence of a distin- 
guished subscriber and my servants ? " 

^^I am very sorry. That person you 
permitted to call upon me insulted me." 

^'Did he, indeed?" exclaimed Miss 
Weaver, folding her hands upon her 
knees, and regarding her victim with 



WOMAN AGAINST WOMAN. 203 

lofty disdain. ^^ I should hardly have 
thought it possible to insult a woman in 
your position . a cast-off mistress, who is 
eventually found grovelling in the gutter 
of Porter's Buildings." 

^'I did not know where I was," said 
No. 35, the tears in her eyes, for she was 
weak, the spirit of resistance having been 
lowered by a mild diet and confinement. 

^' Didn't you ? " said Miss Weaver. ^^ I 
doubt it very much, unless you are a 
lunatic, and I am sometimes inclined to 
think that is your complaint. Mr. Fitz- 
herbert Robinson assures me that he said 
nothing to you unbecoming a gentle- 
man." 

'^ I expect I am strange to you and to 
the people here. I am a foreigner, you 
see, and you should pity me and let me 

go." 

^^ Pity you and let you go, so that you 
may circulate all kinds of reports against 
^ The Retreat ! ' I know you, my dear ; I 



204 CRUEL LONDON. 

know the sort of viper I have nursed. I 
tell you again, you don't leave here except 
with your so-called husband or his friend, 
Mr. Fitzherbert Robinson, the only persons 
who appear to know anything of you in 
England." 

" Then I shall die here ! " said No. 35, 
with a gentle firmness, and looking at her 
persecutor with that defiant expression 
which irritated Miss Weaver, and stimu- 
lated her in her course of torture. 

'^ You may live or die, as you please. 
That is your own look out. Don't imagine 
that threats of suicide have any effect 
upon me : I have heard them before.'^ 

'' Oh, why do you delight to torture 
me ? Why don't you let me go ? Turn 
me out into the street, and I will bless 
you. I will never mention your name ; I 
will try to forget it, and all the cruelties I 
am suffering." 

'' I dare sav ! " remarked Miss Weaver, 
with a contemptuous smile. '' You shall 



WOMAN AGAINST WOMAN. 206 

go when you are tamed, and not till then ; 
no, not if the process of taming kills 
you.'' 

Miss Weaver rose and paced the 
room. 

'^ May I not go out for a little fresh 
air?" 

" No." 

^^My baby will die for the want 
of it." 

'^ The baby can go out. The nurse 
shall take it for an airing." 

^' Why may not I go ? " 

'' You are not fit to be trusted." 

^^Why?" 

^^You are crazy; you are violent ; you 
are not fit to be trusted." 

'^ Do you wish to drive me mad ? " 

Mrs. Gardner asked this question with a 
quick earnestness, as if she gave vent to a 
new thought that had just come into her 
mind. 

" I shouldn't have to drive far," Miss 



206 CRUEL LONDON. 

Weaver answered, now preparing to leave 
the room. 

'' What do you wish me to do ? " 

'' Whatever you like." 

'^ Suppose I did all you desired, what 
is it ? " 

^^ Show a proper confidence in me, and 
not fly in the face of Providence. Don't 
pretend to be what you are not ; and, 
above all things, don't imagine you can 
dictate to Miss Weaver ! " 

This is a fair example of the interviews 
which Miss Weaver had continually with 
her victim, only that she had not, until 
this occasion, fairly roused a suspicion in 
Mrs. Gardners mind that there was a con- 
spiracy against her to drive her crazy . 
perhaps to proclaim her mad. A new 
light dawned upon her now, and she com- 
menced to rack her bewildered brain upon 
the subject of an escape. Little Willie 
had grown querulous of late, and she 
talked to him now more frequently when 



WOMAN AGAINST WOMAN. 207 

he was asleep than during his fretful 
vision of wakefulness. 

^^ I have thought it out, Willie," she 
whispered ; " for your sake, dear, we must 
get out of this place, and then we will 
throw ourselves at the feet of the Queen ; 
she is a woman, and has a fond heart. We 
must stoop low to conquer, Willie ; we 
have been too honest, too frank. I know, 
Willie, I know. We must imitate the 
Indian, dear, and be crafty. Let us think 
of the Indian : craft love, craft ! No, I 
am not going mad, love ; I am coming to 
my senses. Yesterday I thought I would 
leap upon her like a tigress at her throat, 
tear her down, and kill her. My head 
throbbed then . my head. My hands felt 
like claws. But that is over now. I have 
prayed, love, for you, and I feel better ; 
but I must be stronger, dear, before the 
time for action comes. If .we could once 
get into the street, we could run ; we could 
cry, Help ! This is a free country ; we 



J 



208 CRUEL LONDON. 

should be rescued. That is why she dare 
not let me go out. Don't you see how 
fearful she is that I might speak against 
her and her prison? That gives me 
courage. She wishes to make out I'm 
mad, that my accusation may not be 
listened to. She is a bad woman, cruel, 
bad . wicked as Migswood; she keeps a 
prison, worse, and calls it heaven! I 
dreamed of an Indian last night. Craft, 
craft ; seem what you are not. father ! 
father ! why did you die and leave 
me?" 

On the next day when Miss Weaver 
came in to indulge in ten minutes of verbal 
torture, and see her victim writhe, Mrs. 
Gardner received her with unusual defer- 
ence. 

^^ It is good of you to come and see me, 
though you do say unkind things," she 
said, when Miss Weaver had locked the 
door behind her, and taken a seat upon 
the only chair the room contained. 




WOMAN AGAINST WOMAN. 209 

'' Thank you." 

^^ You seemed yesterday to think that 
Mr. Gardner might call ? " 

^^Did I? I think not. If Mr. Fitz- 
herbert Robinson has told him how he 
was received, I should hardly think it 
likely that Mr. Gardner would run the risk 
of calling.^' 

'^ Mr. Robinson has not been again, 
then ? " 

^^Yes, he has." 

'' Oh ! " 

" I suppose you will blame me for not 
acquainting you with the fact ? " 
^ ^^No." 

^^ Really?" 

" I should have had no right to blame 
you." 

*^ Indeed! What condescension, what 
justice ! " 

" I don't like him ; but he says he was 
my husband's friend." 

^^ You don't like me," said Miss Weaver, 
VOL. n. p 



210 CRUJSL LONDON. 

" and I am the only person who has be-- 
friended you." 

'^ 1 fear I have been wrong." 

^' Wrong ! " exclaimed Miss Weaver ; 
" your conduct has been shame- 
ful." 

^^ I expect I misunderstand Mr. Robin- 
son." 

^^ You misunderstand everybody." 

'' Yes, I think I do." 

^^ I thought you would think so even- 
tually." 

^^I have not been accustomed to be 
controlled." 

" Do you want to beg my pardon ? " 

^^I do, I do," exclaimed No. 35, fling- 
ing herself at Miss Weaver's feet. 

^' Very well," said the Lady of Charity, 
raising her, '^ I will consider about it. I 
must have proofs of your sincerity given 
me besid/Bs this humbleness. You may 
kiss my hand." 

No. 35 kissed the extended hand. 




WOMAN AGAINST WOMAN. 211 

^^ Well, what are you prepared to do to 
prove your sincerity ? " 

" I will see Mr. Robinson.^' 

^^ Yes, that's a step in advance. What 
will you say to him ? Complain of your 
treatment by Miss Weaver ? " 

^^No, indeed, I will not." 

'^ Will you write me a letter ? Express 
your regret, and thank me for my kind- 
ness and care." 

No. 35 hesitated. 

^' Supposing I gave you the sitting- 
room, No. 30, with a piano, and treated 
you as I meant to have done at first i 
you had behaved well ? " 

^* I would do all you could wish." 

^^ Very well." 

Miss Weaver left the room. Caroline 
kissed her baby. 

The truth is. Miss Weaver had that day 
received several anonymous threats of ex- 
posure. She was accustomed to epistolary 
stabs in the dark, and had been courage- 



V 



212 CRUEL LONDON. 

ous enough to place some of them in the 
hands of the police ; but this morning a 
placard, with the word "Impostor," had 
been posted on the entrance-doors, and a 
letter of "Inquiries concerning ^The Re- 
treat ' " had appeared in a daily newspaper. 
These incidental troubles harassed her at 
the moment, more particularly because a 
police superintendent had called to inform 
Miss Weaver that Mrs. Gardner would 
have to appear next week at the Sessions 
against Irish Moll. It had therefore be- 
come suddenly necessary that No. 35 
should either be brought into a more 
friendly condition of mind or worried 
into a lunatic asylum. She had not com- 
municated her views in regard to the 
latter contingency to Major Wenn, but 
she had a plan full of audacious cruelty to 
compass her end should she be pushed to 
extremities. Finding No. 35 at her feet 
was, therefore, an event full of satisfaction 
io her. Mr. Fitzherbert Robinson had in- 



WOMAN AGAINST WOMAN. 213 

formed Major Wenn that, if Mrs. Gardner 
would come to Hanover Gate and keep 
house for him, he would take care of her, 
communicate with her friends, and be most 
happy to contribute a handsome sum to- 
wards the funds of '' The Retreat." The 
major had informed Mr. Robinson that it 
was quite a common thing for Miss Weaver 
to receive bank notes for hundreds and 
thousands without a line or a word, anony- 
mous donations for the great cause of 
charity. Mr. Fitzherbert Robinson had 
said he had the greatest confidence in the 
major, and that he would do anything in 
the world for Mrs. Gardner. The major 
had informed Miss Weaver that Robinson 
was in luck, that he had lots of money ; 
and Miss Weaver had said she had only 
one hope now, that Mrs. Gardner would, 
of her own free will, leave the institution 
under the protection of her friend ; such 
an arrangement would meet the case, and 
relieve her of a difficulty. Major Wenn 



214 CRUEL LONDON. 

feared the girl would never do that, " so 
deuced obstinate, you know, like all pretty, 
dark-eyed women." Miss Weaver thought 
she would. 

" I was to show you into No. 30, the 
sittin'-room, marm," said the hard-featured 
Belper. 

Mrs. Gardner followed her. 

A dainty luncheon was laid. There 
was fruit upon the table, and wine. 

^^Miss Weaver said you were to help 
yourself." 

^^ Thank you," said Mrs. Gardner. 

Willie stretched out his hands to the 
grapes. 

^^ My darling," said the mother, "you 
shall have some." 

The little one devoured the grapes and 
cooed. 

" We must be careful, Willie," said the 
mother ; " taste the wine first, that 's what 
Indian would do." 

She tasted the fresh, cool claret. It was 



WOMAN AGAINST WOMAN. 215 

pleasant to the palate after a course of bad 
tea and water. 

" I think it is good ; but we mustn't be 
poisoned, Willie," she whispered. 

^^ Chicken and salad, Willie ; we are in 
iavour, you see. And we must eat and 
drink to get strong, love." 

She sat down, the child "upon her knee, 
and ate the luncheon with the relish of a 
hungry woman. 

There was a piano in a corner of the 
room; in another, an easel, canvas, and 
paints. Mr. Robinson had told Miss 
Weaver of the girl's accomplishments. 
Mrs. Grardner looked at these marks of 
delicate attention, first with delight, then 
with suspicion, then with fear. 

As she expected, Mr. Fitzherbert Robin- 
4Son was presently announced. Her heart 
stood still for a moment, but she rose to 
receive her visitor with apparent ease and 
.calmness. 

'^ Miss Weaver said you would receive 



216 CRUEL LONDON. 

me. I need hardly say how proud I feel,'^ 
said Mr. Robinson, his hat and cane in his 
gloved right hand. ^^ I have only called 
to pay my respects, and to ask if there is 
anything I can do for you." 

*^ You are very kind. I think not," said 
Mrs. Gardner. 

^^Nor for the dear little boy? "asked 
Mr. Robinson, looking at Willie in hi 
mother's arms. 

" If you could induce Miss Weaver to 
let me take him out for a little walk," said 
the woman quickly ; but, correcting her- 
self as quickly . ^^no, on second thoughts^ 
pray don't ; she may think I have com- 
plained, and I have no desire to do so." 

*^ Pray command me," said Mr. Robinson* 

" Have you heard anything more of my 
husband ? " 

^^ Nothing that I should care to tell the 
woman he has deceived." 

^^ I would like to know." 

^^ He has gone abroad with a lady," said 



WOMAN AGAINST WOMAN. 217 

Mr. Robinson, uttering a suggestive false- 
hood. 

^^ With a lady?'' 

"Ah, my dear madam, I only wish I could 
persuade you to think as much of me as 
you once thought of him. But, there, I 
must not touch on forbidden ground ; only 
say that I may call again, that is all, and 
I will trust to time to make us better 
friends." 

" Mr. Fitzherbert Robinson," she said,. 
" I will be glad to see you again. I only 
wish I were as free to come and go." 

There was an invitation to parley in the 
woman's manner which caught Mr. Robin- 
son at once. 

" You might have all the freedom you 
could desire if . pardon my boldness . if 
you would extend the smallest amount of 
friendship to me." 

" I was very rude to you, I fear ? " 

"No; that would be impossible. Mrs. 
Gardner could not be rude." 



218 CRUEL LONDON. 

" Yes, I was, but you have forgiven me ; 
this visit tells me that." 

Mr. Robinson's vanity, to say nothing 
about the mad passion this pretty, uncom- 
mon woman had excited in his selfish 
nature, made him an easy prey to the 
woman's wiles. 

'^ Forgive you ! I love you ! " 

**You must not say that," said Mrs. 
Oardner, trembling with fear, but nerved 
to her bold plan of escape. "I caimot 
listen to it ; not yet, at all events." 

" You give me hope ! My dear Mrs. 
Gardner, what shall I do to prove my 
devotion ? " 

Mrs. Gardner was in her turn taken off 
her guard. . 

^^ Have you a carriage ? " 

" Yes." 

" And where is it now ? " 

^^ At the door." 

^^ Instruct your coachman to take me 
and my little Willie for an airing ? " 



WOMAN AGAINST WOMAN. 219 

" I will. Excuse me a moment ; I will 
return immediately." 

He left the room. Mrs. Gardner drank 
a glass of wine. 

" We must keep our courage up, Willie ; 
even the Indian needs fire-water. Oh, 
Willie, how my heart beats ! " 

She walked to the window and looked 
out upon a small forest of chimney-stacks. 

"A city of bricks and smoke, Willie! 
Is it really as cruel and hard as it looks ? 
Heaven protect us ! " 

She gave Willie a teaspoonful of wine. 
He made faces at it, and then smacked 
his lips. 

Mr. Fitzherbert Robinson returned. He 
looked crestfallen. He stammered. 

" She won't let you," said Mrs. Gardner, 
quickly. " I knew she wouldn't. I 'm a 
prisoner here . a prisoner, sir. ^ Command 
me,' you said. I did. You are re-com- 
manded. You thought you were some- 
body. You see ! But hark ! hush ! what 



220 CRUEL LONDON. 

am I saying ? Forget what I have said. 
I don't want to offend Miss Weaver, nor 
to make you think me foolish and unkind. 
But, oh, it is hard to be locked up here ! " 

Mr. Fitzherbert Robinson raised his 
finger in an attitude of warning. He 
heard a well-known footstep. Miss Weaver 
knocked at the door, paused, and entered 
the room. 

* ^ I am very sorry, Mrs. Gardner, that 
you have made a request which is against 
the rules of ^ The Retreat.' I would have 
liked to show you that my sentiments 
towards you are kindly, but discipline 
must be maintained. The request, how- 
ever, and the very significant way in 
which you have received your friend 
induce me to say something which may 
perhaps save time, and relieve Mr. 
Robinson of his apparent embarrassment 
in making a proposition which I think 
redounds to his credit, and which will 
help all of us under the circumstances." 



WOMAN AGAINST WOMAN. 221 

Miss Weaver took a seat, and motioned 
to Mr. Robinson that he should do the 
same. 

" May I lay little Willie upon the bed?" 
Mrs. Gardner asked, for she felt sure Miss 
Weaver was going to say something which 
would try all her strength of dissimu- 
lation, and- something which she would 
not like even her speechless child to hear. 

^^ Certainly, yes; anything you wish." 

But Miss Weaver left the room with 
her; and then Mrs. Gardner changed 
her mind, for she had a morbid fear of 
letting the child be out of her sight. 
They might steal it, she thought. 

'^ You are indeed a whimsical person," 
said Miss Weaver, but ill concealing the 
annoyance shq felt at this continued 
evidence of mistrust. " She thinks she is 
fooling me," thought the wily Weaver: 
" we shall see." 



222 CRUEL LONDON. 



CHAPTER VII. 

MR. FITZHERBERT ROBINSON WANTS A 

HOUSEKEEPER. 

"Now, Mrs. Gardner, listen," said Miss 
Weaver. ^'Mr. Robinson is a gentleman 
of means and reputation j he wants a house- 
keeper; he knows your husband, and 
seems to be the only friend you have in 
London ; he tells me he is willing to give 
you that position at a good salary, and I 
wish to ask you if it is an offer you care 
to entertain." 

"Pardon me, Mrs. Gardner," said 
Robinson : " Miss Weaver is a very busi- 
ness-like woman ; she puts the matter very 
directly and without sentiment. Will you 



MR. ROBINSON WANTS A HOUSEKEEPER. 223 

permit me to add that, in advertising the 
vacancy, I described the engagement as 
that of a lady-housekeeper who would 
have a staff of servants, her own apart- 
ments, and every possible consideration of 
respect, and I . " 

^^ Thank you," said Mrs. Gardner; "I 
understand. Would you allow me before 
I answer you to have a few words with 
Miss Weaver alone ? " 
** By all means." 

*^ Then I will show I trust you by ask- 
ing you to wait at the end of the corridor 
and see that nobody touches my child. I 
am going to lay him down upon the bed. 
Will you ? " 

^^ You honour me," he said. 
She saw she had conquered Eobinson. 
Mrs. Gardner went straightway into 
No. 35, the door of which Miss Weaver 
had left open. The Lady of Charity fol- 
lowed her. She had not seen the knife 
the desperate woman had concealed . a 



224 CRUEL LONDON. 

knife which had been brought up with the 
luncheon. 

^^ Mr. Robinson, stand by that window, 
will you, please, till you see me return 
for Willie." 

^'I will," said Robinson, looking de- 
fiantly for the first time at Miss Weaver. 

^^ Mad as a March hare ! " said Miss 
Weaver, stiU looking ahead. Her plans 
always stretched away into the future. 

^'Now, madam," said Miss Weaver, 
when the two women confronted each 
other alone, '^ after this new mounte- 
bank exhibition, perhaps you will begin." 

^^You want me gone," said Mrs. 
Gardner. 

^' Not more than you want to go." 

^^ You hate me," said Mrs. Gardner, the 
wine stimulating her. She had not tasted 
anything stronger than tea for more than 
a week. 

^^ Not more than you hate me." 

^^I don't hate you; let me go fireely. 




MR. ROBINSON WANTS A HOUSEKEEPER. 225 

and I promise you never to breathe a word 
of this disgraceful intrigue." 

^^ I don't understand you." 

'^Yes, you do.'* 

" I lie then, do I, you vixen ? " 

Miss Weaver stepped towards her pant- 
ing opponent. The desperate woman 
clutched the knife. 

^' Woman!" exclaimed the American, 
^^be careful ! " 

Even the bold Weaver paused, though 
she only saw the flashing eye and the dis- 
tended nostril of the Southerner, in whose 
attitude there was a suggestion of the 
tigress. 

'^Is there no way for me to leave this 
place but with that man? Answer me 
straight, and let us understand each 
other." 

^' If you will sit down, and talk like a 
rational being, I will listen ; if not, I must 
leave you." 

While she spoke she saw the knife. 

VOL. II. Q 



226 CRUEL LONDON. 

Miss Weaver was no coward. With the 
rapidity of thought, and the strength of a 
man, she seized No. 35 from behind. 
There was in hej method of attack all the 
deftness of a woman who had been a nurse 
in a lunatic asylum. Mrs. Gardner was 
powerless. The knife dropped out of her 
hand. She was cowed. She looked up at 
the giantess who gripped her, in fear, as 
a child might have done. 

" You theatrical hussy ! Now, what 
have you got to say ? " 

^^ Nothing. Forgive me : don't tell Mr. 
Eobinson; don't make a noise," gasped 
the victim. 

^'Very well then, listen; for I don't 
intend to waste any more time upon you." 

'^ Yes; I am listening." 

^ ' You decide at once whether you leave 
^ The Retreat ' or stay ; you leave it at your 
own written and expressed request with 
Mr. Fitzherbert Robinson, as his house- 
keeper, or you stay." 



w 



MR. ROBINSON WANTS A HOUSEKEEPER. 227 



iC Q, 



Suppose I stay, what will you do with 
me?" 

'^ Give up the institution to you, hire 
servants to wait upon you, let you live in 
luxury, give you the right even to call 
Major Wenn your intimate friend." 

Mrs. Gardner shuddered at the malicious 
way in which Miss Weaver hissed this into 
her ear. 

*^ You didn't think I should be so kind 
as that, eh? Did you think I'd starve 
you, lock you up in, darkness, never let 
you see daylight, take your child from 
you, drive you crazy . so crazy that you'd 
have to be chained up in a cellar, and 
finally buried in a ditch ? " 

Miss Weaver bent over the terrified 
woman, clutching her by the shoulder and 
glaring at her, hissing the cruel words into 
her face. 

^' O don't, pray don't ! " exclaimed the 
victim. " I '11 do what you wish, what- 
ever it is." 



228 CRUEL LONDON. 

The moment Miss Weaver relaxed her 
grip, the woman fell back into her chair 
all pale and limp. 

" Here, none of that, no fainting, rouse 
yourself," said Miss Weaver, shaking her. 

'^ Yes, yes," said the woman, making a 
mental effort, and staggering to her feet, 
^^I know. Don't touch me; I will go: 
give me a little wine ; I am weak." 

Miss Weaver poured out half a tumbler 
of wine. The poor woman drank it 
eagerly. 

" Thank you ; tell Mr. Robinson I will 
go with him." 

^^ Very well ; now sit down and com- 
pose yourself." 

Mrs. Gardner sat down. 

^^ You had better go to your room and 
lie down for half an hour. I will send 
you up a lace mantle and a few things. I 
would like you to go away comfortably. 
I don't bear malice, though you did try to 
tab me with a knife." 



MR. ROBINSON WANTS A HOUSEKEEPER. 229 

^' I ! " said the woman ; ^^ I try to stab 
you ? " 

^^Do you deny it? Do you call me a 
liar again ? " 

'' Oh, no, no ! " 

^^ I don't blame you ; it is easy to see 
that you are not quite answerable for your 
actions.'' 

^^ Forgive me," said the woman. ^^I 
will go to baby. Tell him I am ready ; 
tell him, will you ? " 

She went to her room. Mr. Robinson 
was strictly guarding the portal. He 
bowed to her as she went in, and then he 
walked to the sitting-room. Miss Weaver 
had beckoned him. 

Little Willie was fast asleep. Mrs. 
Gardner flung herself down by his side, 
and tried to pray. Presently she got up. 

^^ He cannot hear me in this vile place," 
she said; ^' God has left it. He will not 
look upon it any more than he would upon 
The Cottage. And oh, Willie, the craft of 



230 CRUEL LONDON. 

the Indian is no good against the devil ! 
She is Satan in the guise of a woman ! 
We must go, dear, if we would escape 
starvation, chains, and death. Oh, she is 
cruel; there is torture, murder, in her 
cold eyes. Once outside this prison, this 
den, we will trust to Providence. Better 
to die in the streets and be buried in a 
ditch, Willie, than here. Pray Heaven 
I keep my senses ! I will ; for your sake 
I will." 

She crept by his side and shut her eyes. 

'' I will try and sleep. I must not lose 
my strength; I shall want it soon. O 
Heaven, give strength to my will, and 
wings to my feet." 

^^ She accepts your offer," said Miss 
Weaver to Mr. Robinson. 

^^ The darling! " exclaimed Robinson. 

'' If you please to call her darling I have 
no objection; I thought it was house- 
keeper." 

^' You are so witty and cynical." 



V 



MR. ROBINSON WANTS A HOUSEKIEEPER. 231 

^' She will be ready this evening at 
dusk/' 

^^ Delightful ! I have to thank you, 
Miss Weaver." 

^^ Not at all ; it is nothing to me. She 
is a lonely and friendless woman. I 
rescued her from starvation and in- 
famy. You are her husband's friend . 
her only friend in London; you offer 
her honourable employment, she accepts 
it.'^ 

'^ Just so . most business-like ; thank 
you/' 

^'You will order your carriage to be 
here at eight o'clock. You will call for the 
lady and her child ; in the mean time she 
will have written to me informing me of 
her intentions ; you will also have sent me 
in writing your application in regard to 
her ; then No. 35 will be vacant ; and I 
trust Mrs. Gardner will, through your cha- 
ritable interposition, find her friends, and 
be happy ever afterwards. There ! Does 



232 CRUEL LONDON. 

not that make quite a touching and ro- 
mantic story ? " 

" It does, truly. You should join the 
staff of some popular magazine, and write 
novels." 

^^My dear Mr. Robinson, I have gone 
through all that. I have been a journalist, 
a hospital nurse, I have my diploma as a 
doctor, I am writing for two scientific 
journals at this moment, and I have 
ridden to hounds as straight as the hunts- 
man himself." 

^^ You arc a wonderful woman ! " 

'^ I should not be here otherwise." 

'' True." 

'^ Now, a word of warning about Mrs. 
Gardner. As she enters your carriage we 
shall give her no chance of running away. 
See that you arc equally cautious when she 
arrives at your house. Do you under- 
stand ? " 

" But do you suspect that . " 

^^ I suspect nothing," replied Miss 



V 



MR. ROBINSON WANTS A HOUSEKEEPER. 233 

Weaver. " But this woman is erratic, and 
for some reason or another she dislikes me. 
Her mind has been influenced against me ; 
if she could create a scandal about ' The 
Retreat' she would. When I give her 
into your care, all I ask is that you shall 
really take her home ; keep her there 
four-and-twenty hours, and then she may 
say or do what she pleases." 

^^ I quite understand." 

^'If she attempts to run, take hold of 
her arm ; clutch her tight. A scandal 
would do you no good." 

^ ' Good ! Just now it would do me a 
great deal of harm." 

" Very well, then, pay attention to 
what I say." 

^' All right; I '11 take care, never fear." 



^' Then you shall come to the office and 
write me that letter." 

^^ By all means." 

They returned to the sanctum of the 
Lady of Charity. Major Wenn was there. 



234 CRUEL LONDON. 

drawing out cheques for the signature of 
Miss Weaver. Mr. Robinson wrote the 
letter which Miss Weaver required, and 
when it had been duly addressed and 
placed in Miss Weaver's hand, Major 
Wcnn went out with Mr. Robinson to 
luncheon. 

Mrs. Gardner was sitting by the barred 
window, above a forest of chimneys spring- 
ing out of acres of roofs dingy with smoke 
and soot. She was soothing little Willie, 
who would burst into fits of crying, 
<3very tear that rolled down his cheeks 
paining the suffering mother more than 
if it was a drop of her heart's blood. 
.Cruel London miglit have done its worst 
with her but for little Willie. She talked 
to him, kissed him, prayed that Heaven 
would comfort him. But she prayed with- 
out hope. If she had been looking upon 
tlie green meadows of Essam, she might 
have fancied she saw some glimpse of light 
in the darkness of her fortunes. But 



MR. ROBINSON WANTS A HOUSEKEEPER. 235 

London seemed to stare her in the face, 
hard and grim and cruel. 

'' And this," she said, ^^ is the land which 
your grandfather described as tender and 
chivalrous ! This is the country that sym- 
pathized with the South in the hour of its 
trouble ! This is the land that stands by 
the weak and defies the strong ! This is 
the land flowing with milk and honey! 
Oh, Willie, Willie, how we have been de- 
ceived, betrayed to our destruction ! Let 
your own little heart pray for mamma, 
dear! In your baby-language, ask the 
angels that whisper to you to guide 
mamma this day, to have her in their 
keeping this once, dear, this once." 

And she mingled her own tears with 
those of little Willie, who suddenly looked 
up at her and smiled. 

'^ My darling ! " exclaimed the mother, 
" you understand me, sweetie, you do : 
you have said something to the angels; 
they have answered you." 



2'{(} CRUEL LONDOX. 

Baby cooed, and put its little arms 
around the mother's neck. 

*^ liloss you, my own ! my angel ! Let 
me kneel and thank your companions with 
wingH, your playmates whom I cannot 
see/' 

She knelt with little Willie in her arms. 
A gleam of sunshine fell upon the woman, 
and dwelt lovingly in the room. She took 
tlio dancing light as another omen of good 
proniitto ; and, when the hour came for 
action, slie was calm, self-possessed, and 
resolute. 



k. 



THE GARRISON MAKES A SORTIE. 237 



CHAPTER VIII. 

THE GARRISON MAKES A SORTIE. 

Now it came to pass that on the day when 
Mrs. Gardner was to make a sortie from 
the Weaver garrison that Mr. Henry Bray- 
ford was in search of the enemy who was 
the besieged woman's convoy in friendly 
disguise. 

It was a siege to Mrs. Gardner, this 
shutting up in '' The Retreat." She was 
invested by Miss Weaver and Major Wenn. 
Her liberty was dominated by redoubts ; 
her movements were under constant sur- 
veillance. 

While she had agreed to march out 
under convoy, she was only meeting craft 




238 CRUEL LONDON. 

with stratagem. Her surrender, as a 
prisoner of war, to one of the besiegers 
was, after all, only a sortie for liberty, an 
effort at escape, a determination to fight 
when the convoy was beyond the imme- 
diate lines of Major Wenn and his ally. 
Mrs. Gardner had laid her plans. But she 
had a triple alliance against her, and the 
offensive forces were far-seeing, daring, 
and unscrupulous. 

If Mr. Brayford had only known how 
hard beset the poor woman was ! He 
lived in the neighbourhood of " The Re- 
treat." But he was not only ignorant of 
the case ; he did not even know Mrs. 
Gardner ; ho had never heard of her. 
How should he have dreamed even of that 
hand of fate which was reaching over the 
broad waters of the Atlantic, to gather 
into a circle the lives that are bound up 
in this narrative, when he was putting 
his trust in Jeremiah Sleaford, and wait- 
ing for the shower of gold that was to 



THE GARRISON MAKES A SORTIE. 239 

come out of the Pactolean clouds of the 
Financial Society ? Poor Brayford knew 
nothing of the mysterious hand tliat had 
directed those Southern fugitives, deluding 
one to his death, and delivering the other 
into the hands of the Philistines ! Yet the 
shadow of that distant ship gliding out of 
New York harbour to battle with ^^the 
rolling forties " fell upon our early pages. 
The historian was enabled to picture to 
you the gentle, trusting, but fearful girl 
clinging to the side of her grey-headed, dis- 
triaught father; to show you them, coming 
over the sea to influence the destinies of 
men and women in England of whom they 
had never heard ; bringing with them the 
silken threads of romance necessary to the 
weft of this story of real life, to be, in 
their turn, weaved into the plot which Fate 
had designed beforehand ; one of them to 
contribute a thread of sombre blackness, 
the other to supply skeins of varied hues, 
and, unsuspected in her gloomiest mo- 



240 CRUEL LONDON. 

ments, to be the innocent cause of a 
tragic stain in the golden weft. 

Who shall venture upon a controversy 
with Fate ? Who shall dare to challenge 
her stem decrees ? To say that it might 
have been better for Caroline Virginia 
Denton, and her father, to have stayed in 
their own country is to be guilty of an 
arrogance that pretends to lift the veil of 
the future. Who knows what other ills 
might have beset their path ; what greater, 
bitterer trouble might have tortured their 
existence! Moreover, it was ordained 
that yonder suffering woman, praying for 
deliverance from the snares and pitfalls, 
the pirates, thieves, and murderers of 
Cruel London, should bear her cross in the 
great city. She had a mission. The 
threads of her influence are black, grey, 
golden, and red; and as we stand upon 
the brink looking into the Future, it 
seems as if Fate had another minister 
standing darkly by her side, with ven- 



k 



THE GARRISON MAKES A SORTIE. 241 

geance in his eye; but he looms up, too 
shadowy yet for recognition, his face is 
strange, and his form is shrouded in a 
mist. 

What can a poor creature such as Bray- 
ford have to do with Fate, or Fate with 
him ? It may be that this ungainly 
comical person is destined to play the 
part of the angel, for whose aid the 
victim of ^' The Retreat " was praying. 
For it is certain that Brayford is within 
the shadow of the fortress, and Fate had 
arranged that he should be in search of 
Mr. Fitzherbert Robinson at the severest 
moment of Mrs. Gardner's peril. 

When Mr. Jeremiah Sleaford was re- 
viewing the past and discounting the 
future at Boulogne, his memory failed to 
carry the slightest reminiscence of Mr. 
Brayford. The fact that he and his col- 
leagues had utterly ruined Brayford quite 
escaped his thoughts. No man could 
have been more thoroughly and com- 

VOL. II. R 



242 CRUEL LONDON. 

pletely ruined than Harry Brayford, the 
comic epitaphist and the melancholy 
farceur ! As a mural mason he was wiped 
out. Not a single cemetery company 
would recognize him. Monolith Cottage 
was levelled to the earth. The Mauso- 
leum and Marble Works at Paddington 
had been remodelled by the new pro- 
prietors. They wouldn't even employ 
Brayford. They said he was as big a 
tom-fool as his clerk, ^^ the Wonner," as 
Brayford called him. The serio-comic 
countryman who had amused the Janitor 
at the office of the Financial Society, and 
who had delighted Mrs. Kester with his 
attentions at a certain reception, was now 
an out-at-elbow nobody. The Syndicate, 
the Cemetery Company, and Mr. Jere- 
miah Sleaford combined, had left him 
stranded on the inhospitable shores of 
Cruel London. 

At first Brayford had accepted the 
situation with a light heart. He sought 



THE GARRISON MAKES A SORTIE. 243 

consolation at the Footlights. But it was 
here that he first thoroughly realized his 
misfortunes. The Footlighters who owed 
him money cut him for fear he would ask 
to be repaid his loans ; those who had 
cultivated him with a lively hope of sums 
to be borrowed, snubbed him because their 
chances were at an end. The club gene- 
rally seemed to agree that he was a fool ; 
that he had frittered away a fine business; 
that he had peddled in literature out of 
vanity, and neglected work he understood ; 
that but for his money he would not have 
been tolerated ; that he had introduced a 
lot of men into the club to serve his own 
private ends ; that he had, in fact, used 
the club ; that he had been ostenta- 
tious in his hospitality; that properly 
considered, he had really no quali- 
fication for the club ; and that alto- 
gether he was neither entitled to sympathy 
nor respect. There were a few members 
of the Footlights who did not hold 



344 CRUEL LONDON. 

these views. The chairman was a notable 
exception ; so were the secretary and 
treasurer. But this did not compensate 
Brayford. The shock he had received 
overwhelmed him. He went to " the 
boys " for comfort ; they jibed him. He 
asked them for the bread of consola- 
tion; they gave him the stone of con- 
tempt. 

But a worse discovery than this of the 
uses of money was the revelation that his 
little farces and comic songs had only 
been accepted because he was "a good 
fellow, you know, and it 's easy just to 
push a first piece in now and then, . it 
pleases him, and he don't want money.'' 
When Brayford turned from the grave 
and the comic epitaph to the solemn farce 
and the sad comic song for the means of a 
livelihood, he was laughed at by the very 
men who, over little dinners at the Albion, 
or drinks at the club, had praised his 
songs and listened to his satirical three- 



THE GARRISON MAKES A SORTIE. 245 

act *In Memoriam.' Besides, he had 
neglected his dress; he no longer wore 
gloves, his beard was unkempt, his hat 
was greasy, his boots were not clean, he 
showed his poverty in the careless tie of 
his cravat. Brayf ord was literally ' ' broke," 
as they would say in Lincolnshire; 
^^ stumped," as they put it in London; 
^'in the gutter," as he said himself to his 
old friend ^^ the Wonner," who spent the 
spare pennies he could scrape together in 
buying newspapers and cutting out the 
^^ deaths " for circularization. " The 
Wonner " thought his old chief was simply 
^'up to his larks," that the sale of Mono- 
lith Cottage was a kind of pantomime 
joke, and Mr. Brayf ord's poverty some- 
thing intended to be just as diverting as 
the many other numerous eccentricities of 
which he had been guilty. The only 
incident of the new phase of their lives 
that puzzled him was the occasional want 
of sufficient food. This bothered ^Hhe 



246 CRUEL LONDON. 

Wonner," but not half as much as it 
bothered Mr. Brayford. 

On the day when Mrs. Gardner was to 
make her sortie from ^^ The Retreat," Mr 
Brayford had hoard that Mr. Fitzherbert 
Robinson had profited largely by his 
downfall. He never liked Robinson. On 
the contrary, if Brayford's mM nature 
was capable of supporting the passion of 
hatred, he hated Robinson. He had not 
only heard that his former colleague had 
made money out of the sale and re-sale of 
the Paddington Works, but that, if he 
chose to give Brayiord employment in 
connexion with a little business which 
Brayford had started, he could keep him- 
self and ^^ the Wonner " continually occu- 
pied. He had, therefore, vowed he 
would see Robinson that day, for "the 
Wonner" had complained for the first 
time since their troubles that he was 
hungry. 

Mr. Brayiord had called at Robinson's 




THE GARRISON MAKES A SORTIE. 247 

office, in the City, three times; he had 
followed Mr. Robinson to his club; he 
had been on his track all day. He 
walked along Regent Street, as the shops 
were all closing, towards Hanover Square, 
with the intention of posting himself out- 
side Robinson's house imtil he came home. 
He was hungry himself now, and the little 
money owing to him and ^^ the Wonner" 
for their last job was not due until the 
morning. 

As he turned to go into the square, Mr. 
Robinson's brougham passed him, and he 
fiaw ids old colleague's face in the light of 
a gas-lamp. He ran after the carriage, 
and stopped with it opposite Mr. Robin- 
son's house. His hunger goaded him. It 
made him angry to see his former eel- 
league with a fine carriage and horses, 
while he grovelled, as he had tried to 
explain to " the Wonner," in the gutterr. 
At that moment he hated Mr. Robin- 
son even more than he hated Mr. 



248 CRUEL LONDON. 

Jeremiah Sleaford and the entire Slea- 
f ord family. 

The handle of the carriage-door was 
cautiously turned. A footman leaped 
down from the steps, and opened the door 
of the house with a latch-key. 

Mr. Robinson stepped from the brougham, 
and proceeded to hand out a lady with a 
child in her arms. 

Brayford noted all this as he stood in 
the shadow of the carriage-lamps. 

Instead of taking the hand carefully 
held out to assist her, the woman bent 
her head, darted beneath Robinson's 
arm, and ran with the speed of an ante- 
lope. 

Robinson and the footman were after 
her in a moment, and Brayford after 
them. The woman screamed loudly as 
Robinson caught her. He seized her 
savagely. 

The next moment he was sprawling in 
the road, and the footman as suddenly 




THE GARRISON MAKES A SORTIE. 249 

found it desirable to run to a place of 
safety on the other side of the way. 

A cautious policeman, who had wit- 
nessed the incident, noticed that the 
person who had been knocked down 
gathered himself together as if to resent 
the attack. He, therefore, walked quietly 
round the next street, so as to enter the 
square from another point. 

When he came back to the scene of 
the disturbance, the combatants were no 
longer there. The woman was gone ; 
the child was gone; their champion had 
disappeared. All was quiet at the house 
of Mr. Robinson. No carriage stood at 
the door. A group of people at the 
corner of the street were talking about a 
fight. P.O. XX marched courageously 
into their midst, and demanding " What 's 
up ? " also in the same breath requested 
the loiterers to " Move on !" But the 
little crowd declined to obey the latter 
injunction, though it was very communi- 



250 CRUEL LONDON. 

cative in reply to the former. P.O. XX 
took out a book, made some notes, wrote 
down several addresses; and presently 
Hanover Square resumed its ordinary 
appearance. 



END OF BOOK V. 




BOOK VI. 



CHAPTER I. 

A WORLD OF SNOW AND TWO LOVERS. 

^^He saith to the snow, Be thou on the 
earth," and silence reigns over the valley. 
The squirrel seeks his sheltering nook. 
The quail, halting upon the wing, falls 
dead in the canon. Glittering spears 
hang upon the mountain crags. The 
river pauses in its course. The trees 
moan in the night. The firs are black. 
They look like funeral plumfes. The sky 
is a dull leaden pall stretched over the 
face of nature. 

The miners of the Sacramento Valley 



254 CRUEL LONDON. 

liuddle together and strengthen the tim- 
bers of their rude dwellings. They bid 
each other ^^ Good night '^ with an extra 
grip of the hand. They feel that on the 
morrow many of their huts may be as far 
apart as if they were divided by' mighty 
seas. The air is filling with feathery par- 
ticles of snow. The sky is being gradually 
shut out. All the world is hushed, as if 
hill and dale, listening to the Divine com- 
mand, waited its solemn and sure fulfil- 
ment. ^'He saith to the snow. Be thou 
on the earth." 

On the morrow an awful silence comes, 
more appalKng in its stillness than the 
rush and war of a tempest. Dead silence 
broods over a world of snow. Trees of 
snow. Hills of snow. White mountains 
tower up to an unseen sky. The vaUey 
creeps in snowy undulations up to the 
mysterious rocks. It is the picture of a 
dead world, buried. 

A calm monotony of hill and dale, 



A WORLD OP SNOW AND TWO LOVERS. 255 

without a ragged edge. Every comer 
has been rounded. Even the trees, which 
thrust their branches into the chilly air, 
have the mound-like form of all natural 
protuberances. It is a world of snowy 
hillocks, a mighty graveyard, with fea- 
thery plumes that moult sprays of frozen 
swan's-down. 

In a well-built hut in Decker's Gulch, 
among the lonely Califomian hills, two 
miners sat by a glowing pine-log fire. 
The locality had been named after its 
fortunate owner, who had recently sold it 
to a party of capitalists in San Francisco. 
The purchasers were to enter upon pos- 
session in the spring. In the mean time 
winter had seized the property and fixed 
an icy seal upon its golden treasures. 

Tristram Decker sat propped up with 
skins and pillows upon a rude bench, with 
his thin hand in Jack Kerman's brawny 
fist, on^the first night of the great snow of 
this winter season, in the mountairis of the 



256 CRUEL LONDON. 

Sacramento. A long, poetic face, full of 
lines and tokens of a hard life ; blue, san- 
guine eyes; a spare, bony figure; long 
brown hair ; hollow cheeks, with a hectic 
flush beneath the eyes; Tristram Decker 
was the wreck of a powerful young man. 
Our old friend Kerman, broad of shoulders, 
strong of limb, tall, stalwart, with his frank 
face half liidden behind thick whiskers 
and beard, was almost a cruel contrast to 
the nervous, wasted figure of Decker, the 
enthusiastic lover whose face his persecuted 
countrywoman thought she had seen, in 
the days of her loneliness and trouble, 
looking at her over the hedge in the 
English valley of Essam. 

It was Cluistmas Eve. Not alone the 
silence of the snow and the chance that 
they were both in a living tomb, but the 
time itself made tribute upon the best and 
noblest instincts of their nature. Tristram 
Decker believed he was dying of con- 
sumption. He expected his end was near, 



A WORLD OF SNOW AND TWO LOVERS. 257 

though he continued to say he would not 

die until he had seen Old England. He 

had, nevertheless, his hours of depression 

when he feared that physical weakness 
would exhaust his strength of will. This 

was one of his bad nights. He had been 
talking to Kerman about the end. He 
had been sorrowing over the prospect of 
his companion being left alone in this wil- 
derness of snow. 

^^ If I could only pull through until the 
weather clears," he said, speaking slowly 
and in pain. ^^ It is hard, after all your 
kindness, to leave you by yourself. I 've 
been a deal of trouble to you. Jack, but 
you'd rather have me stay, for all that, 
dear old boy." 

Kerman pressed the hand that lay in 
his as gently as if it had been a woman's. 

^'I think," continued the invalid, ^^ I 
think I shall have to go in a day or two. 
Jack, and I want you to get used to the 
idea of it. Don't be afraid, as I should be 

VOL. II. s 



258 CRUEL LONDON. 

if we could change places, when you wake 
some morning and find me lying still." 

' ' You 're depressed to-night. I have 
put these thoughts into your head by 
talking about Christmas," Kerman replied. 
^^You must cheer up, old boy; it's the 
nature of your illness that makes you 
gloomy; and, instead of being cheerful 
and helping you to keep your spirits up, 
I Ve been dumpy and miserable." 

^^No, no. Jack; I think you are the 
best fellow in the world. They talk of 
the tenderness of a woman by a sick-bed, 
but your gentle patience couldn't be 
equalled by any woman . except one, per- 
haps . except one." 

^^Ah," responded Kerman, ^'we never 
know how much good there is in women ; 
fact is, we don't understand them ; they 're 
so true and stanch that they go on being 
heroines, and keeping it a secret all the 
time somehow. I suppose a man is natu- 
rally such a selfish fool that he hasn't the 



A WORLD OF SNOW AND TWO LOVERS. 259 

heart or the sense to see what a woman 's 
at." 

'' Now you 're thinking of Jane Crosby/' 

said Tristram. 

" I 'm always thinking of her." 
'' And I of Caroline Denton." 
'^ Grod bless them both ! " said Kerman. 
^^ Amen and Amen!" exclaimed Tris- 
tram. 

The logs on the fire settled down, and 
sent a cloud of sparks up the chinmey. 
They looked like a swarm of golden 
bees. 

" Your Christmas fire wants to join in 
our good wishes," said the invalid. '' How 
fond you are of the fire, Jack. Tell me 
about your dear old country. It seems to 
me as if .1 have got to know England 
through this fire of yours. I 've Kved all 
my life in a land of stoves, and your fire- 
side is like poetry to me, something in a 
story, like all your English history, with 
knights and castles in it, and always 



260 CRUEL LONDON. 

green valleys, old homesteads, and dreamy, 
moss-grown villages. I wish I 'd gone to 
England when I left New York, that is, if 
I could have come across you in your own 
country." 

'' You ought to have been a poet, 
Tristy," said Kerman. '' What brought 
a fellow like you fighting Indians and 
digging for gold is a puzzle to me." 

'^ Tell mc about your English firesides. 
Jack," said Tristram, his eyes fixed upon 
the red-glowing logs. ^^ Perhaps Caroline 
Denton is sitting by one of them. I 
should like to think so, . sitting with her 
grim old father. Ah, he was a hard old 
man, was ' Seccsh Denton,' as they called 
him. It wasn't my fault that I was a 
Federal soldier; it was the chance of 
birth. A man can't help it if he 's bom in 
the North; everybody can't be bom in 
Maryland or Virginia. What we are bom 
at all for is a mystery to me. But talk of 
England, Jack, the only place where, it 



^ 



A WORLD OF SNOW AND TWO LOVERS. 261 

seems to me, it's ever really Christmas. 
When I was a boy I always used to look 
at the pictures in the books and papers my 
father got from England, and read the 
ghost stories and about the yule-logs and 
things, and the Christmas bells ringing 
across the snow. There 's plenty of snow 
here. Jack; we only want the bells, my 
boy, . ^we only want the bells. I hope she 
has got a fireside to sit by. Jack, don't 
you ? " 

^^ I do, old man; and I feel sure she 
has." 

" He said he 'd sooner kill her than she 
should marry a man who had lifted a rifle 
against his beloved South; and when I 
said if I had known him and his daughter 
I would have forsworn my birthright 
rather than have offended him, he only 
shrugged his shoulders impatiently. How 
was I to know he and she were living 
away out there in Virginia when 
marched with the boys against the rebs 




262 CRUEL LONDON* 

You talk of beauty, Jack; you should 
have seen that little Southern girl. My 
God ! And I loved her as if I made up 
for only knowing her a fortnight by 
putting a lifetime into those fourteen days. 
Let 's have a drink, Jack." 

^^ We will, old man, we will," said Kerman, 
rising, and fetching a bottle of brandy from 
a rough but capacious cupboard; ^^ a jorum, 
a hot old glass of grog, Tristy ; and we 'U 
wish ourselves all the good things of the 
season." 

He hung a kettle over the fire; he 
brought forth glasses, and a jar of lime 
juice. 

' ' I ' ve got one of my talking fits on. 
Jack. It 's rather rough on you ; but you 
won't talk, and somebody must keep the 
game alive on Christmas Eve. Perhaps 
you 'd like a hand at cards. Jack ? Let 's 
play for the chest, and the claim, and the 
Gulch, and the hut, and the whole lot; 
that '11 wake you up." 



A WORLD OP SNOW AND TWO LOVERS. 263 



'' No, Tristy ; cards will wake me up no 



more." 



'' I shall not forget the night when you 
stood between me and that murdering 
thief at Sharky Nat's hell. You're a 
brave fellow, Jack ; you don't know how 
Lrave you were that night. You English 
fellows never do know. You ought to 
have been laid out that night, Jack." 

'' I expect I did," said Kerman, mea- 
suring the brandy and Jime-juice, and 
pouring it into a jug. 

^^ You saved my life, and how you got 
off without a knife in your heart or a 
bullet in your brain, hang me if I 
know." 

'' Luck, old man, luck," replied Ker- 
man. 

^^ I 'm going to walk about a bit," said 
Tristram, getting up from his cushions and 
skins. '^ I 'm going to help you brew the 
punch." 

" That 's right," said Kerman. '' Bravo ! 




264 CRUEL LONDON. 

we shall make a merry Christmas of it yet. 
Get me the sugar, Tristy." 

The American staggered a Kttle as he 
crossed the floor of the cabin, but he 
opened the cupboard, and struggled with 
a great jar of sugar, which he managed to 
place upon the table. 

'' By the sacred stars and stripes. Jack, 
I feel ever so much better than I did tw> 
hours ago. What a wonderful thing if I 
should get better ! " 

^' If you should get better ? You shall, 
old man ; you shall," said the Englishmar, 
ladling the sugar, with a wooden spoon, 
into the jug. 

^^But supposing. Jack, I should get 
better only to find that we are biuied 
ahve. You don't know what snow means 
in the Sacramento, my dear friend. You 
don't know." 

Tristram spoke solemnly, and looked 
into the face of his friend. 

'' And is that how thou art going to talk 



A WORLD OF SNOW AND TWO LOVERS. 265 

just as soon as thou gets a bit better? 
Thou 'rt a nice Job's comforter, as owd 
Kester o' the Manor Farm in the Marsh 
would say." 

" I like to hear you do that dialect, Jack, 
because I know you are happy, thinking 
of your native land. I should like to see 
it. I suppose old Secesh Denton did take 
his daughter across ; he said he should in 
another name, and that they should forget 
and be forgotten. I was a poor devil 
then, or I should never have left the track 
of them ; and I . only came out to this 
claim in the hope of getting money 
enough to find them and make them rich, 
without them knowing where the gold 
came from. That was my plan. For I 
don't think that bitter old cuss had a 
thousand dollars left out of all he was 
once worth." 

The American had sat down again while 
he was talking, and Kerman had brewed 
the grog. 



266 ' CRUEL LONDON. 

"Now, old man," said Jack, "let's 
wish each other ' A Merry Christmas and a 
Happy New Year.' " 

They each took a steaming tumbler of 
punch, which Jack poured out, and repeated 
together . "A Merry Christmas and a 
Happy New Year." 

" That 's the regular thing," said Ker- 
man, jug in hand. "Now, then, we'll 
drink to Jane and Caroline, married or 
single, God bless them ! " 

Kerman's voice trembled, and Tristram 
said, . 

" God bless them ! " adding, " married or 
single. That 's got too much bitters. 
Jack." 

"You Americans like bitters," said 
Kerman, " and I Ve begim to think they 're 
good. I heard a fellow sing a song at the 
Footlight Club in London, called ' Life 's 
a biunper, filled by Fate,' and I often think 
Fate 's given you and me an extra dose of 
bitters ; but it 's better to take 'em straight 



A WORLD OF SNOW AND TWO LOVERS. 267 

and not complain; so I say, married or 
single. I Ve every reason to think Jane is 
married. I know Miss Caroline Denton's 
happiness is all you care for ; and women 
do get married, Tristy, old man, and 
there 's snow and ice and seas between ns 
and the girls we love. It 's true your 
little lady knows you love her. My great- 
hearted Lincolnshire lass doesn't know I 
care much about her . I didn't know it 
myself before it was too late. Ah, well, 
it can't be helped. I expect we 're a 
couple of old fools, Tristy. Now I 'm 
jawing away like a Yankee orator . ^no 
stopping me once I 'm set going, and I 
wanted you to do all the talking to-night." 

He drained liis glass, pulled out a pipe, 
lighted it, sat down, and commenced to 
smoke. 

' ' I don't think your ideas of love exactly 
fit in with mine," said Tristram, musingly. 

'^Have a cigar," said Kerman, ''and 
tell me your ideas." 



268 CRUEL LONDON. 

"Yes, I '11 have a smoke. How many 
cigars have we ? " 

" Oh, plenty," replied Kerman, going 
to the cupboard and bringing out a hand- 
ful . '' plenty to see us into the spring." 

'' Plenty, because you leave them all to 
me. I believe you 'd swear you hated 
brandy, if you thought there wasn't enough 
for both of us ; you 're a queer, generous 
old cuss. Jack, that you are." 

The American lighted liis cigar, and the 
two men smoked silently for some time, 
looking into the fire. They pretended not 
to notice the hissing wliicli the red logs 
made every now and then, telling of the 
continued falling of the snow. The fire- 
light threw weird flashes upon the rough 
wooden benches upon the blackened hearth, 
and up among the multifarious tools, cook- 
ing utensils, dried fish, hams, herbs, and 
kettles that hung upon the cross beams 
beneath the tarred timber roof. 

" Look here. Jack," said Tristram, 



A WORLD OF SNOW AND TWO LOVERS. 269 

presently. ^'The better the day, they 
say, the better the deed. I Ve made my 
will. I wish I 'd done it before the snow 
came, because I guess it '11 be a long time 
before Old Chimip or any of 'em get up 
here from the Red Indian bar or the camp 
down yonder, and I wouldn't wonder if 
they 're not all buried down there before 
the week 's out. I knew what I was about 
when I prospected this claim, and fixed on 
Landell's Comer for our brown stone front. 
Trust an old hand ! I guess we 're two of 
the richest men in California ; at least, one 
of us will be. Jack . one of us. Hand 
out your pens and paper, I 'm going to 
sling ink." 

'' No, no ; sit quiet, and let us talk." 

'' I thought I was the boss here," said 
Tristram, with an acted air of authority. 

'^ You 're the boss ; yes, old man, you 're 
the boss." 

'^ Very well, then, I tell you I 'm going 
to sling ink, old John Bull. I 've made 



270 CRUEL LONDON. 

my will, and I 'm just going to write it 
out. It 's not exactly a will ; it 's just to 
show I 'vc no title to the gold nor the 
claim, and that it is all yours, Jack. Pull 
it out, John Bull, and let us have a look 
at it." 

' ' I 'm going to do what you ask me, 
Tristy, just to please you and pass the 
time, that 's all, mind. I 'd rather you 
didn't write anything, and I don't want 
you to look at that dross. It seems to me 
that we ought to be thinking of something 
more serious than money matters. I '11 bet 
a trifle there will be no opening the door 
in the morning." 

^^ Serious! Now there's a crusty old 
cuss. I never was more serious in my 
life. Money ! Don't despise money." 

"If it could buy us a track down to the 
camp, a highway into the valley, and a 
free passage through the snow, I would 
worship it. I have known what it is to 
have money, as much as a man could 




A WORLD OF SNOW AND TWO LOVERS. 271 

want, but not more than a fool can 
spend." 

'' I thought you had. I guessed it long 
ago, but you are as close as a clam ; you 
will never tell a man about it ; you 're all 
alike, you English fellows who come out 
here, you 've all got some secret along, 
and you chew it like a Yank, with an ever- 
lasting quid in your mouth." 

'^ Oh, no, it 's no secret. I had a heap 
of money left me. I was an ignorant, 
conceited chap, and I went to London 
with it, to be a gentleman, and I worked 
at being a gentleman, as hard as you and 
me have worked together getting these 
chests filled." 

'' London ! " mused Tristram. '' I 'H 
never see your London, Jack." 

' ' You needn't want to, though you 'd 
know how to deal with it. I thought I 
did, but London 's like one of the flash 
women at Frisco . ^fine to look at, cruel 
as." 



272 CRUEL LONDON. 

' ' The snow, " said the American. ^ ' D' ye 
hear how it hisses in the fire? And I 
thought I heard the wind ; hope not." 

'' Crueller than the snow, Tristy, because 
you know what the snow means ; it looks 
you hard and cold in the face, and begins 
to wall you in and spin your winding- 
sheet. But London cheats you all the 
time ; it robs you on the score of friend- 
ship ; it will trample on love, and every- 
thing men and women hold dear, for 
money ; and when you 've got no money 
left it jeers at you, and leaves you to 
starve. One day, my boy, I was rich, the 
next day I was poor. I went to the docks 
and bought my passage to New York, 
gave the agent lOOZ., so that I couldn't 
touch it, and then I went to have a 
last look round ; I thought I 'd try what 
London was made of. I went to a swell 
club, which my money got me into, I 
borrowed 101. of a man, just to pay a 
billiard debt, hadn't my cheque-book 



\ 



A WORLD OP SNOW AND TWO LOVERS. 273 

about me, I said. He gave it me at once 
Then I went to a dear friend, to whom I 
had rendered many services, told him I 
was mined utterly beyond hope, and 
begged him to lend me lOOl. He asked 
me if I thought he was a fool, and 
turned away. Presently the man who 
had lent me the lOZ. came, and hemmed, 
and hah'd, and said, on second thoughts, 
he wanted that ten-pound note himself; 
the other friend had split on me. I took 
the trouble to listen to the conversa- 
tioif of three or four men in the smoke- 
room. I stood in the shade behind the 
screen. They said I 'd come to grief at 
last, and served me right. My affected 
generosity was damned ostentation. I 
was a pretentious agricultural booby. I 
hadn't the courage to come out and 
acknowledge their compliments ; I sneaked 
away through the busy streets, with the 
lights flashing, went to the docks, and got 
into my berth. The next day we dropped 

VOL. II. T 



274 CRUEL LONDON. 

down the Thames, and I was happy. I 'd 
done my best to make others happy, and 
I seemed as if I 'd just earned my 
liberty." 

^'I like to hear you talk," said the 
American; ^'let me get into my bimk, 
Jack, and then talk me to sleep; I feel 
like that ; but tell me about that old house 
where you were reared, with the fire on 
the hearth, and the dog and that girl, and 
the old woman." 

The American turned into his berth. 
Kerman trimmed the oil lamp, put another 
log on the fire, brewed more punch, re- 
lighted his pipe, and talked all the time 
to his friend, who lay dozing and listen 
ing like a child soothed by an old wife's 
story. 

''It's all so different in England, old 
man, everything 's finished . ^the land is 
under regular cultivation ; as for that old 
kitchen at the Manor Farm, there 's 
nothing like it on this side. At Christmas 



A WORLD OP SNOW AND TWO LOVERS. 275 

we used to bring in a great log and pack 
it on a red coal fire. You could sit in the 
ingle nook, and there was a great kettle 
singing on the hob, and Jane would come 
in and help Kester to make a great spiced 
bowl, hot and steaming, with dried apples 
floating on the top; and the farm men 
would sit round the fire; and then the 
waits would come and sing about the 
Babe of Bethlehem, and . " 

Here Kerman paused. The American 
was sleeping calm and still. Kerman went 
to the door. The entrance to the cabin 
was half blocked up with snow. A bank 
of it three or four feet high fell in upon 
him. He covered Decker up to protect 
him from the wind, and then attacked the 
snow with a shovel. He now wished that 
they had engaged men to help them in 
the Gulch, or given some of the miners at 
Nipper's Creek a share of the claim, so 
that they might have had neighbours to 
help him in this battle with winter. It 



i 



276 CRUEL LONDON. 

was hard work, one spade against a world 
of snow. But the EngUsh miner worked 
with a will, until long after midnight ; and 
daylight brought ample evidence of the 
hard necessity of his labours. 



V 



USELESS TREASURES. 277 



CHAPTER II. 



USELESS TREASURES. 



But the dayKght brought no change in the 
aspect of nature. The snow continued to 
fall, and Kerman renewed his attack upon 
it, keeping a clear space in front of the 
hut. Hope is courage, and Kerman put 
the strength of both into his shovel. 

''It can't go on snowing for ever," he 
said; ''and we have plenty to eat and 
drink." 

" But if the wind gets up the snow will 
drift, and, all of a sudden, we may have a 
mountain upon us," said Tristram. 

The two men were having breakfast, 
and it was Christmas Day. 



A 



278 CRUEL LONDON. 

*' Well, we can only die once, Tristy," 

said Kerman. 

^' We don't want to die* yet," said the 

invalid. 

'^Why, last night you were going to 

square up with Crossbones almost at once." 
'^ Yes; it was one of my bad days, but 
I was quite right about the will, and while 
you Ve been shovelling at the snow, like 
your friend, Mrs. Partington, with the 
mop at the sea, I 've just written it down." 
He took from a pocket-book a sheet of 
note paper, and read to Kerman his last 
will and testament, which gave to Kerman 
the entire claim of Decker's Gulch, making 
him the vendor to the San Francisco Com- 
pany, and stating that all the gold in the 
chest at their hut belonged to the same 
man, who had got most of it with his own 
hands. There was only one condition, 
Kerman was to go to England, find out 
old Secesh Denton, and convey to him, in 
some way that would not wound his pride. 



USELESS TREASURES. 279 

the value of at least one-third of the 
property. 

' ' I '11 tell you how you '11 do that, Jack, 
You '11 go to New York, and get hold of a 
clever lawyer, a judge. His name is 
Clinch ; you '11 easily find him. He is a 
square, downright fellow. He knows Den- 
ton. You '11 tell Clinch that he 's got to 
make the fiery old reb. believe that the 
Government has restored to him in money 
a part of what they stole from him. That 
will satisfy his pride. You '11 go to one of 
those jewellery stores, and buy something 
ior her, with my name engraved on it, and 
if she 's married, see her husband, and ask 
him to let her wear it. And, if the old 
man is dead, . I 've thought it all out, you 
see, like a lawyer, . ^why, the money is hers. 
You '11 manage that ; and if anybody has 
behaved cruelly to her, or deceived her, or 
done her a wrong, you '11 avenge her for 
me." 

'' How do you mean, Tristram ? " 



> 



280 CRUEL LONDON. 

" One day in the summer . ^the very day 
you struck that lode which has made you 
so rich, I was sitting out by the comer, 
wondering why the Almighty should have 
given all the beauty of the earth to the 
Indian, and, having done so, why he 
should let us come and tear it up for gold, 
when I saw a face look out at me from 
the ^ brush' that covers that side of the 
mountain. It was her face, and it looked 
so sad and mournful that the tears came 
into my eyes as I gazed upon it. The 
reahty of it was so intense, that I did not 
doubt but Caroline was there before me 
I went towards her. It was only a face, 
and it faded away as I approached it. 
That was an appeal for help. It was not 
death. She would not come then, because 
she would know there would be two deaths 
if she did. It was poverty. It meant 
that we were to work at the vein we had 
discovered. It meant that the old man's 
money had run out, and that I should be 




USELESS TREASURES. 281 

quick and get rich and go to his aid. 
That is how I read it. And it meant 
more ; it signified that she was true to me, 
that I might still hope; and so, Jack, 
while you were thinking me a money- 
grubber, a keen, selfish Yank after gold, 
I was working for her." 

"And killing yourself, as I have told 
you often enough." 

"No, no, the seeds of my disease were 
laid in long ago, and I wasn't going to let 
you do all the work. I was too selfish not 
to want to feel that I, having won some 
of the money, had the right to give it 
away." 

"Why, isn't the claim yours? Was it 
not yours from the first ? And am I any- 
thing else but an interloper ? " 

'' Bear with me. Jack. I want to tell 
you everything, so that you will be well 
posted if we should be separated. Do 
you know why I say 4f,' this morn- 
ing?" 



282 CRUEL LONDON. 

"To make up for being so contrary 
about it last night." 

"No! I dreamt this morning . and I 
beKeve in morning dreams . ^that I was 
getting well, and that the doctor, up from 
the Indian bar, came and said I was wanted 
in London, and that he laughed at me 
when I said I couldn't travel so far, and I 
woke with his last words in my ear . 
' You '11 go to that there London ! ' he said, . 
you know his rough, uneducated style, . 
^ you '11 go to that infernal Babylon, and 
have a rare old time.' " 

"Good for old Bolus," said Kerman; 
" and I believe him." 

" Then we understand each other ? " 

" Hope so." 

" But you think I am strange, and your 
practical mind don't sympathize with 
visions and dreams." 

"I don't know; I never had much 
experience of them, but a year or two 
among these mountains would make me a 




USELESS TREASURES. 283 

believer in spirits and the rest, there is 
something so solemn in the look of the 
world about here." 

''Hush, a moment." 

Decker went to a small cupboard in a 
comer of the room. Three drinking glasses 
placed in an inverted position upon one 
of the shelves were carefully examined. 
They emitted sounds. He closed the cup- 
board. 

'' I knew it," he said. 

''Your weather-glasses are at work, 
eh ? " said Kerman, with a smile. 

" It 's an old test. Inverted glasses on 
a shelf placed like that foretell storms of 
wind. They sound an alarm. On the 
coast where I was brought up it was 
infallible. We are going to have a storm 
of wind." 

Kerman went to the door. The snow 
had ceased to fall. The sun was getting 
up behind them. A grey mist brooded 
over the vast expanse of hill and dale. 



i 



284 CRUEL LONDON. 

The sun seemed to dwell upon it. A fog- 
bow appeared in the sky ; and beneath it 
the form of a cross. 

" Come . here, Decker, quick ! " cried 
Kerman. 

Decker hurried to the door. 

^^ What's that?" 

" A phenomenon peculiar to mountainous 
countries. It is common in the Arctic 
regions and in the Alps. In the Hartz 
they see spectres. But I Ve never seen 
the figure of a cross before." 

As he spoke, the phenomenon disap- 
peared. Kerman looked anxiously at 
Decker. 

" What 's the meaning of it ? " 

^^It 's an omen." 

^^Of what?" 

'^That God will not desert us. It is 
Christmas Day. He sends us the great 
sign-manual of His goodness, the Cross of 
Christ." 

The face of the American lighted up as 




USELESS TREASURES. 285 

he spoke with a sublime expression of 
tenderness and hope. 

Kerman bent his head reverently. 

" Let us go in, Jack, and pray. Don't 
let us be ashamed of our feelings ; don't 
let us be afraid to speak to God in each 
other's hearing. We shall want His aid 
before long. Your shovel will be no good 
against a tempest of wind." 

They re-entered the hut. 

" You 've upset me, Decker. I feel as 
if some calamity was about to fall upon 
us." 

"Why, you look frightened. Jack." 

" I am frightened." 

"It is strangely quiet, is it not? . ^no 

sounds of life, not even an echo from the 

Indian bar, not a sound from Nipper's 

Creek. It may be that we are the only 

living people this side the Grulch. Did 

you notice that part of the mountain, where 
I saw her face in the siunmer, had sUpped 

away ? " 



286 CRUEL LONDON. 

'^ No ; how do you mean sKpped ? " 

'^ Jerked right away into the valley; 
Nipper's Creek is below there. Boss Maggs 
and his crew are down on the river, I 
shouldn't wonder, under ten thousand tons 
of rock and snow. 

'' And this is Christmas Day," said Ker- 
man. 

'' Shut your eyes, Jack, if you 're 
ashamed to be a man, and confess your- 
self less than Him who sent the bow and 
the Cross, and say your prayers to your- 
self." 

Decker knelt by a chair. Kerman went 
out into the open air, and looked in the 
direction of the mountain of which Decker 
had spoken. The whole side of the ridge 
appeared as if it had given way. It had 
left a dark patch behind, and in the valley 
below there was no longer any trace of 
Nipper's Creek. 

'' Good Lord, have mercy upon them ! " 
exclaimed Kerman. 



USELESS TREASURES. 287 

That was all the prayer he said. 

"Maggs and his lot are done for," he 
said, as he went back into the hut. 

Decker had dragged out before the fire 
the chest of gold. 

'^ I thought you were going to pray to 
God, and I find you 're worshipping the 
devil," said Kerman. 

'' This is not the devil." 

" Put it away, Tristy. I hate it." 

^^Why?" 

'^ Those fellows would have been alive 
now, but for this infernal thirst of gold." 

'^No; they might have been killed 
trying to rescue drowning men at sea. 
No, Jack, gold is Grod, if you use it well." 

'' Don't be profane. Just now I felt a 
certain amount of security because you 
could pray, and I was awkward at it, and 
now you are insulting Grod, for didn't the 
heathens set up a golden calf instead of 
Him?" 

'^Nonsense, Jack. He planted gold for 



288 CRUEL LONDON. 

US to find, and He gives it to some men 

without taxing head or heart to show His 

contempt for it. When rightly used, He 

blesses it ; when wrongfully dealt with, it 

carries a curse." 

Decker paused as he spoke, and, taking 
up a piece of gold larger than the others, 

he said, . 

''Why, Jack, there's blood upon this; 

and on this ! " 



FIGHTING THE TEMPEST. 289 



CHAPTER III. 

FIGHTING THE TEMPEST. 

Kerman took the ore from Decker's hands, 
^^ It is not blood," he said. He wiped it 
upon his coat-sleeve. ^^ It is the redness 
of the earth where we got it." 

'' Yes, I see," said Decker, taking it 
from his companion, and dropping it 
among the rest in the locker. 

" Your manner is very strange to-day, 
Decker; put the stuff away." 

'^ I have been thinking of our riches 
ever since daylight." 

'' Our poverty, you mean," said Ker- 
man, as he commenced to clear away the 
remains of their breakfast. 

VOL. JI. u 



290 CRUEL LONDON. 

'' Poverty," said Decker, smiling; '' do 
you know how rich we are ? " 

''I know how poor we are," said Ker- 
man. 

'' I tell you, man, we are wealthy be- 
yond description; rich enough to buy 
Monte Cristo's cavern of gems, if there 
ever was such a place." 

'^ I never heard of it," said Kerman, 
putting away the last article of crockery- 
ware which formed their breakfast- 
service. 

'' Did you ever read about it ? " 

" Never." 

'' Ah, Jack, you have many pleasures to 
come." 

'^ I hope so." 

'' Do you know that our shares in the 
gold of Decker's Gulch, and the veins 
which belong to it for two miles round, 
may yield us fifty thousand dollars a 
week? We are the possessors of an El 
Dorado. Do you know that we have 




FIGHTING THE TEMPEST. 291 

found the Philosopher's Stone? I don't 
think you realize it, old man." 

Kerman pulled out his pipe, filled it, 
lighted it, and commenced to smoke. 

'^ If I die, Kerman, you will be one of 
the richest men in the world. Think of 
it, man ! You will be a Midas . a Croesus ; 
you will possess the purse of Fortu- 
natus." 

" Boss Maggs had a pretty good pile of 
gold in his bunk yesterday," said Ker- 
man. 

'^ Boss Maggs ! " exclaimed Decker, im- 
patiently. " Why you don't think this 
chest of gold bears any comparison to 
what we 've got ? You 've told me of 
your English farmers showing samples of 
their grain in little bags. This trifle of 
ore. Jack, is only a specimen of the bulk. 
You should have seen the face of the San 
Francisco men when I showed them one 
lump of it ! Why in a few months from 
now. Jack, the country for miles round 



292 CRUEL LONDON. 

oxu' property will swarm with prospectors 
and miners seeking for a mere streak of 
the gold we have got in layers." 

'' Yes, I understand that you have made 
yom^ fortune," said Kerman, ^'and that I 
have enough to enable me to begin my 
genteel studies again with a good balance." 

Kerman never could speak of his 
London experiences without a sneer. He 
emphasized the word genteel with a con- 
temptuous wave of his hand. 

'^ You can't be a true gentleman without 
having read ' Monte Cristo,' " said Decker, 
smiling ; ' ' and you certainly will never 
understand the power of money without 
studying it." 

^ ' Is it a work on fashion, etiquette, 
banking, or what ? " 

^^On all three," replied Decker, in a 
patronizing manner, which he sometimes 
assumed towards his companion. 

^^If Maggs had read it, would he have 
been alive to-day ? " 



FIGHTING THE TEMPEST. 293 

'' Not unless he had had as good a part- 
ner as you have, then he might." 

^^ How's that?" 

" Maggs didn't understand the first 
principle of mining, where to fix your 
quarters. Now we are perched in the 
safest nook of the whole region." 

'^Yes, we are perched," said Kerman. 
^^ That's just it." 

^'Well?" 

^^Why, anything like that landslip 
which has settled Maggs's lot would wipe 
us out; we shouldn't have time to say 
good-bye." 

' ' Bah ! the fog-bow has unnerved you, 
Jack." 

^' It has," said Kerman; '^and I'll tell 
you what it is, dear boy : I can't sit here 
any longer and see you finger that infernal 
dross ; put it away." 

He put down liis pipe, and laid his hand 
upon the lid of the chest, saying, " Don't 
you know this is Christmas Day? You 



294 CRUEL LONDON. 

seem to have forgotten it all in a few 
minutes. Just now you were praying, 
and now you are selling your soul to the 
dev>l.',' 

Decker rose to his feet, and allowed 
Kerman to close the lid and drag the 
locker into its accustomed place. 

'' There, now sit down, and let us talk." 

^'All right, old man. You are right; 
when I begin fingering the gold it changes 
me . ^it seems to fire my blood. Jack, she 
shall walk on it; she shall have golden 
staircases; her house shall be a house of 
jewels. She shall have silks from India, 
furs from Russia, diamonds that have 
been cut for the queens of Europe, gems 
from the temples of Eastern gods." 

Kerman had twice seen Decker under 
the morbid influence of this mad passion 
of gold and love.;^Once before the young 
man had worked himself up into a wild 
paroxysm, in which he had alternately 
prayed and cursed. The unexcitable Eng- 



FIGHTING THE TEMPEST. 295 

Kshman thought it best to resist this craze 
by prosaic remarks, or a phlegmatic dis- 
regard of Decker's ravings. 

'' Supposing she 's married, like my 
Jane ? " he said. 

" I '11 buy him," replied Decker, 
quickly. 

' ' Buy liim ? " observed Kerman. ' ' That 's 
a queer idea." 

^^ Yes," said Decker, seating himself 
cross-legged upon a rude wooden chair, 
having his arms on the back, resting his 
chin upon his arms, and looking straight 
at Kerman, '^ I '11 buy her, if necessary. 
If I live, nothing shall separate us.'' 

'^ You can't buy people. Decker.'^ 

'' Money can buy everything and every- 
body." 

'' Not an honest woman's love." 

'' Something so much like it that you 
can't tell the difference." 

'' But supposing she is married, and 
loves her husband ? " 



296 CRUEL LONDON. 

'' She couldn't love him." 

^' But if he refused to give her 
up?" 

Decker stood up to emphasize what he 
was going to say. ''Vd kill him!" he 
exclaimed ; '' I 'd shoot him." 

' ' What, for loving a woman whom you 
couldn't resist yourself ? " 

'' Kerman, I would shoot him/' said 
Decker, his eyes flashing, his frame trem- 
bling. 

'' And then I should lose my friend and 
partner," said Kerman, smiling, and pre- 
tending to treat the whole matter lightly, 
and as if Decker was joking. 

'' How, Jack, how ? " 

'' They 'd hang you." 

^^ Who would?" 

'^ A judge and jury." 

' ' What ! hang a man with his hands 
full of gold ? Put away one of the richest 
men in the world ? '. 

Decker laughed derisively at the bare 



FIGHTING THE TEMPEST. 297 

suggestion of such a disregard of the in- 
fluence of money. 

^^By the Lord, Decker, they'd hang 
you in England if you owned all the gold- 
mines in the earth! Damme, I think 
they'd hang you all the more on that 
account'." 

^^ Would they? Then I don't think 
much of your civilization." 

'' You 're not in earnest, Decker ? " 

" I am." 

'' Wliat ! do you call it a jDroper use of 
money to bribe Justice ? " 

'' Why, certainly, if Justice stands be- 
tween you and the woman of your choice. 
To have gold. Jack, is to have the master- 
key. Listen, old friend, I never was more 
serious in my life. I 'm going to do what- 
ever I please, if I live. If I die, the talis- 
man is yom-s and hers. I would coin my 
heart for that woman, pawn my hopes of 
heaven, and when I say that, you can 
understand what it means, for you have 



298 CRUEL LONDON. 

seen me pray. Do you know why my 
soul is in such a whirl to-day ? " 

^'No." 

''Shall I tell you?" 

'' Yes." 

'' I am better. That is one reason. My 
cough has not troubled me for four-and- 
twenty hours. I beUeve I am going to 
recover. And I am suffering from re- 
morse." He paused, and sighed. 

" Well ? " said Kerman. 

' ' I ought never to have left her. I 
ought to have followed in her footsteps, 
and watched and waited. By this time 
she might have been mine." 

" She may be yet." 

'' Another obstacle is growing up be- 
tween us now that I am getting better." 

''What obstacle?" 

" Do you hear the wind ? " 

A low moan sounded far away in the 
distance. Again the snow hissed on the 
burning logs. 



FIGHTING THE TEMPEST. 299 

''That," said Decker, pointing to tlie 
fire, and alluding to the snow, '' and that," 
nodding his head towards the door, ''the 
wind more particularly." 

" I thought you didn't care for one or 
the other." 

" I blame myself for letting her go," he 
replied, as if speaking to himself. " I 
wasn't selfish enough. Love is selfish . 
real, true, absorbing love. Its yearnings 
are selfish as the grave. Mine was not 
love. I should have taken her from her 
father. I could have done so. If she had 
been mine, only for a week, and we had 
then died, that would have been life. 
Yesterday, I had given her up. To-day, 
I am strong. God has given me new 
life, and with it gold that opens all doors, 
clears all paths, commands everything 
except the tempest. And it seems as if 
He was about to snatch away the cup 
just as 'I am thinking of being able to 
raise it to my lips. There! That's 



300 CRUEL LONDON. 

what I mean, Jack. I 'm not so mad as 
you think me." 

He took a cigar from his jacket pocket, 
sat down, and commenced to smoke. 

^^Yes, that wind isn't a comfortable 
visitor," remarked Kerman, reflectively; 
^' and the snow 's come on again. I must 
tackle it just now. What bothers me most, 
Tristy, is the weight of it that 's accumu- 
lating on the top of the hut." 

' ' Oh, that '11 slip away ; don't bother 
about that. What we 've got to fear is 
the wind driving a drift upon us. You 
can get at the wood-stack still for the 
fire ? " 

" Yes ; I 've kept that clear so far." 

" Things might have been worse. We 
don't suffer much from the cold, and 
we 've plenty of provisions. In the Arctic 
regions you have to chop your liquor with 
a hatchet, and boil it before you drink it ; 
your beard freezes, and is hung with 
icicles; and if you take up your gun 



FIGHTING THE TEMPEST. 301 

thoughtlessly without several gloves on 
your hands, the skin peels off upon the 
weapon. We are saved all that." 

'' Yes," said Kernian, '' there 's always a 
deeper hole than the one you 're in." 

He went to the door as if to answer 
the knock of a visitor. It was the wind 
that shook it. He opened it. A cloud of 
snow entered, driven by a gust of 
wind. 

Darkness fell upon the hut. 

''And it is only twelve o'clock," said 
Decker. 

' ' We shan't forget this Christmas Day 
in a hurry, Tristy," said Kerman, sorrow- 
fuUy. 

''I think we shall. Jack, old man,'^ 
replied Decker, now as much depressed as 
he had previously been excited. 

''There's nothing to be done?" said 
Kerman, in a tone of inquiry. 

' ' It might be as well to board up the 
window," said Decker. " That was nothing 



302 CRUEL LONDON. 

you heard just now, only the wind shovel- 
ling the snow off the roof ; our fire has 
warmed the caves. We 've plenty of 
candles, that 's a comfort." 

Kerman lighted two as he spoke. 
''I'm going to open the door again," 
said Kerman. ''I fancy that was only a 
strong gust of wind, and we must have 
some wood in." 

He opened the door. The snow came 
in again, but with much less force. Kerman 
went out. Half blinded he crawled to 
the wood-stack, which he had hitherto 
kept tolerably free from the snow. He 
dragged a few logs out and reappeared, 
wliite and shivering. His return changed 
the atmosphere of the hut. His breath 
was like smoke. He had not properly 
refastened the door. The wind banged it 
open, and a white column came whirling 
in. There was a snow storm on the very 
hearth. Decker dashed at the door and 
shut it. Neither of the men spoke for 



FIGHTING THE TEMPEST. 303 

some time. The wind liowled. Kerman 
heaped the logs upon the fire. 

''Let's drink old Father Christmas's 
health, Decker," said Kerman, presently, 
producing a bottle of brandy; ''perhaps 
he '11 like it, and not be so rough on 
us." 

" All right. Jack." 

" They 'd call this seasonable weather in 
England." 

" I wish it was next week. Jack." 

"Why?" 

' ' We shall be either dead or doing well 
next week." 

" Here 's to you. Father Christmas ! " . 
said Kerman; "and I hope you won't 
smother us with your seasonable attentions, 
most worthy monarch ! " 

" Good," said Decker, raising his glass. 
"Don't forget us, old Santa Claus. It 
doesn't look as if there were any inhabitants 
hereabouts; but there are, dear old boss, 
and if we get out of this, there will be no 



304 CRUEL LONDON. 

end to the presents we '11 make in your 
honour ! " 

Decker tossed off the contents of liis 
glass. The wind came down the chimney 
and drove the smoke all over the place. 

'' Neither your Father Cluistmas nor my 
Santa Glaus appears to care much about 
us, Jack," said Decker, ''and it doesn't 
seem much good praying just at present. 
Nature 's a curious institution, Kerman. It 
came into my mind this minute, the story 
of the parson, who, in a storm at sea, was 
told by the captain all had been done that 
was possible, and they must now trust in 
Providence. ' Mercy on us,' exclaimed the 
minister, ' and are we reduced to that ? '" 

'' I don't think it 's just the time, Tristy, 
to be humorous," said Kerman, as he com- 
menced to nail a board over the window, 
which had long since ceased to exhibit any 
view to the eye except a blockade, of 
snow. 

''No, it isn't, but human nature is a 



FIGHTING THE TE^VIPEST. 305 

sassy critter, as my old colonel used to 
say. I remember falling into a rebel 
ambuscade in Vii^ginia, and felt for certain 
my time was come, and the only thought 
that crossed my mind was a sense of 
satisfaction that I had at least lived long 
enough to thrash a bummer who used to 
worry me around when we were school- 
fellows. I have been pretty near the end 
of the street more than once or twice, 
Kerman; but I was never scared before 
now. If this weather keeps on for four- 
and-twenty hours we are gone coons ! " 

They sat and talked until dinner-time, 
They ate heartily, and drank hot grog. 
They talked of their lives . they talked of 
death. Kerman was foiled in his second 
attempt to bring in wood. A bank of 
snow seemed to fall upon him. The wind 
brought the snow in its arms, and flung it 
into tlie comer where the cabin was 
^^ perched." When the door was at last 
shut again, the snow drove in through the 

VOL. II. X 



306 CRUEL LONDON. 

crevice at the bottom. Kerman packed 
the crevice with a rug. 

Night brought the two men face to face 
with death. 

Kerman discovered that the roof nearest 
the mountain, which hitherto had seemed 
to protect them, was bulging and giving 
way. He made an effort to prop it. The 
wind had lifted a bank of snow from an 
adjacent ledge, and dropped it upon the 
hut. At midnight, in spite of every effort 
to prop it, two of the timbers fell in with 
a crash, burying the store-cupboard with 
snow, and extinguishing the lights. The 
snow seemed to come in with a thud, as if 
a dead body had been thrown in upon 
them. The fire leaped up as the candles 
were extinguished, showing the ^\T:'eck in 
all its cold horror. The wind came in 
fierce and shrill through the roof with 
fresh accumulations of snow. 

^' If we stay here, Jack, we shall be 
buried alive," said Decker. 



FIGHTING THE TEMPEST. 307 

^^We can't get out," Kerman replied, 
calmly ; '' the joists and jambs have settled 
down upon the door. A giant couldn't 
open it." 

'' There 's the window," said Decker, in 
a hoarse whisper." 

'' And the snow grave beneath it," Ker- 
man replied. 

The Lincolnshire squire filled his pipe 
and sat down by the fire, which cast warm 
gleams upon the increasing bank of snow 
that was filling up one side of the hut. 

'' Can you smoke at such a time as 
this ? " asked Decker, reprovingly. 

'' Yes ; but it 's all I can do." 

'^ If the other part of the roof goes, it 's 
all over with us." 

'' Yes, that would put my pipe out ; but 
I don't think it will go. The fall at the 
back has relieved the top 'of half the weight 
of snow that rested on it. 

As he spoke, a sudden moan was heard 
high up in the hills, and with it came a 



308 CRUEL LONDON. 

crashing blow upon tlie cabin. It trem- 
bled and all in a moment there was 
no longer any fire, and Kerman found 
himself struggling beneath falling timbers 
and suffocating snow. With a tremendous 
effort he cleared his head of the weight 
that had borne him down. He could not 
see, but he could breathe. There was a 
voice as of thmider in his ears. He 
thought he heard the wreck of the cabin 
hmrled down into the valley, and he w^on- 
dered that he remained stationary. The 
snow fell upon his face. He was afraid to 
speak. The wind moaned. It seemed to 
pelt him with snow. He tried to move his 
arms . one of them was free. He rested 
it on the snow as a lever for his body. 
Fearful to move, he was nevertheless 
anxious to know if he could. He could 
not. When he tried to speak, his tongue 
clove to the roof of his mouth. He 
moistened his lips with snow. Presently 
lie called out, '' Decker ! Decker ! " 



FIGHTING THE TEMPEST. 309 

It was like spealdng in a vault. The 
sound of liis voice seemed to come back* 
upon him. 

^^ Decker! Tristram Decker!" he cried. 

The only answer was a dead, solemn, 
cliilling, silence. Even the mockery of an 
echo was denied to the man. And the 
snow kept falling as if bent on burying 
him alive secretly. Some such thought 
occurred to the despairing victim of the 
storm. 

^'Decker!" he shouted, and with a 
desperate effort he freed both arms and 
flung them wildy upwards, as a drowning 
man in the sea. 

Then the foundations of the earth 
seemed to give way, and he was carried 
down, down, into the lower darkness of 
the night, as if the wind had taken liini 
into its arms to dash him headlong into 
eternity. 

A sudden obstruction impeded their 
flight. All was still again, except the dull 



310 CRUEL LONDON. 

moaning of the stomi as it swept down 
the valley in a chill whirl of death, the 
snow following silently in its wake, to 
cover up and hide the horrors of Nature's 
grim and ruthless invasion. 



'^ FACES IX THE FIRE." 311 



CHAPTER IV. 

^^ FACES IN THE FIRE." 

The snow fell steadily upon Maiylebone, 
upon Miss Weaver's Retreat in the great 
thoroughfare of the borough, and upon 
the business premises of Brayford & Co., 
Circularizers and Advertising Agents, in 
the once famous High Street of this 
division of the great city. But it melted 
nearly as quickly as it fell, converting the 
roads into soft, black mud, and making 
the pavements wet and greasy, as if the 
snow had been soot instead of white rain. 
It was Cln'istmas Day. The shops were 
closed, with the exception of the fruiterers 
and the confectioners, which were patron- 



312 CRUEL LONDON. 

ized chiefly by shivering children, who 
ran to and fro with oranges and nuts, to 
the envy of other little ones, who, tucking 
their red arms underneath their grey pina- 
fores, planted themselves in front of the 
tempting .stores, and reckoned up what 
they hoped to buy on Boxing Day. Beneath 
the several archways of the locality a 
few men, some of them in their Sunday 
clothes, stood smoking in groups, now and 
then stamping their feet for warmth. The 
two or three bells in the adjacent church 
played a dirge-like invitation to prayer. 
In the stables of a local inn, an eccentric 
chanticleer persisted in continuing his 
somewhat tardy proclamations of the 
morn, as if he were anxious to make up 
for the lateness of his announcement bv 
the vigour of his salutations. If you had 
listened to him, you would have been able 
to picture him in your mind, strutting back 
into his stable every now and then to 
shake his feathers free from the clammy 



^' FACES IN THE FIRE." 313 

snow, and returning to liis duty witli 
renewed deteiinination. A dirty mist 
settled down upon each end of the street, 
and tln-ough it, in a hoarse kind of tintin- 
abulary whisper, came the sound of distant 
bells cliiming and ringing, but the local 
^ ^ Bang-bang-bang " of the Marylebone 
bells sat heavily upon all comj^etitors 
excej^t Clianticleer, who deliberately waited 
to get in his cry between the pauses of 
the dull but emphatic call to prayers. The 
air was raw and dirty, for the smoke of 
the locality was more or less mixed up in 
the sluggish current of it that oscillated 
between the banks of mist that shut in the 
street, which was once the j^rincipal part 
of the village of Marylebone, with its 
Royal Palace, where Cliristmas had been 
wont to come hale and hearty w^ith merry- 
making and wassail. 

Almost in the centre of the street, over 
the back j^remises of Moses Aaron's Em- 
j^orium of Antiquities and Cliina, Mr. 



314 CRUEL LONDON. 

Harry Brayford had established himself in 
his new and somewhat mysterious line of 
business. To Mr. Aaron's emporium there 
were two entrances, one in front, another 
at the side, which a neighbouring furni- 
ture-broker had squeezed into the smallest 
possible dimensions. Moses Aaron, through 
the interj^osition of his mfe, had consented 
to the side entrance being partially given 
up to Mr. Brayford, who was described 
upon the door in white letters as ' ' Bray- 
ford & Co., Circularizers and Advertising 
Agents . Ring the bell on the right." If 
you had rung that particular bell, and 
been admitted into the narrow passage on 
this Christmas Day of our liistory, you 
might have been a si)ectator of an interest- 
ing scene. You would have been received 
by a tidy little Jewish girl, wlio wcmld luive 
shown you a set of white teeth, and said, 
^^ Yes, sir, Mr. Brayford is in, but lie's 
just going to have his diinier. Second 
floor, first turn on the right." You would 



"faces in the fire." 315 

have tlireaded your way tlirougli passages 
of antiquities and cliina, and past rooms 
choked with furniture, suits of armour, 
stuffed birds, old oak chests, oil paintings 
hung awry, and ancient swords leaning for 
support against matchlocks from the battle 
of Worcester, and battle-axes which had 
been wielded bv Norman kni^i^lits. Tlien 
you would have come to a blank space on the 
wall, with the direction, " Brayford & Co. 
. First door on the left." Here you would 
have wiped your boots on a cocoa nut mat, 
and knocked at a knocker with a demon's 
head in bronze and wings of flaming brass, 
which bore e^4dence of daily polishing. 
Mr. Brayford was never tired of telling a 
certain infant, that would coo and laugh at 
him without understanding a word he said, 
all about this knocker. It had been on 
the chapter-house door of a famous cathe- 
dral, and every time it heard the clock 
strike twelve it had flapped its wings and 
raised the knocker itself. On this occa- 



316 CRUEL LONDON. 

sion you would have lifted the brazen 
knocker yourself, and, in response to your 
summons, a cheery voice would have said, 
^^Come in, if you're fat; if you're lean 
you '11 do for the cat." Mr. Brayford was 
always ransacking his memory for some 
childisli saying of his old days to please 
one or the other of his two children, as he 
called little Willie and the Wonner. 

If you had elected to accept Mr. Bray- 
ford's nursery challenge on this Cliristmas 
Day, trusting to the plumpness of your 
anatomy, you would have seen a curious 
picture of London life. Mr. H. Brayford, 
in a faded velvet coat and pink slij)pcrs, 
was sitting at the head of a square table, 
pla}^ing tlie host to three other persons. 
(Opposite to him, and with her back to a 
red glowing fire, was Mrs. Gardner, in a 
dark merino dress, with a white collar 
round her throat, her hair gatliered up 
into a massive plait behind. Occupjdng 
another side of the table was little Willie, 



^^ FACES IN THE FIRE." 317 

propped up in a high child' s-chair, and 
facing the Wonner, whose vacant eyes 
were fixed upon the Christmas pudding 
wliich his honoured though eccentric cliief 
was about to carve. 

'' Second act, Mrs. Gardner," said Bray- 
ford; ^'tliat's what I call it, and a good 
act too ; act three will be dessert and sna})- 
dragon. Do you have snaj)-dragon in 
America ? " 

The host did not wait for an answer, 
but he handed a slice of jKidding to the 
Wonner. 

" For the lady, sir, for the lady," said 
tlie host, whereupon the Wonner blinked 
and smiled, and shuffled the i:)latc in front 
of Mrs. Gardner. 

^'That's it," said Brayford; ^'ladies 
first, always, Mr. W., then the infants." 

lie cut up a sKce into several pieces, 
and handed it to little Willie, who attacked 
it at once with a real silver spoon, lent for 
the purpose by Mrs. Aaron. 



318 CRUEL LONDON. 

^' Christmas comes but once a year,'^ 
said Brayford, cutting another slice of 
pudding for the Wonner , ' ^ and when it 
comes it brings good cheer, roast beef and 
niince-picj which nobody likes so well as 
I. There, Mr. W., bend your great mind 
upon that." 

The Wonner looked at Mrs. Gardner, 
as much as to say, '' Ain't he a humourist?" 
And then, nodding in a friendly way to 
little Willie, he commenced to pay atten- 
tion to the pudding. 

^'If the sauce is not strong enough, 
have a little brandy to it . neat . Mrs. 
Gardner. Do, now ; let me assist you." 

' ' No, thank you ; it is very good 
indeed," replied Mrs. Gardner. 

'^Extraordinary world this, madame," 
said Mr. Brayford, ''is it not? Here is 
Mrs. Moses Aaron, who is a Jewess . Sarah 
Aaron is her name, Jerusalem is her nation, 
London is her dwelling-place, antiquities 
her vocation ; and yet here she makes us a 



^ ^^ FACES IN THE FIRE." 319 

/ 

Cliristian plum-pudding on the day that 
we malign her race, and she j)uts in the 
raisins and the lemon-peel as religiously as 
if she'd been brought up with a silver 
cross in her mouth, and had never heard 
of Judas Iscariot or Pontius his Pilate. 
Ahj Mrs. Gardner, we never know what 
the heart is by the religion it professes ! I 
declare if I had a proper nose for the part 
1 'd leave the Chiu^ch and become a 
Jew. I 'm in love with the whole fra- 
ternity." 

Mrs. Gardner smiled, and by a look 
directed Mr. Brayford's attention to little 
Willie, who, as was his wont towards the 
conclusion of dinner, had leaned back in 
his chair and fallen asleep. 

'' Tired natm^e's sweet restorer," said 
Brayford, deprecating with his raised 
finger any other interference with the 
child but his own. ''He, like the world, 
his ready ^dsit pays where pudding paves 
the way." 



320 CRUEL LONDON. 

Then lie lifted little WilKe carefully out 
of his chair, and handed him over to Mrs. 
Gardner, who carried the child into an 
adjacent room, and i)resently returned; 
wliile Mrs. Aaron herself came in, removed 
the pudding, and placed upon the table a 
decanter of port wine, a flask of brandy, 
a dish of almonds and raisins, and a plate 
of sliced oranges. 

^^ Thank you, Mrs. Aaron; you are the 
kindest woman in the world," said Bray- 
ford. 

^^Not a bit of it," said the woman, 
'' there 's many as is kinder." 

'' To think that there should be persons 
calling themselves CluHlstians who look 
do^^^l upon. Jews! Wliy, these Aarons, 
bless you, have plenty of money. Mrs. A. 
has no need to wait on us, but she does it, 
I believe, out of pure kindness," said the 
host, as Mrs. Aaron left the room, which 
she did as humbly as if she lived by letting 
the back premises, for far less than they 



^^ FACES IN THE FIRE." 321 

were worth, to her husband as ware- 
houses. 

'' She is very good," said Mrs. Gardner. 

^^ And all because I was kind, she says, 
to her boy, who is dead ; not that I knew 
him when living, but I built his last resting- 
place, and I sat and comforted the poor 
old lady on the day of the funeral, and 
felt sorry to see her grie^dng, and I wrote 
her a neat epitaph on my own principle, 
which I have explained before, only I did 
this in real earnest ; and that 's how 1 came 
to have such comfortable premises for my 
new business, and there is no end to the 
dear soul's gratitude. She has come to 
regard me at last as an old friend of her 
boy though my only acquaintance with 
him was tln^ough his coffin-2:)late and his 
grave-stone." 

The Wonner nodded and laughed. 

^^ That's right, Mr. W., enjoy yourself. 
Capital joke, wasn't it ? " 

Mr. W. leaned back in his chair, with an 

VOL. II. Y 



322 CRUEL I.OXDOX. 

orange in one hand and an almond in the 
other, and chuckled immensely. 

' ' It doesn't matter to have a vacant head 
if yom' heart 's all right . eh, Mr. W. ? " 

^^He is so clever," said Mr. W. to him- 
self, and laying down his almonds and 
orange to rub liis hands. 

'^Now, Mrs. Gardner, one glass of port^ 
madame, and I am going to give you a 
toast ; fill your glass, Mr. W." 

" So very clever," said Mr. W., j^ushing 
his glass towards Mr. Brayford. 

'' A merry Christmas and a Happy New 
Year to loved ones away and those who 
are here," said Brayford; ^'more particu- 
larly referring, Mrs. Gardner, to Mr. John 
Kcrman and to Mr. Tristram Decker, and 
to us four . ^yourself, and little Willie, and 
Brayford & Co." 

Then, as Mr. Brayford raised his glass 
to his lips, Mr. W. drank. 

^^ Fancy the Wonnor for a Comi)any. 
Doesn't it amuse you, madame ? I often 



^^ FACES IN THE FIRE." 323 

laugh at the idea of it when I 'm making 
out a bill . ' To forty thousand at one 
shilling a thousand, two pounds ' ; or, 
replying to an application . ^ Please quote 
price for tliirtecn insertions, enclosed adver- 
tisement, Brayford & Co.' " 

Mr. Brayford prided himself on being 
the inventor of what he called professional 
circularization. When Monolith Cottage 
and its business association came to an end, 
Mr. Bra}Htord's principal trouble was the 
Woiiher, and how that gentle imbecile was 
to live. The old pensioner had been in 
the habit of addressing circulars to the 
families of all the parties mentioned in the 
obituary advertisements of a morning 
paper, and the only estabhshed idea in the 
Wonner's mind was the absolute necessity 
to the world at large that he should 
continue in this occupation. When for a 
few days he was compelled to leave it off, 
he laboured under the belief that Brayford 
was playing some practical joke upon him. ' 



.M 



324 CRUEL LONDON. 

The first day lie pretended to enjoy it, the 
second day he resented it, and the third 
he broke into lamentations. Brayford 
having no use for Mr. W.'s labours in the 
old direction, conceived the idea of 
addressing others people\s circulars, and 
thus sprang up a business which now 
provides many a humble home with food. 
Companies' prospectuses, tradesmen's cir- 
culars, pamphlets, all kinds of announce- 
ments, are folded, addressed, and stamped 
at so much per thousand, and Mr. Bray- 
ford's first ten shillings, after his downfall, 
were earned by himself and his ancient 
clerk from a city printer. Mr. W., how- 
ever, still continued to address fifty 
envelopes per day from the obituary 
advertisements, which, after some trouble, 
Mr. Brayford had induced a once rival 
firm of mural masons to accept at a very 
low, though remunerative figure. It was 
while he was in search of Mr. Fitzherbert 
Robinson, in the hope of obtaining orders 



'^ FACES IN THE FIKE." 325 

to address liis company prospectuses, that 
Mr. Brayford had come to the rescue of 
Mrs. Gardner and her cliildj whom he had 
brought to Mrs. Aaron, not, however, with- 
out some resistance on the j^art of the 
fugitive. When Mrs. Gardner had told 
her story to Mrs. Aaron, that childless old 
lady offered her a room, and mth the 
business instinct of her race had remarked 
^^ there need be no obligation, for if the 
young woman can write a good hand, she 
may earn her living by addressing enve- 
lopes for Mr. Brayford " ; and so it had 
come to pass that Mrs. Gardner and her 
child were inmates of the Emporium, the 
fugitive accepting the position of an 
assistant in the circularization department 
of the firm of Brayford & ,Co., who had 
recently added to their other responsibili- 
ties the business of an advertising agency, 
as notified in a leading journal . '^Bray- 
ford & Co., High Street, Marylebone, 
insert advertisements and enter into con- 



/ 

A 



326 CRUEL LONDON. 

tracts for the same in all English news- 
papers; estimates given." He had 
demonstrated to Mr. Moses Aaron the 
advantages of advertising, by creating a 
run on cheap stuffed birds, through an 
announcement he had drawn up, with a 
poetic quotation in the middle of it and a 
surprising climax at the close, the spirit of 
which he presented ''free, gratis, and for 
nothing " to professional dramatists. One 
of the Footlighters, who had been many 
times indebted to Brayford for a dinner, 
identified the address of Brayford & Co. 
and Moses Aaron, and in a so-called 
satirical journal, which was not entitled 
Black Maily he congratulated Mr. Aaron 
upon the possession of a poet whose 
poverty, he heard, was sufficiently keen to 
qualify him for the di\^ne afflatus said to 
come best to an empty stomach. The men 
who were under obligations to Brayford 
revenged themselves upon him most 
thoroughly ; but as the author of the three- 



^' FACES IN THE FIRE." 327 

act epitaph rarely saw tlienij or the elegant 
and refined journals under whose shadows 
tliey picked something more than holes in 
lionest reputations, they did not much 
distm'b the peace of mind of their former 
patron. Mr. Brajrford was quite happy, 
lie earned just enough to enable him to live, 
and give food and fi^eedom to Mrs. Gardner 
and little Willie. These additional mouths 
to feed had not only brought him increased 
business, but Mrs. Gardner's history was 
to him a source of never-ending romance. 
He had discovered Mrs. Gardner's husband 
or betraver in Tom Sleaford; he had 
shown her the comer house in Fitzroy 
Square; he had shown her Emily Slea- 
ford's villa in St. John's Wood; he had 
shown her the West-End Bank of Deposit 
in Baker Street; he had told her their 
histories; and, on this dnistmas Day, 
while Tristram Decker and John Kerman 
were in peril between the demon Gold and 
the despot Winter, Harry Brayford had 



328 CRUEL LONDON. 

strange news to communicate to Mi's. 
Gardner, of especial interest to one if not 
both of these men whom we have just left 
at the mercy of the storm. 

'' You said you were going to church, 
Mr. W.," remarked Braj'iord, when the 
white-haired clerk had signified that he 
had finished dining; '^no snap-dragon 
until after tea, when little Willie 's 
awake." 

Mr. W. chuckled and rose to his feet. 
'^Yes, yes," he said, nodding, ^^ always 
church at Cliristmas. He is so clever, so 
Ycrv clever." 

" Conic straight back," said Brayford. 

'^Yes, straight as I can; yes, yes," re- 
plied Mr. AV. 

'' Straight as you can ? why, you 'vc not 
had much port, you dear old sinner," said 
Brayford. ^'Straight as you can! I'll 
talk to you! There was an old gent of 
London, he thought his peace it was un- 
done, so he went off to church, left liis 



'^ FACES IN THE FIRE." 329 

friend in the Inrcli, and said that was the 
fashion of London." 

i^Yery good," said Mr. W. ; ^'clever 
and good J and so say all of us. Amen " ; 
mth which remark Mr. W. took a cloak 
and staff from a peg behind the door, and 
trotted out of the room. 

'' Now, Mrs. Gardner, you still promise 
to be guided by me, don't you ? " 

' '. Yes, Mr. Brayf ord ; you are as wise a^ 
you are kind." 

^^No, don't say that; rather that I am 
not quite such a fool as I look ; I won't 
pretend to go beyond that." 

'' I can never thank you enough for all 
you have done for me." 

" Don't thank me ; I don't deserve it ; I 
have done nothing ; but I want to tell you 
that I have come to the conclusion you 
were not married in London. None of the 
registry offices we have found are at all 
like the one you remember, and I have 
got it right fast in my mind that he never 



A 



330 CRUEL LONDON. 

brought you to town. He knew you were 
a stranger, and, either for the purpose of 
duping you, or for what reason it doesn't 
matter now, he has taken you to Bristol, 
Birmingham, Sheffield, Manchester, or 
some large city, and called it London. 
What do you tliink of that idea ? " 

^^In a misty kind of fashion that 
thought has come into my head more than 
once." 

^^We are on the right track then at 
last," said Brayford, quickly. '' The sha- 
dow of that idea falling on your mind is 
enough to convince me. That's settled. 
We will study the map, and visit the 
nearest large city. I don't know how we 
shall do it, but it must be done." 

Brayford stirred the fire, and asked 
Mrs. Gardner to turn her chair round 
upon the hearth. The two then sat before 
the fire, Brayford on his side, Mrs. Gard- 
ner on hers. The so-called '^ gay dog," 
who had written comic songs, and sub- 



^^ FACES IN THE FIRE." 331 

scribed for an entire ballet company to 
have a Christmas dinner several years ago, 
was as respectful to the Southern woman 
as the humble subj ect of a queen might 
have been to his sovereign; and yet his 
homage was devoid of the ostentation of 
humility. Mrs. Gardner found him quite 
companionable. He exaggerated his age 
in order that even the wildest thought of 
suspicion anent the proprieties should 
make her feel uncomfortable. He might 
have spared himself any trouble on that 
account, for his good, true heart shone 
straight through his face, and illuminated 
all his conduct in Mrs. Gardner's eyes. 
She would never go out alone. Mrs. Aaron 
had been her companion here and there, 
in little shopping expeditions, but Mr. 
Brayford had shown her London in its 
splendour and in its rags, in its kindliness 
and its cruelty. They had stood together 
outside theatres on grand nights; they 
had seen Hyde Park in the season ; they 



i 



332 CRUEL LONDON. 

had been all through Maiylebone Work- 
house to look for an old man once in the 
emplojTuent of Brayford, who had pro- 
cui-ed him a situation as sub-porter at a 
cemetery ; they had wandered through St. 
Giles's that they might see people worse 
off than themselves ; they had stood oppo- 
site a large house in Baker Street^ where 
Mrs. Gardner had clung to Bray ford's arm 
in terror when he said, '' That's his father's 
new swindle, the West-End Bank of De- 
posit ; one day they will drag him out of 
that to gaol." She could never be induced 
to go into the Marylebone Eoad if she 
knew it. Her only fear in life was that 
Miss Weaver might have her seized and 
locked up, more especially as the police 
had issued a notice offering a reward for 
her discovery, in order to complete the 
l^rosecution of Irish Moll. Brayford told 
her that this official interest in her would 
soon be at an end, and he illustrated his 
views by stories of murders which had 



^' FACES IN THE FIRE." 333 

excited London for a week or two, to be 
utterly forgotten for some new sensation. 
'^ London doesn't remember any tiling long, 
and it's astonisliing liow few murders 
tliey ever find out," lie said. But Mrs. 
Gardner was firm in her fear of '' The 
Retreat," and in her resolve never to go 
outside High Street alone, or allow little 
Willie to go beyond her immediate sight. 

The winter twilight fell dark and dirty 
upon the back windows of the Emporium 
as Brayford and Mrs. Gardner sat talking 
by the fire. 

^^ I 've heard," said Brayford, '' that Mr. 
Sleaford, alias Gardner, is visiting at 
Manor Farm, in the Marsh, Lincolnshire, 
and that Miss Crosby is at last likely to 
marry him. That makes me think the 
certificate you saw was a forgery." 

^^ Oh, don't say that, for Willie's sake ! " 
exclaimed the woman. '^ No, no, it 's not 
true." 

^^ Perhaps not. Don't let my bungling 



334 CRUEL LONDON. 

fancies upset you, my dear madame. What 
I wanted to say is this : supposing that he 
should be about to marry Miss Crosby, it 
is our place to stop liim. I had no idea 
he was in England, and I expect he has 
only just retm'ned from the Continent, 
though I did tliink I saw him in Baker 
Street last week. I suppose there is no 
city in the world where people can be so 
thoroughly lost as in London, and the 
nearer you are to those who may be look- 
ing for you, the further you are off. Here 
you are under the very nose of Miss 
Weaver, close to Robinson's house, a 
stone's throw from the West-End Bank, 
and you arc practically as far away as 
if you were on the other side of the 
Channel." 

Mrs. Gardner was staring intently into 
the fire. 

''She is in one of her dreaming fits," 
said Bray ford to himself. '' I had better 
go on talking, and not notice it." 



N 



^' FACES IN THE FIRE." 335 

^^ Do you ever see faces in tlie fire ? '^ 
she asked. 

'^ Well, no ; I can't say that I do." 

^^Oh, Mr. Brayford," she said, ^^I am 
sure that sometlnng seriously affecting his 
life and mine is taking place while we sit 
here. I can see his face even while I 
speak." 

She sighed deeply as she gazed into the 
glowing embers. 

'^Hark!" she exclaimed, in an earnest 
whisper, raising her hands, and bending her 
head to listen. '^ Did you hear nothing ? " 

'' Well, no, my dear child, no," said 
Bra}^ord. 

'' Didn't you hear that ? " 

'' No, I really can't say I did." 

' ' Not a voice saying ' Caroline, Caro- 
line ' ? " she asked, rising to her feet. 

^^No, my poor cliild, no. Calm your- 
self; it is your fancy; you have had so 
much trouble, you see; you fancy these 
things." 



336 CRUEL LONDON. 

^^ Wliat ^vill lie say when he comes?" 
she askedj s})eaking more to herself than 
to Brayford, '' when he comes and finds 
me ? He will come, and my mcked heart 
longs for him. Oh, Clnist, have mercy on 
one of thy most miserable creatures ! " 

^^ We Avill light the candles," said Bray- 
ford, '' and have tea. Mr. W. will be 
here, and we are going to have snap- 
dragon." 

He bustled about, lighted two candles, 
and commenced to clear away the remains 
of the Christmas dessert, calling Mrs. 
Aaron to his assistance. 

" Mrs. Gardner is not quite well," he 
said. ^'If you could persuade her to go 
downstairs and have a nice chat with you, 
I think it would do her good." 

Mrs. Aaron, taking the hint Avith kindly 
promptitude, went up to her lodger, and, 
putting a motherly arm about her, said, 
'' Come and take tea with me, Mrs. 
Gardner. I've got a fresh lot of old 



"faces in the fire." 337 

china and some curious old finger-rings 
just come in. I 'd like to show them to 
you. Won 't you come ? " 

"I'll look after Master Willie," said 
Brayford. " Go with Mrs. Aaron; a little 
change will do you good, and when the 
snap-dragon's ready, and I and Mr. W. 
have brewed the elderberry wine punch, 
Mr. W. shall rim down and tell you." 

Mrs. Gardner leaned her head upon the 
good woman's shoulder, and suflfered her- 
self to be led away. 



END OF VOL. II. 
CRUEL LONDON. 



BOOK VI. . continued. 



CHAPTER V. 



BETWEEN THE LIGHTvS. 



It was a singular, not to say picturesque, 
group tliat was gathered round the table 
in Mr. Harry Brayford's room to engage 
in the harmless delights of snap-dragon. 
First there was the host himself in his 
faded velvet jacket, and w^ith his mild, 
benevolent face half hidden in brown 
beard and whiskers, not untinged witli 
grey. He sat at the head of the table, 

VOL. Ill* B 



CRUEL LONDON. 



with Mrs. Gardner on his riglit hand and 
little Willie on his left. Mrs. Gardner 
looked like an Oriental. She wore a 
double row of Turkish coins round her 
neck, a Christmas present made to her an 
hour previously by Mrs. Aaron, who sat 
opposite to Mr. Brayford in a stiff moir^ 
silk dress, adorned with a brooch of rubies 
and diamonds. Round her neck she wore 
a jet chain with jewelled clasps. She was 
a fat, dark, genial-looking woman, and in 
her conversational efforts she continually 
appealed to her husband Moses, an 
sesthetic-looking Jew, with long features 
and sunken eyes, and in other respects 
quite the figure to realize an artists' idea 
of some ancient Rabbi. Between these two 
notable examples of the chosen people sat 
Mr. W., or the Wonner, in a black thread- 
bare coat, a yellow waistcoat, blue and 
white neckerchief folded many times 
round his neck. His white hair straorj^led 
about his ears, and an expression of gentle 



f^fj-^^Km^^^i 



BETWEEN THE LIGHTS. O 

resignation filled his pleasant face. His 
eyes were continually bent on bis master 
with a look of en\dous admiration. Little 
Willie, in a white frock and a red sash, 
sat up in a tall chair and crowed his 
first words to liis heart's delight and to 
the gratification of the whole company, 
who were assembled rather to amuse him 
than to please themselves. 

The apartment, which served Mr. Bray- 
ford for couliting-house, manufactory, and 
dining and drawing room, was equally 
characteristic of his new business, and 
that of the art trade of Mr. Moses Aaron. 
On an ancient desk, which two hundred 
years before had occupied a niche in the 
ministerial chamber of a Dutch statesman, 
were arranged the Post- Office Directories 
of London and the Home Counties, from 
which Mr. Brayford and his staff directed 
their envelopes and wrappers, which the 
founder of circularization often explained 
to Mrs. Gardner found their way into all 



4 CRUEL LONDON. 

comers of the empire, ranging from the 
cottage to the palace, from Marylebone to 
Windsor. Upon the walls hung a set of 
old family jnctm-es, pm-chased at a sale of 
ducal treasures in the North of England. 
Interspersed among them were a modem 
newspaper maj), a postal chart, and a 
couple of play -bill reminiscences of Mr. 
Brayford's days of influence and j^ros- 
perity. You might have looked for some 
token of the cemetery businc^ss, but you 
would not have found it, not even a sj^rig 
of yew among the holly and mistletoe 
which here and there de(*orated the jnc- 
turc-frames, and shone out bright and gay 
u])on the mantel-shelf. 

One side of the room was filled with a 
carved oak bookc^ase, black with age. 
The shelves were i)artially filled with 
I)ackets of 2)rospectuses of the Lightning 
Utilizer and Safety Thunderbolt Com- 
pany, Limited; notices of removal of 
Badem & Co., silk mercers ; and the Soup 



PPP^^^^"^WP^^^*i^^^ 



BETWEEN THE LIGHTS. 9 

and Chowder Association's pami^hlets o 
the Anglo-American Pro\iders Society; 
all of which were in course of jiostal mani- 
pulation by Bray ford & Co. when the 
Christmas holidays were proclaimed to be 
in force by the patentee of the exj^loded 
three-act epitaph and the inventor of the 
living and prosperous system of circulari- 
zation and chea]^ advertising. On the 
mantel-shelf was a round mirror of con- 
siderable antiquity. In a comer near the 
fireplace stood a Venetian image of Shake- 
speare's Moor of Venice, which, having 
been exposed for twenty years in the 
Emporium window without eliciting a 
single inquiry, had been brought upstairs 
out of the way. The chairs w^ere a mis- 
cellaneous assortment of carved oak and 
modem Windsor, and on the floor was a 
much-used Turkey carjoet ; while the fire 
on the hearth fell hot and glowing upon a 
brass fender, before which the Duchess of 
Metheringhem had often toasted her dainty 



6 CRUEL IXNLKX. 

toes, for 3Ir. Aaron had Luuglit it from 
her maid when the diiiliess refurnished 
her boudoir in modem satin wood and 
silver. 

When, therefore, the light of the 
candles was extingxiL>hed, and a match 
ignited tlie great dish of spirits and 
raisins, the scene was full of curious 
effects of light and shade. Tlie faces 
round the table liad a weird look. The 
laughter of little WiUie and the chuckle of 
Mr. W. sounded the extreme notes of 
childhood. Between the hghts everj^ now 
and then Othello seemed to look out from 
his comer; strange evidence of unsus- 
pected figures behind the varnish were 
seen in the old pictm-es on the wall; 
the mirror on the mantel- shelf flashed, 
in its depths of transparency^ flames of 
blue and red. Is it for weal or woe 
that we see only the glimpses of the 
future that come to us through the 
gropings of our imagination in the 



BETWEEN THE LIGHTS, i 

darkness that separates to-day and to- 
morrow? Sometimes it seems as if 
Heaven hesitated, and halted upon the 
tliought whether it will not compromise 
matters by at least letting full daylight 
into the present, by bridging over with 
a second sight the wide expanse of sea 
and land between those who are dear 
to each other. In the case of Caroline 
Virginia Denton and Tristram Decker it 
is certain that, however imperfect the 
communication might be, there was 
between the two a bond of sympathy of 
sufficient electrical strength to tluill both 
hearts in moments of fear or danger, and 
that both organizations were sufficiently 
sensitive for the imagination to paint 
weird semblances of each other upon the 
uncorporeal air. In the lurid light of the 
Cliristmas dish Mrs. Gardner again saw 
the face of Tristram Decker looking at 
her, pale and wan ; but her gratitude for 
the kindness which she had recently ex 



8 CRUEL LONDON. 

perienced made her exercise a powerful 
effort of will over an almost uncontrollable 
desire to manifest emotion at the ghostly 
sight. She clutched her chair with her 
hands ; she pressed her feet upon the floor, 
and sat still until the vision faded out; 
and then she forced herself into an acted 
appearance of sjonpathy with the plear 
sures of the time. Mr. Brayford was full 
of humorous quips. Mr. W. continually 
chuckled his private opinion of his chief's 
cleverness. Mrs. Aaron thought of lier 
dear boy, to whom Mr. Brayford had been 
such a loving friend ; for she had come at 
last to convince herself that her lodger 
had known him since his babyhood. Mr. 
Moses Aaron screwed a smile out of his 
long, solemn features, and little Willie 
fairly screamed with childish delight. 

No spiritual, electro-biological, or other 
manifestation indicated to Mrs. Gardner 
the continued existence of the late master 
of The Cottage at Essam; nor, for that 



BETWEEN THE LIGHTS. 9 

mattter, did her sensitive nature indicate 
the character of the perils with which 
Tristram Decker was struggling in the 
snow-blocked mountains of the Sacra- 
mento. It is for the historian whose facts 
are arranged under his hands to carry the 
reader from one scene to another irrespec- 
tive of all obstacles of time and place. 
Manor Farm was gay and bright on this 
Cliristmas Day of our history; Manor 
Farm had been twice to church; Manor 
Farm had helped to decorate the old house 
of God with laurel and with holly ; and 
Manor Farm had brought home, after 
evening service, the parson and his wife 
and sundry other neighbours to spend the 
evening. The house was lighted up from 
kitchen to attic. A mistletoe, or ^^ kissing 
bush," hung in the hall, decorated with 
ribbons and rosettes. There were blazing 
fires in the dining-room on one side of this 
spacious entrance way, and in the draw- 
ing-room on the other. A cold round of 



10 CRUEL LONDON. 

beef, a stuffed chine, a mighty cheese, 
two enormous pork-pies, and several 
dishes of plum-pudding and mince-pies 
filled the dining - table. The guests 
^Mielped themselves" when they pleased. 
On the sideboard were jorums of ale and 
decanters of port and sherry. Zancher 
Brown and Elijah Ward helped them- 
selves (*ontinually under the direction of 
Mrs. Kester ; while in the drawing-room, 
which had been given up to ^' a hand at 
cards," Mr. Amos Frith, James Johnson, 
Luke Giles, Mrs. Frith, and Mrs. Brown 
moistened their lips with hot posset, 
which old Goff handed round at every 
possible opportunity. Goff and Kester 
were as happy as they could be . ^happier, 
indeed, than Goff had ever dreamed to be 
possible ; for, stimulated by the prospec- 
tive engagement of Jane Crosby to Tom 
Sleaford, they had arranged with them- 
selves to be man and wife also. Mrs. 
Kester, when slie accepted Goff, had said 



BETWEEN THE LIGHTS. 11 

there were no fools like old fools, though 
she told Goff the change in their condition 
would, after all, only add to lier exercise 
of authority, the right to order him about, 
which she had done for years wdtliout that 
right; and Goff had rc})licd that he 
should obey her only the more (*heerfully 
when she had obtained her power legally 
at the altar, for Goff no more dreamed of 
contradicting Mrs. Kester than he would 
have done if she had drunk of the well of 
St. Keene, or, like Southey's heroine, had 
secured her power by taking a bottle to 
church. 

The rubicund parson and his comfort- 
able wife sat quietly in the dining-room 
before the fire talking to Jane Crosby, 
while the music and clatter of dancing 
came through the open doorways from the 
kitchen, which had been cleaned and 
decorated for this merry festival. A 
mighty log, packed with smaller ones, 
burned brightly on the hearth; sconces, 



12 CRUEL LONDON. 

with ^ ' Cliristmas candles," were fixed 
upon the walls ; the hams and other stores 
had been removed from the ceiling beams, 
which were festooned with greenery; 
refreshments were set out on the dresser ; 
old Sliep lay curled up in the furthest 
corner of the ingle-nook at the feet of two 
old people, man and wife, who sat there 
thinking of the days when they could 
'' foot it with the best of them." 

The parson and his cheery spouse 
meanwhile were talking to Miss Crosby 
of the necessity of making up her mind to 
give a master to the Manor Farm estate, 
and more especially to let that, gentleman 
be Mr. Tom Sleaford, who, dming the last 
few months of his visiting in the neigh- 
bourhood, had made friends on all sides. 

Mr. Tom, it appeared from this conver- 
sation, had been staying at the George 
Hotel, Burgh, ever since he came down to 
the shooting in September, and it was 
well known why he lingered. Miss 



BETWEEN THE LIGHTS. 13 

Crosby admitted that the young man had 
twice proposed to her, and that she feared* 
she would be obliged to marry him at 
last, if not for herself, at least for his 
friends, who all seemed to be intervening 
in liis behalf. The reverend incumbent 
of the parish said he understood that the 
Sleafords were an old Lincolnshire familv, 
and he had himself deposited half his 
savings in the excellent London bank of 
which Mr. Tom Sleaford's father was the 
manager. 

While they were talking Tom Slcaford, 
fanning his face with his handkerchief, 
came walking into the room. 

'^Ah, here you are. Miss Crosby. I 
declare they have danced me almost off 
my legs. How do you do, sir, and 
madame?" 

Mr. Tom Sleaford bowed to the parson 
and his wife, who both rose and shook 
hands with him, paying court to the 
future owner of Manor Farm pew. 



14 CKUEL LONDON. 

^'Wliere is Mr. Thompson?" asked 
Jane. ^ ' Is he dancing with Mrs. Kester ? " 

^^ Well, no; but he has been delighting 
everybody with liis elegant steps in a 
polka with Miss Brown, and I left him in 
the midst of Sir Koger de Coverley." 

Then Tom took the parson aside, and,, 
wdth an apology to the two ladies, whis- 
pered in liis ear; then the incumbent 
raised his hands with joyfid surprise;, 
then Tom said he must return or his part- 
ner would never forgive him, and that he 
(?laimed Miss Crosby's hand for the next 
dance ; and as he left the room the 
reverend incumbent said he hoped Miss 
Crosby would give it him for life, and 
that he rejoiced to learn, even in a whis- 
per, that it was possible Mr. Sleaford 
might give him authority to put up the 
banns next Sunday. 

Miss Crosby received this sally with a 
smile and an uncertain shrug of her 
handsome shoulders. Then she begged. 



BETWEEN THE LIGHTS. 15 

them to excuse lier for a moment, and she 
quietly sought her own room, locked the 
door behind her, and sat down to tliink. 
But her head was in a wliirl, and she went 
downstairs again as quickly as she had 
gone up, returning to the active business 
of her duties as hostess. She walked 
about among her guests, from drawing- 
room to dining-room, from card-tables to 
the dancing, a happy, wholesome picture 
of English beauty. She wore a grey silk 
dress, with white lace ruffles round her 
neck, sleeves that fitted tightly her well- 
shaped arms, and a bodice that showed the 
graceful contour of her rounded bust. Her 
brown wavy hair was plainly dressed; 
and her fair face, with its eloquent eyes 
and full rich lips, never looked more beauti- 
ful than in the homely, hospitable setting 
of Manor Farm. She had heard nothing 
of John Kerman since his sudden dis- 
appearance; but she felt sure he would 
return some day to atone for the past ; and 



16 CRUEL LONDON. 

yet, with all her apparent strength of 
character, she had gradually allowed her 
feelings to be overshadowed by the per- 
sistent attentions of Tom Sleaford, who 
had laid himself out with all his arts to 
capture her. Woman is indeed a strange 
ccmipound ! One would have thought that 
the lady who had carried through that bold 
scheme of betting and edging and laying 
the correct odds for the financial salvation 
of Mr. Kerman could have held her own in 
any undertaking and in any situation. It 
nmst not, however, be forgotten that Jane 
had after all only carried out a plan which 
had been designed and shaped by Mr. 
Jabez Thompson, one of the keenest sport- 
ing lawyers in the Midland Counties. Mr. 
Tom Slcaford had no doubt been able to 
obtain a new footing in Miss Crosby's con- 
sideration through the knowledge that his 
sister Patty was deeply in love with Ker- 
man. This was another unexpected trait 
in that young lady's character. Although 



BETWEEN THE LIGHTS. 17 

she still maintained her usual composure of 
manner, and devoted herself to pink sun- 
sets and rosy-tinted water colours generally, 
she declined to marry Mr. Roper, whom 
she calmly informed that she loved Squire 
Kemian, and meant to marry him when he 
returned. Every possible influence, pater- 
nal, maternal, and fraternal, had been 
brought to bear upon this apparently 
neutral-tinted young lady, but she adhered 
to this declaration just as firmly as she 
devoted herself to a particular class of 
landscape, in which the sun was continually 
setting, and the fields were always bathed 
in hues of pinky red. The 10,000Z. 
would take no harm, she said, lying 
at interest, and IVIr. Tavener had supported 
her in this declaration, as they had also in 
her endorsement of the judgment of the 
trustees, in declining to allow the money 
to be removed to the coffers of the West 
London Bank of Deposit, to the secret, 
bitter, but unexpressed annoyance of Mr. 

VOL. III. c 



18 CRUKL LONDON. 

Sleaford, who had, even in liis prelimiiiar}^ 
calculations, counted upon the manipula- 
tion of John Kerman's romantic gift. 

Jane Crosby sympathized with Patty 
Sleaford, and in her own generous wa}-^ 
had schooled herself to think that it was 
Kerman's duty to marry her . a sentiment 
strongly in favour of the successful wooing 
of Mr. Tom Sleaford. But beyond this 
was the astonishing fact that Tom had 
won over to his side the astute and clever 
Jabez Thompson. Tom's remarkable shoot- 
ing on the 1st of September had laid in 
the foundation of liis triumph in that 
direction. '' The fellow's father may bo 
a scamp," thought the sporting lawyer, 
^ ' but a young man who can handle a gun 
with perfect form must be a gentleman." 
Tom had exercised in other ways thorough 
sportsman-like qualities, and had never 
missed an opportunity to play upon the 
generous nature of Jane's trustee. But it 
was in the limiting season that Tom Slea- 



BETWEEN THE LIGHTS. 19 

ford won the heart of Jabez Thompson. 
If he had distinguished himself in the 
stubbles of September, or on the adjacent 
coast when the woodcocks appeared, he 
had distanced all his previous successes in 
the hunting-field. A man who had a seat 
like Tom's, and could go across country as 
straight, requii'ed no other qualification 
for the position of a country gentleman. 
Instead of showing the cockney white 
feather in the sternest situations of a 
country life, Tom had evinced an aptitude 
for it which had made him popular through- 
out the Marsh. If his country friends could 
only have seen the real expression of Tom's 
face when he was alone after a whole day of 
acted bonhomie J perhaps they would not even 
then have been disenchanted. They would 
probably have attributed the cruel, anxious, 
gambler's look to fatigue. Tom Sleaford, 
alias Philip Gardner, had made up his mind 
to have Jane Crosby's consent to put up the 
banns on this night of the Christmas feast. 



20 CRUEL LONDOX. 

IIo had heard her say that if ever she 
were married she would have the banns 
put uj) in the good old-fasliioncd way, and 
l\)m Sleaford made a point of jotting 
down in liis memory, and thence at night 
into a memorandum-hook, all her little 
expressed wishes or desires upcm any kind 
of siihjeet, so that he might impress her 
wlicn he anticipated them, or acted upon 
tliem, or referred to them. He studied 
hiH game of wooing in every detail. He 
adapted himself to the Manor Fami sur- 
roundings with thoughtful care, studiously 
avoiding in t(me or manner anything that 
could possibly savour of the L(mdon fop. 
Indeed, old Kester said, jMister Sleaford 
was bom to bo a Lincolnshire squire, and 
si 10 was glad our Jane liked him at last ; 
for if ever a young man had persevered 
that young man was Mr. Sleaford, junior, 
though she did not hold with his father, 
and nothing would ever make her hold 
with a 2)crson as never looked }^ou in the 



wmmmmmif^^^^^mf^miBsammmssmmm^smsmmae^mB^m 



IJirrWEEX THE LIGHTS. 21 

face, or if he did, seemed to be making- a 
hole through you with a corkscrew ; but a 
young man was not responsible for his 
father . ^lie neither chose liim nor made 
him ; and Mr. Tom Sleaf ord had no right to 
suffer because his father was sliift}^, and 
his mother as useless as a- door with its 
hinges off. Old Goff would solemnly 
shake his sides Avitli laughter at Kester's 
smart sayings, and mentally clap himself 
on the back, to think that he had had the 
courage to propose to and also to win so 
remarkable, so wise, and so buxom a dame. 
He said he only hoped all married folk 
would be as happy as they, at which Mrs. 
Kester would say, ^'get away with thee, 
thou old softy," and proceed with her work 
or her talk, whichever had been obstructed 
by the expressed indignation of her big, 
awkward, grey-headed companion, who had 
induced her to permit him to tie himself 
down to her aj>ron-strings. 

When the gigs and carriages and market 



22 CRUEL LONDON. 

carts of the Marsh had carried home most 
of her guests, Tom Sleaford asked Jane 
Crosby to let him put up the banns. She 
had made a struggle at the thought of 
putting aside for ever her fond but foolish 
memories of John Kennan, and had at 
last rei)liedj that if Mr. Jabez Thompson 
gave his consent, she would. Tom rushed 
out for Thompson, and sent the lawyer, 
trustee, and friend into the drawing-room, 
where Jane was standing by the fire alone. 
" What is it, my child ? " he asked. 
" Am I to marry Tom Sleaford ? " 
^^I would if I were you," replied 
Thompson, in the same laconic style which 
always characterized Jane's conversation 
with her old friend. 

'' You tliink he 's a good fellow ? '' 

'' Yes ; as the world goes, capital." 

"\i\ acc(^i)t him you will be satisfied ? " 

" Quito." 

'' You don't like his fatlier ? " 

^^No; I thmk he 's a thief." 



BETWEEN THE LIGHTS. 23 

'' That 's bad. You don't think I ought 
to wait for . ^for Mr. Kerman ? " 

''Wait! What to be jilted again? A 
fool who has neither eyes for beauty, love, 
nor money." 

'' Don't call liim names." 

'' Then don't ask foolish questions." 

''You like me, Jabez Thompson?" 

' ' So much that if I weren't such a 
wizened old scarecrow, I 'd Jiave entered 
myself for the Manor Farm Stakes long 
ago." 

" Yes, you are aged," said Jane, smiling ; 
' ' but what I mean is, you wouldn't see me 
do anything you would think was a mis- 
take ? " 

"I wouldn't." 

"And you would advise me to marry 
Tom Sleaford ? " 

" You must marry somebody." 

"Must I?" 

"Certainly! You've no right to leave 
this property without heirs." 



24 CRUEL LONDON. 

" Oh ! Did uncle Martin sav so ? " 
^' His T\dll as good as said so." 
^' There was something wrong about 
that will ? " 
^^Yes." 

^^ What was it?" 

'' Old Sleaford tried to stick in Tom's 
name instead of Jack's." 
''Was that forgcrj-?" 
''Not exactly, and it wasn't bm-glary, 
but it was dishonest. However, that 's 
all past, and it 's a secret." 

" And you think I ought to marry some- 
body ? " 

" Certainly." 

" Tom Sleaford rather than nobody?" 
"Tom Sleaford is a good match; he 
hasn't much money, but he 's a good- 
looking chap . brides straight across countrj', 
likes country life, and is popular all about 
the placf*." 

"Will you draw up the settlements in 
such a way that a part of the share of the 



BETWEEN THE LIGHTS. 25 

estate which uncle Martin intended him to 
have shall go to John Kennan ? " 

^' How much?" 

^^Wliatvou think fair and honest and 
equal in generosity to his own behaviour 
in relinquishing his claims." 

^'Yes, certainly." 

'' Please tell Mr. Sleaford that he shall 
have my answer to-morrow. I shall not 
see him again to-night. I am going to 
bed. That is your gig, I think, coming 
round to the door now. Do you drive 
hifti to Burgh ? " 

^^Yes." 

^' Good-night, then." 

She held out her hand. Mr. Jabez 
Thompson kissed it ceremoniously, and 
she left the room. 

'' Ah, my dear," soliloquized the lawyer, 
looking after her as she closed the door, 
^' if I were only twenty years younger ! " 

While Jabez Thompson's high-stepper 
^' Flyaway " Avas bounding along the hard, 



26 CRUEL LONDON. 

frost-bound road, over the great, T\dde 
Lineoliishire marsh, making allowance for 
the difference of time between this side of 
the Atlantic and the other, the man wlumi 
Tom Sleaford had begun to supplant in 
fame and fortune was fighting for very- 
life in T)ec>ker's lonely Gulch, overlooking 
the wilderness of snow that had made the 
Sacramento valley a cemetery of the living 
and the dead. 



A CHALLENGE ANSWERED. 27 



CHAPTER VI. 

A CHALLENGE UNEXPECTEDLY ANSWERED. 

That first Sunday after Clmstmas dawned 
calm and still upon Manor Farm and the 
Marsh, upon the grey old church, upon the 
adjacent homesteads, upon all the great 
wide plain, white with frost and snow, and 
bright with a cold winter sky. 

There was an unusual solemnity in the 
preparations for church-going that did not 
belong alone to the peculiar sacrcdness of 
the time, which received sj)ecial significa- 
tion in a choral service and the usual 
Cliristmas decorations. It had become 
known that the banns of marriage between 
Jane Crosby and Tom Sleaford were to be 



28 CRUEL LONDON. 

proclaimedj and at Manor Farm and 
adjacent homesteads the event was one of 
great interest. Even Mr. Amos Firth, 
Luke Giles, and Zancher Brown dressed 
with extra care for church that morning ; 
wliile Mrs. Brown declared that her tln-ee 
daughters had " done themselves up as if 
they were going to a wedding itself." 
Elijah Ward had put on his best beaver 
hat, the silky fur of which fluffed into 
downy waves under the influence of the 
winter wind. The distance between 
Manor Farm and the church was but a few 
hundred yards, and the procession which 
wended its way from the farm to morning 
service was a picture of rural simplicity 
and repose. Miss Crosb}', in a long, warm 
cloak, with Mrs. Kester walking resj^ect- 
fuUy by her side, was followed by Goff 
and Kester Shaw in dark broadcloth coats 
and breeches, and the other male and 
female servants of the family, two and 
two, carrjdng their Prayer-Books in their 



A CHALLENGE ANSWERED. 29 

hands, the gilt edges of some of the 
volumes flashing in the light, and the gay 
bits of colour here and there in the 
women's bonnets telling out against the 
wintry landscape. 

The Manor Farm people and their 
neighbours were well seated before curious 
and inquiring eyes peeped out through 
the open door of high-backed pews at Mr. 
Jabez Thompson and Mr. Tom Sleaford. 
Thompson, in his brown coat and brass 
buttons, his tight nankeen trousers, and 
his black and white spotted neckerchief, 
looked the keen sportsman he was. His 
ruddy face was shaven, his grey, short 
hair brushed close to his small round head, 
and his gold eye-glasses, with their 
black riband, sparkled on the lappets of 
his long old-fashioned vest. Tom Sleaford, 
with quiet, self-sustained ease, stepped 
into Mr. Thompson's well-cusliioned pew, 
and surveyed the church with a calm look 
of interest before placing his hat under the 



30 CRUEL LONDON. 

seat and kneeling for a moment in imita- 
tion of his friend and patron. 

While the antique organ was moaning 
out an old-fashioned voluntary, under the 
manipulation of an old-fashioned operator, 
the congregation composed itself for the 
work of the morning's devotional exercises. 
Among the latest arrivals were two persons 
who came in a hired conveyance from 
Burgh. The organ was still stirring the 
dull, soddened echoes of the church as Mr. 
Brayford handed out Mrs. Gardner, who 
had for the first time since her child's 
birth been prevailed upon to leave little 
Willie in the care of a third person. Mrs. 
Aaron would have taken it as a personal 
aifront if she had not done so, just as 
her solemn-visaged husband would have 
resented it as a deadly insult if Mr. Bray- 
ford had declined to accept from him the 
loan of a twenty-jiound note to see him 
through his expedition to Lincolnshire ' ' in 
the interests of British liberty and justice. 



A CHALLENGE ANSWERED. 31 

to say nothing of honour, love, and 
truth." 

^'Wait one moment before we enter," 
said Mrs. Gardner. ''I feel so nervous; 
my heart beats as if it would burst." 

'' Lean on my arm ; I will support you, 
my child," said Bray ford, encouragingly. 
' ' Don't be afraid ; no harm shall come to 
you. You shall see whether an English- 
man, however depraved, will be allowed 
to commit crime upon crime with im- 
punity." 

' ' Thank you ; I shall be better pre- 
sently," she said. 

^ ' They will let you put up your horse 
at the farm," Brayford said to the driver 
of the " covered car" which had brought 
them from Burgh ; ^' we shall want you to 
take us back after the service." 

The man got up into his seat, and urged 
his clumsy horse into the roadway as 
Brayford and his trembling charge dis- 
appeared in the shadow of the porch to 



ii2 CRUEL LONDON. 

i^morgo on the other side just as tlic open- 
in}^ words of tlio service brought the con- 
gr(5gation to their feet. Brayford entered 
a lialf-empty pew among those of the 
liuTiibler worsliippers. He led tlic woman 
ill and placjod a hassock for her, upon 
whi(;h she knelt, burying her face in her 
hands. She prayed in eaniest silence for 
strength and guidance. Brayford whis- 
l)ered to her, '' Kneel as long as you wish ; 
don't mind the service; have no fear; God 
will give us strength for our work ; it is 
He who hath brought us here, that truth 
and virtiuj may not be ashamed." Bray- 
ford said this in further re-assurance of the 
woman's c^mduct ; for she had resisted his 
advice, and at last would have been con- 
tent with making a private communication 
to Miss Crosby ; but Mr. Brayford would 
bo satisfi(jd with nothing short of a full 
and complete exposure of Tom Sleaford ; 
and, in spite of the real nobility of Bray- 
ford's character, it must be confessed tliat 



A CHALLENGE ANSWERED. 33 

it was not only Mrs. Gardner's wrongs 
which he was anxious to avenge, but his 
own; not only Miss Crosby whom he 
wished to save from the machinations of 
a villain, but the Sleafords to whom he 
wished to return in kind some of the in- 
dignities and miseries they had inflicted 
upon him. ''An eye for an eye, a tooth 
for a tooth," had impelled him to action, 
rather than the Saviour's teaching of 
returning good for e^al ; and yet Brayford 
was satisfied that he had a right to look 
that Christian congregation in the face, 
and feel that he was doing a ^drtuous and 
religious work. Xor are we prepared to 
say that he was not, though it must be 
acknowledged his motives were rather 
mixed, and it would be no outrage on his 
good heart to say that the dramatic feature 
of the situation was not mtliout some little 
attraction for him. 

Mrs. Gardner rose from her feet when 
the congregation were chanting the psalms, 

VOL. m. D 



34 CRUEL LONDON. 

wliicli tlicy did on holy days and great 
festivalHj assisted by the organ and a volun- 
tary choir of men and women. The scene 
and the music were very strange to her ; 
but hero a dreaming peacefulness had 
stolen upon her. Had it not been for a 
feeling that she was in some way doing 
her duty to her child by remaining, she 
would have liked to steal out of the church 
even now, and go back to the humble 
security of her London rooms. The pews in 
the old Marsh church were high and stately ; 
but once she thought she coidd see the 
man whom she believed to be her husband, 
and more than once she did hear his voice 
joining in the solemn responses of the 
congregation to the priest. The service 
dragged on in a strange, dull, mysterious 
fashicm, at times leading her into dreams 
of the past, and then moving her to tears 
by its simple lieart-stirring beauty. 

Strange faces looked down upon her 
from the gallery where the choristers sat, 



A CHALLENGE ANSWERED. 35 

men and women, young and old. Once 
she thought the parson fixed his eyes upon 
her, and she bent her head in fear. Then 
again she j^rayed fervently and felt re- 
freshed. By the time that the incumbent 
came to the reading of the second lesson 
for the day she was quite calm and resigned 
to her fate, whatever it might be. Bray- 
ford had marked the place in the Prayer- 
Book when it was his intention to bring 
down the recjkless audacity and arrogance 
of Mr. Tom Sleaford, who had helped to 
ruin him, and who was in full tide of a 
successful attack upon an absent friend, 
who had helped Sleaford many a time in 
his n^ed. Caroline had found comfort in 
the words of the second lesson : not only 
because they seemed prophetic, comings 
immediately before the dramatic event of 
the day, but on account of their appro- 
priateness to her painful situation ; and 
their general promise of strength in the 
hour of trial also impressed Brayford. 



36 CRUEL LONDON. 

'' Couraj^e," he whispered, ^' those are 
God's words," as he followed the comfort- 
ing declarations of the prophet Isaiah, 
allotted to the contemplation of the faithful 
on the first Sunday after Christmas : '^ He 
givetli power to the faint ; and to them 
that have no might He increaseth strength. 
Even the youths shall faint and be weary, 
and the young men shall utterly fall ; but 
they that wait upcm the Lord shall renew 
their strengtli ; they shall mount up with 
wings as eagles ; they shall run and not be 
weary, and tliey shall walk and not faint." 

'' Here ended the second lesson " were 
words that fluttered more than one heart 
in the congi-egation ; for this is the period 
of the service at which the Church orders 
that banns of marriage shall be published. 
Jabez Thompson looked round at Tom 
Sleaford, and smiled as the minister 
began to fidget with some j^apers that lay 
by the side of his Bible. Jane Crosby 
bent down her head, and her heart beat 



A CHALLENGE ANSWERED. 37 

wildly, for it seemed at the moment as if 
all the best instincts of her nature cried 
out against the declaration that was about 
to be made. For a moment the desire was 
strong upon her to repudiate the minister's 
authority ; but she only turned round and 
looked helplessly at Mrs. Kester; and 
then pressing her hand upon her heart 
she lieaved a sigh, that Kester declared 
miglit have been heard all over the church 
if at that moment the parson had not com- 
menced to speak. These w^ere the w^ords 
that clashed upon Jane Crosby's sudden 
and unexpected signal of trouble : . 

'' I publish the banns of marriage 
between Jane Crosby and Tom Sleaford. 
If any of you know cause or just impedi- 
ment why these tw^o persons should not 
be joined together in holy matrimony, ye 
are to declare it. This is the first time of 
asking." 

" And the last!" exclaimed a voice from 
a pew at the east end of the church. 



38 CRUEL LONDON. 

It was answered by a smothered expres- 
sion of surprise from the entire congrega- 
tion. 

*^ I forbid the banns!" continued the 
voice, in loud, emphatic tones, and Bray- 
ford stepped from his pew into the aisle, 
with a dignity and firmness quite foreign 
to his customary manner, and quite equal 
to tlio solemnity of the occasion. 

" Walk into the vestry, sir," said the 
priest, in a voice tremulous with surprise 
and emotion. 

'' Pardon me, reverend sir," said Mr. 
Jabez Thompson, rising in his pew ; ^^bear 
with me, my brethren ; this is a strange 
and startling situation. I would crave the 
venerable incjumbent's permission that the 
grounds for this daring interruption may 
be stated, if possible, as publicly as this 
stranger's claim to be heard is made." 

'^rho incumbent was utterly overcome. 
The emergency was one which he had 
never previously encountered. 



A CHALLENGE ANSWERED. 39 

^^ I am no stranger to the Marsh or to 
the county/' said Brajrford ; " and I am 
ready to state publicly why I forbid the 
banns between Jane Crosby and Tom 
Sleaford." 

Brayford was recognized by several 
members of the congregation, and his 
name was whispered audibly. 

'^ On what grounds? I ask it as Miss 
Crosby's trustee and Mr. Sleaford's friend," 
demanded Jabez Thompson, the whole 
congregation having by this time risen to 
its feet. 

^^As the self -constituted guardian of 
Tom Sleaford's wife, I answer on the 
groimd that he is already married," was 
the defiant and startling response. 

^^ It is false ! " exclaimed Tom Sleaford, 
looking towards the pew where Jane Crosby 
sat, with her face buried in her hands. 

/^ It is true ! " said a soft, gentle voice, 
as Brayiord led Caroline Virginia Denton 
Sleaford into the aisle. 



40 CRUEL LONDOIiT. 

Jane Crosby raised her head and 
listened. Tom Sleaford was thankful that 
the incumbent of the parish now found 
himself sufficiently recovered from his 
surprise to interfere. 

^^ Brethren," said the minister, ^^ dearly 
beloved, the vestry is the place for this 
discussion ; and inasmuch as our devotions 
have been rudely broken in upon, I crave 
your attention while I pronounce the 
benediction, for I am too much overcome 
to proceed further." 

The congregation turned their faces re- 
spectfully and reverently towards the altar. 
The minister, much agitated, walked within 
the rails, delivered the priestly blessing, 
and fell upon his knees ; while the congre- 
gation gradually left the church, to break 
up into groups in the porch and outside ; 
and Mr. Brayford and the lady who 
claimed to be Tom Sleaford's wife went 
into the vestry. Miss Crosby remained in 
her own pew, and Mr. Jabez Thompson 



A CHALLENGE ANSWERED. 41 

and Mr. Tom Sleaford had a whispered 
consultation in theirs. Hurriedly asked 
what it all meant, Tom Sleaford had 
replied, . 

" Black-mail." 

'' The charge must be met without 
flinching," w^hispered Thompson, ^^true or 
not. If it is true, there are no words bad 
enough to describe your conduct." 

^' It is false, it is false," said Tom ; ^^ the 
woman has no claim upon me." 

"If it is merely some indiscretion of a 
young man, or a case of black-mailing, 
you may get over it ; though I doubt if 
Miss Crosby will ever see you again. Her 
pride will be cut to the quick." 

' ' I know the woman, and I repeat her 
charge is false, and her object is money." 

"Very well, then, come into the vestry, 
and confront her." 

Mr. Thompson opened the pew door and 
went out into the aisle, his footsteps 
resounding through the empty church. 



42 CRUEL LONDON. 

Tom Sleaford buttoned liis coat tightly 
over his chest, and followed the trim- 
looking old gentleman. ^' Neck or nothing/' 
thought Tom, ^'I must break her down . 
crush her, that is my only chance." His 
brain was busy Tvdth inventions of her base- 
ness and slurs upon Brayford's reputation. 
He knew nothing of the woman's escape 
from '' The Retreat," the intrigue of Robin- 
son, the rescue by Brayf ord. He had heard 
nothing of her or about her since the para- 
graph which noticed her adventure in 
Porter's Buildings and her introduction 
to Miss Weaver. Wlien on an occasional 
visit to the West-End Bank of Deposit, in 
connexion with which he held an honorary 
office, he had carefully avoided that part 
of Marylebone Road in which The '' Re- 
treat " was situated. Through the woman's 
silence and the absence of inquiries being 
instituted by Miss Weaver, he had come to 
the conclusion that Caroline had gone back 
to the United States. A marriage with 



A CHALLENGE ANSWERED. 43 

]\Iiss Crosby was a far safer and more 
certain inlieritancc than banking transac- 
tions in which interest was paid out of 
capital ; therefore he had laid careful and 
scientific siege to Manor Farm, and the 
garrison was siUTcndering to him at dis- 
cretion when the diversion we have just 
described was brought about by the 
enemy wliose operations he most despised, 
^^that fool, Brayford," as he was wont to 
speak of him in the old days, when he and 
his father were robbing him. 

As the minister left the altar, he paused 
at the pew where Jane Crosby sat mth 
Mrs. Kester by her side. 

^^ It is a sad business," he said, ^^but it 
may be all for the best, whatever the end 
is." 

^^Yes," said Jane, bowing her head 
under the weight of shame and annoyance. 

'^ The charge may be untrue." 

Jane could not talk about it, even to the 
pastor. 



44 CRUEL LONDON. 

'' Thank you very much for your sym- 
pathy," she said; ^'Kester and myself 
^dll f?o home now. Will you, sir, be ^ood 
enough to tell Mr. Thompson to call on 
me when he leaves the vestry ? " 

The minister saw that his best course 
was to leave Miss Crosby alone, and he 
went into the vestrv. 

'' Do you think our neighbours will bo 
gone home by this, Kester ? " asked Jane, 
'' or will they be waiting to condole with 
us and pity us ? " 

^^ I shouldn't wonder if they're all on 
'em lying in wait, just as you think. Shall 
I look out and see ? " 

'' Do, Kester, I 'm too much ashamed to 
meet any friendly face at present." 

Kester clattered down the aisle, brushing 
the Christmas decorations on the old Saxon 
pillars as she passed them, and presently 
returned to say that most of the congrega- 
tion were standing about in the cold ; some 
of them couldn't get away because their 



A CHALLENGE ANSWERED. 45 

traps had not come for them; but the 
sexton had gone to unlock the door 
beneath the belfry, and they could walk 
. over the foot-bridge across Martin's Dike, 
and go home that way without interrup- 
tion. And so Jane Crosby stole away, 
and they who stood about the church saw 
her go by a back path to the farm, and she 
never once lifted her head. 

As the news spread, the few convey- 
ances for which most of the shivering 
congregation were waiting arrived; and 
as the persons in the vestry seemed likely 
to remain there for a long time, the 
people gradually went away, dotting the 
wide plain in various directions, and dis- 
appearing at the homesteads, where long 
columns of smoke went up into the frosty 
air, or fading from the sight behind the 
mist, which in all seasons hangs about the 
sky-line on the broad fringe of the great 
Lincolnshire flat. 

Meanwhile Mr. Brayford told Caroline 



46 CRUEL LONDON. 

Virginia Denton's story, and Tom Slea- 
ford, with hard, unflinching firmness, 
denied it all, except that 'Hhis woman 
had been his mistress." He owned that 
his conduct to that extent was immoral, 
and perhaps indefensible in the eyes of a 
minister of the Gospel; but Mr. Thomp- 
son, as a man of the world, would not 
look upon it from so severe a standpoint. 

Tom Sleaf ord overdid his defence ; and 
his attack upon his victim overleaped 
itself. He branded her as an impostor, 
and worse. He spoke of her being found 
in the lowest haunts of vice in London, 
and gave that as a reason why he could 
not seek her out ; for he felt that she had 
fallen too low for restoration even to her 
friends. 

These taunts did not touch Caroline as 
he had expected. She looked up through 
her tears at the minister and at Mr. 
Thompson, and the reproacliful innocence 
of her face appealed to their judgment as 



A CHALLENGK ANSWERED. 47 

well as to their hearts. The blacker Tom 
Sleaford painted her the whiter she shone, 
though she only uttered a word of denial 
or explanation now and then. 

'^I wouldn't have come here/' she said, 
"but that I was persuaded it was the 
only way to save a good, true woman 
from a life of misery and a bad man from 
another crime; though I have been and 
am anxious to establish my marriage- for 
the sake of my child, not for my own 
sake . ^not for my own sake." 

^'You don't know the craft of this 
woman," said Sleaford. "You do know, 
sir," he continued, now addressing the 
clergyman, "that the devil can assume a 
pleasing shape for his own purposes. 
This woman, the degenerate daughter of 
some miserable slave-owner by a black 
mother . " 

"No!" exclaimed Caroline, interrupting 
him, and appealing to the others. "If 
you are men, you will not let him say 



48 CRUEL LONDON. 

that, lest tlic very cliurch fall on us where 
we stand.'" 

Only an American can fully apfpreciate 
the bitterness of this last invention of 
Tom Sleaford's malice. 

''Don't excite yourself, my child," said 
Bra}^ford, lapng his hand gently upon 
her shoulder. ''Don't listen to his ^dle 
slanders; be seated. None of us believe 
a word he savs." 

Tom Sleaford made a step towards 
Brayford in a threatening attitude ; the 
minister raised his hand deprecatingly, 
and Mr. Thompson took Sleaford by the 
aruL 

" T]ie other gentlemen don't know him 
as well as I do," continued Brayford, 
while he induced the woman, by signs, to 
be reseated. " They don't know that he 
is a thief as well as a liar." 

"Mr. Brayford," expostulated the par- 
son, ' ' such language as that . " 

" Is the language of the Scriptures and 



A CHALLENGE ANSWERED. 49 

the Gospel you preach! I do not use 
it in passion, sir, but calmly, as I look 
that felon in the face, and denounce liim 
as a thief and a liar, and the son of a 
father no less abandoned." 

It taxed Jabez Thompson's strength to 
hold Tom Sleaford, whose rage now got 
the better of his discretion. 

^^ There is only one answer to words of 
that character," he cried. 

^'Gentlemen, gentlemen," remonstrated 
the incumbent, ^^this is a desecration of 
the sacred edifice in which we are 
assembled. Mr. Brayford, I must beg of 
you to withdraw that language." 

'^If it offends your reverence, I must 
withdraw it here, but only to repeat it 
outside, where Mr. Sleaford can give me 
that particular answer he pretends to be 
anxious about," said Brayford, adding, as 
he noticed the anxious face of Caroline, 
^^ Don't be alarmed, my child ; don't be 
alarmed." 

VOL. in. E 



50 CRCEL LOXDOX. 

^'And I ako beg," said the parson^ 
^* that yoa will not f oi^et that this is the 
Lord's Day." 

Jabez Thompson had not spoken a 
angle word to interrupt or to modify the 
explanation of this painful business. He 
had watched the parties with the critical 
eve of a man of the world, who had had 
some experience in judging men and 
women. 

^' Excuse me, Itfr. Incumbent," he said, 
*^and you, madame, and gentlemen, I 
tliink we may now bring this matter to a 
close. Have you, ilr. Sleaford, any more 
to say?" 

" Only to repeat that . ^^ 

'' Don't repeat anything," said the 
lawyer, interrupting him. ^^ What we 
have heard is sufficiently impressed upon 
our minds. Have you anything to 
add?" 

^' Only to denounce these persons as 
conspirators and black-mailers." 



A CHALLENGE ANSWERED. 51 

" Yes, yes," said the lawyer, impatiently; 
" and you, Mr. Brayford ? " 

"Do we look like conspirators and 
black-mailers ? " asked Brayford. 

'^No, I am bound to say you do not," 
replied the lawyer, ' ' since you ask me the 
question; and I feel it equally my duty 
as an honest man to say that at present I 
can only regard my ward, Miss Crosby, 
next to this lady, as a most wronged 
and injured woman . " 

"But, Thompson . " interfered Tom 
Sleaford. 

"You said you had finished," replied 
Thompson. 

Tom Sleaford retreated a step back- 
ward. 

" I don't know," continued Thompson, 
turning to look at Tom Sleaford, ' ' whether 
you married this woman or not, but I have 
no doubt that you have treated her cruelly, 
and I have to thank Mr. Brayford, and I 
do so humbly, for saving my ward from a 



o2 CRUEL LONDON. 

lifelons: miserv to which I should have 
eondemnoil her; I, who have but one 
object in life, to minister to her happiness ; 
I, who, with all my experience, couldn't 
tell a scoundrel from an honest man !" 

The old man turned coldly upon Tom 
Sleaford as he deidt him this blow. The 
yomiger man staggered under it, and 
looked roimd upon the group as if he were 
at bay, and in doubt whether to attack or 
retreat. 

''If, sir," said the lawjxr, the colour 
mounting to his already florid cheeks, '' if 
you tliink there is any possibility of your 
reversing this verdict, you can appeal; and 
in that case I shall be in niv ofl&ce on 
Monday morning at ten o'clock." 

'' This is cruel," gasped Tom Sleaford, 
flinging himself into a chair with an air of 
an injured man, for in presence of the 
belligerent aspect of both Thompson and 
Sleaford he now deemed the business of 
martyrdom the most becoming r6le. 



A CHAH^ENGE ANSWERED. 63 

"Where arc you stavinj^, Mr. Bray- 
ford ? " asked the law}'er. 

" At the George." 

"I will wait upon you at twelve on 
Monday, if the hour will be convenient." 

" Yes, sir, certainly," said Brayford. 

" Good morning," said the lawyer, bow- 
ing to the incumbent and to Brayford and 
the lady ; and, straightening himself as he 
looked at Tom Sleaford with an air of 
contempt and defiance, he took up liis hat 
and left the vestry, his firm footsteps 
resounding tlirough the old place until the 
great doors of the porch clanged upon 
them, and he was gone. 

Mr. Brayford signified to Caroline that 
they, too, should go ; and the parson took 
off his gown, and began to put on his 
overcoat. 

"I would like to speak to you, sir, 
before we leave," said Tom Sleaford. 

Brayford and Caroline bowed to the 
minister, and left the church. Their con- 



54 CRUEL LONDON. 

veyance was waiting for them ; and when 
Tom Sleaford stood in the porch, taking 
his leave of the incumbent, to whom he 
protested that he was the victim of a 
wicked and cruel conspiracy, he could see 
the ^^ top car," which was conveying his 
accusers to Burgh, tossing to and fro upon 
the frozen waste like a vessel on the ocean, 
but not so agitated as his own thoughts, 
which jostled each other in their wildness 
and perplexity. He started to walk to 
Burgh, some eight miles, over the broad 
plain, where, in the olden days, the Saxons 
had made their last desperate stand against 
the Norman conqueror. At first he merely 
crawled along, like a man uncertain of his 
course. Presently he felt the chill of the 
biting air and the frosty wind that came 
in withering gusts down dike and drain 
from the sea. He stopped for a moment 
as if to face it and defy it, shaking him- 
self like a dog after a swim. Then he 
stepped out, breasting the wind, facing the 



A CHALLENGE ANSWERED. 55 

blast, and he began to curse and swear 
aloud, denouncing tlie absent in foul terms 
and with opprobrious epithets. Then he 
rehearsed in his mind the murder of 
Brayford. He could have done the deed 
at that moment. For the first time in his 
cowardly life he realized', as he thought, 
the feelings of a murderer, the desire for 
blood. He saw Brayford at his feet appeal- 
ing for mercy. He saw himself beating him 
down, raining bloody blows upon his head. 

'' And you !" he screamed, as he paced 
along, defying the winter wind, '' and you, 
Mrs. Gardner ! Wait ! You are my wife, 
and you are not, as I may elect. It may 
suit my humour to claim you. And then ! 
curse you, I '11 be even with you ! " 

When Jabez Thompson discovered that 
he had allowed his first feelings of suspicion 
in regard to the character of Tom Slea- 
ford, not only to be lulled into repose, but 
that the diplomatic amiability of the young 
man and his assumed frankness had re- 



56 CRUEL LONDON. . 

placed doubt with confidence, and suspicion 
with friendship; and that he had been 
cheated into this amicable relationship, he 
was angry in proportion to the assistance 
he had given Tom in his successful over- 
tures for the hand of Miss Crosby. The 
clever lawyer had been wilfully deceived, 
for he had had evidence of the father's 
villainy, and he had condoned the discredit- 
able features of the son's financial difficul- 
ties. The astute man of the world, who, 
knowing horses so well, should have had 
some insight into human character, (for it 
is an ascertained fact that men much 
devoted to the breeding, rearing, and run- 
ning of race-horses become intelligent 
physiognomists,) the generally acknow- 
ledged reliable and keen sportsman, who 
could bring down his man in an argument 
as well as his bird in the air, had been 
duped. He was, therefore, fully possessed 
with the anger of a generous man who has 
been victimized through the magnanimity 



A CHALLENGE ANSWERED. 57 

of his disposition. Tom Sleaford went to 
him boldly on Monday morning at ten 
o'clock to appeal against the verdict of 
Sunday, and had found the obdurate 
judge prepared with half-a-dozen special 
interrogations as hard to answer as the 
case put against him in the vestry. Mr. 
Thompson not only informed him that 
Miss Crosby had given him express instruc- 
tions to forbid his appearance at the Manor 
Farm, but advised him to quit the Marsh 
with all speed, lest some means were 
formed for detaining him against his will. 
Tom Sleaford left the office and went 
straight to his hotel, and ordered his horse 
to be saddled; while the lawyer waited 
upon Mr. Brayf ord, to satisfy himself more 
completely upon some points of the indict- 
ment against the scoundrel who had played 
so artfully upon his amiability and his mad 
admiration of sportsman-like feats and 
altitude for country life. 

In spite of the lawyer's admonition, Tom 



58 CRUEL LONDON. 

Sleaf ord presented himseK at Manor Fami 
to seek an interview with Miss Crosby. 
He was met by Goff , who went far beyond 
the instructions of the mistress, when he 
said that he and anv labourer about the 
farm who caught him on the place had 
orders to chuck him into the nearest dike. 
Tom was not coward enough to accept 
that declaration tamely, especially when 
the speaker was an old man. He seized 
Goff by the throat, and shook him till 
Kester's admirer began to turn blue. 
'' That 's my answer to your orders !" ex- 
claimed Tom, throwing his man and getting 
upon his horse, which he had tied to the 
gate leading into the farm. As he galloped 
away he found a little patience in his 
mind now that he had to some extent 
vindicated his physical manhood, which 
had not been questioned. But his latest 
disappointment and all his troubles he laid 
at the door of Caroline Denton and Harry 
Brayford, and he made a coarse, profane 



A CHALLENGE ANSWERED. 59 

VOW with himself to be revenged. At 
night he had taken a late train on the way 
to London; and left the Marsh to settle 
down to its theories, gossip, explanations, 
descriptions, and surmises concerning the 
forbidding of the banns. 

For manv a month afterwards this was 
the most engrossing, romantic, and sensa- 
tional topic of the district. It divided the 
honours at tea-tables, whist-parties, and 
market dinners with the latest murder. 
No banns were published in any of the 
local churches without exciting a thrill of 
suspense to circulate through the sensitive 
constitution of every congregation, ending 
in a sigh of relief when, after a sufficient 
pause, no voice was raised in response to 
the priestly challenge . ^^ If any of you 
know cause or just impediment why 
these two persons should not be joined 
together in holy matrimony, you are 
now to declare it." 

END OF BOOK VI. 



BOOK VII. 



BOOK VII. 



CHAPTER I. 

TRAVELLERS FROM FAR AND NEAR. 

Winter had been vanquished by spring. 
Even the icy fastnesses of the Califomian 
mountains had succumbed to the attack of 
the lusty monarch of the leafy year. The 
Sacramento, released from its frosty moor- 
ings, made gladsome music in the mighty 
valley. The busy miners wlio had lived 
through the Christmas storms once more 
wielded their picks and shovels. When 
the snow had gone, their less fortimate 
brethren were discovered by the sunshine, 
stark and stiff, awaiting the resurrection. 



64 CRUEL LONDON. 

Some of these victims to the gold mania 
had, to all appearance, at the beginning of 
the winter chosen localities far better 
protected from wind and weather than 
those who had been saved. No matter 
where you pitch your tent or. how you 
.shield it, if your time be come. Similarly 
it signifies not that the mountain crush 
your house and the snow overwhelm you, 
if it please God to put forth His hand to 
vour rescue. 

Decker and Kerman survived the dis- 
asters of that never-to-be-forgotten Christ- 
mas in the Sacramento, and they arrived 
at the Palace Hotel, London, on a bright 
May day, when the great city was putting 
on its gay clothes ; when the almond-trees 
were in blossom, and green leaves deco- 
rated sombre streets and squares with 
fresh and delicate tints; when country 
cousins and coxmty belles thronged the 
West-end streets, and added to the lustre 
of the Row ; when Cruel London put on 



TRAVELLERS FROM FAR AND NEAR. 65 

her most artful smiles, and opened all her 
golden gates with clang of gong and clash 
of bells to those accredited to her exclu- 
sive court by favour of birth and fortune, or 
by force of swagger and false credentials. 
As yet she knew not Decker nor Kerman. 
Their fame had not at present reached 
even her scouts and her emissaries, else 
she would have made ready to greet them 
and smile a ready welcome ; for the new 
comers were among the world's richest 
men. John Kerman, despised of time- 
serving clubmen, the vujgar hero of Don- 
caster and Fitzroy Square, was rich as 
the richest of the Rothschilds. Tristram 
Decker was the principal owner of a 
region of gold. He could not count his 
wealth. For him an El Dorado had 
sprung up in response to his prospecting 
rod. His wildest hopes and his worst 
fears had been realized. He was endowed 
with untold gold and a fatal disease. An 
eminent American physician had con- 

VOL. m. F 



66 CRUEL LONDON. 

firmed his belief that consumption had 
laid its bony hand upon him and num- 
bered his days. The doctor had warned 
him that only with care could he possibly 
live five or seven years, and to secure that 
short respite it was necessary that he 
should sojourn in a warm and equable 
climate. England, he said, was better 
suited to his condition than the United 
States ; but his advice was to seek rest in 
the soothing atmosphere of Madeira. It 
was a poor business that all his wealth 
could do no more than this. He would 
have given every foot of his golden farm 
for good health, if Caroline Denton was 
single, and would take him for himself ; 
otherwise he would cheerfully accept the 
penalty of death, with the power to load 
her with riches in return for five years of ^ 
her society. The more certain his early 
death, the more his soul yearned for the 
love of this woman. The poorest labourer 
in the streets who had health and strength 



TRAVELLERS FROM FAR AND NEAR. 67 

to enjoy his hard-earned meal had no 
cause to envy Tristram Decker. Knowing 
his future, the veriest beggar might have 
shrunk from changing places with him. 

Tristram Decker's mission in life, as he 
laid it down for himself, was to find Mr. 
William Graham Denton, and to lavish 
riches upon him for the sake of his 
daughter ; and, if she wer^ still single, to 
beg her from pure charity to make his 
short stay in the world happy out of the 
wild, deep, maddening love he bore her. 
What a world of disappointment and 
sorrow fate had in store for him! His 
love had idolized the object of his fancy. 
His poetic temperament, his imaginative 
power, his egotistic selection of the 
Southern girl as a type of all that is pure 
and tender and good and true in woman 
had never for a moment permitted a sus- 
picion of weakness in his idol. It might 
chance that to doubt her would be to hate 
her. To admit a flaw in the angelic 



68 CRUEL LONDON. 

figure would be to cry aloud for the 
destruction of an impostor, whose over- 
powering beauty only heightened her 
offence. How would he read that story 
of her life at Essam, with all those atten- 
dant smudges that come out of touching 

. 

the world's pitch ? 

^' I don't know," he said, as they sat at 
a window of the hotel, watching the 
stream of London life as it ebbed and 
flowed in the shadow of Westminster 
Abbey . '' I don't know that a man in my 
condition has a right to ask a young girl 
to marry him. Nor an old one, for that 
matter," he added, with a smile. 

'' There are thousands who would be 
only too glad to have you, Tristy, if you 
were on your death-bed even." 

^^ Perhaps the readier on that account, 
Jack. What an inheritance I should be ! 
But to linger about, an invalid, for five 
years, and ask a lovely girl to be my 
nurse, that 's hardly fair, is it ?" 



TRAVELLERS FROM FAR AND NEAR. 69 

^^You take too gloomy a view of the 
situation. I will find a doctor who will 
put you right. London is a cruel city, 
but it 's mighty clever, old man ; perhaps 
the cleverest under the sun." 

" Ah, well," said Decker, " we shall see 
what we shall see. It will be all the same 
a hundred years hence, anyhow. The 
men who built that abbey church have 
had neither headache nor heartache for a 
good many hundred years, Jack." 

" No, my boy, no," Kerman replied. 
'' We must go and see it, Tristy. When I 
did the swell business in London it wasn't 
the thing among my set to go about see- 
ing the sights of the place ; it was only 
conunon folk or foreigners who prowled 
around Westminster Abbey, the Houses of 
Parliament, the Tower, and St. Paul's ; 
and it was your duty to cut anybody dead 
who had been up the Monument, though 
I 'm told it 's a wonderful sight to look 
down on London from the top of the 



70 CRUEL LONDON. 

column, or, for that matter, from the dome 
of St. Paiil\s;' 

" What is our programme. Jack ? " 
'' We ought to rest to-day and do 
nothing, but that won't suit you, I know ; 
so I have ordered a carriage to be here in 
an hour to take us to the City to see our 
bankers, to ask them who is the best doctor 
for YOU to consult ; and then I think we 
will look up that curious fellow Harry 
Brayford, and take him into our counsels, 
that is, if you like the looks of him, and I 
see no reason to change my mind about 
him. His place will amuse you, at all 
events ; and he is a character." 

'^ Very well, Jack," said Decker; ^'we 
must lose no time; I must get on the 
track of the Dentons ; you must help me 
with that old Secesh ; he '11 be likely to 
listen to a manly, straight-spoken, good 
fellow like you, Jack. And Caroline ! Oh, 
my dear boy, if you only knew how my 
very soul yearns for that woman ! " 



TRAVELLERS FROM FAR AND NEAR. 71 

" We are both in the same boat, for that 
matter, Tristy, only I'm not such an 
impulsive, tempestuous chap as you are ; if 
I had been we should never have met." 

'' Then I am glad you are as you are." 

" If you had been me you would have 
taken Tom Sleaford by the throat at that 
reception I have so often told you of, and 
carried Jane Crosby off by storm." 

" Yes, by the sacred stars and stripes I 
should!" exclaimed Decker. ^' I have 
always thought that fellow was a sneak 
and a cur." 

' ' Perhaps he was ; I often think he was 
now, though I didn't at the time. Sup- 
posing Jane is his wife ! That will be a 
bitter pill, Tristy. Unless that message of 
mine, in which I exposed my heart to her, 
gripped her true womanly nature, she is 
Mrs. Tom Sleaford. Well, I can't blame 
her. I wonder how Mrs. Roper gets 
along ? " 

^^ Who is she?" 



72 CRUEL LONDON. 

^' The little girl who would have sacri- 
ficed herself for my money." 

^' Oh, yes, I remember your telling me 
about her. She 's happy enough if she 's 
been lucky ; it 's quite clear she knew the 
value of money." 

^' Well, Tristy, you will have plenty of 
opportunities of testing the strength of 
your golden talisman in this city." 

'^ I hope so." 

" I must introduce you to old Sleaford; 
he would sell liis soul for money. It will 
amuse you, who are shrewd in the world's 
ways, to see him begin to lay traps and 
snares for your coin. And there 's a con- 
federate named Robinson, the Hon. Fitz- 
herbert Eobinson, as some people used to 
call him. He 's a sort of decoy bird ; says 
' Haw ! haw ! ' and talks of his friend Lord 
This and Lord That. We shall have some 
fun, Tristy, when we 've got all our serious 
business settled. You '11 like a turn in the 
city. Old Maclosky Jones, he 's as wily 



TRAVELLERS FROM FAR AND NEAR. 73 

as poor old Maggs was. Lord, how they 
cleaned me out among them ! What a fool 
I was, to be sure ! " 

It was quite an accidental circumstance, 
if anything in tliis life is accidental, that 
brought Decker and Kerman to this par- 
ticular hotel, in the shadow of West- 
minster Abbey; but it was the only 
house at which Mr. Jabez Thompson 
stayed during his brief visits to the 
metropolis, and when Jane Crosby re- 
solved to leave the farm to the care of 
Mr. and Mrs. Goff, and take a holiday in 
London and a trip to Paris, Mr. Jabez 
Thompson had engaged rooms for herself 
and maid at tliis establishment. For many 
weeks after a certain painful incident of 
the first Sunday after Christmas, Miss 
Crosby had refused to see anybody, or to 
visit with her neighbours. Her pride and 
her remorseful belief that Heaven had 
pimished her for being untrue to the only 
man she really loved, had kept her mind 



74 CRCIEL LONDON. 

in a continual agitation, until her health 
was seriously affected, and she had been 
compelled, under medical direction, to take 
long rides by the sea. To set her up com- 
pletely the local authority declared change 
of scene necessary, and Mr. Jabez Thomp- 
son had exercised his influence so success- 
fully as to arrange a visit to London and 
Paris, appointing himself his ward's '4ord 
.in waiting." They had had some little 
discussion upon the point in regard to the 
proprieties ; Jane had said she did not care 
to furnish the Marsh with another scandal ; 
and, after all, her shrewd trustee had not 
shown himself the most discreet adviser 
an unprotected woman could have. Jabez 
had argued that she couldn't visit London 
and Paris without somebody to take care 
of her. He hoped while he was experienced 
enough to do that, he was also suificiently 
aged to be above suspicion. Half in 
earnest, half in fun, the proprieties had 
been inquired into and studied, and finally 



TRAVELLERS FROM FAR AND NEAR. 75 

pronounced satisfactory by guardian and 
ward; and the very day before Decker 
and Kerman : arrived in London Miss 
Crosby and her maid, and Mr. Jabez 
Thompson entered the Palace Hotel. 
Kerman might have seen their names in 
the book of arrivals if he had looked at 
it. The world is very little after all. 

As Decker and Kerman were leaving 
their rooms in response to the announce- 
ment that the carriage was at the door, 
Miss Crosby was coming along the cor- 
ridor. The meeting was not romantic, but 
the situation was fraught with interesting 
and important consequences. Kerman 
gripped Decker's arm, and came to a 
sudden standstill, as a well-dressed woman 
in full morning attire, bonneted, cloaked, 
and gloved, came sailing along with beam- 
ing face and elastic tread. She did not 
appear to see any one. She was evidently 
in a hurry. Kerman recognized her on 
the instant. 



76 CRUEL LONDON. 

" Miss Crosby ! " he gasped, as she was 
about to pass hiin. 

She turned round inquiringly, as if in 
doubt whether she had been spoken to or 
not ; and then the colour left her cheeks, 
and she looked anxiously into Kerman's 
face. 

'' John!" she exclaimed, " Mr. Kerman ; 
why, really, is that you ? " 

" It is, indeed," he said. 

The colour rushed back to her cheeks, 
and there was an expression of joy in her 
face which overcame all Kerman's caution 
and reticence. In another moment he 
had caught her in his arms and kissed 
her. 

'' Decker sauntered along the corridor. 

" Jane, forgive me," said Kerman, 
trembling with emotion ; ^^ I couldn't help 
it. If you only knew how much I love 
you ! " 

She disengaged herself and looked con- 
fused. 



TRAVELLERS FROM FAR AND NEAR. 77 

^' Ah, John," she said, '' if you had only 
told me that before you went away ! " 

" Why, why?" he asked, ten thousand 
fears besetting him. ^^ It is not too late, 
Jane ? " . 

^' I don't know," she said, in a low, sad 
voice. 

* 

'' You are not married ? " 

"Thank God! no," she replied. 

"Amen!" said Kerman. "But why 
that anxious look ? You are not engaged ? " 

"No." 

" Then let me engage you now, Jane, 
and make up that lost time when some 
devil blinded me to your goodness, and 
hid my love under a mountain of conceit 
and pride." 

" You have surprised me so much I 
hardly know where I am or what I'm 
saying. See, there are people coming 
along the passage. This is our sitting- 
room. No. 6 . ^will you come in ? " 

" Not till you say ' Yes,' " he replied, 



78 CRUEL LONDON. 

taking her arm and linking it in his own, 
and walking to and fro opposite the room 
she had indicated. 

^' Oh, John, you know I will say ' Yes.' 
I do say ' Yes ' with all my hearty but . " 

^'But. whybut?" 

'^ Strange things have happened since 
you went away. When you know all you 
may not care whether I say ^ Yes' or ^No.'" 

^' Not care ! " he repeated, the old vague 
fears crowding about his heart. '^ Jane, 
what is this mystery ? " 

'^ I have made a fool of myself." 

The frank, almost blunt, character of 
the woman came out full and hearty in 
this rough mode of explanation. 

''Made a fool of yourself!" said Ker- 
man, the expression even striking him as 
incongruous in the mouth of this handsome 
and elegant woman. 

'' You are letting my arm drop. You 
like me a little less already." 

He pressed her arm to his side. 



TRAVELLERS FROM FAR AND NEAR. 79 

^^ You were 'always a strange girl," he 
said, pausing to look into her face, ^^ but 
as good and true as steel ; and you shall 
please yourself, Jane, whether you tell me 
another word about what has happened. 
If you don't tell me I'll never ask you; 
but nothing can change my love for you, 
and we'll be married to-morrow, if you 
will." 

^^ Jack, it shall be as you please; it's 
not my fault that we were not married 
long ago. Grod bless you for this con- 
fidence and trust!" 

The tears came into her eyes. She had 
tried to keep them back by an effort to be 
off-handed and careless, but the large- 
hearted, manly words of her lover touched 
her, and the fountains of feeling welled 
over. 

'' Come in and see Jabez Thompson, "^ 
she said, sobbing, as she led him to the 
room. ^^He's waiting for me. He will 
explain, he will tell you. I was not so 



80 CRUEL LONDON. 

much to blame as you may think at first. 
They worried me . he pestered me. Jabez 
thought it was right." 

They were in the room by this time. 

' ' Jabez Thompson, here is John come 
back again. Tell him what a fool I made 
of myself. He wants to marry me. If he 
doesn't change his mind when you have 
explained all that has happened, ring the 
bell and send Mary to tell me to come 
back. I am going to my room." 

Before Thompson could recover from 
his surprise, and shake Kerman by the 
hand, she was gone. 

'' Excuse me a moment," said Kerman, 
^' I have a friend outside." 

He rushed to Decker. 

'^ My dear Tristy, it is Jane." 

'' I knew it." 

'^ Will you wait a little longer for me ? " 

" A week, if you like." 

Kerman went back to No. 6, and 
Decker lounged about the end of the cor- 



TRAVELLERS FROM FAR AND NEAR. 81 

ridor, where he could see the Abbey. All 
educated Americans know the liistory of 
England ; some of them are better 
acquainted with the stories of our famous 
buildings than we are ourselves. It liad 
been one of Tristram Decker's earliest 
dreams to visit England, and this poem in 
stone at Westminster, linking the present 
with the vague and misty past, had always 
held his imagination captive. Face to face 
with this wonder of the age, even Caroline 
left his thoughts for a moment, while his 
mind wandered back into the uncertain 
paths of tradition, and made pictures for 
itself out of schoolboy memories and his- 
torical romance. He was presently re- 
called from his reverie by Kerman, who 
begged him to come and be introduced to 
Miss Crosby and Mr. Jabez Thompson, 
^ ' the fine old country squire I told you of 
over our wood fire in the Sacramento." 

Jane Crosby had been sent for, as re- 
quested, and she had returned dressed for 

VOL. III. G 



82 CRUEL LONDON. 

luiichefjii, looking the pictui-e of all that is 
fresh and ehanning in woman.- Kerman 
had informed her that Mr. Thompson had 
explained ever)i:liing, and all he had to 
say about it was that he must find out that 
poor little woman who had stood between 
him and Tom Sleaford, and give her a 
substantial proof of his gratitude. The rest 
of the story he discussed in the same spirit 
of thankfulness that Fortune had been so 
good and true ; for what right had he to 
expect that Jane would keep single, and 
that if she did, he, of all other men in the 
world, could induce her to many ? 

Though hardly an hour had passed since 
the meeting, John and Jane had settled all 
possible diflferences between them ; and 
when Decker appeared on the scene, he 
completed the gathering of a happy family. 
Jabez Thompson, neat as ever, his face 
shining, his head erect, welcomed Decker 
to England, and Jane gave him an invita- 
ti(m to Manor Farm. Kerman engaged 



TRAVELLERS FROM FAR AND NEAR. 83 

them all to dine together in his room that 
evening; and then remembered that he 
and Decker had business to transact, and 
that a carriage had been waiting for them 
at the door for more than an horn*. 

^^ By the way," he said, ^^ we were going 
to call on Brayf ord ; at least, I was going 
to take Decker to his place, partly out of 
curiosity to see a character." 

'^ Poor devil ! " exclaimed Thompson. 

^^Why?" 

'' The Sleafords ruined him." 

^^Is he poor, then?" 

^^Very." 

'^ That's a shame; he was a good fellow." 

'' There is not a better," said the lawyer. 

^^ Then he shall be rich." 

^^How?" 

^^ I '11 make him as rich as the richest 
gravedigger in London." 

'^ You ! Have you hit upon a new idea 
for him ? " 

" Yes, I have ; it will astonish him." 



84 CRUEL LONDON. 

'^ He is not in that line of business now?" 

^^ No ! What is his profession now ? " 

Mr. Thompson consulted a pocket-book, 
and took out a card. 

'' That's his address and his new busi- 
ness." 

^^ Circularizer and Advertising Agent," 
said Kerman, reading it. ^^ Well, we can 
give him some business in the advertising 
way, I think, Tristy ? " 

^^ Yes," said Decker, smiling sadly. 

^' For the present, then, good-bye," said 
Kerman, taking Jane's hand. 

^^ Till dinner-time," said Thompson, in 
his breezy way. 

Jane went* to the door to watch them 
down the corridor, and Kerman took 
advantage of the shadow of the entrance 
to kiss her. 

^'Come along, Tristy," he exclaimed, 
taking his companion by the arm. ^ ^ Forgive 
me for being so happy. It seems unkind 
to you, old man ; but I '11 make up to you 



TRAVELLERS FROM FAR AND NEAR. 85 

for it. We '11 find yom* Southern beauty 
now, and arrange a, double marriage." 

As Decker and Sleaf ord's carriage turned 
to enter the Thames Embankment from 
Westminster, a pretty barouche came along 
Parliament Street, skirted Palace Green, 
and stopped at the hotel. Mr. Tavener 
had excited the jealousy of Mother Sniggers 
to the highest pitch, when one day this 
veliicle arrived bran new, with a pair of 
prancing horses and a coachman ; but when 
the entire turn-out became a part of the 
JBOcial economy of the artist's domestic 
arrangement, then Mother Sniggers knew 
that there was really something wrong. 
But that did not trouble Mr. and Mrs. 
Tavener. Frank had made liis '^ hit," and 
the money came rolling in. They hung 
his pictures on the line now, and the 
dealers kept up a continual competition 
for the honour and profit of buying them. 
Hence the barouche and pair. Miss Crosby 
had informed Mrs. Tavener of their arrival 



86 CRUEL LONDON. 

in town, and had expressed a great desire 
to see her again, and also Patty, whose 
devotion to Kerman she had heard of 
through Mr. Brayiord. The young lady 
had risen in Miss Crosby's estimation when 
she thought of her own weakness, and she 
begged Mrs. Tavener, if she should call 
upon her, to bring Patty, whom she hoped 
to see some day at Manor Farm. 

It was, however, with feelings somewhat 
different to those under the influence of 
which she had written to Mrs. Tavener 
that Jane now received the sister of Tom 
Sleaford. 

When they were announced she was in 
her bedroom, upon her knees, weeping 
tears of joy, and offering up prayers of 
thankfulness. She arose hurriedly, dried 
her eyes, and paused to think what she 
should say and do in regard to the sudden 
and unexpected arrangement between her- 
self and Kerman. The thought of Patty 
Sleaford's disappointment troubled her. 



TRAVELLERS FKOM FAR AND NEAR. 87 

and she tried to compose her features into 
a state of cahiiness though she utterly 
failed to eliminate from the expression of 
her face the joyousness of her heart. 

'' Ah, my dear, I am so glad to see youl " 
she exclaimed. 

Emily kissed her with an earnest hug ; 
Patty embraced lier with her accustomed 
sangfroid, 

'' And tliis is yom' husband ? I am proud 
to make your acquaintance, Mr. Tavener ! 
I have often wondered what you were like. 
I am quite satisfied. Miss Sleaford, I con- 
gratulate you; and Mr. Tavener, I con- 
gratulate you." 

' ' Thank you for both of us. Miss 
Crosby," said Tavener, smiling, and strok- 
ing his long flowing beard. 

'' And may I ask after Mr. Roper ? " 

This to Patty, who stood aside from her 
sister and brother-in-law in her neutral way. 

" Yes, Miss Crosby; and he is very well," 
she said, in measured tones. 



88 CRUEL LONDON. 

^^ I am glad of that. Do you see him 
often ? " 

'' Once a week/' said Patty, without in- 
dicating pleasure or annoyance thereat. 

^^I quite expected to have had cards 
from you ere this . ^Mr. and Mrs. Roper,' 
you know." 

Jane was feeling her way to a disclosure 
of what had just occurred. 

'^Indeed," said Patty, '^I am in no 
hurry to be married ; certainly not to Mr. 
Roper." 

^^ I was afraid, after what had occurred 
on the first Sunday after Christmas, neither 
of you might come and see me; but I 
couldn't help it, you know, and . " 

^^My letter of sympathy and regret 
should have assured you that I had only a 
sisterly and womanly feeling for you in 
the matter, my dear Miss Crosby," said 
Emily, taking up the point without waiting 
for Jane to explain further. 

Jane blushed. 



TRAVELLERS FROM FAR AND NEAR. 89 

'^Yes, yes," she said, "it was very 
good and very kind. Some people 
wouldn't speak of a painful affair like 
this ; but I don't hold with keeping back 
what is in your heart, and I know we are 
all thinking about it." 

"That is true," said Mrs. Tavener. 
" The same outspoken, open-hearted woman 
as of, old. Isn't she all I said she was, 
Fred ? " 

" My wife never tires of singing your 
praises. Miss Crosby," said Tavener. 

" I cannot tell how much I value her 
good opinion, and desire her friendship. I 
am not what you call a society lady, and 
it 's no good pretending that I am. It 's 
better to be what you really are than try 
and seem to be something else." 

" Truth, honesty, and kindness," said 
Emily, "adorn any society; do they not, 
Fred ? " 

" And they go hand in hand with happi- 
ness, I do believe," said Tavener, looking 



90 CRUEL LONDON. 

at Miss Crosby; '' for yom' friend's is the 
most joyous face I have seen in London 
for many a day." 

'^ I could wish it were not so at this 
moment, sir," said Jane. ^^Will you 
excuse me if I take Miss Patty into my 
room for a few minutes. I have news 
for her which I should like to tell her 
first ? " 

'' Oh, yes," said Emily. 

'' Will you come with me. Miss Patty ? " 
asked Jane, putting her arm round that 
young lady and leading her away. 

When the door was shut and they were 
alone, Jane Crosby said, . 

" They tell me you refuse to marry Mr. 
Roper because you love Mr. Keiinan. Is 
that true ? " 

'' Yes, it 's partly true," answered Patty, 
calmly. 

'' But if Mr. Kerman had married some- 
body else ? " 

^^ Then she'd forbid the banns," said 



TRAVELLERS FROM FAR AND NEAR. 91 

Patty, with something like a cynical 
chuckle. 

'' Yes, you 've a right to sneer, my girl ; 
I like it. The thought of my weakness 
helps me to be thankful for my escape." 

Patty looked at her inquiringly. 

' ^ It is all for your good the question I 
am asking you, and what I am going to 
say." 

'^ Is he married, then ? " asked Patty. 

'' Should you grieve much if he were ? " 

'' What would be the good of grieving?" 
said Patty, as if she were asking a ques- 
tion in mental arithmetic. 

'^ No good," said Jane. '' You would 
then say ' Yes ' to Mr. Roper?" 

^ ' The more I say ' No ' to him, the 
more he likes me." 

'^ But that is not the reason why you 
don't say ^Yes'?" 

'^ No. I did not want Mr. Kerman to 
think I was mean about his money." 

' ' Was that all ? Be frank with me. 



92 CRUEL LONDON. 

won't you? I can't help admiring and 
loving you for your devotion." 

'^ I thought he behaved so nobly," said 
Patty, not moved one jot out of her usual 
manner ; ^^ it was like something out of a 
book." 

'^ Yes, it was indeed." 

' ' And I wanted him to have his money 
back. I knew papa would get it away from 
Mr. Roper ; and papa isn 't to be trusted." 

" Don't say that, dear." 

'^ You asked me to be frank." 

'^ But we are taught to honour our 
parents." 

'' And are they not to be worthy of omr 
honour? When Roper had no money pa 
objected to him, and wanted me to marry 
John Kerman. When he gave all his 
money away, and ten thousand pounds to 
the man who should marry me, then he 
told me I might marry Roper. I was 
not going to be dealt with as if I were 
scrip in the City." 



TRAVELLERS FROM FAR AND NEAR. 93 

The slightest deepening of the pink 
colour in Patty's cheek, and a touch of 
something like earnestness in the utterance 
of the last sentence, which was delivered 
in a louder tone of voice than usual, 
showed that underneath the girPs calm, 
phlegmatic, and cold manner there might 
be a smouldering volcano. Jane Crosby 
kissed the pinky- white face as she said, . 

'' Quite right, my child; quite right." 

' ^ And so I told them all I loved John 
Kerman." 

"Yes; and did you? As well as Mr. 
Roper?" 

" Just then I did." 

"But now, dear, now? Would you 
marry him if he asked you to-day ? " 

" Not if he is married already." 

^ ' No, no ; but if Mr. Roper asked you 
to decide to-day, in order that he might 
marry another lady ? " 

" Mr. Roper marry another lady ? " 

"Yes." 



94 CEUEL LONDON. 

" He wouldn't do it." 

^^But a man can't go on waiting for 
ever." 

^^ Archy Roper can." 

u But." 

^ ^ Why don't you tell me what you want 
to ? . you who are so frank." 

Patty looked into Jane's face with her 
calm eyes, resuming her natural manner, 
and speaking in measured accents. 

'^ Lay your head on my shoulder, and I 
will whisper it into your ear." 

She took Patty into her arms, and told 
her of Kerman's return, his proposal to 
her, the explanation, and their engage- 
ment to be married. Then, all blushes, and 
with tears in her eyes, she waited for 
Patty's reply. 

^^Well," said Patty, ''1 had begun to 
guess at it; your heart beat sq, and you 
looked so happy. All I can say is, I 
would not have given him up to any one 
else." 



TRAVELLERS FROM FAR* AND NEAR. 96 

' ' You do give him up ? You won't grieve 
about it ? " 

^^ What is the good?" 

'' My dear Patty ! " exclaimed Jane, 
kissing her again. ^^Wliat will you do? 
Make poor Roper happy, eh ? Will you ? " 

'^I don't know about making him 
happy, . I '11 marry him now." 

'^ Are you glad or sorry at the news ? " 

'^ I think I am glad." 

'^ Then you wouldn't really have liked 
to give up Mr. Roper ? " 

'^No; only I wouldn't be driven. I 
am not a sheep, to be bought and sold. It 
well nigh broke my heart when Mr. Ker- 
man showed me what a thing I was ! A 
chattel . no better, much worse . ^for I 
threw over a man I loved for another I 
didn't care for, to have horses and car- 
riages, and plenty of money. I would 
have married him then, when he found me 
out, if he had been a beggar ! There ! " 

Patty buried her face in Jane Crosby's 



96 CRUEL LONDON. 

neck, and sobbed. Nobody had suspected 
the fire that burnt beneath Patty's icy and 
worldly manner. She had no knowledge of 
it herself until Kerman showed her, in the 
mirror of his own fine nature, the miser- 
able object a scheming father, a foolish 
mother, and a keen experience of the 
misery of ^^ stuck-up poverty" had made 
her. 

'' My dear, dear girl," said Jane, ^' you 
have lifted such a load oflE my heart ! Now 
let me be practical. Is Mr. Roper doing 
well ? " 

'' Yes; he has settled down to business, 
given up all connexion with my father ; he 
has done with horse-racing. I told him I 
would never have a husband who did the 
sort of speculative business my father liked. 
I and Archy are as humble and good as 
any lovers could be ; I have been sorry 
for him." 

" Kiss me, Patty ! Let us be sworn 
friends," said Jane, embracing her again. 



TKA.VELLEB8 FROM FAB AKD NEAS. 97 

" That is what he said." 

"Who?" 

" The man who is to be votir husband." 

^' He shall keep his word. Will you 
come with us to Paris . ^you and Mr. 
Roper ? Perhaps we can make up a nice 
large party. Mr. Thompson shall tele- 
graph for rooms. But let us return to 
your sister ; I fear we have been a long 
time away." 

^'You must forgive me," said Jane, as 
they re-entered the room where Mr. and 
Mrs. Tavener were waiting, ^^ Patty will 
explain to you, by-and-by." 

^' Tell them, Jane," said Patty. 

"Very well, then," replied Jane; "my 
news has grown since I took Patty away 
to talk to her. Two marriages are to 
take place shortly: Mr. Roper and Miss 
Patty Sleaford, Mr. Kerman and Jane 
Crosby." 

The news was received with delighted 
surprise; and Jane and her visitors sat 

VOL. m. H 



98 CRUEL LOHDOK. 

together for more than an hour discussing 
it and rejoicing over it ; while Tristram 
Decker was rushing upon his fate in the 
direction of High Street, Marylebone. 



NO LONGER A VISION, 99 



CHAPTER II. 



NO LONGER A VISION. 



Arrived at the famous bank of Amschel 
Nathans, in St. Swithin's Lane, after some 
formality they were introduced into the 
private room of the chief, who was sitting 
before a pile of papers. 

The banker simply^ nodded, and they 
seated themselves until he had finished a 
calculation upon which he was engaged. 
The Nathans were foremost among the 
rulers of the world, for the chief Powers 
of Europe were indebted to them. 
^' Your business, gentlemen ? " 
"Letters of credit," said Decker, pre- 



100 CEUEL XX)NDON. 

senting several documents from Harmen, 
of San Francisco, and Defreres, of New 
York. 

The banker read the papers, and looked 
at Decker. 

^' Have I the pleasure of addressing 
Messrs. Decker and Kerman ? " 

^^I am Decker; this is my friend Ker- 
man." 

The banker bowed. ^^I have been ex- 
pecting you." 

^^ Indeed ! we had not intimated to any 
one our intention of coming to Europe." 

*^ I had heard of the Decker's Gulch 
successes," said the banker, ^^ and yester- 
day's mail brought me notice of your letters 
of credit. I congratulate you." 

^^ Thank you," said Decker. 

^ ^ One million sterling to the credit of 
Decker and Kerman," said the banker; 
'^ joint account ; and five hundred thousand 
.each to John Kerman and Tristram 
Decker." 



NO LONGER A VISION. 101 

" That's it," said Decker. 

The banker touched the bell. It was 
answered by a white-haired old man. 

'' Take the signatures for these letters of 
credit, Isaacs." 

The attendant bowed. 

^' This way, gentlemen," he said. 

They followed him, inscribed their sig- 
natures in a ponderous volume, and re- 
turned to the private room. 

^^What else can I do for you, gentle- 
men ? " 

'' The doctors on the other side," said 
Decker, '^ give me only five years of life. 
I want ten at the least." 

^'Yes?" 

' ' Can you introduce me to a physician 
who will manage that for me ? " 

The banker looked at the speaker 
thoughtfully. 

^^ You are ill?" 

'^ Dying, they say," replied Decker, 
calmly ; ^^ dying of consumption." 



102 CRUEL LONDON. 

'' Money will do many things," said the 
banker. 

^' But not what I want ? " 

'^I do not say that. If it could bribe 
Death there would be some very old men 
in the City of London/' said the banker, 
with a quiet chuckle ; ^ ' but though the 
bill must be finally met, it may perhaps 
be renewed meanwhile, . ^it may be re- 
newed." 

As he spoke he sat down and wrote a 
note, which he handed to Decker. 

'' Dr. Farmington, Cavendish Square," 
he said, ^^ may be able to meet your views. 
Give him this note." 

" Thank you," said Decker. 

' ' Any other matter in which I can serve 
you ? " 

'' No, sir." 

'^ Good-morning," said the banker, bow- 
ing. '' Isaacs will send cheque-books and 
pass-books to your hotel. You have also 
letters to Bartons ? " 



NO LONGER A VISION. 103 

^^ Neighbours of mine, and a most r^ 
liable firm. It is not every day, even in 
London, that accounts like yours are 
opened at the two great houses. I 
have ventured to give Farmington a 
hint on that score. You cannot take 
his head like an Oriental monarch 
should you fall ill ; but you can endow 
him with a subsidy as long as yott 
Hve." 

' ^ Thank you, sir, I shall act upon your 
hint." 

They had next an interview with the 
Bartons, equally quiet and unpretentious 
on both sides, though Mr. Barton, it must 
be confessed, accepted the letters as if the 
bank as a rule only dealt in millions, and 
knew nothing of smaller sums. Decker 
asked what were the two best Stocks in 
which to invest. 

'' United States Bonds and English Con- 
sols," Mr. Barton replied, paying a tribute 



104 CRUEL LONDON. 

to Decker's nationaKty by putting Ameri- 
can scrip first. 

Next, they drove to Dr. Farmington, 
who promised Decker his full ten years, 
and more, on the condition of his advice 
being obeyed, and arranged for Decker to 
all next day to dinner, when they would 
talk as friends outside the restraints of the 
consulting-room. 

It was four o'clock by the time they 
reached High Street, Marylebone. Mr. 
Moses Aaron himself came to the door to 
receive them. " Two customers," he 
thought, '^ and for something more import- 
ant than stuffed birds." 

" We want to find Mr. Brayford," said 
Kerman. 

^^ Certainly. Yes, by all means," said 
Aaron, ringing the beU at the private 
door. ^^That is the entrance to Mr. 
Brayford's oflfices." 

The summons was answered at once, 
and Kerman and Decker, threading the 



NO LONGER A VISION. 105 

mazes of the Emporitim, which climbed to 
the very attics in relays of old oak chests^ 
vases, armour, wardrobes, china, pictures, 
came at last to the door of Brayford & 
Co. Kerman rung and knocked. Bray- 
ford, with a quill pen behind his ear, 
bustled to the [door and opened it. He 
looked at Kerman inquiringly, and curi- 
ously at Decker. 

'^ Don't you know me ?" Kerman 
asked. 

"Know you! Yes,'' exclaimed Bray- 
ford, the moment he heard Kerman'a 
voice ; "of course I know you." 

He grasped Kerman's hand heartily. 

"Though you are a good deal dis- 
guised," he continued. 

" Disguised ? " said Kerman. 

" Beard and moustache ; why, you look 
like the pictures of one of our royal princes. 
But come in, come," he said, adding, 
" This is your friend, I suppose^? " 

"Yes," said Kerman, smiling. " I have 



106 CRUEL LONDON. 

brought him all the way from the United 
States to see you." 

Brayford looked round as if waiting for 
the stranger's name, but Kerman at that 
moment noticed the Wonner, who sat on 
a tall stool at a tall desk, engrossed in an 
examination oi a morning paper, from the 
front page of which he was making notes. 

'^ Ah, Mr. " said Kerman. 

''Mr. W.," said the Wonner, with a 
vacant smile. 

'' Yes, of course, Mr. W., how do you 
do?" 

'' Thank you, sir," said Mr. W., nod- 
ding towards Brayford as much as to say, 
^' He ^s the clever one, it 's no good talk- 
ing to me." 

When Kerman turned roimd, Tristram 
Decker was making advances to a pretty 
little boy who had toddled towards him, 
looking up at him with large blue eyes, 
something like his own, and long brown 
hair. 



NO LONGER A VISION. 107 

" How do, Kttle one ? "' siiid Decker, 
stooping until he was on a level with it, 
face to face. 

"Do, do," replied the child, lialtiiig a 
few yards from him. 

" I am very well," said Decker, smiling. 

" Wery well ? " said little Willie. 

" Yes, just entered on a new lease of life 
with one of your English doctors, and I 'm 
very fond of little children." 

" See Willie's noo soos," said the child, 
lifting a little foot in a red boot. 

" Very pretty," said Decker ; " come to 
me and let me feel it." 

"-No, no," replied little Willie. 

" Yes, yes," said Decker ; " I think you 
and I might be great friends ; you are the 
first little boy I have spokeii to in 
England." 

" Ittle boy," said the child. 

"Yes; will you come and bo my little 
boy ? " 

^^ Mamma's ittle boy," replied the child. 



108 CRUEL LONDON. 

his blue eyes still fixed on Decker's 
face, 

^' Oh, you are mamma's little boy ?" 

" Is, mamma's." 

" If your mamma is only as sweet as 
you are," said Decker, looking up at 
Kerman and Brajrford, '^ your papa ought 
to be very proud of you both." 

Brayford shrugged his shoulders, and 
sighed. 

Little Willie advanced a step towards 
Decker, who took out his watch, and held 
it up. 

^^ Come to me, and I '11 give you this." 

'' Tick, tick, tick," said WilUe. 

'' Yes," said Decker, undoing the chain, 
and putting it, watch and all, in a heap 
upon the floor, " come and fetch it. I 
will give it to you in return for the happy 
memories you have awakened." 

Willie laughed and pretended to ad- 
vance, but still held back. 

'' I had a sister," he said, turning towards 



NO LONGER A VISION. 109 

Kerman, '' she died when she was three 
years old ; she was the image of this Kttle 
one. I had no other sister or brother. You 
can imagine that I was fond of the little 
girl. Strange I should find her counter- 
part in these eyes, that odd, grave little 
mouth, and this long brown hair." 

^^ Willie's mother is an American," said 
Brayford; but the observation escaped 
Decker, for at that moment Willie ran 
straight into his arms, and Decker kissed 
the little face, and then, lifting up the 
child, sat him on his knee, and dropped 
the watch and chain into the boy's 
lap. 

'^Now you two old friends have your 
talk while we two new friends discuss the 
works of this chronometer.'* 

While Decker opened his watch, and 
exhibited its machinery to the child, Bray- 
ford and Kerman sat down at the other 
end of the room. 

"And what's the news, Brayford?" 



110 CRUEL LONDON. 

asked Kermau. '^You are the first man 
I have sought out." 

^' The first man," said Brayford, empha- 
sizing ^'man." 

^^Not the first woman; no, Harry, 
no." 

'' Wlio liavc you seen ? " 

" Why, whom should I have seen?" 

'^ Not her," said Brajrford ; " though 
you look as happy as if you had, and 
further, as if you 'd made it all up. Jack 
and Jill fell out upon a summer's day, Jill 
was ill, and Jack he ran away ; but when 
the pie was open, th^ birds began to sing, 
and all went merrily along as happy as a 
king, . eh ? " 

The Wonner laughed to himself as he 
spotted a ducal obituary notice, and re- 
marked, . 

^^Oh, isn't he clever ! " 

" Just so," said Kerman, laughing ; '^ I 
have seen lier, Brayford, this very mom- 
mg." 



NO LONGER A VISION. Ill 

^^Wlio? What, Miss Crosby?" asked 
Brayford, beaming. 

" Yes." 

'' And you know everything ? " 

'^Everything." 

" And you 've squared it ? " 

" Yes." 

' ' It 's all right between you ; and you 
know all." 

" Just so," said Kerman. 

'' Hurrah ! " exclaimed Bra3rford. '' The 
bells shall ring, and the cats shall sing, and 
we won't go Jiome till morning, Mr. W. ! " 
- The Wonner turned round and smiled. 

^' A holiday, sir ! Away you go, sir. 
Enjoy yourself. Here's a shilling for 
you ! " 

The Wonner dropped from his seat. 

'^ Good as he 's clever," he said, taking 

the shilling ; '' clever as he 's good." 

Nodding at Kerman, he took his hat and 
cloak from the wall, and trotted out of the 

room. 



112 CEUEL LONDON. 

'^ Now, look here, Mr. Kerman," said 
Brayford, ^^ you see that child ? " 

'' Yes." 

Willie was riding hard to ^^ Hickory 
bockery boo, a horse without a shoo." 
The horse was Decker's knee, and Decker 
was making a poetical and vocal accom- 
paniment to the gaUop. 

^^ You've a rival in my American 
friend. He 's a poet, too," said Kerman. 

'' Ah, I 'm only a doggrel-monger," said 
Brayford ; '' and I 've got into the habit of 
amusing these two children, the two 
W.s . ^little Willie and the Wonner, both 
children, old W. the biggest child of the 
two. And did she tell you about forbidding 
the banns?" 

^^No, no; Jabez Thompson explained 
it." 

. '^Ah, that's her child, the poor, dear 
love." 

^^ Whose child?" 

^^Mrs. Tom Sleaford's, or Mrs. Gard- 



NO LONGER A VISION. 113 

ner's, whichever her name is. Ah, Mr. 
Kerman, one of the best and most lovable 
women in the world; and clever, too. 
Lor' bless you, she has the instincts and 
the taste of the best lady in the land. 
Old Aaron, who is looked upon as a Great 
Mogul in the art way, he actually consults 
her on these things. We didn't know 
what she could do until the other day. 
Here we were putting her to address 
envelopes, and all the time she was an 
artist, a painter, and musician. We 
didn't know it, she 's so modest ; but one 
day she tried a piano, and another she 
said something about a picture that Aaron 
thought a great deal of, and he found her 
out. Mrs. Aaron found out her heart ; he 
found out her head ; and now, instead of 
sitting here writing envelopes, she 's in a 
room to herself, painting. She's done 
Mr. Moses Aaron as one of the Apostles, 
and Mrs. Aaron a portrait. Well, they 
are splendid; and we've all got one 

VOL. III. I 



114 CRUEL LONDON. 

ambition now, to get Aaron, the apostle, 
into the Academy. And little Willie, 
there, is her child." 

^^ I owe you and her a debt of gratitude 
too deep for words," Kerman said. '' She 
shall have her picture in the Academy, if 
money can do it ; and if it can't, she shall 
have an academy of her own." 

Brayford ^smiled, as much as to say, 
'' The same dear, reckless, generous simple- 
ton as of yore." 

^^No, I am not talking nonsense," con- 
tinued Kerman, noticing Brayford's ex- 
pression of incredulity and amusement; 
^^and I want to ask a favour of you, 
Brayford." 

^^Yes; ask and have, if it is in my 
power to comply." 

'' I want a private secretary." 

"You do?" 

" Yes. The work will be light, but I '11 
make it up in salary." 

Brayford laughed. 



NO LONGER A VISION. 115 

^^IVe no salary now. You'll double 
it, I suppose, as they say on the stage." 

'' I will give you a thousand a year to 
begin with," said Kerman; ".and here's 
your first half-year in advance." 

He took a 500Z. note from his pocket, 
and held it out to Brayford. 

"No, no; you're joking," he said* 
"It's a property note . ^a Bank of Ele- 
gance, eh ? Ah, you 've come back a 
wag ! " 

"Brayford," said Kerman, gravely, 
" you don't want to insult me ?" 

" Heaven forbid ! " 

" Listen, then. First take that note." 

Brayford took it, and looked anxiously 
at Kerman. 

"I am a rich man. That note is no 
more to me than a sovereign used to be. 
I liked you in the old days. I am under 
an obligation to you now that I can never 
repay, and I like you none the less. 
Will you be my friend, my secretary. 



116 CRUEL LONDON. 

steward, or whatever you Kke to 
call it?" 

^^Will I?" exclaimed Brayford, rising. 
^^My dear Mr. Kerman, I'd have been 
that to you for fivepence a year for that 
matter, if you couldn't have aflfbrded any 
more, and I could have lived on it and 
pensioned Mr. W." 

^^ It is a bargain, then ?" 

^^ It is ; yes, indeed it is." 

They had not heard a tap at a door in a 
comer of the room opposite the one at 
which they had entered. Nor had they 
noticed the door open, and a woman 
standing there, a palette and brushes in 
her hand. Her black eyes were fixed 
upon Decker and the child on his knee. 
They only knew she was there when she 
dropped the palette, and then they saw 
her transfixed, spell-bound. 

^^Hush, don't notice her," said Bray- 
ford. '' She is like that sometimes." 

"Mamma!" cried little Willie, joy- 



NO LONGER A VISION. 117 

fully, and scrambling from his imaginary 
horse to the floor. 

Decker tmned his face in the direction 
indicated by the child's glance and cry. 

"Great God!" he exclaimed, springing 
to his feet. " Caroline ! " 

He rushed towards her, but not in time 
to catch her in his arms. She had fallen 
at his feet. 



END OF BOOK Vn. 



BOOK VIII. 



BOOK VIII. 



CHAPTER I. 

THE GOLDEN KEY. 

Blow, bitter eastern wind! Tristram Decker 
cares no more to lengthen his days ! His 
dream is over. He does not want those 
extra ten years of Kfe. He will go no 
more to Cavendish Square. Even the 
five years allotted to him by the American 
physicians are now more than he asks. 
One year alone may fulfil his desire. Tear 
down the blossoms, shrivel the yoimg 
leaves, unnatural wind, blowing upon the 
tender buds of May ! Thy sting is not so 



122 CRUEL LONDON. 

keen as the poisoned tooth which has 
lacerated the heart of Tristram Decker ! 

The biting east wind cut its way 
through the London streets just as the 
metropolis had put on its smnmer gear. 
It blew as if it came from the heart of an 
iceberg. It sent the dust whirling through 
every avenue in sharp, wounding gusts. 
Mayf air hurried home in its carriages to 
put on its seal-skin jackets. St. Giles 
crouched in its rags by fireless hearths and 
beneath merciless archways. The trees 
in the parks and squares shivered in the 
cruel tempest. The searching remorseless- 
ness of the wind made havoc with the 
consumptive and the weak, and it pinched 
the lips and shrivelled the faces of the 
istrong. The apple blossoms in the suburbs 
fell in showers from the trees. A shivering 
ripple ran along the river. Tristram Decker 
felt a chiUy spa^m m tins wmter-in-summer- 
wind impregnated the atmosphere of his 
luxurious chambers in Pall Mall East. 



THE GOLDEN KEY. 123 

He had insisted upon having his own 
rooms and living by himself. Kerman 
had remonstrated. Decker had replied, 
*^ Your path is strewn with roses ; I 
will not put thorns into it." Decker had 
answered Kerman that it was best for all 
of them that he should live his own life in 
London ; Kerman his. '' I am Nemesis," 
he had said, in his dramatic way ; '' you 
are Good Fortune. To know that you are 
happy in your love will give me a passing 
pleasure ; my everlasting disappointment 
and sorrow would be a daily blight upon 
your happiness." 

And so it came to pass that, within a 
week after their arrival in London, Decker 
had his own rooms and his own plans apart 
from his companion ; and the last day of 
May finds him entering upon his first ex- 
perience of the English climate, which 
enables the historian to impress upon the 
reader the condition of Decker's feelings 
when describing the cruelties of the east 



124 CRUEL LONDON, 

wind as bearing no comparison for bitter- 
ness with the wounds which his pride, hi 
love, and his hopes have received. 

To him enters on this day of the 
triumph of the east wind a stranger, a 
pale, well-dressed man of forty or fifty, a 
courtly person, with cold, grey eyes and 
white hands. 

^^ Monsieur Favart, I believe ? " 

^^ At your service, sir." 

" Be seated." 

Monsieur Favart, his hat and cane in 
his hand, sat near the fire in response to 
Decker's invitation. The American, in a ^ 
warm velvet dressing-gown, was engaged 
at a desk near the fireplace. 

" You are strongly recommended to me 
by Baron Nathan, the banker." 

Monsieur Favart inclined his head af- 
firmatively. Monsieur Favart did not waste 
words. 

^^ He tells me you have seen service 
under several governments." 



THE GOLDEN KEY. 125 

Monsieur Favart bowed again. 

^^ As a spy." 

'^ Sir ! " exclaimed Monsieur, " the 
baron did not send me here to be in- 
sulted." 

He rose from his seat. 

'' No," said Decker, unmoved, *^ but 
that we may thoroughly imderstand each 
other. Don't be offended, Monsieur 
Favart." 

'' Monsieur is somewhat coarse in his 
speech," replied Favart, still standing. 
'^ I am not used to that mode of address." 

'^ Pardon me, I am a citizen of the 
United States, and over there we call 
things by their right names, and don't 
palaver about business. Pray be seated ; 
put your hat and stick down. If I am 
uncouth I am rich, and I can substitute 
courtesy with gold." 

Monsieur Favart put his hat ^and cane 
upon the floor, and resumed his seat. 

''You are a Jew?" 



126 CRUEL LONDON. 

^^ I was bom in Brussels; I have Kved 
in all countries." 

'' You know London well ? " 

'' Every inch of it." 

'^ The baron tells me that, like the 
Swiss mercenaries of France and Kome, 
you don't care much for whom you fight 
until you are enlisted, engaged, and paid, 
and then you are devoted heart and soul to 
your chief." 

'^ Monsieur le Baron has been frank." 

'^ You have served under him ? " 

'' Many times." 

'' You Hke to continue in his favour ? " 

'' That is true." 

'' He is anxious that you should serve 
me." 

Monsieur bowed. 

'^I want a slave." 

^^ Sir ! " exclaimed Monsieur Favart, ^' it 
is plain you do not want me." 

^^ I want," continued Decker, ^^ a shrewd, 
clever, unscrupulous man, gentlemanly 



THE GOLDEN KEY. 127 

in style, accustomed to all societies^ 
to all countries . a keen, shrewd person, 
who has had experience of criminals 
of all classes, from the king on his 
throne who declares an unholy war, to 
the common thief who picks a pocket ; I 
want such a man to be my slave, to hunt 
for me in human hives, to track down a 
thief and lay him bound at my feet. Such 
a man can count upon the highest pay that 
spy or agent ever received from king or 
commoner. Look ! " 

Decker opened a drawer in a safe that 
stood by his elbow. It was full of sove- 
reigns. He opened another which was full 
of notes. He opened another that flashed 
the radiance of diamonds. 

^' I will be your slave," said Favart. 

'' Very well," replied Decker, closing 
the drawers ; ^ ' fix your own terms : don't 
be afraid ; I mean business." 

^^ Four hundred pounds a month." 

'' Make it eight," said Decker. 



128 CRUEL LONDON. 

^^ And expenses ? " 

'' Certainly." 

^^ Monsieur is too good ; I have only one 
condition." 

^^ Name it." 

^^ We discharge the word ^ spy' from our 
vocabulary." 

^^ Very well, to me you are henceforth 
Monsieur Favart ; I am Tristram Decker 
your chief. Is that agreeable ? " 

^^ Most agreeable." 

'^ You will live here." 

Favart bowed. 

^^ I have ordered rooms to be furnished 
for you above my own. Anything you 
want that you don't find there, order and 
charge in your expenses, on account of 
which I have paid two thousand pounds to 
your credit at Nathan's." 

^^ Sir, you are more than princely." 

" I can afford it. Now to business. On 
the date set down in this summary of 
events," said Decker, handing him a paper, 



THE GOLDEN KEY. 129 

^^ William Graham Dentoiij a distinguished 
citizen of the Southern States of America, 
was said to have been killed at the Ling- 
ham railway-depot. I want the facts, par- 
ticulars of the inquest and burial. A young 
man named Sleaford . Tom Sleaford, an 
Enghshman . and a girl, the daughter of 
Mr. Denton, travelled with the deceased. 
This Tom Sleaford lured the girl away to 
a house he had in the Vale of Essam ; she 
was ill, suffering from the shock of her 
father's death. One day he took her 
thence under the pretence of marrying her. 
She thought he took her to London. It is 
suspected that he took her to the nearest 
large city, and there is a doubt Avhether he 
married her or not ; if he did, it was a civil 
contract at a place called a Registry Office. 
I want to know whether he married her, 
and where, and you must get me a copy 
of the certificate. If it is necessary to 
employ other detective agencies than your 
own, employ them. There is a woman 

VOL. III. K 



130 CRUEL LONDON. 

named Migswood who lived at The Cottage ; 
it is thought she is in London. She can 
assist you. Let me know where she is.'' 

Decker paused, and sighed deeply. 

'' You are ill," said Favart. 

^' Don't mind me. If I am ill, know 
that your successful accomplishment of my 
wishes is the best medicine I can have." 

' ' Sympathy, as well as interest, bind me 
to yom' service." 

'^ Begin, then ; let me have all this infor- 
mation within the week." 

Monsieur Favart had no sooner left the 
room than a short, thickset, round-headed 
man entered. 

'' Davings ! Ah, I 'm glad to see you," 
said Decker ; ^ ^ it does one good to see an 
American face." 

'^ Thank you, General," replied Davings, 
turning in his mouth a quid of tobacco. 
'' I went to the hotel ; they sent me here." 

'' When did you arrive ? " 

^^ At Liverpool, yesterday." 



THE GOLDEN KP:Y. 131 

' ' I want you to take charge of thi 
place and look after me, look after my 
clothes, order ni}^ dinners, see to my 
drinks . " 

" And boss around generally, as I used to 
for Judge Smithers in Frisco ? " 

^' Just so." 

^^Keep my mouth shut, my eyes open, 
and grease the wheels of life." 

'^That's it, to the letter." 

'^Well, when '11 I begin ? " 

'^Now. See the housekeeper; she has 
my instructions." 

Davings rolled out of the room as if he 
were treading the deck of a vessel, and 
disappeared. 

^^I shall get things into shape soon," 
said Decker ; ^' it is time the lawyer came. 
The sight of Davings was welcome. I 
shall have decent food now, and proper 
drink. While I live, I '11 live." 

He drew his dressing-gown about him 
and walked to the window. The dust of 



132 cki;el loxdox. 

Pall Mall wa>4 whirling up around the 

Mtatue of George the Tliird. His bronzed 

niajenty looked like an officer saluting in 

the Hmoke of a field-day. 

*^(>mie in," he said, in resixm>>e to a 

kno(;k at tlie dr>or. 

The Hei*vant announc^ed '' Mr. Sparcoe.'' 

'' Good morning," said Mr. Sparcoe, who 
advanced witli his hand behind his back, 
UK if lie were in pain. 

Decker bowed. 

'' Sparcoe in niy name. Sparcoe, of 
* Sparcoe & Bland,' Westminster." 

Mr. Sparc^oe was a small man with a 
nose that threatened, if the owner lived 
long enough, to riv^al tlie fame of Bardolph. 
Black hair (Mustered in (juris about his fore- 
head ; he pulled nervously at his thick, 
black beard and moustache. He had black, 
bright oycis, and a mouth that betokened a 
certain geniality of mind. 

*^ I 'm a funny man," he said. '' You 
will ex(aise me ; if you will let your servant 



THE GOLDEN KEY. 133 

bring me a little di'op of whiskey, I'll 
thank you kindly." 

Decker rang and ordered the whiskey. 

" Thank you," said Sparcoe, when he 
had smacked his lips over the liquor. ^ ^ I 'm 
a funny man ; but you '11 excuse me, I 'm 
sure, when I tell you I 've had my back 
broken in three places, and my ribs cracked 
in all directions." 

Decker looked at him inquiringly. 

^^ Well, not exactly broken, but worse; 
if it had been broken I shouldn't have been 
here, and a lot of trouble would have been 
saved to a great many ; for I 'm a funny 
man, and not being able to ride any longer, 
it makes me irritable, and I must have my 
own way . ^must . it is life and death that I 
have it. But to the business which brought 
me here . a deed of gift, I believe ? " 

" That's so," said Decker. 

' ' Will you oblige me, mth a sheet of 
paper," said Mr. Sparcoe, rising, one hand 
upon his back, the other fidgeting A^itll 



134 CRUEL LONDON. 

his beard, wliicli he seemed eveiy now and 
then to be plucking out by the roots. 

^^ Thank you," said Sparcoe, re-seating 
himself at a blotting-pad and paper, and 
taking up a pen. ''I'm a funny man; 
though I was never at (college, or anything 
of the kind, I (*an always think ever so 
much better with a pen in my hand and 
foolscap under my nose. Deed of gift. 
Yom^ name, sir, in full ? " 

'' Tristram Decker." 

" Tristram Decker," wrote Sparcoe, in a 
large, sprawling hand, " late of the United 
States, I believe ? " 

"Yes." 

" American citizen, and now of Pall Mall 
East, in the city of Westminster, in the 
county of Middlesex." 

" My time is valuable, Mr. Sparcoe. I 
beg you Avill not detain me longer than 
necessary." 

''Your time is not more valuable than 
mine," said Sparcoe, with a smile that 



THE GOLDEN KEY. 135 

showed a set of teeth that looked the 
whiter for the glowing face. I dare say 
you are thinking he is a funny man, and 
so he is, is Louis William Sparcoe, I can 
tell you, and I don't know that there is 
any other man in London who could have 
got me out of my office except Baron 
Natlian; we've been in at the death to- 
gether many a time when there has been 
a full field, and not six up at the last ; but 
I forget, you don't understand fox-hunt- 
ing in America." 

" We understand business," said 
Decker. 

"' Yes, by George, you do ! I ask your 
pardon, Mr. Decker; it is a just rebuke. 
I '11 run this off in no time ; it is a gift, 
donatio mortis eaitsdj as the law calls it. 
Who is the recipient ? " 

^^ Caroline Virginia Denton, otherwise 
Caroline Virginia Sleaford, or Gardner." 

'' Married woman ? " 

"' I don't know at present.'' 



136 CRUEL LONDON. 

' ^ Ah, sufficient if we identify her pro- 
perly ? " 

This point settled, the next question 
was the property. 

^' The residue of my estate at my death, 
and one million sterling in the mean time, 
in bonds of the Decker Gulch mines." 

'' Decker mines," remarked Sparcoe. 
^^Ah, yes, read a description of them 
yesterday in the Telegraph. What a pro- 
perty! They say the principal mine is 
worth a pound a minute." 

' ' And yet you say your time is as valu- 
able as mine." 

'' You are the Decker in question, 
then ? " 

'' I am." 

'^By George, you are rich!" said 
Sparcoe, still writing. ^^Well, I 'm a 
funny man; I shouldn't care to have so 
much." 

^ ^ In regard to the gift prior to m}' 
death, to be made at once, to-morrow, I 



THE GOLDEN KEY. 137 

want the lady to think it is from her 
father, a sum restored to her by a Govern- 
ment agent in the United States, the North 
having destroyed liis estates dm'iiig the 
war. Do you understand ? " 

'' She is to think this mone^' does not 
come from you ? '' 

''Yes." 

'' Won't she suspect when it is in Decker 
Gulch Bonds ? " 

" She is not of a suspicious nature, and 
the bonds will be converted by you through 
Nathan's, and the money deposited to her 
credit." 

'^ Yes, that will do," said Sparcoe, rising. 
'' The deed shall be sent down for your 
signature in a couple of hours. Bland 
will do the suaviter business about the 
source of the gift ; he has a smooth way 
with him that will overcome any doubts. 
I 'm such a funny man, I should be sm'e 
to let it out. When you Vc lived half 
your life in the hunting-field, }'ou get into 



1-38 CRUEL LONDON. 

the habit of calling a spade a spade. Oh, 
my back, my back ! " 

Wliile lie was still speaking, Mr. Sparcoe 
was crawling to the door, with his left 
hand on his back, and his right swinging 
his hat as if that particular action aided 
his locomotion. 

'' Good morning," he said, with a groan ; 
*'if you had seen me ten years ago, you 
wouldn't believe I could ever have limped 
in this way. Ah, well, the Lord Almighty 
has been very good to me for all 
that." 

Decker smiled when the next moment 
he heard Sparcoe exclaim in a loud voice 
to the servant, who had evidently been 
moved to render him some assistance, . 

^^ Don't touch me! Damme, do you 
think I can't walk ; get out with you ! " 

'^ The carriage is at the door, sir," said 
the servant. 

'' Send Davings to my bed-room." 

While he dressed, Mr. Decker gave some 



THE GOLDEN KEY. 139 

instructions to Davings in regard to dinner, 
and then, handing him a card, said, . 

" I have written down three addresses; 
tell the coachman to drive to those places 
in the order I have put them." 

" Yes, General," said Davings, tmniing 
his quid and rolling downstairs before his 
master. 



140 CRUEL LONDON. 



CHAPTER II. 



decker's slaves. 



Down Pall Mall, by Trafalgar Square, 
amidst a crowd of dust, past the pic- 
turesque sentinels at the Horse Guards, 
whirling along with the east wind down 
Parliament Street, Decker's carriage pulled 
up at the Palacje Hotel, where Tristram 
Decker was introduced for the first time 
to Miss Crosb}'. 

Mr. Thompson, tlie Lincolnshire heiress, 
and Kennaii were waiting for his coming 
before they ordered luncheon to be served. 
He had ju'omised to join them. 

'' I am so glad to see you," said Jane, 



DECKER'S SLAVES. 141 

beaming upon him a genial welcome. 
" This is my friend and guardian, I may 
say, ilr. Jabez Thompson." 

Mr. Jabez Thompson bowed stiflBy to 
the American, whose poetic aspect, long 
brown hair, and sad face rather awed the 
Lincolnsliire sportsman. 

" I have to apologize for delaying the 
pleasure of making your friendship, Miss 
Crosby, but I have had a bitter disappoint- 
ment since I came to London which has 
occupied me in various ways ; and, besides, 
I am an invalid, as my friend Kerman will 
have told you." 

'' Yes, he 's told me all about you, 
indeed he talked about nobody else ; if I 
dared I should be jealous of you," replied 
Jane. 

^' Bring up the luncheon," said Thomp- 
son, addressing a servant who entered for 
orders. 

" All, Miss Crosby," said Decker, " you 
will never liave cause to be jealous ; you 



142 CUUEL LONDON. 

don't know the depth of Kemian's devo- 
tion." 

Jane blushed at the thought of her own 
want of that particular virtue in a lover. 
The first Sunday after Cluistmas was con- 
tinually cropping up in her memory. 

^^ I tliink I do," she said, looking at 
Kerman. ^^ I do believe you men are 
more constant than us poor women ! But 
you must not forget that you were bom 
the stronger, and that we have to carry 
upon our poor shoulders the curse of 
Paradise." 

^' Yes, yes," said Decker, " and we must 
do women the justice to remember that 
the tempter was the devil, and that the 
devil is of our sex." 

'^ Luncheon," said Thompson ; ^^ I'll 
lead the way." 

They followed into the next room, and 
Decker sat near Jane. 

^^ Did John tell you we are all going to 
Paris together ? " she asked. 



decker's slaves. 143 



^ ^ No ; he does not tell me all his secrets 



now." 



'^ He says you are so much absorbed in 
business." 

" It is true." 

''Ahj great wealth is a great respon- 
sibility." 

'' And a great power." 

''John tells me you believe it can com- 
mand all things." 

'' I used to think so. I wish it could 
buy the oblivion of events we dislike. If 
it could blot out of memory, out of exist- 
ence, two or three black years and leave a 
clean white i)age to be filled as we msli, 
then what a power it would be for weal or 
woe ! " 

'' You have some great sorrow, John 
told me so, let us help you to forget it ; 
Mr. Decker, come with us to Paris." 

"No, it is impossible; thank you. I have 
set myself some work to do which will 
occupy me until the end of the year, 



144 CRUEL LONDON. 

possibly; and then I shall take a long- 
rest." 

'' Mr. Decker, you are not drinking," 
said Tliompson, from the head of the 
table. 

'' Thank you, Mr. Thompson, I am get- 
ting through nicely," said the American; 
^'tlie conversation of your ward is more 
sparkling than any champagne." 

''Oh, John," said Miss Crosby, "you 
didn't tell me your friend was what Lin- 
colnshire would call a gallant." 

" 1 said he was a poet, my dear," Ker- 
man replied, as he helped himself to 
plovers' eggs. 

''A poet!" said Thompson to himself, 
'' a lunatic." 

' ' Kerman libels the laureate. Miss 
Crosby, wlien he calls me a poet. But let 
us talk of your plans of pleasure. When 
do you go to Paris ? " 

''When is it, John?" asked Miss 
Crosby. 



decker's slaves. 145 

^^ Ask Jabez Thompson," John replied; 
^^he's the boss, as we should call him* in 
America." 

'' At present," said the lawyer, attack- 
ing a beefsteak which had been specially 
cooked for him because he said he hated 
gimcracks, ^^at present. I shall be worse 
than a nobody soon, I expect, aged and 
turned out to grass for the rest of my days, 
the retired performer, like the picture of 
'that old winner of the Derby we saw 
yesterday." 

' ' You don't call that answering a ques- 
tion, do you?" asked Miss Crosby, who 
was eating her luncheon with the relish of 
a Lincolnshire appetite. 

'^Oh, about Paris?" said Thompson, 
wiping his face with his napkin ; ' ' we shall 
go on Wednesday." 

''It is a fine city, Paris?" observed 
Decker, looking at the lawyer. 

''Fine enough for that matter. I've 
never stopped there long. 1 generally go 

VOL. III. L 



146 CRUEL LONDON. 

over to France to see the French Derby 
ruif ; it 's a place I soon tire of. Seems to 
me that Frenchmen are always thinking of 
going to work and never getting beyond an 
eating-house." 

'' Come with us, Tristy, old man," said 
Kerman. 

'' Impossible," replied Decker. 

' ^ You men will like to have a chat and 
a smoke," said Miss Crosby, rising. *^I 
shall go into the other room and write 
some letters." 

"And you'll excuse me,'' said Thomp- 
son. " My partner has a horse entered for 
the Derby, Mr. Decker, and I have an 
appointment at the Westminster Club. I '11 
say good day, sir." 

Decker, who, having opened the door 
for Miss Crosby, was standing when Mr. 
Thompson addressed him, bowed, and the 
sporting lawyer left the room in an 
opposite direction. 

"Modest fellow, that," observed Ker- 



decker's slaves. 147 

mau; ." his partner has a horse entered for 
the Derby ! Why, it 's his own horse, 
and it 's second favourite. Any other 
man would have thought that something 
to brag about. The race is run on Tues- 
day ; we are going to Paris on Wednes- 
day." 

"Fine old English gentleman, 1 sup- 
pose, eh ?" 

" Yes, a good old specimen.'" 

"Don't like him," said Decker, care- 
lessly, adding quickly when he saw that 
Kerman was disappointed at the remark ; 
" excuse me for saying so, old boy; we are 
used to say what we think to each other." 

" Why don't you like him ? " 

"Because he doesn't lite me. But 
that 's nothing. Look here, Jack, old man, 
I'm going to drive to Lancaster Gate, 
Hyde Park ; will you come ? I want to 
show you something, and your fiiend, Mr. . 
Brayford, is to meet me." 

"Do you want to go now . at mce?" 



r 



148 CRUEL LONDON. 

asked Kerman, handing him a cdse of 
cigars and a light. 

^^ At once/' said Decker, commencing to 
smoke. 

^'AU right; I '11 be with you in a 
minute." 

Kerman knocked at the door through 
which Miss Crosby had passed. Decker 
could hear him say, . 

'' Jane, Decker wants me to drive with 
him to see something ; business, my dear. 
I '11 be back very soon." 

'^ Very well, John," was the reply, and 
something which sounded like a hurried 
kiss brought Kerman back to his friend. 

" Oh, tristy ! Tristy ! " exclaimed Ker- 
man, ^^I wish you were as happy as I am; 
can't it be managed, dear old friend ? " 

^^ You told that dear girl of yours that I 
am a poet. If to be a dreamer, a senti- 
mentalist, to have a heart torn with jea- 
lousy, hatred, remorse, revenge, is to be a 
poet, I am that unhappy thing, Jack. If 



decker's slaves. 149 

I were a philosopher, or a clod, or some- 
thing between your friend Thompson and 
a nigger, there might be hope ; but I am 
Tristram Decker, and the leopard does not 
change its spots." 

Kerman shrugged his shoulders. 

^^But come along, Jack, be happy your- 
self; don't mind me: I shall amuse my- 
self." 

They were driven to a handsome house 
at Lancaster Gate. A matronly woman 
received them. She said Mr. Brayford 
was writing in the library. 

^^Grood; show us meanwhile into that 
little room by the conservatory." 

^* The morning-room ? " 

'' Yes," said Decker. 

'^Sit down, Kerman," said Decker. 
^^ Madame, when I ring it will be for Mr. 
Brayford." 

'' Do you like this room ? " 

'' Yes," said Kerman. 

" Come this way." 



150 CRUEL LONDON. 

He led his friend into a winter garden, 
the atmosphere laden with the perfume of 
a cloud of exotic blooms. The conserva- 
tory opened upon a drawing-room panelled 
in quilted satin, and furnished in ebony 
and gold. They passed through corridors 
lined with costly paintings. They came 
to a dining-room, the picture of old Eng- 
lish elegance and simplicity. 

^^We won't disturb Brayford in the 
library," said Decker, leading the way to 
the morning-room. " What do you think 
of the house ? " 

'^ It is a palace," said Kerman; ^^what 's 
the meaning of it ? " 

' ' A penitent Federalist, who took part in 
the war against her father, has settled it 
upon William Graham Denton's daughter, 
as some return for the loss and misery that 
cruel business has caused her." 

' ' Indeed ! " said Kerman. ^ ^ I know that 
Federalist, the dear fellow ! " 

''But you must not know him. Jack," 



decker's slaves. 151 

said Decker, earnestly ; ^ ^ that is my 
secret." 

'' I will not let it out," replied Kerman, 
putting out his hand, which Decker grip- 
ped with unusual warmth. 

^ ^ It is a great blessing, anyhow, to have 
a friend like you, Jack," he said ;'^* we 
will ring for Brayford now." 

Brayford, in grey trousers, a frock coat, 
and plum-coloured necktie that hid itself 
beneath his stubby beard, entered, hat and 
gloves in his hands. 

'^ Good morning, gentlemen," he said, 
with a solemn air. 

^' How is Mrs. Grardner, to-day?" Decker 
asked. 

'' Better, sir, much better, I am glad to 
say; and the toys you sent to Master 
Willie; well, there he 's a ridy-cock- 
horsing to Banbury-crossing as if he were 
a little royal prince." 

'^ And you have been over the house, 
Mr. Brayford ? " 



152 CRUEL LONDON. 

" Yes, sir ; it 's something too lovely. I 
feel as if I were dreaming." 

" And is Mr. Moses Aaron willing to be 
one of the trustees ? " 

" Willing ! " said Brayford, ^^he is over- 
come with the honom- of it." 

'' Then you will kindly tell your soli- 
citor to complete the settlement to-morrow, 
for the American Minister is anxious that 
Mrs. Gardner should come here at once 
and live in a style worthy of her position 
and the wealth which her father was de- 
prived of through the war." 

^^Yes, sir, thank you, I'll do so at once; 
and The Wonner, Mr. Decker, he prefers 
to continue where he is and go on cutting 
out the obituaries, and Mrs. Aaron she 
will pay him a pound a week regular as 
arranged, and I shall visit him two or 
three times a week, please God, and the 
business will go on all right, I 'm sure." 

Decker looked impatiently at the door. 

"Yes, good day, sir, or au revoir. I will 



decker's slaves. 153 

see that the deed is ready by the time 
named." 

'' I want you to lend me this secretary 
of yours," said Decker, when Brayford 
had gone. 

"- Do what you like with him," said 
KeiTnan; '' I 've nothing for him to do." 

" Come, then, we will go to Gilton's, 
the American bank. He promised to pro- 
cm-e for me, from a friend of his, a coloured 
butler of most reliable character, whom he 
would induce a friend of his to part with, 
under the interesting circumstances I put 
before him. I want to know if he has 
been successful. The Federalist who is 
interested in Denton's daughter learns that 
an old favourite coloured woman, who was 
a nurse in Denton's family, is in New 
York, and he has cabled for her. His idea 
is to give the lady a pleasant surprise." 

They left the carriage at Gilton's, as- 
cended a narrow staircase, and entered a 
sort of counting - house, where several 



154 CRUEL LONDON. 

United States citizens were smoking and 
poring over files of American newspapers. 

" Step in here, sir," said Gilling, chew- 
ing the end of a cigar, which he was also 
smoking. '^It is all O. K., a^ these 
Britishers say ; you can have Julius Brutus 
when you like." 

'' Thank you, that 's good," said Decker. 

'' Any news from New York ? " 

'' The critter 's on her way ; steamer '11 
be in latter end of next week," 

'' That's smart," said Decker. 

'' The way Griltons do their business, 
General." 

^' You will find me liberal," said Decker. 

'^ Guess I know that well enough." 

'' I wish you good day," jsaid Decker. 

" The same to you, General," said 
Gilton. 

^'I'm going home now, Jack," said 
Decker ; ^^you want to go to yom' hotel ?" 

*' Yes, and I'll walk; you 've put my 
head in such a whirl with your kind 



decker's slaves. 155 

thoughts, and your smartness, and your 
strange ways, and one thing and another, 
that a walk will do me good." 

'' As you wish ; acquaint me with your 
movements. Thi6 wind is sharp enough to 
shave a man. Good-bye." 

" Pall Mall," he said to the coachman, 
who smiled because Decker pronounced 
the words as they were spelt; and Decker's 
chestnut dashed up to the door before 
Kerman had crossed Trafalgar Square. 

'' Hain't 'e a stunner! " said the coach- 
man to his son, who officiated as footman, 
when Decker had dismissed him for the 
remainder of the day, saying, ^^I shall not 
want your father or yourself until to- 
morrow. Davings will wait on me : go 
and enjoy yourselves; here are a few 
dollars to do it with." 

'^ Hain't 'e a stunner, 'Ennery James ; 
a hexample to we Britishers, as 'e calls us, 
though he do say ' Paul Maul,' and calls two 
arf so vs doUards. 'Ennery James, we air in 



156 CRUEL LONDON. 

luck ; we'll dress ourself s hup and go to 
the club, that we will." 

'Ennery James and his father thus being 
oflF duty, it devolved ^upon Davings to wait 
upon the General, as he called Decker, for 
the remainder of the day and night. 

'^ Bring me a champagne cocktail, 
Davings, my man," said Decker, gasping' 
for breath as he leaned against the mantel- 
shelf of the room in which he lived, wi'ote, 
and ate ; for he was content to occupy 
only a couple of rooms, with bath and ante- 
chamber en suite, 

Davings had already converted the ante- 
room into a sort of private American bar, 
in which he concocted iced drinks of 
various kinds, and kept a stock of cham- 
pagne always cold. 

^' Guess you ain't looking well," said 
Davings, mth that easy familiarity which 
is characteristic of the relationship that 
generally exists between an American 
gentleman and his confidential servant. 



decker's slaves. 157 

" I am tired." 

" Why don't you rest ? What call have 
you got to go worrying around like 
a Wall Street broker ; you don't want to 
make no money ? " said Davings, handing 
him a tempting-looking glass of pale, 
ruby-coloured liquor. 

" No, I want to spend it, Davings," 
replied Decker, drinking. 

*' Well, I guess you Ve got to the right 
place, for cuss me if they don't charge you 
for lookin' at a store in this town." 

" That 's as good a cocktail as I ever 
drank, Davings." 

"Well, the wine 's good; I '11 say that 
for these Britishers, they sell tiptop 
wine," replied Davings, tossing up the 
empty glass and catching it. 

" What time did I say for dinner ? " 

"Six; and I guess. General, a gentle- 
man need have a gold mine if he 's to eat 
oysters every day in this town, and when 
you 've paid for them their weight in 



158 CRUEL LONDON. 

copper, blame me if they don't taste of the 
metal itself." 

'^ Cable to New York for a regular 
supply of Blue-points, and anything else 
that 's useful, Davings, and don't trouble 
me about trifles ; there are three steamers 
a week from New York ; I want to live in 
London as if I were in New York, with all 
the luxuries procurable here in addition." 

^^ Yes, sir ; and it 's a pity you can't do 
closer justice to them ; but no doubt yom* 
appetite will get better, and I guess you '11 
be having friends to help you." 

'' That will do, Davings " 

" Right, General," was the quick re- 
sponse, as Davings sheered off with a 
lurch to starboard. 

'^ Davings ! " 

'' General," said Davings, pulling him- 
self together, and standing at attention. 

" Is chewing a great comfort to you? " 

^^ No ; and it 's a cursed dirty habit." 

" Give it up, Davings ; give it up." 



decker's slaves. 159 

'' It 's given up, General." 

Davings went away to bring the dinner. 
Tristram Decker opened his letters. There 
was one from Mr. Sparcoe, the proclaimed 
funny man, who appeared to be also a 
clever man ; for he wrote to say that he 
had delayed the deed of gift on his own 
responsibility to suggest the addition of a 
clause settling the money upon the re- 
cipient, exclusively for her own use, tied 
up in such a way that no other person 
could touch it. Decker approved, and 
filled up a telegraphic form to that effect, 
giving two names as trustees if required, 
and appointing a time for signing the 
document. Sparcoe had earned the respect 
of Decker for this bit of worldly and legal 
thoughtfulness. Decker employed Bray- 
ford's lawyer for the work of settling the 
house at Lancaster Gate. He did not 
choose that the situation should be com- 
manded by any single firm. Jeremiah 
Sleaford wrote, in his own hand, to thank 



160 CRUEL LONDON. 

Tristram Decker, Esq., for his deposit of 
five hundred pounds, and appointing a 
meeting at the West End Bank of Deposit. 
A note from the American Embassy stated 
that they had arranged with Scotland Yard 
to place a smart and discreet detective at 
his service during his short stay in London, 
to inspect the city, and inquire into its 
criminal and other phases of life. 

By the time Decker had finished dinner, 
and drawn his chair to the fire on this chilly 
announcement of the English summer, Mr. 
Topper Wingfield was announced. 

" From Scotland Yard," said a sporting- 
looking gentleman, with mutton-chop 
whiskers but an otherwise closely shaven 
face. 

" Yes ; take a seat." 

' ' I 'm placed at yore service as long as 
yo want me," said Mr. Topper Wingfield, 
with a smack of the Lancashire dialect in 
his speech and a certain Northern brusque- 
ness in his manner. 



decker's slaves. 161 

'^ You know who I am ? " 
'' T. W. 's on it," replied Mr. Wingfield. 
Mr. Wingfield tapped his prominent nose 
with the forefinger of his right hand. It 
was a remarkable nose, an organ which, 
regarded from a friendly point of view, 
looked as if it was fnlly entitled to the 
confidence which its owner reposed in it. 
A stout yet pliable nose, it looked straight 
ahead : it did not tm-n up, it did not turn 
down ; it was not thin and inquisitive ; it 
did not end in a sharp point : it was a 
capable nose, that appeared to be looking 
into things always ; not a mere inquisitive, 
prying nose, but an investigating nose, a 
judicial, inquest-loving nose. It had saved 
Mr. Topper Wingfield in many a trying 
case, under many singular and difficult 
circumstances. No wonder he patted it in 
a confidential and affectionate way; no 
wonder his two small eyes, planted rather 
closely at the base of it, looked down ad- 
miringly upon it from their cool, shad}' 

VOL. III. M 



162 CRUEL LONDON. 

depths. It was a most requisitive, cate- 
thetical, scrutinizing, discriminative, pro- 
bative, judicial nose. Nobody had had 
better evidence of this reliability than Mr. 
Wingfield, to whom that accurate and pro- 
found nose was a familiar adviser and 
friend, known to him as '' T. W.," his 
second self, and of which his remark, 
" T. W. 's on it," was by Scotland Yard 
always understood to mean that tlie ques- 
tion under discussion was received as clear 
in demonstration and comprehension by 
Mr. Topper Wingfield and the honourable 
member already described. 

" Oh, T. W. 's on it, is he ?" remarked 
Decker, lighting a cigar ; '4s that T. W.?" 
tapping his own nose. 

" That's T. W.,-' said Wingfield, laying 
his own forefinger upon his own proboscis. 

'^ Very well, Mr. Wingfield ; if you and 
T. W. can spare half an hour, we will 
come to business." 

" Nay, there 's no ' if ' about it ; I 'm 



. ^ H V 



decker's slaves. 163 

your servant, sir, in all that 's reasonable 
and discreet : such were my commands ; 
so you 've gotten to give orders, and I Ve 
gotten to obey." 

^^ Is that it?" 

'^ That 's it. Minister down at Embassy 
said you'd be sure to act liberal in the 
way of expenses and what not ; so I leave 
all that to you. And now, sir, if yo please, 
drive on." 

^^ Do you smoke ?" 

'' Yes, sir." 

'^ And drink?" 

'a do." 

'' Will you help yourself ? " 

'^ Thank yo." 

'^ You are not a Londoner ? " 

*^ I 'm Lancashire." 

" You seem to have as many dialects in 
England as we have in America ? " 

" Yo mustn't reckon to beat us in every- 
thing." 

^^No, so I perceive." 



164 CRUEL LONDON. 

Decker smiled. He liked his new ac- 
quaintance at once. 

'' Have you been long in the London 
police force ? " 

'^ Twenty years." 

' ' You must have had some strange ex- 
periences." 

'' Ah, you may say that." 

' ' What is the most remarkable case in 
which you were ever engaged ? " 

'^ The Longville poisoning case." 

'' Poisoning ? " said Decker. '' Was it a 
murder ? " 

'' If there ever was one ; and the poisoners 
are walking about now." 

^^ How is that?" 

'^The jury wouldn't convict; the med- 
ical evidence was conflicting." 

'' What was the case ? '' 

^'A French lady of position poisoned 

her husband; there was a go-between in 

the shape of a lady-companion; and the 

lady had a lover who was a foreign doctor." 



decker's slaves. 165 

'^ Yes, well?" 

' ^ The two women were tried ; they got 
off." 

^^Why?" 

' ' The doctors couldn't agree whether, 
the man being in a peculiar state of health, 
some medicine which he had taken, not 
being a poison in a criminal sense, had 
done his business or not. They couldn't 
get at the doctor, though I make no doubt 
he doctored him into the state of health 
that was necessary. He was the cheekiest 
lot I ever come across ; a regular knowing 
old Mossoo as you could wish to see. They 
called him as a witness, and under cross- 
examination he said he would undertake to 
poison anybody, and defy every analytical 
test ; and what 's more, he could imitate 
disease so well that any practitioner would 
give a regular certificate of death." 

^ ' Strange evidence to be given publicly, 
that." 

'' Judge said as much, and snubbed him." 



166 CRUEL LONDON. 

" I Hhoidd like to read the report of the 
trial ; can you get it ?" 

^ ^ Oh, yes. This is the best drop of brandy 
I ever tasted/' said Wingfield, holding up 
hiH glass and looking admiringly at the 
liquor. 

" What was the fellow's name?" 

'' The doctor's ? " 

" Yes." 

" Dampez; Dr. Dampez." 

^^Dr. Dampez," responded Decker re- 
flectively, '' does he live in London ? " 

'' No doubt." 

'' Will you get nie his address ? " 

'' Yes," said Wingfield, taking out a 
pocket-book and making a note. 

'' Bring it me to-morrow, with the report 
of the tnal." 

" I will." 

' ' I have several secret missions in 
London," said Decker ; '^ two of them I 
entrust to you. But I must have close, 
faithful, and confidential service. I shall 



decker's slaves. 167 

pay you better than ever you have been 
paid in your life." 

'' Will that be confidential also ? " asked 
Wingfield, taking out a pocket-book. 

'^ Quite . close and inviolable." 

^^ It 's always best to have a clear under- 
standing at first," said Wingfield, laying 
his finger caressingly upon his nose. 

^^ That's T.W.'s view?" 

'^ To a T," said Wingfield, helping him- 
self to brandy. 

" Very well," said Decker, taking out a 
pocket-book and handing the officer a bank 
note, " take that as an earnest of my good 
intentions." 

Wingfield looked at it and then at 
Decker. 

'^ Honour bright, no kid, as we say in 
London, ' janak,' as we say in the North ? " 

Decker nodded. 

'Mt 's too much, sir; but 'Merican million- 
aires are said to be more liberal than the 
English breed, and I thank yo. I '11 tr}^ 



168 CRUEL LONDON. 

and earn it ; but would yo kindly give it 
me in five-pun notes ; wouldn't do for me 
to be changing a sum like that ; I 'd have 
my own pals set to watch me, if that got 
aired." 

Wingfield handed the note back to 
Decker. 

'^I will have it changed for you; the 
notes shall be ready for you when you 
bring me that report and address to- 
morrow." 

" Thank yo, sir." 

' ' We will now come to our first item of 
business," said Decker. *' Do you know 
Miss Weaver's Retreat ? " 

'' It 's been through my hands : she 's a 
clever 'un, is Weaver ; but there 's a many 
of her sort." 
^^Yes?" 

" Lives on rich fools who think they are 
helpin' the poor. It 's a trade in London ; 
they call it charity-mongering." 

" I want that institution busted, as we 



decker's slaves. 169 

say in the States, and Miss Weaver and 
Major Wenn sent to the Tombs." 

^^ The tombs?" 

'^ To prison." 

" That 's Mr. Sparcoe's craze." 

^^Sparcoe's?" 

^^ Yes, the lawyer; but he won't spend 
money on it, else he could have done the 
job long ago." 

" Sparcoe shall meet you to-morrow at 
eleven, when you bring the address and 
the report. You shall arrest Weaver and 
Wenn; I '11 pay the bill." 

^'That's business, T. W., if you like," 
said Wingfield. 

^' You understand ? " 

'' T. W. 's on it," said Wingfield. 

*^ Does T. W. know a person named 
Fitzherbert Robinson ? " 

^^A financier and a speculator in the 
City ? " 

' ' Yes, a sort of swell I believe you 
would call him in London." 



170 CRUEL LONDON. 

'' Cool, downy cove, who puts side on, 
and was in the Hampstead Cemetery 
swindle ? " 

'^ I see you know him." 

' ' A cruel party about women ; brags of 
things as would make a Lancashire lad's 
clogs rattle about his shins . one of these 
prowling beasts as deludes silly young gals 
and leagues with bad old un's." 

'' I want him in gaol, ironed, and when 
he 's convicted I want to tell him why ; if 
he was in America, I 'd shoot him ; but you 
make a fuss about carrion here, and I can't 
afford to waste time." 

Decker's face flushed, and he rose nerv- 
ously to liis feet. 

''We Americans, Mr. Wingfield, love 
our country ; we are more patriotic than 
any people under the Sun, . ^we are a united 
nation on that platform. This Robinson 
has grossly insulted, and would have 
brutally wronged, a countrywoman of 
mine. If 1 had time, and it was convenient, 



decker's slaves. 171 

I would shoot him. He is one of your 
London sharks, a swindling thief. When 
he is committed on a substantial charge, 
I want an order to see him ; and there is 
another note, which can be turned into 
smaller ones, waiting for the time when 
you can tell me he is laid by the 
heels." 

'' Thank yo ! I '11 nick the beggar; he 
deserves it," said Wingfield. 

^^And now, good-night," said Decker. 
''If you have an intimate friend in your own 
line, whom I could employ in a smaller 
matter, send him to me between now and 
twelve o'clock, . ^reliable, shrewd, experi- 
enced, and with a knowledge of lodging- 
houses and slums. I go to bed at half-past 
twelve. My man will be up till twelve." 

'' His name will be Buncher . Jim 
Buncher . safe and downy as a ferret in 
a rabbit-hole. He '11 be here at 10.30 
sharp. T. W. knows where to drop on 
him at 10.15. Grood-night, sir." 



172 CRUEL LONDON. 

'* The business is all straight and clear^ 

eh ? " 

'' As a die," replied Wingfield ; '' T. W.'s 
on it." 

He tapped T. W. briskly, as much as to 
say, ^^ Now, then, wake up, and bid the 
gentleman good-night " ; adding aloud, 
'' Good-night, sir, and thank you, sir. 
To-morrow at eleven." 

Decker walked to tlie door, and heard 
Davings showing T. W. out before he 
closed it. 

Then pacing the room slowl}' to and fro, 
his hands clenched, his eyes flashing, he 
spoke to himself of his plans. 

" Not a soul whoever injured her, not a 
single British thief of them, shall escape. 
I '11 have every murdering 'coon of them 
under my heel. A pretty harmless child, 
a stranger so lovely tliat their pink and 
white beauties fade into nothing before 
her, an innocent, unsuspecting lamb to be 
woi-ried and torn by these London wolves 



decker's slaves. 173 

before she had fairly landed ! By Heaven ! 
if I had never known her, I 'd fall on 
them like an Indian, and cleave their 
cowardly hearts. But to have loved her 
as I have ! Lord, Lord, I wonder that 
there is a drop of patience in my soul ! 
If I had found her married and happy, 
the charm of some peaceful home, the 
gentle spirit of one of those pleasant Eng- 
lish hearths I Ve heard so much about, I 
think I could have looked in upon her 
unseen, and blessing her, gone down to 
my grave without asking even a friendly 
adieu from her sweet lips. But to find 
her a victim to the lust and licence 
of a libertine, left a waif on the streets, 
a fugitive from a den in Porter's Build- 
ings, a lamb who fled from a she- 
wolf to run the risk of worse treatment 
at the hands of Fitzherbert Robinson ; to 
live at last on the charity of strangers ! 
Poor unhappy soul ! and she loved me all 
the time, and cried aloud for me! I 



174 CRUEL LONDON. 

knew it. Did not her very agony make 
itself heard over sea and land, till it fell 
upon me in the mountains ? Did not her 
childlike face tell me so when I lifted her 
up and she opened her eyes, lying in my 
arms in that poor but hospitable room ? 
Shall I ever forget those heart-searching 
words, ' Tristram Decker, I knew you 
were coming to save me ; I knew it ! ' 
Ah, Caroline ! if there were some drug of 
drowsy, dreamy power that could enshroud 
these last few years, and give us to each 
other as we were when first I saw you, a 
rosebud on a knotted stem, that put out 
thorns against me, thorns behind which 
you crept for shelter when I stretched out 
my hand ! " 

He sat down in an easy rocking-chair 
before the fire. 

''What a happy fate ours might have 
been ! " he thought, as he swayed himself to 
and fro. ''Wealth, and Love, and Health, 
what a Trinity ! Wealth I have, Love I 



decker'8 slaves. 175 

had ; but the temple is desecrated, the idol 
is broken. Health ! Well, the absence of 
that last necessity to human happiness, 
after all, only compels me to crowd my 
work into a closer space ; it brings punish- 
ment and reward the quicker. I will play 
the two together . ^Vengeance and Mercy, 
and she shall be the Lady Bountiful when 
I 'm gone." 

'' It 's Buncher, sir, Jim Buncher," said 
a voice in the midst of a pleasant dream, 
which had peopled a short sleep with 
bright fancies. 

Decker breathed hard, and then woke 
up. Davings was standing near him. 

''Guess I'm sorry to wake you, but 
this gentleman said hia business was im- 
portant." 

''Yes; it's Buncher, Jim Buncher, 
friend of Mr. Topper Wingfield, sir," 
said a stolid-looking man in a black suit 
of clothes and a white neckerchief. 

" Quite right ; leave Mr. Buncher with 



176 CRUEL LONDON. 

me, Davings, I shall not keep him five 
minutes. Take a seat, Mr. Buncher. 
Mr. Wingfield has told you that I am a 
liberal paymaster ? " 

'' Yes, sir." 

' ' You know the low parts and slums 
and lodging-houses of London ? " 

'^I do. I'm on the Scripture Reader 
lay just now, working Whitechapel on a 
charity -box business; two parties in fire- 
men's clothes, that collect among small 
tradespeople for Disabled Fire Brigade 
Fund one day, and put on white ties the 
next in the interest of a Home Mission." 

'' Very well. Do you know Porter's 
Buildings ? " 

^^ Rather." 

" And Irish Moll ? " 

" Yes." 

" Where is she now ? " 

" In prison." 

"What for?" 

" Robbing a young foreign lady." 



decker's slaves. 177 

'' Do you remember the lady's name ? " 

" I got up the case against Moll, and 
we had a difficulty because the lady didn't 
appear." 

*^ You got over it ? " 

'' Yes." 

^'How?" 

^^ Miss Weaver appeared, and she said 
the foreign lady . Grardinger, I think, was 
her name . ^had left the Retreat with a 
friend of her family, and she believed had 
gone back to America ; so we had to let her 
go on that. But another charge was made 
against her ; we proved three previous con- 
victions, and she 's gone for seven years." 

" Have you heard of a woman named 
Dorothy Migswood ? " 

'' Can't say that I have." 

Decker described her (for Mrs. Gardner 
had told him the whole story of her 
troubles from beginning to end), and a 
telegram of inquiry to the owner of The 
Cottage at Essam had been answered to 

VOL. III. N 



178 CRUEL LONDON, 

the effect that Dorothy Migswood had left 
the neighbourhood, it was believed for 
London. 

" Now these are the facts : here are notes 
for fifty pounds as a retaining fee. Let nie 
know where Migswood is, what she is doing, 
and all about her, within a week, and I 
will more than double this small fee.", 

^^ Yes, sir," said Buncher ; '^ and Lish 
Moll ? " 

" Let her rest in peace, unless you can 
find her a companion in Dorothy Migs- 
wood." 

" By all means," said Buncher. 

'' Good-night, Mr. Buncher." 

'' Good-night," said the gentleman, who 
was on the Scripture Eeader lay, and Mr, 
Tristram Decker lighted a fresh cigar and 
renewed his conversation with himself, 
walking about the room and stopping every 
now and then to cough violently and gasp 
for breath. 

' ' Eobinson in training, old Sleaf ord well 



decker's slaves. 179 

in hand, Miss Weaver and Major Wenn 
in the care of Sparcoe and T. W., 
Buncher laying for Migswood, the ground 
is well occupied ; the game will soon start. 
Mr. Philanthropical Sleaford shall talk to 
me of his clever son to-morrow, and tell 
me where he is. Mr. Topper Wingfield, I 
have to thank you for starting a new train 
of ideas. Dr. Dampez must be an interesting 
man. ' Murder as a Fine Art ' is a strangely 
fascinating subject in the page of De 
Quincey. But he was a vulgar hero after 
all, the English hero of the essayist. Is 
killing always murder ? What creatures of 
circumstances we are ! I remember when 
my blood froze with horror at the tortures 
of the Inquisition, at stories of the lingering 
deaths of men under the sentences of 
persecuting fanatics. Perhaps the war ciu-ed 
me of my sensitiveness about death. I 
think at this moment I am capable of in- 
venting tortures for Tom Sleaford and 
presiding over them. But not mere 



180 CRUEL LONDON. 

physical tortures ; no, for they bear no 
comparison with my agony. My God ! 
how that man has tortured me ! The rack, 
the wheel, the bastinado, they would have 
been soothing compared to the misery of 
my blighted hopes ; the wretchedness of 
listening to that poor child's story as she 
knelt at my feet and tore the confession 
from her bleeding heart. Why did I 
force it from her ? I had a right to know 
it all, for her sake as well as my own, to 
justify her, to enable me to avenge my 
countrywoman, to pay tribute of justice to 
the manes of my own murdered love ! The 
one great ideal of my soul, the one holy 
yearning of my heart, a pure, noble, all- 
absorbing love, slain, murdered, mangled 
by a selfish, heartless thief, who took an 
angel prisoner and bedaubed her snowy 
wings with pitch ; my angel, the spirit 
of beauty and gentleness at whose feet 
I worshipped. O bitter, cruel, lustful 
ruffian! Tristram Decker is on thy 



decker's slaves. 181 

track. His golden shafts shall reach 
thy black craven heart . ^selfish, lying, 
cowardly thief ! " 

" I thought you was calling me," said 
Davings, entering the room, and answer- 
ing Decker's excited and inquiring gaze. 

'' No, Davings ; no," said Decker, sigh- 
ing. 

'^ Guess you ain't well to-night . over- 
working yourself," said Davings; *^ and 
you ain't got no call to do it. I reckon 
I '11 go back to New York if you don't give 
it up." 

^' It 's only for a short time, Davings. I 
shall not be busy very much longer. I 
shall finish it all up in a few weeks, 
Davings, and then I mean to have a long, 
quiet rest." 

Davings looked at his master. There 
were tears in Decker's eyes. 

" A long, quiet rest, Davings, a holiday 
for you, my friend, and a quiet rest and 
no more work for me." 



182 CRUEL LONDON. 



CHAPTER III. 

THE ARROGANCE OF INFIDELITY. 

The east wind blustered down the river 
and spent itself at sea, and there came a 
breeze from the south-west blowing over 
London. The sun shone hot^and bright, 
and the lepers of the cruel city crawled 
out of their holes to bask in its beams. 
At night the door-step, the parks, and the 
dark arches were almost warm and com- 
fortable. The familiar resting places of 
the outcast, and they who are unnumbered 
in the census, were luxurious under the 
south-west wind, when compared with the 
reign of the east. The half a million of 



THE ARROGANCE OF INFIDELITY. 183 

London paupers broke their bread with a 
grim joyousness now that the summer had 
come, while the twenty thousand masters 
of slaves in plush decorated the park with 
their glittering equipages. Tristram Dec- 
ker opened his window and looked upon 
the brightness of London. He gazed at 
the wonderful procession. Cab and car- 
riage, omnibus and barouche, plodding 
horses dragging heavy loads, prancing 
steeds in burnished harness ; here a coster- 
monger defiant behind a donkey ; there a 
duke flourishing his gold-mounted whip, 
with a prince sitting by his side on the 
box of his drag ; now a cart full of flowers 
^'all a-growing, all a-blowing"; then a 
brewer's dray with mighty horses bruising 
the very roadway with their clanging 
hoofs. On the pavements, never ceasing 
streams of human life, making their way 
to and fro like contrary-flowing streams ; 
and the glorious sun, high up in the blue 
heavens, flooding the human rivers wifl 



184 CRUEL LONDON. 

light and warmth, which a company of 
Household Guards flashes back in blaze of 
. burnished gold and steel as it canters 
gaily by to St. James's Palace. 

^' A wonderful city," mused Decker, " a 
cruel city, a scramble for wealth and 
pleasure; a fight for meat and drink, 
millions working that the few may be 
happy; the East, like Dives in hell, 
looking up to Lazarus in the West." 

^' What are you thinking of, Tristy?'^ 
asked Kerman, who had entered the room 
without disturbing his friend. 

^' That the Bible is a fable, and religion 
an invention to keep the poor in order." 

'' You didn't think so on that Christmas 
Day up in the mountains of the Sacra- 
mento ? " 

^' I was a coward then." 

'^ No, you were never a coward. Decker," 
said Kerman, laying his hand ajffectionately 
on his friend's shoulder, '' and you are too 
good a fellow not to believe in God, by 



THE ARROGANCE OF INFIDELITY. 185 

whose mercy we were so miraculously 
saved." 

^* And by whose mercy poor old Maggs- 
and his fellows were lost," said Decker. 
'^ No, no, Jack, it 's all very well ; let the 
happy believe, let the fortunate be content 
to think they are in special keeping : the 
miserable know better." 

^' Tristy, you are getting into a bad 
way." 

^^No, my eyes are open. I know all 
about it now." 

'^All about what?" 

'' Everything. God has retired from 
business. I 'm going to do His work." 

" Decker, that is blasphemy." 

' ' Then don't be inquisitive about my 
new philosophy. Jack," said Decker, look- 
ing round upon him with a sad smile. 

"Tristy, Tristy, you make me feel 
miserable to see you so changed. You 
can't look up at the sun and down at the 
flowers and deny the Creator." 



186 CRUEL LONDON. 

" I went out at four o'clock tliis morning, 
and I saw the first streaks of morning strug- 
gling into the dark arches. I saw the sun try- 
ing to make its way into Porter's Buildings ; 
and I helped a policeman to lift a woman 
snd her child out of a hovel into a coach . 
they were dying of starvation, within a 
block or two of Lord Jorrocks', who had 
given a dinner the day before to a dirty 
Persian chief, and the cost of the flowers 
wliich decorated the table would have kept 
that woman and her little one for two or 
three years. What does your Deity say 
to that ? " 

'' He promises a compensation in the 
next world," said Kerman, " and makes it 
as difficult for a rich man to get in to 
enjoy the everlasting bliss of heaven as it 
is for a camel to go through the eye of a 
needle." 

'' And do you believe that ? " 

^' Don't you?" 

" I think I did once. The poor get 



THE ARROGANCE OF INFIDELITY. 187 

some consolation out of it. The rich don't 
believe it." 

" Ohj yes, some of the wealthiest people 
in England are the most pious." 

'' But they continue to be rich in spite 
of the threat* of the camel and the needle. 
No, no, Kerman, it 's all wrong. This 
Christianity has been going on in full 
swing for over a thousand years, millions 
of priests and agents have worked the 
concern . they have cut throats and burnt 
at the stake for it, they have built it up 
and given your Deity every power that 
can be conceived, and all the attributes of 
mercy, truth, love, justice; and yet in 
this European centre of His greatness He 
lets your kings and ministers turn peasants 
into demons ; He gives the strong the right 
to make war upon the weak ; He lets the 
mighty carry fire and sword through 
peaceful valleys, and trample down with 
bloody heel the innocent and the weak . 
women and children, virtuous and wicked 



188 CRUEL LONDON. 

alike. Christianity is a failure, Jack. If 
there is a devil, he is the individual to 
pray to. He seems to have all the 
poorer." 

'' Decker, Decker ! " exclaimed Jack, 
" you must not talk like that. I shall get 
Jane to argue with you. She will put 
you right. Come now, let us leave religion, 
and talk of worldly affairs ; for it 's no 
good trying to make us believe that God 
did not save us; that in His mercy He 
did not bring us both here at the right 
moment . ^me to marry Jane, you to help 
and comfort Caroline. You must make 
it up there, dear old boy, and let us all be 
happy together. 

'^ You don't know me. Jack." 

^'I used to do. You were always 
eccentric, but you are more so now." 

''How?" 

'' You said once if you found Caroline 
married you would buy her. Come, old 
friend, try and forgive her." 



THE ARROGANCE OF INFIDELITY. 189 

'' Forgive her ! Bless her innocent 
heart, I have nothing to forgive her ! " 

'^Well, then, give up all those severe 
ideas about marriage. Men have shut 
their eyes before now, and if she is mar- 
ried there are divorces to be had, and she 
is worth a sacrifice. If it 's easy to give 
up religion, it ought to be no harder to 
give up other prejudices." 

^ ' Kerman, that is a good argument. It 
does credit to your head and to your heart. 
It 's the best bit of practical philosophy I 
have ever heard you utter. I wish I was 
a fool, a good, easy-going Christian. I 
am not. Jack. Your Deity has fixed me 
up as I am . wound up my machinery and 
set me going, and I shall finish at the 
point for which I am ' booked,' as you call 
it on your railways." 

'^ Well, it 's no good talking; I suppose 
you will do as you please ? " 

'^ As my nature pleases. I am going to 
humour my instinct. Jack, good or bad; 



190 CRUEL LONDON. 

and I am trying to do some work which 
the great Director ought to do for Him- 
self." 

Kerman tried to put his hand over 
Decker's mouth. The small exertion of 
resistance on Tristram's part set him 
cougliing and Davings had to be called in 
to administer one of his pleasant drinks. 

" We go to Paris to-night," said Ker- 
man, presently, ' ^ and we shall be married 
on our return." 

'' How long do you stay in Paris ? " 

'^ About a week." 

^'Get married quickly, Jack; I don't 
want you to be postponing it while you 
bury me." 

'^ Mr. Sparcoe," said 'Ennery James, 
who looked pale and haggard after his 
night's debauch. 

'^ Don't go. Jack," said Decker ; " let 
me introduce you to a funny man." 

'^ Ah, you had me there ! " said Sparcoe, 
supporting his back with his left hand. 



THE ARROGANCE OF INFIDELITY. 191 



'' I expected you at eleven : it is four 



now." 



'' Very sorry. I 'm a funny man, you 
see. I met Mr. Topper Wingfield on 
my way, and he said he had just left you, 
and you wanted that Retreat business gone 
into ; a regular old hobby of mine, that, 
so I w^nt back, had all the papers looked 
out, gave T. W., you know his funny 
way, the latest tip about Weaver and 
Wenn . we shall have them . and sent 
him with the documents to apply for a 
warrant, which I hope he's got by thi& 
time ; and there, if you woiddn't mind 
letting me ring for a little drop of whiskey, 
just to steady my hand, I should thank 
you kindly." 

The whiskey being produced, Mr. 
Sparcoe sat down and spread some 
papers before him. 

.''I want you to sign this. Jack; it's 
some money that eccentric Federalist has 
given to Caroline, and two trustees are 



192 CRUEL LONDON. 

required ; I put you down for one, Bray- 
ford the other." 

Kerman took the paper up and glanced 
at it. 

'^ Certainly ; where do I sign ? " 

" Here, . ^just there," said Sparcoe, " ^ I 
deliver this as my act and deed.' That 's 
it." 

^' Then I have no more to say at 
present," said Decker, ''except that the 
Retreat business is my affair, that you can 
have a cheque for costs whenever you 
like." 

'' You are a splendid fellow," said 
Sparcoe. '' I 'm a funny man : you are a 
fimnier. I admire you very much. You 
must come home, and see me under my 
vine and figtree. Will you ? " 

'' I shall be very happy to do so, some 
day ; but I had not finished. Do you 
know the Vale of Essam ? " 

'' Yes. Good hunting district. Yes, 
yes." 



THE ARROGAKCE OF INFIDELITY. 198 

^' There is a small estate near the river, 
opposite the town of Essam, called The 
Cottage." 

'^ I think I have heard of it." 

' ' I want to buy it. Can you manage 
that ? " 

" I can." 

'' Buy it as it stands . ^furniture, stock, 
and everything." 

'^ At what figure?" 

'' Buy it, Mr. Sparcoe." 

' ' Well, you are something like a 
client ! " exclaimed Sparcoe. '^ It 's a real 
pleasure to do your business. When do. 
you want the place ? " 

^' At once." 

^' All right! Is that all for to-day?" 
asked Sparcoe, tugging at his beard and 
rising from his chair. 

'' All, thank you." 

'^ Then good day," said Sparcoe, 
muttering as he left the room, ^'Well, I 
thought I was the funniest man out, touch 

VOL. III. o 



194 CRUEL LONDON. 

and go, yes or no, make up your mind 
and it 's done, hit or win, never counting 
the bars of the highest gate or asking the 
width of the brook behind the stifFest 
fence. But there, pshaw ! he 's the best 
fellow I 've ever seen. Me a funny fellow 1 
Pshaw ! he leaves me miles behind." 

^' He 's a character, eh ? " 

'' Yes," said Kerman, smiling. 

' ' London is not half so prosaic as some 
of you Englishmen fancy, now that mere 
picturesque vagabondage is gone by. It 
is full of character, just as full as it is of 
misery, drunkenness, cruelty, and vice," 
said Decker. 

'^ You talk about London as if you had 
known it all your life." 

'' I have. This little country of yours, 
with its mighty city and its wonderful 
history, its green meadows, its moss-grown 
antiquities, and its Thames, with the 
argosies of the world on its bosom, have 
they not a more engrossing interest for 



THE ARROGANCE OF INFIDELITY. 195 

cultured Americans than the legends of 
Greece and Rome ? Don't think that the 
heart of every educated American has not 
a comer of it set apart in which he does 
homage to the home of his forefathers." 

^^Ah, now you are beginning to talk 
like your old self, Tristy," said Kerman, 
in his frank, breezy way, " when we were 
companions in those long, starlight niglits 
in California." 

'^ Am I, Jack ? Then it is time for you 
to go. I am not going to talk like that 
any more." 

Decker looked at his watch. 

^^I have an appointment," he said, 
'^ with a man you won't care to meet. 
The fellow will be here in five minutes ; I 
dare be bound he would talk religion to 
you by the yard, and pick your pocket 
when you were most impressed with his 
virtue." 

^^ Tristy, it does not follow that because 
there are hypocrites in the world who use 



196 CRUEL LONDON. 

religion for a cloak that Christianity is not 
a Divine revelation. John the Baptist was 
none the less true because Judas Iscariot 
was false." 

'^ Jack, dear old friend, you are improv- 
ing. You would soon be able to talk 
well from a good, sober, orthodox stand- 
point if you took theology in hand a little. 
When you are married, and I have more 
time on my hands, we will resume the 
subject ; and seriously, my good fellow, I 
am most anxious that you should take your 
Caroline to church quickly." 

''Not more anxious than I am," said 
Kerman. ''There's many a slip 'twixt 
the cup and the lip, and I don't want to 
run any more risks." 

" Well, then. Jack, if she will consent 

make it next week. I am going away for 
some time soon, and I must be at the 

wedding." 

"Yes, indeed, you must." 

"Next week, then, or I may be . ah, 



J 



THE ARROGANCE OF INFIDELITY. 197 

Heaven knows where ! I 'm going to travel 
by-and-by." 

^^ Yes. I can't go until I have seen 
Mr. and Mrs. Kerman starting on their 
honeymoon." 

" And about Caroline ? " Kerman asked, 
with a grave face, and laying his hand on 
his friend's arm. ^^Jane will expect her 
to be of our party." 

^^ Where?" 

'^ When we are married." 

Decker hesitated. 

'^ I won't be married unless that gentle, 
loving woman is there to give us her bless- 
ing. Remember, Decker, how much Jane 
and I owe to her gentle courage." 

'^ Yes, yes." 

'' Do you object to her being present at 
the ceremony ? " 

'^ I cannot. I have not the right." 

'' Have you the inclination to ? " 

^^No." 



198 CRUEL LONDON. 

" Jane shall write to her." 

^' She has no master . ^no authority 
above her own." 

^^ That 's all right, then. Good-bye, 
Tristy. Try and think better about those 
new opinions of yours." 

'^ Yes, I '11 try. Adieu, or better, good- 
bye for the present, as you say we shall 
soon meet again. My regards and com- 
pliments to Miss Crosby, and a word to 
old Thompson, if you like. Good-bye." 

Decker stood at the window and saw 
Kemian striding like an athlete across the 
road. He watched the manly figm'e until 
it disappeared in the distance, and he 
thought of the vision of Mirza and the 
bridge with the broken arches. '' There 
were vultures, harpies, ravens, cormorants, 
upon the middle arches," he said to him- 
self, recalling the classic English story ; 
'' they were envy, avarice, superstition, 
despair, love, with the like cares and pas- 
sions that infest human life. And there 



THE ARROGAKCE OF INFIDELITY. 199 

were the fresh, green islands beyond, the 
mansions of good men after death ; the 
old conceit ; the everlasting human yearn- 
ing for another world, something beyond 
the gloomy bridge and its pitfalls . ^the 
realization of an ideal of peace and happi- 
ness. Ah, well ! But it was only the long, 
hollow valley at the foot of Bagdat, after 
all. And so it ends, and so it ends ! 

''Mr. Jeremiah Sleaford," said the ser- 
vant, ushering in that smug citizen, with 
his round face and his acted smile of inno- 
(5ence and geniality. 

It was the " make-up " of the old days ; 
the black velvet waistcoat, and tie showing 
a set of diamond studs, grey trousers, and 
a black frock coat; and he bowed with 
proud humility to Mr. Decker, as he handed 
his mom^ning hat and gold-headed cane 
to 'Ennery James, who simply deposited 
them upon a side table, nodding at Mr. 
Sleaf ord, as much as to say, ' ' You haven't 
<i()me to luncheon, nor to dinner, only to 



200 CRUEL LONDON. 

make a call, as I should think, and you 
should have kept them in your hand." But 
Jeremiah smiled loftily upon the ostenta- 
tious footman, and Decker returning Mr. 
Sleaford's ceremonious bow, and '^ Mr. . 
Decker . I . believe" with unusual for- 
mality, and motioned to a seat. 

'^ It is a lovely morning," said Sleaford, 
as if he was turning the remark over on his 
tongue like a sweetmeat, ' ' a lovely morn- 
ing, and a great blessing, after the east 
wind, which is very troublesome to the 
poor, the sick, and the aged." 

' ' I am desirous of placing another de- 
posit at the West End Bank, Mr. Sleaford 
and I wish to consult you about other in- 
vestments." 

"You are verj^ good to give me yom* 
confidence, and I will at the same time 
say, and I can without arrogance, that 
whoever has advised you to use my bank, 
and consult its humble formula, has done 
you a service, sir.'' 



THE ARROGANCE OF INFIDEUTY. 201 

" I am convinced of it." 

'^ The principle on which the West End 
Bank of Deposit is conducted, allows " . 

'' Yes," said Decker, interrupting him, 
' ' I have read carefully yoiu' prospectuses, 
pamphlets, and statements of account ; and, 
by the way, I see that Mr. Tom Sleaford, 
yoiu' son, is one of your honorary advising 
actuaries. I should much like to make 
his acquaintance, and avail myself of his 
technical knowledge and his friendly in- 
terest." 

'^ Certainly, by all means. I shall have 
great pleasure." 

" I met an old friend of his, a year or 
two ago, out in the West, who was con- 
tinually talking of him." . 

"Indeed, yes, to be sure; the world, 
after all, is not so large as it seems ; we 
are all destined to meet again, sooner or 
later ; I remember to have seen that dis- 
cussed in a treatise on . " 

" Is your son in London ? " 



202 CRUEL LONDON. 

''No . no, he is abroad," said Sleaford, 
trying to get back to the point at which 
he was interrupted, but Decker had laid 
down his own track in which the conversa- 
tion should travel. 

'' He is a judge of horses, I believe," 
continued Decker, " and has a knowledge 
of English country life ? " 

"Yes, that is true . as I was saying . " 

' ' I want to buy an estate and a first-class 
stud in a hunting country," said Decker, 
again interrupting his visitor. '^Now if 
your son would take this in hand for me, or 
give me his advice, if he is not too proud to 
make it a business, I should not consider a 
few thousand poimds too mucli by way of 
honorarium." 

" My son^s pride shall not be above it, 
sir; thank goodness I have been blessed 
with a dutiful family, and even now that 
my son has long since come to man's estate 
and can teach his father, I can still exer- 
ciHG a parental control over him. He shall 



THE ARROGANCE OF INFIDELITY. 203 

undertake the business, most assuredly. 
I will telegraph to him, and he shall wait 
upon you at once . at once." 

'^If he is anywhere near Paris," sug- 
gested Kerman, '' I can call upon him." 

'' He was in Paris yesterday I believe, 
but he could meet you at Boulogne ; he has 
a suite of rooms in the hotel there, indeed 
he lives there half Iiis time . likes the sea, 
does a little yachting. His mother and 
sister xirc fond of Boulogne, and it is one 
of his greatest delights to entertain them 
and . " . 

" Are they there now ? " 

'^ No, not at present ; they will wait 
until the season is well advanced ; the social 
duties of London society are exacting, and 
the ladies have to see to that part of our 
metropolitan existence. Tom doesn't care 
for it ; hunting, shooting, yachting, and a 
week or two in Paris now and then . ^that 
is Tom's idea." 

^' And mine, and mine," said Decker, 



204 CRUEL LONDON. 

' * we shall get on eapitall}^ I long to know 
your son. I will call at Boulogne on my 
way to Paris for that purpose." 

'' When do you propose to be there ? " 

'^ In a fortnight . ^this day fourteen days 
. will you give me a letter to him ? " 

''With the greatest pleasure. Shall I 
induce him to come over in the mean 
time V " 

'' No, not on any account ; I would not 
presume to trouble him, and, in addition, 
my movements are very uncertain. I may 
bo in Rome to-morrow, in Egypt next 
week. A man who has the misfortune to 
be so rich as I am, Mr. Sleaford, is a slave 
to his money, and never knows where he 
may be from day to day." 

^' True, true," said Sleaford, making up 
his mind to go over to Boulogne by the 
mail and arrange with Tom in a written 
agreement to share the profits of all trans- 
actions re Decker. 

" But this day fortnight I will call upon 



THE ARROGANCE OF INFIDELITY. 205 

your son in Boulogne, and in the mean 
time you might write to him about the 
estate and the horses, and my desire to 
avail myself of his technical knowledge 
and his friendly interest." 

'' Certainly, by all means. I shall have 
great pleasure, and if you will allow 
me I will give you a line to him 
now." 

He took up a sheet of note-paper and an 
envelope, and wrote, . 

" My Dear Son, . 1 have great pleasm-e 
in introducing to you T. Decker, Esq., the 
distinguished millionaire and traveller from 
the United States. To serve his interests 
will be to serve me. He has honoured me 
with his confidence, and I desire to 
advance his wishes in every way as a 
banker, and, if I may venture to say so, 
as a friend, for he is a comparative stranger 
in Europe, and om' duty becomes a plea- 
sure in the case of a gentleman so eminent, 



06 CRUEL LONDON. 

SO cultured, and so courteous. . Your most 
affectionate father, 

'^ Jeremiah Sleaford." 

He folded the letter up, put it into an 
envelope, addressed it, and handed it un- 
sealed to Decker. 

" Thank you, Mr. Sleaford." 

" Will you read it ? Yes, yes ; do." 

Sleaford was anxious to impress upon 
Decker tlie character of the affectionate 
relationship that existed between himself 
and his son. Decker read the letter. 

^' Ah, this is indeed kind," lie said. 

Sleaford rose and put out his hand. 
Decker laid the letter in it. 

'^ No, no, your hand, Mr. Decker; let 
me grip it as a friend, and in the earnest 
hope that this brief acquaintance may lead 
to a lasting and mutually profitable in- 
timacy." 

Decker allowed Sleaford to shake his 

hand. 



THE ARROGANCE OF INFIDELITY. 207 

'' Certainly, by all means," said Decker, 

' ' You spoke about some question of a 
large investment of capital ? " remarked 
Sleaford, as if referring to a matter quite 
by the way, though it had been on his 
mind from the first. 

' ' Yes, sir ; will you consider between 
now and the end of the week how I can 
best invest, so far as profit and security 
go, two millions gold." 

'' Pounds ? " asked Sleaford. 

'' Sovereigns," replied Decker. 

'' I shall do so with pleasm-e," said Slea- 
ford. ' ' In my early days I was the chair- 
man of . " 

' ^ Will you write to me then at the end 
of the week ? " Decker asked, interrupting 
Jeremiah the Loquacious at the outset of 
that gentleman's latest version of his 
wealth in the grand old days. 

'^Certainly; yes, most assm-edly." 

'' I am expecting another visitor." 

^ ' Of course. I can well understand that 



208 CRUEL LONDON. 

your time is of the highest value. Yes, 
yes ; good morning, Mr. Decker. Grood 
day, sir ; I shall write to you. 

Jeremiah the Astute took up his hat and 
cane, smiled benignantly, put out his 
hand, shook Decker's three fingers warmly, 
and jostled a gentleman who politely 
stood aside to receive Sleaford's profuse 
apologies. 

''Dr. Dampez" was then announced, 
and Sleaford heard Mr. Tristram Decker 
say, '' I am not at home any more to-day, 
whoever calls." 

Jeremiah had come to Pall Mall East in 
a brougham. He now dismissed it. He 
preferred to walk back to his Bank. He 
could think as he walked; and his 
thoughts were many and important. A 
local journal had that very morning 
published an attack on the Bank. The 
writer doubted the value of the securities 
in which the surplus capital was said to be 



THE ARROGANCE OF INFIDELITY. 209 

deposited. Within an hour of the paper 
appearing several ugly inquiries had been 
made by two of the directors, who had 
been content to give the scheme the 
benefit of their names and had taken no 
part in the management of the Bank. 
Fourteen depositors had also given notice 
to withdraw their moneys. It looked as 
if the wind which was to scatter the 
financial house of cards had begun to 
blow, when the American millionaire 
loomed in sight, the good angel. Sleaford 
at once dubbed him the guardian of his 
hopes, the protector of his house, the man 
whose gold would meet the run on the 
West End Bank; for Sleaford did not 
doubt for a moment his capacity to con- 
vert a large contingent of Decker's 
sovereigns to his own uses. The un- 
grateful toiler, the rapacious small trades- 
man, the selfish working man, who had 
put their savings into the Bank of Deposit, 
should see how he would meet their 

VOL. III. p 



210 CRUEL LONDON. 

claims ! A bold fi'ont and a smiling face 
at the beginning of the run upon his 
scanty coflPers would convert what seemed 
like misfortune into a stroke of luck, and 
he should be able to turn the malice of his 
enemies to account. When they saw that 
he could meet their claims, and that he 
did so with a calm smile of rebuke for 
their selfishness and pity for their folly, 
he should conquer all opposition. Then 
he had only to extract an apology from 
the local paper to establish his scheme on 
the surest foundations. He would go to 
Boulogne by the mail, and arrange with 
Tom in regard to the business which Mr. 
Decker desired to place in his hands, and 
return the next day to defend his citadel 
in Baker Street, like a besieged general 
who knew that his reserves were at hand. 
Arrived at the Bank, Mr. Sleaford found 
Mr. Topper Wingfield, as a country 
gentleman, anxious to place a small sum 
on deposit, with a view to extended trans- 



THE AEROGANCE OF INFIDELITY. 211 

actions. Mr. Sleaiord had no suspicion of 
the detective. He did not know Mr. 
Topper Wingfield. Even if some dis- 
agreeable memory had crossed his mind, 
his vanity would have dismissed it; for 
Jeremiah the Discreet believed thoroughly 
in himself, and in the perfection of his 
schemes. It is quite possible that at 
times he even thought his plans honest. 
Some idea, at all events, that he had a 
prescriptive right to plunder the public 
possessed him, or he would not have been 
so severe on the conduct of the persons 
who had ventured to give notice of their 
withdrawal from the Bank. He had not 
hesitated to describe them to his head 
cashier as a set of wretches who were 
utterly unworthy of his attention. 

'^ Fortunately," he said, ^^Mr. Cashier, 
I can meet their malice morally and 
financially ; even if our system of requiring 
notice for the withdrawal of deposits did 
not give us time to prepare for any 



212 CRUEL LONDON. 

adverse action. I could give you ample 
funds to meet all claims to-day. I have a 
reserve that is unknown even to my 
family, undreamt of by my directors." 

The head cashier was, no doubt, glad 
to hear this, because he was quietly 
making his arrangements to visit some 
distant clime at an early day, and he was 
only wailing until the Bank had a suf- 
ficient run of luck to make it worth his 
while to take a long farewell of his native 
land. 

'' Going to Boulogne, my dear," said 
Mr. Sleaford, when Jeremiah reached 
home from the Bank, after having ex- 
plained the principles of the institution to 
'^T. W." 

'' And at once ? Well, I 'm sure I hope 
it will do you good." 

^' It is not a question of doing me good, 
Mrs. Sleaford ; it is business, though, at the 
same time, I must confess it is chiefly in 
the interest of our son Tom, who at last is, 



THE ARROGANCE OF INFIDELITY. 213 

I think, destined, through my influence, to 
be of mutual benefit to father and son. 
Where is Tim ? " 

^' Where is he?" rejoined Tim: ^* at 
your elbow, sure ; didn't I let you in, and 
didn't ye say, ' Tim, I want ye ' ? " 

^' Yes, yes, of course. Pack up my bag, 
Tim, I am going to Boulogne. I shall re- 
turn in the morning." 

'' What time do ye go ? " 

'' To-night, by the mail." 

" ThQre 's plenty, of time, anyway; it 's 
only afternoon at present." 

^'That's true, Tim." 

'^Av course it's true," said Tim, mak- 
ing a dash at a blue-bottle which was buzz- 
ing about Sleaford's head, ^^ an' the missus 
will have time enough to tell you of the 
wonders that liave occurred." 

'' Wonders ! what wonders ? " 

'^Oh, yes, I am sure. I had almost for- 
gotten," said Mrs. Sleaford; ''you put 
me in such a flurry about Boulogne." 



214 CRUEL LONDON. 

'^Misther Kerman, sorr, he's returned 
with riches galore, matrimony in his eye, 
and the Bank of England in his pocket ; 
bedad and I always liked the fellow, 
though ye did call him a clodhopper when 
he 'd made sacrifices worthy of St. Patrick 
himself." 

^^What is all this?" asked Sleaford, 
looking first at Tim and then at his wife. 

^^Be jabers an' it's wonderful! Miss 
Patty will be afther telling ye all about it 
herself. She 's only just come in, and the 
telegram that 's gone off to Misther Roper 
is a regular despatch, that it is, and more 
power to her ! " 

'' Tim, go away," said Mrs. Sleaford. 
' ' I declare you seem entirely to forget 
yourself." 

^'Ah, be jabers, I've done that same 
this many a y^ar, with thinking too much 
about other people," said Tim, leaving the 
room. 

Then Mrs. Sleaford, folding her withered 



THE ARBOGANCK OF INHDELITY. ^1 

arms demurely over a black silk bodice, 
proceeded to give her wondering husband 
a rambling account of Patty's interview 
with Miss Crosby, which caused Jeremiah 
to curse in emphatic language the brazen 
woman who had stood between Tom and 
all their best hopes on a certain first Sun- 
day after Christmas, and to hope that she 
might meet with sundry and numerous cala- 
mities. Mrs. Sleaford met these reflections 
with mild protests of her own against 
Tom's ingratitude, and in the tearful ex- 
pressions of her belief that if he had mar- 
ried Miss Crosby he would have done 
something for the solicitous authoress of 
his being. But she also hoped that the 
minx who had led him astray would meet 
with her due reward, and Mr. Brayford 
too, under whose pauper protection Jere- 
miah understood the disgraceful young 
person was living. 

"And so we are to have Roper as a son- 
in-law after all. Well, well, it is our duty 



r 



216 CRUEL LONDON. 

to consult the happiness of our children 
before all other considerations. I have 
long since given my consent, reluctantly, 
I must confess ; but I have given up mere 
sentiments of family pride, and Roper is, 
after all, not ungentlemanlike in his man- 
ners. He shall come into the Bank. I 
will show Patty that I can be magnani- 
mous as well as affectionate." 

" Thank you, pa," said Patty, entering 
the room ; " but I will not allow Mr. Roper 
to be indebted to my family for worldly 
advancement." 

^ How do you mean, my love ? " 
He shall not be a banker." 

^ My pet!" 

'' I don't like banks." 

'* Why, my love ? " 

^ They break." 

^ Break, Patty?" 

^Yes." 

^But they are national institutions* 
Bankers rule the world." 



THE ARROGANCE OF INFIDELITY. 217 

" They will not rule me." 

'' Patty, my dear, you must not get silly 
notions into your head." 

'^ I can't help it. 

^^ Why, dear?" 

*' Because I can't always agree with you, 
papa; and I am always silly when I 
don't." 

" But we must not be silly, my love ; 
and we must not get absurd notions into 
our little heads about banks," said Slea- 
ford, kissing his daughter on the fore- 
head. 

'' Then don't let us talk about such 
things," said Patty, walking slowly to a 
comer of the room to pick up a box of 
water-colours and commence preparations 
for finishing her latest study of a sunset in 
the Himalaya Moimtains from .a chromo- 
lithograph. " When I get my ten thousand 
pounds out of the Funds, or wherever it is, 
I shall keep it in several stockings until it 
is all spent." 



218 CRUEL LONDON. 

Miss Sleaford patted some pinky-white 
clouds with a long brush as she uttered 
this latter financial absurdity, and looked 
up at her father with her calm eyes. Jere- 
miah, as he returned her look, with an im- 
patient shrug of his shoulders, saw Patty's 
dowry slipping still further out of his 
grasp. '^ Happily," he thought to himself, 
^' I can do without it; my intimate friend, 
Mr. Tristram Decker, has placed his vast 
wealth at my disposal ; by the end of the 
week the new Pactolus will begin to flow in 
golden torrents in whatever course I shall 
direct. Baker Street and Fitzroy Square 
will be the principal receivers of the golden 
flood." 

^^ What are you thinking of, my dear?" 
asked Mrs. Sleaford. 

'' Tha't it is a great blessing," replied 
Sleaford, looking reproachfully at Patty 
and her sunset, " we are not dependent on 
our children, or we might be left to tear 
our grey hairs in the streets, and call upon 



THE ARROGANCE OF INFIDELITY. 219 

the winds to blow and crack their cheeks, 
like the venerable Lear." 

Mrs. Sleaford shook her head, took out 
a lace handkerchief, and tried to force 
back the tears that would not be checked. 

" Mamma," said Patty, laying down her 
brushes, '^ don't be absurd; pa knows he 
is talking nonsense." 

Jeremiah raised his eyes solemnly to the 
ceiling and left the room, and ten minutes 
afterwards Patty and her mother had 
di-ifted into a mild conversation about the 
most becoming wedding dress for a girl of 
Patty's delicate complexion. 

And in the mean time Dr. Dampez was 
giving Tristram Decker a lesson in the 
mysterious and awful science of toxi- 
cology. 



230 cmiEL LONDOV. 



CHAPTER IV. 

DR. DAMPEZ DLSCOUESES ON POISONS. 

Shall, deeply set eyes, that seemed to 
focus an object as if they were lenses in a 
telescope, and cotdd be projected forward 
and withdrawn witliin their depths, which 
were shadowy and dark, a sensual mouth, 
partially concealed by a black moustache, 
a heavy jaw, a broad, flat nose, a somewhat 
retreating forehead, and black, silky hair. 
Dr. Dampez was a remarkable looking man. 
Dressed in black cloth, he wore a white 
cravat and a pair of gold-rimmed eye- 
glasses. When he was amused or excited 
h(> had a habit of showing a set of white. 



DR. DAMPEZ DISCOURSES ON POISONS. 221 

regular teeth that might have been as 
false as the colour of his black moustache, 
for his ill-shaven cheeks and chin were 
stubbly with white hairs. Of medium 
height, he was broad shouldered and 
stoutly built. His complexion was sallow; 
he took snufE continually; he had large, 
fleshy, seared hands, and one leg was 
shorter than the other, so that he limped. 

He was in singular contrast to the spare, 
blue-eyed, delicate, nervous-looking man 
who sat opposite to him, eagerly drinking 
in the doctor's words, and occasionally 
making a note on a sheet of paper. 

'' Yes ; it was a very remarkable case," 
said Decker, " and I am indebted to you 
for your learned and lucid description 
of it." 

" A friend of mine say, ' You must leaf 
London.' ' What for ?' I ask. ' If your 
reputation is bad, lif in London ; if good, 
why then still lif in London. If you wish 
to hide yourself, lif in London. Do you 



222 CRUEL LONDON. 

desire to be pooblique, lif in London. No ; 
I stay. I like the great city of cities ; it 
agree with me best after I haf seen every 
other city of the world.' " 

The doctor spoke with a strong foreign 
accent, and with some slight action of the 
shoulders and the right hand. His voice 
was not unpleasant ; but the peculiar 
motion of the eyes was that of a man of 
intense secretive power. He took snuff not 
only as if it gave him some physical enjoy- 
ment, but as though it assisted his memory, 
and afforded him useful pauses for reflec- 
tion and observation. Some men obtain 
this latter aid by the use of an eye-glass : 
Dr. Dampez did not use his glasses at all 
during his interview with Decker. 
" You have travelled much ? " 
'' All over the world. I know the flora, 
the minerals, the manufactm'es of every 
country, and I am acquaint with the 
mineral poisons of every land, east, west, 
north, and south.'' 



DR. DAMPEZ DISCOURSES ON POISONS. 223 

'' Are you a Frenchman, monsieur ? 
Pardon my inquisitiveness ; I am anxious 
that we should know each other thoroughly.'' 

^' Monsieur does me honour. I am a cos- 
mopolitan : my father was French, my 
mother . was a Servian ; I was born in 
Cairo." 

He smiled, and offered his snuff-box to 
Decker, who declined it politely. 

.'^ I prefer tobacco through the medium 
of a cigar. May I offer you a Cabana ? " 

'^ No, . ^thank you." 

Decker lighted a cigar. 

" And you have devoted most of your 
life to the study of toxicology ? " 

'' All my life, . all, monsieur." 

' ' Just now I was thinking it might be 
possible to learn from you all you 
know." 

'' It might be in a long time," said the 
Doctor, smiling, as if to hide the thought 
which was evidently in his mind. 

'' I want to be your pupil. Don't think 



224 CRUEL LONDON. 

me rude. 1 gathered, from what you said 
a while ago, that you are poor ? " 

'^ It is a verity," said the doctor, " as 
poor as Monsieur Job. I had a patroness. 
The lawyer almost ruin her in making for 
her the defence necessaire in the affair I 
tell you about. She leaf London for 
economies on the Continent ; I remain." 

'' You would like to be rich ? " 

" To have moneys is to live," replied 
Dampez, looking out of his depths upon 
Decker, and taking a pinch of snuff with 
more than usual care, weighing it thought- 
fully before consuming it. 

" You acknowledge the power of gold?" 

" He who denies it is a fool." 

Decker chewed the end of his cigar in 
the comer of his mouth, and, rising from 
his seat to get a better view of the doctor's 
face, leaned against the mantelshelf. 

'^ Will you let me make you rich ? " 

'' Will I ! " exclaimed the doctor, 
shrugging his shoulders. 



DR. DAMPZ DISCOURSES ON POISONS. 226 

'^ You shall give me your secret, and I 
will pay for the knowledge. 1 will be 
your pupil." 

Dampez moved his position, getting his 
back to the light. 

^' Grold for knowledge. Much know- 
ledge, much money," said Decker ; ^' is 
that fair ? " 

'^' Certainly, monsieur, it is." 
' ' Did Mr. Topper Wingfield tell you I 
am a millionaire ? " 

'' No, monsieur, no. But you are 
American." 

^' Therefore rich, eh ? " 
' ' Americans who travel much have 
moneys ; that is my experience." 
" I have a gold mine, Dr. Dampez." 
'' Mon Dieu ! the philosopher's stone. 
Monsieur, I throw myself to your feet." 

The Frenchman rose, smiled with his 
white teeth, not with his sallow face, and 
in sitting down again managed to place 
himself between Decker and the light. 

VOL, III. Q 



226 CRUEL LONDON. 

'' Then is it agreed that I become your 
pupil ? " 

" The treaty is complete." 

'' Shall I pay you a retaining fee at 

once .'' 

'^ Monsieur F American is the soul of 
honour." 

^' Will you fix the amount ? " 

" I leaf it with you : we are agreed 
about the value of knowledge and the 
power of money." 

Decker sat down and wi'ote a cheque 
for three hundred pounds. 

' ' Will that retain your exclusive services 
for one week ? " 

'' Three ondred pounds," said the doctor, 
his eyes coming out of their depths to gloat 
over the draft, '' payable at Nathan's ! 
Monsieur is liberal." 

" At the end of the week I will double 
it." 

'' Monsieur is charming." 

" You are a cosmopolitan, you say, 



DR. DAMPEZ DISCOUHSES ON POISONS. 227 

Dr. Danipez ; but I suppose you have 
sworn allegiance to some Government ? " 

" No, monsieur. I have sworn allegiance 
to Science ; I owe nothing to man. Nature 
is my monarch." 

" Forgive me for asking the question." 

" Monsieur is speaking to his servant," 
said Dampez ; '_' let monsiem" command." 

" May I ? " 

" Certainement." 

But the small eyes seemed to hide them- 
selves and watch. Decker tried to pene- 
trate the optical depths. 

" You gif me moneys ; in return you af 
the service of my brain." 

The doctor Ijrushed away the snuff which 
liad fallen upon his cravat, and Decker, on 
the point of coming- straight to the busi- 
ness which was in his mind, paused for the 
second time, partly in doubt of himself, 
partly in doubt of the instrument to be used. 
It had occurred to liim after reading the 
Lbngville poisoning case, and giving rein 



r 



228 CRUEL LONDON. 

to his morbid fancy, that if there were a 
subtle drug which would play the part of 
a familiar spirit to his bitter inventions 
against Tom Sleaford he could encom- 
pass his revenge in such a way that no 
scandal should attach to the name of 
Caroline Denton. To shoot Sleaford 
would be to invite the whole world to an 
inquest upon Caroline's unhappy history. 
He had resolved to kill him under anv 
circumstances. He would never quit this 
world and leave Tom Sleaford behind. 
There were other considerations which 
influenced him beyond the mere desire 
for vengeance ; other intentions besides 
that profanely expressed one of doing the 
work of Heaven. But at present the 
design of the fatal business was incom- 
plete in conception and plan. It was 
destined that both should be in some 
measure directed by the knowledge to 
be imparted by Dr. Dampez. 

'' I have never studied toxicology," said 



DR. DAMPEZ DISCOURSES ON POISONS. 229 

Decker : '^ all I know about it I gleaned 
from the famous chapter in ' Monte 
Christo.' " 

" Ma f 01 J then it is vera leetle," said the 
doctor, showing his teeth. " Mithra- 
dites, the Medicis, Flamel, Fontana, the 
' Arabian Nights,' L'Abbe Adelmonte, 
Madame Villefort, all amusant and ro- 
mantic. But science, monsieur, is science, 
and fiction is a different thing altogether. 
Aqua della To/ana ! . ires hien ; well, 
what was it ? Only a leetle arsenic 
crystal dissolve "in waterre. It puzzle les 
savants in the ages of the dark, but we 
detect him in the body to-day as easy as 
snuff. The cabbage- garden of ' Monte 
Christo ' was pretty . tres joli ; it is the 
poetry of toxicology . vera good for the 
(children, not for us, monsieur, not for us." 

'' Don't you think, then, that they 
manage these things in Eastern climes 
with the power accredited to them by 
Dumas ? " 



230 CRUEL LONDON. 

" No, not at all ; we laugh at their 
knowledge in London. Would you lif 
with the secrets of the world around you ? 
. London, London! The Orientals wise 
men in toxicology ! They poison like the 
butchers ; it is because there were no 
students des poisons of sufficient attain- 
ment to discover the deadly mineral that 
can nevaire hide him from the test of the 
grand science. Monsieu r,this talk of the 
secrets possess by Italy, by the Turk, by 
the Indian, it is imposition." 

'' Is that so ? " asked Decker, doubt- 
ingly. '' And yet . " 

" You would refer to history ? " said the 
doctor, as if reading Deckers thoughts. 
^^ Well, it gif you accounts of that same 
aqua Tofana as a mysterious invention 
of an Italian womans of the fifteenth cen- 
tury, which was to destroy life in a year 
or in a few hours. During the Pontificate 
of Alexander VII. many husbands die, 
and there was a society of young married 



DR. DAMPEZ DISCOURSES ON POISONS. 231 

womans which deal with the poison under 
directions of an old hag of Sicily. You 
see how beautiful in this is the veil of 
religion; Madame Spara, the crafty old 
womans, she make up her phials of aqua 
delta Tqfana with this inscription : . 
' Manna of St. Nicholas ! ' Ah, Monsieur 
Decker, if you would play cards with 
the devil get under the wing of a 
saint." 

'^ You are a philosopher as well as a 
toxicologist," said Decker. 

'' They go together," replied the doctor. 
" Madame Spara kill six hundred people 
with the ^ Manna of St. Nicholas.' To-day 
let her lif in Europe ; she kill one we 
find her out, with her vulgar arsenic 
and her cheap religion ; though we make 
much of the saints yet, and we murder 
thousands in open day with sword and 
gun, and Europe smile, only that we do it 
under a flag with a cross upon it, and for 
the loaf of God." 



232 CRUEL LONDON. 

" I like you, Dr. Dampez," said Decker. 
^' I am in luck to find so excellent a pro- 
fessor." 

^^ The romance of poisons," said the 
doctor, smiling with his teeth, ^' is full of 
tragic episodes, all with one lesson against 
the unlearned tampering with a science 
which has no royal road to its mystery, 
monsieur. Marguerite d'Aubray, Mar- 
chioness de Brinvilliers, her name is a 
reproach to humanity, but it is also more, 
another of many examples that womans 
always end bad with toxicology. A 
Gascon loof madame, and is put into 
prison by his family. There he study 
poison. She come to him ; he gif her the 
leetle pill or what not ; she kill her 
family; the Gascon make his leetle dose 
in a mask, the fumes of the compound 
are fatal to life ; one day his mask fall, . he 
die. Madame is so much desire to have 
his secret, she sav too much ; her crime 
was discover; she give up the ghost in 



DR. DAMPEZ DISCOURSES ON POISONS. 233 

lire, . they burnt her alife. You shudder, 
monsieur ! " 

'' A horrible death for a woman ! " said 
Decker. 

'' I do not know, . perhaps it is ; some 
womans who haf the faith in the saints 
embrace the fire and say they like it ; but 
that is in the past, not to-day when 
martyrdom is out of the mode.^' 

'' Gone, with truth and honour and 
virtue," said Decker. 

" You haf been disappointed, mon- 
sieur ? " 

Decker shrugged his shoulders. 

^^ Disappointment comes of expecting 
too much." 

'' I hope you and I will avoid that in 
the business which brings us together." 

Dr. Dampez took snuff, and brushed the 
dust of it from his sleeve. 

" The ancients," said Decker, bringing 
the doctor back to his subject, '' had 
poisoned rings ; the Greeks had fatal 



234 'cruel LONDON. 

wreaths for virgin brows; the Indians 
have poisoned arrows to this day." 

^^ True ; but we are talking of a method 
that will defy discovery, are we not ? We 
wipe out the charlatan of the past; we 
snuff out the quackery of witch and magi- 
cian ; we stand in the broad light of 
science." 

^^ It is plain that in this matter of toxi- 
cology I am an infant, groping in the 
dark, nervous, until I grow accustomed to 
the absence of the daylight, but I shall 
have all the courage man can have when 
I feel my feet and stretch out my hand, 
and know what I am clutching." 

'^ Let monsieur be frank with his pro- 
fessor. If monsieur would study toxico- 
logy from a medico-legal basis, I shall tell 
him in the language of the manual that, 
^ la douleur, les angoisses, les convulsions 
en f orment le triste cortege ; la mort en est 
souvent le terme, quelquefois elle frappe 
sur le champ sa victime,' which monsieur 



DR. DAMPEZ DISCOURSES ON POISONS. 235 

will translate, . ' pains, agonies, convul- 
sions, form the sad procession; death is 
often the end ; sometimes suddenly she 
strike her victim.' And with such dolorous 
introduction I shall teach him what a 
poison is, its effects, its antidotes, and I 
shall refer my pupil for historic instances 
to les causes cdebres of ^ Le Manuel des 
Poisons.' But, if monsieur has other pur- 
poses, we waste time." 

Decker bowed, intimating his desire not 
to interrupt the doctor. 

" You wish that I should discourse ? " 
'' Gro on, doctor." 

'' I fear to appear too egotistic, but I 
know of what I speak, and I lay on the 
side tradition, romance, the tragedy on the 
stage, with its phials and its rings, its 
fumes of the witches, and I deal with this 
grand science alone, the wonders of nature, 
and the wonders of the mind of mail, which 
conquer nature. Let us dismiss the quacks 
of the fiction and the stage, and come to 



236 CRUEL LONDON. 

the plain truths. When I was a student 
first I haf for my professor a savant^ who 
was in the schools chez Chaussier ; he had 
witness aux experiences de Messieurs 
Alibert, Dupuytren, Magendie, Orfila; he 
was acquaint with the interesting observa- 
tions of Portal, and as his pupil I began 
my life with the fruits of half a century of 
inquiry, experiment, success. But to-day, 
monsieur, in London there is Englishmen 
who haf find out the very heart of nature, 
who laf at yom- wise men of the East . 
Messieurs Taylor, Guy, Sare John Harley, 
Sare Brodie, Messiem-s Blake and Bernard. 
Monte Clu-isto ! Why we gif to small leetle 
boy in Paris or London tin dleve of the 
school in om' laboratory, om' surgerj , our 
chemistry, . ^we gif to him to manage a case 
of de Monte Christo, and he find it out 
altogether." 

Dr. Dampez shrugged his shoulders con- 
temptuously, and his eyes no longer hid 
themselves. They sparkled in their depths. 



J 



DR. DAMPEZ DISCOURSES ON POISONS. 237 

^'With our experience, our microscope, 
om- analysis, our experiment physiological, 
our leetle frog, our Anglish patience, our 
treatise, our simple test, our complex test, 
. with these we pull the nose of Abb^ 
Adelmonte; we make of him stuff and 
nonsense, as the English say . stuff and 
nonsense." 

Dr. Dampez rose frogi his seat and 
limped across the room, his hands behind 
his back, his head thrust forward. Coming- 
back to his seat he showed his teeth, and 
held out his snuff-box to Decker. . 

' ^ What is there wonderful if I gif you 
one pinch zat leetle snuff enough to make 
you shut your eye to open no more ? Nothing 
at all. But, if I gif it you and it leave no 
trace, . if Monsieur Taylor, Doctor Gruy, 
Sare John Harley, they come to the body 
and find no trace of my little pinch, ah, 
then is the wonder ! " 

Decker paused in the action of taking u 
pinch between his thucab and finger. The 



238 CKITEL LONDON. 

doctor contemplated him with his small, 
piercing eyes, his white teeth, and his 
sallow, devilish face ; Decker shuddered. 

'' Ah," said the doctor, closing his snuff- 
box, ''you would not have the courage 
to administer the leetle pinch, or the leetle 
drop, to a friend who might require to 
make quick his visit to heaven ! " 

'' You are a keen observer. Dr. Dampez?" 

' ' I have seen much peoples ; I have look 
into the minds of many men." 

'' I am rather nervous to-day ; I am ill, 
as you see." 

' ' It is not necessairc to feel your pulse 
to know that. You are a leetle nervous 
now, and weary. Don't you think we 
waste the time ? " 

'' Pardon me, doctor ; and don't be im- 
patient. Let us drink." 

The doctor smiled. Decker rang twice, 
which was the signal for Davings. 

''Two drinks," he said, when Davings 
appeared, " as usual." 



DR. DAMPEZ DISCOURSES ON POISONS. 239 

Davings retired to his anteroom, and 
quickly reappeared with two wine-glasses 
full of an attractive-looking liquor. 

'' We call it in America a cocktail," said 
Decker, as Davings left the room. 

'^ I know him, he is good," said the 
doctor, following Decker's example, and 
drinking the compound. 

' ' Would that be a good medium for a 
fatal dose that leaves no trace ? " 

Decker looked at the doctor; straight 
into the cavernous depths of his suspicious 
and strange eyes. 

''A fine drink . wt vin magiiijique; it 
would be a charming death to die." 

^^ I do not care for a death too pleasant," 
said Decker. 

^' It is not for yourself ? " 

''No." 

" Ah, I see ! " 

' ' I do not need such aid ; my end is 
fixed hard enough." 

The doctor weighed out a pinch of 



240 CRUEL LONDON. 

snuff and took it with great delibera- 
tion. 

''It seemed to me as you read your evi- 
dence, and also from your comments as 
you proceeded, that you do not think it 
difficult to paralyze the body, control the 
action of the tongue, freezing the very 
speech as if at the moment of articulation, 
and that the brain may still be active, the. 
mind at work, almost to the point of death." 

'' You are recovering." 

'' In what way ?" 

" Your (*,ourage is returning to you. 
Order for us, monsieur, one more quantity 
of that sublime wine of the cocktail, and 
we shall get on." 

Davings was summoned: the dose was 
repeated. 

'' Well," caid the doctor, *' you have de- 
scribed something like what I can do ; 
what they suspect was done in the Long- 
ville case, and which Anglish savants 
have not yet discover; it is the one 



..i 



DR. DAMPEZ DISCOURSES ON POISONS. 241 

principal secret they haf not prove ; it is a 
secret known to me. But it cannot last; they 
find out all things in London, as in Paris. 
But, my dear pupil, you miss out the great 
wonder, which is . ^no detection. Now let 
us consider the family of the leetle pill 
you want, and then you can take your 
choice for the experiment in your leetle 
rabbit or your leetle friend. Now look 
you, there is the narcotic which give stupor ; 
your belladonna, hyosciamus niger, which 
make for you delirium; your harmless 
aconite, tobacco ; digitalis and the Calabar 
bean, which procure for you paralysis or 
loss of muscular power . an effect I have 
studied much. Then there is strichnia, which 
your Monsieur Palmer use well at first, 
and then careless ; it get you the tetanic 
spasms, a horrible and a vulgar death. 
There is arsenic, with its inflammatory 
effects; mercury and cantharides, well 
known, and only fit for rats, . they should 
nevaire be used for a human being. Anti- 

VOL. III. R 



242 CRUEL LONDON. 

mony make for the lungs ; manganese and 
copper kill through the liver ; chromate of 
potash attack the conjimctiva, iodine the 
lymphatic glands ; phosphorus is insidious^ 
and brings on that fatty degeneration which 
might be ascribe to natural causes but for 
the luminosity of the body after death; 
spurred rye is not so well known; and 
lead make for the muscles an enemy dQ- 
structive. But all these show themselves 
in their action, and when it is all ovaire we 
find their remains ; they leaf behind their 
handwriting, which Science can read." 

Dr. Dampez took a pinch of snuff, and 
smiled with his lips. 

^' It is the effect I am thinking of, more 
than the discovery of the means," said 
Decker. 

^^ You would like yom* leetle rabbit or 
your pet dog to Knger, to make a quiet 
and interesting coupe f You must then 
describe to your prof essor the effect as you 
wish it to be ; we shall then considaire." 



wmmm^^^m^mmsr^\ w i . . 



DR. DAMPEZ DISCOURSES ON TOLSONS. 243 

He looked at Decker and held out his 
box. 

" It is easy enough, toxicology in a rough 
way, and you make the end almost with 
what you like, . the innocent salts of Ep- 
som, the Godfrey's cordial ; but the grand 
study of the science, where it deal with 
the delicate anatomy, the brain, the blood, 
and the wonderful organization, if it be 
the leetle rabbit or the human kind, it is 
for the savant^ the student, the travellaire 
ovaire many lands, who know the flower 
and the herb and the mineral of all coun- 
tries as an open book, who say to the 
HdleborusfoetiduSj ^ Oh, how is your amiable 
si^teTyHelleborus orientalis ? ' who know the 
dispositions of each member of the grand 
family ; who can say to the Cicuta virosa, 
' Ah, you have a classic history which dates 
back to Athens, and you are more famous 
and more deadly than yom' relative, Phil- 
landrium aquaticum.^ It is the grand 
science for the philosophers who look deep 



244 CRUEL LONDON. 

into the well of the knowledge, who know 
every variation of le champignon . ^the 
simple and tlie poison, the minerals in their 
multifariotLS forms, the alkalies, the car- 
bonates, the acids, the salts of the alkalies, 
and the earth, metallic irritants, their 
powers individual, their effects combined, 
arsenic, antimony, mercury, zinc, silver, 
bismuth. Ah, Monsieur Decker, you enter 
a wide, wide field when you commence 
your research into the wonders of toxi- 
cology ! " 

*^ And you, Monsieur le Docteur," said 
Decker, unintentionally falling into the 
grandiloquent style of the tutor, '' you, sir, 
begin to live when the pupU at your feet 
can load you with riches. Listen, my friend, 
I am a man of business. You can see in 
my face that I have not many years to 
live, and you will the better understand 
that I have no time to waste. To do 
justice to your scientific tuition I should 
want a quarter of a century added to my 



.^^^^^^^jT^w^^y. ^^^^"iB W '. I* ^1 m^m^^mt^^mmm^mmtm^'^^i^-^'^^^^^ -^ m m .*-   " ^^^.^^'m^^^.mm an ^i i^^m^- 



DR. DAMPEZ DISCOURSES ON POISONS. 245 

future years. Since that cannot be, I must 
have the benefit of your researches. Ten 
thousand pounds . ^fifty thousand . are of no 
moment to me ; but I want that compound 
you referred to in your evidence, I want 
your skill, I want to command your assist- 
ance. Do I make myself understood 
now ? " 

" Quite, monsieur, I haf been waiting for 
you to make up your mind to gif me your 
full confidence. Command me, as if we 
were in that East you speak of . ^you the 
grand monarch, I the minister, who only 
knows your will. But . " 

Dr. Dampez paused. 

^' Yes, well?" 

^^ We must not meet again here. It was 
not wise I came, nor perhaps to speak to 
that Mr. Tee Doubleyou, as he call 
him. But he is your servant. I shall gif 
you what you require. I shall do for you 
all you wish. You come to my room ; I gif 
you the address in Soho. Come with a 



240 CRUEL LONDON. 

difforonc.o ; say a leetle beard like this, 
perluips." 

11 drew from liis breast-pocket a pack- 
ajfo. It (contained a false beard which the 
doctor fastened upon his own chin. 

^' Any tiling that will disguise a leetle. 
Well, you come ; I gif you back this draft; 
you bring mo the money, and do not wait 
for the end of the week. I will take all 
you gif in (me sum, at one time, in notes 
and gold, and gif you entire satisfaction." 

^' You are a business man, doctor." 

^' There are now two business mans." 

'^Whon shall I come?" 

'^ At once ; I am ready." 

'' To-morrow night, at ten." 

'' IVum ! you will find me Nombre 20, 
Kuo .lames. I shall be waiting at ten to 
open the door ; I haf no servant, . I only 
trust m}'sclf and my patients." 

END OF BOOK VIII. 



BOOK IX. 



CHAPTER I. 

PUPPETS WORKED WITH GOLDEN WIRES. 

During the week of his friend's visit ta 
Paris, Tristram Decker sat in his chambers 
pulling the wires of his various puppets, 
and making them dance, to his entire satis- 
faction. 

The Califomian mine owner had not 
reckoned without his host. He had not 
altogether over-estimated the value of 
money. No city in the world acknow- 
ledges its potency more promptly than 
London. It is true there are some few 
things money cannot purchase, even in 



CEDEL LONDON. 



I 



this metropolis. Decker, however, be- 
lieved that everything he required, except 
health and a reversal of past inevitable 
events, could be bought. 

Monsieur Favart came and took up his 
quarters at Pall Mall East over the rooms 
occupied by Decker ; but only for twenty- 
four hours. 

Within three days of receiving his 
original instructions, he had brought 
Decker the full particulars of William 
Graham Denton's death and burial, which 
did not differ in any notable detail from 
the sufficient though brief account 
already in the possession of the reader. 
More than this, he had placed in his 
employer's hands a certified copy of the 
registration of the marriage of Caroline 
Virginia Denton to Philip Gardner, at 
Birmingham, bearing out Brayford's 
theory of the registration having taken 
place at ,some large city within easy 
access of Essam. Sparcoe, being con- 



PUPPETS WORKED WITH GOLDEN WIRES. 251 

suited on this, confirmed the opinion of 
Maclosky Jones, expressed on that me- 
morable day when Caroline left The 
Cottage, that a false name would not 
vitiate the marriage, identification being 
established. Dorothy Migswood had gone 
to live with an old sweetheart, who was 
employed in the London Docks. 

The confirmation of Caroline's mar- 
riage, even though Tom Sleaford had 
disguised it under a false name, for a 
little time shook Decker's plans, and left 
him in a condition of uncertainty as to 
what might be the best course to pursue, 
not simply in regard to his own feelings, 
but for the honour and dignity of the 
woman to whom he was ready to sacrifice 
his life in the present and his hopes of 
heaven, if he had any, in the future. It 
occurred to him, like a sunny flash of 
light passing over his gloomy thoughts, 
that if there were anything of the angel 
left in Tom Sleaford's nature perhaps 



252 CRUEL LONDON. 

it might be possible to re-unite the man 
and woman whom Grod or the law had 
joined, establishing the credit and reputa- 
tion of old Denton's daughter, and giving 
to her son an honourable heritage and a 
name. 

This gleam of light was immediately 
followed by the dark shadow of Caroline's 
narrative ; for she had told Decker all her 
story of misery and woe ; she had 
kneeled at his feet, and at the same 
time had confessed her love for him, 
and her hope, when she left New York, 
that he would follow her and wait until 
time had softened the heart of her father, 
and new scenes had pushed back in his 
memory the recollection of his wrongs. 
Then it was that Decker felt how helpless 
gold is when the noblest and best aspira- 
tions of the heart are concerned ; and he 
wished the Sacramento and its treasures 
could have been wiped out, so that he had 
been left free to follow his love through 



PUPPETS WORKED WITH GOLDEN WIRES. 253 

r 

the world. But while he dwelt fondly on 
this thought, the patter of little Willie's 
feet sounded in his heart an alarm of 
hatred, and awoke within his nature all 
that was cruel and revengeful. He was 
tossed on a sea of passion and remorse, 
with the feeling that there was only one 
port to steer for, and that it lay open for 
his entrance. The harbour was full of 
foul shapes. His welcome there would 
be heralded in the demoniacal laughter of 
unholy spirits, and he would pay the 
pilot with that piece of ore which had 
blood upon it. Those days at the Gulch 
came back to him. ^^ There 's blood upon 
it." He remembered the remark, and it 
seemed as if the piece of red-looking 
quartz grew before him, a rock stained 
with bloody footsteps. 

Decker's constitution required addi- 
tional stimulant every day. He built him- 
self up with tonics. He kept body and 
soul together by artificial means. It was 



254 CRUEL LONDON. 

like working high-pressure engines beyond 
their highest power. He knew it, and he 
was continually preparing for the inevit- 
able result. 

^^I intended originally," he said to 
Monsieur Favart on the fifth day of his 
agent's return, ^^to request your sendees 
in Boulogne or Paris, to unearth the hus- 
band of a deserted lady, but during your 
absence he has been delivered into my 
hands. It is curious how the smallest 
things, the most trifling incidents, may 
change one's plans. Mr. Topper Wing- 
field mentioned in the course of conver- 
sation an apparently trifling circumstance 
in his experiences of criminal life. It 
started me on a new track ; it led me into 
a fresh field of inquiry ; it changed my 
entire plans; though neither he in men- 
tioning it, nor myself in listening had the 
remotest thought or idea that it could 
affect anything we were discussing, or 
anybody with whom we were dealing. 



PUPPETS WORKED WITH GOLDEN WIRES. 255 

The mere accidental mention of a cir- 
cumstance entirely outside our relationship 
will turn out to be the most important 
influence in all my plans." 

'^ Do you believe anything is accidental, 
monsieur?" asked Favart, lighting a cigar 
which Decker had pressed upon him. 

" I will answer you with a question. 
Are you a fatalist ? " 

" I am." 

^^ It is a convenient belief ; but it leaves 
no room for independent action . it makes 
puppets of us." 

" What else are we ? It is only for us 
to take the world as we find it." 

"Are we not responsible to a higher 
Power ? " 

" On the contrary, it seems to me we 
have claims and grievances against the 
Kso-called Divine authority for using us ill." 

" Are love, revenge, friendship, hatred, 
mere acts of volition ? Have we no con- 
trol over them ? Do they come unbidden ? 



256 CRUEL LONDOK. 

Are they exercised by some hidden and 
unsuspected decree ? " 

*^ Monsieur interprets my own Tiews." 

'' I am, then, a mere instrument in the 
hands of Fate ? " 

'' Certainly." 

^^ What are my brains for, then, Mon- 
sieur Favart . my feelings, my sentiments ? 
I do not quite go with you. It seems to 
me that the soul of a man is like the 
engines of a steamer, they propel the 
craft . the captain is the directing brain." 

^'And the tides and currents and the 
ocean, may they not still represent Fate ? 
I once waited at Melbourne for a grand 
capture. He came over in a sailing vessel. 
Fate was against me. That ship went to 
the bottom." 

^^ And is Fate such a bungler that an 
entire ship's crew and passengers must go 
down because the death of one man was 
requisite ? Why, that is as bad as the 
people who, to remove some grass that 



H 



PUPPETS WORKED WITH GOLDEN WIRES. 257 

was growing at the base of a church 
steeple, pulled dowoi the steeple itself. 
No, no. Monsieur Favart, you may think 
like that in Europe, but we Americans 
know that each man controls his own 
destiny. If a Western rowdy thought 
Fate had ordained he should shoot the 
man who had insulted him, and whom he 
meant to pepper, he wouldn't do it; he 
wouldn't consent to be a mere tool in the 
hands of Fate . ^not he. Nor will I, Mon- 
sieur Favart ; nor will I." 

'' Monsieur Decker is argumentative. 
I accept defeat with the good grace, 
though your poet say a man convinced 
against his will he is of the same opinion 
stm." 

" Fate had evidently ordained that 
several and sundry persons in this metro- 
polis should have what we should call in 
the States a high old time of devilry ; you 
and our allies, monsieur, will put on the 
break and pull them up. Listen a moment. 

VOL. III. s 



258 CRUEL LONDON. 

This is business. There is in this city a 

house of infamy called * The Retreat,' 

where a certain Major Wenn and Miss 

Isabella Weaver have been playing the 
part of Cruel Fate to young women and 

Good Fortune to themselves. They have 
committed one of the vilest of a great 
city's crimes, that of diverting the golden 
stream of charity from the starving poor 
into their own coffers. Mr. Topper Wing- 
field, an experienced detective, tells me 
that there is an army of Wenns and 
Weavers in London, who collect not less 
than a million and a half to two millions 
a year ostensibly for the poor, and by a 
system of ingenious duplicity continue to 
live upon it themselves idle, debauched 
lives, and to die in the odour of sanctity. 

Is that one of your ordinations of Fate ? 
No, sir; Fate or Heaven, who or what- 
ever it may be, is asleep. If I had twenty 
years before mc I would amuse myself by 
tweaking Fate's nose, and morally . physi- 



PUPPETS WORKED WITH GOLDEN WIRES. 259 

cally if I might . hanging all the Wenns 
and Weavers to the London lamp-posts. 
But I am wandering away from the subject 
in hand. Forgive me. Through the aid 
of one of my agents, Major Wenn has 
been arrested. He is locked up, and can 
find no bail. A committee of the most 
liberal subscribers to ' The Retreat ' is in 
possession of that establishment. But 
Miss Weaver has escaped. Every inquiry 
has failed to trace her. The lady of 
charity had evidently been expecting an 
invitation to defend herself on a charge 
of fraud. She did not wait for Fate to 
execute the warrant for her arrest. She 
preferred to collect together a couple of 
thousand pounds and some jewellery, and 
go away. Now Mr. Wingfield has a very 
intelligent ally in a long inquiring pro- 
boscis ; but he and T. W. are at fault. I 
have a presentiment that they will continue 
so. I think it a pity that Fate should 
deprive Major Wenn of companionship in 



260 CRUEL LONDON. 

the dock, and I want you to assist Fato in 
regard to Weaver, instead of looking up 
Mr. Philip Gardner. I feel sure Made- 
moiselle Weaver will not elude you." 

Decker leaned his head against the half- 
open window, which was filled with 
flowers. He coughed painfully. When 
the paroxysm was over, lie lighted 
another cigar, and sat down, intimating 
by his gestures that Monsieur Favart 
should pay no attention to the trifling ' 
physical interruption, which only reminded 
him that there was not too much time to 
waste in regard to their mutual arrange- 
ments. 

" Here is the lady's photograph," said 
Decker ; " she is a fine woman." 

" Very," said Favart, regarding the 
photograph intently. " It is a face easy 
to recognize." 

" Have you seen it hefore ? " 

" I do not tliink it. Who holds the 
warrant for her arrest ? " 



\ 



m^^mmr^m- ^m< w "w^ 



PUPPETS WORKED WITH GOUJBN WIRES. 261 

'' Mr. Wingfield, of Scotland Yard." 

'^ Good. I may act in this matter 
altogether untrammeled by other persons 
or other inquiries ? " 

'' Quite.'' 

'^ From what you say I judge she has 
left England." 

'' I should think so." 

^ ' Anticipating the storm, she has pos- 
sibly been making ready for her departure 
for some time ? " 

'' No doubt." 

^^ I may be away from London a few 
weeks before you hear from me." 

''So long?" 

'' Monsieur is impatient for her capture." 

''Very impatient. She is a fiend in 
petticoats." 

" That is not a rarity." 

"Indeed. I know nothing about 



women." 



" Monsieur has been saved a world of 
trouble." 



262 CRUEL LONDON. 

^^Ah, Monsieur Favart, how little we 
know of each other in this world ! All 
the people I have met in this metropolis 
envy me for my wealth, even though they 
cannot fail to see death in my face. And 
I would give all I possess to wipe out the 
time when I was making that fortune. I 
should have been occupied in a very diffe- 
rent way, and probably have been living 
in a garret, but I should have been happy. 
But, there, I will not trouble you with 
my affairs. I only wanted to say that it 
is a mistake for any man to envy another, 
or to think that he can altogether judge 
his acquaintance by his own experience." 

''You are not happy, Monsieur Decker. 
Perhaps it is that you view life too 
seriously." 

'' Are you happy ?" 

" Oh, yes." 

'' What makes you happy ?" 

'' Money and success." 

'' Have I made you happy ?" 



PUPPETS WORKED WITH GOLDEN WIRES. 263 

''Very much." 

'' It is gratifying to know that." 

'' You despise me at first. You think 
me a mere spy." 

'' Oh, no. I beg youi' pardon, Monsieur 
Favart, if I hurt your feelings." 

''Ah, well, that is all over. A man 
dignifies his profession by his mode. I 
am never cruel. I give the hare when 1 
hunt him a fair chance. When it is 
merely a diplomatic secret I have to find, 
I slay him like a game at chess. When I 
find that Registry yesterday I thrill with 
delight, though the game was easy." 

" Life is a puzzle." 

" But death, Monsieur, that is the great 
enigma." 

" Do you think so ? " 

" I do not like the day when I shall be 
called upon to solve it." 

"It's only a long rest, Favart; don't 
be afraid. You go to sleep, and sleep 
longer than usual, that's all. I shall lie 



264 CRUEL LONDON. 

down contentedly soon. And. that re- 
minds me, my friend, if you find it neces- 
sary in your absence to draw upon me, do 
so. Don't give Weaver an advantage in 
the chase to save expense. If I don't see 
you within the next seven days, report to 
me twice or thrice every day of your pro- 
gress, your hopes, and . " 

^^My success. Monsieur," said Favart. 
*' I shall find Mademoiselle Weaver." 

'^Buncher, sir . I'm Buncher," in a 
husky voice said a slouching man, who 
had entered the room as Mr. Decker and 
Monsieur Favart parted. 

'' Oh, yes, of course. Take a seat, 
Buncher." 

''I found 'er, sir," he said, jerking his 
right shoulder forward. 

'' Good for you, Mr. Buncher." 

'^Lor', ain't she a stunner, too! A 
regular out-and-outer ! " 

^'Yes." 

^^Come to town, sir, with five 'undred 



PUPPETS WORKED WITH GOLDEN WIRES. .iXib 

quid, as she says 'er missus giv' 'er. 
Comes up, sir, to a ole pal as worked at 
the Docks j and they ups' and takes a 
small public-house near Dock 'Ed, sir; 
and in less nor six months turns 'er out 
into the street, 'e does, an' knocks 'or 
teeth out, sir, an' is nigh bavin' to answer 
for 'er death. She 'as 'im up and gives 'im 
three months. An' there was a party as 
had a hill of sale in the 'ouse, an' they 
sells it up bag and baggage. Ill got, ill 
spent, sir. It 's a old proverb, but it 's 
true." 

"Ah," said Decker, "the little sinnei-s 
get punished ; the great ones get off." 

" I dunno, sir. You knows best." 

" And where is she now ?" 

" Well, sii', when she got served out so 
she signified, it seems, that she knowed 
Bill Smith, of the Old Kent Road. Cock- 
ney Bill, as they calls him . and so they 
took her there in a cab, some of her 
friends ; but Bill he said, well he 'd know'd 



f 



266 CRUEL LONDON. 

her once down at a place as he took pos- 
session of, but she was a houdacious lot, 
and he wasn't goin' to be troubled with 
her, though he didn't mind standing a 
(U'own for her ; and so they took her to 
the workus, and there I see her yester- 
day ; and to-morrow she 's to be charged 
with tearing up her clothes and assault- 
ing the matron, and she '11 get three 
months." 

^^ An interesting and excellent report, 
Mr. Buncher. The devil does not always 
take care of his own." 

'' No, sir, I suppose proverbs ain't always 
to be relied on." 

'' Here *s your mone}', Buncher; it has 
been well earned." 

Buncher took the notes Avith a ^' Thank- 
ve-sur." 

'' Call for me in the morning and take 
me to the Police Court where this woman 
is to be charged. I would like to see her 
in the dock, as you call it." 



^umm 



PUPPETS WORKED WITH GOLDEN WIRES. 267 

'^ Yes, sir, certainly. Anything else, 
sir?" 

'^ Not at present, thank you.'' 
''Wish yer good-day, sir." 
" Good-day." 

" And what of this Robinson, Mr. Wing- 
field ? " asked Decker, addressing his 
next visitor. " What does T. W. say to 
him?" 

'^ T. W. is quite satisfied," said Wing- 
field, patting his nose. '' But this business 
is no ordinary matter, and if it 's stirred 
up it will bring in other people . one gen- 
tleman that 's a friend of yom's." 

'' Indeed ? Who is my friend ? " 

''Mr. Tom Sleaford." 

'' What ! My friend ! " exclaimed 
Decker, losing all control over himself, 
and grasping a chair for support. 

'' I 'm sorry I Ve made you feel ill, sir," 
said Wingfield. " I mean that he used to 
be a friend of Mr. Kerman . the Squire as 



I 



268 CRUEL LONDON. 

he was called . and he 's a frienii of yours, 
I think ? " 

^^ Yes, yes! Well?" 

'' Yo see, sir, when T. W. gets poking 
about and inquiring into things, yo 
shouldn't blame him if the whole thing 
comes out ? " 

^^No. Goon." 

' ^ Well, yo must know Mr. Robinson, 
Mr. Sleaford and some others were mixed 
up with transactions that have been 
squared." 

''Who are others?" 

'' Not Squire Kerman, and not Mr. 
Harry Brayf ord, yo may be sure ; they 
were the dupes." 

''You seem to have studied tliis thing 
all round," said Decker, now recovering 
his self-possession. 

" T. W.'s a devil when he 's once got on 
the scent of things," Wingfield replied. 

'* You have not been talking about 
me?" 



PUPPETS WORKED WITH GOLDEN WIRES. 269 

'' No." 

'^ Yet you seem to understand that I 
like Kemian and Brayford." 

" Oh, yes." 

''How did you know that I knew 
Kerman ? " 

'^ Oh, easy enough ; learnt that in the 
City." 

''How?" 

" Yo won't use what I tell yo ? " 

"No." ' 

" I have an old Lancashire friend at 
Nathan's." 

"You don't think it necessary to pry 
into my affairs when you are inquiring 
into those of Robinson ? " 

" Not at all, sir ; but in my business we 
get into the habit, yo see, of putting this 
and that together." 

" And you keep your secret . T. W. and 
yourself, eh ? There are only you two in 
the partnership ? Is that so ? " 

" T. W. and me is one, and what we 



270 CRUEL LONDON. 

know we know," said Wingfield. '^ If 
yore confidence in me is shaken because 
I Ve got to know too much, sack me." 

Mr. Wingfield drew himself up with a 
defiant look at Decker. 

^' You startled me a little, that 's all." 

^' I 'm Lancashire," said Wingfield, 
' ' though 1 ' ve been in London a good 
many years ; and when a Lancashire man 
takes a business in hand and means it, he 
does mean it, and you 've gotten to trust 
him or chuck him up ; that 's what I Ve 
gotten to say to yo, Mr. Decker." 

'' Yes, yes," said Decker impatiently. 
" Don't let us have any spreadeagleism . I 
understand." 

'' That 's ole right, if yo understand. 
No offence, sir, but the confidence must 
not be ole on one side." 

'' Very well ; now, what is your advice, 
Mr. Lancashire ? " 

^'Wingfield, sir, Wingfield." 

'' What does T. W. advise? " 



PUPPETS WORKED WITH GOLDEN WIRES. 271 

^^Mr. Bray ford can prosecute," said 
Wingfield, ^' and lie is willing to do so." 

'' You have seen him, then ? " 

^' I have. Was that wrong ? " 

'' No. Pray don't be so ill-tempered, 
Wingfield. Have a drink ? " 

''Not now. Beg pardon, I was a bit 
ruffled." 

'' Well, you saw Brayford, and . 

'' I took him to Lawrence & Lawrence, 
the famous company lawyers." 

''Yes?" 

' ' They said there was a good case, but 
it would cost a lot of money to fight." 

" And you told them . " 

" That there was any amount ready for 
the purpose, and that the case was to be 
worked on public grounds ; and I said that 
Mr. Brayford had friends who meant to 
support him in ridding the public of a 
fashionable city swindler." 

'' Very good, Mr. Wingfield." 

" And to-moiTow, sir, you will just put 



272 CRUEL LONDON. 

Mr. Brayf ord into financial position strong 
enough to retain Lawrence & Lawrence, 
and we shall get a warrant to arrest Mr. 
Fitzherbert Robinson." 

'' Mr. Wingfield, you are a smart man." 

' ' Lawrence & Lawrence think Mr. 
Maclosky Jones can only be touched by a 
cdvil action ; but I hope to give them a bit 
of evidence to-morrow about that canny 
Scot which may just open the door of Bow- 
street wide enough for him as well as 
Robinson." 

"Wingfield, I forgive you," said 
Decker, smiling. J' Let us shake hands." 

Wingfield put out his hand in a shame- 
faced way, overcome by Decker's frank, 
genial manner. 

" I am a hasty sort of chap," he said. 
" I beg your pardon for losing my 
temper." 

" It was my fault," said Decker; " and 
you couldn't hear a word of criticism, 
knowing how well you had done your 



PUPPETS WORKED WITH GOLDEN WIRES. 273 

i?rork. Say no more about it. Keep on, 
Mr. Wingfield, keep on ; I will supply Mr. 
Brayford with funds. Pile on the coal, 
keep the engines going; I won't detain 
you a moment ; do your work, I 'U do my 
part." 

The soft June wind came through the 
flowers in the window, as if to woo Decker 
into a tender frame of mind, when the 
man and woman hunters had gone forth to 
join the great human processions in the 
streets. London was in her gayest attire, 
and there was a blue sky overhead. But 
Decker's thoughts were at Boulogne. He 
would hurry his departure thither. Mr. 
Topper Wingfield might plunge still 
deeper into secrets which he regarded as 
his own. He would call at the West End 
Bank of Deposit to find if Mr. Tom Slea- 
f ord was in Paris or Boulogne ; he would 
say farewell to Caroline ; he would leave 
a letter for Kerman excusing his absence 
from the wedding ; and leaving the trains 

VOL. III. T 



274 CRUEL LONDON. 

of powder all laid for systematic explo- 
sion, in regard to the legal processes which 
had been well and successfully conunenced, 
he would now make the acquaintance of 
Tom Sleaford, alias Philip Gardner. 

Received by an old familiar coloured 
nurse, by a butler from the South, and 
surrounded with every indication of wealth 
and comfort, Mrs. Gardner, when she 
awoke the morning following her arrival 
at Lancaster Gate, felt like one who has 
just come out of a bad dream. If she 
had fallen into a low, depressed condition, 
under the influence of adverse fortune, 
her spirits appeared to rebound with the 
change. It was as if the dark face 
touched some long silent chord that started 
old melodies in her memory, and linked 
the present with the past, bridging over 
with delicious music the black unhappy 
interval. Old in experience, her heart 
was still young. She fairly ran from one 



PUPPETS WORKED WITH GOLDEN WIRES. 275 

room to the other in what seemed to her a 
fairy palace. Drawing-room, . library, 
winter-garden, studio, she lingered here 
and there like a butterfly in a newly- 
found garden of floral treasures. Tears 
of joy hung upon the dark fringe of her 
black eyes, and the parted lips uttered 
vague words of joy. Then she would go 
to little Willie in the nursery, where 
Chloe sung luUabys as she did in the old 
days ; and here her happiness would suffer 
eclipse. She would sit down and cry, and 
lose herself in wondering efforts to recall 
the past and trace out the story of her life. 
Then would the pale face of Decker steal 
into the eye of her mind, and her longing 
heart would cry aloud for that oblivion of 
the past which she knew, by an instinctive 
understanding of Decker's nature, could 
alone unite two souls which Fate had 
thrust asunder. Thus it was with Caroline 
Gardner in her new home. She had alter- 
native fits of happiness and melancholy, 



276 CRUEL LONDON. 

but, as Decker had told her, time and the 
exercise of a generous disposition in bene- 
volent acts would bring her peace of mind, 
which was, after all, the tiiiest happi- 
ness. 

It was a sad parting, that of Decker 
with Caroline. 

"We shall meet again," he said. "I 
dreamed that he wts dead, Caroline ; that 
your marriage was proved ; that you were 
a widow; and I thought that my time 
had come too, and you consented to go 
through the world with my name; and 
that little Willie was rechristened, and 
you called him Tristram Decker." 

He looked earnestly at her as he spoke, 
and she noticed that his face had grown 
thinner, even in a week; that the flush 
upon his cheek was hectic ; that his com- 
plexion was almost fair; and she was 
afraid. 

"You do not speak, Caroline. If it 
were as I say would you marry me, so 



PUPPETS WORKED WITH GOLDEN WIRES. 277 

that, if there should be a future state, I 
might claim you in the world to come ?" 

^^ Why wait for dreams and the world 
to come?" she said, in a passion of 
emotion. ^^Take me now, Tristram; I 
am yours, and none other's. Oh, if you 
could but forgive me ! " 

She buried her face in her hands and 
sobbed. He laid his hand gently upon 
her head, and soothed her with soft and 
gentle words. 

" Listen, Caroline," he said presently. 

She looked up at him with the expres- 
sion of a child under the direction of a 
loving parent. 

'' Your words comfort me, and make 
me strong; but listen. I want to look 
deeper into your heart. Listen, my poor 
child. If I brought you that same certifi- 
cate of marriage, all in order . " 

'^Yes," she said, nodding her pretty 
head, from which a raven plait had fallen 
upon her shoulders ; ^^ I am listening." 



268 CRUEL LONDON. 

he was called . and he 's a friend of yours, 
I think ? " 

^^ Yes, yes! Well?" 

^' Yo see, sir, when T. W. gets poking 
about and inquiring into things, yo 
shouldn't blame him if the whole thing 
comes out ? " 

^^No. Goon." 

*' Well, yo must know Mr. Robinson, 
Mr. Sleaford and some others were mixed 
up with transactions that have been 
squared." 

''Who are others ? " 

' ' Not Squire Kerman, and not Mr. 
Harry Brayford, yo may be sm'e ; they 
were the dupes." 

"You seem to have studied this thing 
all round," said Decker, now recovering 
his self-possession. 

'' T. W.'s a devil when he 's once got on 
the scent of things," Wingfield replied. 

'' You have not been talking about 
me?" 



PUPPETS WORKED WITH GOLDEN WIRES. 279 

but I am only a woman, and I love you, 
Tristram. What would be dishonour 
where love is not becomes virtue where 
love is; true, self-sacrificing, devoted 
love." 

'' My dear Caroline! " exclaimed Decker, 
snq,tching her to his arms, ^^you almost 
make me wish to live. Farewell, till we 
meet again." 

The next moment he was gone; and, 
with his kisses still warm upon her lips, 
Caroline looked up vacantly, as if her 
eyes sought something in the room. 

^^No," she said, ^4t was not a dream; 
and yet he is not here." 



280 CRUEL LONDON. 



CHAPTER II. 



HOME AGAIN. 



Golden summer, yellow with buttercups^ 
bright with the flowers of the mustard 
seed, green with waving com, genial 
breezes full of himiming sounds and sweet 
perfumes. Manor Farm, with its broad, 
straggling old house, slumbered in the 
sun. The great Lincolnshire flat, indeed, 
seemed all asleep, like a labourer lying by 
the roadside at noon. The tall grasses in 
the dykes moved gently, as if they whis- 
pered to the dragon flies that balanced 
themselves on their airiest stems. The 
blue smoke of the old house went up in 



HOME AGAIN. 281 

two long columns to the blue sky. Here 
and there, far away in the distance, other 
homesteads could be seen with a few trees 
clustering round the stackyards, and a 
poetic suggestion of summer haze hung 
about the picture as if to "vignette" it, 
as the engraver treats a sketch on the 
wood. 

Mr. and Mrs. Kerman had come from 
Paris and London. Tristram Decker did 
not go to the wedding, but he had loaded 
Jane with marriage gifts. Mrs. Gardner 
was present, and she had accompanied them 
home. Kerman had said that he would 
rather keep the honeymoon at the Farm 
than at any other place, and Jane was so 
overjoyed at her husband's longing to be 
back again in the old county that they 
came almost straight home from the altar. 
Mrs. Gardner and little Willie travelled 
with them, attended by Chloe, the 
coloured nurse, and a maid. The beau- 
tiful Southern woman had fallen with 



282 CRUEL LONDON. 

quick facility into her new mode of life in 
London. She had been so accustomed to 
luxury as a young girl that she returned 
to the habits of wealth with an easy, 
familiar grace. Her house at Lancaster 
Gate soon became one of the best regu- 
lated as well as the most perfectly ap- 
pointed establishments in London. Little 
Willie was growing up into a fine, hand- 
some boy, and he occupied his mother's 
chief attention. She found continual 
delight in his happiness. Sometimes a 
stranger, contemplating her life, might 
think she had not a care in the world, and 
had never known a heart-ache. But she 
had her fits of depression as well as of 
elation. Her ambition, her hopes, her 
joys centred in little Willie, who pos- 
sessed all his mother's warm, loving 
nature. She seemed rather to dream her 
existence away than have a share in the 
activities of life. Before her easel, at the 
piano, driving in the park, at her devo- 



HOME AGAIN. 283 

tions on Sunday, she seemed to live in a 
world of her own ; and looking into her 
soft, loving eyes you could see that it was 
not an unpleasant world. 

On this summer day in the drawing- 
room at Manor Farm, with the windows 
all open, and outer blinds protecting them 
from the sun, were assembled John and 
Jane, and Mrs. Gardner and little Willie. 
Jane, buxom and happy to the tips of her 
fingers, was sitting upon, a low chair by 
her husband, who was talking and rocking 
himself to and fro in an American chair. 
Mrs. Gardner was sitting by one of the 
open windows, her eyes resting upon her 
two friends in a half attentive, half 
dreamy way. In a comer of the room 
Chloe and little Willie (the child partly re- 
clining upon a bundle of cushions) were 
turning over the leaves of a great book 
of pictures. 

Kerman was relating his adventures. 
He never tired of recalling the past. 



i 



284 CRUEL LONDON. 

Jane was always ready to listen. Mrs. 
Gardner's attention never wandered for a 
moment when Kerman dealt with events 
in which Tristram Decker's name was 
mentioned. It was a happy, lazy time, 
and it brought to Caroline's mind the few 
glimpses of calm content which had stolen 
at odd moments into her existence in the 
Vale of Essam. It was Jane's turn to let 
her attention wander a little, or to pre- 
tend not to listen all the time, when John 
told Mrs. Gardner the story of uncle 
Martin's will and Kis desertion of Jane. 
This j)lain narrative of a woman's devo- 
tion was brought to a fitting termination 
with an old box, which John insisted 
upon having on a pedestal in the entrance 
hall as a memento of uncle Martin's good- 
ness and a warning to assurance and 
pride. The letter which it had contained 
was a touching example of the old man's 
kind heart and a sharp illustration of his 
orldly knowledge : . 



HOME AGAIN. 285 

'^ ' You are not to let John Kerman see 
this until you are married to him. If he 
takes after his father he could bear good 
fortune like a man, and give it to the 
woman of his heart the same. But if he 
be his mother's son he would be flighty 
about it, and apt, maybe, to forget his 
benefactor.' 

^^He was a clever old man," said Ker- 
man, pausing, with the faded letter in his 
hand, to look at Mrs. Gardner, '^a down- 
right old observer. He knew me to the 
very core." 

^^ Don't say that, John. It was his 
love for me that blinded him. I always 
told him so," remarked Jane. 

'^No, no, Jane; he knew his man. I 
don't want to say that I was a particularly 
bad fellow, Mrs. Gardner," said Kerman, 
^'but I was a* fool, and under the influ- 
ence of false pride. But listen now to 
this dear old agricultural philosopher, . 

'^ ^ If I left all to you and none to him. 



286 CRUEL LONDON. 

he would fret under his obligation to you, 
for he does not tliink of you as loving as 
you of him. A true woman loves a man ; 
it is everything; nothing shakes it: a 
man has other ideas; he can shoot and 
hunt, or laboiur, and find the pleasure of 
hunting in making money and hoarding it 
up as I liavc. If John do not love you, it 
would be misery to you if he was not well 
off. Suppose he do love you, then he 
will be proud to share his money and 
lands with yom\s. I have behaved bad to 
him. It was something like being jealous, 
I tliink, and then he was always so inde- 
pendent; he would never bend, and he 
was always right, doing every stroke of 
his work to the last. If he had been a bit 
humble like, maybe it would have pleased 
me, and I had a mort of sorrow in my old 
heart nobody knew of, which maybe I 
tried to keep out of sight by damning and 
going on, when I could as soon have cried 
as swore.' 



p 



HOME AGAIN. 287 

" Poor old man ! " said Kemian, while 
a tear trickled down Jane's rosy cheek. 

^' ^ It 's a mortal pity we are not strong 
enough to tell the truth and shame the 
devil, until we think we be come to our last 
Harvest Home : but it 's no good thinking 
that now. So, Jane, my dear girl, I have 
left property in such a way that Jack, i 
he be minded to do what is right, will soon 
change your mourning gown to a wedding- 
dress ; and if he be proud and the like, well 
you will have enough, and so will he ; and 
I make no doubt, if he do go wrong and 
trip a bit, it may come right later on. 
Way I have left money, howsomever, will 
try him, and show what he 's made of, and 
Jabez Thompson, my dear old friend, 
though a lawyer, he will take care as no 
harm comes to you. You will be surprised 
at all the property which is now yours, but 
it has been my only care for years and 
years to accumulate it. God bless you, 
Jane, my good, kind girl, and my first 



288 CECEL LOMDON. 

prayer, since I was a young man, is for 
your happiness. Amen, and good-bye. 
" ' Ephkaim Martin.' 

"The dear old boy!" said Kerman, 
folding up the letter and putting it back 
into his pocket-book; *' he looked a long 
.way ahead, and thank God it has all come 
right at last ! " 

A knock at the door brought old Goff 
upon the scene. 

" Missus thinks it 's time carriage went 
to Burgh to meet folk as is coming by 
afternoon train," said the old man, looking 
at Kerman; "and she says should I go 
.wee it ? " 

" Yes, Goff," said Kerman, looking at 
his -watch ; " Mr. and Mrs. Tavener may 
be expected at Burgh in a couple of hours. 
Go with Peter to the station by all 



" I -will," said Goff. 

This interruption changed the drift of 



HOME AGAIN. 289 

the conversation, which now turned upon 

the Taveners, and thence to Brayford and 

the Retreat. 

Mrs. Gardner told the story of her 

escape from Miss Weaver, and the rescue 
by Brayford, and the kindness of the 
Aarons. The Southern woman spoke as 
if she was addressing little Willie in the 
hay-field at Essam. There was an unaf- 
fected originality in her method, an almost 
epigrammatic force in her sentences, 
which in an orator would have been the 
result of study. It was almost like listen- 
ing to a reading to hear Caroline, in her 
innocent, picturesque way, talk of her 
father's New Jerusalem, the house of 
bondage, and the persecutor who would 
not let the children go. She had the 
Egyptian history of the chosen in her 
mind, when she dwelt upon her early 
troubles in London, and her description of 
the blameless long life of the Jew-Chris- 
tian household in High Street, Maryle- 
VOL. ni. u 



290 CRUEL LONDON. 

bone, was idyllic in its tender passages 
of grateful appreciation. 

The moment Caroline began to speak^ 
Cliloe's ears were opened, and her black 
face looked up from child to mother. 
When her mistress came to the latter part 
of the story, which was as new to the 
Kermans as it was to Chloe, the old ser- 
vant foimd it difficult not to scream aloud 
her satisfaction. She compromised the 
point by hugging little Willie. The 
Kermans had not heard of the arrest of 
Major Wenn and the exposure of the 
Weaver frauds. Caroline was now enabled 
to finish the narrative with the news of 
Wenn's conviction and sentence to five 
years' transportation, and Mr. Fitzherbert 
Robinson's.committal for trial in connexion 
with some City frauds, on the clearest 
possible evidence. 

It was left, however, for Mr. Fred 
Tavener to supply almost the last threads 
of the narrative of the working of the just 



n99i 



HOME AGAIN. 291 

punishment which had overtaken some 
of the wicked people in this romance. 
Neither he nor Kerman suspected who had 
pulled the strings and enforced the action 
of tardy justice. It was after dinner on 
this quiet summer day that the two men 
sat over a bottle of claret and talked of 
recent events. The women had retired to 
have a delightful chat all to themselves. 

^' It occurred a week ago," said Tavener, 
' ^ and last night I had a letter about it. 
Emily has no idea that it was so serious. 
She has always been used to her father in 
money difficulties, and she thinks he has 
gone to avoid the service of a writ. Roper 
saved the old man. A warrant, it appears, 
was issued for the arrest of old Sleaford, 
whose Bank of Discount and Deposit turns 
out to be not quite correct. When it was 
found Sleaford had left town for Paris, it 
was concluded that he had levanted. He 
was expected home in a week. Instead he 
returned the next day, and the clerk to 



(. 



292 CfRUEL LONDON. 

the magistrate who issued the warrant, 
being an old friend of Roper's, and know- 
ing that he was about to marry Patty, 
gave him a hint. Roper, finding from 
Mrs, Sleaford that the old man had gone 
to see his son, started after him ; and, as 
luck would have it, met him at Victoria 
Station returning. Sleaford gave him a 
pitiable account of a quarrel he had had 
with Hs son, which had ended in that 
scoundrel, Tom, knocking his father down 
and kicking him into the street. So he 
had returned to London, he said, to bring 
his grey hairs with sorrow to the grave. 
Roper told him quietly of the danger that 
threatened him, and Sleaford, in an utter 
state of collapse, left himself in Roper's 
hands to do the best for him. They came 
to my house in a four-wheeler. Emily 
had gone to see Patty. We put a wig on 
the old man's bald head, and otherwise 
converted him into something quite unlike 
his original self, and last night I had a 



... .,i I *. I. I p HI. I pii^ .V^aa^VWVWVi^SB^BVMBBia^VV^BlPViPVMBl^l^l 



HOME AGAIN. 293 

letter from Roper, written en route^ to say 
that they would be safe in Spain, outside 
English laws and extradition treaties, by 
the time I received the letter." 

'^A clever fellow that Roper. By the 
sacred stars and stripes ! . as Decker would 
say . you surprise me. It is a pity some- 
body does not wring Tom Sleaford's neck." 

John Kerman looked for a moment as 
if he would not object to do it himself; 
but his face resumed its expression of 
palm geniality almost at once. 

" I don't know," he said. '^ Perhaps it 's 
better to leave a scoundrel to his fate. I 
doti't believe God leaves the punishment 
of a bad lot like Tom Sleaford till after 
he 's dead. But I forgot, Mr. Tavener ; 
pray forgive me . after all^ he's your 
wife's brother." 

^'He is none the less a scamp and 
worse," said Tavener, "but I feel obliged 
for her sake to think of that. Sooner or 
later he must come to terrible grief. 



294 CKUEL LONDON. 

Roper tcllH me lie is living an in&moius 
life of knavery, and I confess it made my 
heart a(;lie to see his father cry, as he 
bo^g(;(l nic to be careful because his cheek 
and jaw were bruised." 

*' Poor old wretch ! he is not the sort of 
man one ought to pity, Tavener, but 
sonieliow I should, even if I did not think 
of his two girls, one your wife, the other 
once on the way to be mine. I suppose 
lie couldn't help doing shady things. 
Pcrha])H it is because one has plenty of 
money that one ceases to be resentful, 
lie took me in, Tavener, to a pretty 
tune. But, there, we've wiped out all 
that long since. Wliat we have got to 
do now is to make things as pleasant as 
wo (5an." 

** Just, so ; I am glad that is your 
view." 

** lie can't come back to I^ngland again, 
I presume ? " 

*a think not." 



HOME AGAIN. 295 

^^ It will all come out, I suppose, pre- 
sently in the papers ? " 

" I fear so." 

" Can't we settle the business ? " 

" You can't settle fraud . they call it 
compounding a felony." 

'^ If Decker was here, he would disagree 
with you. I suppose we could do some- 
thing by restitution ? I mean by giving 
back money wrongfully obtained ? " 

" No doubt we could." 

'' Telegraph to Roper, and ask him to 
come down here. Don't you think that 
would be the best way to begin ? I suppose 
he will return the moment he has landed 
Sleaford safely in Spain ? " 

" Yes, that he will, not only to get 
married, but to consult with me as to 
the next step. I ought to go back to 
London." 

"No, I won't listen to that. Let us 
telegraph to Roper." 

" Very well." 



I 



296 caauEL London. 

Kerman rang the bell, and a few minutes 
afterwards a servant was galloping to 
Burgh with a message. 

" If there is any public exposure, on the 
first suggestion of it," said Tavener, "I 
shall take Emily to Italy and stay there 
for work a couple of years." 

"We will have no exposure. Jabez 

Thompson shall go up to town with a 

blank cheque and settle the whole thing. 

Now, that 's the best idea yet. You don't 

know Thompson, of the firm of Thompson 

& Foxwell. Cleverest man in England. 

Was taken in once, it is true. Tom 

Sleaford rides well, shoots well, and is 
a rare hand at whist. So is Thompson ; 

but that is neither here nor there. Jabez 

shall go to town. Jane shall ask him. 

Don't wince. I shall tell her all about it, 

and Thompson will do anything in the 

world she asks him. He rode over to 

Skegwell Bay this morning. He is sure 

to call here on his way home." 



..V>W^MHiHHBHBaViiR 



HOME AGAIN. 297 

" Please, Mister Kerman, sir, the missus 
would like to see you," said Kester, enter- 
ing the room without warning, and in 
what would be regarded as an unpardon- 
ably familiar manner by a Belgravian 
master. 

^^ Thank you, Kester. We are both 
to come into the drawing-room, eh? Is 
that it ? " 

"Aye, that^s about it, I reckon," said 
Kester, smiling. 

" Very well, Kester ; say we will come 
at once." 

Then turning to Tavener, Kerman said 
he supposed his friend would be rather 
shocked at the friendly sort of relationship 
that existed here between master and 
servants. 

" Not at all ; I like it," said Tavener. 

'' Goff and his wife, you see, are like 
old friends. I am going to make GofE the 
steward, and let him work the place. I 
shall build himji'a^house at the top of the 



298 CRUEL LONDON. 

Hundred Acre Close. We are going to 
buy Grundy Hall and the estate, where 
Dymoke, the Member of Parliament, lived. 
I can remember the time when I should 
have felt shamefaced at going into the 
place on a message, and if I 'd been asked 
into the parlour I should have been a good 
deal more awkward than Goff . And now, 
Tavener, I am going to buy the estate. 
Not that I think we shall ever live there. 
If we do it will only be until we have 
turned Manor Farm into a fine place. You 
see Jane has a hobby, and it 's land. She 
is not proud, but she would like to own 
half the county." 

Kerman laughed aloud at tliis view of 
Jane's humility. 

'^ And, by Decker's stars and stripes, she 
shall, Mr. Tavener, she shall ! Pride ! 
She hasn't a spark of what people call 
pride; but she has a great notion of 
lands and properties. I shall never forget 
when she came to London and tackled me 



HOME AGAIN. 299 

about parting with land. Bless her heart ! 

she 's fond of freeholds. She 's like uncle 

Martin in that. You will begin to think 

I 'm a talker soon. Come, let us go and 

see the ladies, and then you shall do the 
talking, eh ? " 

Manor Farm had never in its history seen 
such gay and festive times. The wildest 
dreams of Uncle Martin in the interest of 
Jane Crosby could not have framed such 
a picture of luxury and ease. Mrs. Gardner 
wore a dress, the seed pearl trimmings of 
which and the gems round her neck 
would have purchased a flock of Kerman's 
sheep and the fee-simple of the meadows 
in which they were feeding. Emily 
Tavener was dressed as an artist loves to 
see his wife . in a curious, pretty, out-of- 
the-way style, and she sang merry songs as 
a set-off to the sweet but plaintive ditties 
which belonged to Mrs. Gardner's reper- 
toire. The Southern woman did every- 
thing in a peculiarly original style. Even 



300 CRUEL LONDON. 

her songs seemed new. A familiar ballad 
on her lips found a fresh significance, and 
she played her own accompaniments as if 
she made the piano sing with her. Jane 
Kerman, in what Mrs. Goff called "a 
speck and span ball dress such as nobody 
ever saw in the Marsh," set off the Oriental 
loveliness of Mrs. Gardner, and also pre- 
sented an advantageous contrast to the 
metropolitan style of Mrs. Tavener. The 
fresh, genial, blooming beauty of Jane 
Kerman asserted itself with a frank amia- 
bility that took out of it all the arrogance 
of really handsome beaming womanhood. 
The two men . Fred Tavener, in evening 
dress, John Kerman, in a loose serge 
jacket . made up a group worthy of any 
society. The sun had gone down, and the 
windows were open to the long green-and- 
yellow landscape and the first red beams 
of the setting sun. 

In the relationship of these three women 
it seemed that the sorrow which Tom 



HOME AGAIN. 301 

Sleaiord had wrought among them had 
boimd them the closer together in bonds 
of sympathy and affection. They were 
like three sisters who had the misf ortmie 
to have a bad brother, and they never 
allowed themselves to talk about him ; 
though in the silent watches of the night 
his cruel shadow sometimes fell upon the 
dreams of the woman whom Fate had not 
saved from him, as Jane Crosby had been, 
until she had felt the bitter cruelty of his 
nature. Nevertheless, Time was making 
her some amends. There is hope of sun- 
shine for ever so sad a sorrow, when Time 
has an ally in youth and health. In 
Caroline's case these advantages were 
coupled with wealth and a love for the 
arts and all that is beautiful in nature. 
Strange to say, that burning desire to 
establish her name and maintain its honour 
had died out. She had one hope to which 
she clung. It was bound up in her love 
for Decker, and one great happiness which 



302 CRUEL LONDON. 

was not denied to her . the companionship 
of her child, which grew day by day 
into a more absorbing and compensating 
pleasure. 

Her worst dreams never brought Philip 
Gardner back to her, yet he is on his way 
to claim his wife and take possession of 
her property. 



A TRAGEDY, 303 



CHAPTER III. 



A TRAGEDY. 



For nearly a whole week the wonder of 
a certain Paris gambling-house was the 
large sums of money that an English, 
captain had won from an American mil- 
lionaire. Captain Gardner was known to 
be a blackleg. His associates were men 
with the hearts of fiends and the manners 
of gentlemen. His chief house of resort 
in Paris was the residence of a showy 
woman who called herself Madame Gard- 
ner. When she considered an excuse 
necessary to account for the fact that the 
villa was her own, and that Captain 
Gardner did not live there, but was only 



304 CEUBL LONDON. 

one of her guests, she said the arrange- 
ment was her own choice; she was 
French, he was English, and they had 
decided upon a policy of mutual and indi- 
vidual freedom. Captain Gardner smiled 
satirically, and twirled the ends of his 
waxed moustache, as the keeper of the 
gambling-house thus intimated to her 
clients that they must not imagine she 
was unprotected. If they thought for a 
moment they could trespass upon her, she 
wished them to understand that the Eng- 
lish captain was at her elbow. The truth 
of the relationship between the two needed 
no explanation, only that even the fre- 
quenters of the villa did not know that 
Captain Gardner and Madame Gardner 
were partners in the establishment, on a 
business basis by regular deed '^signed, 
sealed, and delivered." 

The captain had brought Mr. Tristram 
Decker there as his particular friend, and 
the American had lost immense sums to 



A TRAGEDY. 305 

the captain, who at the outset explained to 
Decker that he was incognito at this place. 
"Don't care," he had said, "to have my 
name bandied about among such a set ; so 
I call myself Gardner there." Tom had 
said this on the day Decker called upon 
him, and in response to Decker's wish to 
see something of Paris life. Decker had 
replied, ^ ' You English are so circumspect ; 
as for me, it doesn't much matter where I 
am seen, or who knows me. I haven't 
many months, they say, to live, so I want 
to live all the time." The wonder among 
the men who went to the Villa Adrienne 
was that the American should be so 
friendly with the captain. Neither the 
heaviest loss nor the apparent contempt 
in which Captain Gardner held him 
ruffled Monsieur Decker, who seemed as 
pleased when he lost as when he won. 
Then they came to the conclusion that, 
after all, Americans were just as droll as 
the English members of the same eccentric 
VOL. m. X 



306 CRUEL LONDON. 

national family. A new comer, who had 
been introduced by one of Madame Grard- 
ner's casual visitors on the very day when 
Tristram Decker appeared, excited almost 
as much interest. He was a Turk, Fabien 
Pasha, a silent, gentle, amiable old man, 
who soon became intimate with Captain 
Gardner and Monsieur Decker. Fabien 
Pasha spoke French fairly well, and he 
appeared to have plenty of money. He 
did not play high, but he evidently 
enjoyed gaming, and he gave several 
private dinners at the Hdtel Bristol, at 
which Captain Gardner and Tristram 
Decker were present. 

Decker had taken a suite of rooms at 
the Grand Hotel, and Captain Gardner 
spent most of his time in the American's 
company. Madame and some of her 
friends had, with grim humour, advised 
Gardner to pluck the Yankee eagle 
quickly, before Monsieur Consumption 
claimed the fine bird altogether; and 



A TRAGEDY. 307 

the Englishman was acting upon the 
hint. 

^^You are a gay dog, Mr. Tom Slea- 
ford," said Decker, over a little dinner 
which they had eaten without company, 
in order that the American might talk 
over his plans. 

" Might as well call me Gardner," said 
Tom. ^' You may let the other name slip 
in conversation at the villa, and I shouldn't 
like madame to hear it." 

" And a sly dog," said Decker. 
'^ Madame, I expect, is not the only con- 
quest, eh ? " 

Tom smiled a grim, cruel smile. His 
face was never a frank, open countenance ; 
but when we first saw it in Fitzroy Square 
it was angelic in comparison with the 
hard, sensual, and rapacious expression 
which had transformed it into a reflection 
of the man's heart. As the young man 
had increased his wicked practices so had 
vice registered them in his countenance, 



308 CRUEL LONDON. 

one by one, until the awful history could 
be read by any keen observer who cared 
to study the man and the face. 

^ ' Oh, I have had my innings ; I can't 
complain," said the captain. 

" You have never been in America ? '' 
'' No." 

^' Ah, you have an experience to 
come ! " 

^'Yes; they tell me your women are 
devilish pretty." 

'' They are : that is true." 
^' After all, one need not cross the 
Atlantic to see pretty American women.'' 

^' No. Do many of them come to Eng- 
land ? " 

''Yes, and to Paris." 
'' Have your conquests ever extended to 
my countrywomen? Beware how you 
eonfess, Captain Gardner: I am very 
jealous of the honour of my compatriots, 
men and women." 

''I used to know a very pretty 



A TRAGEDY. 309 

American woman/' said Tom, as he 
sipped his coffee and smoked a cigarette. 

"Ah, said Decker, sighing, "don't 
mention her name, or I might know her, 
and then perhaps we might not continue 
good friends." 

"Your patriotism is romantic," said 
Tom. 

" What was she like ? " 

' ^ A brunette from the South : a beauti- 
ful girl . ^but a vixen, a regular vixen." 

Decker pressed his feet upon the 
ground and closed his teeth. 

" But Fabien Pasha's is the right idea, 
after all. Beauty palls on a man. The 
harem is the only reasonable arrangement, 
and it has the advantage of being ordained 
by Scripture." 

"Yes; every man finds an ally in the 
Scriptures, whatever his vice may be." 

" Vice, Mr. Decker ! You don't call that 
vice ? " 

" You parted, then . ^you and the lady, 



310 CRUEL LONDON. 

the brunette ? " said Decker, not noticing' 
the question. 

'' Oh, yes ; she was right enough for a 
time, but I got tired of her." 

'^ Ah, you men of society, you are like 
butterflies. And what became of her ? " 

" Became of her . damn her! " 

Decker found it difficult to sit still. 

'^ Don't curse the woman." 

''Damn her!" exclaimed Tom, de- 
fiantly, as the scene on a first Sunday 
after Cliristmas occurred to him. ''You 
would curse if you knew the trick she 
served me." 

" But what of the trick you served her 
first, mon ami?^^ said Decker, with well 
acted coolness. 

" Trick!" said Tom, who only thought 
of that never-to-be-forgotten Sunday. 
"She was a strumpet before I knew 
her.'' 

" Tom Sleaford, you lie ! " exclaimed 
Docker, springing to his feet. 



V^V^^W^^^iV^i^-^PVI^H^iV^^BW>^^^^WB^i^HH^^*H^MOTHVi^^P^ 



A TRAGEDY. 311 

The ci'devant Captain leaned back in 
his chair, and stared at the white face, 
with its never-fading flush under the 
eyes. 

'' I beg your pardon, Captain Gardner,'^ 
said Decker. ' ' Eeally I was not thinking 
what I said. You see we Americans are 
sensitive about our women." 

Two hours after this incident, Tris- 
tram Decker was closeted with Fabien 
Pasha. 

" I '11 shoot him ! " said Decker. 

'^ Monsieur knows his own business 
best," said Dr. Dampez. 

^^ The low, crawling, lying thief; he 
ought to die twenty deaths ! " 

Decker paced the room, stopping now 
and then to cough. 

^'A duel is easy. Are you a good 
shot ? " 

" Yes." 

'' Insult and call him out." 

^' I dreamt this morning . ^it was a 



312 CRUEL LONDON. 

wakeful dream : I knew it was a dream, 
and it seemed as if I prolonged it at will . 
I dreamt that he sat before me iq The 
Cottage at Essam ; he was dead, except 
his brain; I told him his history, and 
mine ; I laughed at his agony as it was 
depicted in his face; I told him of her 
wealth ; I explained my first hopes about 
him that a reconciliation might be pos- 
sible ; I hit him in the face ; I gloated 
over him like an Indian with an enemy 
tied up for torture and death ; I told him 
he would lie in his coffin alive in the very 
house where he had seduced her and dis- 
owned her ; and I awoke laughing." 

Decker coughed and struggled to a seat. 

^^ My pupU, to talk like this is madness ; 
you are losing your self-control. I gif 
you a leetle soothing draught, see." 

The doctor took a phial from his pocket, 
poured half its contents into a tumbler of 
water. Decker drank it and sat down. 

^^You haf gif me all your confidence^ 



A TRAGEDY. 313 

more than I wish. I haf gif myself to you 
in return for money that make me income 
for life. I sell myself to you. Some 
philosopher sell to le diable ; I to Croesus, 
and when I sell I am yours, but with con- 
dition, you make a plan^ you carry it out 
or not, it is done or you leaf it alone." 

'' Forgive me, doctor. It must not be 
myself whom I consider, but a woman, 
and you will pardon me that I do not say 
who she is. If I shoot him, as I would at 
Decker's Gulch, scandal seizes upon her ; if 
we fight a duel, it is not that I value life, 
but an accident might leave him in the 
world to persecute and torture that woman 
and her child." 

^ ' Well, well, that is sentiments, and not 
for me; philosophic dispense with that; 
keep it in your own breast, monsieur; only, 
once for all, and the last time, is your first 
plan to stand ? " 

" It is," said Decker, " if that dream 
may come true." 



314 CRUEL LONDON. 

His face was haggard, his Kps apart, he 
gasped for breath. 

" To-day is Monday. On Friday you 
take him to your English estate. After 
dinner your dream." 

Tlie Doctor took a heavy pinch of 
snuff. Decker nodded his satisfaction. 

" And now, monsieur, you sleep a leetle . 
Did Monsieur le Capitaine tell you he in- 
sult me after you leaf Madame Gardner's, 
last night ? " 

^^No." 

' ' Ah, he did ; he was a leetle drunk, 
and he call me a name which was im- 
polite and a lie." 

^' What did you do?" 

' ' I came home to my leetle room in this 
quarter, which I haf for years when I am 
in Paris, a leetle room where I am Dr. 
Dampez and not Fabien Pasha; I come 
home, I mix a leetle of my own secret, 
Numbres Two, I call it, and I take my 
pinch of snuff and I say, * Wait, Monsieur 



A TRAGEDY. 315 

le Capitaine, I come for you.' But nevaire 
mind that ; you now go to sleep a leetle, 
this week I build you up, I gif you cour- 
age, I make for you strength, a heaven on 
the earth for you ; a hell for the English 
thief." 

Decker slept. Dampez took snuff and 
watched him. 

A new motive had strengthened the 
Dampez-Decker alliance, and had, at the 
same time, increased the necessity for 
caution. Madame Gardner was the lady 
who had been tried in London in the 
Longville poisoning case. She had given 
Dampez to understand that she was in 
Italy. The relationship between her and 
Dr. Dampez had been of a more intimate 
character than patient and doctor. This 
was suspected by judge and jury, but 
never proved. Madame had met Captain 
Gardner at Boulogne and Paris. Tom 
Sleaford was a bold wooer, as the reader 
knows. They lived at The Villa Adrienne. 



316 CRUEL LONDON. 

In less than six months it was turned into 
a gambling-house, and madame became 
the ostensible proprietress. She knew 
Dampez under his disguise of Fabien 
Pasha; but there was at once a tacit 
imderstanding between them, arrived at as 
if by instinct, that they would elect to be 
strangers. 

" I am a philosopher," said Dampez to 
himself, while contemplating Decker ; 
'' but I haf a strange unaccountable sym- 
pathies with this young man. He shall die, 
that English thief of the night ; it shall be 
a revenge for him and for me." 

On the Thursday of the same week 
Decker had arranged that Tom Sleaford 
should receive the news of Caroline Vir- 
ginia Gardner's accession to fortune. He 
was present when the captain received the 
letter. 

'^ You have good news," said Decker. 

'^ The devil does take care of his own," 
said Tom. " 'Pon my soul I think it 's best 



A TRAGEDY. 317 

to chuck over everything the world calls 
respectable, and be a free lance." 

" You have come into a fortune ? " 

'' Yes, my wife has ; it 's all the same." 

'^ Your wife?" 

^ ' Yes, I '11 show her whether I am or 
not," he exclaimed, snapping his fingers. 

^^ Do you mean madame, at the Villa 
Adrienne ? " 

^^Do I mean Madame Longville! Curse 
her! no. Listen," he said, reading from the 
letter in his hand : ^ ' the American Govern- 
ment, or a Federal commander, one or the 
other, have compensated her for all her 
father lost. I don't know all the facts, 
but she 's now worth more than a million, 
and she is Kving in grand style at Lan- 
caster Gate." 

" That must be old Graham Denton's 
daughter," said Decker. 

^' You've hit it," said Tom, folding up 
the letter. ^' By Jupiter, I '11 lead her a 
dance ! " 



i 



318 CRUEL LONDON, 

*^ She is your wife, you say ? " 

'^ Yes, my wife." 

"It is reported in London that she is 
a single woman. When I came away 
American society was talking about the 
case." 

" This letter 's true, then ? " 

" Oh yes, quite true ; everybody's talking 
of it in London." 

" What does she call herself, then ? " 

" Miss Caroline Denton, I presume." 
" "She is my wife. Decker, and I can 
claim everything she possesses." 

" She can't be the brunette, the American 
girl you were telling me of the other 
day ? " 

"No . well, not exactly, but she 's a vixen 
for all that. Oh, but we shall be good 
friends now ! I shall just have to show 
her who the master is to begin with, and 
then ! You must come and see us. Decker ; 
there will be a pair of us then . a pair of 
millionaires." 



A TRAGEDY. 319 

" I don't know about that," said Decker. 
^'I think there would soon only be one 
millionaire if we continued to play at 
cards. However, I 'm glad you 've come 
into all this money. I congratulate 
you." 

Decker put out his hand. It was cold 
and chilly. 

"I shall go to London on Saturday,'^ 
said the captain. 

" Come to Essam with me, en route.^^ 

''To where?" 

" The Cottage, Vale of Essam." 

'' What do you mean ? " 

" I bought it a few weeks ago." 

''You did?" 

" Yes, is that so odd ? Don't think 
that interferes with the Quom estate. You 
have undertaken to engineer that business 
for me." 

" Yes," said Tom, his face still full of a 
surprised expression. " You must be 
awfully rich. Decker." 



320 CRUEL LONDON. 

'' Didn't your father tell you so ? " 

" Yes ; but we had a trifling misunder- 
standing, and he did not conclude the 
business. I left him in a huff. But it is 
strange you should buy The Cottage. It 's 
a stunning place for a quiet lark. Damme 
if I shouldn't like to see the place 
again ! I was down on my luck when I 
left it." 

'' This is your plan then. We get there 
in time for dinner to-morrow night; and 
on Saturday we will go up to town toge- 
ther. What do you say ? " 

" The fact is, Decker, I 've won so much 
of your money that I feel myself at your 
command. Are there billiard tables at 
Essam ? " 

'^ Yes, I believe so ; I bought the place 
furnished as it stood." 

'^ You don't know how strange this is," 
said the captain. " I '11 go with you. I '11 
give you your revenge at billiards in your 
own house ; and before we go to bed to- 



A TRAGEDY. 321 

morrow night, I '11 tell you all about it. 
Meanwhile look at this." 

He unlocked a travelling case and pro- 
duced a document. It was the original 
marriage certificate of which Decker had 
the copy. Captain Gardner read it. 

^' Then you married in a name not 
your own ? '' 
" Precisely." 

^^ And is such a marriage legal ? " 
" To-day I shall take this before a 
proper ofiicer. I don't know what they 
call him in Paris, but there is an English 
solicitor who will tell me all about it. I 
shall make an affidavit that I, Tom Slea- 
ford, am Philip Gardner. It's just as 
well to be properly armed when you go to 
i take possession of property which some- 

body else may claim. I shall just pin 
;,; that affidavit to the certificate, and put 
1' both into my pocket-book, for use or not, 
,3( as circumstances may require, and on 
ta Saturday night I shall sleep in my new 

VOL. m. Y 



322 CRUEL LONDON. 

house at Lancaster Gate. Damme, I'm 
in luck ! " 

Tom Sleaford leaned back in his chair 
and laughed a hard sinister chuckle^ 
which conveyed to Decker, more than 
words, the utter heartlessness of the man 
whom he was now more than ever resolved 
not to leave behind him when he should 
be summoned to go. 

Captain Gardner was late in arriving at 
the Villa Adrienne on this Thursday night. 
He said he had only just left Dr. Fleury's- 
*^ What was the matter ? " they all asked. 
He had been taken ill in the street, he 
said. All he remembered was that he had 
suddenly lost the use of his limbs. A 
soldier caught him, and he lay in his arms 
to all appearance insensible. " But I was 
as sensible," he continued, "as I am at 
this moment. I couldn't move, I couldn't 
speak, but I was all right otherwise. The 
fit lasted ten minutes, I suppose. They 
carried me to Fleury's. He says I drink 



dPH^gaw. ai^wBa.wap^BsaaP8aa r,,T.," .. =^ 



A TRAGEDY. 323 

too much, smoke too much, and live too 
fast ; I ought to marry and settle down to 
a life of regularity. I told him that was 
just the thing I was going to do ; that in 
fact I had done half of it, but had not yet 
settled down." Madame looked at Fabien 
Pasha as the captain described his symp- 
toms; but in a short time the incident 
was forgotten in play, and it found almost 
utter oblivion when Captain Gardner, ex- 
cited by wine and some taunting remark 
of madame's, suddenly rose, and in a 
drunken speech informed the company 
that he had that day given notice to dis- 
solve the partnership between himself and 
Madame Longville, and that he was going 
to leave Paris to join his real wife in 
London on the next day. Madame said 
some bitter things in reply. She pressed 
Fabien Pasha's hand at parting, and 
begged he would call and see her the next 
day alone. 

'^By the time you arrive at Essam, a 



324 CRUEL LONDON. 

leetle sooner, a leetle later," said Dr. 
Dampez, as daylight was stealing into his 
private room, where they had appointed 
to meet after leaving the Villa Adrienne, 
^* that fit will come on again ; it is better 
it should, that there may be no mystery 
at the last; haf a doctor call, and he 
will talk of you cannot bum a candle 
at both ends, and the fatal result that 
.ome of debauchery and dissipation. 
After dinner, at night, your dream come 
true." 

Decker shuddered. 

"I go to London on Friday night; on 
Saturday you find me, if you want me, at 
the old place ; if you not come, you find 
me on Tuesday at Villa Adrienne. I haf 
done all for you I can ; now you act for 
yourself. I gif you the leetle phial which 
I call Nombre Trois. In the water bottle, 
or the wine. Comprenez-vous ? Ah, that 
is good. Au revoivj it may be Adieu! 
Well, we shall see." 



, . , B .^ .., ,, ^^ ,j nj w^ wwawai^ip^. PH^^HI^B^^^p. I. iPi. Hi^. p^ 



A TRAGEDY. 325 

And it came to pass, just as Dr. Dampez 
had foretold, that Captain Gardner was 
taken ill on the platform at Essam, and 
that on his recovery from the fit half an 
hour afterwards the local surgeon had 
delivered himself of a homily on fast living 
and the vices of dissipation. Unfor- 
tunately for the patient the doctor knew 
him again, and his life at Essam rose up 
to bear witness against him, and to justify 
the local practitioner's words. 

The peace of Essam fell upon the 
troubled soul of Tristram Decker. The 
hum of the summer atmosphere, full of 
gentle life, sung a lullaby to the flowers. 
At the gate, as they entered The Cottage 
precincts, a sensation of awe possessed 
him. Among the clustering roses that 
climbed the portals of the house a sweet 
face seemed to be looking at him. His 
companion asked him what he was staring 
at. But for a red flush imder the eyes 
Decker's face was extremely pale. His 



326 CRUEL LONDON. 

answer to his companion was a fit of 
coughing. It occurred to Tom Sleaford 
that the American had not long to live. 
But after a little while Decker seemed 
strong again, and his guest, pulling him- 
self together with a bottle of champagne, 
was full of boisterous spirits. 

Decker proposed a walk in the grounds. 
His guest said he knew them too well. 
He would prefer a game at billiards. He 
was anxious to give his friend a fair chance 
to recoup his losses. The tables were in 
excellent condition. But Decker found no 
pecuniary revenge in the game. At last 
Sleaford proposed to play for The Cottage. 
He had already won enormously. Decker 
said no, he would not risk The Cottage, as 
he had bequeathed it to a lady. As a 
closing bet he had in his pocket-book a 
two thousand pound bank-note ; they 
would play one game for that sum, and 
that must close their transactions for the 
present. Decker lost. When they had 



A TRAGEDY. 327 

washed their hands and sat down to smoke 
a cigarette before dinner, Decker led the 
conversation up to Sleaford's visit to Lan- 
caster Gate. 

'^ Now, look here, captain," said Decker, 
presently; ^^you have plenty of money, 
why not let that little woman in London 
enjoy her good fortmie in her own way 
without interfering with her ? " 

'' What do you mean ? " 

" You say she is a vixen, and I conclude 
you do not love her." 

^^ Love her! Bah!" 

^^I have heard she is an unassimiing, 
quiet, kindly lady." 

^^ Indeed! You should have heard her 
talk to me on the lawn outside." 

^^But you didn't treat her quite well, 
ch?" 

^^ Didn't I! And what of her? How 
has she treated me ? Comes into a fortune 
xtnd never says a word. I might be 
starving for what she knows or cares. 



328 CRUEL LONDON. 

I 'U show her ! I '11 wake her up, never 
fear ! " 

" Didn't you tell her she was not your 
wife, you had tricked her ? " 

"What of that? You seem to take a 
great interest in my wife ? " 

" I do, I knew her father." 

"Indeed; well, if you will come with 
me to-morrow you shall know her." 

" Don't think me obtrusive, . Captain 
Gardner; but, knowing her father, and 
feeling an interest in my coimtrywoman, 
let me ask you, is there any chance of 
your allowing her a diyoree, and . " 

"A what?" 

" A divorce." 

"What for?" 

" On the groimd of desertion, say ; that, 
I believe, is sufficient." 

" Not on any account. I like her. Just 
now I love her. Why, what are you 
talking about ? Didn't old Fleury advise 
me to marry and settle down ? I 'm going 



A TRAGEDY. 329 

to do it, now that I 've something to settle 
upon. Why, my dear friend, I mean to 
cut a dash in London this season. A mail- 
phaeton in the Park, a pretty wife by my 
side. Damme, I '11 make Lancaster Gate 
howl, as you Yankees say ! " 

The speaker laughed that hard, metallic 
laugh which had shaken Decker's nerves 
before. It only now made them rigid. 
He bit his lip as the Englishman looked 
admiringly at himself in a mirror, and 
twirled the waxed ends of his moustache. 
The cruel malice of the face, framed in 
the black mounting of the glass, struck 
Decker like a blow, stimulating his waver- 
ing spirit. 

" Look here, Mr. Decker," continued 
the captain, after surveying himself; 
*^ Caroline Virginia Denton is my wife* 
When she did not know it I gave her the 
chance to be relieved of me. In return 
she served me a dirty trick. She joined a 
conspiracy against me, in combination 



330 CEUEL LONDON. 

with a fellow named Brayford. I 'U tell 
you what it was after dinner, since you 
take such an interest in her." 

The speaker's face expressed intense 
malice as he paused to look at Decker and 
ask a question, . 

'^ Do you think she has a heart ? " 

" I know she has." 

'^ Do you believe hearts can be broken?" 

^^I know they can," said Decker, 
sadly. 

'^ Then, by the God above me, I '11 break 
that woman's heart clean in two ! " 

The speaker stamped his foot as he 
uttered the diabolical threat, and Decker 
laughed. Tom Sleaford had never heard 
his companion laugh before. It was not 
alone on that account that he was startled ; 
but there was something so incongruous in 
Decker's previous remarks and his laughter 
at what ought to have enraged him that 
Tom turned sharply round. 

^^ You laughed?" 



A TRAGEDY. 331 

" I did." 

'' I thought you would have been mad." 

" There was a time when I should have 
been." 

There was a look of triumph in Decker's 
blue eyes which astonished Tom Sleaford 
more and more. 

^^ You are a queer fellow, Mr. Tristram 
Decker." 

^^I am. I was trying to soften you in 
the interest of Caroline Denton, thinking 
I could perhaps wipe out the past, and 
make you friends. Have you ever tried 
to push some painful event that has 
blighted your happiness right away into 
the shadow ? " 

'' Not I ! I don't know what you mean. 
But I'd like to see the man or woman 
who 'd wipe out of my memory a certain 
event that happened in Lincolnshire. Well, 
I don't know, they may do it next week, 
perhaps, when Tom Sleaford has proclaimed 
his marriage. I'll show my lady! And 



332 CRUEL LONDON. 

as for Mr. Brayford, I'll break his 
back." 

^^Will he be there?" asked Decker, 
who seemed to Sleaford to have become 
quite jocidar over the business. 

'' He wiU." 

'' Shall you do it in the daylight ? " 

" Whenever the opportunity occurs." 

'^ He 's a strong fellow, and smart too." 

'^ You know him, then ? " 

" He is a friend of Mr. John Ker- 
man's." 

'' You know him too ? " 

'^ We are partners." 

^^nwhat?" 

^' Gold mines and other property." 

'' Kerman ! " exclaimed Sleaford. 

" Yes ; he married a Miss Crosby." 

^^ Married! When?" 

^^ A fortnight ago, I think. Since you 
and I first met." 

'' You astonish me ! The governor said 
nothing of this." 



A TRAGEDY. 333 

'' Perhaps he did not know it." 

^^Mr. Decker, you are a mystery to 



me." 



^' Am I ! We shall be better acquainted 



soon." 



^ ' What do you mean ? There is some- 
thing strange in your manner. You are 
laughing at me." 

'' No ; it amuses me to think how small 
the world is, and how we aU come together, 
everybody we have ever heard of or 
known. Kerman used to talk of you in 
the Sacramento, when we were winning 
our fortunes." 

^^ndeed!" 

'^ He said you were a good fellow. I 
think he thought so. But he didn't know 
the world." 

^' Then I am not a good fellow ? " 

" Good fellows don't want to trample 
upon helpless women." 

" No ? Then I 'm a bad fellow, for I do, 
and I will . on one of the sex, at any rate." 



334 CRUEL LONDON. 

*'You brute!" exclaimed Decker, un- 
able to maintain the calm sarcastic tone 
which he had assumed; '' if you were in 
America I would . " 

Decker had risen to his feet. His pas- 
sion brought on a fit of coughing, which 
left him panting on a seat. 

''I'm a fool," he said, when he could 
speak ; '' Don't let us talk of this business 
any more. I owe you an apology; you 
are in my own house . it is not for the 
host to insult his guest." 

' ' Say no more about it. If I had lost 
as much money to you as you have to me 
I should be riled; I might even try to 
pick a quarrel with you." 

Dinner was announced. 

It was a plain English dinner, cooked 
and served by the servants, who had been 
taken over with the house by Sparcoe, at 
Decker's request. When it was finished, 
Decker proposed another game of bil- 
liards. 



A TRAGEDY. 335 

'^ You can go to bed," said Decker to 
the woman who waited on them. '' Leave 
out some soda, brandy, and cham- 
pagne." 

They had finished two games, and 
Decker had won both of them, to the 
surprise of his guest, when Philip Gard- 
ner, alias Tom Sleaford, staggered, and 
would have fallen had not Decker caught 
him and laid him on a couch, beneath the 
window that looked out upon the wood, 
where the birds had seemed to listen to 
the woman prattling to a child, some sum- 
mers back, in the field that was once more 
waiting for the haymakers. 

Tom Sleaford looked helplessly at 
Decker. 

^^This is your third attack?" said 
Decker. 

The patient moved his lips. 

^^It is your last!" said Decker, with 
the solemn air of a judge pronouncing a 
culprit's doom. 



*i36 CRUEL LONDON. 

There was a visible effort on the part of 
the unliappy wretch to move. 

*^ You are poisoned. Listen. You can 
understand all I say ? " 

The staring eyes of the stricken man 
looked an affirmative answer. 

^^If you had had a spark of manliness 
in your composition you should have been 
spared. Wliether it is God's work, this 
conclusion of a diabolical career, or mine, 
I know not. The supreme moment is 
more terrible than I concluded. If you 
think there is a God, pray to Him. Your 
faculties are still under your own control. 
Pray if you like, but waste no time." 
After a short pause. Decker resumed, . 
^^ Originally, it was in my mind to gloat 
over you, when this last scene should come : 
to remind you of your brutal and inhmnan 
conduct; to tell you I loved Caroline 
Denton so truly that I would one day 
have found contentment in knowing that 
she was happy with another ; to torture you 



A TRAGEDY. 337 

with the knowledge that just as fortune is 
within your grip it is I who strike you 
down; to tell you that I condescend to 
become an assassin, to save your wife from 
scandal; Fabien Pasha is the famous, or 
infamous, Dr. Dampez ; his draiights leave 
no sign for coroner's inquests; besides. 
Dr. Fleury told you from what complaint 
you suffered, and yoiu* local physician has 
already confirmed that opinion. Dr. 
Dampez is a great man. He has cal- 
cxdated yoiu* death at the third attack 
almost to a question of minutes." 

The eyes of the dying man moved. An 
expression of agony pEissed over the dry, 
hard features. 

" If I could have fought you in a duel, 
or shot you in a quarrel, I would have 
preferred it to the cowardly secrecy of 
Fabien Pasha's artful aid; but I had 
resolved that Caroline Denton's life should 
from henceforth be unruffled, except by 
her memories of the past ; that your death 

VOL. III. z 



338 CRUEL LONDON. 

nhould appear to be the natural result of 
your infamouii life; that hIio should find 
peace in an early widowhood, and, if 
wealth can give contentment, the pleajmre 
of knowing that every wish that money 
can satisfy may be hers. To-day my 
heart failed me. I would once, I think, 
have changed my plans. One ray of 
human light from your black heart might 
have made me pause. You remember that 
I laughed. No wonder it startled you. 
Not less was I surprised myself. The 
executioner had pronoimced your final 
docim in that mocking laugh. Nemesis 
was at your elbow ; for it needed a slight 
blending of the wine you liked so nmch to 
bring on this third and last attack. Tom 
Sleaford, alias Philip Grardner, your body 
is already dead. Your brain is alive and 
active. Listen I The money in your 
pockets and in your travelling case 
belongs to your wife. I shall take care 
that she is in speedy possession of 



A TRAGEDY. 339 

the certificate of her marriage and your 
affidavit. If you prayed just now, and 
there is a God to hear you, it may be 
a consolation to you to know that you 
have a son who has inherited all his 
mother's goodness and virtue, and that in 
a son's love and devotion she may forget a 
husband's cruelty and dishonour. Philip 
Gardner, alias Tom Sleaford, adieu! I 
go to call the servants. They will carry 
you to a bedroom which will recall past 
days. They will send for that doctor 
who knows you. He will say you are 
dead. You will be alive all the time. 
You will hear them say what a hard, cruel 
man you were while you were living. If 
all this does not make you feel that, if 
there is not a God, there is at least some 
eternal law of reward and pimishment, 
you will die as you lived . a hypocritical, 
heartless blackguard. On the other hand, 
shoxdd the justice of your death and the 
manner of it touch your dull, leaden soul, 



340 CRUEL LONDON. 

you will repent, and if you do, according 
to the Scriptures, you will go to heaven 
and be happy ; and if you don't, you will 
go to hell, and you can rejoice over me, 
for you will then understand how much 
you have made me suffer in this world, 
which, but for you, might have been a 
heaven for me ! Farewell 1 In two hours 
you will be a dead man. Make the most 
of your time ! " 

Just as Decker had foretold, so it came 
to pass; and the next day Caroline 
Virginia Denton Sleaford, at one and the 
ame time, knew that she was a wife and 
e widow- 



PEACE. 341 



CHAPTER IV. 

PEACE. 

Time has its own beneficent method of 
smoothing the rugged ways of sadness 
and sorrow. When, a year after the 
burial of Tom Sleaford, there came to 
England Tristram Decker's last message 
to John Kerman and Caroline Gardner- 
Sleaford, with the news that he had found 
his way back to New York, and died 
there in the arms of his father, there was 
heartfelt and bitter mourning in two 
households three thousand miles from the 
shores of Manhattan. But it has been 
ordained that the human mind shall 
accustom itself to the visits of Death, and 



342 CRUEL LONDON. 

see in them the removal of loved ones to a 
better land. It is a comforting and a 
holy philosophy that almost finds an 
earthly j)lcasure in contemplating the joys 
of a future state. 

The beautiful widow who spent half the 
year at Lancaster Gate and the other 
half in the Vale of Essam was a happy 
woman. Hers was the bliss of living to 
do good and to enjoy the pleasures of art. 
From the moment when we saw her 
standing upon that ship in the distant 
port, destined to bring with her the black 
threads of trouble which should complete 
the weft of this romance, she was also 
fated to be the good angel of the legend 
which the weaver's shuttle had to portray 
in his cloth of silk and gold. 

The American woman was destined to 
play the part of Fortuna. Her hand 
served to soften the blow which fell upon 
Mr. and Mrs. Roper, and upon Emily 
Tavener and her husband, when a crowd 



PEACE. 343 

of duped depositors thronged round a 
house in Baker Street, and sacked the 
financial trap of Jeremiah Sleaford. Her 
hand succoured many of the poor people 
who had sufEered by the failure ; and Mr. 
Jabez Thompson found means to help the 
others. It is not always true that the wicked 
are punished in this world in proportion 
to their deserts. At this very moment, 
while I am writing these lines, I am in- 
formed that Mrs. Sleaford last month 
joined her husband at a delightful village 
in the kingdom of Granada, which she 
reported in a letter to be ^^ under the beau- 
tiful shadow of the Alpuj arras, which, my 
dear, the Moors considered to be part of 
heaven ; and your father is contented and 
happy, freed from the cares of finance, 
which he vows he will not touch again. 
Thanks to his thoughtfulness, we have 
enough for all our wants, and though the 
odious English laws and his cruel enemies 
in London have made England impossible 



344 CRUEL LONDON. 

for us, we shall not complain now that our 
dear children, for whom alone your father 
fought and strove always, are settled and 
happy; but we hope that Emily will 
come over with Mr. Tavener and visit u& 
soon; your father would so much like 
Fred to paint some of this scenery ; you, 
my dear Patty, might also find some beau- 
tiful effects of sunshine ; later in the year 
we propose to travel. Seville is con- 
sidered to be a lovely city for the winter, 
and if Mr. Roper and you, my dear child, 
will meet us there, your father says 
oranges can be plucked and eaten in the 
open air when London is suffering from 
fog and cold and snow, which is a comfort 
to think of when one is an exile in a 
strange land. We also find consolation in 
knowing that I have been able to pro- 
vide you with a house for your married 
life, and your father now fully realizes 
the benefit of having had the Fitz- 
roy Square property put into settle- 



PEACE. 345 

ment, and I hope you have had your 
lOjOOOZ. secured in the same way." Patty 
and Roper found that they suited each 
other well, and they did not propose to- 
winter at Seville, for the youngest of the 
Sleaford girls was engrossed in the study 
of a pink-and-white subject which gave 
her a great deal more trouble than the 
production of certain studies in water- 
colour which now adorn the walk 
of the drawing-room at Fitzroy 
Square. Jeremiah's grandson is said to 
be the image of his mamma; indeed, 
Emily tells Fred that " it is quite a baby 
doll, in complexion and in features." Tim 
Maloney sticks to the old house at present, 
and has taken a fancy to the baby ; though 
he sometimes threatens to join "the 
master" in foreign parts, and he varies 
this with hopes that " Ould Ireland " may 
want his services soon, seeing that the 
latest report of a celebrated Fenian leader 
announces " the decline and fall of the 



346 CRUEL LONDON. 

British Empire, and the coming conquest 
of England by the gallant sons of Erin." 
It is true Tim- winks and utters a genial 
" bedad " when he tells Mr. Roper that this 
is one of the events that may call him 
suddenly away from London ; though he 
promises, when the Irish-American con- 
tingent sails over the sea to join the Rib- 
bonmen, the Whiteboys, and the Fenians 
of Connaught in sacking London, the 
comer house of Fitzroy Square shall be 
spared, and be jabers but he doesn't know 
if he won't have the entire square pre- 
served in honour of the young master, 
though he declines to make any binding 
promise upon that point. 

Brayf ord is still the private secretary of 
Mr. John Kerman, though he continues to 
reside in London, the better to advise Mrs. 
Gardner-Sleaford in regard to the manage- 
ment of her property, and also to fulfil 
the duties of private almoner to that 
estimable lady. The Footlights Gub 



PEACE. 347 

came to an ignominious end a year ago, 
but the few distinguished members of it 
have signed a requisition to their old friend 
Harry Brayford to join them in the forma- 
tion of a new society on the old lines. He 
has already named the new club in memory 
of a dear friend who no longer studies the 
first page of a morning paper, and dwells 
upon the genius of his chief. It is to be 
called ^^ The Wonner.^' Mr. Brayford has 
already purchased for the new rooms a 
grand piano, and it is his intention to 
revive the once familiar chant in which 
the Wonners, Kke their predecessors, will 
declare their undying affection for ^^ Old 
Brown's Daughter," their united belief in 
the propriety of her conduct, and their 
full and settled determination, supposing 
they were a lord mayor, a marquis, or an 
earl, to marry no other lady than old 
Brown's girl. Brayiord, for the first and 
last time, really carried out his idea of the 
three-act epitaph, when he raised a monu- 



348 CRUEL LONDON. 

ment to " The Wonner " ; and after some 
revision by the directors of the cemetery, 
and a discussion with the clergyman of 
the parish, he was allowed to have it 
engraved upon a tablet, which, though a 
well-intended and not unworthy tribute to 
"my intellectual friend, and once the 
partner of my literary toils," is a curious 
example of that grim satire which too 
often characterizes memorial honours to 
posthumous fame. Brayf ord idealized Mr. 
W., who will go down to posterity as an 
eccentric genius in whose honour a com- 
pany of celebrated men founded a fantastic 
club. 

Monsieur Favart captured the fascinat- 
ing Weaver, on the eve of her marriage, 
in New York, with the captain of the 
ocean steamer in which she had crossed 
the Atlantic. She had been the life and 
soxd of the vessel during a very pleasant 
voyage. The captain was a young ofl&cer 
who had just been promoted. Some of 



PEACE. 349 

the male passengers, who were jealous of 
the lady's preference for the captain, said 
he was too inexperienced for his position. 
They knew better than that, for he had 
sailed the sea, man and boy, for five-and- 
twenty years. It flattered them in their 
declared opinions of his verdancy when 
on their return voyage in a sister ship 
they learnt that the lovely Miss Beauchamp 
Dudley, as Miss Weaver called herself, had 
been arrested for fraud, and taken to 
England. Major Wenn, in an unbecoming 
prison dress at a certain convict prison, 
confided to the chaplain that he thought 
it rather hard he should get five years, 
and Weaver six months. He could only 
conclude that the judge had been led 
away from the path of duty, by ^^ Isy's 
siren smile." The chaplain turned out to 
have been an old friend of Wenn's in 
India, and this was the one ray of light 
that illuminated the mind of the reflective 
major, as he helped to make the prison 



350 CRUEL LONDON. 

clothing, under the watchful eye of a 
warder, who had a sword by his side, and 
all manner of sanguinary weapons in the 
expression of his face. Mr. Fitzherbert 
Robinson looked at the murky daylight 
as it crept through the bars of a prison in 
a county adjacent to the one which encom- 
passed the gallant Major Wenn. Robinson 
had not been broken in for prison life by 
the discipline of a military career. While 
Major Wenn fell into a strict observance 
of prison regulations, Mr. Fitzherbert 
Robinson resisted the unaccustomed pres- 
sure, and had become acquainted with a 
dark cell and a light diet. Nemesis was 
surely nodding when, with these men 
under lock and key, Mr. Maclosky Jones 
still flourished. Perhaps the justice of the 
situation was considered poetically met in 
the fact that Mr. Maclosky Jones had 
made a fortune out of Sleaford's Omaha 
scrip, which had suddenly and unexpectedly 
realized all the wild dreams of the in- 



PEACE. 351 

fatuated speculator in mines. Maclosky 
has recently taken to preaching, and he 
promises to become a shining light as 
president of a new society for converting 
the Jews to a sense of their misery in 
being outside the fold to which Mr. 
Maclosky Jones lends the sanction of his 
name and the financial aid of one hundred 
pounds per annima. 

Summer time at Essam comes, with per- 
fumed breath and sweet songs of birds, to 
find a thoughtful hostess surrounded by 
pleasant English friends ; while Autumn is 
full of ripened joyiulness at Manor Farm j 
and the sunshine of two happy lives is all 
the brighter for coming after many days 
of storm and tempest. 



THE END. 
