ROOKSTONE. 



CHAPTER I. 

ROOKSTONE PARK. 

rriHERE always had been Wolferstons at 
Rookstone Park. There had never 
been any notability in the family, or any 
marrying among the yoimg folk for position 
or title, but for old blood and unspotted 
fame you might search England over and 
find no family purer or truer than the 
Wolferstons. 

The present squire had succeeded his 
maternal grandfather in the property, and 

VOL. I. 1 



ROOKSTONE. 



as the estate had been carefully managed 
during his long minority, he foimd himself 
a richer man than many of his more im- 
mediate predecessors. 

It seemed so far that Christopher Wolf- 
erston's lot in life was a singularly happy 
one. He had married, when very yoimg, 
the woman he loved ; he had two charming 
daughters, both nearly grown up, and 
about eight years ago his dearest wish had 
been fulfiUed by the birth of a son and 
heir. 

A good landlord and a most tender hus- 
band and fetther, all his fidends and neigh- 
bours said that the owner of Rookstone 
deserved this unceasing tide of prosperity, 
he made such good use of it. He might 
be slightly vacillating, a little inclined to 
act on impulse, but he had done much for 



ROOKSTONE PARK. 



the welfare of others. His village schools 
were the best built and endowed in the 
comity, and lately he had been planning 
the erection of almshouses for old and im- 
poverished folk belonging to the neighbour- 
hood. 

This afternoon he and his wife were 
looking over some drawings which had 
been sent in by the buUder. 

'* Won't you put Kitty Bobbins in one 
of the almshouses ?" said Mrs. Wolferston. 

" Old Kitty 1 Why, Amy, I believe it 
would break her heart if I turned her out 
of the lodge. No, I'll do this if you like ; 
I'll make the lodge and the garden it 
stands in, her own as long as she lives, so 
that in case my life drops before hers, and 
Christy takes a dislike to her, she may be 
safe." 

1.2 



BOOKSTONE. 



" Christopher ! how could Kitty outlive 
you ? she must be sixty-five at least." 

" Well, I think she's older. She had a 
grown-up daughter who died when I was a 
child ; but then these sort of women are 
grown-up when they are sixteen, and I 
believe Kitty wasn't older than that herself 
when she married. But I think we owe 
the old woman something for the devotion 
she has always shown to us, though she is 
such an old crab." 

Mrs. Wolferston laughed. " Is she ? She 
is eccentric and rather proud in her ways, 
but the is always civil to me and the girls." 

"You should hear Richard's opinion of 
her. I expect he won't approve of this 
gift of mine." 

A clcud ccme over his wife's tweet 
face, and she sighed. 



ROOKSTONE PARK. 



" I sometimes wish Richard had stayed 
in America." 

" Why do you wish that, Amy T 

Mrs. Wolferston looked at her husband. 
There was almost a mischievous smile on 
his happy, genial mouth, and it puzzled 
her. It was painful to her even to allude 
to a matter on which she did not think as 
he did, for something told her that he had 
guessed the cause of her perplexity, and 
made light of it. 

She got up from her chair, and, going to 
her husband, put her arms round his neck. 

" I believe you know my reason already, 
Christopher. It is for Mary's sake I shrink 
from Richard." 

Mr. Wolferston took her hand, but he still 
smiled in the same easy, amused fashion. 

" Why should you shrink from him, if 



6 ROOKSTONE, 



Mary does not ? I think she likes Richard. 
Now, don't sigh, Amy ; do you know that I 
shall think her very lucky if he does care 
about her V 

"He loves her, I am sure of it . but 
Mary is such a child still, not seventeen, 
remember. I think . " 

She paused to gather courage, for what 
she had yet to say was an effort. 

" What do you think, my pet V he said, 
kindly, for he saw the struggle in her face. 

"I think that if you were to invite 
Richard less often to Rookstone, Mary and 
he might scarcely ever meet ; and if this 
were managed carefully she would soon 
forget any slight impression he may have 
made on her fitncy." 

. 

" And Richard ? You have no regard 
for his feelings, then, supposing them to be 



ROOKSTONE PARK. 



what you suspect. You women only think 

of your own side of the question. Amy. 

Remember you were but eighteen yourself 

when you married, and Janet was younger 
when she engaged herself to Wenlock." 

"I had better be quite candid, for I 
know you guess my reason, although you 
will not perhaps see its force as I do. I 
would rather hav^ Mary made imhappy 
even by this separation than see her 
married to Richard. When he arrived in 
England you told me that his strange free- 
thinking notions were merely the result of 
his colonial habits . that he had often lived 
so cut off* from human beings, that he had 
grown careless about the outward forms 
of life. I made allowance for aU this, and 
waited. But more than a year has gone 
by, darling, and I see no change . ^he still 



8 ROOKSTONE. 



takes every opportunity of scoffing at what 
lie calls cant. Honestlv, I often wonder 
at the sympathy you seem to find with a 
man so totally unlike youraelf, so unlike 
any Wolferstons that I ever heard of." 

She had made her husband look grave 
at last, and gravity was a very rare 
expression on his pleasant handsome face ; 
there was regret, too. His wife's words 
had awakened a sharp feeling of self- 
reproach. 

" Well, my pet, I take some blame on my 
own shoulders," he said, after a short silence. 
"Perhaps, if I had spoken to Richard he 
might have been led to think of things 
more seriously. But, my dar|ing, you must 
remember that he has had no advantages . . 
his mother was an Italian, a singer, I believe. 
What should I have been without your 



EOOESTONE PARK. ^ 

influence, Amy, and why may we not hope 
that Mary will do as much for Richard V 

His wife protested against this view of 
the case. Mary was so young and childish 
that Richard would be far more likely to 
mould her to his own opinions and habits. 

"If it were Janet, it would be quite 
different," she said. 

"Well, well" . the gravity of the con* 
versation had exhausted his patience . " we 
won't discuss it any longer, dearest. Mary 
is, of course, too young to marry at present. 
But I think you are prejudiced, and we 
owe a far heavier debt than you are aware 
of to Richard. I wish now I had told you 
of it before, but I never knew quite the 
right story until he came over to England^ 
and then he asked me to keep it quiet, so 
as not to revive the remembrance of his 



10 ROOKSTONE. 



father's disgrace. I think you ought to 
know it, though, and if I get the oppor- 
tunity I shall ask him to-night to release 
me from my promise of secresy." 

'* I did not know you expected him." 
"Yes; I forgot to tell you. He is 
coming down on business." He looked at 
his watch. " In fact, I thought he would 
have been here by this time." 



RICHARD WOLFERSTON. 11 



CHAPTER II. 

KICHABD WOLPEKSTOX. 

nnHE sun was setting as Richard Wol- 
ferston passed through the gate 
beside the keeper's lodge. The red may- 
tree in the little garden served as a focus 
for " last gleams ;" it was intensely crimson 
in its full-blossomed beauty. But, once 
through the gates, the tall trees intercepted 
the level simlight, and the day looked at least 
an hour darker. The candelabra-like blos- 
soms on the horse-chestnuts stood out almost 
ghastly against their now sombre leaves. 



12 ROOKSTONE, 



The gate clicked in shutting, and the 
keeper s mother, old Kitty Robbins, came 
out into the little garden, and looked after 
the visitor with a frown on her wrinkled 
brown face. *' I wish ye'd never come this 
way . I don't trust ye," she muttered, as 
she went back into the lodge. 

Farther on was a large clearing where 
several of the grassed rides that intersected 
the park met, some of them dark alleys 
full of mysterious shadow. Along that 
which ran westward the light still glinted, 
spangling the leaves here and there, and 
those so specially singled out, burned with 
intense radiance. 

Richard Wolferston's pale face glowed 

too as the distant light travelled to it, 

and the unusual tinge gave him a look of 
fire and energy. His ordinary expression 



RICHARD WOLFERSTON. 13 

was languid, almost indolent. He was a 
well-grown, handsome man, with singularly- 
large, dark, dreamy eyes . ^these seemed to 
flash back the red western light angrily, 
and then he looked round at the stately- 
growth of trees. 

He was thinking deeply as he made his 
way through the park, silent now except 
for the occasional cry of the nightjar or the 
sheep-bell's monotonous tinkle, or perhaps 
the whirr of a stag-beetle almost in hia 
face. His thoughts went on in this fashion : 
. " Another long minority . nothing would 
surprise me less ; young Christopher cannot 
be more than eight years old, and his 
father . well, I imagine Christopher to be 
about forty; but the Wolferstons never 
make old bones. To think that all this 
may lie waste for years !". 



HfT 



\ 



14 ROOKSTOl^'E. 



He sighed, and then walked on impa- 
tiently. 

Near the house the trees were no longer 
in dense masses, they stood in twos and 
threes, well chosen both for form and 
colour, and grouped harmoniously in the 
foreground of the picture, which the dis- 
tant coxmtry offered from the windows. 
It was a long, low house, with two widely 
stretching wings. Along the centre ran a 
terrace, with grey, worn stone balustrades 
on a red wall. On this, as Richard 
approached, two peacocks stood, stiff as if 
carved and then painted to imitate life- 
But when he reached the flower-garden 
beneath the terrace, one of the birds flew 
away, with its shrill, ungainly scream, and 
the other soon followed, dropping a feather 
almost at his feet. 



RICHARD WOLFERSTON. 15 

The sun had sunk quite out of sight, even 

the red memory of him had been replaced 

by the exquisite chrysolite hue one only 

sees at that hour . a time which speaks of 

peace and rest, soothing the perturbed 
soul by its infinite solemnity, and bidding 

the wearied body rejoice that the close of 

outdoor labour is come. 

Richard Wolferston stood a minute 

gazing at the soft green sky, then he turned 

and mounted the steps. He had recovered 
all his easy indifference, and sauntered on 

towards the open windows of the saloon, 
balancing the peacock's feather on his 
finger. He had often seen the room before, 
and yet he stood looking in before he 
entered, with keen admiration. Eichard 
Wolferston loved the beautiful in nature 
and in art, but he preferred it in the latter ; 



16 ROOKSTONE, 



and there was so much in the arrangement 
of this sitting-room of Mrs. Wolferston's to 
give pleasure to the eye, that it would have 
been wonderful if he had taken no heed of 
it. The saloon, as it was called, was a long 
room stretching almost the length of the 
terrace, with a huge fire-place at each end ; 
a double row of four marble columns sup- 
ported the two centre beams, wide enough 
apart to make another little room between 
them. All along the waUs ran soft-cushioned 
divans covered with some dark blue woollen 
texture, and mounted in black carved 
wood, evidently Indian by its lightness 
and grotesque perforations. The walls 
showed a few choice pictures, chiefly in 
water-colours. But it was nothing in 
detail that caught Kichard Wolferston's 
eye. It was the harmonious grouping of 




RICHARD WOLFERSTON. 17 

fresh flowers in simple crystal vases beside 
antique bronzes, of a straw work-basket on 
the table at the farther end of the saloon, 
with the cabinet of cameos close by, and 
the ^tagfere, filled with Chelsea and Dres- 
den and Sfevres and Limoges, and here and 
there a rare, highly-prized specimen of 
Henri Deux porcelain. The Chelsea 
Venuses and the bronze bulls were equally 

at home in that pleasant, well-stored saloon 
. so well-stored that you might have spent 

more than one day in it before you had 

discovered aU that it contained to deUght 

eyes and heart alike. 

He tapped playfully at the window, and 
went in. 

There was a likeness between the cousins 
as they shook hands . a likeness of features, 
but not of complexion, for Christopher was 

VOL. I. 2 



18 ROOKSTONE. 



fair-haired, and his eyes were more brown 
than black ; the one face, too, although it 
showed the same indolence as the other, 
had not a trace of discontent. 

" I had almost given you up, Dick," 
said Mrs. Wolferston. 

" The train was late, and I loitered com- 
ing through the park. How are you ?" 

This last to Mrs. Wolferston. Though 
she was his cousin's wife, he had not yet 
learned to call her by her name. He liked 
her . better, perhaps, than he usually liked 
people, for he was cynical about the good 
quahties of others . but he seemed never to 
attain the intimate footing at Rookstone 
which would have set him quite at ease 
with its mistress. Looking at the sweet 
fragile face, it seemed impossible that a 
loving heart did not belong to Amy Wol- 



RICHARD WOLFERSTON. 19 

ferston ; but Richard had begun to doubt 
this after a year's acquaintance ; and Mrs. 
Wolferston's greeting was so cold this even- 
ing that it was a rehef when his cousin asked 
Richard to come into his writing-room. 

Mrs. Wolferston sat some time after the 
gentlemen had left her, perplexed and 
anxious. Putting the objection she had 
m'ged against Richard on one side, she 
had another cause for anxiety. Mr. Pain- 
son, the old family lawyer, had taken 
offence, about two months ago, at the defe- 
rence the squire of Rookstone showed to 
his new-foimd cousin's opinion, and had 
begged him to seek another adviser. Mrs. 
Wolferston knew that her husband secretly 
regretted this estrangement, and also that 
he thought his cousin had been haughty 
and unconciliating in the tone he had 

2.2 



20 ROOKSTONE. 



taken in differing from Mr. Painson. The 
cause of quarrel had been a mere trifle . 
the most advantageous way of leasing some 
fanns which Mr. Wolferston had recently 
added to his property. 

Richard Wolferston had been brought 
up to the law, and when Mr. Painson 
sent in his resignation, the squire placed 
his papers and affiiirs in his cousin's 
keeping. 

" I suppose Christopher is right, and I 
am prejudiced," Amy Wolferston said to 
herself ; " Richard must be quite thirty- 
five, old enough to manage business, if he 
is ever to manage it ; clever, too, and cer- 
tainly a person one feels inchned to like 
and consult, and yet I feel as if the pro- 
perty was no longer so safe under his 
management as with dear old Mr. Painson ; 




RICHARD WOLFERSTON. 21 

lie was often cross and fidgety, and not 
half so agreeable as Ricliard is ; but I wish 
he were still Christopher's adviser." 

She went to the window that opened on 
to the terrace. There in the distance were 
her three children . Mary and Christopher 
running races, Janet walking slowly some 
little way behind. The sight cleared away 
Mra. Wolferston's perplexity. 

*^ What is coming to me," she said, " that 
I should begin to doubt or despond ? 
Surely no woman was ever so blessed as I 
am, with such a husband and such children ; 
and why should I fear, for Christopher is 
better and wiser in every way than I am ? 
Even if this foreboding that weighs on my 
spirits be a presage of evil, no eflforts of 
mine can ward it off. I am forgetting the 
very precept I teach my children, that all 



22 ROOKSTONE. 



vexations and troubles, however small, are 
sent us." 

She passed out on to the terrace to meet 
the group. They were close to the spot 
where Richard had stooped to pick up the 
peacock's feather . Mary, a tall, lovely girl, 
with her father's fair hair and soft, sweet 
brown ayes, wa3 flushed and panting W 
her heedless racing, and little Christy's 
cherub face was scarlet, and his golden 
curls all disordered. 

" My dear children, how you have 
heated yourselves !" said their mother ; 
*' come in and keep quiet, Mary." 

"Tell us something first, do, please." 
Christy had got both hands clasped round 
his mother's arm, and was squeezing it 
with a mixture of affection and eagerness 
that compelled her to stop and listen. 




BICHARD WOLFERSTON. 23 

"Is Richard here, darling? Mary de- 
clared she saw him go up the terrace steps 
as we stood among the trees there, below 
the lake." 

Mrs. Wolferston glanced involuntarily at 
her youngest daughter. She had been staod- 
ing quite still, and yet the flush on her cheeks 
had deepened. Her mother sighed ; she 
turned to Christy . "Yes, Richard has just 
come, but you cannot go to him, he is in the 
atudy engaged on business with papa." 

" I know, I know ; it's a secret, but I 
know what it's about," and the wild little 
fellow let go his mother's arm, and ran 
roimd and roimd her in his glee. 

"Hush, Christy," said Janet, "you are 
talking nonsense about a secret. You ought 
not to repeat anything you hear papa say 
by chance." 



24 ROOKSTONE. 



Janet Wolferston was scarcely nineteen, 
but she had quite the manner and the 
authority of a much older person with her 
brother and sister. Strangers called her 
strong-minded and eccentric, but her 
mother, although she might sometimes 
regret the sternness of her eldest child's 
rebukes, respected the motive which she 
knew prompted them. Janet had never 
been so great a favourite with her father 
as either Mary or Christy, and thus had 
escaped the systematic spoiling they re- 
ceived at his hands. Reproof was intoler- 
able to Mr. Wolferston's facile, sweet tem- 
per, and he found it pleasanter and easier 
to yield entirely to these young wills than 
to thwart them. Janet was not so tall 
as her sister, and was unlike either of 
her parents in appearance. Her hair and 



% 



RICHARD WOLFERSTON. 25 

complexion were neither fair nor dark, 
though the latter had the bloom of Hebe ; 
her eyes were bright and large, and of the 
darkest blue. Richard Wolferston said 
they were the eyes of a Diana, and the 
severe aquiline profile and firmly- cut lips 
confirmed this idea at first sight, though 
Janet Wolferston was not cold-looking ; 
but Richard had taken a dislike to her 
from the beginning, and he encouraged 
little Christy in mutinous behaviour to his 
elder sister. 

" You are very clever, Janet," the child 
said, mischievously, " but you don't know 
a bit what I mean." 

" Hush, Christy," his mother began ; 
but he was hugging her arm again, and 
holding his fair flushed face up to be kissed. 

" It's only this," he said, too low for any 



-26 ROOKSTONE. 



one but his mother to hear ; " Richard has 
<jome to-day to do something to papa's 
will. I heard them settling it just before 
he went away. I only said it was a 
-secret to tease Janet, for they both knew I 
was close by, and papa took no notice." 




RICHARD WOLFERSTON TAKES OFFENCE. 27 



CHAPTER III. 
EICHARD WOLFERSTON TAKES OFFENCE. 

A WEEK had gone by, and the subject 
of Richard Wolferston's visits at 
Rookstone had not been mentioned be- 
tween the husband and wife. It was such 
a very rare circumstance for Mrs. Wolfer- 
ston. to differ from her husband, that she 
felt it must be a long time before she could 
get courage to renew the discussion. 

She was sitting by herself, her husband 
was out riding with his daughter, and 
Richard Wolferston was announced. He 



28 ROOKSTONE. 



thought her manner more formal than 
ever, and it irritated him. Buffeting with 
the world may brace a man's energies, but 
it seldom sweetens his temper, and Richard 
Wolferston had had a hard struggle ever 
since boyhood to gratify his extravagant 
tastes, or keep himself even near the 
position he wished to fill. 

He asked for the girls, and Mrs. Wolfer- 
ston's cold, almost indifferent answer stung 
him beyond enduranse. His pale face 
flushed. " I am afraid, Mrs. Wolferston, I 
have been so unfortunate as to offend you, 
or that I am no longer welcome at Rook- 
stone." 

He laid a stress on the name, to remind 
her of his claim of kindred. 

She flushed too, but she did not answer 
at once. It seemed to her that as he had 



RIOHARD WOLFERSTON TAKES OFFENCE. 29 

given her this opening, it might be well 
to speak frankly to him about Mary. 
The impulse was strong, and she yielded 
to it. 

"You have not offended me, but you 
are right in thinking that I do not wel- 
come you to Rookstone." 

" I scarcely imderstand such a nice dis- 
tinction." 

" Shall I be quite frank with you, then ? 
and if I offend you, will you beheve that I 
do so without intention T 

He bowed, but he looked cynical. If 
Amy Wolferston had known how little 
belief he had in her sincerity at that mo- 
ment, she would not have been so con- 
fiding. 

" It seems to me '' . she stopped, and 
then went on hurriedly, plimging into 



30 ROOKSTONE. 



what was so difficult to approach by de- 
grees . " that you admire our youngest 
daughter." 

She looked at him ; every trace of colour 
had left his face, but he made no attempt 
to answer her. 

" She . she is very young, perhaps you 
do not know how young . she is not quite 
seventeen . in mind she is quite a child 
still " . she remembered Mary's blush, and 
she faltered . "I should be very sorry to 
have her otherwise for a year or two 
longer." 

Still no answer, only his head rather 
more erect, and his lips tightly closed. 

"Now you understand why . why . I 
may enjoy your society very much, and yet 
be unwilling to expose Mary to the risk 
of seeing you so constantly while you feel 



EIGHARD WOLFERSTON TAKES OFFENCE. 31 

HI, -~- - r 

as you do towards her. You have not 
contradicted me, therefore I venture to 
think I have guessed rightly. Girls of 
Mary's age are not as quickly won as when 
their feelings are more fully developed, but 
constant association would be painful and 
unsafe for both of you, and I really wish to- 
save you pain, too, Mr. Wolferston." 

** Thank you." He bowed deeply as he 
rose. "I give you credit for the best 
possible intentions '' . ^his lip curled with 
scorn at what he considered her mercenary 
views . "and you are quite right, doubt- 
less, in thinking Mary far too beautiful to 
throw away on a poor strugghng lawyer. 
You have taught me my place, Mrs. Wol- 
ferston, and I thank you for the lesson. 
Poor relations, you know, are apt to 
forget themselves. I had meant to ask 



32 ROOKSTONE. 



your husband's permission to . to ad- 
mire Mary, as you say ; now I will re- 
firain." 

His tone was so bitter that she saw he 
was deeply wounded. Before she had 
made up her mind how to answer him, 
he spoke again in his usual voice. 

"I will wait in the study till 
Christopher comes in, I have something 
to do to the papers I have brought." He 
left the room. 

Mrs. Wolferston felt very dissatisfied. 
It would have been better to tell Richard 
the true cause of her objection to him. 
She had let him go away under a false im- 
pression, but he was so very angry that 
explanation would probably have been use- 
less. 

She thought for some time longer, and 



RICHARD WOLFERSTON TAKES OFFENCE, 33 

then decided to consult her husband, and 
ask his permission to write fiankly aaid 
fully to Richard Wolferston. She feared 
that Christopher would disapprove her 
having broached the subject at aU. She 
could give herself no reason for having 
spoken. it had been an irresistible im- 
pulse, and it had only made matters 
worse. It might keep Richard away 
from Rookstone, but it was very pain- 
fiil to feel that she had made an 
enemy of her husband's most intimate 
Mend. 

She must see Christopher before he 
met Richard. He would be sure to 
come in through the saloon, and she could 
tell him in a few words all that had hap- 
pened. 

If she could have known the mis- 

VOL. I. 3 






. 



34 ROOKSTONE, 



chief her words were working, she would 
at once have followed Richard Wolfer- 
ston into the study, and have braved his 
anger. 




FORESHADOWINQS. 35 



CHAPTER IV. 

FORESHADOWINGS. 

rriHE door opened, and Mrs. Wolfer- 
ston started up, but it was only 
Newman the butler^ 

" K you please, ma'am, old Kitty from 
the lodge has sKpped down just now, 
coming into the court, and Mrs. Knight's 
afraid she's sprained her ankle." 

" Where is she V 

"In the housekeeper's room, ma'am. 
Mrs. Ejught thought you might quiet her, 

3.2 



36 BOOKSTONR 



perhaps, for the poor old creature will have 
it her leg's broken. She seems in awfiil 
pain. 

" Poor thing !" and Kitty Bobbin's suf- 
ferings put to flight aU Mi-s. Wolferston's 
anxieties. She was soon kneeling beside 
the old woman, and examining the injury. 

"Now dwoant'ee, dwoant'ee touch I." 
Kitty pushed away the soft white hand 
with her brown, hard-working fingers. 
*' For pity's sake, dwoant. Madam Wol- 
ferston ; ee may be as soft as feathers, but 
feathers 'ud rasp, I know. Oh, dear ! oh, 
dear ! The ways o' Providence goes 
crook'd at times, I be a thinkin'. There'll 
be that gipsy hussy at the toll-house, as 
never does naught for her livin', with both 
her legs safe and soimd, and no use for 
and here be I, with use enow for six, 




FORESHADOWINGS. 37 

dean robbed o' the best of 'em. Ah ! it 
be no use talking. I know . I beant a fool 
. I hanna lived sixty years to be told and 
taught about my own bones and jints, Mrs. 
Knight." 

This was in answer to the housekeeper's 
assurance that her bones were uninjured. 

I 

Mrs. Wolferston asked if the doctor had 
been sent for, and finding this had not 
been thought necessary, she gave orders 
that a messenger should at once be dis- 
patched, for she saw that no meaner deci- 
sion would have weight with Kitty. 

" Tellin' I as it beant broke, ony twisted " 
. ^the old woman's indignation got loose as 
soon as the housekeeper had gone with her 
mistress's message . " when it yachs all the 
way up to the knee-jint. Weary me ! 
there be folks as knows th' extent o' other 



38 ROOKSTONE. 



people's pains a deal better than th' extent 
o' thay appetites." 

Mrs. Wolferston petted and soothed 
the poor old woman, and bid the house- 
keeper summon her again when the doctor 
came. 

As Mrs. Wolferston crossed the hall on 
her way back to the saloon, she met 
Janet. 

" Where is your father ?" 

"Richard's here, and papa is in the 
study with him." 

Then she had lost her chance of speak- 
ing to her husband, and, having lost it, it 
would perhaps be better not to mention 
what had happened till after his cousin 
went away, for she guessed that she 
should scarcely see the squire for a minute 
before the dinner-bell rang. The little 



k 



FORESHADOWINGS. 39 

interview with old Kitty had calmed 
her. She began to think that Richard 
Wolferston would see he had been imjust 
and hasty. 

His manner at dinner-time puzzled her. 

There was an uneasy restlessness she had 
never before noticed in him. In answer 
to his cousin's invitation, he said he could 
not sleep at Rookstone, he had an early 
appointment in London. 

" But you will get home in the middle 
of the night.'* 

" Not quite so bad as that/' he said, with 
a forced laugh. "A train leaves Purley 
station at ten ; I shall be safe in chambers 
by half- past one o'clock. But, I say, 
Christopher, we had better finish off that 
business to-night." 

The two gentlemen spent the rest of the 



40 MOOKSTONE. 



evening in the study. The bell was rung 
more than once. 

Mrs. Wolferston and her daughters were 
sitting in the library, a cozey room, walled, 
except on the window side, with oat book- 
cases* The very door was concealed by 
sham books, so that when it was closed a 
stranger might have looked vainly for 
means of egress. 

Mi-s. Wolferston was busy with needle- 
work, Janet was reading, and Mary, having 
idled away the first part of the evening in 
play with her favourite dog Loulou, dis- 
covered that she had left her embroidery in 
the saloon. 

She came back with it, laughing. 

"What can papa and Richard have to 
say to those two men ? I saw John, the 
new groom, and that young gardener^ 



' F0RESHAD0WING8, 41 

Kitty's nephew, going in to the 
study." 

" Mary, how curious you are," said Janet, 
indignantly. 

" People are sometimes wanted to write 
their names as witnesses, dear," said their 
mother ; " and those are chosen who are 
the least interested in the papers they have 
to sign." 

Ten o'clock struck, but the gentlemen 
did not come into the library. 

" I suppose they will finish the evening 
there," Mary said, in a vexed tone. 

Mrs. Wolferston rang the bell. 

"If you please, ma'am, master said I 

was to tell you he had driven Mr. Richard 

over to the station, and he hoped you would 
not stay up for him," said the butler. 

Mrs. Wolferston sent the girls off to 



42 ROOKSTONE. 



bed. She went up-stairs herself, but she 
could not stay there, she felt too rest- 
less. 

The evening had been oppressive, and 
the saloon windows were still unclosed. 
She passed through the centre one on to 
the terrace. There was no moon, not even 
a star ; the sky was almost awfiil in its 
vast darkness. 

Just then the stable clock rang out 
eleven in a shrill, clanging tone, as if it 
was telling the household it ought to be 
in bed. 

" I wonder what keeps Christopher," she 
thought ; " it is only half an hour's drive 
from the station." 

Still she paced up and down. A night- 
ingale, far off in the woods, began to trill 
out his marvellous gurgle of sweet soimds. 



FORESHADOWINGS. 43 

but they did not soothe her. Her hearing 
was so intently strained to catch the first 
sound of retiiming wheels, that even the 
nightingale's song came as an unwelcome 
distraction. 

She had left the saloon in darkness, now 
she saw a light moving in it. 

It was only Newman come to close the 
windows. 

"You can leave the centre one open," 
said his mistress ; " I can close that. I 
shall stay here till your master returns. 
Is he not very late ?" 

" Yes, ma'am, only this being the first of 
the month, we haven't got the new train- 
book yet, and Mr. Richard's train may go 
later now ; and master would wait to see 
him off, ma'am." 

This was said to soothe his mistress ; the 



44 MOOKSTONE. 



man was himself growing anxious at the 
delay. 

Speaking out one's fears often relieves 
them, and when Amy Wolferston stepped 

on the terrace again her heart felt less 
heavy. 

How kind, and good, and unselfish her 
husband was. She believed that he had 
been at the trouble of driving his cousin 
over to Purley to please her. He would 
not press him to stay because she had 
asked him not to encourage Richard at 
Rookstone, and yet he would dismiss him 
so courteously that Richard could not take 
offence. Why should not his words come 
true . why should not his cousin be brought 
to a better, less worldly life, if Christopher 
bent his mind to the task of influencing 
him? 



^ 



FORESHADOWINGS. 45 

" Then I could give him Mary joyfully," 
she said ; " but I cannot believe it would be 
right to expose the child to Richard Wol- 
ferston's influence in order that she might 
benefit him. It would be doing evil that 
good might come/' 

Again a light in the saloon. She had 
not heard the wheels, but it might be her 
husband. The wind was rising among the 
trees, and amid the creaking and swaying 
of their giant arms other sounds were 
scarcely heard. ' 

Newman came out on the terrace to speak 
to her before she reached the window. She 
could not see the man's face, but there was 
a troubled soimd in his voice. 

"It's more than half- past eleven now, 
ma'am. Should I go out along the Purley 
Road, and see if I can meet master T 



46 ROOKSTONE. 



All the foreboding, all the nameless 
terror that had lately weighed on her, and 
which she had so bravely struggled with, 
thronged back suddenly as the man spoke. 

" Yes, Newman, I shall go at once. I 
wish we had gone sooner. You and John 
can go with me, and let some of the other 
men foUow us with lights." 

Before the butler had got back into the 
hall with a lantern, his mistress stood there,^ 
wrapped in a large cloak, the hood drawn 
over her head. 

" You won't go yourself, ma'am," he said 
respectfully. *' You'll take cold, ma'am,, 
and perhaps . " 

"Open the door," she said, in a more 
decided voice than he had ever heard from 
her. " You had better lead the way with 
your lantern, Newman, it is so dark." 



FORESHADOWINGS. 4r 

It was as dark as it could be . ^that 
impenetrable, immeasurable inkiness that 
makes one fearfiil where each footstep may 
lead. At another tune Amy Wolferston 
would scarcely have dared to walk un- 
guided in such blind fa^on ; but now she 
hiuried on, helped by the glimmer of the 
butler's lantern, a faint help against the 
dense gloom. 

" You have told the men to bring lights, 
have you not T she said ; *^ we can see 
nothing distinctly by this lantern." 

"Yes, ma'am, there are some torches at 
the keeper's cottage, and I told them to 
wake up Jem Bobbins, and bring him 
along." 

They had lefb the park behind them, and 
were in the high road leading to Purley. 

" What is this ?" she exclaimed with a 



48 ROOKSTONE. 



half cry, as her arm struck against some- 
thing hard which seemed to be in the 
middle of the road. 

Newman raised the lantern. 

" It's the toll-gate," said the other man 
who accompanied them. " Molly must 
know if the master's passed through yet. 
Holloa, Molly ! Molly, wake up, I say." 

They knocked long and vigorously before 
any signs of stirring were heard in the toll- 
house. At last an upper window was un- 
closed, an angry voice cried out . 

" What d'ye mean by such a caddie at 

this time o' night ?" 

" It's me, Molly . Mrs. Wolferston. Has 

the master gone through the toll to- 
night ?" 

" Then be off wi' ye, ye're an impudent 

baggage; ye'll not be teUin' o' I that a 




FORESHADOWINGS. 49 

real lady bom, like madam at the park 
yonder, 'ud be comin' out in the high road 
'twixt night and morning, rousin' honest 
folk from their lawful rest." 

"Let me speak to her, ma'am," said 
Newman ; " she's only half awake, and 
doesn't know what she's about. Look here, 
Molly, my girl, wake up, and look sharp, too. 
It's me, Newman, and the mistress. You 
remember the master driving by here in 
his new dog-cart this evening, rather before 
ten, don't you know, now ?" 

'^ And what then ? The master have a 
right to go where he choose without folks 
a spyin' after he and his ways. It's like I 
should see whether a dog-cart's old or new, 
and the night so dark I can't see my own 
hand. It were the master, though, for he 
said, ' Good night, Molly.' " 

VOL. I. 4 



50 BOOKSTONE. 



'^ We're losing time/' Mrs. Wolferston 
said, in an imploring, eager tone to New- 
man ; *^ she can tell us notliing." 

" And you're sure, Molly, he hasn't been 
baxjk r 

" I shouldn't talk of his going if he'd 
come back too, should I, ye dxmderhead ?" 

" Well, then, lend us your lantern, quick, 
like a good lass, for we're afraid something's 
gone wrong." 

It was terrible to Mrs. Wolferston to hear 
her own sickening fear put into words as a 
certainty. She could not stand still while 
the sleepy, unwilling woman groped about 
for her lantern. She hurried on alone in 
the darkness, and feeling for the little 
swing gate, passed through it before New- 
man and John were ready to follow her. 



A DARK NIGHTS WORK. 51 



CHAPTER V. 

A DARK night's WORK. 

/^N the other side of the gate, alone in 
the utter darkness, Amy's courage 
failed. What was this nameless horror 
that had come upon her? Christopher, 
her husband . ^it was impossible that any- 
thing should have happened to him. 

" Christopher 1 " but her words seemed 
choked and muffled by the darkness. they 
fell back on her tongue and palsied it for a 
moment. The inner darkness was wprs0 

4.2 



62 EOOKSTONK 




than that without, and then her heart was 
lifted up from that crushing despair, and 
she clasped her hands together, and prayed 
for help and guidance in this her sore 
need. 

As she turned to listen for her com- 
panions' footsteps, she saw the welcome 
sight of lights a little distance off ; the men 
from the gamekeeper's cottage had made 
good speed, and would soon join them. 

But Newman and John were through the 
gate. Molly's lantern gave a better light 
than their own, and they went on faster. > 

The two men whispered together every 
now and then, softly, but their mis- 
tress could not speak ; she dared not even 
think ; she was trying her utmost to keep 
calm and self-possessed, for a new dread 
flashed into her mind. 



A DARK NIGHTS WORK. bZ 

Newman came up to her, even in that 
moment of fear and doubt touching his hat 
with his customaiy respect. 

" I don't see how there can be any acci- 
dent, ma'am. If there'd been one, the 
horse and dog-cart would have come home, 
unless . " 

He was surprised at his mistress's cahn 
answer. 

" You are thinking Mr. Wolferston has 
taken the lower road from the station, by 
the null-pond* I think so, too. We had 
better stand still till the men join us, for 
we must be getting near the angle where 
the roads separate. As soon as they come 
up, make them light all the torches, then 
let John and a couple of them go to the 
station along the regular road, the others 
can follow you and me." 



64 ROOKSTONE. 




The man repeated her orders mechani- 
caUy as the rest joined them a few minutes 
afterwards. The mill-pond ! . a thought, 
so Newman said to himself, to make a man 
feel sick and giddy, much less a delicate 
woman like his mistress. 

It was a large deep pool, encroaching 
far on the road, which was speciaUy narrow 
at this spot, as the footpath was raised 
several feet above its leveL 

"Surely, although it is so much the 
nearest way, the squire would not have nm 
such a risk on such a night as this is. 
Suppose he's gone to town with Mr. 
Richard after all. He certainly said mis- 
tress was not to wait up for him ; and yet 
he never did a thing like this before." 

Mrs. Wolferston still kept at the head of 
party. The next turn of the road she 



A DARK NIGHT'S WORK. 65 

tLiought must bring them to the mill-pond, 
but in the darkness she felt uncertain. 

Suddenly she called out in a high imna- 
tural voice, . 

*' Torches ! bring them forward here." 

She could not have told why she uttered 
that cry ; she could not have described the 
chill horror that came with it ; but it was 
no sudden shock or terror when the red 
smoky glare shed a broad light round the 
spot on which she stood, to see a dark form 
stretched across her very path, and to 
know before she looked that the white up- 
turned face was her husband's. 

The red glare reflected brightly in the 
deep quiet water of the pond. It was 
close beside its edge that the squire had 
Mien. His wife knelt down quickly beside 
him, and loosened his collar ; then she bent 



56 ROOKSTONE. 



down her ear to listen, but all was still* 
She kissed his forehead gently, as if she 
feared to wake him. Till now she had 
acted as we act in a dream . ^moved and 
acted without sense or feeling ; but the icy 
chill that met her lips pierced through the 
stupor that had benumbed her ; she gave a 
deep gasping sob, and sank down beside 
her husband. . 

While Newman was busy sending men 
off in different directions for the doctor, for 
the means of conveying the squire's body 
and his almost lifeless wife to the park, 
some of the others were searching for the 
missing horse and dog-cart. The last was 
soon foimd on the farther side of the pond, 
more than half under water, and broken, 
but of the horse there were no traces . 
none, at least, discoverable in the darkness. 



A DARK NIGHTS WORK. 6T 

He might be lying at the bottom of the 
pond, strangled in his attempts to free 
himself, or he might be rushing wildly 
about the country, maddened by the terror 
he had undergone. 




58 ROOKSTONE. 



CHAPTER VL 

MR. WOLFERSTON's WILL. 

l^TEXT morning the sun came stream- 
ing in througli the windows as if 
nothing had happened over-night to make 
his presence unwelcome at Rookstone. 

The blinds had been drawn down, but 
still the bright light forced its way in . 
into the bedroom upstairs, where Mary lay 
sobbing hysterically on her bed, deaf to 
Janet's tender soothing words, and entrea- 
ties to calm herself for their dear mother's 



MR. WOLFERSTON'S WILL. 59 

sake ; into the nursery, where little Chris- 
topher sat, his cherub face stiffened to an 
unnatural seriousness, more at the solemn 
stillness that reigned everywhere than 
because he as yet realised his loss. 

But it was in the death-chamber below 
that the warm cheerful sunbeams were 
most unwelcome. The master of Rook- 
stone had been borne into a seldom-used 
room leading off from the entrance-hall, 
called the small library, and here his wife 
had taken her place beside him. Janet 
had stolen in once or twice during the 
night, but she felt that her mother's sorrow 
was too sacred to be intruded on. It had 
come upon the loving wife with such a 
sudden sharpness that she could not believe 
in it. With her head bent slightly, listen- 
ing as intently as she had listened the night 



60 ROOKSTONE. 



before for the carriage wheels, Amy Wol- 
ferston sat, almost as stiU as the rigid form 
beside her, except that every now and then 
she gently raised the covering Janet had 
placed over the face of the dead. Then the 
wistful yearning of her sad eyes told that 
all hope waa not over within her. 

But as the day wore on hope fled, and at 
last, when Janet came and urged her to 
take some rest, she yielded, and suffered 
herself to be led away. Even then she 
said, softly, . 

" You will not leave him, darling. We 
could not leave him alone." 

At her room door she saw little Christo- 
pher seated on the mat. He jumped up 
and ran to her. 

"Nurse says I am to keep away from 
you, darling, am I ? You want your own 



MR, WOLFERSTON'8 WILL. 61 

little Chris, don't you, poor, pretty 
mamma T 

As the little arms clung fondly round 
her, the forced calm gave way. She buried 
her face among the child's golden curls, and 
wept passionately; then she drew him into 
her room, and, closing the door, she clasped 
him in her arms with a vehemence which 
startled him, it was so unlike his sweet 
gentle mother. 

But the relief to pent-up feeling did her 
good. When Janet came to her, about two 
hoiu^ later, alarmed by Christopher's terri- 
fied accoimt of the way "mamma cried," 
she found her with swollen eyelids, sadly 
worn and exhausted, but more really calm 
and resigned than she coTild have ex- 
pected. 

Next morning it seemed to Janet that 



62 ROOKSTONE. 



her mother had grown yeaxs older. She 
had dressed herself m black ; her beautiful 
hair was strained completely away from 
her face, and gathered in a simple knot 
behind 

And Amy Wolferston felt years older. 
It seemed to her as if she had lost half of 
herself, the moving spring of her life, the 
Sim which had cheered and lighted her 
every thought and action. But she did 
not give way to sullen or uncontrolled 
sorrow. 

Sorrow she must. While the woimd 
was still so acute, there was no use in try- 
ing to heal it ; but she strove hmnbly and 
patiently to see God's hand in it, and not 
to rebel. Meanwhile Mary resisted all 
Janet's attempts to tranquillize her. 

" You have no feeling, Janet ; strong- 



MR. WOLFERSTON'S WILL, 6a 

minded women never have, and they think 
others give way, just because they have 
deeper feelings. If you had loved darling 
papa as I did " . ^and here the poor child 
burst into a fresh fit of sobbing, and flimg 
herself on her bed, resolved not to be com- 
forted. 

Janet had borne up bravely, and she had 
striven hard to keep the knowledge of 
Mary's state from her mother, but on 
this second day Mrs. Wolferston asked for 
her, and her sister was obliged to tell the 
truth. 

Mrs. Wolferston put little Christopher 
off her lap, and went to her daughter's 
room. Mary lay on the bed, still sob- 
bing. 

Her mother wept with her at first, and 
then reasoned; but when she foimd that 



^ ROOKSTONE. 



Mary made no eflfort at self-control, she 
grew anxious. 

"My dear child," she said, "do you 
think your father is pleased that you give 
way to such violent grief? Little Christo- 
pher said to me just now, ^ I must be 
always good, mamma, for you know he can 
always see me now, and he used not to 
when I was in the nursery/ " But Mary 
was only quieted for a moment ; she soon 
burst into vehement sobbing. 

It was strange to see the different effect 
that this trial had on the two sisters. 

On the quick-tempered, energetic Janet 
it seemed to have laid a softening, chasten- 
ing hand. Her gentleness with all was 
wonderfiil, and her tenderness tried to save 
her mother even the trouble of thinking 
for herself. The shght erect figure glided 



MR. WOLFERSTOirS WILL. 65 

noiselessly about the house, giving direc- 
tions and transacting business that might 
have been thought too serious for her age. 
On Mary, the sunbeam of the femily, the 
bright lovely darling who had cheered all 
hearts by her saucy winnmg ways, the 
effect had been entirely opposite. She 
alternated between long desponding fits of 
sUence and sudden bursts of forced cheer- 
fulness, which usually ended in hysterical 
sobs. 

Poor Janet-in the midst of her sorrow 
came what a week ago would have been 
hailed as a special joy, a letter from her 
betrothed husband. Captain Wenlock, to 
announce the return of his regiment from 
Malta. He had been away for more than 
a year, and Mr. Wolferston had promised 
that directly he returned the marriage 

VOL. I. 5 



66 ROOKSTONE, 



should take place. Now, such a thought 
was mockery. She crushed the letter into- 
her pocket, feeling as if the very gladness 
its contents had filled her with were a 
robbery from the sorrow due to the dear 
fetherjust taken to Ms rest. 

The same post, too, brought her mother 
a letter from Richard Wolferston . a formal 
letter of condolence, and an oflfer of service 
if he could in any way be of use to his dear 
cousin's wife and children. 

Janet opened it, and grew thoughtful as 
she read. 

" I do not like to worry, dear mother,'^ 
she said, "and yet I must. My father's 
will must be read. I wonder if Mr. Pain- 
son has it, or whether it was transferred to 
Richard." 

Janet wrote at once to Mr. Painson and 



ME. WOLFERSTOIPS WILL. 67 

asked the question before she spoke to her 
mother. 

The answer came promptly. Mr. Pain- 
son regretted that he had no longer any 
claim to advise Mrs. Wolferston legally, 
although as a Mend he would always be 
entirely at her disposal. It waa a very 
kind, warm letter, contrasted with Rich- 
ard^s, and something in the difference be- 
tween the two struck Janet pamftilly. 

She gave both letters to her mother. 

Mrs. Wolferston read them attentively, 
but she made no comment, except to tell 
Janet that she wished both Mr. Painson 
and their cousin to be present at the 
fimeral. 

The day came, and with it that fear- 
ftdly sharp wrench, almost like the sever- 
ance of body and spirit, when the loved 

5.2 



68 ROOKSTONJB. 



one ifl really taken from our mortal eyes for 
ever. Janet and little Christopher fol- 
lowed their father to the grave, and re- 
turned home soothed and comforted. 
Janet came to her mother's room. 

" I am not going to stay with you, 
dearest." She kissed her fondly as she 
spoke. "Mr. Painson wishes me to be 
present when the will is read. Will 
Mary come too, or will she stay with 
you r 

To her surprise, Mary rose up briskly, 
and said she would accompany her, but as 
she reached the door she looked back at 
her mother. 

There was a plaintive, beseeching ten- 
derness in Mrs. Wolferston's fex5e, doubly 
plarative in the mournful cap she wore for 
the first time, that recalled her wayward 




ME. WOLFERSTOITS WILL. 69 

daughter's straying thoughts. Mary left 

Janet abruptly, and sat down again beside 

her mother. 

Neither Mr. nor Mrs. Wolferston had 

any very near relations. Mrs. Dawson, a 

sister of the late squire's fitther, and Mr. 

and Mrs. Webb, the last a cousin of Mrs. 

Wolferston, the doctor, the clergyman, Mr. 

Painson, and Richard Wolferston, and an- 
other person, a stranger . ^these were aU 

the group that Janet foimd collected in the 

dining-room. 

They seemed to have been waiting for 
her. 

Kind Aunt Dawson came forward, and 
made Janet sit between herself and Mrs. 
Webb ; then there was some little earnest 
talk between Mr. Painson and Richard 
Wolferston, who stood half hidden in the 



70 ROOKSTONE. 



deep bay window ; and then the stranger, 
whom Richard named to Mr. Painson as 
one of his clerks, seated himself before a 
desk, and began to read. 

Janet tried to listen and to understand, 
but she could not. After the first few 
words all sounded like a confused jargon, 
belonging to some far-off period of language 
rather than the present. Exactly opposite 
to her as she sat was a portrait of her father 
painted at the time of his marriage, and as 
she gazed on the fair handsome face, with its 
winsome smile and open fearless eyes, the 
memory of her loss grew painfully present, 
she with difficulty restrained her tears . all 
outward sights and soimds were obliterated. 

Her own love for Captain Wenlock . ^for 
though her reserve made her chary of 
speaking of him, she loved him with all 



MR, WOLFERSTOIPS WILL. 71 

the strength of her nature . gave Janet 
some estimate of the agony her mother 
suffered, and the contemplation of the long 
widowed years that might be yet in store 
for this darling mother was almost more 
than she coUld bear. It was terrible to sit 
there, racked with such son-ow, with the 
outward consciousness that it must be re- 
strained and kept within bounds. 

It seemed as if the clerk's monotonous 
voice had been reading on for hours, when 
it suddenly stopped. There was a con- 
fused murmur of voices, some speaking 
with vehement disapproval. Mrs. Webb's 
was the loudest. 

"It's shameful, and there's no other 
word for it ; after being such a wife, too, 
as no man ever had before, I do say it 
comes very near a fraud. Not but what I 



72 ROOKSTONE. 



always thought poor dear Christopher in- 
clined to be selfish." 

Selfish ! her father selfish ! 

Janet looked up quickly, but she saw 
Aunt Dawson quieting Mrs. Webb, and 
she sat still and tried to understand the 
cause of this commotion. 

Mr. Painson stepped forward and begged 
for silence. He looked severely at Mrs. 
Webb ; he was scandalised at such a 
breach of decorum. 

The clerk went drawling on, and Janet 
tried to listen. She could not quite 
imderstand, but it seemed to her that 
Richard Wolferston's name came in con- 
tinually. A few words at the close forced 
themselves upon her attention : . " There- 
fore, as the estate, if entailed, must have 
belonged to the said Richard Wolferston 



MR. WOLFERSTOIPS WILL. 73 



years ago, and ha;S only been alienated from 
him by a prejudice arising from no fault of 
his, I am hereby by this restitution merely 
doing the part of an honest man to him 
and his heirs, and reUeving mine from the 
burden of unjust possession." 

Then the paper concluded formally, and 
the clerk handed it to Mr. Painson. 

There was a dead silence. Janet was 
conscious that something utterly unex- 
pected had happened, that some new mis- 
fortime had fallen on her mother ; but 
before she could in any way collect her 
thoughts Mr. Painson came up to her with 
the will in his hand. 

"You and I, Miss Janet, wUl go to 
mamma now ; the sooner this news is 
broken to her the better." 

She took his arm passively, but directly 



74 ROORSTONE. 



she found herself alone with him in the 
gallery outside her mother's room, she 
stopped. 

" I can't quite make it out." She passed 
her hand across her forehead, as if to clear 
away the confusion from her brain. " Why 
did Mrs. Webb call dear papa selfish, and 
why did every one look so angrily at 
Richard Wolferston T 

Mr. Painson pulled up his shirt collar 
stiffly. He had flattered himself that 
Janet had shown an early promise of 
developing excellent business powers ; it 
was mortifying that an affair simple enough 
for the comprehension of a baby had 
puzzled her. 

'' Why, my dear child, it lies in a nut- 
shell. YoTir fiither, in what . don't look 
shocked, Miss Janet . even I must call an 




MR. ylrOLFERSTON'S WILL. 75 

unwarrantable fit of conscientiousness, has 
willed Rookstone and aU its appurtenances 
to Richard Wolferston as heir-at-law, and 
left your mother 400 a year for her life, 
with succession of said 400 to Christo- 
pher, and to you each 100 a year. I must 
say, my dear, that it's fairly monstrous ; it 
will take me some time to get over. Now, 
-shall we go in to your poor dear mamma T 



76 ROOKSTONE. 



CHAPTER VII. 



MR. PAINSON's story. 




" T WAS prepared for sometliing unex- 
pected in my dear friend's disposal 
of his property," Mr. Painson said, when 
he had communicated the contents of her 
husband's will to Mrs. Wolferston. " Before 

I got Miss Janet's note, Mr. Richard 
Wolferston had written to ask me to be 
present to-day, as he said his cousin 
had made a different will from his former 
ne." The old lawyer checked himself. 



MR. PAINSON'S STORY. 77 

Mary's eyes were fixed on him with a 
strange intensity, and he began to con- 
aider whether the presence of so many 
listeners was desirable. He was a bachelor, 
a cautious as well as a nervous man^ and lie 
had a very hazy belief in the trustworthi- 
ness of any woman . always excepting his 
favoiurite Janet, whom he had petted from 
her childhood. But as he could not well 
make a difference between the sisters, he 
said he thought what he had to say had 
better be told to their mother only. 

Janet rose at once, and looked at her 
sister, but Mary lingered ; she felt that 
what Mr. Painson had to tell was in some 
way connected with Bichard Wolferston, 
and she longed to stay and defend him 
from any blame which might be laid to 
his charge. 



78 ROOKSTONE. 



"You can go to Aunt Dawson and 
Cousin Louisa, dears," Mrs. Wolferston 
said. " After what Mr. Painson has just 
told me, I think I will not attempt to see 
them to-day ; will you give them my love,, 
and ask them to excuse me T 

As soon as the girls left the room, she 
turned to Mr. Painson. " This news sur- 
prises me, of course, but still not so much 
as I dare say you expect. Only a short 
time ago he . my darling husband . spoke 
of restitution due to his cousin. We were 

interrupted, and he did not fully explain 

f 

himself. I remember he said he had pro* 
mised to keep the matter a secret, but I 
am sure he meant to have told me hi& 
intentions . if . if this had not hap- 
pened." 

She tried to be cahn, but it was very 



MR, PAINSOJSrS STORY. 79- 

* 

difficult to speak of her lost one without 
emotion. She went on, presently, "You 
can do me a great service, Mr. Painson, if 
you will. You can caution Mrs. Webb, 
especially, that no one must ventiire to^ 
disapprove of this disposal of Rookstone . 
to me, I mean. Mrs. Webb means well, 
but there are times when well-meaning 
people can do a great deal of harm." She^ 
spoke with dignity. She wished the old 
lawyer to understand that this prohibition 
extended to him also. 

He bowed ; he was lost in wonder, partly 
reverent, partly pitying, for he thought, in 
her extreme duty to her husband, this per- 
fect wife was forgettiQg the claims of her 
chUdren. 

" May I ask you a few questions ?" he 
said ; " I want specially to know when the 



80 ROOKSTONE. 



conversation you mention took place : can 
you remember the exact day ?" 

She thought a minute. 

"Yes; it was the 25th of May. I re- 
member the day well, because Richard 
Wolferston came down on business." 

" Ah !" The old lawyer's brows knit ; 
he had never conquered his vexation at the 
breach that had occurred between the late 
squire of Rookstone and himself. " May 
I ask if my dear Mend had seen his cousin 
when he told you this ?" 

" No ; he was sitting in the saloon with 
me, expecting him. It was his arrival, in 
fact, that broke off the conversation I spoke 
of." 

"And when Mr. Richard lefb, did you 
renew it T 



" No ; he stayed till next morning, and 



MR. PAINSON'S STORY. 81 

. ^" She paused, and a &int colour stole 
over her pale face. She could not say she 
had forgotten it, for she knew that durmg 
those few happy days that followed, she 
had studiously avoided any topic which 
would lead to the mention of her husband's 
.cousin, in her tender shrinking from a re- 
vival of the former discussion. 

Mr. Painson's practised eye saw that she 
was keeping something from him: but it 
was not his way with women to face a per- 
plexity openly ; he considered them subtle 
creatures, and therefore took them, if he 
<50uld, at imawares. 

" You must forgive me, my dear lady, if 
I seem to give you needless pain, but from 
your applying to me as you did, immedi- 
ately after this distressing calamity, I 
imagine that you have some wish to rely 

VOL, I. 6 



82 EOOKSTONE. 



on my advice T She only bowed, and he 
went on, not looking at her. His green- 
grey eyes had a trick of wandering about 
nervously, as if they could find nothing 
satisfactory to rest on. " Now I want you 
to try and concentrate your memory on 
the occurrences of the last few weeks, and 
having done so, to tell me whether you 
have not seen a difference in your husband's 
manner . ^a flightiness, perhaps, . or a de- 
spondency, or a restlessness, or an irrita- 
bility, which might have shown you, if you 
had been less blinded by . ^by natural aflPec- 

 

tion, that . Stay, my dear lady, you pro- 
mised to hear me out," for Mrs. Wolferston 
tried eagerly to interrupt him . "I say, 
which might have shown you that his 
intellect was . was . you must forgive 
me . clouded . ^not quite soimd, in fiict." 




MR, PAINSON'S STORY. 83 

He touched his forehead to. point his 
meamng, but Mrs. Wolferston had risen, 
and stood looking at him with pained sur- 
prise. 

" I see what you mean, Mr. Painson, and 
I must tell you that you are very wrong 
even to hint such a suspicion. Do you 
think me so regardless of my boy's future 
as to suppose that I could take his inherit- 
ance quietly, if I thought his father had 
not really wiUed it ? . ^fcH* if his mind had 
been aflPected, I consider the act would not 
have been his own." ' 

" I beg your pardon," said Mr. Painson, 
meekly . her outbreak had been more ve- 
hement than he expected, and he had as 
great a dread of a woman's wrath as some 
folks have of cold water . " but you led me 
into this supposition yourself." 

6.2 



84 EOOKSTONE. 



"I? Mr. Painso^r She looked con- 
founded. 

" Yes ; just now, when you spoke of 
Richard Wolferston, your manner was so 
confused and hesitating that you irresis- 
tibly led me to the conclusion that he had 
unduly influenced your husband in the 
disposal of his property, and that you had 
combated such a disposition ; and knowing 
the nature of my dear friend's feelings 
for you as I did, I could not fancy this 
influence being used successfully against 
yours, had Mr. Wolferston's mind not been 
previously warped." 

For a moment his manoeuvre had nearly 
succeeded. In her anxiety to establish the 
soundness of her husband's intellect, she 
was on the point of betraying the secret of 
their discussion and of her own dispute 




MR. FAINSOIPS STORY. 85 

with his cousin ; but Amy Wolferston had 
been trained early to set a watch on her 
words. Perhaps the very dispute I have 
mentioned was one of the few occasions 
when this habit had been neglected, and 
the bitter remembrance it had left, that on 
her last day of married life she had acted 
in opposition to what she knew were her 
husband's wishes, served to keep her 
watchful over her words now. The bitter- 
ness was doubled, because, as we know, she 
had been obliged to keep the matter from 
her husband. 

" My uneasiness arose from quite another 
cause," she said, quietly . "a cause which 
could not in any way affect your present 
inquiry." 

She spoke, as she thought, the truth, and 
yet if she had then told Mr. Painson all 



86 ROOKSTONE, 



that had really happened, he might have 
read his old friend's strange will through a 
different pair of spectacles. 

"There is something I should like ex- 
plained more clearly," she said ; " you un- 
derstand that I entirely accept this dispo- 
sition of his property as Mr. Wolferston's 
deliberate wish ; but I want quite to un- 
derstand the nature of his cousin's claim." 

Again Mr. Painson inveighed mentally 
against the dulness of womankind . for 
was not the whole claim of kindred fairly 
stated in the wUl he had just read to her ? 

"Richard Wolferston" . he pulled up 
his shirt-coUar and spoke in his most im- 
pressive manner, knocking off the different 
items of his statement with his raised 
forefinger . "is the son of his father, 
Charles Wolferston; and Charles Wolfer- 



MR. PAINS0IP8 STORY, 87 

ston was the son of Christopher Wolfer- 
ston, the late squire's grandfather and pre- 
decessor at Rookstone. You know . or it 
is quite possible you don't know, for such 
extraordinary pains were taken to keep the 
matter quiet, that I don't believe there are 
above a couple of people left, besides my- 
self, who remember the story . ^that the old 
squire had only these two children . Janet, 
the eldest, your husband's mother; and 
this boy Charles. Charles was intended 
for the army: he went to Eton first . 
there he was soon rusticated ; and at 
Oxford he got worse and worse. He was 
about the wildest young fellow you can 
imagine. I fancy the old squire was too 
indulgent at first, and then desperately 
hard when he found he had been deceived. 
The mother had died young, you see, and 



88 ROOKSTONE. 



Janet had married and was Uving abroad 
with her hiisband : so there was no one 
always at hand to say a good word for the 
poor young scoundrel . for he was a scoun- 
drel to deceive his father as he did. I did 
what I could. I was the junior in the firm 
that then managed the Rookstone property ; 
but Charles contrived to blind me too. 

" His father paid all his debts, as he sup- 
posed ; purchased him a commission, and 
made him a handsome allowance ; and the 
first news he got of his son was that he 
was arrested for about three times the 
amount he had just relieved him from. 
Even then he did not quite give him up. 

He insisted on his leaving the army and 
taking to a more hard-working life ; for he 
the extravagance which he might 
ito. He went into a well-known 




ME, PAIN SO IPS STORY, 89. 

banker's : it was difficult enough to get him 
in, but his antecedents had been kept sa 
quiet that it was generally believed he had 
sold out because his regiment was ordered 
abroad and he could not get an exchange . " 
Mr. Painson stopped abruptly, and looked 
se^rchingly at the pale earnest face. He 
had got warmed with his subject, and it 
seemed to him that, circmnstanced as his 
friend's widow was with Richard Wolfer- 
ston, she ought to know his whole history, 
"Now comes a fact" . he spoke in a low 
cautious tone . " which I can only mention 
in the strictest possible confidence. My 
dear late friend must have been aware of it, 
and it was this, no doubt, which he intended 
to communicate to you as soon as his 
cousin released him from his promise of 
secresy. It is said in the will that Christo- 



90 ROOKSTONE. 



pher Wolferston, your husband's grand- 
father, disinherited his only son Charles in 
favour of his daughter Janet, then the wife 
of Sir Gordon Dawson, that the said Janet 
had become a widow before the news of her 
brother s disinheritance reached her ; that 
when she returned here to Rookstone after 
her husband's demise, bringing her boy 
Christopher with her, the old squire took 
legal measures to change his name to Wol- 
ferston . ^but of course you knew about this 
change of name before." 

"Ah! yes; I have heard it from old 
Aunt Dawson ; she caUs herself Mrs., but, 
as you know, she is the maiden sister of my 
husband's father." 

" Yes, yes, she could teU you that, and 
she, no doubt, thought the yoimg scape- 
grace Charles Wolferston rightly served for 




MR, PAINSON'S STORY. 91 

his extravagance and his unfortunate mar- 
riage, for he went over to Paris and got 
married to an opera singer there ; but he 
was not disinherited on those counts, before 
then something had happened which broke 
the old man's heart . ^he lived some years 
afterwards, but he never held up his head 
again. This is what did it. One day one 
of the partners of the firm in which Charles 
had been placed came down to Rookstone 
. You wiU not breathe this even to your 
daughter Janet ?" 

" No," she answered. She shrank from 
the story of another person's guilt ; but the 
thought of Mary made her determine to 
know aU that was to be known of Eichard 
Wolferston. 

" Charles Wolferston had forged a cheque 
for 5,000 on the bank in the name of one 



92 ROOKSTONE. 



of the partners. Happily for him, the 
fraud had been discovered at once, and 
therefore was easily concealed. The firm 
behaved nobly : the only compensation they 
demanded was that the culprit should leave 
England and pledge himself not to return 
for a term of years, I forget the precise 
time ; however, he died in California before 
the expiration of it, when his son, this very 
Richard, was about nine years old. I 
believe he still receives the allowance the 
old squire made to his cast-off son; but 
this was all managed so secretly that your 
husband knew nothing of his cousin's exis- 
tence even, until he received a letter from 
Richard himself annoimcing his return to 
England, rather more than a year ago." 

" Then no one knows anything about 
Richard Wolferston's previous life ?" 



\ 



MR, PAINSON'S STORY. 93 

" I have never met with any one who 
knows anything about him ; but, my dear 
fiiend, if you will permit me to call you so, 
I have not many acquaintances, and none 
of them have ever lived in Australia or 
California." 



94 ROOKSTONE. 



CHAPTER VIII. 



Mary's confession. 



T 



|HE son of a felon ! . for although not 
convicted in a court of justice, what 
else had Charles Wolferston been? . and this 
was the man who loved Mary, and for 
whom she feared Mary had more than mere 
cousinly liking. 

Long after Mr. Painson left her, Mrs. 
Wolferston sat thinking in her dressing- 
room, tortured with the feeling that she 
must risk her daughter's safety or her hap- 



MARTS CONFESSION. 95 

piness. On one point she would not let 
her thoughts rest . her husband's incaution 
in admitting his cousin to intimacy with 
his chndren on such short acquaintance. 
The excuse for this was Richard's irresisti- 
ble charm of manner . a charm which she 
acknowledged spite of her disapproval of 
his principles ; a charm which seemed to 
have subjugated all the inhabitants of 
Rookstone except Janet and old Kitty 
Bobbins. 

For the present the shock of Mr. Pain- 
son's story had dulled the remembrance 
that Rookstone was no longer a home for 
her and her children, but after a while this 
came back. It was so very hard to go 
away . ^to leave this first and only home of 
her wedded happiness . to go where she 
should have nothing to remind her of her 



6 ROOKSTONE. 



husband ; but a mind so raised above 
earthly things as Amy Wolferston's was 
oon restored from this trial of its peace. 

" What am I lamenting over ?" she said ; 
*^ I, the half of whose life has already passed 
away. How much worse it is for these 
young ones, just at the time when they 
were entering on all the pleasures and 
amusements their position entitled them to 
enjoy 1 How shall I comfort them, and 
win them to be resigned, if I am myself 
rebellious ?" 

She spoke to both her daughters next 
morning. She found Janet silent, unwilling 
to enter on the subject of the will; she 
got up and left the room when her mother 
turned to Mary. 

Mary's eyes were round with surprise. 

" But, mamma, why need we go ? Bichard 



MARYS CONFESSION. 97 

does not wish it. How could he? He 
would not grieve you for the world ; I am 
sure he would not." 

" How can you be sure, Mary ?" 

The beautiful girl blushed at the grave 
question, but she crept up to her mother a 
minute afterwards and put both her arms 
round her. 

" He told me so himself yesterday, when 
Janet took me away from you and that 
hatefiil old man." 

" Hush, my darling." 

" Well, I must hate him, for I know he 

tries to set you against Richard, just be^ 

cause Eichard's so clever and knows better 

than he does how to manage dear papa's; 

business. When we got down-stairs Richard 

was in the hall. I don't know what became 

of Janet. Just then I was ^mry sjxgry, 
VOL. I. 7 



98 ROOKSTONE. 



because I thought, as you do, that he- 



n 



it 



Richard, I mean . ^was a usurper, and was 
driving you away from your rightftd home." 
What eke could you think ?" 

Well, we are both wrong, darHng 
mamma." She kissed her mother again, as 
if she would conquer the incredulity she 
read in her eyes. "Richard was so sur- 
prised and shocked when I said it that it 
was impossible to think he had ever con- 
templated driving us away. He told me 
that he and Mr. Painson had been appointed 
joint guardians of Christy, and he said this 
is a plain proof that dear papa never meant 
us to leave Rookstone." 

Mrs. Wolferston drew her daughter's 
hands into her own, and holding them 
there, looked at her steadily. 

" My dear Mary, you are not quite a 



MARTS CONFESSION. 99 

child ; tiy and consider this question as if 
you had no interest in it. Would your 
fetther have made his cousin master of 
Rookstone during my lifetime if he had 
intended me to remain here T 

*' Ah, but that is just the point Richard 
made so clear to me. He said dearest papa 
had suffered from a scruple of conscience ever 
since he had known that his imcle Charles 
had left a son, and it was only to quiet this 
scruple that Richard yielded to the will 
being in its present form ; for, as he says, 
he was only ten years yoimger than papa 
when the wiU was made, and he thought 
his hfe the worst of the two. Even if the 
property had been left to you, some one 
must have managed it for you. Why 
cannot you stay here, dearest, and consider 

him as only the manager? You will 

7.2 



100 ROOKSTONE. 



make him and .all of us happy by doing 
this." 

Maiy spoke eagerly, with flushed cheeks 
and imploring eyes. 

"My darling, listen. I know what 
Richard does not. Before your father 
made this will he was thoroughly aware 
that I wished to break off our intimacy 
with Richard. Stop, Mary, and hear my 
reasons." The impetuous girl piiUed both 
hands away from her mother, and hid her 
face between them. "It is not possible, 
therefore, that he could have intended us 
to live together ; it would be . an insult 
towards hiTn to judge him so wanting in 
tenderness towards me. You are fond of 
Richard. It is quite natural ; he is your 
cousin, and has been very kind both to 
you and Christy ; but, Mary, Richard 



MARTS CONFESSION. 101 

is not a good companion for either of 

you." 

The flushed face looked up, half angry, 
half tearfiil, the rosy pouting lip drooping 
doubtfully. 

"I do not blame him, for he has had 
no home teaching which could help him, 
^nd much foreign residence rarely improves 
amaiL I do not think, my darling, you 
could be long content with a friend who 
mocks at all religious ordinances as Eichard 
does." 

" Ah, but, mamma, are we not told not 
to judge others, and may not he be 
thoroughly good, although he gives less 
outward signs of it than others do ?" 

Mrs. Wolferston trembled. It seemed 
to her that the evil influence had gone deep 
with Mary already. 



102 ROOKSTONE, 



" I am no bigot, Mary," she said ; " I 
hold that love and truth in the heart must 
be pleasing to Grod, but I also think that 
he has always shown in all ages, that he 
wills mankind to give him some outward 
form of worship, and I cannot believe that 
anything but Self-Will in its deadUest 
form refiises this act of public homage and 
thanksgiving." 

The flush feded from the girl's fece- 
faded to an almost deathlike whiteness ; 
her hands feU idly in her lap. 

*^ Mamma ! " . the words were rather 
sobbed than spoken . " if I may not trust 
Richard, take me away from Rookstone. 
I could never stay with him and not . " 
She buried her face on her mother's 
shoulder. 

Mrs. Wolferston saw how deep the 



MARTS CONFESSION, 103 

wound was, and shrank from probing it ; 
but she saw, too, that she must not 
remain one day longer than was needful at 
Eiookstone. 



104 EOOKSTONE. 



CHAPTER IX. 



A CHANGE OF PLANa 



T3UT matters will not always arrange 
themselves as we wish. 
On the morning after the reading of the 
will the widow received a letter from the 
new master of Rookstone. In it he re- 
peated all that Maiy had already told her. 
He begged her not to remember, but to 
pardon, the hasty and uncourteous words 
he had spoken on the evening of his last 
visit. He would not attempt to deny his 
love for Mary, but if Mrs. Wolferston 




A CHANGE OF PLANS. 106 



thought his presence at Rookstone unde- 
sirable, he would remain in London, and 
only visit her when she required his advice, 
or when his presence might be wanted on 
the estate. If she would treat him as a 
brother, as one whom her husband had 
loved and believed in, he would be satisfied 
to wait, and hope that her mind might 
change about Mary. 

Mrs. Wolferston showed this letter to 
Janet. She had been so accustomed to carry 
every thought and every wish to her hus- 
band, that she coiJd not resist the comfort 
Janet's firm mind and single-hearted view 
of things gave her. Janet read the letter 
very slowly. The cloud of gloom that had 
settled on her face since the reading of the 
will had not left it. 

"I am almost sorry you consulted me. 



106 ROOKSTONE. 



mother," she said ; " I feel I take a selfish 
view of the whole matter, and so caimot 
judge fairly." 

" I think we must judge equally on one 
point, dearest . ^that Richard Wolferston i 
disposed to act generously and delicately 
towards us." 

" That is just the point on which I sup- 
pose my mind is warped," Janet said, 
bitterly. She stood still a moment, think- 
ing. "Mother, if one has a suspicion, a 
dreadful, terrible doubt about another per- 
son, and one knows at the same time that 
one's own motives are interested in cherish- 
ing this suspicion, how should one act ?" 

She had taken one of her mother's hands 
as she spoke, and was grasping it with 
painful tightness, while she looked search- 
ingly in her mother s face. 



A CHANGE OF PLANS. 107 

" You axe excited, my darling ; you have 
been overwrought these last few days, and 
your mind mistakes fancies for convictions. 
Try to turn your thoughts to something 
else." 

She bent forward and kissed Janet's 
forehead, lined slightly already with tracer 
of thought, but the girl still looked restlesa 

and unquiet. 

"You don't quite imderstand me, 
mother; would it be wrong to teU you 
what my suspicion is ?" 

" Try to conquer it instead ; if you can- 
not do that, then I suppose I must hear it ; 
but I could only do this for your sake, 
Janet, and I believe if you take the means 
I suggest you will not find it necessary to 

consult me." 

Janet turned away. The world had 



108 ROOKSTONE. 



indeed changed if her own darling mother 
refiised to listen to her confidence. What 
had come to her ? She seemed quite to 
have forgotten how this change of fortune 
had ruined her eldest child's hopes of happi- 
ness. When Janet had been promised to 
Henry Wenlock she was the daughter of 
the rich Mr. Wolferston, of Rookstone ; her 
lover could not now be expected to keep faith 
with her in such a different position. If 
her mother would only have listened to her, 
she would have asked her advice, but this 
check threw her back into silence ; " for the 
future I must lean on myself alone," she said. 
Mrs. Wolferston watched her anxiously. 
She did not guess that distress and anxiety 
had brought disease to aid them, and that 
under the pressure Janet's mind was fast 
becoming no longer under her own control. 



A CHANGE OF PLANS. 10 



In the evening Mr. Painson came down 
ii'om London to take Mrs. Wolferston's in- 
structions. He was surprised to find her 
in such haste to leave Rookstone ; and he 
tried to dissuade her, but her resolution 
was not to be altered. 

He returned to town early next morning,, 
promising that by the end of a week he 
would have a small house ready for their 
reception in one of the London suburbs. 
Mrs. Wolferston thought, on Christopher's 
account, it would be desirable to give up a 
coimtry life. 

It had been arranged that the day before 
they left Rookstone, Richard Wolferston 
should come down and be formally put in 
possession by Mr. Painson. The latter 
had objected to this, as exposing the widow 
to unnecessary pain ; but Mrs. Wolferston 



no ROOKSTONE. 



expressed a wish to see her husband's 
cousin once more at Rookstone before she 
left it. 

On the morning of his expected arrival 
Janet did not appear at breakfast, and 
when her mother went to her room she 
foimd her so ill that all thoughts of a 
journey were postponed ; the coimtry 
doctor was summoned, and he told Mrs. 
Wolferston that the case was so serious 
she had better telegraph for further advice. 
Eichard Wolferston and Mr. Painson 
reached Rookstone in the evening, and 
they learned that the London physician, 
who had just preceded them, pronounced 
that there was decided pressure on the 
brain, and that the slightest excitement 
might augment this to brain fever. 



THE WA VERLET A VENUE. Ill 



CHAPTER X. 

THE WAVERLEY AVENUE. 

TTIOR several days Janet lay between life 
and death. Her mother never left 
her. Mary wished to stay with her 
mother and share her anxious watchings, 
but Mrs. Wolferston would not even allow 
her to enter the sick room. " It can do no 
good," she said, " and the sudden sight of a 
fresh face may cause the excitement the 
doctor dreads." 

In her utter absorption for Janet, Mrs. 
Wolferston did not ask whether Richard 



112 ROOKSTONE. 



still remained at Rookstone. She had 
warned Mary against him. She knew that 
Mr. Painson, in his anxiety for Janet, 
would be frequently at Rookstone ; she 
could only trust that all would be ordered 
for the best. 

Mary came downstairs disconsolately 
when her mother forbade her to enter 
Janet's bedroom. She was sure Richard 
did not intend to leave Rookstone. She 
had heard him arranging plans with Mr. 
Painson which must occupy several days. 
How then could she avoid seeing and 
speaking to her cousin ? 

" I wish mamma would have had me 
with her," she said. " I want to obey her 
advice strictly, and yet I seem to be put 
into the way of temptation." 

She strolled out on the terrace. Christy 



THE WA VERLET A VENUE. 113 

was teasing the peacocks, making them fly 
so as to shake out their feathers. He said : 

" I want to make a fan for TnaTmrnfl- 
Eichard won't mind my having these, 
though I suppose they are aU his now." 
His joyous fece looked serious, and the 
little fellow sighed. 

" You poor, dear little thing !" Mary 
stooped and kissed him. " If it were only 
the feathers, we would not mind who took 
them from us." 

" Now, that's where girls know nothings 
I just should mind anybody taking my 
particular own feathers which IVe always 
had to play witL Look, here comea 
Richard. I say, let us go and ask him if- 
if I mayn't have them." 

Here was one of the temptations Mary 
dreaded. 

VOL. I. 8 



U4 ROOKSTONE. 



.'* No, Chris dear, come this way. I'll show 
you such a lovely squirrel in that old oak 
in the copse-bit. Won't you come ? Very 
well, then, I shall go alone." 

She saw Richard hastening towards 

them. If he joined her, she should forget 

all her good resolutions. She turned away 

and lefb the terrace. 

 

Eichaxd Wolferston bit his lips ; lie 

could not mistake Maiy's action. She 

had waited till he came ahnost within 

speaking distance, and then had pointedly 

avoided him. Christy tn up to him. 

" I say, Cousin Richard, do you mind 
my taking these feathers ?" 

" Where is Mary gone ?" his cousin 
asked. 

" She said she was going to look at a 
squirrel, but she never thought about 



THE WA VERLEY A VENUE. 115 . 

going till I told her you were coming. 
Why " . he looked earnestly in his cousin's 
face . " you are quite red, Richard ; don't 
be angry with Mary; TU go and teU her 
you want her, if you like." 

" Don't be a little fool " . ^Richard spoke 
savagely, and caught his yoimg cousin 
by the shoulder. "Who said I wanted 
her r 

The boy made no attempt to struggle. 
He was so utterly surprised that for 
a moment his busy little tongue was 
silenced. 

He had been Richard's pet and play- 
mate, and he thought his cousin must be 
joking. A glance at his frowning forehead 
and compressed Hps taught him his mis- 
take, and rousing himself, he tried to 
ahate off the rough grasp on his arm. 

8.2 



116 ROOKSTOSE. 



" Let me go, you never dared speak so to 
me when papa was alive/' said the fearless 
child, his blue eyes looking as stem as 
Janet's. " You need not be afiraid I shall 
fetch Mary. No, I amnot going to tell tales 
of you" . ^for he saw a change in his 
cousin's ice, and with childlike quickness 
of perception, interpreted it rightly. " I 
shall leave her to find out for herself how 
cross you can be. Janet was right after 
aU." 

Something in the words affected 
Richard, He let the child go, and 
walked into the house . *^ Janet was right 
after aU !" 

He had gone into the study, and he 
sat deliberately down in his dead cousin's 
high-backed chair to think out the child's 
meaning. 



THE WA VERLET A VENUE. 117 

" But I am a fool to worry myself 
about the nonsense of a baby like Christy" 
. ^he got up and moved towards the door 
. " I did not need to be told that 
Janet dislikes me ; because I would not 
submit to her proud and interfering spirit. 
Neither she nor her mother have ever 
shown me due courtesy. Why should I 
hesitate to plead my own cause with 
Mary? The only advocate I had with 
her is gone now. Poor Christopher I I 
suppose few people would believe how 
heartily I wish him back again. That 
sanctified wife of his will be civil to me 
to serve her own purposes, but she will 
leave no stone imtumed to keep Mary 
from me . for what else was she huiTying 
away with her from Rookstone ? She 
must have poisoned the dear little thing's 



118 ROOKSTONE. 



mind to some purpose, too, for her to avoid 
me aa she did just now." 

He stopped with his hand on the lock 
of the door. Had he been deceiving him- 
self all this time ? And was Mary really 
indifferent to him ? "I was never de- 
ceived in a woman yet," he said, "and 
such a nature as hers cannot be misunder- 
stood. She's a sweet, loving, yielding child 
at present ; but no doubt her puritanical 
mother has infused a strong ingredient of 
duty, which is another name for prejudice. 
Let her do her worst ; I defy Mrs- 
Wolferston herself to rob n\e of Mary if 
I am determined to win her " . ^he smiled 
proudly . "but I don't see why the poor 
little darling [should go through any 
mental torture on the subject. I said 
I would not attempt to win her affections ; 



TEE WA 7ERLET A VENUE. 119 

but that was on condition that Mrs. Wol- 
ferston accepted my terms; she has not. 
Mary's manner tells me that her mother 
has not remained passive in the matter ; 
the poor chUd has plainly been told to 
avoid me. Look to yourself, Mrs. Wol- 
ferston ; you have taken the first step. By 
all means. I follow your example." 

There was a bright, eager Hght in his 
eyes as he crossed the saloon. Christy was 
lying on one of the divans playing with 
Loulou. The sight of the dog made 
Richard doubt for a moment whether 
Mary was not nearer than he imagined, 
but he did not choose to ask any more 
questions. It was in one way a comfort 
to have oflfended Christy, there was no dan- 
ger that the child would follow hinL The 
left-hand boundary of the lawn which 



120 ROOKSTONE. 



stretxjhed out at the foot of the terrace 
was a long range of conservatory. Beyond 
this the ground sloped gently to the en- 
trance of a long alley, or rather avenue, of 
lofty elm-trees ; the avenue itself was 
narrow, so that the meeting branches over- 
head took the form of an acutely-pointed 
Gothic arch, filled just now with the 
tender green atmosphere of "leafy June." 
Here and there were seats almost hidden 
behind the massive tree trunks, and rather 
more in fi'ont, fiill of exquisite light and 
shade as stray simbeams glinted down on 
them from between the leaves, were 
quaintly-sculptured, greystone statues, re- 
presenting characters from the Waverley 
novels. 

Richard looked down this cool inviting 
vista, but there was no trace of Mary. At 



THE WA VERLEY A VENUE. 121 

its farther end, however, he saw the small 
iron gate open. He knew that this led to 
the flower-garden. He believed that Mary 
had retraced her steps from the copse-bit, 
and would be found here. Love's instincts 
are usually to be trusted, and with all 
Eichaxd Wolferston's errors his love for 
Mary was true, and so far as his lights 
guided him, unselfish. 

" I wonder where my grandfather picked 
up these quaint old bits of stonework," he 
said, looking at Ivanhoe, spear in hand, 
with the blank shield of the Disinherited 
Knight ; " one would fancy they must 
have been new when he put them here, 
and yet they bear all the traces of anti- 
quity. Exposure to the weather, and the 
constant drip from the trees, I suppose, 
eats away the surface of the stone." He 



122 ROOKSTONE. 



hurried on past Rob Roy, in his bonnet 
and kilt, past the Lowland-garbed bent 
figure of Old Mortality, almost past a stout, 
stalwart man-at-arms, no other than that 
dear fiiend of boyhood, Dugald Dalgetty, 
but he stopped here suddenly. 

Out of sight, screened on one side by the 
square block on which the figure stood, and 
by a huge elm trunk on the other, safely 
sheltered in the deep cool shadow, Mary 
lay on the grass, seemingly asleep. She 
looked so very lovely lying there ; her fair 
hair, half escaping from the black riband 
that tied it, harmonised so perfectly with 
the green shadow, spangled with golden 
flecks and sparkling down between the 
leaves to rest on the virginal head at the 
foot of the stone pedestal Her hat lay 
beside her, half fiUed with wild roses-it 



TEE WA VERLE7 A VENUE. 123. 



was plain she had been to the copse- 
bit. 

But Mary was not sleeping. Richard 
had walked on the turf, which reached on 
either side as far as the wire fence, dividing 
the avenue from the park, and she had 
not heard his footsteps. While he still 
stood gazing with exquisite pleasure at the 
picture she made lying there beside the 
grim old soldier, she started up and suddenly 
faced him. A look of terror and then of 
imeasiness clouded her lovely face. 

He did not attempt to take her hand ; he 

spoke in his gentlest voice; he saw that 

she must be soothed if he would have her 

listen to him. 

" I have been looking for you," he said. 

Mary blushed and hesitated ; then she 

raised her eyes fearlessly : " I must go to 



124 ROOKSTONE, 



deax mamma. Do you know Janet is in a 
very anxious state ?" 

She spoke with a coldness that might 
have checked his ardour, but Richard Wol- 
ferston was too practised a man of the 
world not to read this innocent yoimg girl 
rightly . ^rightly, that is to say, because 
they loved each other, for fearless innocence 
will sometimes prove a hard enigma to mere 
worldliness, without the help of that sure 
sjnnpathy which unlocks all hearts. 

" Yes, the doctor told me so, it is very sad, 
I have been looking for you ever since." He 
stopped to see if her attention was gained, 
but she glanced furtively along the avenue, 
as if she still meditated flight. "After 
what Mr. Bannocks told me, I felt anxious 
to see your mother " . ^this was true ; he 
was returning to the house with this in- 



THE WA VERLET A VEN UE. 125 

tention, when the sight of Mary on the 
terrace put everything else out of his head 
. " but perhaps it may be as well to send 
her a message through you." 

Mary's face was fully turned towards him 
now ; her self-distrust was lulled to sleep . 
there could be no harm in spealdng to him 
about anything that might be important to 
dear suffering Janet. 

But Eichaxd did not mean his interview 
to end under the elm-trees. 



126 rookstone: 



CHAPTER XI. 



A WARNING. 



"^^ npiHE doctor said " . aa he spoke he 
walked slowly on towaids the 
little iron gate at the fiirther end of the 
avenue, and Mary found herself obliged to 
follow . " that he thinks your sister's illness 
wiU be a tedious one, but that he does 
not consider her symptoms dangerous ; his 
anxiety seems to be quite as active on 
your motiier's accoimt." 

He saw the little start of fear, and he 



A WARNING. 127 



felt that she drew nearer in her eagerness 
to listen. 

"After all that has lately happened, 
Mrs. Wolferston will be unable to bear 
the fatigue of such continued nursing. 
The doctor says that your maid Thomson 
is also a very delicate person. Now, my 
dear child, will it not be better to send to 
London for a professional nurse at once ? 
Only tell me what you wish, and I wiU 
go to town myself, and choose a desirable 
person." 

The tears were coming so fast that she 
hung down her head to hide them. This 
was the man her mother and Janet had 
thought selfish. She had heard that sud- 
den prosperity tested men more truly than 
sudden adversity. This was only the 
Becond time she had talked with him alone 



128 ROOKSTONE. 



since the reading of the will, and how full 
of nobleness and generosity she had found 
him! 

He was growing impatient for her to 
speak, but he was too wise to hurry her. 
The avenue was walled in from the flower 
garden by a tall yew hedge on either side of 
the gate, and over this was an arch of rose- 
trees ; on the right, lying back beyond the 
gate, was a small bower covered also with 
clustering roses. The very spot for lovers. 

Richard had remembered this pleasant 
resting-place, when he found Mary beside 
the old statue, and with the prompt de- 
cision and iron will which, when united, 
enable men to rule others at their pleasure, 
he had resolved that the story of his love 
should be spoken here. 

When they reached the gate, he 



A WARNING. 129 



opened it and held it for her to pass 
through. 

" Well !" he said, at last, for she stood 
still and silent. " What do you think of 
my plan T 

" I don't know how to thank you . you 
are so very kind ; but I am a&aid dear 
mamma would not like any stranger to go 
near Janet ; perhaps if I ask her again, she 
might let me help her." 

" She will not do that," he answered. 
He meant that he shotild not consent to 
such a risk for Mary. " But is there no 
poor woman among the cottagers used to 
illness ? I thought every village had its 
wise woman." 

Mary stood thinking. " There is Kitty 
Robbins," she said, at last. " She is a cross 
old woman, and never cares what she says, 

VOL. I. 9 



130 ROOKSTONE. 



but I believe she is a very good nurse ; only 
I am afraid she is stiU lame from an acx^i- 
dent." 

" Sit down a few minutes and rest while 
you think some of the people over. That 
Kitty looks a perfect old hag ; I can^t fancy 
your mother would like her." 

He went into the bower, and she fol-^ 
lowed him and seated herself on the low 
bench which rau round it. Eichard re- 
mained standing, his gaze fixed on her 
drooping eyes* 

" I can't think of any one else," she said; 
"but had I not better go at once to 
mamma, and ask her if she wants any- 
body r 

" Listen, Mary. You must try to rely on 
yourself, and spare her the trouble and worry 
of judging ; her life may depend on it." He 



A WARNING. 131 



took her hand, and in her trembling anxiety 
she was too much overwrought to withdraw 
it. " The doctor made no * if ' about it ; he 
said, * Mrs. Wolferston's health will give 
way/ What use is there in consulting 
your mother? she is much too good to 
disobey the doctor. If you cannot think of 
some villager, I believe I ought to secure 
a nurse from London as soon as possible.'' 

" K Eatty is not still lame, I know 
mamma would rather have her than a 
stranger; I remember when we all had 
measles she sent for her to help nurse 
us, and dear papa was fond of her." 

" Very well, so be it," Richard said, with 

an impatient sigh . -he was glad to get the 

subject disposed of, and yet he had a special 

dislike to Eatty Bobbins. 

" We will walk over to the lodge and 

9.2 



132 ROOKSTONE. 



see lier ; and now, Mary" . seating himself 

beside her . " I want to know how I have 
been so imfortimate as to offend you." 

"You have not offended me." In her 
surprise at his sudden accusation she forgot 
her resolutions, and looked at him with the 
old sweet frankness. 

" You are sure I have not ? . you don't 
know how happy you have made me ; but 
I want you to make me stiU happier . ^to 
promise me that you never will be offended 
with me, but will let me do all T can to 
show my love for you." 

She tried to draw away her hand, but he 
held it firmly. " Mary," he said, softly . 
the tone stirred her young heart with a 
wild throb it had never before felt . "I 
want you to love me, not only as your 
cousin, but as a friend who will give all 



A WARNING. 133 



his life to serve you. I want you to pro- 
mise to be my friend too . to cling to me, let 
who will try and prejudice you against me, 
for I have no Mend but you, Mary." 

But the promise did not come as easily as 
he expected.. At first she refused resolutely 
to resume her former tone of intimacy with 
him, without consulting her mother. 

Then he put forth his great powers of 
pleasing to gain his point, and his real love 
for her helped him. He urged upon her the 
cruelty of distracting her mother's thoughts 
from Janet, and, at the same time, the torture 
she inflicted on him by any doubt of hei' 
feelings towards him. Duty struggled for a 
time, but his tender words and looks were not 
to be resisted. Before Mary left the bower 
she had confessed to Richard that she loved 
him better than any one else in the world. 



134 ROOKSTONE. 



and she had promised never to avoid his 
presence, or to believe evil of him. 

" There is much about me, Mary," . ^he 
drew her fondly towards him . fondly, but 
gently, for he felt the little fluttering heart's 
terror . " which I will explain to you some 
day ; now I am content to be misunder- 
stood, because I am too proud to justify 
myself; but I am not afraid of you, Mary 
. I trust you ftdly ; you have all my hap- 
piness in your keeping now. You know as 
little what that is as you do of my love for 
yoiL Come, my own darling, shall we go 
to Kitty Bobbins T 

That walk through the park was like a 
delicious dream to Mary. Recollections 
of her mother's warning words came back 
and troubled her joy, but she soon chased 
them away. 




A WARNING. 135 



Eichard had said that no one understood 

him-and, under the speU of his dark 
yes, she could not disbeUeve . it was a 

spell that had magic in it. Mary seemed 

drawn to him by an irresistible influence, 

^nd yet she feared him : she knew she 

dared not disobey him, even at the risk of 

her mother's anger. 

They were just in sight of the cottage, 
when Richard stopped. " I shall wait for you 
here, my own ; I don't like that old woman ; 
she wiU most probably make me angry." 

Kitty Robbins was in the garden water- 
ing her flowers when Mary lifted the latch 
of the little gate. 

" Good evening, Kitty ; I'm so glad to 
see you about again ; then your ankle was 
not sprained really ?" 

" If 'ee means there wur any sham about 



136 ROOKSTONE. 



it. Muss Mary, ye be altogether wrong ; my 

flit wur strained and bruised enougb for 

six, and there be folks as 'ud be sittin' still 

now, a cryin' over it, but Kitty bean*t 
one o' thay as frets over spilt milk/" 

Mary smiled, for Kitty had the reputa- 
tion of a professed grumbler. "Well, 
Kitty, I daxesay it was very pabM, ad 
Tm glad it is better. Are you well enough 
to come up and help mamma nurse Janet V 
And then came the explanation of the doc- 
tor's fears. 

While she listened, Kitty stood looking 
across the park. "Til come up t' the 
house," she said abruptly. "But Muss 
Mary, what be ye doin' wi' that cousin o' 
yomn ? K madam knowed what I do, it's 
not a young pretty piece of innocence as. 
'ee be as she'd trust to be slathered over 




A WARNING. 137 



with all the flattering lies he puts he's 
tongue to . " 

" Silence, Kitty !" Mary's eyes flashed 
with indignation. " Is that the way you 
speak of your new landlord V . 

" Landlord ! bless ye, child, why your 
dear good papa made over this cottage to 
I for life. What have a landlord to do wi' 
I? and it's not zackly of heself I wur 
thinkin' ; he be a stranger hereabouts, 'ee 
knaws. Muss Mary, for your life's sake 
dwoant 'ee love he, dwoant 'ee trust he, 
dwoant 'ee marry he. There be bad blood 
in he and his'n. Bide a wee, miss, and 
listen." The old woman's manner had 
changed from its usual cynical snarl to one 
of earnest warning. Mary was impelled to 
listen, jagainst her will. " I had a darter 
once, a rare pretty gal, not like you, may 



138 ROOKSTONE. 



99 



be, for she's eyes wur as dark as the new 
squire s and she's hair to match ; but all 
for that her wur a beauty, and as good as 
gould. Yolu- grandmother. Lady Dawson, 
tuk a deal o' notice o' Minnie, and for 
aU of it her wur that modest and sweet, 
making no accoimt o' sheself Well, Mas- 
ter Charles, that wur the fiither o' yoru- . ^ 
she jerked her thumb towards the way by 
which Mary had come. "him never left 
my gal in peace tiU him made she say she 
loved he. I dwoant say him meant real harm 
by she. Him knowed hiu- had been bred 
wi' a good name to uphold ; but, Muss Mary, 
I dwoant think neither (as hur did, poor 
soul !) as him meant to marry she. Him 
just found he's time heavy on his hands 
when t' old squire kep' he fro' Lunnon, and 
my Minnie lightened it. I wm- at Staple 
Cross nussing, and Jem's father wur too 




A WARNING. 139 



great a gowk to keep the young man 
fro' coming to the Lodge more oft than a 
ahonld ha' corned, if Fd been to home." 

" But you said just now, no harm hap- 
pened to Minnie," Mary said, doubtfully. 

'^I said, muss, no harm come to she's 
good name ; none coTild ha' come to my 
Minnie ; but if e'er a man killed a young 
girl in cold blood, that wur Charles Wol- 
ferston. Him taught the poor lass to love 
he better than all the world beside, and 
him went away from Rookstone wi'out so 
much as a look or a token." 

" Ah, but that might not have been his 
own faiilt." 

" Come, now, dwoant turn nxe agen 'ee, 
too, dwoant 'ee now, Muss Mary. I tell 
ye," she went on, fiercely, " him wur mar- 
ried a few weeks after ; him only cared to 
look at Minnie's sweet face till he'd some* 



140 ROOKSTONE. 



thing else to pleasure he. He broke her 
heaxt^ that wur bad enow, for she never 
held up she's head after she heard the 
news ; and do 'ee think, Muss Mary, it wur 
right to set a modest girl up to be talked of, 
as him did, by running after she for ever. 
He wur a wicked raskil, and he had a 
mother's curse. A poor girl. Muss Mary, 
may be as good as gould, but hur mim keep 
to her likes if hur will na make gossip and 
evil speech about she. I telled ye this o' 
purpose for a warning ; ye may guess Kitty 
dwoant go bragging easily o' her darter's 
sorrow. The new squire comes o' a bad 
father, and a bad mother too, I b'lieve. 
Dwoant 'ee love he, neither trust he. 
He'll biing 'ee to bitter sorrow if 'ee do." 

She turned her back abruptly on the 
frightened girl, and disappeared into the 
cottage. 



CALLED TO ACCOUNT. 141 



CHAPTEE XII. 



CALLED TO ACCOUNT. 



"myrES. WOLFEESTON was glad to ac- 
cept Kitty's help, and after a day 
or two of anxiety a change for the better 
took place in Janet. Even the doctor, 
although loth to lose his patient, was 
obliged to say he thought she might be 
moved in a week. 

Mr. Painson was to quit Eookstone that 
day, and Mrs. Wolferston sent for him 
before he started to tell him the good 





^. ,.f?': : ' lircfKire the new 


1 . '. ' 


'a >t cUi invalid. 

1 


1 


iiii hiind to him as he 



' > I 



I ..I'l* 



. it 



!u 1 ." di'easing-roonL 
iiiu walking about London 
>hu Haid, brightly. " I am 
. I > Li> l^egin our new life in the 

, liLlli-- hotme you wrote to TnamTna. 

i.viuii> h<5 went away he had settled 

oiili Mi4. VVolferston that^ if the amend- 

UK ul iu Janet continued, they were to 

i.il^ii |j(fMN3HHion of their new abode that 

\Uv vvtHik. 

' I (' I don't find Miss Mary in the sa- 
luini/' llu5 old gentleman said, as he reached 
U(M door, " will you make my best respects 
In linr, and my apologies for scant cere- 




CALLED TO ACCOUNT, ua 



"I will send for her. Kitty''. Mrs. 
Wolferston called the old woman out of 
her bed-room . "will you tell Miss Mary 
1 want her T 

Kitty gave a sarcastic smile, and limped 
towards the door. 

" I won't trouble Mrs. Bobbins," said 
the lawyer. "Perhaps I may find Miss 
Mary with Mr. Kichard. I miist see him 
before I start." 

Kitty turned round with a grin. 

" That 'ee will, sir, if 'ee looks sharp, 
I saw 'em go down the statty walk toge- 
ther as close as peas, as I wur standing t' 
end o' long gallery." 

Mrs. Wolferston turned so very white 
that even the biisy old man, full of his 
deeds and plans, saw there was something 
amiss. 



144 ROOKSTONE. 



He stood looking at her. 

She forced a smile. ''I am not veiy 
well," she said. "Will you kindly send 
Mary to me when you have said good-bye 
to her?" 

He bowed and went away. 

Janet's pale [&ce flushed crimson. 
** Kitty/' she said, sharply, " are you sure 
you saw Miss Mary just now ?" 

The keen-eyed old woman knew that her 
words had made what she would have 
termed "a caddie." She had no actual 
dislike to Mary, but she took a secret 
pleasure in revenging herself for the in- 
difference paid to her warning. 

" It mim ha' bin she," she said, dog- 
gedly ; " it win* the new squire safe eno', 
he and Muss Mary be alius side by side, 
beantthev?" 




CALLED TO ACCOUNT. 145 

'* Kitty " . Mrs. Wolferston spoke almost 
as severely as Janet; she disliked asking 
questions about her own chUd, and yet she 
wanted to fathom Elitty's knowledge, and 
to close her mouth towards others . *^ you 
cannot know much about Miss Mary since 
you have been shut up here." 

" At your pleasure, Madam Wolferston ; 
but what I said to her I say to you without 
fear nor favour. He beant the man I'd let 
my girl choose for a husband. He be come 
of a bad father and a bad mother, and he 
be likely to come to a bad end heself." 

" Hush, hush, Kitty ! You must not 
speak against your new master. Miss Mary 
is far too young to think of marriage, and 
you should not couple her name with her 
cousin's. Pray don't say anything more 
about it." 

VOL. I. 10 



146 ROOKSTONE. 



Kitty went down to the housekeeper's 
room to get her tea, wagging her old head 
in protest against the madam's blindness. 
Meantime, Mr. Painson was hiurying along 
the Waverley avenue to overtake the 
lovers. He did not reach them till they 
had got to the end. They had been too 
deep in talk to hear his approach till he 
was close to them. 

Mr. Painson was a very incurious old 
gentleman sometimes, although, when need 

required it, he could be as observant as a 

hawk. He saw Mary's flushed face as she 

turned round, and he thought she and her 

cousin had quarrelled. 

He gave her her mother's message. 

" I thought I should find you with Mr. 
Richard," he added, "and if I were you. 
Miss Mary, I would go to mamma at once, 




CALLED TO ACCOUNT. 147 



for she seemed ready to faint when I left 
her.'' 

The truth flashed upon Mary ; she looked 
imploringly at Richard. 

** I dare not go," she whispered, " unless 
you tell me what to say." 

Mr. Painson looked from one to the 
other. He had noticed during this week 
that they were often together, and 
although personally he did not care much 
about Richard Wolferston, he had settled 
in his own mind that his dear late Mend's 
widow was a wiser woman than he took 
her for, and meant to make the best she 
could out of a bad business, by her young- 
est daughter's marriage with the new owner 
of Rookstone. 

Richard's brows contracted ; he took 
Mary's hand and drew it through his arm. 

10.2 



148 EOOKSTONE. 



" My cousin has promised to become my 
wife, Mr. Painson, and she fears that her 
mother is too much taken up with Janet 
to sympathise with her." 

Mary's blushes deepened. This was not 
the truth, and yet she feared to contradict 
Eichard. 

Mr. Painson smiled gravely. 

" Young ladies are always difl&dent," he 
said ; " but if I were Miss Mary I shouldn't 
keep the matter from my mother." 

" She has no intention of doing so ; we 
are simply waiting irntU Mrs. Wolferston's 
anxiety for Janet is ended." 

Richard spoke very haughtily, and the 
old lawyer felt all his former doubt and 
dislike rekindle. 

"I should say that is quite over," he 



CALLED TO ACCOUNT. 14& 

said, coldly; "they are going to London 
this day week." 

He bade them farewell, and went away 
. ^troubled . he scarcely knew why. It 
seemed to him that Mary was too yoimg for 
Richard Wolferston ; but girls of seventeen 
often marry men of five-and-thirty ; and 
then Mr. Painson found he was late for his 
train, and forgot aU else. 

Mary had paid daily visits to her sister 
since she began to mend, but the subject 
of Richard Wolferston had been mutually 
avoided. Each time she had felt guilty 
and ill at ease. Richard had told her not 
to speak of anything that had passed be- 
tween them until he gave her leave to do 
so, but she had been imhappy in this con- 

ceahnent. 

" You are sUly to be so Brightened, my 



W) ROOKSTONE. 



darling," he said, when Mr. Painson turned 
away. " Why should your mother object 
to our engagement ? for remember, Mary, it 
is a solemn engagement, which you cannot 
set aside without breaking your word." 

" I don't want to set it aside," she said, 
sadly ; " but oh, Richard, if you knew 
what it is to have to confess to mamma 
tliat I have deceived her, you would have 
some pity." 

" You have not deceived her," he said, 
smiling : " I advised you to keep this from 

her because of her present anxiety ; it would 
have been very selfish to tease her with it 
when Janet was so ill ; don't tell her now 
imless you like . only that old chatterbox 
is sure to do it." 

" If she does not know it already I need 
not tell her then, but you will tell her, won't 




CALLED TO ACCOUNT. 161 



you, Richard ? I do so want her to know, 
although I dread telling her myself." 

" Little coward," he said, fondly, " one 

would fancy your mother an ogress." 

Mary knew the true reason of her fears . 
she had never told Richard of her mother's 
warning, she feared it might stir up strife 
between them ; but it was this disobe- 
dience that rankled so sorely. 

When she entered the dressing-room she 
saw that all was discovered. 

Kitty Robbins's knowing smile would 
have been enough, but her mother's sad 
pale face crushed away all the courage left 
in the young girl. 

** You can go into my bedroom, Kitty, 
and shut the door," said Mrs. Wolfer- 
ston. 

It might have been better for Mary if 



152 ROOKSTONE. 



her mother had seen her alone. Janet was. 
the first to speak ; . 

** Mary, how could you do it ? Is it 
possible that you have been spending all 
your time with Richard Wolferston ?" 

Mary's spirit roused. Before her mother 
could interpose, she answered her sister 
haughtily. 

" Let me speak, Janet," Mrs. Wolferston 
said, so sadly, that Mary's pride melted. 
" Mary, I only ask you to be perfectly 
honest and candid. I have left you toa 
much to yourself during this week, and I 
am therefore partly to blame. Has Richard 
been your companion often T 

Under Janet's stem, reproving eyes,. 
Mary would not soften outwardly. 

**Yes, . ^we have been together every 
day." 



GALLED TO ACCOUNT. 15a 

*'But did I not warn you, Mary?" 

For a moment the sad thrill in her 
mother's voice had almost conquered ; but 
there is no nature so stubborn as a 
weak one at bay. Richard's words, " You 
are the only fiiend I have . no one 
understands me," came back to harden 
her. 

" You warned me, manmia, because you 
think Richard very diflferent from what he 
really is ; please not to speak against him 
to me, I have promised not to listen, and I 
cannot : you can separate me from him, of 
course, but nothing can ever change my 
feelings to him now." 

She stood erect, her feet firmly pressed 
on the floor, resolved that nothing should 
move or conquer her. 

There was a pause, and then her mother 



154 ROOKSTONE. 



looked at Janet, who lay back exliaiisted 
on her sofa. "Come with me into your 
own room, Mary; Janet is not strong 
enough to bear discussion at present," 

Mary followed silently, while her mother 
walked slowly along the gaUery, utterly 
confiised by this new mood in her yoimgest 
daughter. Mary had been fretfiil and 
wayward when thwarted, never stubborn. 
Her mother prayed earnestly to be guided 
rightly ; it seemed to her impossible that 
in so short a time matters could have gone 
far enough to engage Mary's affections irre- 
trievably. If she had known the hours 
spent in those few days in that heart-to- 
heart communion which binds people more 
closely than months of casual visits, she 
might have given up hope. 

" Mary, you must answer me one ques- 



CALLED TO ACCOUNT. 155 

tion. Did you tell Richard I wished you 
to avoid him V 

" No." 

" I hoped you would have done this." 

*' It would have been useless. It would 
only have made him angry with you." 

A flush came into Mrs. Wolferston's face. 
" I would rather endure his anger than 
your disobedience," she said. 

"Mamma!" . her passion burst from 
Mary at last ; she clasped both hands toge- 
ther and then flimg them out wildly to- 
wards her mother. "how can you be so 
cruel to me ? do you think I have not 
struggled ? Do you think I have been 
happy all this wlule ? I did avoid Richard 
at first, and that only made him own his 
love for me. I cannot tell you what I feel, 
mother; it would be impossible. I will 



156 BOOESTOSK 



nerer liide anjrdung fiom joa again. I 
hsLYB prcMniaed to be Bidiaid'a wifis, bat 
anty with your oMisent''* 

She flung ber anns round ber mother, 
and bid her &oe on her shoulder, bat ber 
caresses were not returned. This orud blow 
bad oome too suddenly to be at once re- 
ceived with resignaticMi. The yielding her 
daughter up to such a man as her cousin 
seemed impossible to Mrs. Wolferston. She 
forgave Mary her deceit more readily than 
her obstinacy. ''At least I may ask this 
of you," she said, when both bad remained 
silent for a time ; " during the rest of our 
stay at Bookstone promise me, Mary, only 
to see Bichard with my leave and in my 
presence !" 

Mary hesitated. She was willing, in 
the repentance her mother s sad &ce was 



GALLED TO ACCOUNT. 157 



fast awakening, to make some atonement 
for the sorrow she had caused, but she 
feared Eichard's anger. " Then let me stay- 
up here with Janet," she said ; " if I go 
down again, I dare not refuse Richard any- 
thing he asks me." 

Her mother sighed. It had come to 
this already ! Would any length of 

absence wear out his influence ? And 
then, when she remembered the wonderful 
fascination of his manner, she grew hope- 
ful, and thought that perhaps at Mary's 
age the old proverb, " Out of sight out of 
mind," might be realised. 



158 ROOKSTONE. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

THE DRESSING-ROOM WINDOWS. 

XT was a weary time for Mary. 

For the first few days Richard was 
left without any explanation, to vent his 
anger and discontent as he liked. Christy 
had gone on a visit to Mrs. Webb until 
the moving was over, and, all things con- 
sidered, he was well out of the way, for his 
cousin was by no means in an amiable 
humour. 

He was angry with Mary for submitting 



TEE DRESSING-ROOM WINDOWS. 15^ 



to this imprisonment, as he termed it; 
furious with Mrs. Wolferston for daring to 
oppose him openly . ^he had not given her 
credit for so much courage, and he was 
therefore surprised when, on the evening 
of the fourth day, he found her waiting for 
him in the saloon. He bowed to her, and 
was passing out, on to the terrace. 

"I want to speak to you," she said, 
quietly ; " can you spare me a few 
minutes T 

He sat down. At that moment he 
almost hated Mrs. Wolferston. 

''I dare say you have guessed that 
Mary has told .me what has happened, and 
I must tell you frankly that after the 
assurance you gave me, I was surprised and 
grieved to hear what had passed between 
you and her." 



ICO ROOKSTONE. 



He smiled : he was not afraid of Mrs. 
Wolferstx)n's influence with Mary, and he 
was resolved that she should not irritate 
him. 

"I gave you that assurance when I 
asked you to remain here as mistress, Mrs. 
Wolferston; but" . and he smiled with 
the winning sweetness which always made 
him hard to resist . " why will you harden 
yourself against me and against what I 
believe to be inevitable ? You may find a 
better husband for Mary, but you wiU not 
find any one who will make her happier. 
We love each other truly. Surely you wish 
your child's happiness T he said, earnestly. 

Every word he uttered told her his 
power, and if she felt it, what hope could 
she cherish of fireeing Mary from its influ- 
ence. 



/^ 



THE DRESSING-ROOM WINDOWS. 161 

It was difficult to believe that those 
dark, soft eyes, looking so eaxnestly into 
hers, had been all aflame with hate and 
anger only an hour ago. 

Mrs. Woherston scarcely knew how to 
answer him. Had she been too harsh in 
her judgment ? - and might not this 
marriage prove . as her husband had said 
. the means of reforming Richard ? But 
then, again, she felt sorely troubled . she 
knew so little of Richard WoHerston. 

"I wish Mary's happiness most ear- 
nestly," she said, at last ; " but, even at the 
risk of annoying you, I must speak openly. 
You and I take different views of happiness 
. I would choose her happiness in the next 
world rather than in this." 

He sneered . ^he could not help it . and 
Mrs. Wolferston saw that he did so. 

VOL. I. 11 



162 ROOKSTONE. 



\ 




" Let me finish," she said. " I do not 
presume to judge you or any one, but my 
daughter has been accustomed to outward 
observances, which I believe to be essential 
to her through her whole life ; you think 
nothing of these things, you would proba- 
bly teach her that they are valueless; I 
cannot willingly give her up to such teach- 
ing; this is my objection to you, and^ 
besides this, I feel that you have been 
scarcely generous to take advantage of her 
extreme youth and inexperience." 

He got up and walked the length of the 
room before he answered. He was puzzled ; 
he had judged Mrs. Wolferston fi:om a 
wrong standard. He had not thought she 
would have spoken so frankly. 

** After all," he said, at last, " you must 
be hard on me. Remember what 



THE DBESSING-ROOM WINDOWS. 165 

Mary is, and how dearly I love her. Be- 
sides, the old proverb says, ^Alls fair in 
love.' I do not press for a speedy 
marriage, and I promise you at once that I 
wai never interfere with her religious no- 
tions. If you continue to keep us apart, 
you will make us both very unhappy with 
no good result. Mary will not break her 
promise." 

Mrs. Wolferston knew this abeady, and 
her perplexity increased to positive torture. 
The burden of widowhood was indeed 
heavy now. 

^' I separate you most unwillingly," she 
said, so sadly that even Richard could not 
disbelieve. " But think how young Mary 
is, she is only seventeen. In a year you 
may no longer wish to make her your 
wife ; remember how short a time you have 

11.2 



164 ROOKSTONE. 



known her. A year of separation will 
test you both, and will give me a better 
security, so far as regards her, a^gainst 
the danger I dread." 

A year! Why, these four days had 
nearly killed him. No, he would not, and 
could not endure it. But Mrs. Wolferston 
foimd his anger far easier to resist than 
his entreaties, and finally he submitted, on 
condition that he was to have one farewell 
interview in her mother's presence before 
Mary left Rookstone. 

Then he bade Mrs. Wolferston a hasty 
and rather sullen good night, and went 
down the teri-ace steps into the park. 

He had made an immense effort at self- 
control, and now his anger passed all 
bounds. He hurried across the park with 
long swinging strides. He reached the 




THE DRESSING-ROOM WINDOWS. 165 

lake, but he passed round it and climbed 
the rising ground on the other side. The 
trees had been thinned out to give a good 
view of the house from this spot, and 
Richard flung himself down on the grass. 
There was stiU light enough to make out 
the windows. Mary's room he knew was 
on the other side, but she was probably 
with Janet, and those three windows 
exactly opposite to him represented the 
length of Mrs. Wolferston's rooms. 

A year ! he would not endure it. Wild 
ideas of inducing Mary to consent to a 
private marriage, of carrying her off 
whether she consented or not, crossed his 
excited brain; and yet he felt sure that 
Mary would not marry without her mother's 
blessing. One moment he laughed at such 
folly, and the next he half owned to him- 



166 ROOKSTONE. 



self that he should respect her the more for 
her firmness. 

The darkness grew fast, the surfitce of 
the lake dulled from the silver shimmer 
which had reflected the trees so clearly, 
lights began to twinkle over the distant 
house, but Richard Wolferston still lay on 
the grass above the lake, at war with him- 
6eLf and all the world. 

At last he had foimd a pure, innocent 
gu-1 who loved him truly, in whose love he 
might have the happiness of peace and 
rest ; for, like most men who have had to 
struggle for existence, Richard fancied 
that he longed for rest . ^blind to the fact 
that the excitement engendered by neces- 
sity had become a real source of enjoy- 
ment. 

^* I do not pretend to goodness," he said ; 



THE DRESSING-ROOM WINDOWS. 167 

^^what is it but a pretence at which the 
best player reaps the best reward ? but if I 
had Mary for a wife, I think I should feel 
more liking and sympathy for my fellow- 
creatures. She seems to send all harsh and 
-discordant thoughts away, she . but why do 
I say ^if ?' . she shall be my wife. I have 
had no ' ifs ' in my life as yet ; no man has 
who knows how to seize on opportunity and 
make her his fortune, instead of making 
for himself a life-long regret by his unready 
hesitation. Her mother urges her youth. 
Bah !" . ^he shrugged his shoulders with the 
foreign action inherited from his mother. 
** As if the cares of life being thrust on her 
so young . such cares, too, as I shall allow 
to burden her . could weigh down and 
.crush her bright youth as much as this 
.cruel barbarous separation. I can fancy 



168 EOOKSTONE. 

her there, boxed up with that precocious 
prude Janet, heavy-eyed and heavy-hearted, 
poor Kttle darling, perhaps just now crying 
bitterly over this precious covenant her 
mother has forced on me." 

In his renewed anger at having been 
conquered by a woman, he sprang to his 
feet, still keeping his eyes fixed on the 
house, now only a dark shapeless mass, 
blent with the surrounding foliage, dotted 
here and there with spots of light. As he 
gazed, a quick exclamation escaped him. 

At the comer occupied by Mrs. Wolfer- 
ston's three windows, there came a sudden 
brighter light, then one of the windows 
showed out plainly as if filled with 
flame. 

Almost before he had time to grasp the 
thought, the flame had spread on to the 



THE DRESSIJUrQ'ROOM WINDOWS. 16^ 

next window in a broad red glare that told 
its nature with fearful truth. 

Richard Wolferston did not stay to see 
what came next. His wonderful self- 
possession helped him now. The keeper's 
lodge was much nearer to him than the 
house, and he almost flew there ; he roused 
Jem Robbins, who was already snoring, . 
bade him ride like the wind to Staplecross 
for the parish engine, and then he turned 
and ran at full speed himself to the house. 

He found a group of female servants on 
the lawn, gazing up at the blazing comer 
of the building. The house was very old, 
and the flames were spreading rapidly 
among the dry joists and beams. " Where 
are Miss Mary and her mother ?" he cried. 

The women pointed to the saloon. As 
he reached the window he met the butler. 



170 ROOKSTONE. 



" We can't get the garden hose to reach 
80 high, sir, and water's scarce." 

In an instaat Richard's eagerness was 
gone, and he was cahn and collected. 
** Make all the women help you, Simpson, 
and form a chain to the lake; there is 
plenty of water there." 

But he had caught sight of Mary's white 
dress within the saloon, and the next 
moment he was beside her. 



FAREWELL TO ROOKSTONE. 171 



CHAPTER XIV. 

FAREWELL TO ROOKSTONE. 

lyyTRS. WOLFERSTON stood by her 
daughter, trying to calm her agita- 
tion. Even in that exciting moment 
Richard Wolferston saw how deathly white 
she looked, but he only glanced at her, and 
then lifted Mary in his arms. ^*Come," 
he said to her mother, " you are not safe 
here. Look ; the smoke is bursting through 
the ceiling already." 

Mrs. Wolferston sprang after him and 



172 ROOKSTONE. 



clasped his arm. " Janet ! will you save 
Janet ? The staircase is still safe. I have 
only just left it. I brought Mary down 
first; she dared not venture alone. The 
servants are wild with terror, only you can 
help me." 

She turned to re-enter the hall, but 
Richard held her back firmly. He replaced 
Mary in her chair. 

" Look !" he said. 

He opened the door just a little ; the 

smoke rushed in with blinding force. " No 

one dare trust the staircase now; follow 

me at once." 

He took up Mary again, and seemingly 

deaf to Mrs. Wolferston's agonised entrea^ 

ties, he caught her hand and dragged her 

after him. As they passed down the steps 

he saw the men bringing ladders, and 



FAREWELL TO ROOKSTONE. 173 

heard a cry of inquiry for Kitty. All the 
servants had thought Miss Jaaet safe with 
her mother in the saloon, but no one had 
troubled about Kitty Robbins. He laid 
Mary on the grass. She had fainted with 
terror. 

" Will you save Janet ?" said Mrs. Wol- 
ferston. 

" Do you see those windows one sheet of 
flame T said Eichard, sternly. 

" Yes, yes ! that is where she is." 

" And you ask me to plimge in there and 
rescue your daughter at the risk of my life. " 

" Oh, don't lose time. Yes, yes, any- 
thing !" she cried, in her almost frenzied 
anxiety. 

" If I bring Janet to you safe will you 
give me Mary for my wife ?" 

" Go, go. I will give you anything you 



174 ROOKSTONE, 



ask," she said. She pushed him away in 
frantic terror for her child's safety. 

He sprang up the steps at a bound. Two 
men had nearly reached the windows, but 
they were driven back by the smoke* 
Richard caught the last man by the collar 
and puUed him from the rung on which he 
. still stood, trying to get breath for another 
attempt. 

" Now, my men, with a will," he shouted^ 
" there's less flame at this fourth window ; 
move it there." 

The men obeyed with the rapidity that a 
strong wiU always exacts in moments of 
danger, and almost before it was steadied, 
Richard had sprung up the ladder, and had 
disappeared in the gulf of black smoke 
above. Till now all had been eager-tongued 
excitement. A deep, dead stillness sue- 



FAREWELL TO ROOKSTONE. 176^ 

ceeded. Tlie anxious crowd below held ita 
breath in the fearful expectation. 

Mrs. Wolferston stood a little way apart, 
her hands clasped, her whole soul poured out 
in fervent prayer that her darling might 
yet be spared. How slowly time passed 1 

The flames grew fiercer, and were spread- 
ing rapidly along the upper part of the house* 
The heat was so intense that only the men 
who held the ladder dared remain on the 
terrace. Through the black rolling masses 
tongues of flames leaped out, and then 
pyramids of sparks fell down, messengers 
to tell the havoc enacted within. 

Mrs. Wolferston's agony grew more than 
she could bear. She sank on her knees 
and covered her eyes with her hands. A 
loud cry from those near her, and she 
looked up. There was no one on the lad- 



176 ROOKSTONE. 



der; its top was hidden by flames that 
wreathed themselves round it as completely 
as the smoke had done when Eichard dis- 
appeared into it ; but something must have 
happened to cause this excitement. She 
started to her feet. 

The terrace was in broad hght now, and 
Eichard Wolferston was hurrying along it 
with one woman in his arms, and draggmg 
another by the hand. 

He placed the half-stifled girl beside Maiy. 

" You had better look to her/' he said 
simply to Mrs. Wolferston, " and to the 
poor old woman, too, who has behaved 
bravely. If she had not guided us to the 
back staircase, which is stone, you know, 
we should not be here." 

" God bless you ! how can I ever thank 

you r 



FAREWELL TO ROOKSTONE. 177 

But he was on the terrace again, eager 
now that anxiety for life was over, to stop 
the further progress of the flames. 

He could do but little. The water, 
thrown on in small quantities, seemed 
rather to refresh the himgry leaping flames, 
and give them new power to dart on their 
prey. 

The engine came at last, but by that 
time the fire had become so extended that 
it was not easily extinguished. About 
a third of the house was ruined, and 
much of the remaining portion seriously 
damaged. 

Even Richard Wolferston agreed that it 
was better that the widow and her daugh- 
ters should remove to their new home 
without delay, and next afternoon they 
bade a sad farewell to Rookstone . ^black- 

VOL. L 12 



178 ROOKSTONE. 



ened, broken, defiled . no longer the dear 
home so cherished and so fiill of sacred 
memories. 

It was a sad leave-taking, and Mrs. Wol- 

ferston shortened it as much as possible. 

Richard helped her into the carriage. 

"God bless youl" she said, earnestly. 
It was the first allusion that had been 
made to Janet's rescue, for he had scarcely 
seen her since the night before, and the 
words brought the whole scene back 
vividly. 

He smiled, and pressed her hand in both 
his own. " I do not hold you to your pro- 
mise. I asked it when I was beside myself 
at the thought of separation firom Mary, 
but my own nature is too free to accept an 
extorted gift. I throw myself entirely on 
your mercy." 



FAREWELL TO ROOKSTONE. 179 

He spoke in so low a voice tliat only 

Mrs. Wolferston heard him. 

Before she could answer, he had signed 
to the coachman to drive on. 



12.2 



180 EOOKSTONE. 



CHAPTER XV. 



NO PROOFS. 



"liyrR PAINSON, ma'am," said the 

maid; "but he says imless you 

are quite well enough to see him, he will 

call again when your mamma is at home/' 

** Ask him to come in," answered Janet, 

"I am quite weU enough to see an old 
friend." 

She spoke ahnost eagerly; she seemed 

afraid he would go away before the maid 

reached him. 



NO PROOFS. 181 



Mr. Painson came in trying to smile, as 

if there were no change from the luxurious 

elegance of the saloon at Rookstone to the 
smaU villa dmwing-room in which he now 

found Janet. But when he saw how thin 
and pale she looked, her deep mourning 
making this still more apparent, he fairly 
broke down in an attempt at a joke. 

The room was pretty* Simply furnished, 
it yet had that nameless taste and elegance 
in its arrangements which the very pre- 
sence of some inhabitants creates. It is 
their atmosphere, and it moves about with 
them ; while in larger, more costly dwell- 
ings it is nowhere to be found, or seen only 
in some isolated object, makes all the rest 

still less attractive. 

A flower-table, fiill of graceful ferns, 

stood near Janet's sofa, and Mr. Painson 



IS2 ROORSTONE. 



sighed as he looked at it. He remem- 
bered having seen it at Rookstone. 

" You must not do that," she said, cheer- 
fully. " I know and understand all your 
kind feelings for us, dear Mr. Painson, but 
I believe we ought firmly to resolve against 
regrets, unless, indeed" . she stopped, and 
then, meeting his sharp inquiring glance, 
she blushed and went on hiumedly . 
" mamma has taken Mary out for a drive. 
Mrs. Dawson very kindly sent her car- 
riage, and such an offer is not one to throw 
away now, is it T 

Again Mr. Painson could not check a 
sigh, but he uttered no regrets; he in- 
quired for Mrs. Wolferston's health. 

Janet thought her mother better than 
could have been expected after the variety 
of emotions and trials she had undergone. 



NO PROOFS. 183 



"But then, you know my dear mother's 
life is so bound up in that of others, that 
I believe, in her anxiety first for me and 
then for Mary, she has given no heed to 
her own sufferings." 

"Is Miss Maiy iU, then?" he asked, 
anxiovisly. 

Janet looked perplexed. " I am sorry 
I said anything," she said. "I fancied 
my mother had consulted you. Mr. Pain- 
son, will you let me think a minute ?" 

She rested one cheek on her slender, up- 
turned hand, and sat with bent head. 
The old lawyer looked at her, wondering 
how anyone could prefer her sister in 
Janet's presence. 

Mary was taller, larger in every way ; 
she was certainly handsomer than Janet ; 
but it was the soul breathing out of Janet's 



184 ROOKSTONE. 



every feature with sparkling truth and in- 
telligence that to him eclipsed all the 
softer, more material charms of her young 
sister. 

Presently Janet looked up. " You can 
scarcely fancy how old I feel," she said, 
sadly. "I seem to have thought more 
during the last fortnight than through the 
whole course of my life. Till now I have 
consulted my mother. It seems to me 
that I am grown too old to lean on her, 
when she has no prop to sustain her. Do 
not mistake me ; it is in no trust in my 
own power for self-guidance, I say this; 
it is simply to spare her any little burden 
of the heavy load she must bear alone. 
Well," she went on abruptly, " there are 
things I cannot settle for myself, and in 
which I feel a man's judgment would help. 



NO PROOFS, 18& 



me greatly. If . if Captain Wenlock 
were in England, I should consult him^ 
but I do not know when I may see him 
now." 

Mr. Painson did not answer her at once ; 
he sat thinking what an exceedingly inju- 
dicious adviser a hot-headed yoimg man 
like Henry Wenlock would be in Janet's 
present position. Men above fifty are slow 
to acknowledge the merit of their brethren 
under thirty years of age. 

" You have known me ever since I was 
a baby, Mr. Painson, and" . ^she smiled 
frankly up in his face . " I cannot remem 
ber that you ever refiised me anything. 
Will you listen to me now ? I have a 
horrible idea which is wearing me to deaths 
which I believe caused my illness. I dare 
not burden my mother with it, and yet if 



186 MOOKSTONE. 



I do not get some advice, it will either 
drive me mad or kill me." 

She clasped her hands nervously, and 
such a heart-wrung look came into her lace 
that he no longer wondered at her wasted 
appearance. 

" I wish you had told me this long ago," 
he said. " Remember, Miss Janet, for the 
rest of your life, there is nothing so dan- 
gerous for a woman to keep to herself as a 
secret : she cannot bear the weight of it. 
Now, what is this trouble of yours ?" 

He spoke gently, and bent his head on 
one side, as if he were encouraging a timid 
child to confidence. 

" Did you ever think . did it ever come 
into your head to doubt the genuineness of 
my father's will ?" 

He started, not slightly, but in positive 



NO PROOFS. 187 



fear of what her next words might be. To 
this man of the world, so trained in all its 
ways and maxims, it was terrible to speak 
out a plain unvarnished suspicion. 

" My dear yoimg lady," he said, " I will 
hear all you have to communicate before I 
answer ; but, remember, we cannot be too 
cautious in speaking of others." 

Janet smiled almost bitterly. "I have 
been cautious," she said, " or I should not 
have waited till to-day to utter my doubts. 
From the first, my feeling has been that 
my father never made that will . that 
in fact it is a fabrication of Richard Wol- 
ferston's !" 

He had stretched his hands out to her 
in deprecation of those last words, which 
he felt were coming, but she would speak 
them, and then she sat still, relieved by 



188 ROOKSTONE, 



this confession, but in breathless anxiety 
for his answer. 

To her surprise, he smiled when ha 
began to speak. "Well, you know, my 
dear yoimg lady, such things have happened 
before ; and they have happened, we may 
say, I think, without meaning any oflfence, 
especially in cases where the relative who 
stepped into the property was the family 
adviser . ^privately, you know. Miss Janet^ 
we are talking privately now . relatives aa 
advisers are a mistake . a great mistake" . 
he fidgetted with a ring on his little finger. 

"Then you think my suspicion justi- 
fiable T she said, eagerly. 

He drew his features together, and looked 
at her through his half-shut eyes. 

"I said nothing of the kind in your 
case, I was merely stating a fact which, in 



NO PROOFS. 189 



my legal capacity, caused me to examine 
the document in question cautiously, and 
. and, well, Miss Janet, this is perfectly 
entre nous, I suppose . I went so far as to 
test the signatures, and found them per- 
fectly genuine. No, there is no flaw in 
that will ; the only question I could find 
to hang my hat on was your father's state 
of mind when he executed it, and that 
yoiu: poor dear mother won't hear a word 
against." 

" Then, in your opinion, I may dismiss 
this suspicion at once as unjust and 
groundless ?" 

. 

" Certainly, I should say so ; dear me . " 
he said, irritably, " what else can you do ? 
if a thing can't be proved there's an end 
of it." 

Then, without giving her time to speak, 



190 ROOKSTONE. 



he went back to the question which Janet 
had purposely left unanswered. 

" Did you say that yoiu: sister was ill ?" 

Janet looked perplexed again. "I 
thought you knew that she had engaged 
herself to Richard at Rookstone, Well," 
for Mr. Pamson nodded, " on the night of 
the fire my mother promised to consent to 
their marriage, and although Richard after- 
wards released her from this promise, she 
considers herself boimd by it." 

"You don't mean to say your mother 
had anytHng to say against such a mar- 
riage for Miss Mary ? Really, really," said 
the lawyer, in such a state of nervous irri- 
tation that he fidgetted from head to foot, 
" she must have lost her senses !" 

Janet was sUent. She was oflPended with 
Mr. Painson for blaming her mother, and 



NO PROOFS. 191 



thoroughly overwhelmed by his assurance 
of Eichard Wolferston's innocence. 

"My dear child," he said, "husbands 
don't grow ready made now-a-days ; we 
must take 'em as we find them, and it wiU 
be a thousand pities if anything should 
occur to prevent your cousin from marrying 
Miss Mary. If I'd seen mamma I should 
have told her so. I reaUy hope. Miss 
Janet, if there is any prejudice at work 
you'U do your best to remove it. Dear me ! 
dear me! Miss Mary mayn't have such 
another first-rate chance of settling while 
she lives." 

He shook hands and went away, deter- 
mined, if he saw Richard Wolferston, not 
to lose a chance of bringing the lovers 
together again. His feelings had not 
changed towards the new squire of Hook- 



192 ROOKSTONE. 



stone . ^he disliked him quite as much as 
ever. He shrank from his cynical sarcas- 
tic words, and his indifferent superciHous 
manner . for Richard took no pains to con- 
ijUiate him ; but this marriage with Maiy 
was, in Mr. Painson's eyes, a pure question 
of worldly advantage to the whole family . 
the only means, in fact, which would 
enable the Wolferstons to maintain their 
former position and connections ; and posi- 
tion and connections were among the gods 
of Mr. Painson's worship. 

And whUe he walked quietly back to 
his office in one of those quaint deserted 
streets leading down to what used to be 
the silent highway of the noblemen and 
gentlemen of London . streets in which are 
the remains of houses that tell how society 
has migrated westward since the days when 
nobles made the Strand their dwelling- 



NO PROOFS. 193 



place . Janet sat trying to realise the truth 
of his assurances. Before Mr. Painson she 
had controlled both surprise and agitation, 
hut now she could do this no longer. 

The will genuine I the will which she 
had looked on only as a means of tempo- 
rarily depriving them of their happy home 
. of all that was so justly theirs. Dur- 
ing her illness she had solemnly vowed 
to devote the remainder of her life, if it 
were needed, to unravel the mystery of her 
brother's disinheritance ; and must she yield 
all this up, must she give up the hope of 
ever again seeing her darling mother the 
rightful mistress of Rookstone? And 
Richard ? Since he had saved her life, 
her task had seemed harder, but she had 
not flinched from it. 

Almost as soon as they were settled in 
VOL. I. 13 



l4 ROOKSTONE. 



their new home, she had spoken very 
strongly to Mary on the subject of her 
engagement, and had assured her that 
no blessing could rest on an attachment 
formed in opposition to her mother's 
wishes. Mary had reproached her for her 
own ingratitude to Richard ; but the earnest 
warning, solemnly spoken by her sister, 
had troubled the young girl's peace, and 
Mary had told her mother that for the 
present she preferred not to see her 
cousin, and alleged Janet's warning as her 
reasoD. 

Mrs. Wolferston was surprised. She 
could not imderstand Janet's strange per- 
sistence in her dislike to the marriage, 
for at her age it was not likely that the 
objections wHch weighed with herself 
against Richard could equally influence 



NO PROOFS. 196 



her eldest daughter. She even felt pained 
by Janet's ingratitude, and she told her so. 
The girl had borne these reproaches 
silently, so long as they were unproven. 
She had resolved not to utter her suspi- 
cions against Richard to anyone except 
Mr, Painson, and now, after what he had 
said, she did not know how to act. It 
seemed as if the whole tenour of her 
conduct must change. She must retract 
her own words, tmsay her own argu- 
ments, and yet without daring to give 
any reason for such seeming wayward- 
ness; for if Richard Wolferston married 
Mary, how could she ever tell even her 
mother the horrible guilt of which she had 

suspected him ? 

She tried to thank God for relieving her 

mind from the dark, dreadful doubt that had 

13.2 



196 ROOKSTONE. 



oppressed her, but she felt no comfort or 
relief in this thanksgiving ; her words 
seemed to roll back on herself, confiising 
and depressing her. She told herself that 
he was cleared from all suspicion, and yet, 
deep down in her heart, hiding away, doubt 
Imgered . doubt which influenced her, even 
though as yet she was not aware of its 
existence. 

" Oh, if Henry would only come back," 
she said, " I should have some one to help 
me combat this miserable perplexity ; and 
yet why am I so weak ? Probably I shall 
never see him again. Why do I not at 
once try to bear my own burden, instead of 
wishing to lay it on others ?" 

The servant came in with letters ; one of 
them bore a foreign postmark. It was 
from Captain Wenlock. Instead of return- 



NO PROOFS. 197 



ing to England, his regiment had been 

ordered up the country for a year, so the 

letter addressed to him at Malta would 
probably never reach his hands, and he was 

still ignorant of all that had happened at 

E/Ookstone. 

Poor Janet! it was a very hard trial. 

Three months at least she must still wait 

before she knew the effect which the change 

in her fortunes would work in her lover's 

affections.  



198 ROOK&TONE. 



CHAPTER XVI. 



MRS. Dawson's invitation. 



T>EFORE Janet slept that night, slie 
asked her sister to forgive her, as 
she felt that she had given way to unjust 
prejudice in speaking of Richard Wol- 
ferston, and she hoped Mary would 
suflTer nothing she had said to influence 
her. 

To her surprise, Mary burst into tears. 
" You are so cruel," she sobbed ; " why not 
leave me in peace ? You first advise me 



MRS. DAWSON'S INVITATION. 199 

one way and then the other, until I seem 
not to know what is right or wrong. If 
Richard really cared for me he would not 
have released mamma from her promise. 
Between you aU, I am made perfectly 
miserable." 

There was no use in combating a mood 
like this ; but next morning Janet repeated 
nearly the same words to her mother, and 
told her also how strongly Mr. Painson 
advised the marriage. 

Mrs. Wolferston sighed. " I thought I 
was acting for the best in opposing it," she 
said ; " but it seems to me that this mar- 
riage is to be, and, therefore, of course, I 
may not set my own will against it. It is a 
relief to me that you no longer dislike it, 
Janet, for I must own that since the night 
of the fire my feelings towards Eichard have 



200 ROOKSTONE. 



undergone a complete change, and it pained 
me to see your aversion." 

Janet blushed, she could not confess the 
trutL " Did dear papa know of Richard's- 
attachment T she asked. 

'* Yes" . her mother spoke thoughtfiilly 
. " it seems to me that the knowledge of 
his own intentions towards Richard made 
your dear fitther encourage his visits to 
Rookstone lately. I see now that he must 
have planned this marriage from the first." 

" Then, mamma," said Janet, impulsively ,. 
" ought you not to see his wishes fulfilled 
as soon as possible ? Ought we not to in- 
vite Richard to come and see us ?" 

" At present Mary shrinks from seeing 
him. There is no hurry, Janet," Mrs- 
Wolferston smiled ; " I believe it is always 
best to leave lovers to settle their own 



I 



MRS. DA WSON'S IN VITA TION. 201 
aflfairs. I wish I had thought thia 



sooner." 



Before Janet could answer, Mrs. Dawson 
was announced. She was a round, comely 
looking lady, between fifty and sixty, with 
sparkling dark eyes, a good set of teeth, 
and a profiision of small, iron-grey ringlets 
which waggled a sort of accompaniment to 
her frequent bursts of laughter. 

The sight of Mrs. Wolferston subdued 
her liveliness to a minor key. " How are 
you to-day, poor dear ? Enjoyed the drive 
yesterday ? That's right. Famous thing a 
drive for getting spirits up ; nothing like it ; 
but it's not you IVe come to see . no, nor 
you either, you poor, pale-faced Janet. 
Mustn't tell her so, must we ?" . this in 
apology to Mrs. Wolferston. ** That was a 
slip of the tongue, was it not ? Where'a 



202 ROOKSTONE. 



the naughty beauty, as I call her? My 
visit is to her." Janet went in search of 
her sister. 

"Just a little private talk you know, 
dear; Janet will not be coming back, 
will she ? " Mrs. Dawson edged her chair 
confidentially close to her nephew's widow. 

" I don't know," spoken coldly, for Aunt 
Dawson's mysteries were not always to Mrs. 
Wolferston's taste. 

" Oh, if she does, invent some excuse or 
other to get rid of her. Can't you say she 
had better lie down a little ? I am sure 
she looks pale enough." 

"No" . Mi-s. Wolferston smUed in spite 
of herself . " I would rather tell her you 
want to tell me something privately." 

" Oh, no. Why, my dear Amy, you, a 
mother of two daughters ! . ^really, I must 



MRS, DAWSON'S INVITATION. 203 

say, even an old maid like myself knows 
better than that." 

" I scarcely understand you." 

" No, I daresay not, poor thing. You 
see it is all so sudden and recent, and I'm 
no doubt premature, and that . only oppor- 
tunities may come and go, and once gone 
can't be had back. You understand 
exactly, I've no doubt, and see the force 
of things just as I do, so wise you always 
were, you poor bereaved one." 

The " poor bereaved one " looked tho- 
roughly mystified, but she was not to be 
enlightened directly. 

*^ Ah, here's the beauty," and Aunt Daw- 
son jumped up nimbly, and advanced to 
meet Mary as she came in. " Now, 
Miss Careless, guess what I have got for 

you." 



204 ROOKSTONE. 



Mary was not in the saucy spirits her 
aunt expected. " I don't know, aunt/' she 
said, simply. 

"You'll be losing your head next, or 
your heart, I shouldn't wonder. Now, 
look here. I wonder who is the owner of 
this pretty thing 1" 

She was fumbling in a capacious pocket, 
so full of miscellaneous articles, that a 
struggle was inevitable when any one of 
them had to be extricated. If the sharp- 
eyed old lady had not been thus occu- 
pied, she must have seen how deeply Mary 
blushed. 

" My ear-ring 1 Oh, where was it 
found ?" 

" Ah, only suppose now you had been in 
a hired fly. I wonder what chance there 
would have been of your ear-ring coming 



MRS. DA WSON'S INVITA TION. * 206 

liome again. I have heard " . she dropped 
her voice to its tone of mystery . "that 
some of those fly-drivers make large for- 
tunes just by what people drop. But now, 
Amy, I really do want you to listen seri- 
ously. It's a most important communica- 
tion, I assure you, dear. Mary's not of 
the least consequence, because you see she's 
not a party concerned ; but I think you 
and I must put our wits together a bit 
and just see that the Rookstone property 
don't quite slip out of the family." 

" But, Mrs. Dawson." 

" Now, my dear, I know what you are 
going to say as well as if you were a bee in 
a glass hive. You object to match-making, 
of course, dear, and very right and proper 
too, as long as you had a roof over your 
head, and your thousands to spend and 



206 ROOKSTONE. 



squander. I don't mean any reflections by 
' squander/ as you know, my dear Amy ; but 
words come crooked when one feels as 
strongly as I do now/' 

She might have added, " and speaks as . 
fast," for in her excitement ideas flowed so 
rapidly that she had not words enough to . 
express them, and they came tumbling out 
in strange incoherent fashion. 

"Now, you know. Amy, Janet's quite 
marriageable, quite . now, don't shake your 
dear head, it's the greatest mistake in the 
world your consenting to her wasting all 
the best of her youth in a desert, pining 
after a wild young oflficer like Henry Wen- 
lock. Who's to say he is not married by 
this time ? And, my dear, when one reads . 
in the papers of breaches of promise for fiir 
less provocation than poor misguided Chris- 



MRS, DAWSON'S INVITATION, 207 

topher^s will, it seems to me that you 
should cut the Gordian knot yourself. 
Write and give him up, and so make an 
opening for Richard Wolferston/' 

" But, putting every other consideration 
aside, Richard Wolferston would never 
think of marrying Janet." 

It was the first pause Mrs. Dawson had 
come to, and it happened more from want 
of breath than because she had nearly 
developed her ideas. 

" Ah, you see," she said, triumphantly, 
the iron-grey ringlets dancing with delight, 
'' I should not have come here to-day, dear 
Amy, rousing you from the memory of the 
dear departed, for whom I'm sure no one 
can have a more sincere and hearty respect 
than myself ; I shouldn't have dreamed of 
coming here to state a theory ; you thought 



208 ROOKSTONE. 



80 now, did you not ? Ah, no, my deax, I 
could not, at such a time, oh, no. The fact 
is, between ourselves" . ^here she stretched 
out her short fat neck till her face nearly 
touched Mrs. Wolferston's, and jerked out 
<each word with deliberate emphasis . " I 
saw my gentleman this morning ; ascer- 
tained his intentions or aflFections, or what- 
ever men call the thing they wear xmder 
their waistcoats, and fancy it's a heart ; and 
if you'll only leave the matter in my hands. 
Amy dear, I'll undertake to have these 
young people married and settled before 
I'm six months older." 

. 

" Who are you speaking of. Aunt Daw- 
son ?" 

** Patience, child ; how you startled me, 
speaking in that soleron, serious way, and 
how strangely you look. I declare you 



MRS. DA WSON'S INVITATION. 209 

gave me quite a turn, Mary. Well, you 
mustn't go and repeat it to Janet, you 
know, for of course Richard will like to 
tell his own story best; but of course ^ 
you knew all about it long ago. Ah, 
I thought so ; why, my dear Amy, it is 
not likely that a man would go rushing 
into roaring raging flames as he did, to save 
a mere indifferent life like anybody else's 
. you couldn't expect me to believe such a 
thing. But now look here. Couldn't you let 
me take Janet back with me ? Richard has 
promised to dine with me to-morrow. Now 
have I not arranged a pleasant little sur- 
prise for him ? I'd have taken Janet off 
then and now, without a word to discom- 
pose her mind, only it struck me it might 
be as well to cong6 that tiresome, hot- 
headed young Wenlock first, and let her 
VOL. I. 14 



210 ROOKSTONE. 



Start feir with Richard. Don't you think 
I waa right. Amy dear?" 

Mrs. Wolferston could not answer ; but 
for the distress in Mary's face, she must 
have laughed at the good-natured busy- 
body's mistake. The best course to pursue 
now was to dismiss her before Mary be- 
trayed herself. 

** Thank you," she said, " I am sxure you 
mean kindly, but Janet is deeply attached 
to Henry Wenlock ; and even if he releases 
her from her engagement, she is not 
likely to marry any one else. Besides this^ 
I feel sure neither she nor her sister would 
think of visiting at present." 

Mrs. Dawson was vehement in her protest 

against this decision ; but she knew of old 

that, gentle as "dear Amy" was, she could 

be firm also, and she was obliged to go away 
alone. 



SETTLED IN HASTE. 211 



CHAPTER XVII. 

SETTLED IN HASTE. 

"pwIRECTLY Mrs. Dawson had departed, 
her mother turned to Mary. 

" Of course, my dear child, your aunt 
has made a mistake, and has arrived at an 
entirely wrong conclusion about Richard." 

" I cannot agree with you." 

The decided words, the abrupt manner, 
were quite unlike spoiled, petted Mary. 

" But, Mary." 

*' Mamma, it is useless, the foreboding of 

14.2 




SETTLED IN BASTE. SIS 

mother, she must . how 
it ? . and then it seems to me 
them both." 
'olferaton soothed and reasoned, 
&t ]a3t she persuaded the sob- 
girl to lie down on a 60&, 
to find her eldeat daughter, 
you had sent for me at once," 
.when sbe heard ber mother's 
" I would have crosa-queationed 
3on \mtil I had found out the 
The tears sprang to her eyes, 
.lis as if every day bringe some 
of estrangement; till lately, 
*e so happy together, and 
to be left alone with 

.ist matter I behove silence is 
course," said Mrs. Wolferston ; 



218 ROOKSTONE. 



this has been upon me ever since we left 
Bookstone. He loved me once . I know 
that well, I can never forget it; but oh, 
mamma, mamma, I lost his love" . she hid 
her fece on her mother's shoulder, and 
broke down in violent sobs . " on the night 
of the fire. He saw the difference between 
us . ^you know what a helpless baby I was, 
and I lost my senses quite at last, and Kitty 
told me that, until the smoke almost choked 
her, Janet was so brave and calm . it was 
my cowardice that killed his love ; and I 
suppose, savmg her as he did, drew him to 
Janet. Now do you see why he gave me 
up ? Oh, so many things have come clear 
to me in these few minutes : now I know 
why Janet has grown so suddenly kind 
about him ; she does not love him, but she 
cannot hate a man who loves her, and she 



SETTLE!) IN HASTE. 213 

will love him soon^ mother, she must . how 
can she help it ? . and then it seems to me 
I must hate them both." 

Mrs. Wolferston soothed and reasoned, 
but in vain : at last she persuaded the sob- 
bing, unhappy girl to Ue down on a sofa, 
and then went to find her eldest daughter. 

" I wish you had sent for me at once," 
Janet said, when she heard her mother's 
tidings. " I would have cross-questioned 
Aunt Dawson imtil I had found out the 
truth." The tears sprang to her eyes. 
" It seems as if every day brings some 
fresh cause of estrangement; till lately, 
Mary and I were so happy together, and 
now I dread to be left alone with 
her." 

" In this last matter I believe silence is 
your best coTirse," said Mrs. Wolferston ; 



t 



U BOOKSTONE. 



" peihaps if we both treat it with entire 
indifference, Mary may take the same view 
of the case ; she is too much excited just 
now to judge at alL" 

''Poor girl, she has had unhappiness 
enough," said Janet, warmly. "Mamma, 
will you let me write to Eichard ? I have 
never yet thanked him for saving my life ; 
surely I may ask him to come here and let 
me thank him personally." 

Her mother smiled. " I begin to think 
you are imitating Aunt Dawson," she said ; 
"but do as you like, my darling; I be- 
lieve onlyKichaxd himself can caJm Maiy 

now." 

Janet wrote, and then she sat coimting 
the hours that must pass before Eichard 
could make his appearance. She tried to 
cast all doubts and fears away, to tell her- 



SETTLED IN HASTE. 216 

elf that the marriage was ordained to be, 
and that, therefore, neither human right 
nor might could avail to prevent it ; but 
she could not feel tranquil. The step she 
had just taken was not a mere resigning 
herself to the ways of Providence ; instead 
of this d>e had resolved on hastening 
Mary's happiness in her own way hence- 
forth. Come what might of the marriage, 
humanly speaking, her act had rendered it 
inevitable. 

She did not speak of Henry Wenlock's 
letter. It seemed to Janet that already 
her mother's sacred grief had been in- 
truded on by care for others ; she ought 
now to be allowed to give herself up to the 
seclusion of her own thoughts and memo- 
ries ; and for this reason also she wrote to 
Mrs. Webb, asking her to keep Christy a 



216 ROOKSTONE. 



week or two longer . ^till they should be 
settled in their Brompton home. 

There was a small garden attached^ the sort 
of garden one finds to all new villa houses, 
which answers well enough for those who 
can replenish the flower-beds as &st as gas 
and smoke empty them, but which bears as 
much comparison to a real flower garden as 
an ordinary young lady of fashion fresh from 
the milliner's hands does to a beautifiil 
Roman peasant girl in her festal costume. A 
London garden destroys all sentiment ; you 
look in vain for the plants of last year ; 
you had grown fond of them in your efforts 
to tend and increase their growth ; you find 
only new comers, like the " Veneerings,'' 
your neighboiu's and the shining furniture 
you see over the way. If you care for old 
association . links to the past . avoid an 



SETTLED IF HASTE. 217 

"improving London suburb," where the very 
walks and green-lanes dear to your child- 
hood grow into streets with high-sounding 
titles ; where all is artificial, simplicity and 
freshness vanish with the daisies and but- 
tercups. 

Janet was in this garden examining some 
of the plants they had brought with them 
when Richard arrived. They had only just 
breakfasted, and she had not expected him 
so early. For the moment she felt really 
glad to see him, and she told him so. 

He was touched by the change in her 
manner. 

" Where is Mary ? how is she ?" he asked. 

" We shall find her in-doors." She did 

not teU him how imprepared her sister was 
to see him. Janet's fear had been that 
Mary would refuse to meet her cousin or 



218 ROOKSTONE. 



manage in some way to avoid him. The 
street door was open, and she went in 
quickly, foUowed byEichard. 

Mary was sitting alone in the little 
moming-room, her head resting on her 
hands. She coloured when she saw who 
was Janet's companion, and looked resent- 
fully at her sister. 

She made no sign of greeting, and Rich- 
ard looked at Janet in surprise. 

She smiled. " Mary is not well or 
happy," she said, rather mischievously, 
"but I think she will be better now" . 
and Janet went away thinking that Richard 
would find it easy enough to convince her 
sister of her mistake. 

But it was not an easy matter to get her 
to listen at all. At first she begged him to 
excuse her, to let her leave the room. She 



SETTLED IN HASTE, 219 

i?7islied for the future only to see him 
when her mother or Janet was present, 
and when she found he would not listen, 
she sought refuge in silence. 

" Now, Mary, my sweet child," . he took 
both her hands and held them fast in his 
. " what have I done to deserve such a 
reception ? Is this your love for me ? I 
believe you are not in earnest, you are only 
trying some of your old saucy tricks on me." 

But when he drew her nearer to him, 
the real sorrow in her eyes showed him she 
was in earnest. 

He tried to soothe her and win her con- 
fidence by gentleness. She relapsed into a 
sort of forced indiflference which tried his 
patience, and his anger rose. He let go 
her hands, and walked up and down the 
room. 



220 ROOKSTONE, 



" Mary," he said, " you are determined 
to try me, to see the worst of me, or you 
would not use yoiu* power over me in this 
way. I have been living on the thought 
of your sweetness and your love, feeling a 
if I could not live without you. I came 
here as soon as I got Janet's letter ; it 
seemed to me a new hfe had begun, and 
you receive me as if I had committed a 
crime.'' He stood facing her, stem and pale 
with anger, and Mary grew terrified. ** You 
have promised to be my wife, and till I 
release you from that promise you are 
mine," he said roughly, taking her hand 
again in his strong firm clasp, "and you 
are boxmd to tell me who has been making 
mischief between us ; I insist on knowing ; 
is it your mother ?" 

He had touched the right string. She 



SETTLED IN HASTE. 221 

might not have yielded to fear for herself, 
although she was really afraid of him now, 
but it would be dreadful for her mother to 
be frightened by his violence ; and, hke 
many another woman, spite of his anger, 
Mary loved him the better for compelling 
her obedience. She told him Mrs. Daw- 
son's story. His brow cleared as if by 
magic ; he laughed, and then, as if that 
were his best assurance of truth to her, 

he drew Mary to his heart and kissed 
her. 

" You are a darling little goose," he said, 
*^'and Mrs. Dawson is more silly than I 
thought her. It would serve you rightly, 
you naughty child, if I were really ta 
transfer my love to Janet, don't you 
thmk so r 

" I don't know," she sobbed, " I feel as 



222 R00K8T0NE. 



if you must love her best ; she is so good 
and wise, and I am so siUy." 

"And do you think I should like a wise or 
clever woman for my wife, Mary ; a woman 
who would lecture and preach against every- 
thing not quite right in her eyes? My 
wife must be mine entirely, her thoughts^ 
her opinions, her wishes, must be mine too. 
I am a dreadfiil tyrant, my pet ; but I be- 
lieve you will be the most loving, docile 
darling a man ever took to himself for hia 

own." 

There was almost a fierce earnestness in 

his words, and she trembled. A vague 

faint memory of her mother's warning, that 

in marrying Richard she would yield up 

her notions of right and wi-ong, as well as 

her love, to his guidance, feU across the 

purple light of love which a minute before 



SETTLED IN HASTE, 22a 

had seemed to penetrate every sensation ; 
but under the spell of his eyes, listening to 
the fascination of his words, she could 
neither think nor remember distinctly . ^he 
was her idol, her all ; and when a little 
while after he whispered that the only way 
to make his happiness sure would be a 
speedy marriage, Mary forgot her mother's 
grief, her own deep mourning, and let him 
take her consent for granted. 

He asked to see Mrs. Wolferston. She 
looked pained when he told her that only 
her consent was wanting now to the cele- 
bration of their marriage. The wedding 

should be as quiet and private as she 
pleased, but he hoped she would allow it 

to take place immediately. 

*' I think thi^ haste is cruel," she said ; 

" why not wait till Mary is a year older ? 



4 ROOKSTONE. 



you shall see her as often and with as little 
restraint as you wisL" 

He entreated and argued, and Mrs. Wol- 
ferston already found it difficult to refuse 
him, when, to her smprise, she found Janet 
ranked on his side. 

She had joiaed Mary when Eichard left 
her, had gathered the pinrpose of his errand 
to her mother, and deciding in her usual 
firm way, had come to the conclusion that 
her mother would have no quiet or seclu- 
sion as long as these lovers' quarrels were 
likely to reciu-. Janet only lived for her 
mother now. She was angry with Mary 
for being able to think of marrying at such 
a time of mourning ; " but if she can do 
so already," thought the elder sister, " she 
will always be fretting and discontented 
imless Richard is here, and all this will 



SETTLED IN HASTE. 226 

worry our darling mother. They had 
better be married at once." 

.^ At once/' according to Janet, meant in 
three months' time, a period which , Rich- 
ard's persuasions curtailed to two. He did 
not leave the house till Mrs. Wolferston 
had promised that the marriage should take 
place that day two months. 



VOL T. 15 



226 ROOKSTONE. 



CHAPTER XVIII 



THE RETURN HOME. 



A YE All passed slowly away. The mono- 
tony of Mrs. Wolferston's and Janet's 
life was only interrupted by Mary's letters, 
fiiU of her fresh and delighted experience of 
foreign travel. Directly after the marriage 
Eichard had taken his yoimg wife to Italy, 
and they had lingered there month after 
month, although Mr. Painson was contin- 
ually iirging on the new squire the im- 
portance of making himself thoroughly 



THE RETURN HOME. 227 

well known and popular among his ten- 
antry. 

Till the wedding was over Mrs. Wolfer- 
ston had borne up so wonderfiilly, that 
even good-natured Mrs. Dawson had 
shaken her head^ and thought that poor 
dear Amy had less feeling than she had 
given her credit for, . nay, in a biurst of 
confidence to Mrs. Webb, she had even 
hinted that she was afraid old Painson was 
looking after the widow abeady, and that 
his attentions did much to keep up her 
spirits. But the good soul only chattered 
thoughtlessly, and felt sorry for her out- 
pourings when she got home, after the 
fashion of impulsive females, while Mrs* 
Webb felt a calm satisfaction in repeating 
a slander not invented by herself. But 
before a week had passed, time, the usual 

15.2 



228 ROOKSTONE, 



avenger oi, injustice, had silenced Mrs. 
Webb. 

Mrs. Wolferston was seriously ill, and 
the London physician whom Jaiiet insisted 
on calling in to consult with Mrs. Dawson's 
doctor, declared that only care and time 
could restore her, and even then she must 
be very tenderly dealt with. The anguish 
she had so bravely struggled against had 
brought to light or life inward weakne^, 
and he said that although there was no 
actual disease of the heart at present, there 
was that which made it imperative that 
Mrs. Wolferston should be spared any 
fatigue or sudden emotion. 

Janet did not write this news to Mary. 
The yoimg girl's aim in the life she had 
planned for herself was to bear her own 
burdens alone . ^a good plan enough for a 
fretful complaining woman, but one which 



TEE RETURN HOME. 229 

has its evils in such a nature as Janet's. 
She grew silent, and less and less com- 
municative in her replies to Mary's bright 
amusing letters ; confidence was gradually 
diminishing between the sisters, and it was 
Janet's ault. To her mother and little 
Christy she was all they could wish, but 
this constant effort at self-reliance had 
made her years older. 

She softened when at length an an- 
swer came to her letter to Henry Wen- 
lock. 

"What matters loss of money," he 
wrote, after many expressions of sympathy 
for her sorrow, " to people who love each 
other as you and I do, my own Janet ? I 
shall be in England, I hope, next Septem- 
ber ; then I shall sell my commission, and 
get some more profitable employment, and 



230 ROOKSTONE. 



your good kind mother will give you to 
me as soon as I have made a home for 

you." 

Captain Wenlock would have wondered 
if he could have seen the burst of tears his 
letter evoked, but these brought comfort 
and solace to the overburdened spirit. It 
was not for always, then, that she should 
have to walk thus alone and unaided. In 
a few months she should have Henry to 
look to for guidance and sympathy, but she 
could not marry him while her mother 
lived . her desolate mother, who had only 
her to rest on now. 

Mary had told Mrs. Wolferston that she 
hoped to become a mother early in October ; 
it was now August, and still they did not 
return to England. 

But one mormng, soon after the begin- 



THE RETURN HOME. 231 

ning of the month, Janet came into her 
mother's sitting-room with her hands ftdl 
of letters. She was laughing, and seemed 
unusually animated. 

" Mother, what wiU you give me for my 
news r she said, half fearing lest its sudden- 
ness might bring on one of the fainting fits 
her mother had lately suffered from. " It is 
very surprising but veiy pleasant, but the 
outside of the letters will tell their own 
story. Here is one from Mary, with a 
Geneva postmark ; this one is from 
Richard, dated Paris ; and now, where do 
you think this comes from ?" 

"Are they indeed at Rookstone ? Ah ! 
Janet, I can scarcely tell you how thankfrd 
I am for dear Marv's sake.'' 

" Yes, they reached Rookstone two days 
:ago, and that is not all ; Mary wants you 



232 ROOKSTONE, 



to go to her at once ; but, mother, if you 
have any shrinking from this visit, I can 
easily take your place." 

But Mrs. Wolferston was eager to go 
herself. In the joy of seeing her darling 
again after this long separation she forgot 
the pain all the old memories would suffer 
in this sudden rekindling. 

Janet felt secretly indignant that 
Richard should have taken her sister home 
without staying even one day in London 
with her mother, but when she hinted this^ 
Mrs. Wolferston said it was gratifying to 
her to see his anxiety that Mary should be 
spared fatigue. 

"Why, you see, dear, he has even 
written this last note himself to save her 
trouble." 

Janet did not answer ; she thought it 



THE RETURN HOME. 233 

would have been more natural for Mary to 
have written and to have included herself 
and Christy in the invitation, but she had 
resolved not to harbour evil thoughts of 
Richard, and she went upstairs to pack her 
mother's trunk, as Mrs. Wolferston was 
asked to go to Rookstone as soon as 
possible. 

She had grown so much stronger during 
the last few months that even Janet felt 
no anxiety in allowing her to make the 
journey only accompanied by a maid. 

Richard Wolferston met his mother-in- 
law at the railway station ; he looked much 
older ; she thought his face had grown lined 
and anxious. 

" I thought Mary had better meet you 
indoors,'' he said ; " the idea of your visit 
has made her rather hysterical," and then 



234 ROOKSTONE. 



SO grave, almost stem a look, came into his 
face, that Mrs. Wolferston felt an uneasy- 
restraint creep over her. 

As they approached Rookstone she sank 

back in the carriage and drew her thick veil 
more closely over her face. She had not 
been outside the gates between that event- 
ful night and the day of her departure, and 
every hedge-bank, every well-known group 
of trees, gave a fresh pang to the still keen 
sense of bereavement. 

Here were the sprigs of wild clematis he 
had gathered for her to draw, or in their 
early married days had wi*eathed round her 
hat ; there were the cottages his liberal 
hand had restored from decay; here the 
peep of distant country they had so often 
admired together ; and here . ah ! here, 
indeed . ^was a poignant remembrance, the 



THE RETURN HOME. 235 

toU-house, where on that sad night doubt 
had grown so strong . the doubt of her 
husband's safety. All the events of that 
night came back to her with terrible 
reality ; all her bitter anguish was re- 
newed. 

Richard turned to her abruptly. "I 
dare say Mary will tell you I wanted your 
visit deferred ; the truth is, of course, I am 
very anxious about Mary, and I was afraid 
this first coming back would depress and 
agitate you ; and frankly, it will annoy me 
greatly if my wife is in any way upset.'' 

His tone was not unkind, but still she 
could not help shrinking from his words ; 
even her gentle spirit roused to wonder 
why Eichard should imagine her less care- 
ful of her daughter than he was of his 
wife. 



236 ROOKSTONE. 



" But it is only his great love for her," 
she said to herself; " surely I should not 
complain of that, and he could not know 
how sad I am." 

They were driving in at the great gates, 
not the entrance by which we saw Bichard 
Wolferston go in more than a year ago. 
These gates were on the other side of the 
park, much nearer the house. Mrs. Wol- 
ferston looked towards the house. Could 
this be Mary standing on the steps ? a 
beautifiil woman dressed in the latest 
fashion, her hair so frizzled out of any re- 
semblance to natiu:e, that her mother could 
hardly think it was her own. 

She laughed and cried and was so ex- 
cited that Mrs. Wolferston could scarcely 
quiet her : in her heart she felt thankftd 
that Richard had left them together, he 



THE RETURN HOME. S37 

would, certainly, have thought that her 
presence agitated Mary. 

But after a little the girrs old Jnight 
saucy self eame back, and she was 
nestling h^ head on her mother's shpul- 
der, kisring and petting her as if she were 
still a child. 

"You will find the house so changed," 
she said ; " I have not grown used to it yet ; 
all our own sleaping-rooms have been re- 
built, and they are not a bit like the old 
ones. Will you like to see the room I 
have chosen for you ? it is eloae to my 
own. 

Mary rang the bell. Mrs. Wolf^rston 
looked in hopes to see a familiar face ; j3he 
had remarked that the servant^s she had 
already seen we^e strangers, bt a mous- 
tached foreign^ answered Mary's summons. 



238 ROOKSTONE. 



" Send Eulalie." 

"Is your maid French?" her mother 
asked. 

"Oh yes, Bichard prefers foreign ser- 
vants ; he says they are so much quicker- 
witted ; so that, except coachmen, grooms, 
and housemaids, we have nothing but 
French and German people about us." 

Mrs. Wolferston had resolved not to 
volunteer an unasked opinion on any 
changes she might observe, but there was 
something in this thorough break-up of 
old associations which deeply pained her. 
Most of the Rookstone servants had been 
there for years. It was a hard return for 
faithful service. 

In some ways, perhaps, it was less trying 
that her new rooms did not remind her of 
the past ; this was no longer her Rookstone, 



TEE RETURN HOME, 23^ 

and when she came down to dinner she 
felt like a visitor in a strange house. 

Eichard was courteous, but his cold 
watchful manner threw a constraint over 
everything. Mrs. Wolferston longed for 
dinner to be over to find herself once 
more alone with Mary, but this was not 
to be. 

To her surprise he followed them almost 
immediately into the saloon. Nothing 
was changed here, even the new squire's 
fastidious taste had seen no need of altera- 
tion. 

He came up to Mary. 

"I thought your mother would like a 
stroll in the park ; there is still some light 
left. What do you think of it T 

Mrs. Wolferston was in hopes her 
daughter would have elected to remain 



240 ROOKSTONE. 



indoors, but Kichaxd's slightest wish was 
law to his wife, and she seemed to think 
there was no doubt of her mother's acquie- 
scence. 

They strolled down to the terrace steps, 
where the peacocks, all unconscious of any 
change of masters, strutted about, only 
thinking of themselves. At the edge of 
the lake, Richard was tmning to the right 
so as to climb the higher ground on the 
other side, which commanded a view of the 
house, when Mrs, Wolferston stopped. 

" I should like to see Kitty Robbins," she 
said ; " I suppose she is still at the lodge ?" 

A dark shadow crossed Richard's face, 
and Mary looked fidlghtened and nervous. 

" Oh, never mind, dear mamma, going 
to see Kitty now, she is such a nasty, cross 
did thing, and . '' 



THE RETURN HOME. 241 

" Mary '' . she checked herself suddenly 
rt the sound of her husband's voice . " you 
are not going to see Mrs. Bobbins ; why 
do you interfere with your mother's 
wishes? why should she not go if she 
pleases T 

Mrs. Wolferston looked from one to the 
other; she felt certain that Eichard had 
forbidden his wife to hold any communica- 
tion with the faithful old dependant, and 
her spirit rose against what seemed to her 
tyranny. 

"FU go alone, Mary," she said. "I 
think poor old Kitty will feel hurt if I do 
not pay her an early visit." 

"Very well," Eichard Wolferston an- 
swered, "we will wait for you here; you 
will not be long, I dare say ?" 

It seemed as if he implied "you must 
VOL. I. 16 



242 ROOKSTONE. 



not/' spite of the courteous tone in which 
the words were spoken. 

Mrs. Wolferston turned towards Kitty's 
cottage. The dark fears which at one time 
had influenced her so strongly against 
Richard Wolferston came back with over- 
whelming force. The bright, happy tone 
of Mary's letters had eflTectually quieted 
any remains that lingered of these fears, 
and the sunshine in Mary's face had con- 
firmed her mother's belief that Richard had 
proved a tender, indulgent husband, for 
she knew her daughter could not be happy 
unless she were petted and treated lov- 
ingly. But something in his tone startled 
her ; it was more like that of a mas- 
ter to an unreasoning child, and yet it 
seemed not to pain or perplex Mary. Why 
was she not allowed to visit old Kitty ? 



THE RETURN HOME, 348 

For a moment Mrs. Wolferston had nearly 
turned back and asked her daughter to go 
with her. 

"But I resolved not to stir up strife 
between them/' she said, " and I beheve he 
would refuse to let her accompany me." 



16.2 



544 R00K8T0NE. 



CHAPTER XIX. 

kitty's warning. 

rilHE light had faded quickly, and when 
Mrs. Wolferston stooped to enter 
the low cottage door the room was in dark- 
ness, except for the smouldering log on the 
hearth. 

Seeing a visitor, but not making out who 
it was, Kitty got up briskly and struck at 
the half-burned wood. The sparks flew 
out in all directions ; then, stooping down, 
the old woman took a few shavings from a 



KITTTS WARNING. 245 

heap in the comer, and in a moment, as if 
by magic, the little room was fiUed with 
bright, ruddy light. 

The red glare flickered over Kitty's face 
as she turned sideways to peer at her 
visitor. She looked something like what 
we fancy the old witch of a feiry story ; 
but a gleam of hearty, unfeigned delight, 
such as no witch's face ever glowed with, 
spread over hers when she recognised her 
visitor. 

" Well, to be sure ! Be it ee'self as is 
come back, this is a sight ! Jem he said 
summat on't ; but him be a rare gawk at 
news, and I just bid he hold his idle talk. 
Will 'ge please sit ye down. Madam Wolfer- 
ston ? Ah ! it wur a sad day for Rookstone 
when ye left it. Have 'ee brought Master 
Christy to see fold place T 



246 ROOKSTONE. 



!'* 



" No ; I came alone. My daughter^ 
Mrs. Wolferston, is not well enough to bear 
the fatigue of much company/' 

Kitty groaned. " Not well, beant her ? 
An' no wonder ; what call has her to look 
for health or welfare either, I'd like to 
know, flyin' in the face of a solemn warn- 
ing 

Mrs. Wolferston looked puzzled. She 
felt inclined to check Kitty ; and yet the 
old woman's manner was too earnest not to 
be impressive. Kitty grew more and more 
excited as she went on : 

" I warned she as if her wur my own 
child. I teUed she yon squoire were 
naught for a 'ooman to trust to ; and Mary 
beant a 'ooman, she be naught but a un- 
grown gal. More's the pity for 'ee. Madam 
Wolferston, she be so untamed like; for 



KITTTS WARNING. - 247 

thay do tell I 'ee never liked the match, 
hut thay young folk wur too strong for 'ee. 
Bless us, I knaw what thay sort o' gals be : 
easy enough to drive when thay be coupled, 
but as hard-mouthed as colts when thay be 
single. Hell knaw how to guide she, let 
him be for that/* 

"You have been misinformed, Kitty." 
Mrs. Wolferston spoke very coldly; she 
thought the conversation better ended. " I 
was quite willing that my daughter should 
marry Mr. Wolferston." 

A cry of astonishment burst from Kitty 
before her visitor had finished speaking. 
" Eh, but I ha' heerd o' witchcraft and other 
tomfooleries, an' I put 'em aside for idle talk. 
I a'most think there be sununat o' that in 
Bichard Wolferston, or he'd not ha' gla- 
moured the mother as well as the darter. 



248 ^ ROOKSTONE. 



it 



Nobut yeeself/' she went on, slowly shakings 
her head, "would ha' made I believe a 
quiet, sober, godly lady, as *ee be. Madam 
Wolferston, would uphold such awftil way& 
and practices as goes on at Rookstone now. 

" Well, Kitty, I came to see you, and to 
hear about your rhexmiatism and Jem ; but 
if you can only find fault with Mr. Wolfer- 
ston I must go away." 

Mrs. Wolferston rose as she spoke. The 
old woman's words had increased the dark 
feai^ and forebodings Richard had re^ 
awakened ; but it was impossible to listen 
to any gossip about Rookstone. 

To her surprise, Kitty laid her hand on 
her arm. 

" Dwoant 'ee bring Master Christy here, 
then," she spoke in a shriU, eager voice. 

May be him 'ull get tainted wi' all thay 



a 



KITTTS WARNING. 249^ 

new-fangled nossiuns . no prayers, na 
church-gwoing. Oh, Madam Wolferston,. 
ye may have changed ; tho' I can't credit 
such a felling away. But what would the 
dear squoire heself say . him as wur so 
right-minded . to see a lot o' cursin' 
Frenchmen and drinkin' German chaps, 
drivin' the whole viUage wild with thay 
doins V 

" It can be no business of yours or mine/^ 
Mrs. Wolferston was much moved by the 
old woman's earnestness, although she strove 
not to show it. " Remember, Kitty, that 
they have only been home a fortnight, and 
have not got into regular ways yet. Now 
I must say good night, for it growa 
dark." 

" Well, madam, I means naut but good 
by what I says " . Kitty opened the 



250 ROOKSTONE, 



door reluctantly . '^ there be thay as won't 
see and thay as can't ! thay as natur blinds 
and thay as blinds thayselves. But one 
word I will speak, tho' aU the world wur 
strivin' to keep my mouth shut. I beant 
one of thay sort as dimibs my tongue when 
it ought to be waggin'. Yon squoire's a 
dark man, wi' more bad in he than good. 
I don't say what the bad be . I hanna 
found out ; but he has doin's with t' evil 
one ; an' he'd not a' nourished bad blood 
agen an old creetur like I, if I hadna 
somehow hit the right nail on the head in 
what I said to Miss Mary. Look ye here. 
Madam Wolferston. The real squoire, him 
as was kind by young and old alike, never 
meant to cast his little fair-headed boy on 
the world without a home over his head ; nor 
you neither. I know I'm only a stupid old 



KITTTS WARNING, 251 

'ooman, may be as soiur as a crab, some folks 
say; but I beant a shiftless 'ooman as 
leaves her work imfimshed. My life, may 
be, wonna last long enough, but while it 
lasts I beant a gwoin to rest till I ha' made 
out summat more about yon Eichard Wol- 
ferston than he gives out. He's more than 
one story hid under that black head o' hisn." 

"Good night, Kitty, I must go ;" and Mrs. 
Wolferston hurried away, too much dis- 
turbed and bewildered for any settled 
thought till she rejoined Mary, and then 
her daughter's smiling, happy face seemed 
to give a decided negative to Kitty's dark 
warnings. 

She felt pained when, coming down early 
next morning, she was told by the bearded 
Frenchman, who seemed to act as major- 
domo, that there would be no use in wait- 



262 ROOKSTONE. 



ing breakfast ; monsieur and madame 
always took coffee in their rooms. 

Mary appeared about eleven o'clock, full 
of apologies ; she had got into bad habits 
abroad, she said, but she hoped to do better ; 
and then, seemingly afraid of this topic, she 
flew off like a bird to all sorts of desultory 
talk, and won her mother to listen, though 
her heart was aching at what she felt was 
a want of confidence between them. 

Sunday came next day, and Mary's maid 
tapped at Mrs. Wolferston's door soon after 
breakfast. 

"Would madame wish the carriage to 
go to church in ?" 

"No, thank you, unless your mistress 
usually drives to church." 

The Frenchwoman shook her head. 

Madame did not go to church, but she 



KITTY'S WARNING. 253 

had thought that her mamma would find 
the walk much too fatiguing. 

Mrs. Wolferston repeated that she pre- 
ferred walking, and the smart maid de- 
parted. 

Never went to church ! But this was 
probably a hazarded assertion . ^the maid 
perhaps had not been long in their ser- 
vice : this wa only Max^'s third Sunday 
in England ; she might have felt ill or tired. 

But these excuses brought no comfort, 
and there was something in the warm 
greeting Mrs. Wolferston .met with after 
service was over, from the clergyman and 
his flock, which made her aware that &ces 
from the park were rare in the village. 

She went back to Eookstone sad and 
anxious. Janet she knew would have 
spoken out her thoughts and remonstrated 



254 EOOKSTONE. 



with her sister, but her mothet hesitated. 
Richaxd had specially told her that hia 
wife was deUcate and easily agitated, and it 
seemed impossible to open such a subject 
without giving Mary some amount of pain, 
and this Mrs. Wolferston, in her tender long- 
ing not to alienate the child who seined so 
anxious for her aflfection, could not make up 
her mind to give. 

Should she speak to Bichard ? She did 
not know why, whether fipom the eflfect of 
Kitty's words, or from the restraint his 
formal, courteous manner had created, but 
Mrs. Wolferston became suddenly aware, 
when she asked herself this question, that 
she had grown afraid of her son-in-law ; she 
noticed, too, how seldom he left her alone 
with Mary. 

He might be capable of separating them 



KITTTS WARNING: ^5 



?. -T I tr 



entirely if she interfered with his opinions ; 
and yet was a mother to give up all right 
of influence over so young a girl as Mary, 
knowing as she did the utter incapacity of 
her husband to help her in these ways ? 
And Mary was ^about to become a mother 1 
Mrs. Wolferston had heard that those who 
give up appointed public ordinances are apt 
to fall into careless ways about private ones. 
A prayerless mother ! this idea was terrible, 
and when she at length slept, her night 
was disturbed and restless. 

She awaked with that strange sense of 
impending misfortune we all know so well ; 
Kitty's words came back much more vividly. 
She knew Kitty to be a clever, energetic, 
and persevering woman. It was terrible to 
think that she would henceforth be a per- 
petual spy on Mary's husband, and Mrs. 



266 ROOKSTONE. 



Wolferston could not hide from herself the 
<50iiviction that probably in his life in Cali- 
fornia there had been episodes which 
Bichard might wish to remain unknown. 
The hints about the will had not troubled 
her. She always clung to the remembrance 
.of that interrupted conversation with her 
husband as a safeguard against doubts or 
murm\u. He had thought Richard's father 
unjustly dismherited, and he had resolved 
that Christy should not entail a c\ue on 
himself by possessing what was rightfully 
the property of another man. 

But the arrival of the post entirely 
changed the ciurent of her thoughts. 
Janet wrote that Henry Wenlock might 
be expected any day, and although she 
did not ask her mother to shorten her 
visit, Mrs. Wolferston felt how much com- 



KITTTS WARNING. 257 



fort her sympathy would be to Janet 

in these anxious days of expectation. 
When Mary came downstairs her mother 

told her Janet's news. 

*' I believe, my dear child, I ought to go 
home at once ; poor girl, she has no one 
but me to share her joy with." 

Mary burst into passionate weeping ; 
her mother tried to calm her, but it was 
useless. 

" You don't love me. Oh ! I am sure 
you do not ; no one loves me but Richard," 
she sobbed, "and he will not love me 
long, for I have teased him and made 
him angry ; I know why you are going, 
you think me so wicked because I try 
to obey and please my husband ; but, 
mother, it is cruel of you to punish me for 
this." 

VOL. I. 17 



258 ROOKSTONE. 



" But, Mary, what have I said or 
done that is cruel ?" 

"I know," she said, **I was watching 
you the first evening; I begged him so 
hard before you came just to let things be 
as they used to be, and he said it would be 
acting a falsehood, and he would not have 
shams in his house ; he is so true and 
noble, mother, he could not ; and when I 
begged him hard, he went away angrily, 
and said I was hysterical ; and, mamma, 
mamma, I know if I were to try and please 
you by going to church and all that, not 
only it would make imhappiness between 
him and me, but he would never let me 
see you again. 

A slight flush came into her mother's 
face. 

" I think and hope you wrong your hus- 



11 



KITTTS WARNING. 259 



band, Mary, but if you feel yourself that 
you have acted wrongly in giving up these 
things, surely you are in great peril ; we 
have nowhere a warrant to let human love 
or human duty come between us and that 
which we feel to be necessary to us. I am 
not speaking to you as I might speak ; I 
am not urging you to disobey your hus- 
band, if it is indeed possible that he has 
forbidden you a religious mode of life, but 
I only tell you to listen attentively to tha 
fears and misgivings which I can see beset 
you ; they are not idle scruples, my dar-^ 
ling." 

But Mary's agitation had become un* 
controllable ; it seemed as if something 
in her mother's words had moved her 
beyond endurance. One hysterical fit 

17.2 



260 ROOKtSTONE, 



succeeded another, and Mrs. Wolfer- 

ston was growing seriously alarmed, 

when Richard came abruptly into the 
room. 



JSQ UIRE CHRISTOPHERS STUD Y. 261 



CHAPTER XX. 



SQUIRE Christopher's study. 



"p ICHARD WOLFERSTON looked 
sternly at his mother-in-law and 
then at Mary, but he did not speak. 

" Ah, Richard !" his wife sobbed, 
" mamma is going away from me 
already." 

" How can you be such a baby T he said, 
coldly; *'I thought the post must have 
brought some very distressing news," he 
glanced at the letter on the table. ** Surely 



262 ROOKSTONE. 



you don't wish to force your mother to stay 
against her wilL" 

His words had a magical effect on Mary, 
but the tone jarred Mrs. Wolferston ; she 
looked up at him ; there was that cold, 
cynical sneer on his face which had at first 
alienated her from hun. 

" Willingness is not in question," she 
said, "but I find we may daily expect 
Captain Wenlock's arrival, and I think I 
ought to be with Janet." 

" I am the last person who would will- 
ingly interfere with your notions of duty," 

he spoke with such studied politeness that 
it seemed to Mrs. Wolferston he was really 

angry, but she feared to agitate Mary by 

any explanation. 

Mary had dried her eyes, and sat quiet 

and subdued tUl her husband asked her to 



SQ UIRE CHRISTOPHERS STUD 7. 263 

execute some commission which obliged 
her to leave the room. Both mother and 
daughter felt that he did this on purpose, 
and as their eyes met, the glance of sup- 
pressed alarm in each made them strangely- 
alike. 

But Mrs. Wolferston's fear was only- 
momentary ; she rose to follow Mary. 

Richard had turned away to the win- 
dow, but he knew of her movement in- 
stantly. 

"I want you to look here, if you will 
be so good, Mrs. Wolferston," he said, 
quietly, without so much as a glance to- 
wards her ; " you know the value of those 
oak-trees as well as I do, and Painson 
wants to persuade me to cut them down." 

He spoke with that unruffled calm 
which always gives its owner an advan- 



264 ROOKSTQNE. 



tage over more impulsive, sensitive na- 
tures. 

Instead of following Mary, she came and 
stood beside him. 

His forced manner left him at once ; hfe 
kept her there talking for half-an-hour 
about the park and the trees, Captain 
Wenlock and his prospects, till she almost 
felt towards him as she had felt during the 
days of his short engagement to Mary, 
when he had won her to look upon him 
with real affection and confidence. 

Suddenly he broke off the conversation. 

" I forget if you said when you would 
like the carriage to take you to the station." 

"I had not specified any time, I was 
just settling my departiu'e w;hen you came 
in, but I have no wish to leave Mary 
abruptly." 



SQUIRE CHRISTOPHERS STUDY. 265 

. . 

" You are always unselfish, I know," he 
smiled, "but whenever you go the poor 
child will feel it sadly; will it not be 
better to make one business of it and re- 
turn to town this afternoon ? I will order 
the carriage to be ready to meet the four 
o'clock train." 

He left the room before she could an- 
swer, and Mrs. Wolferston felt greatly 
bewildered. His manner had been frank 
and kind, winning even, and yet there was 
something so decided in his proposal, 
something which she felt herself so power- 
less to resist, that it was difficult to believe 
he had not snatched at a pretext for sepa- 
rating her from Mary. 

A sudden fear came upon her as she 
remembered his harshly spoken warning 
on her way to Kookstone. Was he going 



266 ROOKSTONE. 



to pimisli her for the agitation which he 
had witnessed in his wife, and to separate 
them for ever ? And as the idea mastered 
her, with ahnost a wild terror she resolved 
to see Mary at once, and if she found her 
urgent for her stay, to remain at Rook- 
stone a few days longer. If Richard's 
manner had been truthful, if he really 
liked her as much as he had implied, he 
<50uld have no wish to hasten her de- 
parture. 

She knocked at the door of Mary's 
room; there was no answer,* and when 
she knocked again, Richard himself opened 

it. 

"You want Mary?" he said, in a low 
voice. " I have persuaded her to lie down 
in her dressing-room. I have told her as 
gently as possible that you are going to 



SQ UIRE CHRISTOPHERS STUDY, 267 

town this afternoon ; I did this to save you 
another scene, but, as I suspected, she had 
imagined that you intended to leave Rook- 
stone to-day, and I think she is ashamed 
of having so distressed you." 

His words were gently and smilingly 
spoken, and yet they fell like a stone on 
the hope which had beeu struggling with 
all Mrs. Wolferston's dark doubts and 
fears. As he closed the door and she 
passed along the gaUery, she felt half 
tempted to go into the dressing-room and 
see whether Mary was kept there against 
her will. It was only a momentary 
thought. Had she not resolved never to 
stir up strife between the husband and 
wife ? Mary belonged more to Richard 
than to herself now ; it was bitter to yield 
her child up to his guidance, but what 



268 ROOKSTONE. 

could she do ? Open remonstrance to him 
respecting his opinions would, she felt cer- 
tain, ensure the separation she so greatly 
dreaded. All she could trust to was the 
influence affection gave her over Mary, and 
prayer, that a better, higher life than the 
mere earthly existence they seemed to lead 
at present might yet be in store for her 
erring children. 

Mary came down into the saloon only a 
little while before her mother's departure ; 
her husband followed almost directly. 

She looked as if she had been crying^ 

but she was calm and composed, even when 

she said good-bye ; the strained clasp in 

' which she held her mother alone told how 

deeply she felt this parting. 

Her husband drew her hand into 
his arm and led her back into the 



SQ UIRE CHRISTOPHERS STUD Y. 269 

saloon before the carriage was out of 
sight. 

" That is brave and good," and he kissed 
her. 

But she did not answer ; for the first 
time since their marriage he felt that she 
received his praise and his tenderness 
passively, almost with coldness. 

At another moment his strong power of 
self-control would have enabled him to 
appear imconscious, but self-reproach 
usually makes a man irritable, and Mrs. 
Wolferston's sad yearning eyes, as they 
took their last look at Mary, haunted 
him. 

" What is the matter now T he spoke 
so sternly that his wife started. " Really 
my patience begins to wear out : one 
minute I find you in an agony of sobs 



270 ROOKSTONE, 



and tears at the bare idea of losing your 
mother, and when I try to comfort you for 
her loss you repulse me." 

" Oh ! Richard," and then the facUe,. 
easily-moved nature broke down, its mo- 
mentary anger melting in tears. 

She did not know what was the matter 
with her : it seemed as if all her happiness 
had gone. She had behaved foolishly to 
her mother, and now she had made her 
darling husband angry. all this came in 
little bursts of penitent misery between her 
sobs. finally, she beHeved it would be 
much better if she died, and then Richard 
Tvould be free and be able to many a really 
good wife and be happy. 

For a moment the cloud left her hus- 
band's fiice. 

" Come, come," he said, pettingly, " you 



SQUIRE CHRISTOPHERS STUDY. 271 

are in a hurry to settle matters ; we won't 
talk about a new wife till I'm tired of you^ 
my pet ; but I think, for the futiu'e, you 
will be more inclined to be guided by me 
than by your own inclinations." 

These last words were gravely spoken, 
and he rose from the couch beside her and 
stood while she answered . 

"I don't know what you mean. I 
thought you always guided me." 

He seemed imeasy ; he took a turn up 
and down the room before he spoke 
again. 

" Your memory is worse than I thought 
it. I can hardly think you have for- 
gotten the answer I made you when you 
urged me to let you ask your mother to 
Rookstone." 

" I remember that, of course, but I don't 



272 ROOKSTONE, 



see what it has had to do with my un- 
happiness." 

He threw his head back with a quick, 
impatient movement. 

"I should have thought it needed no 
application. I told you that a mother-in- 
law always breeds quarrels in a household, 
not from any fault, but from the natural 
jealousy she feels of her daughter's hus- 
band ; you would not believe me, and per- 
haps it is as well that I allowed you to 
convince yoiu^elf." 

" But, Richard, it is an entire mistake. 
Mamma never said a word to me until I 
spoke to her, and then what she did say 
was only what my conscience tells me if I 
listen to its . " 

" Conscience, Mary ! have I not told you 
that I detest cant of any sort ? And this 



SQUIRE CHRISTOPHERS STUDY, 273 

conscience of yours" . ^he laid a sneering 
emphasis on the word . "seems to me to 
be very one-sided in its tellings. You pro- 
mised me that if I would consent to your 
mother's visit you would hold no conversa- 
tion with her on this special subject, and 
yet you say you began it yourself Does 
your ^ conscience ' tell nothing about dis- 
obedience to your husband T 

He looked fixedly at her ; to his surprise 
she sat quiet without showing any of the 
impulsive sorrow he had expected. He 
had thought himself so thoroughly mas- 
ter of this loving nature's moods that 
he felt as disconcerted as a showman feels 
when he pulls the wrong strings of a 
puppet. 

Mary pressed her hands tightly together 
VOL. I. 18 



274 ROOKSTONE, 



before she spoke; a half-bewildered, half- 
imploring look came into her face. 

" Oh, darling, I do not know ; it is aU con- 
fusion again. While mamma talked to me, 
light seemed to come into my mind ; it was 
very painfiil ; it was more than I could bear, 
but I think it was the real truth ; it was as 
if I caught sight of things I have been hiding 
my eyes from ever since I left Rookstone, 
and it almost made me want to go back to 
the old life again ; and then comes the 
thought of marriage vows ; it must be 
right to love and obey you, Richard. Why 
did I feel, when you spoke just now, as if 
I should foUow inclination and not duty in 
obeying you ?" 

His face had grown very pale, and a 
nervous twitch about the mouth more than 
once betrayed a desire to interrupt her, but 



SQUIRE CHRISTOPHERS STUDY. 275 

he waited till she had finished . waited even 
when she sat there pale . with those soft 
imploring eyes raised to his. 

She did not guess what a tempest she 
had raised. He almost trembled with pas- 
sion when he found that aU the subtle 
sophistries with which, aided by his real 
tenderness, he had lulled Mary's religious, 
or, as he called them, superstitious scruples 
to sleep had been swept away by a single 
conversation, and that deep down in his 
wife's heart the root of aU this " folly and 
nonsense" was as firm as ever. If he had 
answered her in the heat of anger it might 
have been better for both, but he dared 
not ; he felt that it was a crisis, and with 
all his tyranny he dreaded the power that 
his passionate love for his wife gave her 
over him ; he must have time for thought. 

18.2 



276 ROOKSTONE. 



" I will come back to you in a moment," 
he said, and then he went into the room on 
the left, which had been the late squire's 
study. 

It was no one's room now ; it had been 
left untouched since that sad evening, and 
there was something almost ghostly in the 
sight of that tall, high-backed wooden chair, 
placed in front of the davenport. 

It was plain that Richard Wolferston 
thought so, for a perceptible shudder ran 
through him as he stood stiU in the middle 
of the room, his eyes strained on the chair 
as if he were striving to picture his lost 
cousin in his accustomed place. For a few 
minutes he stood spelled by the painful re- 
membrance, then his eyes wandered list- 
lessly over the room tiU they fixed them- 
selves on the davenport : a start . a shock 



SQUIRE CHRISTOPHERS STUDY. 277 

of sudden remembrance . and he went hur- 
riedly to it and tried all the drawers, one 
after another ; aU were locked, but the key 
was in the top drawer on the right hand 
side ; he took this out and put it in his 
pocket. 

" I am glad I came here," he said ; " the 
sight of the place, hateful as it is, has 
brought me to my senses. Where would 
be the use of arguing with such a chUd, 
darling though she is ? I will take no 
fiirther notice of her outbreak, but I think 
my saintly, interfering mother-in-law has 
paid her last visit to Rookstone." 

He turned quickly to the door; as he 
reached it something seemed to occur to 
him ; he went back to the davenport, raised 
the lid of the desk, and placed the key of 
the drawer inside. 



278 ROOKSTONE. 



Then the same horror returned that had 
possessed him on his entrance ; he hurried 
to the study door, locked it on the outside, 
and put the key in his pocket. 



END OF VOL. I. 
ROOKSTONE. 



CHAPTER I. 



RICHARD WOLFERSTON's JOURNEY. 



"T^ yrARY had felt too wretched about this 
first serious dispute with her hus- 
band, to recur voluntarily to anything likely 
to revive it, so that when he returned to 
the saloon and asked her to come and sit 
beside the lake with him, she was only too 
glad to throw herself into the old happy 
life again, imclouded by doubts and mis- 
givings. 

VOL. II. 1 



ROOKSTONE. 



Her mother's words came bax?k with a 
vividness that now and then startled her ; 
and then, with the sophistiy which comes 
so easily when it finds us inclined to receive 
its teaching, she told herself that Richard 
was a good man, and, except in this one 
matter, neglect of the ordinances of re- 
ligion, he led a blameless life. Why should 
he not be as right as her father and mother 
had been? His creed was, so far as she 
could discover it, that the abundant love 
which created us intended us to live free 
and unshackled by any forced service of 
prayer or praise ; but she was vague on the 
subject of her husband's opinions. He had 
taught her in the first days of their married 
life that a woman who could argue seriously, 
or even think deeply, was unfeminine and 



RICHARD WOLFERSTON'S JOURNEY. 3 

unlovable, and this had hitherto checked 
any eflfort she had felt impelled to make 
towards discussion Her foreign life had 
helped to make her careless; the uncer- 
tain and short-lived nature of their house- 
hold arrangements . ^for they had rarely 
remained more than a month in one spot . 
had precluded any attempt, even if she had 
felt inclination to make one, at order in her 
own way of passing time. Hitherto hers 
had been a dolce far niente existence, full 
of love and sunshine, her mind animated 
and amused, and her memory stored with 
variety of scenery, with famous pictures, 
and statues, and sights. She had scarcely 
had a moment for serious thought till she 
settled into the old Ufe at Rookstone. 

Even before her mother's visit, in those 

1.2 



ROOKSTONE. 



few intensely quiet uneventful days suc- 
ceeding her return, she had been conscious 
of a secret discontent. She had thought 
Richard's absence and occupation through 
business caused it, and already she regretted 
they had come back. Abroad there had 
been no one to take him from her side. At 
Rookstone the bailiff, or the steward, or the 
gamekeeper, or some other troublesome per- 
son was always on the watch to deprive 
her of her husband. 

After Mrs. Wolferston's departure this 
had mended, and to her joy Mary found 
that her husband rarely left her. He had 
never shown himself so tender, so caress- 
ing, as during these last few days, and 
hour by hour her mother's influence gi-ew 
fainter, and its memory ftirther off. 

One morning he came into the charming 



RICHARD WOLFERSTOirS JOURNEY. 5 

little room he had built for her special oc- 
cupation on the site of one of those con- 
sumed by the fire, a room filled with the 
art-treasures his good taste had collected 
for her during their foreign travel, for 
Richard Wolferston possessed emmently 
the gift, call it by what name you will, 
which marks out the man of true taste 
fi:om the mere amasser of objects of art. 
To him price and rarity were alike indif- 
ferent ; he worshipped the beautiful, and 
if the object he saw fiilfilled its require- 
ments, it must be his immediately almost 
at any cost. As he came in he glanced 
over the letter in his hand. The troubled 
look on his face alarmed his wife. In a 
moment she was clinging to his arm, her 

heart beating fast and her eyes filled with 
eager enquiry. 



6 ROOKSTONE. 



" Nothing to be frightened at, my own 
darling, only a dreary prospect for both of 
us. What will you say now if I tell you I 
must go away for a whole week T 

"Oh, Richard, I should die, indeed I 
should. I could not live a week without 

you." 

He drew her closer to him. " It is not 
worse for you than for me," he said, fondly, 
" but I am afraid it must be ; just a year 
ago I promised Lord Seton to spend the 
first week of September with him, and I 
must keep my word. Now, Mary" . she 
had hidden her face between her hands . 



" you do not believe that it is for the sake 
of slaughtering a few miserable birds that 
I am willing to leave you . I need not leave 
Rookstone to do that . but if I mean to 



RICHARD WOLFERSTOirS JOURNEY. 7 

be an Englisli landholder I must follow 
Painson's advice, though the old rascal 
forgot his place when he gave it . I must 
improve my position/' 

"You say you only live for me," she 
murmured, hiding her eyes on his shoulder, 
for tears were gathering rapidly ; " if I am 
satisfied with you, why need you care about 
others ?" 

He looked vexed for a moment, and then 
he smUed. " It is for you, you darling little 
unbeliever, that I undertake this journey 
to Scotland. You don't suppose I mean 
you to follow your mother's example, and 
spend aU the best and brightest part of 
your life at Rookstone; I want other 
people to know how lovely my darling is . 
people who can appreciate beauty and 



8 ROOKSTONE. 



grace a little more correctly than our beef- 
and-mutton-eating country squires, and 
their awkward red-armed daughters ; I 
mean you to spend next spring in London, 
but at your age you must be under the 
wing of some great lady or other, and 
either Lady Seton or the Duchess of 
Moray, her mother-in-law, is exactly the 
person to do you justice and give you the 
prestige you deserve. I only wish you 
could go with me now/' 

Her foreign life had cured Mary of the 
little shyness she had by nature, and there 
was something in this brilliant prospect 
that took her fancy. She looked up 
smiluig, and then a sudden new thought 
checked her. 

" But I am afraid you are going to take 



RIO HARD WOLFERSTON'S JOURNEY. ^ 

all this trouble for nothing, there will be 

my dear little baby to think of next 

spring." 

He laughed. '* It is high time, I see, to 

put you under Lady Seton's care. When 

shall I teach you that everything is made 

for our enjoyment, not to fetter and tor- 
ment us ? We shall leave the baby in 

safe hands at Rookstone, far happier than 

it could be with such a very experienced 
mother in London. Now look bright and 
happy again, my own darling. Have I not 
always smoothed all your little troubles 
away for you V 

What could she do but listen and be- 
lieve while he explained to her all his plans- 
for their future life in England? . a life 
which seemed to Mary more like a peep 



10 ROOKSTONE. 



into fairy-land than anything reaL Richard 
had taught her that she possessed unusual 
loveliness, and she could not help sharing 
in his desire to display her beauty to the 
world. 

Finally she agreed cheerfully to his jour- 
ney to Scotland. He was to start the 
next day, Monday, and to return the fol- 
lowing Saturday. 

" It will be very, very lonely, though,'' 
and a thought which she dared not utter 
set her lips quivering. 

He had expected her to speak it ; but 
till now he had resolved not to lead the 
way. Somehow the tender trembling 
mouth made him suddenly weak. 

" I know what you are thinking, my dar- 
ling, that you ought to have your mother or 



RIOHARD WOLFERSTOIPS JOURNEY. 11 

your sister to comfort you in my absence, 
but you are too good to wish to disturb 
them now. Captain Wenlock must either 
have just arrived, or he must be expected 
to arrive at any moment." 

" Yes, I know, only if . ^if I should be ill, 
Richard, or . " 

" HI ! you are looking as bright as a 
rose, and you are too good to fret yourself 
ill ; besides, you have only to send me a 
telegram, and I should be with you in 
twelve hours; but" . ^he laughed, though 
he looked uneasy . " why should you think 
of illness ? Illness does not visit youth 
and beauty like yours without a cause. 
Come, I want you in the flower garden." 

He started early next morning on his 
Scotch journey, and Mary was so brave at 



12 ROOKSTONE. 



saying good-bye, that the disquiet her 
words had roused faded quickly from hi& 
mind ; ambitions, thoughts, and plans, took 
possession of him, and although every now 
and then he remembered his darling's lone- 
liness, still it was only a momentary idea, 
conveying no real sensation of uneasi- 
ness. 

Mary stood looking after the carriage, 
and then she went back into the saloon, 
and hiding her face among the cushions of 
a sofa, she sobbed as if she could never be 
comforted. 

" It is not only losing Richard," she said, 
" that is bad enough, but there is some- 
thing worse, though I dared not tell him ; 
while he is here he keeps away those 
teasing, tormenting thoughts, because I am 



RICHARD WOLFERSTON'S JOURNEY. 13 

always with him ; but now I am all alone, 
what shall I do to get away from them ? If 
he had not forbidden me, I would go and see 
old Kitty. She amused me even when she 
was cross. At any rate if I meet her I 
may speak to her." 

She had hesitated before she said the 
last words, but they seemed . to cheer 
her. 

She rang for her hat, and then went 
down the terrace steps in the direction of 
a copse, that stretched away behind 
Kitty's cottage and skirted the edge of 
the park. 



14 ROOKSTONE. 



CHAPTEK 11. 



TWO TELEGBAMS. 



QN ae morning of EioW. dept.re 
for Scotland there was great excite- 
ment at the Brompton villa. A telegram 
came to Janet from Captain Wenlock at 
Southampton. He would be with them 
as soon as he could follow the message ; 
but morning parsed, and then aaemoon, 
and still he had not come. 

At length there was the welcome sound 



TWO TELEGRAMS, 15 

of a cab stopping before the gate. Janet 
ran to the window. The cabman had 
opened the door, and Mrs. Webb got out 
of the vehicle. 

'' Oh, mother " . Janet clasped her hands 
vehemently . '*it is not Henry, it is Mrs. 
Webb ; she will be here when he comes ; 
how very unfortunate; what shaU we do 
wil^h her V 

Before her mother could answer, Mrs. 
Webb was annoimced. She greeted her 
cousins with a series of kisses on the cheek. 

" So you have a telegram from Henry 
Wenlock. I am glad to know he is coming 
back at last. He has not hiuried himself, 
has he, Janet ? But I fancy, for those who 
like it, India is an attractive residence. 
When did he say he should be with you ?" 



16 ROOKSTONE. 



The question was addressed to Janet, 
but she left her mother to answer it. 

" He did not specify any time," said Mrs. 
Wolferston. " I think it possible he will 
stay to get some of his baggage cleared 
before he leaves Southampton." 

Mrs. Webb laughed; she had one of 
those small metallic laughs that remind one 
irresistibly of a cracked bell. 

"Then you won't see him for a week, 
Amy. There is so much vexatious delay 
in clearing this Indian baggage ; my notion 
was that a person in Captain Wenlock's 
position" . a significant look at Janet 
pointed her meaning . "would be far too 
impatient to trouble himself about bag- 
gage. I should have thought, you know" 
. another Uttle stinging laugh. " that he t 



TWO TELEGRAMS. 17 

would have made himself quite ridiculous 
in his hurry to get to town, but really young 
men are not what they used to be." 

Mrs. Wolferston tried to turn the con- 
versation to Mrs. Webb's husband and 
daughter. 

" Ah, John's quite well, thank you . 
looking forward already to his holiday . ^he 
is thinking of Venice this year by way of 
the Tyrol. It is charming to know that he 
has so much enjoyment, is it not ? I really 
rejoice in it." 

Janet looked up sharply. There was 
very little sympathy between her and her 
mother's cousin. 

" What do you rejoice in . his absence ?" 

^'Oh, dear, no; not likely I should do 
that. When you come to have a husband, 

VOL. n. 2 



18 ROOKSTONE. 



Janet, you will understand the trial ot 
separation ; but of course a woman is a 
mere nobody and nothing beside her hus- 
band, and if he enjoys himself she ought 
to be quite content." 

" That is not my notion of married hap- 
piness," said Janet. " It seems to me it 
must be mutual." 

Mrs. Webb nodded her head with 
another provoking laugh. 

'* Ah, but you see you have no real ex- 
perience yet. Those sort of ideas are very 
pretty and charming, but you have a little 
worldly wisdom to learn, my dear ; nothing 
like it, you may depend . for checking dis- 
appointment afterwards." 

" I don't imderstand you," said Janet, 
hotly. She tried not to dislike Mrs. 



TWO TELEGRAMS. 19 

Webb, but she always came out of any 
discussion with her mother's cousin sore 
and worsted. 

"Well, I mean, dear, that some girls 
have such exaggerated notions about love 
and romance, and all that, and my idea is 
that it's a great pity for them to enter 
upon life with their eyes closed to the 
truth. All that sort of * love's young 
dream' is very pretty in books, dear, but 
there's not one husband in a thousand who 
does not enjoy a little independent holiday 
every year. I'm not mahgning men, you  
know. They mean aU they say at the 
time; but there is disappointment to be 

a 

found in everything, Janet, and the less 
worldly wisdom you begin life with, the 
sharper your disappointment will be." 

2.2 



20 ROOKSTONE. 



Mrs. Wolferston saw the hot flush 
deepen, and she was afraid of Janet's 
answer. 

" Well, Louisa, we cannot expect her to 
benefit by experience just now. She must 
take her chance, as others do." 

" Blindfold ! Well, Amy, for a prudent, 
religious mother, you have the strangest 
notions. By-the-by, how is poor dear 
Mary? I was so surprised to find you 
had left her, though, between ourselves, 
you never could have got on with that 
precious son-in-law of yours . dear me, no." 

"I came back to receive Henry Wen- 
lock." 

Mrs. Webb laughed. 

" There, Janet, my dear, you looked in- 
dignant at me just now for counselling 



TWO TELEGRAMS. 21 

worldly wisdom ; yoiir mother doesn't 
despise it, you see. Poor dear Mary, I am 
so sorry for her ; so young, too ; she's quite 
alone now, of course . oh yes, she is . ^as I 
passed the Paddington station just before 
luncheon, who should I see in a cab but 
Eichard Wolferston ?" 

The widow gave a little surprised start, 
but she recovered herself at once. 

**Very likely; I believe Richard will 
often be obliged to come to town to see 
Mr. Painson and other business people." 

^^Well, I don't know, I'm sure, about 
business ; I don't know what gun-cases 
have to do with busines.s What with them 
and portmanteaus, it seemed to me that 
your son-in-law had luggage enough with 
him to travel over Europe." 



22 ROOKSTONE. 



Mrs. Wolferston looked pale and serious 
in an instant. What if her words had 
really awakened Mary to a sense of her 
neglected duties, and had created an es- 
trangement between her and her husband ? 
and yet this seemed impossible. 

"I scarcely think it could have been 
Richard," she said ; " Mary would have 
written to me." 

'^Ah, my dear Amy, I am afraid I 
praised your worldly wisdom too soon ; we 
all knew how you disliked that engage- 
ment, and, of course, poor dear Mary knew 
it too. It is not in human nature to sup- 
pose that she would let you know that you 
were right in your dislike, for, of course, 
with all my disbelief in romance after mar- 
riage, I do say that a man who could leave 

..J 



TWO TELEGRAMS. 23 

liis wife at such a time cannot be a very 
pattern husband." 

Janet quitted the room so suddenly that 
her mother's attention was arrested. 

Instead of answering her cousin, Mrs. 
Wolferston walked across to the window 
' and looked out. There was no luggage, 
but a taU, handsome man had just sprung 
out of a cab, and was imder the portico 
almost as soon as she caught a glimpse of 
him. 

She hoped Mrs. Webb would not guess 
what had happened, but that good lady's 
sharpness never slimibered. She reached 
the window in time to see the cab driving 
oflP, and like lightning she anived at the 
truth. 

^' Then Captain Wenlock has come, has 



24 ROORSTONE. 



he, at last ? Well, I am glad for poor 
Janet, after her long and wearisome sus- 
pense. Amy, don't you think we should 
go out to her ? . she might faint, you know, 
from the suddenness of the thing/' 

She was hurrying to the door, but Mrs, 
Wolferston stopped her. 

" Don't go to her, Louisa ; indeed, I 
think she is best left alone ; and perhaps 
when we have just said * How d'ye do ' to 
Henry, you and I had better go up-stairs ; 
after such a long separation they must 
have so much to say to one another." 

" I quite understand ; but really. Amy, 
I must say you might have trusted my 
discretion ; it is not probable that I, of all 
people, should be capable of anything 
likely to finstrate a match for poor Janet ; 



TWO TELEGRAMS. 25 

for, although one can't say much for his 
prospects, it will be an immense matter to 
get Janet off your hands." 

But any answer to this parting shaft was 
prevented by Captain Wenlock's entrance. 
Whatever his prospects might be, there 
could be no mistake as to the goodness of 
his expression. His deep blue eyes were 
handsome, but it was their hearty, genial 
truthftdness that fixed your gaze on them. 
His fair complexion, sim-browned by India, 
almost matched his tawny beard and mous- 
tache : he was a splendid specimen of an 
Englishman, and might have sat as a model 
for Richard the Lion-hearted. 

Before Mrs. Wolferston could shake hands 
with him, he had thrown both arms round 
her and given her a hearty kiss, at which 



26 ROOKSTONE. 



impetuous proceeding Mrs. Webb drew 
back, her thin lips pinched themselves 
together, and her whole maimer indicated 
a discreet terror lest the infliction should 
be extended to her. 

" Ah, Mrs. Webb, you see I have not 
forgotten how I used to tease you and 
Louisa ; how is Louisa T 

Such a rich, good-humoured voice, it 
seemed to Mrs. Wolferston as if he had 
brought the first real sunshine into those 
small rooms of the Brompton villa. 

" Louisa is quite well, thank you," her 
mother answered, stiffly ; " but she is a 
yoimg woman now. Captain Wenlock." 

** Now, you don't mean by that, that I 
am to call her Miss Webb ;" he laughed 
heartily at her discomfited face : " why, we 



TWO TELEGRAMS. 27 

are going to be cousins almost directly, you 
know, so I can't see the use of giving up 
good old customs." 

It seemed to Mrs. Webb there was no- 
thing to be gained by prolonging her visit, 
so she reluctantly said good-bye. As she 
^crossed the hall, escorted to the door by 
Captain Wenlock, she met Janet, and she 
mentally decided that her tall, well-grown 
daughter would be a far more suitable 
wifii for him than that ordinary-looking girl. 

" After all," she speculated, as she made 
her way back to Pimlico, " after all, they 
are not married yet, nor can they marry, so 
far as I can see, if he is to remain in Eng- 
land, and I don't suppose Janet would 
leave her mother. He has not a penny 
besides his pay, and Amy says that that 



28 ROOKSTONE. 



absurd girl Janet scarcely allows herself 
necessary articles of dress, because she is 
saving all she can out of that paltry 100 
a year for Christy's education. I hate such 
affectations of self-denial. However, dress 
would be quite thrown away on such a poor 
figure as Janet's." 

Meanwhile the three persons she had left 
at Brompton . specially two of them . ^were 
in the fulness of that exquisite happiness 
which a sudden reunion with those we love, 
after long separation, creates. 

Henry Wenlock laughed and talked and 
behaved far more like a schoolboy of twelve 
years old than a reasonable being. He 
called Mrs. Wolferston his darling mother 
already. He was going to give up the 
army, and change into a hard-working man. 




TWO TELEGRAMS. 29 

he said. He should not care what he did 
or how hard he worked, so long as he made 
a comfortable home for Janet. " How long 
will you give me to do this in, mother T 
he asked. 

** I shall leave you to do it in your own 
time, and according to your own wishes. I 
trust you entirely, Henry." 

Her eyes filled with quick-springing 
tears. His manner was such a contrast to 
Eichard Wolferston's ; and yet if, instead 
of all this joy and warmth at their reunion, 
he had dropped his engagement to Janet 
because he was not rich enough to marry a 
portionless wife, she could not have cen- 
sured him. 

She soon fo\md an excuse to leave him 
and Janet to themselves ; she wanted to be 



30 ROOKSTONE. 



alone, for her heart was overflowimg with 
thankfulness for the return of warmth and 
sunshine to her home. Her great aim had 
been to rear her children equally, and lat- 
terly it had seemed as if all this was re- 
versed . ^that all the earthly joys of hfe were 
showered on Mary, while Janet had a 
double burden of bitterness to bear alone. 

" And yet," said Mrs. Wolferston to her- 
self, " before this confirmation of her long- 
tried hopes, in the time of her most weary- 
ing suspense, I believe Janet was really 
happier than her sister. I fear the bright- - 
ness of Mary's life is a mere delusion, which 
keeps her from seeing the remorse she is 
laying up for the ftiture." 

But Mrs. Wolferston's was not a morbid, 
self-tormenting mind, and her thoughts 



TWO TELEGRAMS. 31 

soon went back to the contemplation of 
Janet's happiness. The meeting between 
Janet and her lover recalled vividly her 
own youth, and then came the remembrance 
of her early days at Rookstone, link by 
link, making the chain of events which had 
brought her to her present state. " It was 
too much happiBess for earth," she sighed : 
" and I was not thankful enough for it." 

She sat leaning her head on her hand, 
trying to call up distinctly the last look she 
had seen on her husband's Uving face. She 
remembered that when he passed through 
the saloon after dinner, on his way to the 
study, he had turned and looked at her 
with his pecuHar smile . the smile which 
Mary inherited, and which made her at 
times so like her father. Suddenly Mrs. 



32 ROOKSTONE. 



Wolferston started, and a keen remem- 
brance shot through her. The study was 
the room her husband had last occupied, 
and she had never revisited it since his 
death. It seemed a strange omission now : 
she wondered at herself as we often wonder 
at the non-fulfilment of purposes which, 
looked at without hindrances, seem to have 
l^een more than practicable . absurdly easy ; 
the excitement, the agitated mind, the suf- 
fering body, the manifold occupation, the 
over-taxed brain . all those things which, 
when present, so completely absorbed or hin- 
dered us, fade away into oblivion, and what 
we now call our negligence . our indolence 
even . stands out reproachingly. For the 
moment she forgot Janet's illness, the fire, 
her own hasty exit from Rookstone ; and 



TWO TELEGRAMS. 33 

when some of these remembrances came 
back to soothe her self-reproach, she asked 
herself why she had not visited the study 
during her recent stay in her old home. 

Well, she should soon be going there 
again ; spite of their painful discussion, she 
felt that Mary climg to her, and when the 
baby should be bom she knew that the tie 
between them would be drawn yet closer. 
" I do not often make resolutions," the pale, 
gentle woman said, quietly, to herself ; " but 
if my life is spared, the study shall be one 
of the first rooms I go into. If I find it 
is not occupied, I think I shall ask Richard 
to let me consider it my own room when- 
ever I stay at Eookstone." 

The dinner-bell roused her to join the 
lovers. Almost before they were seated at 

VOL. II. 3 



34 ROOKStONE. 



table came an impatient ringing at the 
gate. It was a telegram from Rookstone. 
Mrs. Wolferston was wanted there " at 
once" 



TRESPASSING. 36 



CHAPTER III. 



TRESPASSING. 



It TARY reached the first belt of trees, 
then she hesitated. " Supposing I 
should meet old Kitty," she said, "and 
she were to begin some of her awftd warn- 
ings and frighten me, what should I do 
now that I have not Richard to go to for 
comfort ? and yet Kitty was fond of me 
once. I remember when mamma went to 
see her she used generally to take her 

something . tea or snuff. and when she 

3.2 



36 ROOKSTONE, 



was ill we used to send her jelly. I won- 
der if she is ill now ; but I should not 
know how to help her if she is. I wish I 
had gone sometimes with mamma and Janet 
to see sick people ; I should have learned 
how to speak to them ; but I hate sitting 
in those Kttle stuflfy rooms. I never could 
understand the pleasure Janet seemed to 
find among the poor.: kissing those Httle 
rough-headed children, and listening to all 
their mothers' complaints. I would much 
rather follow Richard's plan . give them 
some money and have done with them ; but 
I dare not oflPer money to Kitty, she would 
be afironted ; aad yet if I could win her 
over to speak well of Richard, I should be 
so happy. Oh, I know what I'll take her." 
She clapped her hands in her wild childish 



TRESPASSING. 37 

delight. The last time she saw Kitty Rob- 
bins she waa crying over a dead thrush 
which she had kept in a cage for a long 
time. Mary had brought over several pet 
canaries from France, and she thought that 
one of these pretty little singing-birds would 
make an admirable peace-offering for cross 

old Kitty. It seemed strange that she 
should trouble herself about the old woman 
at all ; but Kitty had nin^ed her through 
^n illness, and had been very fond of her in 
her childhood, and Mary's was one of those 
olinging natures which cannot bear to be 
unloved by any one. Even at the risk of 
affecting more feeling than she really pos- 
sessed, she never could resist the tempta- 
tion of striving to win the love of others : 
it was this that made Janet consider her 



38 ROOKSTONE. 



sister false and shallow, when in truth she 
was only weak and over-anxious for aflPection. 

Kitty was the last remnant of the past 
left at Rookstone, and Mary clung to this 
remembrance ; besides, deep down in Mary's 
heart there lay a superstitious dread. Kitty 
had laid a sort of curse on her if she mar- 
ried Richard Wolferston, and it seemed to 
Mary that it might be well for her unborn 
child if she got Kitty's blessing before 
it came into the world, and thereby her 
good-will afterward. 

She ran back to the saloon and took down 
the smallest of the bird-cages, then with un- 
usual thoughtftdness she opened the drawer 
of a cabinet in which she kept her bird-seed, 
and rolled up a packet to take with her. 
As she forced the parcel into the pocket of 



TRESPASSING, 39 

her dress, her hand struck against some- 
thing hard and heavy. 

" It is that foolish key, and I am more 
foolish to cumber myself with it, instead of 
putting it into some safe place till Richard 
comes back. He said I was to take great 
care of it, but he never said I was to carry 
it about me ; it can't be lost, for I see it is 
labelled ' Study-door key ;' it may just stay 
snugly on this mantel-shelf till I come in 
from my walk. Oh, I do hope I shall meet 
Kitty !" 

She went down the steps again with her 
bird-cage in her hand. Its little occupant 
was so pretty, in its bright golden plumage, 
. surely Kitty must be appeased by such 
an ojffering. 

She did not go direct towards the cot- 



40 ROOKSTONE. 



i&ge ; she could not do this without dis- 
obeying her husband's express injunction. 
She had often seen the old woman gathering 
sticks to mend her fire on the border of the 
copse that fringed the park, and she went 
there to look for her. 

There was no Kitty, however, but a little 
way farther on, hidden among the thick 
bushes, she caught sight of the old woman's 
blue-checked apron. She opened a little 
white gate and passed through ; there was 
a notice board on either side of her, but she 
paid no heed to them. She only thought 
of her good-fortune in finding the object of 
her quest with so little difficulty. Yet as 
she drew nearer to the blue apron, half 
hidden by intervening tree-branches, its 
stillness struck her as unusual. 



TRESPASSING, 41 



She stooped below the drooping ash 
branches so as to get a ftdl view of the 
trunk where the blue apron still fluttered. 
Kitty was not there : one of her old aprons 
. which had evidently held the keeper's 
stores . ^hung on a fragment of bark. 

A dreary feeling of loneliness seized on 
Mary. She could not remember ever to 
have been in this part of the park before. 
Just then a dry twig snapped loudly under 
her feet. At the noise a pheasant whizzed 
out of the leafy branches of a beech-tree 
opposite her, almost touching her arm as it 
passed close by where she stood, completely 
screened by the drooping ash boughs. She 
saw a sudden flash, and felt a duU pain in 
the arm nearest the bird, and then came 
like lightmng the sharp report of a gun. 



42 ROOKSTONE. 



Mary screamed, and then stood stunned 

with terror : it seemed a long while to her 

after when she saw a pale, awe-struck face 

peep cautiously between the branches of 

the beech-tree. It was Jem Robbins, the 
keeper. 

His fiight and face called back Mary's 
senses. 

" Run for your mother," she said, autho- 
ritatively, " and take care of this bird." 

She had not let go the cage, and Jem 
took it from her hand and disappeared with 
it among the bushes ; then she found she 
could stand no longer. She did not faint, 
for the pain in her arm made her conscious ; 
but she was so giddy and weak that she lay 
down, as well as she could, on the heap of 
brown mast at the foot of the beech-tree. 



TRESPASSING, 4a 



Meantime Jem ran at his utmost speed 
to the lodge. He found his mother bend- 
ing over the stew she had concocted for his 
di^ar ; but Wa sudden entance and agi- 
tated face, gave her such a fright, that with 
a loud exclamation she upset the saucepan 
and its contents into the fire. 

" Oh ! Jem, ye be the unfortunatest gowk 
that wur ever cradled ; to think o' a beauti- 
fiil pheasant and two partridges burned and 
spiled past mendin'." 

" Thay be nothin'," he gasped. " Oh ! 
mother, IVe murdered she ; it be only one 
barrel, but she ha' got it all in she's 
side. Oh ! mother, will I be hanged for 
murder T 

The great overgrown feUow hid his face^ 
and began to roar like a bull. 



44 ROOKSTONE. 



" Hold yer noise this minit' will 'ee," his 
mother said, fiercely; "who be she as 
yee's speaJdn' on ; tell I quick, will, 'ee V 
she said, shaking his shoulder when she 
found he did not speak. 

" It be Muss Mary . pretty Muss Mary 
. ^the new Squire's missus." 

Kitty screamed, and clasped her hands in 
an agony of terror ; then like lightning her 
keen wits showed the necessity for imme- 
diate action. 

" Where be her ?" she said, hoarsely. 

" r the copse agen the white gate ; oh, 
oh," and Jem began to howl a&esh. 

Then she spoke more gently. "'Ee 
must think o' nothin' else but she now ; 
run down to the house and send foiu* or 
five of 'em to where you left she ; then get 




TRESPASSING, 45^ 



on a horse, and ride as fast as you can make 
it gallop to the station, and bid the master 
send one o' they wire messages for Madam 
Wolferston. Bide a wee " . she was fiimb- 
ling in her great pocket . " here's the place, 
her writ it down when her wur here. Call 
for Dr. Bannock as ye pass, but dwoant 
'ee loiter. The wire message is to come at 
all speed to * Muss Mary.' '' 



^6 ROOKSTONE. 



CHAPTER IV. 

THE HEIR OF ROOKSTONE. 

f |lHE trembling suspense was over. 
Mary was the mother of a healthy- 
son and heir to Rookstone, and as Mrs. 
Wolferston bent over and kissed her, the 
look in her daughter's eyes told her that 
this new little life would bind theirs for 
the future more closely together. 

Mrs. Wolferston had reached Rookstone 
nearly as soon as the doctor had, but Kitty 
Robbins had been invaluable. She had 



k 



THE HEIR OF ROOKSTONE. 47 

found Mary insensible, and having satisfied 
herself that the wound in her arm was a 
mere graze, only serious on account of the 
Bhock that had accompanied it, she stood 
quietly beside her till more efficient help 
arrived, planning how best her young lady 
might be conveyed to the house. 

Fortimately, Frangois, the French butler, 
was equally ready-witted, and Mary was 
soon in her own bedroom, from which Kitty 
Bobbins peremptorily expelled all assistants 
except one of the few English maids who 
had been retaiaed in the household. 

But as soon as Mary and her baby could 
be left for an instant the old woman drew 
Mrs. Wolferston away from the bedside. 

" May I be forgiven. Madam Wolferston, 
but if 'ee had not ha' comed when 'ee did I 



48 ROOKSTONE. 



wur just that frighted, as I thought I wur 
dyin'. Her" . a jerk of her thumb towards 
the bed showed the subject of her words . 
" niver spoke a word to I ; her looked at I 
hard like, and then her shut she's eyes, and 
says, *It is Kitty's curse; oh, mother, if 
you were to pray for me 1' I turned that 
cold, madam, as a stone, and shaked like as 
if the palsy had tooked I ; to think of the 
poor lamb takin' my words to heart ; do 'ee 
think thay have done she harm T 

"I trust not," said Mrs. Wolferston, 
gravely ; " but I hope this may make you 
cautious for the future, Kitty, not to take 
up such strong dislikes, and to be more 
careful ia what you say of others." 

" Dwoant 'ee tempt I to make a promise 
I shall likely break. Madam Wolferston./ 



THE HEIR OF ROOKSTONE. 49 

There beant no mortal use in trying to 
speak up for them as 'ee dwoant think no 
good on ; it be like papering a mUdewed 
wall, it 'ud break out in spite o' all I coTild 
do to keep it in." 

"Well, you need not promise, but I 
think you might try, Kitty, and I hope 
you will." 

Kitty shook her head doubtfully, and 
returned to her duties. 

Mrs. Wolferston spent the night in her 
daughter's room. She felt very anxious, 
for Eichard's absence put a double respon- 
sibility on her. She had sent off a tele- 
gram for him on her arrival, and another to 
announce the birth of his chUd, but Fran- 
9ois seemed doubtftd about the possibility 
of his master's speedy return. Mr. Wol- 

VOL. II. 4 



60 ROOKSTONE. 



ferston had said that he was not going 
direct to Lord Seton's. 

Next morning the doctor pronounced his 
patient to be doing as well as possible, but 
he said she must be kept very quiet, and 
seemed to think Mr. Wolferston's absence 
was not to be regretted. 

The days and nights passed uneventfully. 
The baby was a small, delicate creature, 
but pretty, nevertheless. Kitty said she 
wished it would not be so still and quiet, 
but it was a comfort to see it alive and 
likely to live. 

On the afternoon of the third day,' when 
the doctor had seen his patient, he asked 
Mrs. Wolferston to come down-stairs with 
him into the saloon. " You must excuse 
me, my dear old friend," he said, kindly ; 



THE HEIR OF ROOKSTONE. 61 

^*but there is no need for you to shut 
yourself up in Mrs. Kichaid's rooms. She 
is doing famously, and if you don't take a 
little air and exercise I shall have another 
patient to look after. What will Mr. 
Wolferaton say if he comes back and finds 
you ill r 

She smiled and said she was only a little 
tired, but the doctor would not go away 
till she had promised not to return to 
Mary's room till evening. 

" You may feel perfectly easy," he said ; 
^* I settled it all with Mrs. Bobbins while 
you were admiring your grandson in his 
cradle. Good-day. If I don't find you 
less pale and heavy- eyed to-morrow I shall 
order you back to Brompton. Mrs. Richard 
will do capitally now." 

4.2 



52 EOOKSTONE. 



Perhaps there is no time when we feel so 
listless and at a loss what to do with our- 
selves as when we have been anxiously 
engaged in the incessant duties of a sick 
room. Till now, Mrs. Wolferston had 
^ \ scarcely left Mary's bedside. She had not 

quitted the rooms either night or day, and 

;^ want of fresh air as well as fatigue and 

I ^ anxiety had told severely on her delicate 

i .. frame. Tired as she was, she yet felt too 

restless to sit still. She walked from one end 
i 
] of the saloon to the other, looking about 

i J her eagerly. She wanted something to do, 

' !. 
* r 

to think of. There was not even old Kitty 
to sympathise with. The clock on the 
mantel-piece had stopped. It was a curious 
old-fashioned timepiece of the date of Louis 
Treize, and Eichard Wolferston never 



!;.. 






THE HEIR OF ROOKSTONE. 53 



allowed any one to wind it but himself. 
Strangely enough the hands pointed to the 
exact tune of bab/s birth. 

"How very remarkable," thought Mrs. 
Wolferston. She bent down to examine 
the clock more closely. It was quaint and 
unique-looking, but certainly not an oma- 

ment to the handsome alabaster shelf . 
almost covered with figures and grotesque 
carvings collected in their travels, stiU 
Ijdng in a sort of artistic disorder. Among 
these lay a key. She scarcely knew why, 
it was so contrary to her usual habit to 
examine that which belonged to others, 
but Mrs. Wolferston had taken up the key 
and read the label attached to it, before 
she remembered what she was doing . 
" Study-door key.'' 



54 ROOKSTONE. 



Her resolution flashed back on her 
remembrance. Up-stairs Mary and the 
baby had completely absorbed every 
thought. She had not once recollected her 
promised visit to her husband's room. All 
her listlessness and fatigue had gone now 
in an instant. She fitted the key into the- 
lock of the door that divided the two rooms 
and tmned the handle. Then, unwilling 
that other eyes should pry into this retreat^ 
now so dear and sacred to her, she went 
back to the double doors of the saloon, and 
closed them. 

The afternoon passed away in the quick 
fading of September daylight, the golden 
light of sunset quivered over the beech- 
trees, with the gleam of a pheasant's wing ; 
here and there a leaf, sooner tired of life 



THE HEIR OF ROOKSTONE. 55 

than Iiis feUows, had withered to a rich 
red-brown, and in the intense warmth of 
that good-night of the day-king glowed a 
burning scarlet, making aU else pale and 
tame by comparison. 

But the man coming rapidly across the 
open sward between the terrace and the 
first belt of trees had no eye to note the 
burning leaves, or the rose-coloured clouds 
reflected in the lake, where the trees break- 
ing away revealed the full glories of the 
sunset. A great moth whirred into his 
face, almost blinding him, but he did 
not even raise his hand to dash it from 
him. 

Richard Wolferston was insensible to all 
outward things. He had received the 
telegrams together at four o'clock that 



66 ROOKSTONE. 



morning, a change in Lord Seton^s plans 
having taken him far away from the place 
to which they had been addressed, and he 
had not stayed to eat or drink, but had 
hastened southward with all the speed he 
could. When he reached the station, his 
impatience had not let him wait while a 
horse or vehicle was being found for him ; 
he had hurried breathlessly away, and strik- 
ing across the fields had reached the park 
gates by Kitty's lodge with wonderful 
rapidity. 

Meantime, up-stairs in the sick room, 
Mary was growing weary of her mother's 
absence ; she felt so much better and 
stronger, she was sure she might have 
talked to her this evening. 

She asked Kitty to go and find Mrs. 



TEE HEIR OF ROOKSTONE. 67 

Wolferston, but the old woman reftised to 
do this, although she wondered at *Hhe 
madam's" absence. So Mary lay count- 
ing the roses in the border of the 
paper, and wondering at her mother's 
neglect. 

There was a sound of footsteps in the 
dressing-room at last, and Kitty hurried in. 
But instead of Mrs. Wolferston, there stood 
the new squire, pale as death, through his 
bronzed complexion, for all the world, as 
Kitty told her son afterwards, like a white 
nigger. 

" Kitty," he said . ^he had never called 
the old woman by her name before, but now 
it seemed to come naturally . " will you tell 
Mrs. Wolferston I am here ? She must not 
be startled, you know." 



58 ROOKSTONE. 



.< 



"Teachin' I," growled Kitty to herself; 
but it ^be like aU new-comers ; thay all 
tries thay's own ways at first goin' off, but 
thay be glad enough to take advice afore 
they be done." . " Ee'd best find the madam 
herself," she said ; ** maybe her can let Muss* 
Mary know as 'ee be here." 

"What do you mean by madam?" he 
said, roughly ; " go and teU my wife as 
gently as you can that I am here, and ask 
her if I may see her." 

I'll do yer biddin'," the old woman said,, 
sulkily ; " but t' old madam 'ud ha' done it 
better and more quiet-like. Doant 'ee go 
for to cast blame on I if her be a bit flighted 
wi t. 

He only pointed impatiently to the door 
of communication between the two rooms> 



<( xn 



THE HEIR OF ROOKSTONE. 6^ 

and Kitty felt herself obliged to obey 
him. 

Richard Wolferston had travelled so 
rapidly that he had scarcely realised all 
that had been happening at Eookstone, 
and as he looked round the dressing-room, 
metamorphosed for the time being into a 
nursery, a dreary feeling of change and 
discomfort crept over him. Instead of hia 
darling's bright welcome, he should find 
her a weak helpless invaUd, likely to 
continue ill, perhaps, for several daya 
longer. 

A Httle bleating sound caught his ear, and 
he became aware that what he had looked 
at as a basket mounted on two chairs wag^ 
the cradle of the heir of Eookstone. There 
had been too much of suddenness and 



0 ROOKSTONE. 



Anxiety at its unexpected arrival to think 
about the rich lace and pink sUk hang- 
ings which had been ordered for its 
bed. 

To most men the sight of their first-bom 
would have left no room for smaller feelings, 
but Richard's fastidious eyes saw nothing 
but a little crimson face between the folds 
of a blanket, and he drew back in 
disgust. 

" Well, to be sure 1" he exclaimed, *^ can 
that be Mary's chUd ? and I suppose aU my 
comfort wlQ be sacrificed to this hideous 
httle plaything." 

It may seem absurd, but it is a truth 
notwithstanding, when he obeyed Kitty's 
summons, and entered his wife's room, a 
strong feeling of jealousy had already risen 



THE HEIR OF ROOKSTONE. 61 

against the unconscious baby who in his 
eyes had worked so disastrous a transfor- 
mation in his house. 



2 ROOKSTONE. 



CHAPTER V. 

LOST. 

ItyrAEY'S loving reception dispelled 
some of his gloom, but although 
he tried to seem contented and cheerful as 
long as her eyes were on him, his conversa- 
tion with her had given him jfresh causes 
for discontent. His mother-in-law at 
Rookstone, and Kitty Eobbins, of all 
people in the world, installed, for the time 
being, as manager of his child ! " Not a 
very finished kind of nurse for the heir 



LOST. 63 

of Rookstone," he said to himself^ as he 
went downstairs in search of Mrs. Wolfer- 
ton. 

" Heir of Eookstone " . the words had a 
pleasant sound, a sure, genuine ring ; it 
ahnost seemed to Richard then, as he came 
slowly down the great dimly-hghted stair- 
<5ase . for the tall old stained-glass window 
was too full of armorial bearings to admit 
much sunshine. that the ground felt firmer 
beneath his feet. 

The rightful branch of the family was 
grafted in again on the parent-stock, the 
fitain was removed from his father's name, 
and it was his doing, for if he had not 
^ined the goodwill of his cousin Christo- 
pher, matters might have turned out dtflfe- 
Tently. 



64 ROOKSTONE. 



As he reached the hall he met the doctor. 
The little man congratiilated him, but not 
with the heartiness he had shown towards 
his old friend's widow. Something in the 
new master of Eookstone kept most men 
at arm's length whom he did not strive 
specially to fascinate. 

" We have had it all our own way, you 
see, squire, and I think we've done weU.'^ 
He rubbed his hands with rather a mis- 
chievous look. " I expect if you had been 
at home you would have sent for some Lon- 
don big-wig or other, and a fine stuck-up 
lady nurse, who would have wanted halP-a- 
dozen servants to wait on her.'' 

But Richard Wolferston had no fault to 
find : he shook hands cordially with Mr. 
Bannock. "As long as that ugly old 



LOST. 66 

woman does not cast an evil eye over 
the cliild," he said, laughing, " I suppose 
she is as good a niurse as my wife could 
have about her." 

" Yes, yes," said the doctor ; " she does 
well enough, because she does what one 
tells her ; but as long as Mrs. Richard has 
her mother, she is aU right, squire. She 
has not left her for a moment, till I insisted 
on it, and I just called in again now as I 
<jame back from my afternoon round to tell 
her not to sit up to-night ; it's a perfect 
nonsensical throwing away of vital power," 
said the lively doctor, puUing up his shirt 
coUar. " Perhaps you can tell me where I 
shall find Mrs. Wolferston, senior ; the ser- 
vants don't seem to have seen her since I 
left, and that must be some hours ago." 

VOL. n. 5 



66 ROOKSTONE. 



Richard rang and asked where his mo- 
ther-in-law was. Mrs. Wolferston had not 
been seen or heard of since she went into 
the saloon with the doctor. Mary had com- 
plained to her husband of her mother's ab- 
sence, so there was no use in looking for 
her upstairs ; the French maid had already 
been up twice to seek Mrs. Wolferston in 
her own rooms. 

" Don't you think she may be in the 
park ?" said Richard. 

The doctor thought this probable, but he 
had not time to continue the search, and 
Richard promised to deliver the message 
he left for his mother-in-law. 

A new tie had sprung up between them, 
and as he walked slowly towards the lake 
it seemed to Richard that his feelings were 
less bitter towards his cousin's widow. He 




LOST. 67 

had always heard that grandmothers be- 
came completely foolish in their devotion 
to their daughter's children. It might be 
well if this were realised in the case of 
Mary's mother, she would have no thoughts 
to spare for interference in the household ; 
and if she were allowed undisputed sway in 
the nursery, he should have Mary all to 
himself again, for surely she would be 
willing to give the child up to her mother's 
care. What could she herself know about 
its management ? He even thought it 
might be well, next spring, when he took 
his wife to London, to ask Mrs. Wolferston 
to watch over her grand-child during their 
absence, for he determined that nothing 
should ever induce him to move about 
encumbered with nurses and chUdren. 

5.2 



6B ROOKSTONE. 



"People call them blessings," he said; 
" they might be if they came ready grown, 
but it seems to me for the next ten years 
or so there will be a perpetual hue and cry 
after the health of this precious morsel of 
humanity." 

He grumbled thus to himself, but his 
pride of fatherhood grew stronger every 
moment, and already he was looking for- 
ward to the time when this son should be 
a candidate for honours which he felt his 
own father s disgrace had debarred him 
from striving after. 

" We have been commoners long enough," 
he said ; " why should not my son win him- 
self the right to bear a title ? Blood is all 
very well, but in these days, like most old- 
fashioned things, it is out of date, and 

must have the advertisement which popu- 



LOST. 69 

larity or a well-sounding title will give, to 
show people what it is worth." 

He had become so wrapped in these 

speculations that he had almost forgot- 
ten the subject of his quest. By the' 
time he had gone round to the point 
where a small rustic bridge spanned the 
lake, he had convinced himself that Mrs. 
Wolferston was not likely to remain so 
late in the park. The hght had become 
dim and uncertain. It was more probable 
that she had returned to the house by a 
different path to that which he had taken 
when he began his search. 

As he reached the foot of the terrace 
steps he met one of the under gardeners, a 
cousin of Jem Robbins's, who had been bom 
and reared on the estate. 

" Have you seen Mrs. Wolferston ?" He 



70 ROOKSTONE. 



spoke in the cold haughty voice in which 
he addressed all the old dependents at 
Rookstone. They treated him with out- 
ward respect, but he had a vague conscious- 
ness that they regarded him as a usurper, 
and would gladly have seen httle Christy 
in his place. 

" Yes, squoii-e, I ha' seen she." 

" Where, in the park T 

" Naa.^' 

" Where then T 

" In there" . he pointed to the saloon . 
" she wur there when I came to work afore ; 
I seen her through the window." 

Richard felt irritated. No one could tell 
him anything but this . Mrs. Wolferston 
had been last seen in the saloon. 

'^ Were you here at work all the after- 
noon V 



LOST. 71 

"Yes, squoire, and I'd finished, as I 
thowt, but Muster Sprague when him 
heered as 'ee wur a corned back puts I on 
again to sweep the gravel off the steps." 

" Well, you can go now," said his master. 
*^ Then all the time you were at work here 
you did not see Mrs. Wolferston come 
down the steps, or out on the terrace 
even ?" 

" Hur have never comed out ; I believe 
she be in yonder stiU." 

This time Richard looked at him more 
lattentively. He pointed in at the saloon 
window as before, but towards the little 
door of the study. 

The squire turned deadly white. It was 
npt light enough for the gardener to notice 
his paleness, but he did remark a strange 
change in the tone of his master s voice. 



72 ROOKSTONE, 



" In where ? can't you speak plain, man T 
he said, hoarsely. " Here, come in, and 
show me where it is you mean." 

He held open the glass door which led 
off the terrace into the saloon, and the 
man followed him. The squire's manner 
had " put him out," he told his cousin Jem 
afterwards, and he was determined to avoid 
ftirther bullying. He walked straight up 
to the study door, and touched the handle. 
** I see her go in there," he said. 

The key was in the lock, but Kichard 
Wolferston stood looking at it as if he had 
been smitten with paralysis. 

The rough countryman, considering his 
errand fulfilled, pulled his hair and left 
him. He thought his master a rare sulky 
fellow for not so much as saying, " Thank 



LOST. 73: 

'ee ;" but Richard did not know that he 
was left alone ; he only saw the labelled 
key hanging in the door of his cousin's 
study. 



74 ROOKSTONE. 



CHAPTER VI. 

MONSIEUR FRANgOIS LEBOUX. 

1ITRS. WOLFERSTON'S maid, Thomp- 
son, had been spending the after- 
noon with her old acquaintances in the 
village, and she and Mrs. Slocombe, the 
mistress of the one shop of Rookstone, had 
waxed so very chatty over their tea, that 
time had passed by unheeded. However, 
there was no evening dressing to go home for, 
and her lady had desired her not to hurry, 
so Mrs. Thompson did not feel very guilty. 



MONSIEUR FRANCOIS LEROUX. 75 

although it had grown quite dark by the 
time she reached the park gates. She saw 
some one coming up the avenue, and she 
soon made out that it was Monsieur Fran- 
cois Leroux, the French butler. 

Monsieur Leroux had seen a good deal 
t)f life in various ways. He had been a 
soldier, an actor, a hairdresser, and finally 

had attained the rank of major-domo to the 
quire of Rookstone. He said that in all 
his adventures he had always fallen on his 
legs, and this good-fortune he owed proba- 
bly as much to his imperturbable good- 
temper and ready courtesy as to the 
singular ingenuity on which he prided 
himself. 

He imderstood women perfectly, and 
was a great favourite among them. Even 



76 ROOKSTONE. 



Kitty Robbins pronounced him a decent 
enough fellow for a " furrineer." Monsieur 
Leroux, among his other accomplishments, 
wrote poetry, and he had asserted in verse 
that all young women were angels, and that 
they were only allowed to grow old that 
mortals might be reminded that this was 
earth and not heaven. The severest re- 
proach he felt he could inflict on a woman 
was to tell her she was old, loss of beauty 
being the greatest affliction that, in his. 
opinion, human nature could suffer. 

" Ah, Madame Thompson," he exclaimed, 
when he came up to her, " we have been sa 
dull without you. The house has been of a 
sadness to make me die. It is too . what 
you call this word I know not, or at least I 
cannot utter it in your English, so I must 



MONSIEUR FRANCOIS tEROUX, 77 

tell to you, madame, in French, that you 
are harhare to desert us for so many hours. 
You and your charming mistress, you come 
to Eookstone . ^well, we are so 'appy, we joy 
in your presence, and then . pouf ! . you go 
back to your London, and we are left tristes 

Mrs. Thompson bridled. She was a 
plump, blue-eyed, comely damsel of thirty- 
five . a spinster calling hei-self Mrs. for the 
sake of dignity, for dignity was her weak 
point. She admired Monsieur Leroux's 
handsome black eyes and whiskers, but 
she treated him with the cold reserve she 
considered women should, at least on 
a slight acquaintance, maintain towards 
men. She thought that Miss Mary had 
allowed herself to be won far too easily. 



78 ROOKSTONE. 



Mr. Richard ought to have been kept in 
suspense much longer, and as Mrs. Thomp- 
son considered Monsieur Leroux as part 
and parcel of his master, she was resolved 
he should not imagine she was to be duped 
by "fine Mllagree rubbish," as she called 
the Frenchman's compliments. 

She told him that, on their former visit, 
her mistress had been obliged to retimi to 
town on business, and that their present 
stay was not likely to be a long one. 

" Ah, madame ! why will you poison the 
present by reveaUng the fixture ? I come to 
you sore and wounded for consolation, and 
you, on the contrary, increase my vexations." 

Mrs. Thompson laughed. She knew 
very well that, in his master's absence, 
Monsieur Frangois reigned supreme. No 



MONSIEUR FRANCOIS LEROUX. 7 

one dreamed of disputing his authority^ 
and the news of the squire's return had 
not reached the village. 

" Oh, Monsieur Frangois !" she said. 

'* Madame, it is true." He put his hand 
on his heart. " That old woman have 
vexed me . she is, I think, one of the 
furies, or perhaps a vitch." 

"A what !" said Mrs. Thompson ; *' you 
know, monsieur, I asked you not to use 
foreign words in speaking to me." 

" But, madame, I speak English ; it is 
your Shakespeare who tell to me the name 
of vitch . ^they are three. Oh ! it makes 
me turn cold to think of them . lean, and 
old, and horrible. Well, then, I call this 
old woman, for she is no other, a vitch. 
Just now the squire, my master, he have 



W ROOKSTONE. 



return while you take walk. He say to 
me, * Leroux, go to that old woman and tell 
to her, where is Madame Wolferston/ Well, 
I go upstairs, and I tap so sweetly at the 
door. It open, and I see the vitch. I ask 
for Madame Wolferston, and the face of 
the old woman become red with fury. 
* What you mean ?' she say, and she come 
in the gallery and shut the door behind 
her ; * this is the third time my lady is dis- 
turb ; your master must be a fool ; Madame 
Wolferston has not been here once since 
the doctor left.' " 

" Do you mean to say that my mistress 
has not been in Mrs. Richard's room all the 
afternoon ?" Mrs. Thompson had found 
a sudden interest in the Frenchman's 
story. 




MONSIEUR FRANCOIS LEROTJX. 81 

" No, madame, and that which there is 

of most extraordinary is, that your madame 

has not been seen anywhere. She has, in 

^, vaiush away, just as the spirits Me 

in your Shakespeare, which telled to me 

the name of vitch. Madame Wolferston is 

lost, but when I tell so to the old Madame 

Kittee, what think you she do ? She take 

my shoulder, and she say, * Get away with 

you, and tell to your master he ought to be 

^shamed ; if the madame cannot be found he 

have made away with her/ Truly it is true 
which I tell to you, Madame Thompson. I 

feel so d^concerted that I try to soften the 
anger of the vitcL I think if I speak to 
her with much respect, she will recover her 
reason, for she have the look of an insen- 
sate. So I say, * Madame,' . and then my 
VOL. n, 6 



82 ROOKSTONE, 



ti'esome memory cheat me, and I cannot 
remember the name of the vitch, but her 
eyes make me hurry, and by good luck (at 
the least it seems to me good luck) I re- 
mind myself that she have the name of a 
small and rather impertinent bird. So I 
tell her, smiling, you know, and bowing 
like so" . he put on his most fascinating 
manner . " * Madame, Kittee Sparrow, I 
assure you . ' Well, Madame Thompson, 
I am ashame to tell to you the conduct of 
your vitch : she leave go of my shoulder 
and she box me." 

" Law ! Monsieur Frangois.^ 

** It is true, madame ; even at this in- 
stant, but for the obscurity you would see 
my ear is always scarlet from her box. 
Alia, madame, it is too much to suflfer from 



 



MONSIEUR FRANCOIS LEROUX. 83 

the hand of a hideous fiirj. It is, perhaps, 
for her 'appy that she have at once made 
retreat into my lady's bedchamber. If you 
have regard for her, madame . ^your vitch 
. ^you wiU counsel her not again to 
offer herself to the sight of Frangois 
Leroux." 

Monsieur Fran9ois drew himself up with 
military rigidity ; his outraged feelings had 
reasserted themselves as he related Kitty's 
insult ; he was in no mood for compliments, 
now. 

By this time they had reached the side- 
entrance of the house, and Thompson 
asked one of the housemaids, who was. 
crossing the passage which led from it, if 
she knew where her mistress was. 

" No, and no one else knows ; weVe all 

6.2 



64 ROOKSTONE. 



been looking for her ever since the squire 
came back." 

" Where is the squire T said Thomp- 
son, more finghtened than she cared to 
show. 

The girl shook her head, and passed on ; 
but Leroux had heard the question and 
answered it. 

"If the sqiure is in the house at all he is 
sure to be in the saloon." 

Thompson was too much agitated to 
remember proprieties, and she hurried 
through the passages till she reached the 
entrance hall, and then almost ran into the 
saloon, dressed for walking as she was. 




FOUND. 85 



CHAPTEK Vll. 

FOUND. 

rilHE light was so dim within the study- 
that at first Richard Wolferston 
could not make out anything distinctly ; 
but after a little, one familiar object, then 
another, became more and more visible, 
and he saw that the room had no occu- 
pant. Empty, and seemingly imdisturbed 

since he had locked the outer door and 
taken away the key; his cousin's high- 
backed wooden chair looked as if it had 



f 



u 

ii 

it : 
J 

I 



86 ROOKSTONE. 



been pushed away from the davenport by 
some one who had occupied it, but he 
could not be positive that he had not him- 
self pushed it on his last visit. And yet it 
was folly to tell himself all this. How 
came the key in the door, and who except 
his cousin's widow would have felt any 
interest in visiting this close, musty room ? 
If he had followed the 'impulse of his 
strong loathing for the study, and aU that 
it contained, he would at once have re- 
treated and locked the door; but he re- 
solved to make himself quite sure that the 
room was in the state in which he had left 
it. In that uncertain light he could not 
be sure of anything. He knew there were 
candles on the chimney-piece, but he 
might knock something over groping in 



FOUND. 87 



the dark, and he went back through the 
saloon and lit a taper from the gas lamp in 
the hall. 

Once more within the study, he held 
the light up, and took a minute survey of 
all the room contained : nothing seemed 
disturbed. Standing in front of the fire- 
place he faced the larger part of the room ; 
he tiumed the light towards it suddenly, 
and he started. 

On the desk, shown plainly now that 
the light fell on it, lay the key of the 
drawers, the key which he remembered to 
have taken out of his pocket and placed 
in the desk just before he left home. 

He made a hasty forward movement, 
and his foot became entangled in some- 
thing on the floor. 



88 ROOKSTONE. 



The shudder that came with the touch 
told Richard Wolferston that he had at 
last found what he expected to find in hi& 
cousin's study, though he had not expected 
to find her in such a situation. He held 
the light down an instant to see how she 
was lying, and then he raised his mother- 
in-kw's insensible body and carried it into 
the saloon. 

He laid her on the nearest ottoman, and 
went hastUy back into the study. 

It had been all so instantaneous that in 
raising and removing her he had been 
guided more by a mechanical impulse than 
by any process of thought. 

But when he took up the small key and 
tried the drawers one by one his senses, 
came back to him. 

" Is she dead or living ?" he asked him- 



FOUND. 8 



self. Even then he was carefiil to close 

and lock the study door behind him before 

he went back to look at her. 

Mrs. Wolferston was white as death ; 

her fax^ had all the rigidity of a pei^on 

lately departed, her hands were cold and 
lifeless. He was still bending over her, 

trying to feel her heart-beats, when 

Thompson burst into the room. Usually 

she was calm in moments of emergency, 

but the sight of her beloved mistress lying 

as she thought dead, made her frantic. 

" Oh, what's the matter with her ? She- 
has been murdered T' she exclaimed. " Who 
has done this, Mr. Wolferston? . oh, my 
poor dear ill-used lady I" She fell on her 
knees in a paroxysm of tears and sobs. 

" Don't be a fool " . Richard spoke 



^0 ROOKSTONE. 



fiercely . " your mistress Ims fainted ; if 
you can't control yourself, send Eulalie and 
Frangois, they will know what to do." 

He could not have taken a better means 
to restore Mrs. Thompson's senses : the 
idea of turning her darling mistress over to 
the tender mercies of that " frippery thing, 
Eulalie, who dressed to look no better than 
she should be," was at once a quietus and a 
stimulant. She saw that this was no 
time for argument, and running away, she 
quickly came back with the necessary 
remedies. 

As soon as a faint movement quivered 
in the closed eyelids, the maid turned 
to Richard Wolferston, who had been 
anxiously watching her, and in readiness 
to aid her efforts. 



FOUND. 91 



"I mean no offence, sir," she said, 
gravely; "but I think Monsieur Leroux 
will help me to carry my mistress better 
than you can. Would you mind ringing 
for him, if you please, sir ?" 

Monsieur Leroux came. He raised his 
eyebrows and shrugged his shoulders, but, 
a true man of the world, he made no com- 
ment on madame's helpless state. He not 
only carried the poor lady upstairs, but 
proceeded to turn down the bed, and settle 
the pillows and toilet arrangements . ^much 
more like a woman than a man, as Thomp- 
son afterwards related . and then he asked 
tenderly if he could be of any use or send 
any one to help his dear Madame Thompson. 

Her answer surprised and discomfited 
him. 



92 ROOKSTONE. 



" If Mr. Wolferston will be good enough 
to stay with Mrs. Richard for a few 
minutes, I should like to see Kitty Rob^ 
bins." 

Leroux threw up both hands, and his* 
shoulders nearly touched his ears, but he 
obeyed, muttering to himself as he went 
down the gallery, . 

" These EngUsh are truly an impossible- 
people . if even a vitch is of their nation . 
they give her preference to a Frenchman 
well bom, well made, and well bred . they 
are of a prejudice and an ignorance that 
one cannot imagine to oneself." 

His self-satisfaction was soothed next 
morning when he found Thompson waiting 
to speak to him as he came across the hall. 

Mrs. Wolferston was still very ill, the 



FOUND. 93 



maid said, and it would be a great favour if 
Monsieur Leroux would step over at once 
to the doctor, and ask him to come and see 
her mistress. 

"But," she added, in a whisper, "you 
need say nothing about the fainting fit; 
my lady seems anxious not to have it 
spoken of in any way." 

Thompson's own belief was that Richard 
Wolferston had quarrelled with her mis- 
tress, and frightened her into the state in 
which she found her. She did not dare to 
ay this ; but she had made up her mind, 
if the doctor would only second her, that 
they should not spend an hour longer than 
was absolutely necessary at Rookstone; 
.and in pinrsuance of this idea, by the time 
Mr. Bannock arrived she had packed every- 



94 ROOKSTONE. 



thing, and was ready to start at a mo- 
ment's notice. 

Mr. Bannock was greatly shocked at the 
change a few hours had made in his old 
friend. There was a wild startled look 
about her, and her face was still deathly 
pale. 

He asked several very searching ques- 
tions, but he did not elicit the truth, and 
he believed that Mrs. Wolferston was suf- 
fering from over-fatigue and anxiety. 

" If you are so weak as this," he said, 
gravely, "you ought to get a change at 
once. Now Mrs. Richard has her husband 
to cheer her up a bit ; she will not miss 
you so much ; you can come back again, 
you know, when you feel up to it." 

Mrs. Wolferston was strangely altered, 




FOUND. 95 



he thought. At first she insisted on re- 
maining with her daughter, and grew eager 
and excited at his opposition ; but when 
he said he should call her son-in-law to 
combat her arguments, she yielded at once, 
and said she was ready to go. 

On one point the doctor remained firm, 
and deaf to all her entreaties. There must 
be no leave-taking . he would not answer 
for the consequences of such a trial to Mrs. 
Richard. He would take all on himself. 
He should tell his young patient that, as 
her husband had chosen to return before 
he was wanted, he had sent her mother 
home, to prevent her from seeing too 
much company in her sick-room at 
once. 

Mrs. Wolferston did not speak or smile,. 



m ROOKSTONE. 



but sat with the same fixed, scared look on 
her face that had so startled him on his 
first arrival. 

" Can I go at once ?" she said, suddenly. 
" If Mary hears I am gone, she will take 
my absence more quietly. She will fret 
to see me if she knows I am in the 
house." 

The doctor felt her pulse again. 

" Yes," he said, cheerfully, though in his 
heart he felt terribly anxious. " I believe 
you ought to be with Miss Janet. If 
you start now you will get the early 

train." 

Mrs. Wolferston lay back exhausted. 

" You could do me a great service," she 
said, presently. " I believe you are right 
about leave-taking. If I could go away 




FOUND. 97 



from Eookstone without seeing any one at 
^ . if you could manage this for me . I 
siu-e it would be better." 

A sudden look of inquiry came into the; 
doctor's face. Had Mrs. Wolferston and 
her son-in-law quarrelled ? But this wa^ 
no time for questioning ; and he merely 
answered that nothing could be easier; 
the squire never appeared before eleven 
o'clock, and she would be on her way to 
town long before then. 

So with only the doctor and Frangoib 
to see her off, Mrs. Wolferston again bade 
farewell to Rookstone. She looked sad 
and pale, and her eyes wandered restlessly 
over the park, as if she was bidding good- 
bye to aU her favourite haunts and remem . 

brances. 

VOL. n. 7 



98 EOOKSTONE. 



" Shall I ever come back again ?" she 
said to herself, and something seemed to 
shut this hope from her future. And like 
the burden of a song, the words seemed to 
sound in her ears, "Never more . ^never 
more." 



MRS. WOLFERSTOIPS SECRET. 99 



CHAPTER VIII. 



MES. WOLFERSTON's SECRET. 



.m/TRS. WOLFERSTON lay dying. The 

doctors had told Janet that they 

could not say with certainty how long life 

might linger, but that its duration now 
could only be a question of days or hours, 
and it was so fearful to witness her 
mother's gasping spasmodic breathing that 
even Janet felt compelled to give up 
hope. 

Both the doctors persisted that some 

7.2 



100 EOOKSTONE. 



sudden shock had accelerated the progress 
of the disease which perhaps might have 
spared her some years of life. Janet ques- 
tioned Thompson, but the maid had given 
so solemn a promise not to reveal what had 
happened on the eve of her departure from 
Rookstone, that she evaded her young 
mistress's questions, although she saw that 
her suspicions were roused. Yes, the old 
doubts which had only been smothered, 
never uprooted, had got possession of 
Janet now, and would be listened to. So 
far as she could make out, her mother had 
shown no signs of illness till the squire's 
return. When Mrs. Wolferston reached 
Brompton she had been far too ill for ques- 
tioning, and in the intervals which suc- 
ceeded the fearful attacks of spasmodic 



MRS. WOLFERSTON'S SECRET. 101 

breathing she was exhausted abnost to in- 
sensibility. 

Henry Wenlock had gone down into the 
country to see some rich relations who pro- 
mised to help him in finding some appoint- 
ment as a means of livelihood, and Janet 
had no one to speak to . no one to divert 
her thoughts from her suffering mother. 

Day after day passed, and stiQ Mrs. 
Wolferston Ungered. Her mind apparently 
did not wander, and yet Janet fancied that 
when she took little Christy in to kiss her 
before he went to school, her mother's eyes 
had a wild, unnatural expression as they 
fixed steadfastly on the chUd. 

One evening she was sitting by the bed- 
side half asleep. Her mother had passed a 
terrible night of suffering, and had lain 



102 ROOKSTONE. 



nearly all day without seeming to notice 
what went on around her. 

"Janet," said the faint voice, and Janet 
started into waking life. "Come very 
close, dear, and listen. Give me some of 
those drops the doctor brought yesterday." 

Janet was surprised ; she had thought 
her mother unconscious when the doctor 
on the previous day put into her hands a 
strong restorative, telling her to give it 
when the patient should seem able to take 
it. She gave her some of the medicine now, 
and she saw her mother's eyes brighten ; 
her voice, too, was louder and steadier. 

" Janet, darling, listen ; I want you to 
promise me two things before I leave 

you/' 

"Oh, mother, mother!'' and the poor 



MRS, WOLFERSTON'S SECRET. 103 

girl's tears burst forth, though she tried 
hard to keep them back. 

Her mother went on as if she had not 
spoken. " Promise me to watch over Mary 
as if she were your child instead of your 
sister . and promise me . to keep my secret 
from every one but Mr. Painson." 

" From Henry V Janet looked implor- 
ingly ; but her mother's face did not alter. 

"It seems hard, my good, obedient 
child, to ask this . but I must : you might 
teU every one if you told Henry." 

The trembling voice grew weaker, and 
Janet again put the restorative to her 
mother's lips, and she went on speaking. 

" On the last day I spent at Rookstone . 
I saw the key of your father's study in the 
-saloon . I had not been there since . since 



104 ROOKSTONE, 



that night . and I unlocked the door and 
went in. Evidently the room had never 
been used since he left it : its desolate 
look made me very sad. I sat down in his 
chair, in front of the davenport, thinking. 
I sat there nearly an hour ; I believe I had 
just risen, and was going out of the room, 
and I remembered that he used to keep 
in one of the davenport drawers a sketch 
of Mary as an infant. He drew it in cray- 
ons for me himself . and I thought I would 
try and find it." 

Her voice sank again, and her eyes 
closed wearily. 

" You are exhausting yourself, darling, 
finish telling me another time," said Janet, 
anxiously. 

She shook her head. " No, no . no other 



MRS. WOLFERSTON'S SECRET, 105 

time," but her voice was a whisper now, in- 
terrupted by hard-drawn gasps of breathing. 
Janet bent her ear to listen. 

*' I was nearly sure it was in the lowest 
drawer, and yet, I cannot tell why, but it 
seemed as if I must begin at the top and 
go downwards. I found the key just 
within the desk . the first drawer was 
quite empty . the second looked Qmpty too. 
I was just closing it, but I heard the rust- 
ling of paper, and I found I could not shut 
the drawer close. I put my hand in, a roll 
of paper had got fixed at the back so as to 
prevent the drawer from shutting. I drew 
it out. Outside the roll was a strange 
handwriting . I don't remember the words 
. ^but I saw that it was your father's will. 
I put it back in the drawer . I only^ 
thought that it was a copy of the other." 



106 ROOKSTONE, 



The voice had become so broken, so 
faint, that Janet could scarcely gather the 
sense of the words. She felt desperate ; 
raising her mother's head, she put the 
restorative to her lips again, and the 
suffocating gasps grew stiller. 

" I put it back in the drawer . and then 
I pulled it out again and opened it. I do 
not know why I did this . I could not help 
it. It was another will, Janet . the re- 
verse of that we have believed in." 

" Was it signed T said Janet, eagerly. 

" I cannot remember ; I do not think I 
looked. I put it back in the drawer and 
locked it . ^and then I do not know what 
happened till I was carried upstairs." 

Janet's lips burned with questions, but 
her mother had no longer strength to 



MRS. WOLFERSTOirS SECRET. 107 

speak. A fearful spasmodic attack suc- 
ceeded the unusual exertion, and during 
several hours Janet feared that life would 
pass away. Towards morning Mrs. Wolfer- 
ston grew quieter, and desired that a 
clergyman might be sent for. He stayed 
with her for some time ; but when he took 
leave of Janet he told her he feared her 
mother was dying rapidly. 

" She is quite aware of her state," he 
said, "but I think you ought to know it." 



108 ROOKSTONE, 



CHAPTER IX. 



MANOEUVRING. 



It TRS. WEBB was in her own opinion a 
devoted mother, but she had mar- 
ried a man several years younger than her- 
self, and naturally wished to look juvenile 
as long as she could, and she felt there was 
nothing like change and society to do this. 
So it came to pass that in Louisa's infancy 
her mother had consigned her to the charge 
of an experienced nm-se, contenting herself 
with a peep at " the sweet darling '* once or 



MAN(E WRING. 109 

twice a day. It had been very hard, of 
. <;oTirse, thus to deny herself ; but then, as 
Mrs. Webb said, " the duties of society must 
not be neglected." What would become of 
her husband's position in the world, to say 
nothing of dear Louisa's future prospects, 
if she did not maintain and continually re- 
plenish her circle of acquaintance. Dress, 
too, Mrs. Webb argued, unless it is to be a 
matter of lavish expenditure; must be a 
matter of time and thought and contriv- 
ance. Mrs. Webb did not dress well ; she 
possessed neither the elegance of simplicity 
or good taste, but she was always smart 
^nd showy, and made herself conspicuous ; 
probably this was all she aimed at. 

It had been pleasant as long as Louisa 
wore white frocks and sashes to listen to 



no EOOKSTONE. 



the admiring comments her beauty excited. 
Mrs. Webb had been nice-looking, and 
Louisa inherited the same doll-like type, a 
white skin and dark eyes and hair, but 
instead of her mother's restless intriguing 
expression, she had her father's calm self- 
satisfied tranquillity. 

John Webb thought that it was impossi- 
ble a Webb could err. He had greatly 
admired his wife before he married her ; if 
he had been a little behind the scenes he 

might have been astounded at the skill 
with which the pass^e flirt had succeeded 

in entangling him into an engagement ; but 
now that she was his wife and bore his 
name, he regarded her as a piece of perfec- 
tion, only second in degree to himself. 
He was short and stout, a good-looking 



MANCEUVRING. Ill 

common-place man, but in his own eyes the 
model of that which a man should be. 

Louisa had just returned from a finishing 
school in Paris, and her mother began to 
realize that a daughter, however charming, 
is expensive. 

Louisa's requirements had already nearly 
doubled her dressmaker's bill, and when 
his wife pleaded this to Mr. Webb, he told 
her that money was " tighter than ever," 
that in fact he believed he ought rather to 
diminish her allowance than increase it. 

" Can't you talk to Louey, my dear, and 
teach her how to economise ?" 

His wife had waited patiently for this 
answer. Mr. Webb thought slowly, and de- 
livered his words as if they were oracles. 

Mrs. Webb sneered. 



112 ROOKSTONE. 



" It would be of as much use to expect 
reaaon from Louey as practical advice from 
you ; she is as headstrong as she is extrava- 
gant." 

" Then, my dear " . the oracle walked up 
to the glass and satisfied himself as to the 
arrangement of his moustache . " I can 
only say I am sorry to hear it ; Miss 
Webb must not be headstrong if she is to 
maintain her proper position in the world/' 

He took up his book and went on 
reading. 

One of the most remarkable traits in 
Mrs. Webb was that she never quarrelled 
with any one ; she had no depth of feeling, 
therefore her sensitiveness rai'ely sufiered. 
She had a very exalted idea of her own 
powers of management, and she certainly 



MAN(EUVEING. 113 

understood the art of governing her hus- 
band. She arranged his home so that it 
should suit all the requirements of his 
fastidious taste ; she maintained his repu- 
tation in the world ; she screwed and 
pinched in every possible manner to save 
out-of-sight household expenses, and she 
iBxely contradicted her husband in pubHc. 
As to inducing him to be less puffed up by 
his own merits, and be more charitable in 
his judgment of others, as to helping hbn 
in any way to live for anything but himself, 
Mrs. Webb could not have done this, 
because she was so wrapped in self-love 
that she attributed aU the little vexations 
and trials of life to the malice and folly of 
others. 

She had that morning heard of the death 
VOL. n. 8 



114 ROOKSTONE, 



of her cousin, Mrs. Wolferston ; and now, 
as she sat pondering on the best means 
of meeting Louisa's expenses, a bright idea 
came to relieve her perplexity. 

But she was in no hurry to communicate 
it to her husband. She prided herself on 
her judgment, and she liked to be sure 
there was no flaw in her projects before she 
put them forth. 

Janet and Christy must have a home, 
why should they not Uve with them ? 
They ought to pay, for such comforts as 
Mrs. Webb was prepared to give them, 
100 a year each. And besides this, Mrs. 
Webb entertained another scheme : she 
had always liked and admired Henry 
Wenlock : he was not rich, but he was 
thoroughly well-bom and had good expec- 



MAN(EUVRING. 115 

tations ; who could say what he might not 
do in the new line of life he had chosen ? . 
for Mr. Webb had astonished his wife only 
a few days before by telling her that 
Captain Wenlock had sold his commission 
and had got a post in a banking-house. 

She wished Louisa to marry young 
Wenlock, but this would be a difficult 
arrangement to carry out. Mr. Webb dis- 
liked seeing young men at his house. If 
Janet came to reside with them, as a matter 
of course Henry Wenlock would be a fre- 
quent visitor, and to Mrs. Webb it seemed 
impossible that he could continue to prefer 
that girl Janet to her lovely Louisa. 

Do not consider Mrs. Webb crafty and 
cruel ; remember she had not married for 
love herself, and she was quite incapable 

8.2 



116 EOOKSTONE. 



of estimating the agony such a desertion 
would inflict on Janet. Besides, she pro- 
mised herself that when Henry was safely 
married to Louisa she would find a more 
suitable husband for her young cousin. 

Mrs. Webb mentioned the first part of 
her scheme to her husband in the evening, 
having looked at it from every point of 
view, and to her surprise he acquiesced in 
it cordially. He had been speculating 
imknown to his wife, and just then he was 
almost beside himself with anxiety, trying 
vainly to raise money to avert an exposure. 
Two hundred a year would be a boon, 
indeed, no matter how it was earned. Mrs. 
Webb lost no time in proposing the plan to 
Janet. 

It seemed very hard to the poor girl 



MANCEUVRING. 117 

to be disturbed in the midst of her 
deep sorrow to discuss business arrange- 
ments. 

At first she asserted positively that she 
and Christy could continue to live alone at 
Brompton, but she was obliged to admit 
after a while that this would be very difii- 
cult, unless she took a chaperon. She 
would have preferred a residence with 
good-natured Aunt Dawson, but Mrs. 
Webb had so managed matters that Mrs. 
Dawson thought Janet would not like such 
a plan, and therefore did not propose it ; 
besides, she lived so very far away fi-om 
Christy's school that it would scarcely 
have been desirable to place him under her 
roof, so Janet agreed to Mrs. Webb's plan. 

The news of her mother's death had 



118 ROOKSTONE. 



been a severe shock to Mary, and on the 

day of the funeral she was so ill that 

Richard would not leave her. To Janet it 

was a reprieve not to see him ; till now she 

had scarcely had leisure to reflect on her 

mother's story, she had been called on to 

decide on so much of pressing importance. 

She had stipulated only to join the 

Webbs at meal times and when she liked 

in the evenings, so that she had the 

luxury of solitude . a luxury, indeed, when 

associates are thoroughly wanting in 
sjrmpathy. 

It seemed to her, as she sat alone now, 

some weeks after her mother's death, that 

the words, '^ It was another will . ^not the 

one we have believed in," again sounded in 

her ears. She did not give a thought to 



MAN(EUVRING. 119 

Mary^s sorrow at the discovery of her hus- 
band's guilt, for Janet never doubted that 
he was guilty ; she only felt a fierce satis- 
faction in the task that seemed laid on 
her to reinstate her Uttle brother in his 
inheritance. 

Her mind became gradually filled with 
the contemplation of herself as the devoted 
champion who should baffle injustice and 
bring guilt to shame ; she forgot her 
mother's injunction to watch over Mary 
as if she were her child instead of her 
sister. 

In this mood she was glad of her mother s 
prohibition about Henry Wenlock ; she pre- 
ferred achieving her victory unaided, then 
with what joy and triumph would she an- 
nounce it to him. 



120 ROOKSTONE, 



She must consult Mr. Painson : her 
mother had desu'ed her to do this. She 
did not want his opinion . ^her mind was 
made up on the subject of Richard's guilt, 
but the old lawyer might be useful in sug-^ 
gesting means and plans ; at present she 
could not see how she was to act. 

The pupils of her eyes dilated till the 
eyes themselves looked black, and a bright 
colour glowed on her delicate skin. 

.' Yes, my darling father," she said, " the 
stain of injustice shall be removed from 
yoiu- memory, and Christy shall lead the 
life he was bom to lead." 



LOUISA WEBB. 121 



CHAPTEE X. 



LOUISA WEBB. 



X OUISA WEBB had rejoiced at first 
when she heard that she was to 
have Janet for a constant companion, but 
when she found that her cousin's residence 
with them would prevent her mother from 
spending part of the winter at Brighton^ 
she changed her mind. 

" Such nonsense ! if Christy's school has. 
begun, what does it matter ? . as if they 
could not have stayed in Vincent Square 



122 ROOKSTONE, 



by themselves while we went away ; and 
then mamma says our Christmas must be 
very quiet because of Janet's deep mourn- 
ing ; it is very hard on me, when I'm only 
just home from school." 

When she found that Janet's residence 
entailed the frequent presence of Henry 
Wenlock, she grew more reconciled. 

Louisa had a thorough belief in herself 
und her own powers of fascination . a belief 
which gives a woman far more power in 
society than the mere timid unconscious 
possession of real beauty or worth. From 
the first evening she saw Henry Wenlock 
and Janet together, she decided that he was 
-entirely thrown away on her cousin, and 
although she was not blind to his evident 
affection for his promised wife, she per- 



LOUISA WEBB. 123 

suaded herself this simply axose from the 
fex3t of his long absence from England, and 
from his having lived in stations where there 
was little female society. 

" He knows no better," she said. 

Louisa did not share her mother's ma- 
noeuvring notions. She did not wish to be 
bound too soon. She felt she was far too 
charming to think of marriage for two or 
three years to come, but . Captain Wenlock 
was not blind, and if he admired her . 
well, it would perhaps be better, and really 
no one could blame her. 

There is a kind of woman who sets down 
the result of aU the arts she practises to 
the natural attractions she possesses. Never 
once does she acknowledge to herself that 
fihe has made any steps towards seeking 



124 ROOKSTONE. 



the admiration she exults in ; it is her fate ; 
she is charming, she says sometimes, with a 
Httle tender sigh . ^too charming for the 
happiaess of others. 

It was not at all displeasiog to Louisa 
when next Captain Wenlock came to dia- 
ner, to notice Janet's brusque answers and 
reserved, absent manner. 

She watched the lovers closely during 
dinner ; she saw that, although Henry stUl 
persisted in addressing his conversation 
chiefly to Janet, his manner grew more re- 
strained and his face clouded. 

As they went up-stairs she spoke to Janet, 

" I say, dear, how you do tease Henry ; 
I couldn't do as you do ; you'll have to go 
down on your knees and make a humble 
apology when he comes up-stairs, I can teU 



LOUISA WEBB. 125 



you : he looked as cross as two sticks just 
now. I shall stay here to see how prettily 
you will do it." 

"Then I am afraid you will be disap- 
pointed ; and really, Louy, you take strange 
fancies in your head ; you are quite mis- 
taken if you think Henry and I have 
quarrelled." 

Louisa laughed after her mother's teasing 
fashion. She loved teasing dearly, and she 
thought it would be great fun to see a 
lover s quarrel between Captain Wenlock 
and her dignified little cousin, for Janet's 
distaste for Louisa's confidences and missy 
notions had created a certain amount of 
pique in Miss Webb. 

When Henry Wenlock came up-stairs he 
went at once into the back drawing-room 



126 ROOKSTONE. 



where Janet was sitting; she knew that 
Louisa's satirical eyes were upon her, and 
although she longed to know if Henry were 
displeased with her, she would not even 
look up at his approach. 

" I have done nothing to make him reaUy 
angry," she thought. "Louisa will soon 
be tired of watching us, but she shall get 
no food for her curiosity if I can help it." 

Captain Wenlock lingered a few moments, 
then he seemed to become aware that Janet 
was trying to look away from him, and he 
went into the other room. 

She could not see his face ; if she had, 
the pain and surprise there must have 
touched her through all the pride she had 
roused to keep herself from following him 
across the room. 



LOUISA WEBB. 127 

The watchful Louisa smiled. She sat 
down and sang a song which Henry Wen- 
lock had specially admired on his last visit. 
At first he took no notice ; he stood at a 
table turning over some of the very xmin- 
teresting books which Mrs. Webb consi- 
dered drawing-room literature. 

He hoped Janet would follow him ; he 
could not imderstand what ailed her. 

At dinner-time she had treated him as 
courteously as she might have treated a 
stranger, and now she was tiying to avoid 
him. He detested caprice ; hitherto he 
had seen no trace of this in Janet. He 
began to remember how very young she 
was at the time of their first engagement ; 
they had been separated nearly two years ; 
how could he be sure that she had not 



128 ROOKSTONE. 



changed in the interval ? He had seen her 
very seldom since his return . almost always 
in the presence of others. 

He loved music, and sometimes it had 
troubled him a little that Janet could not 
sing. 

Louisa finished her song, and he compli- 
mented her on it. 

" Come and sing this duet with me," 
she said, in her coaxing, arch way. "I 
am going to make a brother of you, do you 
know ? I have always so longed for a bro- 
ther who could sing duets with me. Come !" 

Without waiting for an answer she began 
the accompaniment, and Wenlock found 
himself singing to his heart's content al- 
most before he had decided what to do. 

One song succeeded another rapidly, and 



LOUISA WEBB. 129 



when at last the fair musician pansed, ex- 
hausted by her exertions, it was nearly 
eleven o'clock. 

Wenlock hurried from the piano to Janet ; 
sXi his anger had evaporated long ago, and 
he felt vexed at his own neglect. 

Janet looked up, smiling. 

" Thank you for your songs. I wish I 
could accompany you as Louisa can ;" then 
seeing Mrs. Webb suppress a yawn of 
weariness, she added, " It is not late, is it T 

Louisa smiled, and inwardly applauded 
Janet's self-control, but Wenlock could not 
help feeling stung that she had not missed 
him. 

He said good night and went away soon 
after. 

"Have I been mistaken in her all this 

VOL. II. 9 



130 ROOKSTONE. 



while V he said to himself as he walked 
home ; " if she had looked vexed when I 
went up to her just now it would have been 
only natural, but I believe she was glad to 
be left alone. Does she love me really, or 
is she only holding to this engagement from 
a sense of duty ? Ever since her mother s 
death there has been this strange reserved 
change in her manner." He walked on 
thinking. " It may be her sorrow^ after 
all," he said, " and I'm only behaving like 
a brute in wishing her to be dififerent. 
Trials have come so fast upon her lately, 
that it is cruel to expect that they will not 
deaden her for a time, at least to other 
thoughts, poor darling. I ought to be 
doubly tender and considerate towards her, 
instead of acting as I acted to-night." 



LOUISA WEBB. 131 

He might have spared himself the re- 
morse his hasty, generous nature suflEereA 

Janet was far too much absorbed in 
thinking out her suspicions of Richard 
Wolferston, and her plans for putting them 
into action, to trouble herself with any- 
feeling so petty as jealousy of Louisa Webb. 
It seemed to her selfish to think of her 
own happiness till her father's memory waa 
vindicated. 

Janet was not faultless ; she was proud,, 
self-reliant, and self-willed, but she wa 
noble-minded and generous-hearted : where: 
she had once given her confidence she could 
not have withdrawn it without such a 
wrench as can come but seldom in a life- 
time. Nothing could have made her stoop 
to the petty meanness, the small spites, by 

9.2 



132 ROOKSTONE. 



which women will rub all the bloom from 
their own lives and the lives of all who 
belong to them. 

The fault of such great hearts is that, in 
what they think pursuit of Duty, they are 
too apt to sacrifice their own feelings, for- 
getting that if the hearts of others are 
bound up with theirs they also must 
suffer. 



JANETS SCHEME. 133 



CHAPTER XL 



Janet's scheme. 



A LMOST before Mr. Painson had set- 
"^ tied himself at his desk next mom- 
ing, a lady was announced. He was 
surprised to see Janet Wolferston. He 
had not met her since her mother's death, 
and it seemed to him strange that she 
should be going about so soon by her- 
self 

"I am not alone/' she said, answering 
his surprised look. **Poor Thompson is 



134 EOOKSTONE. 



staying at Mrs. Webb's till we can find a 
place for her, but I left her down-stairs 
because I want to see you alone." 

Mr. Painson smiled, but he soon looked 
grave when Janet told him the purport of 
her visit. At first he was all attention, but 
as she went on, his interest plainly slack- 
ened, and when she said that her mother 
could not be sure that the wiU was signed, 
he shook his head impatiently. 

" My dear Miss Janet, you must excuse 
ine, but that is so like a woman, to build 
up a history on what really has not a leg 
to stand on. Your father may have made 
another will ; but if unsigned it is of no 
more use than this newspaper." 

"But my mother did not say she was 
sure it was not signed." 



JANETS SOHEME. 135 

"Well, then, the thing remains as it 
was ; still, I can't think that any one so 
-sharp as yonr cousin Richard would allow 
a duly executed will to lie about where 
any one might find it, always supposing 
him to be cognisant of its existence ; but 
perhaps you mean that Mr. Richard is 
ignorant of this other wiU V 

" Ignorant !" Janet's eyes flashed ; she 
was indignant with Mr. Painson for his 
tameness and want of sympathy. " Why 
was the study kept locked then ? why did 
Eichard never come to inquire for my 
mother . for I wrote to him at once to say 
how iU she was ? No, Mr. Painson, he is 
guilty, and it is useless to try to shake my 
belief in his guilt ; you yourself doubted 
the will at first." 

" True, but I afterwards told you that I 



136 EOOKSTONE, 



had questioned the witnesses, and had no 
reason to doubt their signatures/' 

" But suppose the will to have been a 
forgery altogether, it would have been very 
easy to put the same date ; and then if 
the handwriting of these people were skil- 
fully imitated, I cannot see how question- 
ing them would serve you." 

" Don't be in too great a hurry, my dear 
child ; all these doubts occurred to me, but 
in my youth I was for some time with an 
expert, and I have not lost the practice I 
acquired with him. I dared not communi- 
cate my doubts to your mother tiU I could 
prove them, but as soon as I found that 
she would not let me attack the will on 
the plea of your father's mental incapacity 
at the time he executed it, I got both the 



JANETS SCHEME. 137 

witnesses to sign their names, and com-^ 
pared them with the signatures affixed ta 
the will ; they are identically the same. 
Richard Wolferston may have done much 
in the way of undue influence, I graat you, 
but you may be sure in your own mind. 
Miss Janet, that the will imder which he 
holds the property is no forgery ; he would 
not have left it in my .hands and have 
transferred the business part of it entirely 
to me if he had been afraid of a flaw in it." 

Janet did not inteiTupt him, but his 
words had not made the slightest impres- 
sion on her conviction respecting the will. 

" All you say may be quite right/' she 
said, calmly, " and yet the will my mother 
foimd may be that which my father really 
meant to leave behind him. Remember 



138 ROOKSTONE. 



she was not sure about the signatures ; 
now, Mr. Painson, you see it is lost time 
to try to persuade me out of this belief. 
What I have come to you for, is to ask 
how I am to set about disputing Richard's 
possession of Rookstone." 

Mr. Painson looked very grave. 

" In your sister's present state of health 
I should say, do nothing at all, and indeed, 
my dear yoimg lady, I scarcely see what 
you can do in any case. Supposing . and, 
mind you, I do not credit the supposition, 
but just for the sake of argument we will 
suppose . that will in the study to be 
genuine and fully executed, how are we to 
get at it ? If your brother-in-law be what 
you think him to be, he will destroy it on 
the first hint of a contest, and then where 



JANETS SCHEME. 139 

are you ? you will have incurred all sorts 
of expenses, for there is no use in attack- 
ing Richard Wolferston except in a formal, 
legal manner ; you will have created family 
disunion, have brought yourself imder pub- 
lic notice, to serve no purpose." 

Janet made no answer ; she leaned back 
in her chair, thinking. Her judgment had 
always been clear, but the excitement 
which had possessed her since the previous 
evening had added wings to her thoughts 
and had given a power of rapid invention 
which by nature she had not. 

Mr. Painson did not disturb her ; he 
knew Janet to be capable of reflection . ^a 
capacity he denied to the generaUty of 
womankind . and he fondled his chin com- 
placently with his left hand, and decided 



140 ROOKSTONE, 



that his last argument had proved " a 
settler." 

She turned round abruptly, her animated 
&ce lit up by a glow of unusual excite- 
ment. 

" But if a credible witness could see the 
will, and swear to the signatures, would 
not that be sufficient to establish the 
case T 

"If! . why of course it would place 
Richard Wolferston in an awkward posi- 
tion ; but we are talking in the clouds. 
Any one who could see the will, supposing 
it to exist, must see it without Richard 
Wolferston's knowledge, and I can scarcely 
tell how this could be managed ; it would 
be almost as easy to get possession of it, 

eh r 



JANETS SCHEME. 141 

He looked half mockingly, half in- 
quiringly, into Janet's eyes, for their ex- 
pression roused his curiosity. 

" And supposing the will, or an accurate 
description of it, were brought to you, you 
would undertake to see my Uttle Christy 
righted T 

" If the moon falls at my door-step to- 
night I promise you a slice," he laughed. 
*' My dear child, you are left alone in the 
world now, and have only me to advise 
you ; pray be careful, think of the scandal 
and distress you would bring on yourself by 
an unsuccessful suit against your brother- 
in-law ; he is very clever, and . ^and between 
ourselves . I am afraid, he is not over scru- 
pulous ; take my advice and let well alone." 

" Good-bye," said Janet, " you are a dear 



142 ROOKSTONE. 



kind friend, Mr. Painson, although you are 
so verjr cautious." 

She pressed his hand warmly ; he seemed 
the last relic left of the old life at Rook- 
stone, and she went back to Mrs. Webb's 
to develop into a practical shape the sud- 
den and singular idea that had darted into 
her mind in Mr. Painson's office. 

Mary had not yet written to her ; she 
had been too iU to do so, and Janet had 
mentally decided that, with her present 
feelings towards Richard Wolferston, she 
could not go to Rookstone ; but now she 
took a different view. If Richard was not 
the rightful possessor, why should she 
shrink from accepting his hospitality ? In 
her self-imposed character of redrcsser of 
Christy's wrongs and her father s memory. 



JANETS SCHEME. 14a 

she persuaded herself that anything was to 
be attempted for the end to be attained. 

If she had not been carried away by her 
intense purpose she must have shrunk from 
the step she now contemplated, but when 
Christy was safe in bed she sat up long 
into the night, revolving the project which 
seemed to have become the one aim of her 
life, to have absorbed every other thought. 

She waked in the morning with an xm- 
usual feeling of disquiet and dissatisfac- 
tion. 

A letter for her was lying on the break- 
fast-table. 

As she read it the clouds cleared from 
Janet's face. It was plain that she was in 
the right way ; here it was smoothed for 
her. 



144 ROOKSTONE. 



The letter was from Mary ; she was still 
very iU and weak, and she should be so 
glad to see Janet ; wotdd she come to her 
the next day for a few weeks? she was 
jsure Janet would like to see baby ; and 
then, in a few sorrowful words at the end, 
the poor girl spoke of her mother, and of 
the longing she felt to hear all the details 
of her illness. 

Janet hesitated as to whether she should 
acquaint Mr. Painson with her visit. Why 
should she do this ? he would only send 
her a budget of cautions which would make 
her angry with him and do no good. She 
must tell Henry Wenlock, of course. Mary 
said that both she and Richard would be 
glad to see Henry, but Janet knew that 
her lover resented Richard's usurpation far 



JANETS SCHEME. 145 

too keenly to allow him to accept his hos- 
pitality, and she was glad of this. She 
wanted to be alone at Rookstone, free and 
unwatched by any one who took a special 
interest in her. 

She wrote at once to accept Mary's 
invitation. 

" You will not mind losing me for about 
a week, Christy, dear?" she said to her 
little brother when he came home to dinner, 
for it was a half-holiday. 

Christy's face lengthened. 

" Louisa laughs at me so," he said ; " I 
hate girls to laugh at me ; and, do you 
know, Janet, I believe I hate Cousin 
Webb ? she says I'm to call her * Mrs.' " 

'* Well, that is not such a great crime, 
Christy dear." 

VOL. n. 10 



146 ROOKSTONE, 



She put her arms fondly round the boy^ 
and kissed him. 

" It isn't that. I'm not such a baby as 
that/' he said, indignantly ; " but when 
you find fault with me, Janet, you do it 
seriously, and unless I am naughty I know 
it is for my good ; but Cousin Webb's way 
is different. I'm not saying it to tell tales, 
but that way she has of laughing and half 
scolding makes me as angry as anything. 
If she were only a boy, T know I'd give her 
a licking." 

" Oh ! Christy," and his sister looked 
distressed, for she began to feai- that, in 
her absence, matters might grow serious, 
" you wiU try and be good while I go 
away, won't you ? I will not stay a day 
longer than I can help, darling," and she 



JANETS SCHEME. 147 



hugged him closely to her. "I am not 
going to please myself ; try and think of 
your lessons, and I wiU aak cousin to 
invite your Mend Roger to spend next 
half-holiday with you, and Henry will be 
sure to come and see you." 

The last promise seemed to give the 
greatest comfort. 

**I wish you would make haste and 
marry Henry/' the boy said; '*he is a 
regular jolly fellow, and treats me as if I 
really was his own brother . I love him . 
he's different from Eichard ; I say Janet/' 
he said, looking very serious, *^ do you 
think Richard is kind to Mary now there 
is no one left to take care of her ?" 

" Yes, I think so ; dear mamma thought 

so ; but now remember what I said about 

10.2 



148 ROOKSTONE. 



cousin ; try not to be saucy to her, you will 
soon have me back, you know ; and, dear 
Christy, we are only here for a little while, 
so we must try and make the best of it." 

Janet did not like to encourage the child 
in angiy dissatisfied thoughts, and yet she 
had already seen enough of Mrs. Webb in 
her own home to be siu'e that Christy could 
not benefit by maintaining any close inti- 
macy with his cousins. 

But she was to start for Rookstone to- 
morrow, and her head was too busy with 
the scheme she had resolved to execute to 

give much thought to anything extraneous. 
Christy and his vexations were soon for- 
gotten, and herself and the part she was to 
play again became paramount. 

There is no subject of contemplation so 



JANETS SCHEME, 149 

fascinating as self ; it may tempt us in the 
way of self-worship as to our outward ap- 
pearance, or self-esteem respecting our 
mental powers, or worse, and more ensnai-- 
ing than all, under the pretence of humility, 
it may tempt us in the way of self-con- 
templation. 

Janet did not write to Henry to an- 
nounce her intended journey till evening. 
She meant to start early next morning, but 
it seemed to her that the plan she had laid 
down must unravel this secret, which , 
seemed to stand as a barrier between her- 
self and her promised husband, and although 
she tried to believe that as yet he was not 
aware of any estrangement between them, 
still the restraint the secret imposed had 
become to her so painftd, that she resolved 



160 ROOKSTONE. 



not to risk the chance of seeing Henry 
again till she had accomplished her pur- 
pose. 

She was determined she would not leave 
Rookstone till she had foimd entrance to 
her fiither's study and seen the will, the 
discovery of which, as she firmly beUeved, 
had caused her mother's death. 



KITTY AGAIN. 151 



CHAPTER XIL 



KITTY AGAIN. 



TANET was at Rookstone, but two days 
had gone and she had made no pro- 
gress in the search she had resolved on. 

Both doors of the study were locked. 
She had searched in every likely place, but 
she could find no trace of the key. 

Just now in talking to Mary, Janet had 
said, carelessly, she should like to revisit 
their father's study. 

" It is impossible, dear ; I don't know 



152 ROOKSTONE, 



why, but Richard always keeps the key in 
his pocket; he even scolded me during^ 
my illness because I left it in the saloon." 

" You have had the key, then T said 
Janet, eagerly. 

" Yes, he gave it to me when he went to 
Scotland. I laughed at him, and called it 
his Blue Beard's chamber, for he said I had 
better not go into the study myself, nor let 
any one know that I had the key; and 
would you believe it, Janet, I was so care- 
less, that on the very evening poor Jem 
Bobbins took me for a pheasant . I always 
tease Kitty about this, although of course 
the poor feUow reaQy fired at a pheasant- 
just because the key felt heavy in my pocket, 
I took it out and put it on one of the 
chimney-pieces in the saloon. I think 



KITTY AGAIN. 153 



Richard said somebody unlocked the door 
and went in, but I was so ill that I don't 
quite remember ; and then you know came 
the news of dearest mamma's illness. Oh, 
Janet, how I envy you, you who were with 
her to the last." 

Mary lay back on her sofa, crying bit- 
terly ; she had not yet left her room, she 
was still too weak to bear any extra 
fatigue. 

At another time Janet would have 
soothed her and shared in her sorrow, but 
Mary's words had so completely realised her 
mother's story, that she could think of 
nothing else. 

It was a dull lowering afternoon. Richard 

had gone out shooting, and had said he 
should not be in till dinner-time. 



154 MOOKSTONE. 



He had given Janet a cheerful welcome 
to Rookstone, but she had been much 
struck by the change in his appearance 
and manner, a change which her mother's 
report on her first return to Brompton had 
not in any way prepared her for. He was 
so terribly aged ; he looked careworn and 
haggard. When they were alone together 
at breakfast and dinner, he never spoke 
unless Janet addressed him, and then 
he seemed to force an unnatural cheer- 
fulness. 

Was he afraid of her ? Janet asked her- 
self, or was he haunted by the remembrance 
of his crime? . for that he was criminal 
she never doubted. Had she known how 
terrible his anxiety had been about his 
wife, and how great a shock he had sus- 



KITTY AGAIN. 165 



tained in finding her mother, as lie thought, 
lifeless on the floor of the study, she 
might have been more merciful in her 
judgment. 

But Janet was in no mood for mercy. 
Wrought up as she believed to a high pur- 
pose, the purpose of redressing her brother s 
wrongs, and vindicating her fiither's jus- 
tice, she never looked on the other side of 
the picture. She never thoiight of the 
possibility of Richard's innocence, of her 
sister's shame and misery, should he be 
proved guilty ; she was wholly bent on 
discovering a means of access to the study. 
She came down from Mary's room and 
looked at the closed door, and it seemed to 
her that this mystery about the key was a 
fresh proof of Richard's guilt. The diffi- 



156 ROOKSTONE, 



culty of getting possession of this key . 
for it was not likely that Richard would 
again trust it to his careless wife . ^had 
thrown Janet into a renewed perplexity, 
and she had quitted her sister hastily to 
think it out. 

Mary had announced her intention of 
coming down next day into the saloon, and 
her presence would interfere with Janet's 
freedom of action. It was more than pro- 
bable, too, that Richard would be so 
dehghted to have his wife down - stairs 
again, that he would stay indoors, and 
Janet felt that it was only in his absence 
that she was fearless. The gaze of those 
dark penetrating eyes seemed to paralyse 
her wits. What she had to do must be 
done this afternoon. There were still three 



KITTY AGAIN. 157 



hours of daylight left, and then there would 
be an hour of darkness before Richard came 
in. She seated herself with her back to the 
window, and resolutely closed her eyes, so 
that no object should divert her thoughts. 
A whole hour passed, and still she had not 
stirred ; her brain remained blank and 
empty. The clock on the mantelshelf 
struck three-quarters past two ; the silver 
tones seemed to mock her, and she started 
from her seat and paced up and down the 
saloon . up and down till she stood still 
before one of the windows, and looked out 
over the park. How beautiful the trees 
were in their golden and russet fohage, as 
bright as the many-tinted pheasants that 
every now and then showed suddenly 
through their boughs. The peacocks were 



168 ROOKSTONE. 



in their accustomed place on the terrace 
wall, everything was as it used to be, and 
yet to Janet all was altered, 

'* But it need not be altered," she said,, 
passionately ; '' if I had only courage and 
resolution and wit enough, I should devise 
a means for restoring his rights to my dear 
little Christy." 

And Henry too . he had been defrauded 
of the portion he expected to receive with 
her. What could she do ? and as she 
asked herself the question it was answered. 

Kitty Robbins . she would go and consult 
Kitty Bobbins. From her mother's account 
the old woman had not overcome her dis- 
like to Richard Wolferston ; it would not, 
therefore, be creating any fresh prejudice 
against him if she took her into counsel. 



KITTY AGAIN. 15^ 



She went upstairs to her own room, and 
got her hat and cloak. The rain was be- 
ginning to fall, but she took no heed of it, 
she was too much absorbed in her purpose. 
No heed did she take either of Monsieur 
Fran9ois Leroux. 

He was standing just outside the open 
hall door, but he watched Janet's move- 
ments attentively. Then shrugging his 
shoulders as she went into the saloon again 
dressed for walking, he said, " Ma foi, I shall 
never arrive to understand these English ; 
they are too profound for me. Here is a 
young lady . pretty, amiable, and as she 
should be . she come to see madame, her 
sister, who, Eulalie tell to me, she love very 
much. Well, what do she do ? These two 
days I observe her. She stay very little up- 



160 ROOKSTONE. 



stairs in madame's room, she walk always 
dlone about the house, and now this after- 
noon the squire have gone out for longer time 
than ordinary, and instead of being with 
her sister to make themselves cheerftd to- 
gether, she come downstairs with a so 
serious face, and she walk out in the rain. 
It is a thing not to be believed, a nice 
delicate young lady to leave a pretty com- 
fortable room where she have a fiiend who 
can speak with her, and with whom she 
can enjoy, and go instead into the rain, 
and dirt and spoil her toilette and her 
boots." 

If he had seen the state of Janet's boots 
when she reached Kitty's cottage, he would 
have congratulated himself on his fore- 
sight. 



KITTY AGAIN. 161 

It seemed as if the weather was against 
her project, for the path she took was nar- 
row, bordered on each side by tall grass 
-and weeds ; and long before she was half- 
way on her journey these became so com- 
pletely saturated with the fast-falling rain, 
that she might almost as well have walked 
through water. 

" Well, sure ! Miss Janet ; who'd a thowt 
o' seeing 'ee !" and Kitty started up to wel- 
come her visitor and let fall the ball of yam 
off which she was knitting Jem's new winter 
socks. " But 'ee be soakin' wet. Sit 'ee 
down close agen the fire," . she was dusting 
a chair with her apron while she spoke . 
^* and let I see to 'ee bits o' boots," 

But Janet refused to change these ; she 
had but little time, she said, and she 

VOL. II. 11 



162 ROOKSTONE. 



could not spare a moment of it ; if she 
got her boots off she much doubted being 
able to get them on again. 

" Now, Kitty, listen : I wiQ come and 
see you again, and talk over old times, and 
teU you about Christy, and all you want to 
know ; but now I want your help, for I am 
in great trouble/' 

The keen face eyed her shrewdly, and 
then resting her chin between both her 
shrivelled hands, the old woman sat, in- 
tently listening. 

" The second time that my mother was 
here," said Janet, ^^ she went into my 
father's study, and she saw something there 
which . which . it is of great importance 
to me to see also. But I find that the 
study-door is always kept locked, and I 



KITTY AGAIN. 163 



have reason to beUeve that even if I asked 
Mr. Wolferston for the key, he would not 
give it to me. Now, Kitty, I have come to 
you for help ; I know you are very quick- 
witted, and I think you may be able to hit 
on some plan by which I can get into the 
study without the squire's knowledge, and 
I do not think it is wrong to do this, for it 
is for the sake of justice." 

She left off speaking, but Kitty made no 
answer; she seemed to be studying her 
visitor s face, while a scornful look spread 
fast over her own. 

" Miss Janet," she said, " I be old, but,, 
as 'ee wur sayin', I hanna lost the wits God 
gived I at startin', and thay be sharp 'uns ; 
Miss Janet, thay be sharp 'uns enough not 
to let I go into nothink blindfold. Do 'ee 

11.2 



164 ROOKSTONE. 



think, miss, as Kitty be too old an' foolisli ta 
guess whatten your blessed mother seed in 
that there room ; 'ee be a lady bwom, miss, 
and knaws better than a auld gowk such as 
I, but I'll lay 'eeVe got scent o' another 
will now, or 'e'ed not be in such a 
caddie." 

The colour rushed up to Janet's temples ; 
she felt ashamed of her want of confidence. 
How could she expect this old woman to 
run a risk in her service, if she only treated 
her as a blind instnmient ? 

She took one of the wrinkled hands in 
her own ; her eyes glowed with excitement 
and youth as she stood before Kitty, her 
dripping garments clinging closely round 
her, while the old woman crouched in her 
high-backed chair, her blue gown and 



KITTY AGAIN. 165 



apron and spotless white neckerchief 
thrown into high relief by the glancing 
fireHght ; she kept her keen eyes fixed 
sternly on Janet, as if she would force the . 
truth from her, whether she willed it or not. 

"You are right, Kitty, and I was 
wrong, not to tell you at once ; it was a 
will that my mother saw, but she was not 
sure that it was signed." 

" And what wur the matter o' that T 
Kitty's eyes flashed out under her thick 
irregular brows, and her voice grew shrill 
as she went on. " Roight must be roight ; 
let the writin' be as it may, if yer father 
willed the squoire to be measter o' Rook- 
stone, let he bide measter, but if him hav' 
wronged Measter Christy, the real squoire's 
own darlin', Ipt he look to heself ; I alius 



{ 



166 EOOKSTONE. 



said I'd ferret out the rights o' it some 
day, but I'se na lookin' for the day to come 
so soon." 

She had kept hold of Janet's hand while 
she spoke, and now giving it a painful grip 
she let it fall and stood erect, as if to show 
that she was ready to obey orders. 

" Can you think of any way by which I 
can get into the study T said Janet, eagerly, 
for she knew how fast time was flying. 

" There's the winder," said Kitty, with 
the singular promptitude which distin- 
guished her from most old women. 

Janet shook her head. '^ I thought of 
the window ; if it looked on to the terrace it 
would be easy, but those side windows are 
at such a height from the ground, no trees 
or anything to help a climber ; and besides. 



KITTY AGAIN. 167 

Kitty, the study window is sure to be 
bolted inside/' 

'^ Then that be just what it be sure not 
to be," said Kitty, triiunphantly ; and if 
Fran9ois Leroux had seen the mahcious 
twinkle in her eyes he would have pro- 
nounced her more like a witch than ever. 
*^ I'se na helped thay lazy gals up at 
t' house so oft not to knaw summat about 
thay fastenin's. The real squoire hated 
fastenin's : him say to I, ' Kitty,' him say, 
' I loike to open my window when I will 
to open he, dwoant ye bother I wi' no 
bolts :' an' if so be as that there room beant 
used since, I ask ye how should the bolt 
be fast now ? not it, 'ee may make sure o' 
thatten." 

"Well, but . " Janet spoke doubtfiilly, 



168 ROOKSTONE. 



for she was only half convinced-" suppos- 
ing I find the window unfaatened, how can 
I get to it ? I cannot climb up the bare 
wall ; besides, I should be seen by some 
one." 

" That 'ere be true, miss." Kitty 
mused; even she considered this a real 
difficulty. 

Presently she began muttering to her- 
self. " Them be roipe and them dwoant 
ought be left hangin' for the bottleflies to 
spile. Tell 'ee what, Miss Janet," she said, 
turning round with a broad smile on her 
face, " 'ee may go home as fast as 'ee loikes 
and leave Kitty to do 'ee business. Dwoant 
'ee be seen goin' fro' the park, that be my 
way ; and our roads dwoant oughten lie 
together. Well, Miss Janet, betime ee'r 



KITTY AGAIN. 16 



standin' below t' study winder, may be 
'ee'U find Kitty there wi' a key as'U let 



ee m. 



Janet questioned, but she got no answer,, 
except a recommendation to be off as fast 
as she might, if she did not want Kitty to^ 
be on the ground first. 

Janet departed, half satisfied ; she knew 
that the road was much the longest ; but 
she knew, too, that the old woman was 
right in saying they ought not to be seen 
both together. 

Kitty stood looking after her. " Her be , 
like she's father, after all. I would na' ha' 
thowt it, such a serious, quiet lass . but I 
maun be gooin', or she's young legs 'ull 
beat my old 'ims." She wrapped herself 
up warmly, and even then she shuddered a. 



170 ROOKSTONE. 



little at ventTiring her rheumatic bones 
into the rain ; but it was not quite such a 
down-pour as Janet had met with, and 
Kitty was better defended, and had, more- 
over, a huge gingham umbrella. " Us'U 
see this day," she said to herself, as she 
trudged along, "what gratitoode there be 
in men folk. I'se na' asked my nevay Paul 
for a good turn since I got he the garden 
place at Rookstone ; him wur a good lad 
onst, and I wur all a same as a mother to 
he till him wur saxteen an' more : but I 
dwoant believe in ne'er a man aHve, except 
my gowk of a Jem," 



AT MRS. WEBFS. 171 



CHAPTER XIII. 



AT MRS. Webb's. 



rriHERE was company at Mrs. Webb's . 
Mrs. Dawson, Henry Wenlock, and a 
Mr. and Mrs. Buchanan : a tall, insipid man 
lost in the contemplation of his own beard, 
and his wife, a fat comely lady of about 
forty, so round, so smooth, so smiling, so 
full of her own perfections, that you found 
yourself wondering whether she made life 
as easy and full of simshine to those around 
her as she evidently did to herself. 



172 ROOKSTONE. 



She had just come over from Paris, and 
Louisa could not take her eyes off the novel 
arrangement of her head-dress. 

" So striking, so elegant," she sighed ; 
" ah, if mamma would only let me keep a 
French maid ! How I do hate everything 
English." 

Louisa continued in a lackadaisical state 
all through dinner, although Henry Wen- 
lock, who sat between Mr. and Mrs. Bu- 
chanan, did his best to amuse her. In 
Janet's absence Miss Webb did not feel 
half as anxious to captivate him. 

Secretly Wenlock was very dull himself; 
he had only accepted Mrs. Webb's invitation 
because Janet had asked him to take every 
opportimity of seeing Christy duiing her 
absence ; but he had looked for a letter 



AT MRS. WEBFS. 173 

from her that morning, and it had not 
<3ome. He was not in the best temper in 
the world in consequence. 

He thought Mrs. Buchanan, with her 
winning ways and incessant display of 
white teeth, an insufferable mass of conceit ; 
but she never discovered his dislike . ^it 
could not have occurred to this lady that 
any one coidd help being charmed with 
her. It was a refuge to Henry to turn to 
Louisa. 

Up-stairs, whUe Louisa, seated on a stool 
at Mrs. Buchanan's feet, was endeavouring 
to elicit the secrets of the new coiffure^ 
Mrs. Webb took Mrs. Dawson into counsel. 

" Poor Janet, she is so very eccentric ; 
never consults me about the smallest trifle. 
I believe she has more confidence in that 



174 ROOKSTONE. 



woman Thompson . between ourselves, I 
think she is a trifle touched in the 
head/' 

" Who . Thompson ? dear me, that is 
sad, when you think she has her bread to 
earn and all ; and you know there was a 
lady's-maid who cut her mistress's throat 
from insanity . so easUy done, too, in put- 
ting on your cap, or anything. Now I 
come to think of it, Thompson has put 
mine on for me often at Rookstone. Dear 
me, Mrs. Webb, I wish you hadn't told me, 
you have given me quite a turn." 

The gentlemen came up, and the conver- 
sation became more general. 

There was a lamentation from Mrs. Webb 
because Mrs. Buchanan, who had a repu- 
tation as a musician, had nearly cut the top 



AT MBS. WEBBS. 175 

of her thumb off in carving for a party of 
friends at luncheon, and was consequently- 
disabled; but the fat round dame made 
quite as much market out of her chopped 
thumb as she would have afforded by her 
musical efforts. She had small plump 
hands, and she held them up to designate 
the injured digit in such a fascinating, 
appealing manner, that while Mr. Webb 
thought her almost the most charming 
creature he had ever seen, Henry Wenlock 
felt as if he must leave the room at once. 

" So unfortunate for me, is it not ?" said 
Mrs. Buchanan ; " for I use my hands." 

** One would call a man who indulged in 
such antics an intolerable puppy," said 
Henry Wenlock to himself; "what must 
one call a woman ?" 



176 ROOKSTONE. 



He had placed himself near the piano. 
Louisa waB singing, aad her mother attri- 
buted his movement to irresistible attrac- 
tion. 

Mrs. Webb was sitting beside Mrs. Daw- 
son, near enough to be overheard by Cap- 
tain Wenlock even when she spoke in a low 
voice. 

" How fond he is of sin^ng," she S9id, 
designating Henry by a movement of her 

head. 

Mrs. Dawson looked, and fell into the 
trap at once. 

*' How much Louey has improved," she 
said ; and then, lowering her voice, " Don't 
you think it a great pity, for Henry's sake, 
that Janet can't sing V 

"Yes, it is a pity," said Mrs. Webb, 



AT MRS. WEBFS. 177 



thoughtfiilly^ with a fiirtive glance every 
now and then towards the piano ; ** and yet 
it would be useless for her to try, she has 
neither ear nor voice. A wife who cannot 
play and sing is such a drawback to a man 
in society, especially if he sings." 

She was perfectly aware that Henry 
Wenlock could not accompany him- 
self. 

*^ Why did you say Janet was eccentric 
just now ?" said good blundering Mrs.. 
Dawson. 

'* Hush !" said Mrs. Webb, wamiiigly . 
she saw Wenlock fidget, and she thought 
he woTild move away. 

" Louey, love, can't you play that lov6ly 
little bit of Schubert T and then, knowing 
that Louisa woidd keep Henry beside her 

VOL. n. 12 



178 ROOKSTONE. 



to turn over her leaves, she answered 
Mrs. Dawson : . 

" Well, I'll tell you what I mean, and 
leave you to judge. Of course I have a 
daughter of my own and try to bring her 
up carefiilly. I do not set up for a strait- 
laced prudish person, you know ; but still 
even I call it eccentric for so very yoimg 
a girl to run after Mr. Painson as Janet 
does." 

" Does she really, now ?" said Mrs. Daw- 
son ; she loved Janet, but gossip was as 
necessary to her as daily food. 

" Oh yes ; goes to his ofl&ce, you know, 
and stays hours there, and never utters a 
syllable about it to any one.'* 

" Well, but " . Mrs. Dawson s conscience 
reproached her for listening so quietly . 




AT MRS. WEBFS. 179 

''^ don't you think she goes, perhaps by 
Captain Wenlock's wish, and to considt 
Mr. Painson for him ?" 

" It may be so. I wonder the idea had 
not occurred to me ; only Captain Wenlock 
does not give me the notion of a man who 
would let a woman manage either him or 
his affairs, he is so very manly and 
energetic." 

" Then I am quite afraid Janet will be - 
wasted on him," said Aunt Dawson, in the 
glow of confidence which a Httle special 
notice was sure to ehcit from her ; " for I 
don't know any one who is so well able to 
advise others : she would be quite a trea- 
sure to a weak husband, now. She is so 
thoroughly strong-minded, and I fancy she 
likes to rule." 

12.2 



180 BOOKSTONE. 



Mrs. Webb laughed. 

" You know her so much better than I 
do, you see ; but depend upon it, Mrs.. 
Dawson, Janet will manage her husband : 
a strong-minded woman always rules after 
marriage. especially one who knows how 
to keep her own secrets ; and I dare say it 
is all for the best ; we who are more yields 
ing and dependent only give our husbands 
much mmecessary trouble, I believe. Poor 
Louey, how she will cling to the opinion of 
the man she marries 1" 

" Poor Louey " was left to finish her 
romance alone. Henry Wenlock had never 
been noted for self-control, and he had no. 
idea of exerting it on the present occasion. 
Against his will he had heard every word 
of this conversation ; it was impossible to 




AT MRS. WEBBS. 181 

him to remain quiet and talk drawing-room 
platitudes for the rest of the evening, with 
uch a turmoil of vexed thoughts in his 
mind. 

Mrs. Webb protested^ against his depar- 
ture, but secretly she rejoiced at the effect 
of her words. She read in his face that he 
was vexed and anxious. 

" If I can once make him thoroughly- 
jealous," she said, " it will do ; it is only a 
preconceived idea of Janet, I believe, that 
holds him to this imsuitable engagement ; 
.once his eyes are opened, he must love 
Louey, and what a blessing it wiU be in 
^very way, to get her married !" 

Captain Wenlock was very angry; at 
first he had heard incredulously, but then 
he suddenly remembered that on his last 



182 ROOKSTONE. 



day of freedom he had asked Janet to go- 
with him to a photographer's, as he was 
not satisfied with the likeness he had of 
her. Janet had refused, on the plea of a 
previous engagement, and when, he inquired 
into its nature, she told him it was only a 
matter of business. 

She had smiled, certainly, and had 
seemed really sorry to disappoint him ; 
but Wenlock abhorred mystery, and the 
notion of a wife who coidd keep her own 
secrets was most jarring to his warm- 
hearted, impulsive natiu-e. He saw no 
impropriety in her consulting Mr. Painson ; 
the man was old enough to be her father, 
and yet he felt stung that she should do 
this unknown to him. 

"She is almost my wife" . ^he walked 



AT MRS. WEBB'S, 18;J 

slowly back to Jermyn Street . " and my 
wife must trust me wholly ; she shall be as 
free as air, and manage just as she pleases, 
but there can be no true love where there 
is even a shadow of concealment." 

With the word " manage " came the 
remembrance of the rest of Mrs. Webb's 
words. He would have despised himself 
if he had been aware that they moved him. 
He almost thought he should prefer a silly 
wife to one who would " manage " him. 

He had intended to write to Janet that 
evening ; he wanted to tell her he had seen 
Christy, and to implore her to write more 
frequently ; now he should wait till she 
wrote again. 

'^As to mysteries," he said, "the first 
time I get Janet alone, I will know the 



184 ROOKSTONE. 



truth of this Painson business. What is 
the use of going on with doubts and heart- 
burnings, when a few simple words will set 
all straight T 

And Henry Wenlock went to sleep, per- 
suaded in his honest single-heartedness 
that if aU the folks in the world would 
speak only plain truth, and the whole 
truth, about everything, to each other, all 
the wrongs of life would be righted. 



JANETS DISCO VERY. 185 



CHAPTER XIV. 



Janet's discovery. 



ItTEANTIME Kitty had reached the 
^^ kitchen garden ; she went prowling 
about, first into a potting house, then into 
tool sheds, and at last, seated on some bass 
mats, with a pipe in his mouth, she found 
Paul Robbins. 

He started at the sight of his aimt, 
and grew pale through his dark gipsy 
skin. Sharp-eyed Kitty noticed these 
signs, spite of the waning light, and 



186 ROOKSTONE. 



knew that she had him at an advan- 
tage. 

" Well, Paul, my lad " . she spoke 
heartily . " I be right pleased to see 'ee. 
Since 'ee's na come to see I, I be come ta 
see 'ee instead. What do 'ee think o^ 
that r 

Paul muttered something about his 
being always too busy to go anywhere,, 
and dexterously, as he thought, hid his 
pipe out of sight. 

" Dwoant 'ee stow 'eer baccy away for I, 
lad," said Kitty, chuckling grimly at the 
lad's discomfiture; "'ee be so busy alius, 
be ye ? I dwoant know, lad, what 'ee calls 
busy, but I'se na call it busy to be let 
smoke baccy afore dark, and t'other chapa 
hard at work yet." 



JANETS DISCOVERY. 187 

Paul saw there was no help for it, so he 
made the best story he could. His first 
situation had been in London, and a yeai- 
or two there had taken much of his native 
dialect away. 

" Be quiet,'' he said, in an earnest 
whisper, " wiU ye ? It be as much as my 
place be worth if Mr. Tomkins or one of 
the gardeners should hear that I was a 
smokin' ; it be only," he said, turning his 
face away from the keen eyes, "as IVe a 
bad toothache, and IVe heard say baccy be 
good for it." 

" Dwoant 'ee make no excuses," said the 
indignant old woman ; " if 'ee wants I'se 
na to tell tales, 'ee be taking the wrong 
road, my lad. I knaws what ye been 
arter, an now, sin ye ha gi'en up work 



188 ROOKSTONE. 



for 'eeself, happen ee'll do a stroke for 
Kitty." 

Paul professed himself willing and able 
to do anything she might require. He 
knew her to be universally respected 
among the few old servants left at Rook- 
stone, and among these was Mr. Tomkins, 
the head gardener, a strict disciplinarian, 
who punished " loafing '' by dismissal 

" Our pears be roipe, lad," she said, 
gravely, " and Jem him be feared to ask 
for the loan o' a pair o' steps, so, thinks I, 
Paul, him beant done I so much as one 
good turn since I spoke to t' old Madam 
to get he put in t' garden work ; an I say 
I knaws Paul wonna say nay, when I 
ask him for the steps to gather in the 
pears." 



JANETS DISCOVERY, 189^ 

'' I'll carry 'em down to the lodge thia^ 
evening," said Paul, with alacrity. 

" Thank thee, lad, there be no need. 
Set 'em thereabouts among t' shrubs 
where I be a gwoin to show 'ee, and my 
Jem ull carry 'em down for I, and brings 
'em back while 'ee be a thinkin' o't." 

Lazy Paul made no objection, and Kitty 
led the way triumphantly, followed by the 
dark-browed, lumbering fellow, with a pair 
of high steps on his shoulder. 

It has been said that the saloon formed 
the gardien frontage, flanked at either 
comer by a large circular room, the great 
dining and drawing-rooms. The terrace 
extended to the angle of these, and then 
the groimd sloped abruptly downwards, so 
that the windows on the left side of the 



190 ROOKSTONE. 



house facing the avenue . ^and the study- 
window was one of these . were at the 
height of some ten or twelve feet from 
the ground. There was a thinly-planted 
shrubbery just below the study window; 
through this ran a gravelled path, com- 
mimicating with the carriage sweep in 
front; beyond the gravel path the shrub- 
bery was much thicker. 

As Kitty drew near the gi-avelled walk, 
from the thicker side of the shrubbery, her 
sharp eyes spied some one beneath the 
study window. She made a sudden halt, 
and turned to her nephew. 

" This be nigh enow, and thank 'ee, 
Paul ; an' the next time 'ee smokes so 
early dwoant 'ee do it nigh o' them bass 
mats, thay be rare 'ams for catching light, 
that them be." 



JANETS DISCO VERY. 191 



Paul made off hastily, leaving the steps 
where she bade hun, and Kitty chuckled 
at the hold her discovery had given her 
over what she termed " a loafing vaga- 
bond." 

As soon as he was out of sight she 
moved cautiously forward till she reached 
the gravelled path, and then she stood still 
dismayed. She had felt sure she saw 
Janet's waterproof cloak beneath the study 
window, and she had dismissed Paul lest 
he too should see it. 

The place was vacant now ; but at the 
angle of the house nearest the hall entrance 
she caught a glimpse of Mr. Fran9ois 
Leroux. 

" The black-bearded i-askil I" ejaculated 
Kitty ; ** him be makin' he's hay in sun- 



192 ROOKSTONE. 



shine. Smokin' them nasty cigars in the 
very front o' t' house; I jist hope he^a 
measter may ketch him at it." 

The rain had ceased: she looked up 
longingly at the clouds, still moving too 
swiftly to promise any long cessation of the 
showers. Spite of her rheumatics, Kitty 
would have given much to ensure another 
torrent of rain, for she knew this would 
drive the Frenchman off the field. He 
was not in sight now, but she felt that he 
was walking up and down the front of the 
house. 

" Be him set on to watch V she asked 
herself, anxiously ; and then she held her 
breath with excitement, for this time she 
had not deceived herself. There was 
Janet in her dark-grey cloak, peeping 



JANETS DISCO VER Y. 193 

round from the back angle of the building. 
Kitty dared not speak or move, or give 
the slightest indication of her presence. 
She must trust that Janet s own discretion 
would keep her from making a rusthng 
among the shrubs, for Leroux would be 
back in another minute. Yes, here he 
was, and Kitty almost groaned in her 
agony of apprehension. Her fear was for 
Janet. She herself had a perfect right to 
be standing where she was, at. the entrance 
of a winding path in the thick shrubbery, 
leading away to the distant outhouses ; 
but a young lady like Miss Wolferston had 
"no call," as Kitty said, "to be jammed 
up again the wall, ankle deep in the soft 
wet mould, and hidin' among thay drip- 
pin' shrubs." All she could hope was 

VOL. II. 13 



194 ROOKSTONE, 



that in the fast growing darkness Monsieur 
Frangois would not distinguish either of 
them ; but still Kitty knew that she dared 
not attempt the risk of carrying the steps 
out of their hiding-place till the French- 
man was fairly off the premises. 

*' Them be rare fickle 'uns, be fdrrineers. 
Maybe him'll soon tire o' prancin' up and 
down loike a bantam cock. It be a wonder 
him stay here at all wi' ne'er a body lookin' 
at he. If Muss Janet ull bide still, us'll 
tide over yet, unless him be set on to 
watch." 

The rain seemed to be coming again as 
she had hoped : the clouds moved more and 
more swiftly, until, roUing themselves into 
one dense leaden knot overhead, they 
seemed to hold counsel together, and then 



JANETS DISCO YER Y. 195 

, . .* 

parting in sudden discord, poured down 
their wrath in liquid torrents. 

Janet pressed yet more closely against 
the wall for shelter, and poor old Kitty 
was glad to crawl under the drooping 
branches of a copper beech-tree to escape 
the violence of the storm. 

As to Monsieur Leroux, he dashed into 
the hall, objurgating and gesticulating at 
" this vilain climate," which gave to a poet 
no opportunity of refreshing his ideas by a 
contemplation of nature. 

But the brave old woman knew that 

while the fiirious rain lasted she and Janet 

might pursue their schemes in safety. She 

raised the steps, and although she staggered 

under their weight, she carried them out 

from behind the shrubs across the gravelled 

13.2 



196 ROOKSTONE. 



walk towards Janet's hiding-place. She 
could scarcely see her young lady now, for 
a sudden increase of darkness had come 
with the storm. 

"Muss Janet," she whispered, "be ye 
there ?" 

Janet stood beside her in an instant, and 
half relieved her of her load. Poor old 
Kitty had not known till then how much 
too heavy a task she had set herself. 

Neither of them spoke till the steps 
were firmly placed beneath the study win- 
dow, no easy matter in the blinding, pelting 
rain, and on the sodden mould into which 
they seemed each moment to sink deeper. 

Janet's heart was throbbing wildly. 
Here was the moment for which she had 
planned and striven, and yet, now that the 



JANETS DISCOVERY, 197 

way was clear . that she had only to mount 
the steps and see with her own eyes the 
proof of Richard's gmlt . she hesitated and 
drew back. 

Kitty could not see her face plainly, but 
she saw that there was a needless delay. 

" Coom, Muss Janet, pluck up a sperrit 
and climb up steps ; I be a-gwoin to sit on 
bottommost, no fear of slipping then . coom, 
up wi' ye." 

"I'm not afraid of sHpping, Kitty; but 
. ^but" . she hesitated. 

" Eh, miss, never fear, it's roight and 

justice ee go for." 

" Yes, yes, Kitty, you re right" . she 

began to mount the steps . "but, Kitty, 

suppose the squire or any one should pass 

and see the steps. Had you not better lay 



198 ROOKSTONE. 



them down among the bushes as soon as 
I'm up, and shelter yourself somewhere 
till I let you know I am ready to come 
down T 

" An' how'U ye do that ? Let Kitty be, 
muss ; if so be I can move thay, maybe I'll 
lay thay down ; but I'se na gwoin to stir 
fro' below the winder, an' if ye just say 
Kitty, I be here, muss." 

The old woman's bravery determined 
Janet, and she climbed quickly up the 
steps ; the window ledge was broad enough 
to stand on, and she tried to raise the sash. 
Yes, Kitty was right, it moved stiJffly, but 
it was not bolted. It made a startling 
noise in opening, but this was no time for 
hesitation. Janet bent her head and 
stepped into the room. 



JANETS DISCO VER Y, 199 

It was quite in daxkness, but, with that 
mechanical memory which seems to serve us 
without our will, she remembered where she 

should find a taper and matches. How long 
it seemed before she found them, and her 
fingers trembled so that she thought the 
taper would never be lighted. The flame 
kindled at last, and then a sickening dread 
came over her lest the light should be seen 
from without. It flickered so wildly that 
she saw she must shut the window if she 
would not have it extinguished. She closed 
the noisy, creaking sash, and set the taper 
on the davenport. Fear seemed to leave 
her suddenly, and again the fierce desire to 
pimish Richard and redress her brother's 
wrongs mastered her. 

The key lay just within the desk. Janet 



200 ROOKSTONK. 



had felt so sure that she should find the 
will stowed away as her mother had de- 
scribed it, out of sight, that it was almost 
a shock, when she opened the second 
drawer, to see at once a thick roll of paper 

lying in front. 

She took it tip eagerly. Her first inten- 
tion had been to read it and replace it in 
the drawer ; but this seemed, now that she 
had seen it was a reality, too great a 
risk . she would take it just as it was to 
Mr. Painson. She closed the half-opened 
drawer, replaced the key within the desk, 
and stooped to blow out the light. Then 
she hesitated. 

" I will see if it is signed first," she said ; 
" though I feel certain it must be." 

At first she could not be quite sure where 



\ 



JANETS DISCO VER Y. 201 

the end came, but when she had carefully 
looked through all the sheets she saw blank 
spaces left, evidently for signatures. 

A mist came over her eyes, and her 
hands shook as though they were palsied. 
Thought and recollection grew indistinct, 
and she sank into her father's high- 
backed chair ; not with the bodily insensi- 
bility that had seized her mother in that 
fatal spot, but as utterly stupefied to outer 
things. Suddenly she started awake . a 
clicking sound roused her . she listened in 
a breathless agony of terror, for it seemed 
to come from the door leading into the 
saloon. All was still again, it had only 
been her fancy ; but thought and memory 
came back tumultuously. What had she 
done ?. effected an unlawful entrance into 



2U2 ROOKSTONE. 



a house, and, for the first time, it struck 
her that it was unlawful, to prove what ? . 
that which was simply unprovable; that 
which, in fact, had never been done ; for 
unless two wills had been executed, Richard 
had not committed forgery. In her terror 
and utter revulsion of feeling . for she felt 
like a thief . she tried to open the drawer 
again, so as to replace the will, and regain 
the window as quickly as possible ; but the 
key slipped from her nerveless fingers and 
fell on the floor. 

It seemed to her impossible to find it in 
that vast darkness, and like some desperate 
animal she looked about her for a hiding- 
place into which she could thrust the wiU. 
As she grasped it a new thought came 
to her. Why did she not read the will. 



JANET'S DISCO VER Y, 203 

and see wherein it differed from that 
which had been declared genuine. Hiir- 
riedly, breathlessly, straining all her senses 
to gather in its meaning through the tech- 
nical jargon, she made out that her father 
had appointed her mother sole guardian of 
Christy, and that Rookstone had been left 
unreservedly to. him : her mother amply 
dowered, and she and her sister handsomely 
provided for. Legacies to old servants, 
friends . all imremembered in that will 
which had constituted Richard master of 
Rookstone ; traits of kind thoughtfulness, 
so like her father that they seemed to bring 
him back, living, breathing, to her memory, 
stamped conviction on her mind as she read 
that these were his genuine intentions, and 
that no matter how contrived, the other 
will was indeed a fabrication. 



204 ROOKSTONE. 



But the mystery seemed darker than 
ever. She looked eagerly on to see if 
Richard's name were mentioned. Yes, 
near the end : he was left a handsome sum 
of ready money. Her interest had con- 
quered terror ; past and future had become 
centred in trying to read this riddle. 

Had fear been as powerful as when she 
first discovered that the will was unsigned, 
she must have heard a faiat sound at the 
door leadiQg into the saloon. She would 
not have started with such a shuddering 
cry of terror when the door itself opened 
and Richard Wolferston entered the study. 



UNSIGNED. 205 



CHAPTER XV. 



UNSIGNED. 



jjlOR an instant neither of them spoke ; 
then Richard Wolferston closed the 
door behind him and walked up to the 
davenport. 

All Janet's courage had deserted her. 
In an inscrutable yet irresistible manner, it 
seemed as if she were the criminal, and 
Richard the person sinned against, and 
yet in her heart she still believed him 
guilty. 



206 ROOKSTONE, 



" Miss Wolferston," he said, sarcastically, 
"would it not have been easier to come 
m here by the door than by the window ? 
. rather more in keepiQg, too, with the 
extreme respectability of the Wolferstons 
of Rookstone ?" 

He waited, but she could not answer. 
A weaker woman would have got rid of 
some of her alarm in words or tears, but 
Janet sat trying to collect her scattered 
wits before she spoke. 

'^ I keep this room locked up," he said, 
quietly, *' because I have never yet had 
time to examine yoiu" father's papers. It 
would have been better in all ways if you 
had mentioned yoiu" wish to look through 
them with me." He glanced at the parch- 
ments before her. "As it is," he spoke 



UNSIGNED. 207 



faster and more roughly, "I consider your 
behaviour unjustifiable. Do you know 
that if you were not my wife's sister, I 
should feel myself tempted to give you in 
custody." 

It seemed to Janet that this anger was 
assumed, that he was seeking to make her 
quarrel with him. 

" Would you have given me the key of 
this study if I had asked for it ? If you 
would have done this, you will not refiise 
to give me this will." 

She fixed her eyes on his face, and she 
fancied that he grew paler, but the light 
was so indistinct that she could not be sure. 

He came still closer, and took up the 
roll and opened it. 

" This," he said, when he had examined it 



208 ROOKSTONE. 



for some minutes . " is this the only draft 
you have found? Surely there must be 
several others ? You know, of course, as 
weU as I do> the mania that possessed your 
father latterly respecting wills. I fully 
expected him to die without executing one 
of the numerous forms he caused to be 
drawn up. Why should I give you this ? 
it can serve no purpose. I imagine you 
have satisfied yourself that it is neither 
signed nor witnessed ?" 

" It is not, and yet . " she spoke sternly, 
for she felt that there could be no longer 
the disguise of even outward civility be- 
tween herself and Richard . *' I believe this 
to be my father's genuine will, the one he 
intended to be carried out, and that by which 
you hold possession here, a fabrication." 



UNSIGNED. 209 



He pressed his lips tightly together. 
Her boldness had taken him by surprise. 
Was it not enough to find fier at this time 
of night forcing a secret entrance into his 
house lite a burglar ? . and instead of con- 
fusion and terror, she carried her insolence 
so far as to accuse him. 

" If I answered you as you deserved to 
be answered," he said, ** I should at once 
tell you to leave the house ; but you are 
Mary's sister, and are therefore protected 
from my just anger. I hope and expect 
you will quit Rookstone to-morrow. I will 
account to Mary for your sudden departure. 
As to your accusation, you may, perhaps, 
regret your strange behaviour, if I swear 
to you by all you hold most sacred that 
your father's signature and those of the 

VOL. II. 14 



210 ROOKSTONE. 



witnesses to the will by which I hold Rook- 
stone, are as genuine as that he was your 
father. Take them, test them as you will in 
any court of justice, and you will only find 
yourself convicted of most unjust accusation 
and unfounded suspicion." 

Almost the same words Mr. Painson 
had used. Janet's head seemed to spin 
round as she varuly tried to see light in 

this dark riddle ; if Richard ^vere indeed 
guiltless, what was she ? Could it be pos- 
sible that, trained as she had been, her 
heart was yet so evil as to have begotten 
and nourished this black suspicion against 
an innocent man ? 

Scales fell from her eyes. It had then 
been her father's habit to make and remake 
his will, and her mother had been led into 



UNSIGNED, 211 



the same error as she had been by the sight 
of the same docimient. 

To Janet it was impossible to persist in 
error an instant after she saw it to be error. 
This first doubt of her own judgment re- 
awakened the better nature which had been 
slumbering, and she felt impelled to atone 
at once for her wrong-doing. She was 
not convinced, but it seemed to her that 
she ought to be . that she had allowed her- 
self to judge wilfully. 

" I have been wrong in suspecting you 
secretly," she said ; " I ought to have told 
you my doubts openly; I cannot wonder 
at yoiu" anger. I shall certainly leave 
Rookstone to-morrow." She paused a 
moment ; the expression of his face puzzled 
her, it was so set and hard. She began to 

14.2 



212 BOOKSTONE. 



see that Richard Wolferston was not a 
person to be offended with impunity. 
" You will not say anything to Mary, 
neither shall I ; she need never know I . 
have doubted you." 

He made no answer, except by opening 
the door for her to leave the study. As 
she passed him he said, abruptly. 

"You had better go at once to your 
room. I will explain yom- absence to the 
wretched old woman you have chosen to 
confide in." 

Then seeing she was about to remon- 
strate, he spoke more harshly. 

" Miss Wolferston, I must be master in 
my own house ; you have given scandal 
enough lor one night. You are too young 
to know the serious injury that might result 



UNSIGNED, 213 



if this childish attempt of yours got talked 
about among the servants. I cannot allow 
you to hold any further intercourse with 
that woman Robbins ; if you persist in 
resistance, I shall take some means of 
getting rid of her." 

Something in his tone made Janet sus- 
pect that she had been watched ; she felt 
powerless to strive against his wiQ, and she 
went up-stairs. 

Richard stood watching her till she dis- 
appeared into the gallery, then he went 
back into the saloon, down the terrace steps, 
and in another minute stood below the 
study window. He had moved so quietly 
that Kitty had not known of his approach 
till he was close beside her and the 
steps. 



214 ROOKSTONE. 



" Now, Mrs. Robbins " . ^he could scarcely 
distinguish her in the darkness, but he 
spoke as assuredly as if he could see the 
sudden terror that had seized her . " take 
yourself off as fast as possible ; you are a 
inischief-making old vagabond, and if it 
were not for Mrs. Wolferston, you should 
find yourself in Staplecross Jail before 
morning. Let nie find you trespassing 
near the house again, and you leave Rook- 
stone." 

"There be two words wanted to that 
ere, squoire. I be no tenant o' yom-n, and 
'ee knows I beant ; 'ee may keep I out o' 
the park, but 'ee can't turn I out o' the 
lodge, try as 'ee will." 

" I'll have you transported for to-night's 
work if you say another word," he said, 
furiously. 



UNSIGNED, 215 



Kitty hobbled away, though when she 
was, as she thought, at safe distance, she 
called out, " Good-night to ee ; maybe 
ee'U carry them steps away ; them 'ull tell 
tales to-morrow." 



216 ROOKSTOSE. 



CHAPTER XVI. 

CAPTAIN WENLOCK TAKES A RESOLUTION. 

"1 TRS. WEBB'S feelings, both as a wo- 
^^ man and a mother, were outraged 
by Janet's sudden return. It was against 
all precedent, to her well-regulated mind, 
for yoimg ladies to fly about the country 
like birds, giving no hint of when they 
might be expected ; and besides this, she 
had planned an excursion to the Crystal 
Palace with Henry Wenlock and Louisa; 
he had promised to come this evening and 




CAPTAIN WEN LOCK'S RESOLUTION. 217 

settle it, and at lunclieoii who should make 
her appearance but Janet Wolferston. Mrs. 
Webb met Janet with outstretched arms, 
and a succession of small bird-like kisses. 
How pale and strange the girl looked. 

" I wonder if there ever was insanity in 
the family ; I'm sure she's touched in the 
head, poor thing," thought Mrs. Webb. " I 
must consult her Aunt Dawson, and I 
really think I ought to give a hint to 
Henry Wenlock." 

Something more than Janet's changed 
looks puzzled her observant cousin . those 
small, hard, black eyes were taking in 
every word and gesture while the girl sat 
in the dining-room. 

Janet was so much gentler . Mrs. Webb 
could almost have said so much better 



218 ROOKSTONE, 



behaved ; so much more humble would have 
been nearer the mark. 

In the long night that had followed her 
interview with her brother-in-law, Janet 
had not slept : her self-reproach, her deep 
heartfelt contrition, had been too keen, too 
overpowering. Like a lightning flash had 
come the revelation showing her the pride 
and self-confidence in her own judgment 
which she had mistaken for a high and 
noble purpose. 

When such revelations come, and in 

mercy they are sent to some of us, reason 
seems almost to totter, while the mask that 
has so ingeniously aped the face of truth 
falls off, and as it falls shrivels into the 
nothingness it is. 

All Mrs. Webb's little satirical sillinesses, 



CAPTAIN WEN LOCK'S RESOLUTION, 219 



once so stinging and offensive, fell un- 
heeded on Janet's ear, or if heard were 
accepted as a deserved humiliation for her 
own overweening pride. Before she left 
Rookstone she had written to Mr. Painson, 
asking him to see her at ten o'clock next 
morning. 

" I will tell him all," she said, as she 
dressed for dinner ; " it is only just to 
Richard to say that the will my dear 
mother saw was not signed ; then if Mr. 
Painson says I am to dismiss all doubts, I 
will try hard to do so. I do not believe 
Richard guUty of forgery ; but it is still 
impossible to me to think that he did not 
use his influence unfairly." 

She felt that her mind must be made up 
pne way or tiie other before she saw Henry 



220 ROOKSTONE, 



.} 



again : it was so very hard to keep this 
secret from him, and yet her mother's pro- 
hibition had been urgent. If Mr. Painson 
told her that her father had really had the 
mania for making and remaking his will 
which Richard had asserted, it would help 
to lessen her doubts of her brother-in-law. 

" If Henry is to be his brother, too," she 
ended, " why should I prejudice him still 
further against Richard by speaking of last 
night's work ? I wish ten o'clock to-morrow 
were here. I will not see Henry tiU I have 
heard Mr. Painson's opinion." 

She went down-stairs. Henry was in 
the drawing-room talking to Louisa Webb. 
Janet's surprise at seeing him gave her 
manner an increase of restraint. 

Ever since the evening of Mrs. Webb's 



CAPTAIN WEN LOCK'S RESOLUTION, 221 

dinner-party, Wenlock had been disturbed 
and restless. He thought that to ask an 
explanation in writing of Janet's reserve 

and mysterious ways would be to increase 
the barrier which, ever since her mother s 

death, had come between them . a barrier 

more keenly felt by himself than by Janet, 

for, as we have seen, her mind had been 

filled with her plans for the detection of 

Richard's guilt, to the exclusion of all else. 

Henry had determined the next time they 

met to make an appeal to her to restore the 

confidence which had once existed between 

them. 

Louisa giggled when Janet came in. 

" Mamma would not let me tell you he 
was coming," she said. "I suppose she 
thought you would enjoy the surprise of 



222 ROOKSTONE. 



1 



.I 






seeing Henry ;" then, in a loud whisper to 
Janet, " So sorry, dear, the dinner-bell is 
just going to ring . no use in my running 
away, is there T 

At dinner-time, as Henry Wenlock, much 
against his will, listened to Mrs. Webb's sil- 
linesses, most of them on the topic of her 
own valuable qualities, or covert censure of 
some of her neighbours, it suddenly came 
into his mind that here might lie the secret 
of Janet's absent, changed manner. 

She might be unhappy with this foolish, 
spitefiil woman. "All silly women are 
spiteful to those of more intellect than 
themselves. It is the old story of the Fox 
and the Grapes ; and Janet is disgusted, 
too, with that assumptive fellow Webb's 
pomposity. Who on earth cares where his 



CAPTAIN WEN LOCK'S RESOLUTION. 223 



mutton was bred and his Burgundy grown ? 

I hate to be told the history of all I eat 

and drink : if it were not for Janet, I'd 

never dine with the fellow again." 

Just as the ladies were rising to go 

up-stairs, the visit to the Crystal Palace to- 
morrow was proposed to Janet by Louisa. 

" I am very sorry, thank you, but I have 
a business engagement to-morrow." 

No one answered, but Mrs. Webb gave 
Henry a significant and pitying glance. 

" Only another reason," he thought, " for 
speaking to Janet at once. She shall not 
expose herself to that detestable woman's 
remarks and suspicions. Surely she would 
be happier in ever so humble a home of her 
own than in this family." 

When he reached the drawing-room 



.>l 
I 



224 ROOKSTONE. 



I* 



Janet was not there, Louisa was lounging in 
an easy chair, in a lackadaisical fashion ; 
her mother was walking about the room, 
evidently restless and uneasy. 

Henrj" knew that Janet had a private 
sitting-room, and he determined to ask if 
he could not have a few minutes talk with 
her there ; but before he could speak Mr. 
Webb asked where Mrs. Dawson was. 

" Mrs. Dawson . I don't know what you 
mean, John." 

" Why, there was a ring : wasn't that 
Mrs. Dawson who arrived just now V 

Mrs. Webb's eyes looked brighter and 
harder than ever as she took a quick glance 
at Captain Wenlock to see if he were 
listening. 

" Oh dear, no !'' with a slight toss of the 



CAPTAIN WEN LOCK'S RESOLUTION 225 

head ; " it was a visitor for Janet : a gen- 
tleman." 

"A gentleman . what gentleman?" the 
words came from Henry before he knew 
what he was saying, 

" Well, I don't know whether I ought to 
tell." Mrs. Webb gave her irritating little 
laugh. "Janet is so fond of secrets, you 
know ; but " . an involuntary movement of 

Captain Wenlock s made her look at him . 
" don't look like that, pray, or I shall be in 
terror of some melodramatic scene taking 
place, and you know it's only my fun ; no- 
thing at all to wonder about, if dear Janet 
were only a little more communicative." 

"Who is it?" Even Mr. Webb had 
grown suflficiently inquisitive to be impa- 
tient. 

VOL. IL 15 



226 ROOKSTONE. 



" Dear me, Jolm, why only old Mr. Pain- 
son; but Janet took him off to her own 
room in such a stage-struck, mysterious 
manner, that I think she deserves a little 
teazing." 

She spoke to her husband, but she kept 
her eyes on Henry Wenlock. He pulled 
his moustache as if he meant to root it out. 
He was too angry to speak. How could 
Janet expose herself to the ridicule of her 
empty-headed cousin by such absurdity ? 
Why could she not have told him she 
expected the old lawyer ? and then an 
angry flush rose on his forehead. Janet 
had not thought fit to apprise him of her 
return ; but she must have written to Mr. 
Painson, or how could he have known 
it? 



CAPTAIN WEN LOCK'S RESOLUTION 227 



Half an hour passed, and Janet did not 
appear. Wenlock felt strongly tempted to 
send up a message to her room, but he shrank 
from Mrs. Webb's ridicule. If he could 
have heard the words that were being 
spoken up-stairs he would not have waited 
so patiently. 

Mr. Painson was obliged to leave town 

early the following morning for a stay of 
some days, and Janet's note was so urgent 
that he had been imwilling to keep her in 
suspense tUl his return ; he had therefore 

come to see her this evening. He listened 
attentively to her story. When she had 
ended, he blamed her for taking old Kitty 
into counsel. 

" Now," he said, " I suppose you want my 
opinion. I wUl give it to you on one con- 

15.2 



228 ROOKSTONE. 



dition, that you do not breathe a word of 
this business to any one." 

" I only wish to tell Captain Wen- 
lock," she said. "I think he ought to 
know." 

Mr. Painson shrugged his shoulders, and 
looked irritable. It was one of the 
blemishes on his favourite's good sense, he 
thought, that she should have cast in ker 
lot with an impetuous hair-brained fellow 
like Wenlock, just because he happened to 
be six feet high. 

" Decidedly, no ; the very last man in 
the world to confide in. What I mean, my 
dear child, is" . for Janet's fetce warned 
him of his imprudence . " that Captain 
Wenlock is not likely to be impartial in the 
matter ; his feelings must natiuully get the 



CAPTAIN WEN LOCK'S RESOLUTION, 229 

better of his judgment, and would urge 
him to take the very reverse line of action 
to that whidi I would suggest to you," 

"Action ! but it seems to me that there is 
nothing to be done." 

" If you win promise to be guided by me, 
I'll teU you what / think about it," he 
answered. " It seems to me that there is 
much TdOTQ hope of recovery for your little 
brother than I thought; but unless you 
promise not to open your lips to any one 
on the subject, I must decHue to say 



more." 



She hesitated ; the old lawyer looked at 
his watch, as if he was in a hurry to leave 
her. 

"After all," she thought, "this time I 
am not seeking to guide myself, and the 



230 ROOKSTONE. 



 



i 



mystery must come to an end if open mea- 
sures are adopted against Richard ; it is 
only my own comfort with Henry that I 
sacrifice/' 

She gave the required promise, and then 
Mr. Painson spoke. The point that struck 
him was Richard Wolferston's assertion 
that the late squire had a mania for draw- 
ing up wills. This, he said, was entirely 
false ; he had often urged his dear friend to 
make a will, and he had invariably excused 
himself; he did not believe that, in the 
short time that had elapsed since he gave 
up the management of the property, a habit 
of this kind would have become fixed. 

He asked Janet if she could rememb^: 
the date of the will in the study. 

*'I do not remember taking it in dis- 



I 
/ 



CAPTAIN WENLOGK'B RESOLUTION, 231 

tinctly at the time ; you know I was still 
reading the will when he came in ; but it 
seems to be a fixed idea with me now that 
it was dated May 25th." 

" May 25th ! Miss Janet, you must be 
positive ; surely, if you tax your memory, 
you can be ; if the will you saw was really 
dated May 25 th, I feel nearly sure that it 
contains your father's real intentions. Now 
think ; take as long as you like, only be 
positive." 

He took a book from the table, put on 
his spectacles, and aflfected to read it dili- 
gently. 

Janet held her forehead with both hands, 
trying to concentrate thought on the events 
of the previous night; it seemed to her 
that she had seen May 25th on the wUl, 



232 ROOKSTONE. 



but Mr. Painson's words had attached so 
much weight to her answer, that she daxed 
not feel sure. Suddenly a new idea oc- 
curred to her. 

" Is that the date of the will that has 
been proved T she asked. 

" Yes," said Mr. Painson, gravely. 
" Now don't be like any other woman, and 
run away with the notion that it's all plain 
saiUng, and that you have the clue in your 
hand ; you have no proof against your 
cousin, remember ; simply, the only notion 
I have is that his keeping this unsigned 
will . in the event of his having exercised 
undue influence in persuading your father 
to make another, for this is all I fancy he 
has done, my dear child . I say the very 
circumstance of his keeping it shows that 



CAPTAIN WEN LOCK'S RESOLUTION. 233 



he has some conscience left, and if Christy 
outlives him, I should not be at all sur- 
prised at your cousin willing Eookstone 
back to him again. Let us see, is this 
baby a boy or a girl ?" 
"A boy." 

" That's unlucky ; however, it may not 
live. Don't look so shocked, my dear 
yoimg lady ; I only mean to tell you that 
all you have to hope for is from Richard 
Wolferston himself, and that any threat, 
or any attempt to make your doubts pub- 
He, will only cause a family feud, and pro- 
bably hinder your brother's chance of resti- 
tution. Now I must say good-night." 

Janet followed him down-stairs, per- 
plexed and heavy-hearted. What could 
she say to Henry to explain her conduct ? 






X le^ itjasniET -xi le jaomr 



xzrn. Jim. imxassiesL vilil 



I ifc.. 



i TlTgir J2tTf*^ "ll Oe ^BDC 



REFUSED, 236 



CHAPTEK XVIL 

BEFUSED. 

XANET came into the drawing-room 

feeling like a criminal. She saw the 

cloud on Wenlock's face, and she knew 

she could not clear it away ; but she went 

up to him at once. 

" I can go with you to-morrow, Henry ; 
I am free of my engagement." 

" I am very glad : come downstairs into 
the dining-room," he said; "I want to 
speak to you before I go away." 



I 



236 ROOKSTONE. 



He turned to the door as he spoke. 

Janet followed him in silence. Life was 
too hard to live. For more than a year 
she had been doing ceaseless battle with 
herself and her own inclinations. It 
seemed to her that duty always forced her 
to aHenate the love she longed for. In 
childhood even, she had known by a sure 
instinct that people esteemed her more 
than they loved her. She had not Mary's 
power of flinging herself into the hearts of 
others, even by the very charm of her wil- 
fulness ; and now, except little Christy, no 
one really loved her but Henry, and she 
had condemned herself to the risk of losing 
this, the only happiness left her." She would 
not . she could not do it ; it would be 
better to break her promise to Mr. Painson. 



REFUSED, 237 



But she dared not do this. She had 
done evil once that good might come, and 
what had come of it ? There was no time 
for further parley with hersalf ; she had 
reached the dining-room, and Captain Wen- 
lock closed the doc:. 

" Janet," his voice was agitated, " I am 
going to be very plain with you, but I 
believe it will be happier for us both. Why 
have you secrets from me ? What is this 
business you have to see Painson about ? 
I ought to know. If I cannot help you in 
it, at least I could help to bear any trouble 
or annoyance it may cause you." 

" You cannot, thank you." 

She spoke very quickly, but such a look 
of pain came into her face that he felt 
sorry he had spoken so urgently. 



238 ROOKSTONE. 



He took her hand in both his. 

" Look here, my darling, I can't bear to 
vex you . you know that ; but I don't 
think it is for our happiness to keep secrets 
from each other. Even if I were to say, 
as I feel inclined to say when I see that 
sad look in your dear eyes, that it makes 
no difference to me, it wouldn't be the 
truth, darling. Perhaps I'm too off-hand 
and open about things ; but I can't get on 
with anything like a mystery, and I think 
it's safer and better in every way to say so 
at once." 

" Yes, I know," said Janet, in the same 
dreamy voice. 

She longed to throw her arms iround 
him, and tell him how miserable she felt, 
but she could not. It seemed to her that 



BEFUSED, 239 



Henry was really alienated, and her sorrow 
paralyzed her from trying to regain his 
love. 

He waited a few minutes for her answer. 

" You will not give me your confidence, 
then ; you cannot trust me, Janet ?" 

Her manner stung him out of all self- 
control ; he let go her hand. 

" What am I to think ? What has come 
over you, Janet, to change you so com- 
pletely ? If I have lost your confidence, 
at least I have a right to know how I have 
done it. You must tell me. I will not 
leave you till you have explained the 
change that has come between us." 

He spoke vehemently. Her continued 
silence irritated him, as silence does irri- 
tate an angry man. More than this, all 



240 ROOKSTONE, 



the vexation he had been trying to sup- 
press since the evening of Mrs. Webb's 
dinner-party, broke loose, and added itselt 
to his grievances. 

Perhaps a man never loses his power so 
completely as when he reproaches a WOToan. 
There is something weak about reproach . 
something that reminds one of the small 
dog's yelp against the larger brother he is 
afraid of ; besides, it is a woman's weapon, 
and some women abhor anything that 
savoiu*s of their own weakness as much as 
they honour strength. 

Janet's heart seemed to tiun to stone at 
his words ; if she could have stooped 
to words . had she no wrongs to com- 
plain of ? Not against him ; but had not 
she all her life been thinking more of 



REFUSED, 241 



the well-doing and happiness of others 
than of herself ; and what had she reaped 
in return ? The secret feeling that she was 
considered stiff and restrained, while all 
the time her heart was fiill of burning love, 
which did not dare betray itself by demon- 
stration, lest it should meet with a rebuff. 
Often she had envied her sister Mary's 
naughtiness ; it seemed to give her such a 
bright saucy power of saying out what she 
felt, without half the offence her own well- 
intentioned but abrupt reproofs occasioned. 
But till now she had never felt this 
with Henry. He was the only being with 
whom she had been able to cast aside all 
reserve, to bare her heart's true feelings, 
and be sure she was rightly read. And 
now he too was like the rest. He would 

VOL. II. 16 



242 ROOKSTONE. 



not take her on trust ; lie only loved her, 
in fact, so long as she submitted implicitly 
to him. 

Still she did not answer him as a 
smaller-minded woman would have an- 
swered. Her hands were clasped tightly 
together, and that wistful look came in her 
eyes which a man often misreads in a 
woman . ^a look which says, " Be noble ; be 
strong ; be a rock for my feebleness to 
cling to." 

" Henry," she said, " I am not happy ; 
but tni now you have never added to my 
unhappiness." 

He had thought the look in her eyes an 
appeal to his submission; but her words 
conquered his doubts. He forgot Mr. 
Painson and all the causes of his vexation. 






REFUSED, 243 



Jaaet was unhappy, and he could comfort 
her. 

He drew her fondly to him; her head 
nestled on his shoulder, as it had often 
nestled in brighter days, and for a moment 
it seemed to Janet, as they stood thus 
heart to heart, that true love and peace 
might return, spite of her secret. 

" My darling," he whispered, " I know 
you cannot be happy with these people. I 
hesitated to ask you to come to such a quiet 
home as I can give you ; but, Janet, why 
should we waste the happiness of being 
together in waiting for a few luxuries ? 
You must be mine altogether, dearest ; why 
need we wait ?" 

For a moment the warm blood spread 

over Janet's face. It seemed as if all of 

16.2 



244 ROOKSTONE, 



joy she had ever known had come back : to be 
always with Henry . his wife . away from 
unloving looks and tongues for ever. She felt 
she must give everything else up and yield 
herself entirely to his love and guidance. 
And then, as quickly the warm blood re- 
ceded, a hand of ice seemed to steal be- 
tween his heart and her own, and she knew 
that this imion could not be till she was 
free from her secret. But she dared not 
tell him this. She would be so watchful, 
so guarded over her own manner, that he 
should never discover she was keeping any- 
thing from him. He should never again 
complain of her reserve. 

He took her sUence for consent ; he 
pressed her yet more fondly to him, and 
thanked her in glowing, joyful words for 
the happiness she had given him. 



REFUSED. 245 



It was like sunshine in winter, and yet 
she must withdraw herself from it. The 
poor, tried, aching heart shrank from the 
wrench she knew her next words must 
give ; for to Janet's unsophisticated nature 
it seemed as if it would be impossible for 
a wife to keep a secret from her husband, 
it would be a transgression of the marriage 
vows. Henry had himself said he could 
not endure a secret, and yet she was deter- 
mined that he should not know the real 
reason of her refusal. 

A deep sob roused him from his joy. 

"Janet, my darling, what is it? Tell 
me I am not deceiving myself" 

" Not wholly," she said. " I love you 
more than ever, and yet I will not come to 
you as your wife till I can bring you a less 



246 ROOKSTONE. 



sorrow-burdened heart/' He tried to in- 
terrupt her, but she shook her head, and 
burst into tears :" It is all so recent ; I 
have hardly had time to realise that she 
baa really left me. I know it is selfish to 
wish her here again ; but, oh ! Henry, you 
cannot teU how sharp the agony is some- 
times, of feeling that I no longer have 
my mother to go to for counsel and help." 

" But is not that the very reason why 
you should yield to my wishes ? Surely in 
your own home you can be quieter . more 
to yourself . than you are among these 
frivolous Webbs." 

" It is not that," she said. " I am not 
so selfish as to wish to shut myself up 
alone with my sorrow. I only want time 
to heal its first violence, and to soothe me 



REFUSED. 247 



into greater resignation than I am able to 
feel now. I don't want to bring mourning 
into your home, Henry ; it is not fair or 
right towards you." 

He urged her again ; but at last he sub- 
mitted, unwilling to distress her, though 
not convinced . not, however, till he had 
told her that on that day three months he 
should renew his claim, and should take no 
second refusal. 

As soon as he was gone, Janet hurried 
to her room. Was life worth living, on 
these terms ? she asked herself. Was she 
never once in anything to seek her own 
pleasure or her own happiness ? Would it 
not have been better to accept the great 
happiness she had just refused, and take 
the chance that her secret might mar its 



248 EOOKSTONE, 



perfection ? and then came back a sentence 
heard from her mother's lips in early child- 
hood, which Janet had never forgotten . 
'' We are never doing right, we are almost 
always doing wrong, when we are striving 
to please ourselves/' " But it would not 
have been only to please myself. Surely 
Henry asked me as much for his own sake 
as for mine. I could make him so happy. 
I know I could. What if I let this secret 
die away ? We can take care of Christy 
between us, and leave Richard in peace at 
Rookstone." She sat still, her face buried 
between her hands, thinking. Common 
sense, common justice to Henry, every ordi- 
nary and superficial motive of action, bade 
her rest from her self-imposed task. Scru- 
ples and doubts struggled to be heard, but 



REFUSED, 249 



she would not listen to them. She lay- 
down to rest at last, half resolved to write 
to Henry and retract her refusal. 



250 ROOKSTONE. 



CHAPTEK XVIII. 

PERPLEXED. 

TTENEY WENLOCK walked towards 
Vincent Square in a very ruffled 
state of mind. Since the night of Janet's 
retiun from Rookstone, the night when 
she had refused to become his wife at 
once, he had kept away from Mrs. 
Webb's. 

Mrs. Webb's hints and suspicions had 
failed to make him jealous, but they had 
made him unwilling to see her again. He 



PERPLEXED, 251 



also entertained a hope that by leaving 
Janet longer than usual alone with her 
cousins she might be more inclined to 
listen to reason, or, in other words, to 
many him. He had intended to go and 
see her on this evening, but in the morn- 
ing he had received a note from Mrs. 
Webb. Could Captain Wenlock call on 
her at five o'clock ? He would be sure to 
find her alone and disengaged. She 
wished to consult him at once on a matter 
which nearly concerned dear Janet. He 
did not like to refuse, and yet he shrank 
from this woman's interference. He re- 
solved not to allow Mrs. Webb to enter 
into any explanation except in Janet's 
presence. Perhaps a secret hope that this 
meeting might break ground for a fresh 



262 ROOKSTONE. 



state of things, might help his cause with 
Janet, had induced him to consent to it, 
although all the while he resented Mrs. 
Webb's meddling. 

When he reached Vincent Square, her 
manner surprised him. Hitherto he had 
regarded her as a vain shallow woman, 
flippant in her efforts to amuse and attract, 
spiteful where she could not succeed ; but 
to-day she was perfectly quiet ; she pressed 
his hand with a gentle subdued tenderness 
that at once propitiated and alarmed him ; 
he fancied that Janet was ill, and Mrs. 
Webb wished to prepare him. 

He looked so disturbed that her concern 
increased. 

" Where is Janet T he said, abruptly ; 
'' I can see her, cannot I ?" 



PERPLEXED, 253 



"I am sorry to say you cannot," said 
Mrs. Webb ; and then seeing his dismay 
was as complete as she could wish for, she 
went on. 

"Janet is not here, and I do not feel 
quite sure that I know where she is gone 
to." 

She spoke simply. She had by this 
time persuaded herself so fully of Janet's 
eccentricity that she had no occasion to 
exaggerate her feelings, and her intuitive 
penetration taught her that any trace of 
spitefulness would enlist Wenlock against 
her view of what had happened. 

He answered her impetuously : 

"Not know where she is? What do 
you mean, Mrs. Webb? You are her 
mother's nearest relative ; she placed her- 



254 ROOKSTONE. 



self under your care, and you are bound to 
protect her." 

Mrs. Webb gave liim such a sweet sad 
reproachftd look, that he felt ashamed of 
his own hastiness. " When did she leave 
you ?" he said, more quietly. 

" I believe Janet to be quite safe," she 
answered, " but sit down. Captain Wen- 
lock, and I will tell you all I know. Janet 
has been more silent and reserved than 
ever, since that last evening you were here. 
Yesterday morning she went out early. 
Louisa oflfered to accompany her, but she 
refused to let her go with her in such a 
very decided manner that my daughter did 
not like to press it. She was away for 
some time, and when she came home 
stayed up in her own room the rest of the 




PERPLEXED. 265 



day. In the evening she sent down an 
excuse for not appearing at dinner. She 
wished tea to be sent upstairs to her. I 
went up with it myself. Janet looked a 
little pale, perhaps, but certainly not ill 
enough to keep her room ; but when I 
questioned her, she seemed unwilling to 
answer, I can scarcely tell you why, or at 
least I could tell you if I were not afraid 
of making you very unhappy ; but I felt 
dreadfully anxious about her sti^ange con- 
duct. 'Where did you go this morning, 
Janet ?' I asked perhaps rather more 
urgently than I might, had I felt less 

deeply. 

" ' I had business to attend to,' she said, 
abruptly ; and her face showed that she 
disputed my right to question her. 



256 ROOKSTONE. 



" Now, as you know, dear Captain Wen- 
lock, she had always been so well brought 
up by that dear good mother of hers, that 
it would scarcely have occurred to me to 
doubt the propriety of anything she chose 
to do, but for the strange change that has 
come over her since that sudden return 
from Rookstone. No doubt she gave you 
a satisfactory explanation of it, but to us 
she said nothing." 

Mrs. Webb paused here to give Wenlock 
opportunity to justify Janet, and for the 
first time he remembered that he had 
never so much as made a remark on the 
suddenness of her return on the night 
when she had refused to become his 
wife. He shook his head, and listened 
eagerly for the rest of Mrs. Webb's story. 



/ 




PERPLEXED. 257 



" This morning, as soon as breakfast was 
over, she asked if a cab could be sent for 
to take her to the Waterloo Station. I 
said, ' Where can you be going, Janet V 
^nd then, to my surprise, she said she was 
going to Rookstone. She could not say 
how long she should be away : she might 
stay there a fortnight, or she might be back 
to-morrow. Really I felt so startled I 
scarcely knew how to answer her.'' 

" I don't see anything remarkable about 
it," said Wenlock, stiffly. "I am afraid 
you have alarmed yourself and me very 
imnecessarily, Mrs. Webb. Why shouldn't 
Janet go to Rookstone ?" 

" Of course . ^the most natural place in 

the world for her to go to . the place she 

should never have left had I been con- 
VOL. n. 17 



i:jS EOOKSTONE. 



suited." Mrs. WebVs tone sharpened here, 
but she speedily recovered herself " But, 
my dear Captain Wenlock, Janet is not 
gone there. Bless you, that was only a 
blind. As I stood at the open window, I 
heard her tell the cab to drive to Mr. 
Painson's.'^ 

Henry looked annoyed. 

*' It is quite possible she called on 
Mr. Painson on her way to the sta- 
tion." 

" But, Captain Wenlock, listen to reason. 
When Janet came back fix)m Rookstone, 
she told Louey that she was not likely to 
go there again for a long time to come. 
I know that she has not received a let- 
ter since her retimi, either from Mary 
Wolferston or from her husband, and 



PERPLEXED. 259 



Janet is not Kkely to go anywhere un- 
asked." 

Henry stood stiU, thinking. His first 
impulse would have been to go down to 
Rookstone, and ask Janet the meaning of 
this sudden departure. It seemed to him 
extraordinary that, without any summons, 
she should have gone off alone in this ab~ 
rupt manner, and then he remembered a 
sentence of Mrs. WebVs. 

" What is it that you shrink from telling 
me because you are afi'aid of making me 
unhappy ?" 

But Mrs. Webb broke in upon his 
thoughts. 

" First of all, will you answer me one 
question ? Are you still engaged to marry 
Janet ?" 

17.2 



260 ROOKSTONE. 



" I should scarcely have answered your 
summons so promptly, if our engagement 
were ended. I don't think such a question 
admissible." 

" Then I am very sony I asked." Mrs. 
Webb looked beseechingly up in his hand- 
some face, quivering now with the emotion 
her Words had created. " But I feared you 
suspected what I did, and had broken 
your engagement the last time you saw her." 

" I do not know what you suspect, nor 
do I imderstand you at all," he answered 
haughtUy. " So far from any break between 
us, the very last time we were together, I 
tried to persuade Janet to become my wife 
at once." 

Mrs. Webb had a hard struggle to keep 
her mortification out of sight. 



PERPLEXED. 261 



" Perhaps, after all, I had better speak 
out,'' she said, in the wearied tone with 
which we yield up an unpleasant fact to 
our listener. " I have watched Janet at- 
tentively of late, and I regret to say that 
to me she betrays strong symptoms of the 
mental derangement wliich, of course, we 
must expect one or other of poor Christo- 
pher's children to inherit." 

" Derangement ! Mr. Wolferston was as 
sane as you are, Mrs. Webb." 

Henry Wenlock almost smiled, spite of 
his anger. 

Mrs. Webb shook her head. 

" Ask Mr. Painson what he thinks about 
the will. Why, he admitted to me on the 
day of the funeral that he could not believe 
his old fidend was himself when he executed 



262 ROOKSTONE. 



it. If it is not the germ of insanity in 
Janet, I ask you to tell me what it is that 
Jias changed her so. She was a little old 
for her age perhaps, but she was a clever, 
lively girl, always ready to take the lead in. 

conversation, and to keep others amused. 
Now she sits moping all day, generally 
alone, or else she goes out on long mysteri- 
ous errands, and never opens her Hps when 
she comes home. Was it not eccentric in 
a young girl of her age to send for Mr. 
Painson as she did that evening? But 
stay a nunute, please ;" for Henry had 
been trying to speak for several seconds. 
"I do not wish to wound your feelings, 
but another cause for poor Janet's state of 
mind has just occurred to me. Does she 
really wish to be your wife, or is she 



PERPLEXED. 263 



merely holding to her engagemenb from 
her wonderful sense of duty ? Do not be 
angry with me ; pray don't, now/' He 
moved away ; but she followed, and laid 
her soft white hand tenderly on his shoulder. 
"'We have all been pained to notice the 
coldness with which she has treated you ; 
indeed, I fancied that you were conscious 
of it, and that you went downstairs with 
her on that last evening to have it fiilly 
explained." 

She paused at last, but Wenlock could 
not answer her. There is sometlung hor- 
ribly convincing in hearing our own 
thoughts spoken by some one else. Was 
it possible that Janet no longer loved him ? 
She had said she did love him as truly as 
^ver ; but the more he reflected on her re- 



t^ EOOKSTONE. 



fusal to become his wife, the more singular 
it seemed ; and if after all she did not love 
liim, what had changed her? Only one 
answer came ; she loved some one else. Not 
Mr. Painson . it was absurd to hold such an 
idea for a moment ; and yet Mr. Painson had 
plainly more of her confidence than he had. 
He turned suddenly on Mrs. Webb. 
Wounded affection, jealousy, and anger at 
this last suggestion, overcame all remains of 
self-control. "After all, Mrs. Webb, I 
scarcely see why you sent for me. You 
may suppose it is very painful to me to 
hear you find fault with Janet. She is her 
o^Yll mistress, and if she chooses to go off to 
Rookstone without consulting you, it is 
possibly because she does not value your- 
opinion." 



PERPLEXED. 26^ 



"Well, it is better, perhaps, that you 
see it in that way " (she gave him a pitying 
smile) ; " but the impression on my mind is 
that she has gone away to avoid you. 
However, that is of course no business of 
mine ; only I must say this, I do not con- 
sider a girl who goes rushing about the 
country in this sudden mysterious way, a 
fit companion for my daughter, and I think 
if you ask any other mother you will get 
the same answer. Louey at^ present is 
perfectly docile and submissive, but there 
is no saying what this strong-minded, 
self-willed sort of example may teach 
her. Forgive my plain speaking, but I feel 
sure I have acted the part of a true friend. '' 
And Henry Wenlock, as he walked sor- 
rowfully back to his lodgings, asked himself 



'^^ 



RT" 



JJ .. - ^A. 



.M.^J 



I^ 






.'" *'-*. t'^' 



" .* 



AN UNEXPECTED VISITOR. 267 



CHAPTER XIX. 

AN UNEXPECTED VISITOR. 

TT was a bitterly cold day. The trees in 
Rookstone Park were almost bare, and 
the few sickly yellow leaves which yet 
lingered were swept away by the keen 
north wind, in a rapid whirling dance, tiU 
they fell giddy and lifeless on the crisp 
turf. 

It was thorough winter, without the 
sparkling sunshine or bracing atmosphere 
that makes frost so endurable. 



268 ROOKSTONE. 



Mary Wolferston crouched closer and 
closer over the fire. She had recovered 
her usual health, but she looked listless 
and discontented. Her baby was a bonny 
healthy child, her husband as tender as 
ever, and yet she felt restless . ^mentally 
ill at ease. She seemed for ever wanting 
something not to be found at Rookstone. 

"How glad I shall be when spring 
comes," she said to herself, " and we can 
leave this dull place. In old times I used 
never to think it dull. I wonder if Richard 
will let me take baby to London. Oh ! 
he must. I could not be parted from him. 
I wish I could think his father loved him." 

The rosy under lip drooped, and her 
whole face clouded over. Every time she 
looked at her infant, or held it in her 



AN UNEXPECTED VISITOR. 269 



arms, holy and pure feelings strove to be 
heard ; and mingled with these was a more 
awfiil conviction . a sense rather felt than 
realised of a responsibility . for hitherto 
Mary had never called herself to account 
about anything. 

She had not hinted this to her husband. 
She knew too well the sneer it would pro- 
voke. Richard had often told her that 
every man should take care of himself, and 
that so long as parents fed and clothed 
their children, and educated them, in the 
way of book-learning, they did what was 
requisitie ; and formerly she had listened to 
this in docile acquiescence. 

But she could not stifle these whisper- 
ings which taught her an entirely new creed 
respecting her duty to her child ; and yet. 



270 EOOKSTONE. 



although she listened to them in some de- 
gree, they seemed to make her daily more 
discontented, 

"I believe I am getting morbid and 
silly," she said, " but there is no use in 
my trying to be wise. I never had any head. 
I always used to go to dear mamma for ad- 
vice, and I cannot depend on myself. How 
I wish Eichard would take just a little in- 
terest ; but, if I worry him, I'm afraid he will 
care for baby even less than he does now. 

She checked herself in sudden alarm r 
she had discovered her husband's jealousy, 
lest her motherly love should alter her 
affection for himself; and here she was, 
already blaming him in thought . she who 
had resolved to make his will her la\V^ in 
all things. But this feeling of mental 



 



AN UNEXPECTED VISITOR. 271 

disquiet was becoming troublesome, and 
Mary's was a nature which always sought 
relief from a burden by laying it on some 
one else. A new idea had occurred to her, 
and her face brightened into its usual 
beauty. Just then her husband came in. 

"You are not coming out with me, 
then, pet T he said. " Well, perhaps you 
are more comfortable here. I beheve you 
are growing lazy, child." 

" No, indeed I'm not ; but come and sit 
down, too, darling, and I'll make a beautiful 
blaze. I am thinking of writing to Janet, 
that selfish Henry must spare her to me 
for a few days." 

She was warming her husband's cold 
hand between her own, but he pulled it 
away almost roughly. 



272 ROOKSTONE, 



" Janet ! why, she was here quite 
lately. What can you want with Janet, 
Mary?" 

He never called her Mary unless he was 
displeased with her. He had a store of 
tender petting epithets always ready to 
lavish on her. 

She looked up at him half frightened, 
half vexed. 

" But she stayed such a very short time 
I scarcely saw anything of her ; surely you 
don't mind her coming, Richard T 

'' You have not answered my question." 
He spoke very coldly. " Why do you so 
much wish her to come to Rookstone ?" 

Mary hesitated, and then she felt 
prompted to speak openly. 

" Now I am a mother" . she saw a frown 




AN UNEXPECTED VISITOR. 273 

gathering, and she went on nervously . - 
*' there are so many things I want advice 
about. I don't teaze you, darling, because 
I know you would not like it ; and I dare 
say I am nervous and silly, but then Janet 
won't mind my silliness, and she will help 
me out of all my worries." 

" Worries ! what do you mean T 

" Never mind, darHng ; only say Janet 
may come, and you shall never be wor* 
ried about anything." 

She looked up at him in the sweet be- 
seeching way she used to find irresistible, 
but Richard had turned from her, so that 
she could not see his face. 

" Mary " . ^his voice sounded very stem . 
" I may as well tell you at once that I have 
no wish to see Janet here for some time to 

VOL. n. 18 



i'74 ROOKSTONE. 



come. She. she displeased me extremely 
while she was here, and for the present, at 
any rate, she and I are better apart." 

He turned round and saw that his wife 
was crying. He went on aogrily,. 

" I don't understand you, Mary. What 
is the matter ? You used to be happy and 
satisfied with everything. I was company 
enough for you, but now you seem always 
to be wanting something you have not got." 

" Oh ! Richard ; it was only for baby's 
sake I wanted Janet." 

" I wish the child had never come," he 
said, impatiently. " I believe you care for 
nothing else in the world." 

Before his shocked, terrified wife could 
answer, he had left the room, and was on 
his way up the avenue. 



AN UNEXPECTED VISITOR. 275 

Coming down it at a helter-skelter pace, 
quite unlike his usual elegant lounge, was 
Mr. Frangois Leroux. He nearly ran 
iigainst his master before he recognised 
him. 

" Ah, monsieur, one thousand pardons ; 
I did not see you, but you are on the right 
road. Do you know who is going to arrive 
at the park . will be arrived there if we da 
not hasten ourselves T 

" What do you mean ?" 

Leroux knew by his master's voice that 
he was not in a himiour to guess 
riddles. 

" It is that young lady, of whom you 

said to me that she was not to return to 

Eookstone, madame's sister, Mees Wolfer- 

ston." 

18.2 



276 HOOKSTONE. 



Eicliard muttered something to Hmself, 
then he said aloud, . 

" When did you see her ?" 

"Just now, monsieiu:. I was in the 
toll-house, but she did not see me, and as 
soon as she had passed I jumped over the 
first gate I came to in the lane, and kept 
the hedge between me and her till I had 
left her behind; then I ran as fast as I 
could to tell you, monsieur." 

Richard Wolferston's fe.ce was not plea- 
sant to look at. He had certainly said to 
Leroux that Miss Wolferston had offended 
him, and that she would not return to 
Rookstone, and yet he felt annoyed that 
the man should have remembered this, 
and that he should have interfered 
now. 



AN UNEXPECTED VISITOR. 277 

"You can leave me alone," he said,^ 
sullenly. "I am going to meet Miss Wol- 
ferston." 

The Frenchman stood looking after 
him. 

" These English are unciviHsed," and he 
shrugged his shoulders. "I spy out, I 
intrigue, I take the risk of injury to my 
health by a so quick run as that, and then 
Mr. Wolferston never say, * Thank you, 
Leroux.' It is strange, I have notice it 
before, why is he all at once so angry, and 
in such hurry, when he hear the name of 
the sister of madame ? What is this 
dispute they have when she go away so 
suddenly ? Thou art growing stupid, 
Frangois, my friend, in this beef-eating 
England, or thou wouldest not ask thyself 



978 BO0K3T0JK 



a qiiestioa twice; it would be scanething 
to improve this dull Bookstoiie, if I could 
find it had a secret. Yoyons, there is 
nothing like a little qniet observation.'' 




JANETS PROMISE. 279 



CHAPTER XX. 



Janet's promise. 



"piCHARD WOLFERSTON met his 

SLster-in-law just outside the park 
gates. He placed himself in her way, but 
he did not offer to shake hands Avith 
her. 

** What do you want 2 You cannot see 
your sister." 

" I only want to see you," said Janet, 
quietly. " Take me anywhere you like 
so that we may be safe from interrup- 



 



--*.-. 



.^40m^* 



,2^ 



.finicuijtr r 



t*Er ". .7fft"jifr"5i imirf! :& 



^e .#wt "iie ^wTsir saxssat: ditr ^Biit ::Tn ie 

W^W, .X' W, <t// j^jn wiaa to say T 

i \fM*\ \/"A^i thiitkiug refj mncli about 



/ fi 




JANETS PEOMISE. 281 

you," she said. " I do not wish to defend 
my own conduct the last time I saw you ; 
but I feel sure now, Richard, that you 
have no right to be master of Rook- 
stone." 

She spoke slowly and calmly, but he 
broke in with anger, . 

"If you have only come to repeat 
this wild nonsense, I cannot listen ta 

you." 

" I think you will listen a little longer. 
I do not ask you to give up Rookstone" . ^he 
laughed . " or to do anything which might 
convict you in the eyes of the world. I 
believe you have some right to this pro- 
perty ; but that right cannot justify you in 
holding it by means of a fraud." 

" I cannot listen to these accusations ; if 



282 ROOKSTONE. 



you have nothing else to say we had better 
separate." 

She looked at him steadily, and he re- 
turned her gaze. 

" Richard, if you had nothing to conceal, 
would you have had me watched when I 
was last at Rookstone . ^for you would not 
have come into the study as opportunely 
as you did if you had not been told I was 
there ; besides, I know that my very com- 
ing to-day has been watched and reported 
to yoiL" She laid her hand on his arm, 
for he turned away. "You are Mary's 
husband; try to believe that I am not 
moved by angry feelings towards you, but 
by an irresistible longing to save you much 
unhappiness. Oh, Richard ! do confess this 
fraud." 



JANETS PROMISE. 283 

t . 

" Confess I" He stamped his foot angrily, 
and the sneer on his face must have 
deterred Janet from further speech, if she 
had not been resolved on saying all she 
had come there to say. " Janet, you are 
surely mad; you know how I detest all 
cant and hypocrisy. Speak the truth, and 
say you want me to give up Rookstone to 
Christy, and to gain your point you have 
concocted this precious idea of a fraud. I 
don't know why I condescend to argue 
with you at all. Come before a magistrate 
if you choose, and hear me swear, as I pro- 
mise you I will swear, as I told you before, 
that there is no forgery in the signatures to 
your father's will . ^that is what you mean by 
a fraud, I imagine . ^but I am not going to 
listen to such crazy stuff as this. I don't 



284 ROOKSTONE. 



know why I have listened at all. If you 
were not Mary's sister I should feel strongly 
inclined to have you pimished for bringing 
a false charge against me." 

For a moment Janet stood doubtftJ. 
This indignant, open denial was exactly 
that of an innocent man. 

'^ I wish I could believe you," she said, 
sorrowfully, "but I can't. I have tried 
hard against this conviction, but it will not 
leave me. I make no terms for Christy, if 
you only acknowledge what you have done, 
you will be guided to act rightly towards 
him. Oh! Richard, listen only one mo- 
ment. Try and beUeve it is for your own 
sake, and Mary's, and your child's, that I 
have come here to-day." 

She spoke with such passionate eamest- 



/ 




JANETS PROMISE. 286 

ness that he was obliged to stand there till 
she had ended. She fancied his lips trem- 
bled slightly. 

" I have heard that ill-gotten goods 
never prosper," she went on ; ** and if you 
carry this secret with you aU your life, it 
may be that others will suffer for your 
crime. Besides, what peace of mind can 
you have ? How can you enjoy life at aU ? 
Already I see a change in you, and Mary 
will see it soon, perhaps ; and how wiU 
it be if she finds out what you have 
done r 

" You mean to tell her all this rhodo- 
inontade of yours, do you?" He had 
roused at last from the spell Janet's fer- 
vour had exercised. " Then I shall know 
how to deal with you. You are plainly 



2S BOOKSTQTJS: 



one of yainr mind on this poizit ; and as I 
\ii> not cLcGse mj wib to be fir^iiteiied or 
onnoved. I stftalT take smji measures as will 
prevoit joiL &om. poiscmiEKg t^- mind by 
your &IIt. YotL must be ported. Yoa shaQ 
not 3ee her. It issitirely your own &i]It. 
When I maxried your ^ter, I bad no in- 
tention of separ atii ig hear &om bar &inily ; 
bat yoa leaTe me no <^oice. I won'^t baTC 
Mary trooMed. I entir^ loibid yoa to* 
come to Sookstone again." 

He led tbe way to the gate. 

Just as they readied it, Janet spoke. 
" I believe yon will yet see things differ- 
ently/' she said '" What I came to tell 
you to-day was that I only want yon to 
make this acknowledgment to myself and 
Mr, Painson, It is no question of giving 




JANETS PROMISE. 287 

up Kookstone during your lifetime to 
Christy." 

He answered by opening the gate for 
her. 

" You need not even own it to Mary," 
she said, pleadingly. "We would keep 
your secret." 

" I have no answer to make to such 
foUy. Good day." 

He did not look angry now. He seemed 
weary of the discussion, and anxious to 
end it, and Janet was obliged to pass 
out. 

She heard him lock the door as soon as 
he had closed it, and then she took her 
way back to the station again. 

She had succeeded in seeing Kichard 
sooner than she had hoped for ; but what 



*>^> "^' 



.*" w<*> 



'^^ n*i 




...... .Mi.^.Tr 



>...;. 



..*' --'.'fi '^r^rL ISC 



V4I 



* /.* 



r#*^.-wpr^ ii^ii^ 



^".-r-VwtfftTII^Vf-^ISr^ -^ 



^.".f.^S^ /*>* 



i^'^^^'.arr^'T. 



Y'f^ f.4* 



rmBUXSXiS^ 



yMVr/^rr-yJ. 1^ KTk 



-o if 






:n::i;u<if It: 



^i^^ r^rfi^^v. 



JANET'S PROMISE, 289 

" I do not say it will do any good," he 
had added ; " but at any rate it will 
relieve your mind/' 

And now she had succeeded in seeing 
Richard . it did not seem to her as if she 
had said half she meant to say . and she 
knew that he would not listen to her 
again. To all appearance she had done no 
good, still as she went back along the well- 
known road she felt hopeful . hopeful as we 
all feel sometimes, when we know no reason 
for our hope. No word that Richard had 
spoken was calculated to cheer her, and 
yet her heart felt lighter than it had felt 
for months. 

It might have been that her conscience 
was relieved from the weight that had 
burdened it. She had done what she 

VOL. II. 19 



290 HOOKSTONE, 



could . all that, according to Mr. Painson, 
it was possible for her to do ; this secret, 
the barrier which so short a while ago had 
seemed insurmountable between herself and 
Henry Wenlock, had dwindled away into 
a creation of her own imagination ; a soft 
blush rose on her cheeks, and her deep-blue 
eyes grew liquid as she dwelt in thought 
on her next interview with her lover. 

How short the way back to the station 
seemed . how exquisite the golden brown 
of the few remaining oak-leaves . how bril- 
liant the scarlet of the hoUy berries as they 
peeped from the glossy, glistening hedge. 
The day was as cold and ungenial as it had 
been when she started ; the sky wore just 
the same leaden uniform tint ; and yet 
Janet walked on with the elastic, springy 
tread of keen enjoyment. 



JANET'S PROMISE, 291 

She had left some luggage in the parcels 
office. As she went to reclaim it, a man 
who was standing at the door turned hur- 
riedly away. He seemed to be trying to 
escape notice, and Janet looked after 
him. 

It was the same man who had followed 
her on her way from the toll-house . 
J^ichard's French servant. Her first im- 
pulse was to avoid him, and then a thought 
struck her. Why should she not take this 
opportunity of com m imicating with Mary ? 
It was plain, from what Richard had said, 
that any letter she addressed in future to 
her sister would be intercepted ; and 
although she felt that, with the assurance 
she had of her husband's guilt, she and 
Mary could no longer meet without a feel- 

19.2 



292 ROOKSTONE. 



ing of restraint on her side, still her heart 
yearned towards her sister . so young, so 
inexperienced, and so entirely given up to 
the guidance of a man who could not lead 
her rightly ; for, as Janet felt, such a sin as 
Richard's must drag the doer of it down- 
ward; must, so long as it remained un- 
acknowledged, unatoned for, choke every 
striving for good, and wither and canker 
the germ of even natural affections. 

It was sad to think of Mary believing 
herself forgotten . Mary, whom her mother 
had solemnly charged her to watch over and 
protect. Ah, that charge had perhaps been 
prophetic. When she remembered the 
sneering, scofl&ng look that seemed now 
habitual to Richard, she wondered whether 
he would at last doubt his wife, and treat 



JANETS PROMISE. 29a 

her with coldness and suspicion. She must 
give Mary the assurance that the estrange- 
ment on her part was unwilling. 

She hastened her steps and she was soon 
beside Leroux. 

For a moment the man's ready-wit- 
tedness forsook him; he looked ashamed 
and startled. 

" Good morning." 

Janet spoke so simply and naturally that 
his self-possession came back. 

" If I give you a note for my sister, Mrs. 
Wolferston, can you imdertake to deHver 
it to her T 

She made no excuse for her sudden 
appearance, no allusion to his master* 
Leroux admired her courage, although he 
thought she might have taken the trouble 



294 ROOKSTONE. 



to make " things more vraisemblable ; she 
is so EngUsh, this yoimg lady." He an- 
swered civilly, . 

" Certainly, Mees Wolferston, I will give 
the note to madame. Can I do anything 
else r 

" Nothing, thank you." 

She tore ^^off the back of a letter and 
wrote, . 

"Deaeest Mary, 

" Do not be siuprised at not hearing 
from me ; your husband does not wish me 
to write or go to you ; you can show him 
this note if you choose. I have no wish to 
do anything unknown to him. May God 
bless you, my darling sister! Remember 
if at any time you really want my help or 



JANETS PMOMISE. 295 

counsel, no one shall keep me from you ; I 

promise this. 

" Your truly loving 

"Janet." 



She had no envelope, no means of fasten- 
ing her note securely ; but she knew that 
Leroux must be aware of all that she had 
written ; she risked nothing in giving it to 
him. 

" Madame shall 'ave it directly." 
He took it from her without the slightest 
indication of surprise or secret understand- 
ing; he was far too polite to make any 
woman so pretty and so young as Miss 
Wolferston uncomfortable for a moment 
when they were thus brought face to face, 
although he had not scrupled to play spy 



296 ROOKSTONE. 



on her movements ever since he had first, 
seen her from the toll-house. 

Janet lay back in the railway carriage, 
exhausted but happy. She repeated to 
herself the promise she had made to her 
sister. It was possible that Mary might 
never require its fulfilment. Janet hoped 
earnestly that this would be so . that 
Richard's repentance might come before 
she expected it, and that he and his wife 
would begin life over again, in a new and 
better way. And then her thoughts tra- 
velled back to Henry Wenlock, and Mary, 
and her own promise to her, were forgotten 
in happier anticipations than she had 

known since the night of her mother's 
death. 

END OF VOL. II. 
ROOKSTONE. 



CHAPTER I. 

FRANCOIS LEBOUX SHARPENS HIS WITS. 

11/rONSIEUE LEROUX left the station 
.^ as soon bb the train was in motion, and 
when he found himself fairly alone in the 
road he took Janet's note out of the pocket* 
book in which he had carefully placed it, 
and read it through. 

The first reading seemed imsatisfactoryj 
and he went through it again; then he 
looked at the back, and finally folded it up> 

VOL- III. 1 



ROOKSTONE. 



and put it back in the pocket-book, shrug- 
ging his shoulders and raising his eye- 
brows till his forehead looked like the 
flutings on a picture-frame. 

"It is inconceivable," he said; "there 
is here" . ^tapping the pocket-book . " only 
what I knew before, not one word about 
secret or dispute ; and there must be a 
secret, and there has been a quarrel also, 
or monsieur would not take so much trouble 
to hinder Mees Janet from seeing madame. 
I felt so glad to get the billet, and ma foi, 
it is no use to me. Where is the point at 
which I must begin to find this secret ? It 
gives me fresh energy, fresh life, to have the 
idea of discovering something ; besides, it is 
useftd to me. In this quiet country life I rust 
.I become as a turnip or a water-melon for 



FRANCOIS LERO UX SHARPENS HIS WITS. 3 

inteUigence. Wten I return to the capital 
the police will no longer benefit by my ser- 
vices, I shall have become too stupid to be 
usefiil ; aUons, Franois, my friend, sharpen 
thy wits, it is always best to begin at the 
beginning. When didst thou first smeU 
out this idea T 

He walked on slowly, thinking ; but till 
he reached the avenue he could not in any 
way recaQ when his first dim suspicions had 
awakened. He settled that they had come 
by degrees, caused chiefly by the singular 
change in Ms master. 

" He was never gay," he said, " but he 
was willing to trust all to me ; now he is 
for ever displeased with somebody, and he 
grows more and more stem and silent. 
Even when madame is with him I do not 

1.2 



ROOKSTONE. 



think he laughs or takes any enjoyment 
from his life ; it is strange, too, when he 
has a son to succeed him, and everything 
he can want. If there is a secret, madame 
does not know ; I am sure of it ; she could 
not be so happy and careless when she plays 
with her bebby. Still she does not seem 
always so happy, but that is perhaps be- 
cause her husband is so grave and dull/' 

He went on in silence, till something in 
one of the tree-trunks reminded him of his 
walk there with Thompson. She had 
pointed out its peculiar growth to him. 

" Ah," he said, " if that civil yoimg per- 
son had come with the sister of madame, I 
woiild have had the secret from her . quick 
. quick as I take the cork from a bottle, for 
Madame Thompson knows it of course, if 



\ 



i 



FRANCOIS ZERO UX SHA RPENS HIS WITS 5 

Mees Janet knows it, and mees must know 
it, or monsieur would not exile her from 
madame . " 

He stopped suddenly . a flash of light 
had shot into his brain, and shown him 
what he was seeking. He thought all 
over again now, and hnk by link his scat- 
tered memories arranged themselves to 
point all in one direction . the study. He 
had not seen the light burning there on the 
night of Janet s discovery, but he had not 
then set himself to trace out the secret he 
now believed to exist. He had not been 
expressly set to watch Janet on that night. 
He had been told carelessly by his master 
to keep a good look-out in the evening, and 
if the old woman Robbins came prowling 
about, to send her back to her cottage. 



ROOKSTONE. 



Mr. Wolferston had said no more, but the 
qiiick-witted Frenchman had noticed the 
coldness of his manner towards Janet, and 
had jumped at the conclusion that his master 
wanted to prevent Kitty from getting 
speech of her. He had watched diligently 
through the evening ; but once the rustling 
among the bushes had nearly betrayed the 
old woman's presence, still he had found 
nothing to report to his master. When 
Richard returned home . ^he found his faith- 
ful spy in the hall, where he had taken 
refuge from the rain . Leroux said he had 
seen nothing of Mrs. Robbins, 

" The trees rustled once," he said, under 
the study window, " and I looked about, 
but there was no one." 

And then his master had released him 



FRANCOIS LERO UX SHARPENS HIS WITS. 7 

from his post, and as soon as Leroux was 
safe indoors Richard hastened round the 
comer of the building, and saw Janet's 
tell-tale candle through the study window. 
But Leroux knew nothing of this ; the 
circumstance that had startled him when 
he thought of his walk with Thompson was 
the remembrance of Mrs, Wolferston's 
death-like swoon. He had joined in the 
search for her ; he had looked all over the 
saloon a very short while before he was 
called to help in bearing her up-stairs. 
Where had she come from in that fainting 
condition? He had not left the entrance 
hall, so she could not have gone in that 
way . he was certain she was not in either 
of the rooms at each end of the saloon, he 
had looked in them ; she must then have 



8 ROOKSTONE. 



been in the study. Wliy was that door 
always kept locked ? The housekeeper said 
it was because of deeds and papers which 
Mr. Wolferston's absence from home had 
prevented him from sorting and arranging, 
and Leroux at the time had accepted this 
reason as valid. He smiled now at his own 
credulity. 

" We sing songs like this to children," 
he said ; " it has a Blue Beard's room then, 
this Rookstone, has it ? and it is possible 
that Miss Janet has also had a peep in the 
terrible study, and that is why she is so 
sent away without ceremony. Aha ! mon- 
sieur, my master, I mean you no harm ; 
but you make life dull and unpleasant at 
Rookstone, and I have the right to take a 
little revenge to amuse myself. Yes, it is 



FRANCOIS LERO UX SHARPENS HIS WITS. 9 

the study ; the secret is there ; my master 
ha^ not been joyM or pleasant to me ever 
since the poor lady, his mother-in-law, went 
away ; and I do not tjiink he has been in 

that room since, except the night before 
Mees Janet departed." 

StUl this idea was not worth much ; he 
might be able to find his way into this Blue 
Beard's chamber ; but what was he to look 
for when he got there? He was clever 
enough to know that his suspicions must 
be more definite before he could act upon 
them. He had reached the house by this 
time. He wanted to find Mrs. Wolferston 
alone, and he went into the saloon on the 
pretence of seeing to the huge fires which 
were blazing in the grates at each end 
of it. 



10 ROOKSTONE. 



Mary was still sitting near one of the 
fires. She looked sad, but less discontented 
than before. 

Leroux went up to her, and then, looking 
round with an air of great mystery, he 
informed her that Miss Wolferston had 
given him that note for Madame, and had 
charged him to deliver it to her when she 
was alone. 

" Miss Wolferston ! Where did you see 
her ? does Mr. Wolferston know she is 
here ?" 

Leroux bowed his head gravely. 

" Mees Wolferston is not here now, 
madame, she 'ave gone back to London ; 
but I do not think monsieur will like madame 
to be inform of her sister's visit ; madame 
may trust me, I can be silent." He laid his 



FRANCOIS LEROUX SHARPENS HIS WITS. 11 

hand on his heart in an impressive manner 
and went away. 

Mary read the note, and the longing to 
see her sister grew stronger. The discus- 
sion with her husband about Janet had 
taken away any surprise she might have 
felt at this mode of communication, but it 
deepened the pain. She knew Richard's 
resolutions and dislikes were unchangeable. 

There was comfort in Janet's promise, 
and yet what did it amount to ? As long 
as Richard loved her she could never really 
want help or counsel so urgently as to 
justify her in sending for her sister. She 
thought she would show Richard the note, 
and then she remembered what he had said 
before he left her. It would only make 
matters worse between him and Janet if 



iViUiiyr 




% 



12 ROOKSTONE, 



she betrayed any knowledge of her presence 
at Rookstone. It would make a fresh dis- 
pute with Richard . "No, I cannot vex 
him again," she thought. While she had 
been sitting there before Leroux came in, 
she had been taking herself soundly to task 
about Richard's jealousy of his baby . ^it 
was aU her fault, she knew it was; she 
loved her husband as dearly as ever, but 
she had given up many little ways, which 
he doubtless missed, so as to spend more of 
her time with her child. While she was 
dressing for dinner Richard came into her 
room ; he asked her to send away her maid. 
"My own darling," he said, as soon as 
they were alone . and his voice had the 
strange fascination, a sweetness full of sub- 
dued power, which made him so irresistible 



FRANCOIS LERO UX SHARPENS HIS WITS 13 

. " forgive me, I was cruel to you just now. 
When I think how much more I have done 
to show my love for you than most men 
have, it is wonderful that I can cloud the 
only happiness I have ever known." 

She looked up at him lovingly, too much 
moved to weigh his words, and he went 
on, . 

" I told you once, my darling, that you 
were the only being who had ever under- 
stood me or done me justice. I can say 
more than this now ; it is only when I am 
actually with you that I know a moment's 
peace or happiness ; you are aU I have ; 
can you wonder if I am jealous of every 
minute you rob from me ?" 

Never since their marriage had he spoken 
to her with this strange frankness . a fiunk- 



14 ROOKSTONE. 



ness which became ahnost vehement when 
he spoke of his love for her. It was de- 
licious to the young wife to listen to this 
assurance of the affection she feared to 
have alienated, and yet a secret sense of 
dread mingled with her joy. 

" But, Richard, darling, it is dreadful 
that you are never happy or at peace un- 
less we are together. Think how young 
people die sometinres, and if I were to be 
taken away from you . " 

He started as if some one had given him 
a blow, and a look of terror, and then of 
defiance, came into his face. 

Clasping his wife closely to his heart, he 
spoke in the hard stem voice that had lately 
become so habitual. 

"You must never say that again: the 



FRANCOIS LERO UX SHARPENS HIS WITS 15 

thought comes too often as it is, and it 
makes half my misery. I will not con- 
template it ; I will not believe such injus- 
tice possible. Hush, darling !" She tried 
to interrupt him, and he went on more 
gently : " I know aU you want to say, and 
when I am able to think such an idea pos- 
sible . and there are times when it masters 
even me . I wonder how I can ever leave 
your side for an instant . ever waste one 
fraction of the happiness that may be so 
short. There, I did not want to bring 
tears." He stooped and kissed them 
fondly from her eyes. "King for your 
maid, and I give you five minutes only 
before you join me in the saloon, and then 
you shall spend the evening in chasing all 
these shapeless terrors from my head." 



16 ROOKSTONE. 



Again lie kissed her, and Mary, bewil- 
dered between her passionate delight and 
the vague sense of underlying fear, was so 
restless under her maid's hands that even 
the adroit French girl was at last obliged 
to remonstrate. 



SETTLED. 17 



CHAPTER II, 



SETTLED. 



TTENRY WENLOCK went back to 
his office from Mrs. Webb's, but 
he found his work intolerable. He had 
always detested writing, and now he asked 
himself how he could have been so foolish 
as to give up a profession he liked for mere 
office drudgery. If Janet would neither 
marry him nor give him her confidence, he 
had better have remained in the army. 
He did not believe in Mrs. Webb's fears 

VOL. III. 2 



18 ROOKSTONE. 



for Janet's saxiity, but he thought it most 
unbefitting that his promised wife should 
fly about the country in this way, without 
giving any previous warning of her inten- 
tions. As the afbemoon wore on this 
thought grew troublesome, and he began 
to wonder at the supineness with which he 
had taken for granted that Janet was really 
at ErOokstone. 

He could not remain in doubt any longer, 
and he left the office hurriedly. 

At the station he foimd there would be 
no train for Rookstone for an hour, but 
that there was one expected from Rook- 
stone almost directly. 

While he stood waiting it came up, and 
Janet got out of one of the carriages. 

She started when she saw him, and then 



SETTLED. 19 



such a tappy, glad look beamed out of her 
eyes, that Henry's anger melted for an in- 
stant. But he kept down the relenting 
that wanted to make peace at once. 
While stm anxious, he had brought him- 
self to attribute aU Mrs. Webb's warnings 
to spitefdlness. It might be that Janet 
had gone away to avoid her cousin's \m- 
kindness ; but now that he saw her safe in 
London again on the same day as that on 
which she had started for Rookstone, he 
began to think she must indeed be very 
eccentric . more eccentric than he could 
have thought possible ; and until she had 
fiilly explained her conduct, it behoved him 
to maintain a dignified reserve. 

" Are you going back to Vincent 
Square?" he said, stiffly. 



2.2 



20 ROOKSTONE. 



He did not ask p^mission to accompany 
her. He had made up his mind not to 
quit sight of Janet till she was safely be- 
stowed somewhere ; he wished heartily that 
he had the right to take her to his own 
home. 

"Yes/^ but she looked surprised at his 
question. 

The cab drove up and Janet got in, and 
then, as soon as Henry Wenlock had fol- 
lowed her, she looked at her lover. 

There was an archness mingled with the 
happiness that beamed out of her eyes, that 
in his present mood was, to say the least, 
disconcerting; but Janet was too fiiU of 
joy at the delight of seeing him to be 
chilled by his manner. She felt years 
younger in the possession of that exquisite 



SETTLED. 21 



bliss whicli for the time will overcome the 
reserve of even the most timid among us, 
consciousness of our own power to make 
another happy. 

"I have seen Mrs. Webb to-day, and 
she told me where you had gone," Wen* 
lock said, gravely. *^ Are you not terribly 
fatigued, Janet T 

His last words had grown severe, for no 
shade of regret or annoyance showed in 
those blue eyes raised so lovingly to his. 

Janet did not look confused, she laughed. 

"I am too happy to feel tired yet." 
Then seeing his imsympathising expression, 
she stole her hand gently through his 
arm. 

" You are vexed with me, darling, and I 
cannot wonder. I ought to have told you I 



22 ROOKSTONE. 



was going to Rookstone, but I thought I 
should, perhaps, be at home again before 
you came to Vincent Square." 

" And that I need know nothing about 
it." He spoke more stiffly, and though 
the little hand still lay on his arm, it stayed 
there of its own free wilL 

A depth of tenderness swam into her eyes. 

*^ No, indeed, my own. I should have 
told you all I am going to teU you now, 
all I can teU you, for the discussion be- 
tween myself and Richard is of too private 
a nature to repeat." Her lover's face dark- 
ened again, but she went on. "I met him 
on my way to Rookstone. He forbade me 
to see Mary ; he wishes to keep us apart 
for the present. I may as well teU you," 
she added, . she saw he was not satisfied, . 



SETTLED. 23 



"that Richard and I quarrelled the last 
time I went to Rookstone, and we are not 
likely to be friends again." 

"So much the better . I do not like 
him ; but why did you go down there to . 
day r 

" I wanted to see him, and I should have 
been glad to see Mary too, but as he does 
not wish it, of course we must be strangers 
for the present." 

" What do you quarrel about V 

Janet had been dreading this question, 
and yet she was almost glad to hear it, for 
she knew Henry would have asked it sooner 
or later, and it seemed to her as if her fate 
himg on the way in which he might receive 
her answer. 

" That was what I meant just now by . 



24 ROOKSTONE. 



saying that our discussion must remain 
private . " 

" Even from me I" He drew himself away 
from her, and sat upright, looking so proud 
and stubborn, that for a moment she felt 
hopeless . ^felt as if all her life's happiness 
was going to be sacrificed, after all, to this 
secret. 

She gazed at him with such a timid 
softness, such a yearning tenderness, that 
as he looked down into her face at her 
next words, he felt as if he must take her 
to his heart and trust her for ever. 

" Henry, I know all you are feeling, but 
you cannot know how I have longed to 
say all this to you before, or how bitter it 
is to me to keep anything from you ; and, 
darling, while I thought that this secret 



SETTLED. 25 



might prove any cause of vexation between 
us, I was so determined that your happi- 
ness should not be affected by it, that . 
that . I do not think I could ever have 
become your wife while a fear of this 
lasted ; but I hope it is over. The matter 
itself is now so wholly bound up in 
Richard and Mary, that I cannot see what 
interest it could have for you in its present 
state, even if I were free to speak of it, 
and I am not." 

So far Henry had listened eagerly, every 
moment with growing interest; but now 
he suddenly clasped Janet's hand in both 
his, and broke in abruptly, . 

" Then you will be my wife now, Janet ? 
If I have understood you rightly, this was 
the bar to our marriage ; my darling, my 



26 ROOKSTONE. 



darling, why did you not trust me sooner ? 
why did you not let me stand between you 
and all these vexations T 

In his transport at this imexpected pros- 
pect of happiness, he could not listen to 
her repetitions that she was stiQ as much 
boimd as ever to keep the secret from him. 
He forgot all his resentful doubts about 
Mr. Painson and the confidence she reposed 
in him, and by the time they reached Vin- 
cent Square he was pressing her eagerly to 
fix the wedding day. 

Janet told him that he was unreason- 
able, but she promised at last to give him 
an answer to-morrow evening, when he 
came to Mrs. Webb's. 

As the cab stopped a new idea occurred 
to him. 



SETTLED, 27 



" Don't you think you might go and 
stay with Mrs. Dawson until we are mar- 
ried ? I feel as if you would be happier 
there." 

Janet thought for a few minutes. 

" In some ways, yes ; but Aimt Dawson 
is away from home till the end of the 
Chiistmas holidays, and then I could not 
leave Christy alone in Vincent Square, and 
the walk to school would be much too far 
for the child at this time of year from Aunt 
Dawson's, No " . she smiled up at him . 
" I know why you wish for this, darling ; 
but we must make the best of Mrs. Webb, 
I believe one sees the worst of her . ^poor 
woman." 



28 ROOKSTONE, 



CHAPTER III 



AN ACCIDENT. 



XT was a singularly early spring; the 
leaf-buds on the trees swelled rapidly, 
promising a speedy unfolding. Little more 
than two months had gone by since Janet's 
last visit to Rookstone, and yet the year 
looked, judging by outward signs, much 
further on its way than the last week of 
March. Spring flowers, however, were still 
shy and backward ; here and there a wild 
strawberry blossom starred the hedge-baDk, 



AN ACCIDENT, 29 

but the village children out on holiday 
rambles had to search closely for primroses 
for their Easter posies. 

Eichard Wolferston was driving his wife 
home across the park. Just within the 
gates they met the nurse carrying the 
child in her arms, a healthy, Uvely boy, 
nearly six months old now. He held out 
his arms and crowed with dehght as the 
carriage stopped beside him. 

** Oh, you darling I" Mary exclaimed ; 
'* give him to me, nurse. Oh, Richard," for 
her husband remonstrated, " you must let 
me have him just a Httle minute. Baby 
would like a ride, wouldn't he, the dar- 
ling ! Look, dear, I have him quite firmly 
in my lap. You can go home, niu:se, I 
mean to keep him." 



30 ROOKSTONE, 



Her husband looked vexed, but her 
bright face made him ashamed of thwart- 
ing her. 

" Well, if you let him fall, don't say it 
was my fault." He touched the horses 
lightly with his whip, and they dashed 
rapidly along the avenue. " Hold him 
fast," he said, and turned into a grassed 
road that led to the house by a nearer way. 

Mary was laughing at some baby ex- 
ploit, and her husband looked fondly down 
on her simny face. Just then the horses 
started, plimged, and reared madly, the 
carriage jerked violently on one side, and 
Mary was thrown out, with her child 
clasped in her arms. 

Almost as she fell Richard sprang down, 
and was at the ponies' heads before they 



AN ACCIDENT, 31 

could move forward. He looked round for 
his wife, but he dared not leave the strug- 
gling, terrified horses. Mary was not 
stimned. In a minute or two she had 
raised herself, and was sitting up on the 
grass with her child in her arms. Eichard 
looked round for help, and then he saw the 
cause of the mischief. 

An old woman with her apron full of 
faggot wood stood trembling in the path 
of the terrified horses. It was Kitty Rob- 
bins ; but she looked so pale and scared, 
that for the moment Richard had not re- 
cognised her. 

"Curse you, you old hagl" he said, 
fiercely, "how dare you come prowling 
here V 

The words changed Kitty's fear into 



32 ROOKSTONE, 



fury. She knew that Mary lay there on 
the turf beside the carriage ; she knew, 
too, that the angry squire could not leave 
the still frightened, struggling horses, but 
she could not find room just then for any 
thought but the wrath he had raised. 

" Dare I is it you who dare I, Richard 
Wolferston ? A man should be sure he 
be on his own land afore he warns others 
off it ; stolen goods never thrives, and ye 
may find the curse come back to 'ee and 
what owns 'ee." 

Then she moved slowly round to the side 
of the carriage. Mary was still sitting with 
her child in her lap when Kitty reached 
her; the little creature had fallen on its 
head, and it lay senseless, although other- 
wise it showed no mark of injuiy. 



AN ACCIDENT. 33 



Richard dared not leave the horses' 
heads, though he saw what had happened. 

" Could you manage to get with him into 
the carriage again T he said to Mary, " and 
then I will lead the horses home." 

" Oh, no, I could not. Go home as fast 
as you can, and come back to us." 

It seemed the only thing to be done, and 
as the horses were quieter since Kitty had 
removed out of their sight, Richard sprang 
into the carriage, and drove rapidly away. 

Mary's eyes were fixed in such intense 
agony on her child, that she had forgotten 
Kitty's presence tiU she spoke. 

** Let me take he. Muss Mary," the old 

woman said, quite gently ; " maybe I'll 

bring he to . " 

"No, no, I'U not part from him," and 
VOL. ni. 3 



34 ROOKSTONE. 



Mary clasped the unconscious child stiQ 
closer. The pressure roused him ; he half 
opened his eyes, and began to cry. 

" Thank God him '11 do now," said Kitty, 
with a sob ; " Lord love 'ee, him dwoant ail 
nought." 

Mary kissed him, and soothed, and at 
last quieted the sobbing child. 

"'Ee'd better let I take he'. Kitty 
held out her arms . " and then 'ee can be 
moving. Muss Mary. Do 'ee feel hurt any- 
wheres ? 'ee'd be best at whoam now, I'm 
thinkin'." 

But Mary had heard Kitty's words to 
her husband, and she drew back with evi- 
dent repugnance. 

" No, Kitty, I could not let you touch 
my child after what you said just now. 




AN ACCIDENT. 35 

You are very wicked to speak in such a 
manner to Mr. Wolferston ; I believe he 
could have you punished." 

"Let he try I'' The evil light flamed 
up again in the old woman's eyes. " There 
beant no law agin teUin' the truth, Muss 
Mary, and if 'ee believe yon husband o' 
youm owns the Park by lawfiil right, 'ee 
believe a lie." 

Something in the words, but more in the 
solemn manner of the speaker, went 
straight to Mary's conviction. " Go away," 
she said faintly. She was still sitting on 
the turf, and it was well that she was so 
sittiQg, for her limbs seemed to grow weak 
suddenly, and aU her powers of conscious- 
ness to become dim. 

Kitty retired out of sight among the trees. 

3.2 



36 ROOKSTONE, 



" An old chattering fool I be, I'd best 
bite my tongue out," she said to herself ; 
'* it wur one thing to say it to he, but what 
call had I to fiighten she, poor lamb T 

Kichard was soon back again, foUowed 
by Leroux, the nurse, and some other ser- 
vants, and amid a sort of chorus of sym- 
pathy and wonder, Mary and the baby 
were conveyed to Rookstone. 

Leroux's sharp eyes had spied Kitty 
lurking among the leafless trees. He had 
heard his master say she had caused the 
mischief, and he lingered behind to speak 
0 her. 

"Good evening, Madame Robbins," he 
said, advancing towards her, " it is a fine 
mischief this which We happened." 

" Your master should keep to beaten 



AN ACCIDENT. 37 

tracks, then. What call had he to leave 
the drive to come across this joltin', on- 
even road, diiving like mad as him 

do r 

Leroux looked at her curiously, and 
divers little remembrances came back. 

** It appears, madame, you not like very 
much Mr. Wolferston ?" 

" No, I dwoant, an' what o' that T She 
laughed in a short hard way, and then she 
looked fuU in the Frenchman's inquisitive 
face. 

" For what reason do you not like him, 
madame V said the Frenchman, politely. 

" For reasons o' mine, and as thay bees 
mine I mean to keep 'em, and not give 'em 
to 'ee. What caU ha' you to come askin' 
questions about the master whose bread ye 



:38 ROOKSTONE. 



live on ? Go along wi' 'ee, 'ee dirty sneak, 
tryin' to creep up my sleeve with your 
wrigglin' fiirrin ways . go along, I say." 

She stood resolutely pointing towards 
Rookstone, and Leroux, taken rather aback 
by the quickness with which she had read 
his piupose, tiu:ned in the direction she 
indicated. 

" Ma foi, she is a vitch," he said ; " she 
miist be one ; and yet I am perfectly sure 
she knows about the secret of my master 
and Mees Janet. I have been thinking this 
long time to speak to her, but it is useless ; 
she is a too spiteful old woman. All I can 
do now is to see Madame Thompson, and 
find if she know anything." 



JANETS VISITOR. 39 



CHAPTER IV. 



Janet's visitor. 



XT was, as has been said, the end of 
March, and the time fixed for Janet's 
marriage was drawing near. 

At first Mrs. Webb had thrown decided 
obstacles in its way, obstacles suggested so 
skilfully that they had appeared even to 
Janet insuperable, and at last, when every- 
thing had seemed propitious, little Christy 
fell ill with measles; he was so very ill 
that Janet would not trust his nursing to 



40 ROOKSTONE. 



any care but her own, and spite of all her 
tender devotedness weeks passed before 
the child could safely leave his sick 
room. 

But all this was happily at an end. 
The marriage was at last fixed definitely to 
take place in a month, and Janet was sit- 
ting now with her little brother, chatting 
over plans for the future. 

" You see you will be quite strong be- 
fore we come back, darling, and then we 
shall aU be so happy together.'' 

Christy looked at her fretfully. His 
likeness to Mary was very striking since 
his iUness. 

" Why can't I go with you, too ?" he 
said. " I don't want to go to the seaside 
alone with Thompson, she's not amusing,. 



JAJ^ETS VISITOR. 41 



and she doesn't know the name of any- 
thing. I don't like to be with stupid 
people." 

Janet laughed. She was so happy and 
bright now, no wonder Christy clung to^ 
her companionship. 

" You are growing such a wise little 
man," she said ; " but now that you can 
read, Christy, you can answer some of your 
questions yourself. You must not be 
selfish, dear. I will give you some nice sea- 
side books to take to Hastings with you." 

He did not look content, but before he 
could answer, a servant came in and asked 
if Miss Wolferston could speak to Thomp- 
son for a few minutes. 

*' Yes, tell her to come upstairs." 

"Then I shaU go," said Christy; "if 



42 ROOKSTONE. 



I'm to be shut up with Thompson for a 
whole fortnight, I shall have enough of 
her." 

" Oh, Christy !" so tenderly spoken that, 
already ashamed of his petulance, he went 
back to his sister, with a half-strangling 
kiss and a whispered '* I'm sorry," and then 
ran away to hide the tears his growing 
manhood despised. 

Janet leant back in her chair musing, 
her lips parted a little, and her eyes full of 
soft sweet thoughts. There were no con- 
flicting doubts to fdrrow her brow, or to 
tighten the relaxed curve of the rosy 
mouth. She was very, very happy. 

It had been painfiil to delay Henry s 

happiness for the sake of nursing Christy, 

-and yet it had been a clear duty ; even her 



JANETS VISITOR. 43 

lover had consented cheerfully that she 
should fulfil her mother's part towards her 
little brother. How good, she thought, 
Henry had been to her through all, how 
unselfish ; and now she was to spend all 
her life in trying to make him happy. 

** Not that he wants it," she said, softly 
to herself "He is too good not to be 
happy, and any woman he loved must have 
given Hm her whole heart.'' 

There was a tap at the door, and Thomp- 
son came in. Janet had expected her ^ for 
some days past. She had not gone to ser- 
vice again when finally dismissed from 
Vincent Square. She had joined a friend 
who had set up a small dressmaking and 
millinery establishment in Pimlico, and 
Miss Wolferston had promised to entrust 



44 ROOKSTONE, 



her with some of the wedding outfit. 
Therefore she felt much surprised to see a 
serious look of disquiet in poor Thompson's 
inexpressive eyes, instead of the smiling 
eagerness with which she had received the 
news of the approaching marriage. Janet 
took no notice, however. She unfolded a 
large parcel which lay on the sofa, and 
asked Thompson's opinion of some of the 
dresses she had been buying. Thompson 
looked at them with a sort of resigned 
patience. 

" Very nice ; very pretty, indeed. Miss 
Wolferston . elegant, I may say, and, above 
all, what your poor dear mamma would 
have chosen.'' 

Here she heaved a deep sigh. 

"You must excuse me, Miss, but I've 




JANET'S VISITOR. 45 



been thinking so much of her since yester- 
day that I'm only in poor spirits. Ah, Miss, 
how true it is in the midst of life we are 
in death." 

Janet was silent. She thought, with 
Thompson, that five months . ^for it would 
be scarcely a longer period . was scant time 
between her mother's death and her own 
marriage ; but she knew what her mother s 
wishes would have been, and she felt there 
was no real want of affection in consenting 
to marry Henry. 

It's best to teU you at once, mk'am, for 
you'll hear it soon enough ; but it does 
seem so sad to have happened just now." 

" What has happened ?" Janet's heart 
beat quicker, for she saw that Thompson 
had really something to communicate. 



a Tj., 



46 EOOKSTONE, 

"Well, ma'am, Mrs. Wolferston 's lost 
her baby. It was upset out of a carriage, 
it seems, and in the evening it had a fit 
and died. Poor lamb !" 

" Oh ! how dreadful. But how did you 
hear this ? Are you sure, Thompson ?" 

" Sure and certain, ma'am. I was mind- 
ing the showroom yesterday, and who 
should walk in but the French gentleman 
from Rookstone, Mr. Leroux, and he told 
me all about that and other things too. 
Oh, dear ! oh, dear ! Miss Wolferston," 
Thompson broke down into a sort of pitiftd 
cry. '* I acted for the best . I really did ; 
but what with his way of asking questions 
and that, I couldn't sleep all night, and the 
only thing seemed to be to come and tell 
you all about it." 

Janet was so absorbed in sorrow for her 



JANETS VISITOR. 47 

sister's trial, that she had not taken in the 
sense of Thompson's words. 

" Do you know how my sister is, or 
when this happened ?" 

" About a week ago, I fancy, ma'am ; and 
I think Mr. Leroux said poor Miss Mary 
had kept her room ever since ; but really, 
ma'am, I don't know the particulars ; what 
came afterwards frightened me so that at 
first I nearly forgot all about the dear babe. 
I must tell you, if you please, ma'am." 

Janet looked up surprised. She thought 
it was some private trouble of Thompson's 
to which she was asked to listen, and she 
wondered she should choose such a moment 
for communicating it. 

But Thompson was too much interested 
in what she had to teU to heed the expres- 
sion of her listener's face. 



48 ROOKSTONE. 



" First of all, Mr. Leroux began asking 
me if I remembered the last evening your 
poor dear mamma and I was at Rookstone, 
and of course I did. It wasn't likely I 

should ever forget such a fright as I got at 
seeing her lying on that blue couch as 
white as death ; and then he looks at me 
in a sort of strange, clever kind of way, 
and asks me if I had any idea where Mrs. 
Wolferston had been all the evening? 
Now, here's where I was foolish, ma'am, 
and, oh, dear ! oh, dear ! I hope I haven't 
done harm. But he led me on, sympathis- 
ing with me for losing her, and my being 
thrown out of such a good situation, and 
talking of his own pleasure again at seeing 
me ; for he said it was the first holiday 
he'd asked for for months ; but he felt 



JANETS VISITOR. 49 

such a strange longing to see me. And so, 
ma'am, I thought it only perlite to ask him 
to have a cup of tea ; and you know there's 
something sociable in tea-drinking. It 
leads you on, as it were ; and, little by 
Uttle, I hardly know how, he got out of me 
all I knew about that study at Rookstone, 
and the papers your poor dear mamma 
found in the davenport, and . " 

An exclamation escaped from Janet's 
lips, a sort of anguished cry. This treasured 
secret which she had fancied laid at rest 
tin repentance should quicken in Richard 
Wolferston, known to a man like Leroux, 
over whose silence she could exercise no 
power ! 

" But how do you know anything about 
the study or papers, Thompson V* 

VOL. III. 4 



\ 



50 ROOKSTONE. 



She tried to look indifferent, but the 
woman shook her head. 

*^ Dear me, Miss Wolferston, you forget 
I never left your poor dear mamma in her 
illness when you was not with her, and 
often when she lay in those long dozing 
fits she told quite enough to make me 
guess where she had fainted, and why^ 
even if I hadn't felt certain of it before,, 
because where could your poor dear mamma 
have been that afternoon if she wasn't in 
the study ? I was out, but Leroux and all 
the rest had hunted everywhere from top 
to bottom of the house ; and as to being 
out of doors, which the squire pretended to 
think, why her bonnet was in her room, 
and your dear mamma was not the lady . 
no, indeed. Miss Wolferston . ^to run about 



JANETS VISITOR, 51 

in the evening with nothing on ; but, ma'am, 
I assure you, if you ask any of the Rook- 
stone people, you'll find they're all in the 
same story, they all think Mr. Eichard came 
by his rights in an imfair, underhand way. 
I don't say they know anything, but they 
all think poor dear little Master Christy's 
been iU-used." 

Janet had had time to recollect herself. 

" I am very sorry, Thompson, you re- 
peated anything you may have overheard 
to Leroux ; and I must think you were 
very wrong to do it. If this man comes to 
you again, I hope you will refuse to speak 
on the subject at all." 

" You may be sure of that, ma'am. I 
wouldn't have named it again to a soul, 

not to you even, only I thought somehow 

4.2 



52 R00K8T0NE. 



it might work round, and get a lot more 
made of it, and I'd rather you should hear 
what really did take place." 

Thompson thought it more prudent to 
suppress the opinions she had volunteered 
to Leroux on the subject of his master, and 
after she had been again warned by Janet 
never to mention the subject to any one, 
she departed from Vincent Square lighter- 
hearted than she had come there. 



MARTS APPEAL, 53 



CHAPTER V. 



Mary's appeal. 



liyrARY WOLFERSTON'S chUd lay 
out of sight under the great grey- 
stone at Rookstone chiu^chyard. 

Gone away just when the spring flowers, 
of which he had seemed to her a type, were 
every day revealing their presence. " Her 
bird," she had called him, and now, as every 
morning the songs came in fuller, richer 
music from the trees, they waked sadder 
echoes in the bereaved mother's heart. 



54 ROOKSTONE. 



It was the day after the funeral, and 
still Mary sat in her room, heavy-eyed and 
listless, as if her life had no farther purpose 
in it. Richard had tried to comfort her, 
but for the first time she was indifferent to 
his tenderness ; she wanted to be left alone, 
she said, she could not talk yet. And he 
had left her much to herself during all these 
days of sorrow. He hated grief ; it was so 
natural to find sunshine in his wife's lovely 
face, that it disturbed and irritated him to 
see it disfigured by sorrow. He had grieved 
for the loss of his boy, but more from pride, 
and sympathy for Mary, than because he 
had as yet conceived a strong love for the 
child himself But he thought she had 
sorrowed long enough, she ought to rouse 
herself now, and he went indoors to seek 



MARTS APPBAL. 55 



her. Mary took no notice of his approach ; 
even when he took her hand in his she did 
not look at him. 

"Come, Mary, it will do you good to 
take a turn with me in this bright sun- 
shine, you have been indoors long enough." 

"I cannot, indeed 1 cannot; I shrink 
^way from the brightness. Ah, Richard, 
if you had loved baby you would not want 
me to be happy again." 

He soothed her, and then, finding she 
still remained stubborn in her grief, he 
.spoke more firmly. He told her she would 
injure her health, and that she ought to 
consider that she belonged to him as well 
^ to her child. 

'^Richard," she said abruptly, almost as 
if she had not heard his words, '^ you surely 



\ 



56 ROOKSTONE. 



will let Janet come to me now. You 
must." 

A bright spot came on her cheek, and a 
feverish, eager light into her eyes. She 
was trying for courage against the opposi- 
tion she expected. 

" Don't ask me that, my darling. I will 
do anything else you please, but I cannot 
let you see Janet." 

Mary got up from her chair, and stood 
fibcing him ; for he had turned away from 
her as he answered. 

" What is this you are hiding from me, 
it is something I ought to know T she said ; 
"other people know it, and you keep it 
hidden from me. Richard, it is because 
Janet knows something you do not wish her 
to know, that you drive her away from 




MARTS APPEAL. 67 

Rookstone. No, don't stop me ; I want to- 
tell you everything ; I knew Janet came 
here in January. I thought then it was^ 
cruel of you not to let her see me, but I 
know now that you were afraid she would 
tell me what she knew." 

" What are you talking of, Mary ?" he 
said with an oath . but he turned so pale 
that she felt sure she had hit on the truth 
. "you have grown crazed sitting up hete 
with your moping fancies." He stopped, 
and made a strong effort at self-control. 
" Come out into the sunshine, and get rid 
of all these follies." 

Mary was dreadfully shocked, , but his. 
vehemence had roused her, and, like many 
another timid woman, having once forced 
herself to the attack, she grew bold in main- 



fih ROOKSTONE, 



MiiriiHg it. Blotted out for the time by her 
\iii\iyH Hudden death, Kitty s words had re- 
cuntA with terrible significance during the ' 
)//rig lonely hours. She had spoken just now 
at mndom in her anger at his refusal, scarcely 
\^\uiy\ng in the existence of a secret ; but 
Itiichard's sudden paleness and agitation 
awakened a deep and overmastering dread. 

Strangely, too, inthatmoment of suspicion, 
the affection which ever since her sorrow 
Imd seemed frozen and stagnant, now welled 
up again to shield her husband from hann. 

"Richard'' . she spoke so solemnly that 
\iB was compelled to listen . " what is this ? 
T(bU me, my darling . I shall love you just 
tba same . ^but is it true that you ought 
not to have Rookstone V 

** No, it is not, and if Janet told you this. 




MARTS APPEAL. 59 

I feel more than ever glad that I separated 
you from her." 

But he did not meet her eyes as he 
answered, and try as she would against it, a 
doubt of her husband still remained in 
Mary's heart. 

" It was not Janet," she said, gravely, 
^4t was old Kitty." 

Richard cursed the old woman. 

*^ I don't care who it was, you ought not 
to have listened to such nonsense." He 
turned angrily away. 

She reached him before he opened the 
door to go away. 

" Are you quite, quite sure it is non- 
sense ? I love you so much, darling, that I 
wiU believe you did all for the best, if you 
will only tell me all the truth." 



60 BOOKSTONE. 



He turned round suddenly and faced her. 

" Mary, I have been such a husband to 
you as few women possess ; but if you per- 
sist in this folly, you will drive me away 
from you ; if you cannot believe me, if you 
cannot be happy with me, you will have to 
try a lonely life/' 

He left her. She cried bitteriy at having 
roused his anger ; but she could not get rid 
of her doubts ; do what she would to lay 
them, they revived. Oh, if she could only 
see Janet, and ask her how she ought to 
act ! She resolved to make one more appeal 
to Richard. If he would not let Janet 
come to Rookstone, he would perhaps con- 
sent to let her go up to London and see 
her sister. 




JEALOUSY. 61 



CHAPTEK VL 



JEALOUSY, 



T|1HE result of Thompson's visit to Vin- 
cent Square was that Janet deter- 
mined once more to see Mr. Painson. On 
the day when Henry had met her at the 
railway station, Janet had discovered, rather 
from instinctive perception than from any 
open complaint on his part, that her lover 
disliked her visits to the old lawyer. Since 
that time she had not consulted him. Her 
secret being laid at rest, she had felt inde- 



62 ROOKSTONE. 



pendent of Mr. Painson's counsels; but, 
besides this, she had a secret dislike to- 
seeking them, since she had remarked his. 
manner at her last visit. 

Lately Mrs. Webb had invited Mr. Pain- 
son to dinner. He had come more than 
once, and at every visit it had seemed ta 
Janet as if he piu^osely disagreed with 
Henry Wenlock ; and, moreover, her lover,, 
so happy tempered and friendly towards 
every one, was always irritated by Mr. 
Painson's presence. 

" He is never a bit like himself when 
Mr. Painson comes,^' thought Janet. " It 
is plain they do not like each other, and I 
wish Mrs. Webb would not ask them to 
meet." 

But Mrs. Webb saw the mutual dislike 



JEALOUSY, 63r 



between the two men and understood it. She 
had fully resolved by this time to set aside 
Janet's marriage. Besides her own mshes 

in the matter, she believed that Louisa had 
a liking for Henry Wenlock. She did not 
dream that so well-brought-up a girl as her 
daughter could have ventured on the ex- 
treme impropriety of falling in love. Mrs. 
Webb's creed was that that love is the 
safest and most lasting which comes after 
marriage ; but she thought it was quite 
natural that Louisa should admire Henry 
Wenlock, and think him handsomer and 
more agreeable than any one else wha 
visited in Vincent Square. 

Mrs. Webb had never believed in the 
reality of Henry's attachment to Janets 
He had fancied himself in love with her,. 



-64 ROOKSTONE. 



no doubt, before he went to India, and 
now held to his engagement from some 
over-strained notion of honour ; but if he 
could once be seriously offended . made 
^ujtually jealous . Mrs. Webb believed that 
he was impetuous enough to break off at once 
with Janet, and propose to some one else. 

'^ And it must be Louey's own fault if she 
is not the person . so much more suitable in 
every way. The real difficulty lies with 
Janet. I don't want to injure the poor thing ; 
but she and Mr. Painson would pair off so 
nicely together, she is much older than her 
age. I can see the whole thing. If only 
another quarrel would come up between 
these two ill-matched yoimg people, it would 
be easy enough. I would not let matters 
take their course as I did last time. The 




JEALOUSY. 65 



fact of the matter was that I had no idea 
they would ever make it up so quickly ; I 
did not think that little Janet so deep ; 
very foolish, too, for she'll never be happy 
with Henry, and she's just the wife for 
Mr. Painson. She would be richer, too, 
and she used to be so fond of him." 

In making these reflections, Mrs Webb 
scarcely did justice to her own shrewdnesSv 
She had, it is true, contemplated marrying 
her daughter to Janet's promised husbandj 
but Henry Wenlock s scanty means had been 
a serious drawback to his distinguished ap* 
pearance and titled connections. Within the 
last fortnight, however, an event had oc- 
curred which had placed him on quite an- 
other footing in her eyes. It has been said> 
that soon after his return to England Jie 

VOL. III. 5 



66 ROOKSTONE, 



went down into the country to visit some 
relations . Lord and Lady Fletcher. These 
people had just lost their only son, and 
although there were several daughters, the 
property was strictly entailed, and must, 
unless another son were bom, descend with 
the title to Henry Wenlock. Another son 
might be bom, but this was not probable. 
It seemed to Mrs. Webb that Henry was 
tolerably safe of the inheritance, and surely 
it would not matter how humble Louisa's 
home was at first, if eventually she were 
to succeed to a title. A title ! Mrs. Webb 
could not control her excitement when she 
thought of it . to own a title, or to be 
on visiting terms with the person who 
owned one, being a privilege, in her eyes, 
more to be coveted than any other. People 



JEALOUSY. 67 



might be foolish, ignorant, ill-bred, insolent, 
but if they were titled, that which they did 
was to be imitated and applauded . no sub- 
servience was too low, no praise too high, to 
bestow on them, and her own daughter to be 
titled ! Oh, it was like a glimpse of heaven ! 
She had been trying to arrange her plans 
rather more definitely lately ; as a primary 
measure she had informed Henry Wenlock 
that Mr. Painson was desperately in love 
with Janet, and then she had taken every 
possible opportunity of throwing the two 
men together. She noticed Janet's avoid- 
ance of her old friend, and it puzzled her. 
Mrs. Webb would have given much if she 
could have found out that her young cousin 
still sought the lawyer's advice, as she had 
done after her mother's death. 

5.2 



68 EOOKSTONE, 



'* Well, he is coming to dinner to- 
night," Mrs. Webb said, "and I must 
do what I can ; much may happen in a 
montL" 

This was the day of Thompson's visit, 
and when Janet heard Mr. Painson an- 
nounced, she resolved to ask him to see 
her next morning at his office. 

She was afraid Henry would not approve 
of her doing this ; but afber thinking the 
matter over, she had come to the conclusion 
that it was the only course left to her. If 
anything were to be done with respect to 
Leroux, it would be much better that Mr. 
Painson should appear in the affair than 
that she should do so. If the man were 
at once told that his suspicions were value- 
less, he would not try to act on them. 




JEALOUSY, 69 



What Janet dreaded was, that if Leroux 
endeavoured to get at the papers which he 
knew had so terrified his mother, and 
Richard discovered him, he would suspect 
that Janet was the Frenchman's employer, 
and harden himself yet more against the 
confession of his own guilt. Yes, she must 
see Mr. Painson. 

It was not a large party . composed 
chiefly of young unmarried , people and 
Mr. Painson ; he took Mrs. Webb in to 
dinner . she had managed to place Henry 
and Janet at the other end of the table, 
and another pair of engaged lovers beside 
Mr. Painson, so she had the lawyer to her- 
self. She asked him how he thought Janet 
was. He glanced down the table. Janet 
was looking grave, without the bright smile 



70 ROOKSTONE, 



which had lately become habitual to her ; 
and as he kept his eyes fixed on her, she 
looked at him anxiously. 

" Not quite so well as the last time I saw 
her," he said to Mrs. Webb. 

" Ah I you see it, then ; poor girl, as the 
time draws near for this marriage, I'm afraid 
she has misgivings. I believe there never 
was more complete self-deception on both 
sides than there is in this case." 

Mrs. Webb drew her thin lips together, 
and put all the significance they were 
capable of expressing into her small black 
eyes. 

Mr. Painson felt interested . ^this was a 
new view of things ; he wanted to hear 
more ; he knew very little of Mrs. Webb, 
but he thought her a pretty - mannered 




JEALOUSY. 71 



woman enough, and her recent civilities 
had disposed him to judge her favourably. 

" Dear me I do you really ? I always 
understood it was a marriage of attach- 
ment on both sides." 

She laughed her peculiar laugh. 

"I sometimes think, Mr. Painson, that 
in this world we have only to label things 
according to our own notions, in order to 
make other people think the same. I was 
told that this was a marriage of attachment ; 
but then you see I am a mother, and 
mothers have wonderful insight in these 
matters, especially when a girl in poor dear 
Janet's position is confided to them ; be- 
sides, you see, I can remember my own 
dear mother's anxiety about me. Do you 
know, Mr. Painson, she could hardly make 



n ROOKSTONE. 



up her mind to paxt with me, even to Mr. 
Webb. * Louey, my dear/ she said, * if you 
are not going to be happy, I shall break my 
heart.' It was fortunate for me, you see, 
that I had such an unexceptionable hus- 
band, for after that I could not let my 
mother know any extent of misery . she 
would have broken her heart." Mrs. Webb 
looked down in a sentimental manner, and 
sighed, too much taken up by herself just 
then to notice Mr. Painson's weariness. 

*' How one thing calls up another," she 
said. ** Dear me ; it seems only yesterday 
that I was stroking my old cat, and mamma 
said, * I can't let the cat go too, Louey. It 
wouldn't do, you know ; I should miss you 
both so dreadfully ;' so as I thought dear 
John would not be satisfied with the cat 




JEALOUSY. n 



instead of me, I thought it better to let 
mamma keep it. I'm afraid you'll think 
me very silly/' 

She looked up in his face with such a 
would-be-sixteen air, that Mr. Painson 
wondered. 

" The old fool," he said to himself; " she 
must be forty-five, if she's a day." But he 
said aloud, . 

"Very charming, indeed," . then more 
gravely . "but why do you consider our 
yoimg friends ill-matched ?" 

" Why, it's just this " . she gave a quick 
glance round ; Henry was talking to Mr. 
Webb, and Janet was listening to him . 
" he has no appreciation of her remarkable 
powers of mind. You think her very clever, 
don't you ?" 



74 ROOKSTONE. 



" Very . altogether superior." 

*' Yes, I know you must think so ; and 
jjhe has abready discovered this want of 
sympathy, and will pine for the support of 
H higher mind ; in fact, what Janet is 
HViited for is to be the wife of a man much 
^Jder than herself I have thought . of 
i^Hirse from certain things I have noticed 
this may be only a fancy of mine . ^whether 
^0 has not met with such a mind since 
kh0 engaged herself ; but she is so reserved 

Hud has such a high sense of honour, that 
^t) would sacrifice herself before any one 
iH>uld discover if this were so." 

Mr. Painson began to grow interested. 
Igven Mrs. Webb's silliness was forgotten 
^ he listened to her. 

m. think so ? This would be very 




JEALOUSY. 75 



sad," he said. " Am I to understand that 
you consider this was a mere boy-and-girl 
liking, which time and absence have been 
too much for ?" 

" That is exactly what I do mean. I 
believe, if one only dared to interfere, that 
both would be much happier apart, and yet 
it is just one of those cases in which I see 
no possibility of interference." 

" I must say I can't agree with you," 
said Mr. Painson, curtly. And then he 
began to talk on other topics so decidedly, 
that Mrs. Webb saw the matter must be 
left quiet for the present. 

As soon as the gentlemen came upstairs, 
Mr. Painson went up to Janet, and re- 
mained talking to her nearly all the rest of 
the evening. She had never foimd such a 



'^ ' -^ \ 



,. .. 



K ^^^A >v^t^ t^f her 
.1 I'vs. u!i V^ V<\^rt filled 



n.i'i 1 {. \\.\-^ uK'iavu.u'^i, cuul hot eves 

. vv Ux^ai.l wiiU cciultTuocid. At first, 

.J4. It li^ avN Homy standing near her, 

.1,, li.ul \n1:.IuhI Mr. Painson far away, but 

1,^ ,li -ivis mIio hocauie deeply interested, 

uihl liti' iinpationco changed into earnest 

lh,l niiii;. Ml'. IViuaon jmused at last, and 

(li(;ii nlm nijulo hov itujuoat for an interview 

iM .\1, iiinrhing. His fatn^ l>eamed with de- 

li^^hl .liuii^t mnvruely knew why, but she 

IiIiimIhmI ill thu UHgevneaa with which he ex- 

prcrtrtud hia muiineBa to aee her. 

'' I ^>iiu\ii, uomu, Janet,** aaid Mrs. Webb, 
** I ciniuut hi you keep Mr. Painson all to 




JEALOUSY. 77 



yourself in this way. I want him to hear 
Louisa sing." 

She carried him off in triumph to the 
piano. Henry Wenlock was standing there, 
but seeing the coast clear, he moved to- 
wards the other room, where Janet sat 
alone now, for the other guests had 
crowded roiuid Louisa. 

" Wait a moment," said Mrs. Webb, as 
he passed her. 

She was beside him a minute afterwards. 

" I want to tell you something ; only I 
have such a horror of interfering," she 
whispered. 

" So have I," Henry smiled and looked 
on towards Janet. He heartily wished 
Mrs. Webb were a man instead of a 
woman. But she was resolved not to lose 
an opportunity of breeding discord. 



78 ROOKSTONE, 



" Do you remember what I told you 
about Mr. Painson . I mean his attach- 
ment to a certain person T 

" Yes, I remember." 

" Well, he has been talking to me about 
her all dinner-time ; went so far as to say 
it would be very sad for her to marry if 
she did not love her husband as well as she 
once thought she did. Now, don't be so 
very impatient. What I think is that 
Janet ought to be told this, and then 
really she would not give the poor old man 
so much encouragement, she is positively 
going to call on him again to-morrow." 

" Very likely." But Henry Wenlock bit 
his lip, and Mrs. Webb let him go on to 
Janet, sure that her words would rankle. 

Janet looked so radiant with happiness 



JEALOUSY. 79 



at his approach that he had no heart to say 
anything in the way of complaiat, and Mrs. 
Webb's manoeuvres woiild have been finiit- 
less if Henry had not been beside Janet 
when her old friend said " good-night " to 
her. 

" To-morrow, then." That was all, but 
Mr. Painson looked ten years younger as 
he spoke it, and Wenlock felt as if he could 
have thrown him out of window with the 
greatest satisfaction. Repressed wrath 
seldom fails to break bounds, and all the 
smothered impatience of the first part of 
the evening blazed into fire. " What did 
the old idiot mean by looking in that sen- 
timental manner? and what need had he 
to hold Janet's hand in his a moment ?" 
Mrs. Webb took good care to leave 



80 EOOKSTONE, 



Henry alone with Janet as soon as the door 
closed on Mr. Painson. 

" What are you going to do to-morrow, 
Janet T he said. " I cannot imagine what 
you can want always running after that 
old noodle." 

'* Oh, Henry, remember what a friend he 
has been to us all, and how long he has 
known us." 

" What did he mean about to-morrow ?" 

A shght flush rose on Janet's cheek. 
She did not wish to keep her visit a secret, 
but Henry's tone was unpleasant ; it was 
harsh and suspicious. 

"Only that he would see me at his 
office ; I asked him if I might go there." 

'' If it is only a business question, I 
really think you had better employ either 




JEALOUSY. . 81 



me or Mr. Webb. I don't like the notion 
of your going about by yourself to a 
lawyer's office." 

" I have been there befora" 

" I know you have, and I disliked it 
then. I really wish you would send a 
note instead of going to-moiTOW." 

Janet's spirit rose. This interference 
seemed to her very like tyranny. Her 
mother had always urged her to consult 
Mr. Painson, and why should Henry 
oppose it ? 

She looked at him frankly. " I think 
you are a little imreasonable to-night, 
dearest. I have one or two things to say 
to Mr. Painson. This will be my last visit 
to him." 

" Why could you not say them to-night ? 

VOL. III. 6 



82 ROOKSTONE. 



If you persist in calling on him to-morrow, 
I will go with you ; it will be better in all 
ways." 

" Indeed, dearest, I must go alone," she 
said, quietly y although her heart ached at 
this fresh cause of disagreement ; "it is 
simply a family matter. If you like, 
Henry, I wiU promise that it shall be my 
last visit, but I must go to-morrow." 

'^ Very well ; do as you like. It is plain 
your own will is of more importance than 
any wish of mine. Good-night." 

" Henry, don't go away angry." Her eyes 
were fiill of tears, but he did not look at her. 
He wanted to get away before he should 
ay something which she could not forgive. 
He was half mad with jealous anger. 



LEROUrS TIDINGS. 83 



CHAPTER VII. 



LEROUX'S TIDINGS. 



nVTEXT morning at breakfetst Janet 
found Louisa and her mother in 
angry discussion. 

" The fact of the matter is, my dear, that 
you are growing very self-willed and un- 
feminine, just like some one else I know !" 

Janet's entrance checked Mrs. Webb s 
words. 

Louisa looked sulky. 

'' It is so duU here," she said ; " you do 

nothing but pay visits from morning till 

6.2 



84 ROOKSTONE, 



night, and Janet thinks of nothing but 
Christy. If I were going to be married I 
should take rather more interest in my 
gowns and things than she does. I want 
to go to Julia Fuller ; she would like to 
have me, I know she would ; there is some 
fun to be got out of Julia !" And Louisa 
gave a dreary sigh. 

She had grown to like Henry Wenlock 
very much indeed. 

While Janet had talked to Mr. Painson 
on the previous evening, Henry had stood 
beside Louisa at the piano, and had praised 
her singing. 

^' Poor dear fellow !" she sighed to her- 
self, " it's all over with him, I don't believe 
he's at all happy ; there's no chance of that 
ridiculous engagement being broken oflP now 



LEROUX'S TIDINGS. 85 

the day is fixed; but if I'm to feel like this 
when he goes away, I would rather not see 
him any more till he really is Janet's hus- 
band. Then I suppose there will be no 
danger in flirting with a married man ; 
besides, he will be my cousin." 

She said all this to herself in her own 
room, and then she remembered a long- 
standing invitation from an old school 
friend, and determined to accept it at once. 

Before Janet left the breakfast table 
Louisa had carried her point. Her journey 
into Norfolk, to stay with Julia Fuller, was 
settled to take place early next morning . 
her mother yielding on her promise to re- 
turn at the end of a fortnight. 

It was very trying to Mrs. Webb that 
Louisa should be so restive just when all 



8 ROOKSTONE. 



her schemes seemed likely to prove fruitfiil ; 
but then, as she told herself, Louisa could 
be very unattractive when she chose to be 
so, and if her wiU was crossed in this matter 
she would probably sulk and look ugly for a 
week. If Heniy really cared for her daughter 
. and Mrs. Webb fondly cherished this 
hope . a short absence might awaken more 
decisive feelings, especially just now when 
he had gone away angry ; for Mrs. Webb, 
although too far off to hear what had 
passed, had studied the young man's face 
intently during his talk with Janet. 

" Obstinate mule I" she said. She was 
looking out of her window, for busy as Mrs. 
Webb asserted herself to be, she never lost 
sight of the doings of others. In fact, to 
watch, chronicle, and criticise these, for the 



LEROUX'S TIDINGS, 87 

mental food of her fellow-gossips, was the 
chief business of Mrs. Webb's life, and the 
work for which her mental capacity appeared 
best suited. As she looked now, she saw 
Janet crossing the square. 

" Obstinate mule that girl is ! Going 
to old Painson's, of course. 1 could not 
have believed her so short-sighted, after 
all Henry Wenlock looked last night. I 
really do think she likes the old man the 
best. Taking that child Christy with her, 
too . so very absurd. If she really felt the 
impropriety of the thing as she ought to 
feel it, she would have asked me to chaperon 
her. Not she I I really believe her abomi- 
nable self-will has infected Louey," 

Day by day Mrs. Webb's suspicion that 
Janet liked Mr. Painson grew stronger. 



88 ROOKSTONE. 



Lately the young girl's spirits had been daily 
recovering from the depression which so 
much sorrow had laid on them, but when 
Janet returned from her visit to Mr. Painson 
she was silent and preoccupied. Mrs. Webb 
rallied her, but Janet's thoughtfulness was 
plainly caused by anxiety, for she soon 
relapsed into it again, with bent brow and 
firmly-<jlosed lips. 

Janet was both unhappy and anxious. 
She had found it diflScult to get Mr. Pain- 
son to listen to her on the subject of Leroux. 
He had been so eager to talk to her about 
herself, and when she did succeed in fixing 
his attention, he treated her information 
lightly, and told her not to think about the 
matter . ^to send Leroux to him. He had 
been so strangely different . so excited, so 



LEROUX'S TIDINGS. 89 

changed ifrom the half- scolding, fatherly 
manner she was used to . ^that Janet had 
felt piizzled and disquieted, and at parting 
from him the warm admiration his eyes 
expressed had made her withdraw her 
hand abruptly from the very close grasp in 
which he held it. 

Sitting in her own room now . for Mrs. 
Webb's joking and tittering laugh soon 
grew unbearable . she asked herself why 
she had thus shrunk from Mr. Painson, why 
she felt such an unutterable repugnance 
from the idea of ever having to consult him 
again. A warm blush rose to answer her. 
She had thought Henry harsh and unreason- 
able, but she understood his meaning now ; 
and yet it was too vain, too foolish to 
believe that Mr, Painson loved her. No ; 



90 ROOKSTONE, 



the reason why she shrank from him was 
because he had found fault with Henry. 
She went in thought over the morning's 
interview, and her first conviction deepened. 
Mr. Painson had asked her very earnestly 
if she was quite sure that the marriage she 
contemplated would promote her happiness ; 
and when she had answered him . ^half in 
doubt whether he were not jesting . ^he had 
sighed. He hoped Mr. Wenlock would 
know how to treat a wife better than most 
young men did. Ah ! and then he shook 
his head, and Janet got up to go away, 
feeling vexed and disturbed. 

She began to think that it had been a 
mistake to consult any one but Henry. Mr. 
Painson had imagined that she reposed 
greater confidence in him than she did in 



LEEOTJTS TIDINGS. 01 

her future husband ; but then her mother 
had strictly enjoined her to consult no one 
but Mr. Painson, and she remembered, with 
a sudden new light on it, the lawyer's 
refusal to help her unless she promised 
entire secresy. 

" But he did not think about me then in 
this foolish way, I am sure of it ; and after 
all, it may only be a vain fancy. Still, I 
cannot go to his office again imless Henry 
goes with me." 

The door opened, and Mrs. Webb came in. 

" So sorry to disturb you, dear, but there 
is some one wanting to see you ; and as it 
seems to me that he may be an impostor, I 
thought I would just come and ask you a 
question or two first." 

Janet looked her answer ; she knew Mrs. 



92 ROOKSTONE, 



Webb would tell her own tale without 
help. 

" I can't think you know this man ; he 
won't say where he comes from, or give his 
name either; but I am sure he is a 
foreigner, I should say an Italian, by his 
dark appearance ; he keeps on saying he 
wants to see Mees Wolferston. IVe no 
doubt he is an impostor, and wants to steal 
something." 

"I beheve I know who it is," said 
Janet; "he had better come here and 
speak to me." 

" Know him I dear me ! but really, my 
dear, had you not better see him in the hall ? 
Suppose he's a swindler ; he may take your 
watch and your purse . ^rob the house, in fact 
.and be off before we know a word about it." 



LE ROUTS TIDINGS. 93 

- - - * - 

'' No, he is not a swindler" . Janet smiled 
. " but I can see him in the dining-room, 
if you don't like him to come up-stairs." 

"Yes, dear, I really thinly it will be 
much better to see hun in the dining-room ; 
and it so happens I'm sitting there just 
now, doing my accounts ; it wouldn't do at 
all, you know, my dear, for you to see a 
person of this kind alone." 

"Then I am afraid he must come up 
here after all," said Janet, resolutely ; " I 
know his business is private ; you can settle 
it whichever way you please." 

Mrs. Webb had learned by this time 
that this short, decided manner of Janet's, 
which she alone had the art of eliciting, 
admitted of no appeal, and therefore she 
said Janet had better come down-stairs, she 



94 ROOKSTONE. 



really could not give unknown foreigners 
the run of her house. 

Said very spitefully, but entirely lost on 
her young cousin. Janet guessed that it 
was Leroux, and shrinking, as she had 
learned to shrink during the last few hours, 
from Mr. Painson's good offices, it was very 
painful to be obliged to refer this man to 
him . for doubtless he had come to make 
her an offer of his services . on the subject 
of the will. 

It was Leroux . looking so exceedingly 
bright and happy, that for a moment Janet 
thought he must be the bearer of good 
tidings. 

" Have you brought me any message 
from Rookstone T she said. 

Leroux shrugged his shoulders. 



LE ROUTS TIDINGS. 95 

" I have a message for you, Mees Wol- 
ferston, but it is not from Eookstone." 

" Who is it from V 

Janet spoke very coldly. 

" It is fi'om the sister of mademoiselle, 
Madame Wolferston, she is in London now." 

" In London ! Where ?" 

Janet got up from her chair ; she must 
go to Mary at once. 

" Pardon, mademoiselle, I have not yet 
given the message." 

The Frenchman looked surprised at her 
impatience . at Rookstone Janet had ap- 
peared a quiet, sedate personage ; he 
paused till she had seated herself, and then 
he shrugged his shoulders. 

"Mademoiselle, there has been a great 
deal of chagrin at Eookstone. First, the 



96 ROOKSTONE. 



bebby 'ave died. Ah ! it is very sad accident; 
it is too 'orrible that a child's life must pay 
for a bundle of wood ; mafo% I think so." 

" I don't understand," said Janet, greatly 
alarmed. 

"Ah! mademoiselle have not heard ! Bonl 
I will tell you. Monsieur is driving madame 
one fine evening, and madame has the bebby 
on her knees ; there is an old and ugly woman 
. a vitch, Bobbins or Kitty she is called . 
who puts it in her 'ead to gather a faggot 
in the path of the carriage. Madame talk 
to the bebby, and I imagine monsieur look 
on and smile. Suddenly, croc / the horses 
jump, the carriage turn over, and madame 
and the bebby are on the ground. Well, 
mademoiselle, we all go ; I especially lead 
on the rest. I find madame and her bebby 



LEROUTS TIDINGS. 97 

and bring them home ; they seem well, 
quite gay and 'appy, and then . in the 
evening I hear a cry from the nursery. 
Madame is there bending over the bebby. 
She say, ' Eun, fly, fetch the doctor, quick, 
quick, my child die ! ' Well, mademoi- 
selle, I go, I run, I almost fly ; but of what 
use? Alas! none. When I arrive back 
with the doctor the bebby is one little 
corpse 

Janet sighed deeply. 

*' How is my sister now ?" she asked. 

Leroux shook his head very gravely, and 

his eyebrows followed the movement of his 
shoulders. 

'' Ah !" . he drew out the word . " that 
is endeed a serious question, Mees Wol- 
ferston; but you will see her to-morrow, 

VOL. III. 7 



V 



98 ROOKSTONE, 



and then you will know for yourself. At 
first, she do not eat or diink, and I think 

she do not sleep neither, for she keep so 
pale and ill ; then she write to you two, 
three times ; I 'ear her tell to Mr. Wolferston 
she will do so, and he become very angry 
endeed." 

" Stop,'' said Janet, " I do not want to 
hear of any disagreements between Mr. 
and Mrs. Wolferston." 

The Frenchman opened his eyes, and the 
comers of his moustaches rose perceptibly. 

*^ Bien, mademoiselle, as you will ; but 
your sister will tell you, and everybody at 
Rookstone will tell you also, that Mr. Wol- 
ferston is a change man. No one know 
what 'ave 'appen to him ; but since a week 
he is more extraordinary than I can say ; 



LE ROUTS TIDINGS. 99 

he suspec' everything ; he suspec' madame 
and he suspec' me too, and suddenly yester- 
day he tell to me to pack everything he 
shall be able to want for several months, 
and to come in France with him." 

" To France !" exclaimed Janet, but the 
Frenchman went on. 

" Well, I was ver' much surprise, and 
we was all surprise. I do not think ma- 
dame wish for to go, for I see her always 
crying. Yesterday, but just as we go in 
train, Mr. Wolferston leave her for one 
moment, and she beckon me. *Leroux,' 
she say, ' as soon as we shall arrive in Lon- 
don, you will go to my sister in Vincent 
Square, and you will tell to her to come to 
me to-morrow morning, at eight o'clock, at 
the hotel we go to. 

7.2 






{ 



100 ROOKSTONE, 



" And where is she now T 

"We are all in a hotel in Cavendish 
Square . a very dull place, I think, for 
London." 

"Stay" . while she spoke Janet had 
opened her desk . " I will just send my 
sister word that I am coming." 

In her excitement at Leroux's tidings, 
she had entirely forgotten Richard's prohi- 
bition. She wrote a few hasty lines to her 
sister, and Leroux departed with them. 
He could not teU her how long his master 
meant to remain in London, but he said he 
fancied Mr. Wolferston must have some 
business to transact before he could start 
for France. 

When he was gone, it seemed to Janet 
as if she were in a dream. Was Mary a 



LEROUX'S TIDINGS. 101 

prisoner, being carried off against her will ? 
and what had happened to Richard to 
cause the change Leroux spoke of? She 
remembered Richard's prohibition now, but 
she no longer heeded it. It seemed to her 
that if Mary, loving her husband as she 
did, could send for her in this secret man- 
ner, she must have some urgent cause for 
so doing, and that she was bound to pro- 
tect her at all risks. 

That warm sheltering love, the germ of 
motherhood, which holds so large a place 
in some women's natures, stirred Janet's 
heart now so strongly, that she could not 
keep back her tears. It seemed as if she 
could hardly wait till eight o'clock to- 
morrow. 



102 EOOKSTONE. 



CHAPTER VIII. 



Janet's note. 



"TTTHAT had come to Richard? Mary 
had been asking herself this vainly 
lately, and still she could find no answer to 
this question. 

Kitty's words on that memorable evening 
in the grassed road had wakened a con- 
fused and misty uneasiness, but till Mary 
put her doubt in words, and saw how 
strangely her husband was affected by it, 
it had not gained any strength ; probably. 



JANETS NOTE. 103 

had she never spoken it to him, it would 
have withered out of existence. But ever 
since she had spoken she had been aware of 
a strange change in her husband's manner 
towards her . a change which seemed to 
have a deeper cause than her words, for it 
was not directed to her only. He seemed 
tormented by some inward anxiety which 
kept him ever restless, ever watchfiil over 
the movements of those among whom he 
lived. He rarel;^ lefb his wife, but he seemed 
to take no pleasure in her companionship ; 
he sat sUent for hours, and if he did leave 
her he always reappeared suddenly, as if he 
wanted to take her by surprise. Was he 
fretting for the loss of his child ? Mary 
' asked herself ; but in other ways he gave no 
sign of this. She noticed, too, how he 



104 ROOKSTONE, 



watched the movements of the servants. 
Once she found him at her writing-desk dili- 
gently examining its contents, and she would 
have paid no heed to this but for her hus- 
band's sudden start of alarm, as if he had 
been caught in the commission of some crime. 

She longed to ask what ailed him, but 
ever since the birth of her child she had 
learned to fear her husband. He was rarely 
angry with her, but she knew what his 
anger livould be, and she shrank from rous- 
ing it. Besides, siQce her last appeal about 
Janet, there had been a reserve between 
them which seemed to poor Mary im- 
passable. 

At last he told her his intention of taking 
her to France ; she remonstrated* but he 
took no notice. 



JANETS NOTE. 105 

Then for the first time since their mar- 
riage Mary felt rebellious. 

" I cannot go, Richard ; it would break 
my heart to leave baby's grave." 

Even then he turned coldly away. 

" You do not know what is good for 
you T he said, gloomily ; *^ you are fretting 
yourself to death here, change is absolutely 
necessary for you." 

She protested, but he was deaf, and she 
left the home of her childhood, and of her 
married life also, weeping passionate tears . 
tears whose bitterness lay in the distrust 
her husband felt towards her. 

As yet the doubt Kitty's words had 
wakened had not weakened Mary^s love. 
Women love on even when aU semblance 
of good is stripped from the idol they wor- 



106 ROOKSTONE, 



ship ; and doubtless this bhnd clinging love 
has done as much in winning souls as the 
more severe virtue which can only love 
what is unstained. 

Mary behoved her husband was really 
still the same, obscured for the present by 
some dreadful anxiety, which he thought her, 
alas ! too weak and incapable to share ; but 
she had no patience to wait for this to clear 
away. She longed to question him openly ; 
but he had once threatened to leave her, 
and something told her that Richard was 
not a man to threaten twice. 

She knew they must make some stay in 

London, and she resolved to see Janet ; but 

she decided most imwillingly that this must 

be effected without her husband's know- 
ledge. He left her alone very seldom now. 



JANETS NOTE. 107 

However, he always breakfasted in his 
dressing-room, never coming down-stairs till 
ten o'clock, and it seemed to Mary that in a 
strange hotel it would be quite possible for 
her to see Janet quietly before her husband 
appeared. Janet was so wise, she would teU 
her what to do, and for Richard's sake she 
felt something must be done. She said this 
to herself as a reason for disobeying her 
husband's orders ; but Mary was longiQg 
for her sister's love . ^longing to pour out 
this overwhelming sorrow to some one who 
would really comfort her. She had set 
aside and neglected the safe ways in which 
she had been reared; now in sorrow she 
longed to return to them, not so much from 
repentance as from a secret foreknowledge 
of the comfort they would bring. 



108 ROOK^TONE, 



"Janet has always been so good and 
religious," she said ; " the very look of her 
will give me help." 

And then, as we know, she had watched 
her opportunity, and beckoning Leroux to 
the railway carriage, had given him the 
message for her sister. 

She was sitting now with Janet's reply 
in her hand. Richard had only just left 
her to smoke a cigar, and although Leroux 
had returned some time ago, he had not 
before found an opportunity to deliver 
Janet's note to his mistress. 

Blunted as Mary's perceptions of right 
and wrong doing had become during the 
past year, a quick flush rose on her cheek 
as the man gave her the note. Richard 
might be harsh to her, but was not this a 




JANETS NOTE, 109 

deliberate act of deceit ? But a blunted 
conscience or a stifled one is soon hushed. 
It was for a good purpose that she wanted 
to see Janet ; both her husband and herself 
would be happier afterwards for the ad- 
vice and guidance she should be sure to get 
from her sister. 

She read th^ note again. Janet said she 
hoped to be in Cavendish Square next 
morning punctually at eight o'clock ; there 
was actually nothing else to be gleaned 
from the note, except a few loving epithets ; 
but they were sweet comfort to the poor 
soul. Just now Mary hungered for love, 
and she read her sister's tender words over 
and over again, and kissed and wept over 
them. 

She was very, very weary. Yesterday 



110 BOOKS TONE. 



had been a day of passionate sorrow and 
anger ; she had passed a sleepless night, 
and then had come the fatigue of the 
journey, and the wrench of leaving her 
baby's grave. She sat with her fair head 
resting on her hand, the soft waxen light 
falling on her lovely face, while she read 
Janet's letter ; and presently as she read 
the lines seemed to cross one over another, 
her head became heavier and heavier . she 
was fast asleep. 

The door opened gently, and Richard 

came in. For a moment he stood looking 

* 

at his sleeping wife, and if Mary had then 
opened her eyes, and met his look of wist- 
ful tenderness, much sorrow might have 
been spared her. But she did not wake ; 
she could not hear his tread on the rich 



JANETS NOTE. Ill 

soft carpet as he advanced towards her. As 
he advanced he saw the open letter m the 
hand which had sunk on her lap. His face 
darkened instantly. A letter ! How was 
it possible she had received one when their 
journey had been planned and executed 
with such speed ? But he did not hesitate ; 
he drew the note from between her fingers 
and read it. Surprise, utter, unbounded 
astonishment that his docile plaything of a 
wife was capable of conspiring against him, 
bad an equal share with the anger that rose 
against her. He had been thunder-struck 
when at Rookstone she avowed her know- 
ledge of her sister's visit ; but then he knew 
that she was aware also that he had sent 
Janet away again. Fear of his displeasure 
might have produced concealment. This 



112 ROOKSTONE, 



was quite different. Something in the 
tender words, coming jfrom so cold a person 
as he considered Janet to be, assured him 
that Mary had complained to her sister . 
had appealed to her for love and protection, 

and an uneasy consciousness of his late cold- 
ness and neglect made itself felt. But he told 
himself Mary had brought that on herself 
by daring to question him, and as the remem- 
brance of her words came back, his face grew 
darker still. How did he know the number 
of secret letters that had been passing, or 
how Mary had been watching him during 
these last few days. He had suspected her 
at Rookstone, but he had almost smUed at 
his own suspicions ; now they took definite 
shape. He knew what he dreaded, and he 
knew also that to avert the fulfilment of 



JANETS NOTE. 113 

that dread, Mary and Janet must never 
meet again . never, that is to say, till time 
and change of scene had obliterated certain 
memories from the mind of his wife. 

While he stood there thinking, his face 
had hardened into the expression of a set 
purpose. He looked at his wife. She 
started, and a sob escaped her, but she did 
not waken. Bending over her gently, he 
replaced the letter as he had found it, and 
left the room as noiselessly as he had 
entered it. 



VOL. III. 



114 ROOKSTONE. 



CHAPTER IX. 



DISAPPOINTMENT. 



rilHE summer-like spring had been delu- 
sive . a mirage of the season which 
we know is too far off to be real yet ; but 
it lasted long enough to deceive poor credu- 
lous vegetation, and the biting morning 
wind set the green leaves shrivelling, in 
the vain hope that by curling up their 
edges they could protect themselves from 
the fierce enemy ; not they, the wind only 
laughed at their efforts, and scared all 



DISAPPOINTMENT. 116 

verdure out of them ; and then, content 
with what he had done to the trees m 
Cavendish Square, he dashed away into the 
Regent's Park in search of young fruit 
blossoms, and finding some anxious to 
appear in the world before their time, he 
cut them ofi" with his sharp breath, and left 
them dying on the black cold ground. 

Janet shivered as she stepped out of a 
cab . at the hotel to which Leroux had 
directed her. She heard the clocks striking 
eight as she passed into the entrance hall. 

Presently a servant appeared. 

" Can I see Mrs. Wolferston T 

" I'll see, ma'am," and the waiter, who, 
looking as if he were only just awake, dis- 
appeared again. 

He soon returned. 

8.2 



116 ROOKSTONE, 



''Mrs. Wolferston is not here, ma'am, 
they left quite early this morning." 
" Gone ! This morning 1" Janet felt 



so 



Btunned that she did not know what to say 
next. 

" Yes, ma'am, for the continent, I believe." 

" Do you know if they left any letter or 
message ?" 

" I'll inquire, ma'am, if you will wait one 
moment," and he showed her into a small 
waiting-room. 

Gone ! what could this mean ? and then 
it flashed upon Janet that Richard had dis- 
covered her intended visit, and had taken 
this means of preventing a meeting between 
her and her sister. But why should he be 
at such pains to keep them apart ? and then, 
as she remembered Mary's blind devotion 




DISAPPOINTMENT. 117 

to her husband, it seemed to her that 
matters must be greatly changed between 
them before her sister would send for her 
against his wishes ; for Janet had quite 
comprehended that the intended meeting of 
this morning was to have been kept from 
Richard's knowledge. Something deeper lay- 
under this sudden flight. She tried to think 
over all that Leroux had said yesterday. 

The waiter came back. 

" There is no note or message left, 
ma'am. Mr. and Mrs. Wolferston and 
their man servant . the lady brought no 
maid with her . ^left here this morniQg to 
catch the tidal train at Charing Cross. 
Their luggage was addressed * Paris.' " 

The mechanical precision of the waiter's 
news fell like lead upon Janet's heart. 



118 ROOKSTONE. 



There was no use in staying any longer. 
The cab was waiting, and Janet went back 
in it to Vincent Square. A deep dark fear 
had taken hold of her. 

Had Mary reason to suspect that which 
she herself suspected ? Had she also seen 
the fatal wiU which had stirred up so much 
sorrow and anxiety ? It seemed to her this 
must be so, and that her sister's anxiety to 
see her arose from this knowledge, and from 
her terror at finding herself in possession of 
such a secret. But, then, if Mary loved 
Richard, would she wish to betray him ? 
This was a question Janet dared not 
answer. 

How strangely her mother s early preju- 
dice against Mary's marriage was vindicat- 
f, and how bitterly her own inter" 




LISAPPOINTMENT. 1 19 

ference on Richard's behalf was brought 
home to her! She prayed earnestly for 
her unhappy sister . sprayed, too, that she 
herself might never be exposed to such a 
trial of love and truth. She reached Vin- 
cent Square before her cousins had left 
their bedrooms, and in the excitement and 
bustle of Louisa's departure for the country 
her morning expedition seemingly escaped 
the notice of even Mrs. Webb. 

Louisa had just driven off, accompanied 
bv her father, and Janet went to her own 
room. She wanted to think over what had 
happened, and to plan some means of com- 
municating with her sister. Mr. Painson 
would soon find out some trace of Mary's 
destination, but she could no longer consult 
Mr. Painson, She must trust the matter 



120 ROOKSTONE, 



to Henry; and dearly as she loved him, 
Janet knew that the very qualities she 
prized in her lover . ^his outspoken frank- 
ness, his manly sincerity and horror of 
mystery or subterfuge, would unfit him for 
the task. 

While she sat thinking, a letter was 
brought to her. The address was almost 
illegible, but it was written by Mary. 
Janet's heart gave a great boimd. The 
excitement of the last few days was un- 
nerving, although it strung her up into a 
temporary feverish excitement. There were 
only these few words : . 

" Dearest, follow me quickly. You will 
soon overtake us. Remember you promised 
to come whenever I asked you. I shall die if 



DISAPPOINTMENT, 121 

you do not come. . Mary. Hotel des 
Princes, Rue de Riclielieu. . This is where 
we went before, so I expect we shall go 
there now." 



The words were blotted, smeared with 
traces of hot tears, it was plain to Janet that 
her sister had been taken away by surprise, 
and against her will, and her indignation rose 
against Richard. She wrote to Henry at once 
at his office, begging him to come to her as 
soon as he could. She would explain the 
reason of her hasty summons when she saw 
him. She went out and posted the note 
herself. Glad of any movement or exertion, 
she was far too highly wrought to sit 
quietly, letting events take their natural 
course ; and even with all the tasks she set 



122 ROOKSTONE. 



herself to accomplish, the hours passed 
slowly and heavily till the time when she 
might reasonably expect her lover. He 
might have come sooner, she knew that, 
but then he might have been detained ; 
but when an hour had gone by from the 
time of his expected arrival, she grew very 
anxious. 

It was not yet four o'clock. Leaving 
word with the servant that if Captain 
Wenlock called he was to be asked to await 
her return, she went herself to his lodgings. 
In answer to her inquiry, she learned that 
he had that morning received a telegram, 
and had gone away immediately. 

" Did he leave any message for me V 
" No, nothing ; only I knows he won't be 
back by Sunday." 



DISAPPOINTMENT. 123 

The stolid, stupefied-looking servant, 
who worked incessantly from morning till 
night, and then got about six hours* sleep 
in an underground kitchen . " had not seen 
Captain Wenlock when he went away." 

If she had taken the trouble to inquire, 
she would have found that her mistress had 
a note for Miss Wolferston, a note in which 
Henry told her that a telegram had sum- 
moned him to Lord Fletcher without a 
moment's delay. 

Later in the evening, when the mistress 
was going out, she gave this note in charge 
to the servant to deliver if any one should 
come from Miss Wolferston. In his hurry 
Henry Wenlock had given no directions 
about posting it, and in fear of a reprimand 
for her previous neglect of inquiry, the maid 



124 ROOKSTONE. 



settled her conscience by putting the note 
on the fire. 

Janet felt puzzled and uncertain ; it 
seemed to be a clear duty to follow Mary. 
Henry could not help her, Mr. Painson 
should not, and yet she could not go to 
Paris by herself ; she might take Thompson, 
but then Thompson would probably not be 
able to leave her business at a moment's 
notice ; and it was plain to Janet that if 
she wished to trace her sister easily she 
must not delay. 

As she walked home debating this ques- 
tion with herself, a new thought occurred 
to her. Aimt Dawson . she was always 
good-natured and willing to serve any one. 
This certainly was not an ordinary request, 
but still she could make it. 




DISAPPOINTMENT, 126 

She had just passed a cab-stand; she 
hurried back to it, and desired to be driven 
to Harley Street. 

It seemed to Janet as if the first steps 
were accompUshed when she heard that 
Mrs. Dawson was at home. 

" Very glad to see yon, I'm sure, my 
dear. it's quite a coincidence ; if I hadn't 
had callers, I was going to drive round and 
ask you to spend a few of these last single 
days with me ; eh, what do you say now V 

Janet smiled. She felt less excited now. 

" I should like it very much, thank you ; 
but I have a siunmons to join Mary at 

< 

once, and she is in Paris, and I don't like 
to travel alone . it would not be quite nice, 
would it, aunt ?" 

" Nice 1 lor no, my dear ; nice . I should 



126 BOOKSTONE, 



say exceedingly nasty, not to say improper 1 
Why, when I was a girl, Janet, I should 
not have thought of going about in a cab 
alone ; and as to travelling, dear me I girls 
have altered more than any other thing 
since I was young ; it seems to me they do 
everything that a man can do, and yet they 
give themselves up far more to dress and 
vanities than they used to do ; and as to the 
way they display their ankles . ^well, I can 
only hope the rising generation have well- 
shaped feet r 

Janet's impatience grew uncontrollable. 

" But, aunt, I must really go to Mary ; 
she has lost her baby ; she is, I fear, ill and 
unhappy. Will you go with me ?" 

Travelling was very pleasant to Mrs. 
Dawson, but then her travelling was 



DISAPPOINTMENT. 127 

always planned and executed with con- 
siderable forethought. The planning and 
re-planning the route ; the diligent study 
of " Murray f the purchase of various 
articles, most of which she never used ; the 
numerous notes of arrangement which had 
to pabs, before aU was done, between her- 
self and the chosen fiiend who was to 
share her tour . all these little prelimina- 
ries constituted half the pleasure of the 
journey. She looked aghast at Janet's 
sudden proposal. 

"Go with you at once, my dear; too early 
in the year, isn't it ? . the equinox is hardly 
safely over, you know. Paris, you say. 
Should you want to pay a long visit, Janet ?" 

"Oh, no, a couple of days would be 
quite sufficient. I don't like troubling 



128 ROOKSTONE. 



you, but . but you seem the fittest person 
to apply to, aunt." 

"Yes, yes, my dear, of course I am; 
and I eertainly will go with you. But only 
stop two days ! Mercy, child ! do you think 
I'm a firework or a railway engine, to go 
here, and there, and everywhere, without a 
moment's rest ? How soon do you want to 
start ?" 

She went through a fi:esh course of 
astonished remonstrance when Janet offered 
her the choice of crossing by that night's 
boat from Folkestone, or of waiting for the 
early morning train ; and finally she de- 
cided on the latter plan, with much self- 
condolence for the extraordinary effort she 
was making. 

" But I was helpless," she said to her- 



DISAPPOINTMENT. 129 

self when Janet had departed . " every bit 
as helpless as a screw in a hole that fits it ; 
she drove me into it whether I liked it or 
not, and whether I do like it now I haven't 
the slightest idea." 



VOL. in. 



130 JROOXSTONK 



CHAPTER X. 



PURSUIT. 



II /TAR Y sat in her bed -room in the 
Hotel des Princes very white and 
trembling ; her husband had a heavier 
frown on his face than she had ever seen 
there. 

It was the day after their arrival, and 
something in the arrangement of the house 
had annoyed Mr. Wolferston. He gave 
orders to Leroux in his wife's hearing to 
remove at once to another hotel. 



PURSUIT, 131 



" I will not sleep here to-night/' he had 
said. 

Mary lost all self-control ; a paroxysm of 
terror seized her lest she should miss Janet. 

" You must stay here, Richard ; I have 
disobeyed you ; I have written to Janet ; 
if I don't see her I shall die !" 

For a few moments Richard did not 
speak, his anger so completely overmas- 
tered him ; when he did, Mary hardly 
knew his. voice. 

"Then you really expect your sister 
here T 

She could only bend her head by way of 
answer. 

" Very well. Instead of moving to an- 
other hotel, we shall leave Paris at once. 
This sort of thing is intolerable. I have no 

9.2 



132 ROOKSTONE. 



time to say what I tliiiik of yoiir conduct ; 
but you see how utterly useless it is for 
you to attempt to deceive me." 

She hid her eyes away from his ; she 
could not bear the anger in his face. He 
left the room abruptly and summoned 
Leroux. 

" I shall leave Paris at once." 

A look of uneasiness in the man's face 
roused his attention. 

" Bien ! monsieur ; in one quarter of an 
hour aU will be ready. If monsieur will 
tell to me the place to which we go, 
I will arrange for the trains and the 
luggage." 

Richard took his time-table out of his 
pocket. " Rouen," he said, " that will do 
very well ; even if we find it too long a 



PURSUIT. 133 



journey, you and the luggage can get on 
to Rouen to-night." 

" Ah, then, monsieur proposes to himself 
to make the voyage of La Normandie ; it 
is a beautiful country, La Normandie . 
hien ! Does Monsieur know La Normandie ?" 

The man's manner confirmed his master's 
suspicion. He felt less surprised now at 
the skill with which Mary had succeeded 
in deceiving him. 

" Leroux is in Janet's pay," he thought 
to himself, " and between them Mary will 
be taught falsehood ; but I must put a stop 
to all this." 

The carriage was soon announced. He 
went and fetched his wife and placed her 
in it. As they went towards the station, 
he kept looking out of window. He was 



134 MOOKSTONE. 



thinking over what had happened. He 
determined to have no further explanation 
with Mary. Change of scene and new 
impressions would soon obliterate the re- 
membrance of all that had caused this 
painful estrangement. He had cause 
enough for anxiety without any new bit- 
terness of feeling, an anxiety that made 
him long for Mary's love as it had once 
been his . unquestioning worshipping love, 
without one cloud on its enjoyment of 
present happiness. The revelation in Le- 
roux's face had added a fresh sting to his 
anxiety. But he had no time to sift this 
now. His one object was to elude Janet's 
pursuit, and prevent a meeting between 
her and Mary. 

It was nearly dark, and the lamps were 



PUESUIT. 136 



all lighted. They had got into such a 
block of cabs and omnibuses that it was 
impossible to move on fast. Richard put 
his head out at window. Just then a cab 
passed, and a face in it met his gaze fiilly. 
It was Janet ! For an instant they looked 
at each other . and then the block of vehi- 
cles dispersed, and each carriage bore its 
occupant away. 

Janet soon recovered herself. Her im- 
pulse was to follow Richard ; but she had 
not seen Mary beside him ; there was no 
luggage on the carriage ; he might be only 
going to another part of the city ; so she 
told the driver to go on as fast as he could 
to the Hotel des Princes. 

" Dear me, child, how you are exciting 
yourself !" said the unconscious Mrs. Daw- 



136 ROOKSTONE. 



son. "No wonder you don't grow fat. 
You'll never make time a minute longer by 
hurrjdng it.'' 

Jaaet could not answer. The remem- 
brance of yesterday's disappointment was 
stm vivid, and the nearer she drew to her 
journey's end, the stronger her forebodings 
grew. When they reached the Hotel des 
Princes it was scarcely a surprise to hear 
that the English family named Wolferston 
had left it. She could not learn for some 
little time where they were bound. 

At last a waiter was produced who 
knew aU about it. " Mademoiselle is Eng- 
lish, that is right ; she is, then, the lady to 
whom Monsieur Leroux send word that he 
is gone in Normandy." 

In the midst of her anxiety Janet smiled. 



PURSUIT. 137 



But she guessed that Mary had entrusted 
Leroux with the task of leaving traces of 
her movements. She glanced at Mrs. 
Dawson ; the poor lady looked utterly ex- 
hausted. It would be cruel to ask her to 
go on travelling. It was already evening ; 
by sleeping in Paris and starting early next 
morning it seemed to Janet she might still 
overtake her sister. 

She had left a letter for Henry with 
Mrs. Webb. She felt too uncertain of his 
movements to write to him direct, to teU 
him the motive of her journey and her in- 
tention of returning speedily ; but this un- 
looked-for accident would delay her, and 
she resolved to write to him again, and beg 
him to follow her as soon as he returned to 
London* 



138 ROOKSTONE. 



" I do not ask you to write," she said ; 
" I may miss Mary again, and may have to 
move so rapidly from place to place that 
there is little chance of a letter reaching 
me ; and for the same reason I may 
possibly not write to you again, but please 
start as soon as you get this ; and wherever 
I go I will leave a note for you, to enable 
you to follow and overtake us easily/' 

And then she assured him tenderly of 
the comfort and help she should find in his 
presence. She asked him to tell Mrs, 
Webb not to expect to hear from her, for 
she foresaw that writing would be almost 
an impossibility. 

She felt sure that Richard was purposely 
evading her, and her conviction of his guilt 
strengthened. StiU, imless he feared that 



PURSUIT. 139 



she would betray him to Mary, she scarcely 
comprehended his motives for this avoid- 
ance. 

She felt happier when she had written 
to Henry, and then she submitted to 
Mrs. Dawson's orders and took some re- 
freshment. 

While the waiter was removing the 
supper things Janet asked by what line of 
railroad people usually entered Normandy. 

" Ah, ma foi ! mademoiselle, there are 
different ways : if you were going on to 
Caen you would take train to Lisieux ; but 
most people, above all English peoples, 
have the wish to see Rouen . it is a beauti- 
ful city, the finest of small cities of the 
world. I am of Rouen, and I assiire 
you, mesdames, there is nothing which 



140 ROOKSTONE. 



can to it be compared. Ahl but it is 
superb." 

His patriotic enthusiasm was wasted on 
Janet; here was a difl&culty she had not 
counted on, and for a little while she sat in 
puzzled silence. 

However, the distance at last decided 
her; Rouen seemed so much more direct 
and accessible that it was not probable 
Richard would undertake the longer 
journey at such a late hour. Before she 
closed her letter to Henry she told him 
they were starting for Rouen. 

The letter being closed at last, Mrs. 
Dawson insisted on sending her to bed. 

" I should like to know what Captain 
Wenlock would say to me if he saw your 
heavy eyes and pale cheeks ; he'd say I 



PURSUIT. 141 



oiiglit to be shaken for consenting to this 
mad plan of starting off again to-morrow 
morning. I believe I'm a sad old fool, but 

it is only you young people that are too 

< 

much for me. Folks of my own age, in- 
deed; I should like to see one of them 
whisking me from Dan to Beersheba in 
such a fashion." 

Janet smiled, for it was notorious that 
Aunt Dawson had never in her life found 
courage to say " No " to any one, except to 
two offers of marriage ; and there are no 
means of proving what her answer would 
have been even in these two instances, had 
the offers been spoken instead of written. 
It seemed due to herself to remonstrate 
with her niece ; but in her heart the hurry 
and excitement of this pursuit had an in- 



142 ROOKSTONE. 



terest which quite compensated for a little 
fatigue. 

"It's almost like a novel," she said to 
herself when Janet had left her ; " and just 
as if one was among the characters. I don't 
mean for a moment to say I'm so foolish as 
to enjoy this ; I should think not, indeed . 
it is only my sympathy with poor dear 
Janet. Strange thing it is how people are 
mismatched in this life, as Mrs. Webb says 
. she's always so sensible, Mrs. Webb . a 
little too much so, perhaps, but you never 
catch her saying or doing anything foolish 
or enthusiastic. It reaUy does seem to me 
that Captain Wenlock was far better suited 
to either Mary Wolferston or Louey Webb 
than to Janet ; she's too good for him, and 
he's not clever enough for her ; she'd have 



PURSUIT. 143 



done better for that dark-eyed cousin of her 
father's ; though, mercy me, I could never 
have had the courage to marry that man if 
I'd been a girl ; he looks like what I should 
fancy a brigand might be, or a pirate cap- 
tain, or one of those sort of book people." 

By this time Mrs. Dawson had finished 
putting up all the iron-grey ringlets in 
paper, and having carefully encased them 
in a trebly-frilled nightcap, and looked at 
the whole performance in the glass, she 

went to bed. 

When Richard Wolferston reached the 

railway station he beckoned Leroux, who 

was standing near the luggage. 

" I am not going to Normandy ; I have 

engaged a carriage to take us on to Meu- 

don ; you can bring what is wanted, and 



144 ROOKSTONE. 



leave the heavy luggage here to be sent 
for." 

Something in his master's face told Le- 
roux that he was suspected, and without 
any attempt at delay he gave the necessary 
directions, and was soon on his way to 
Meudon with Mr. and Mrs. Wolferston. 



MRS, WEBB. 145 



CHAPTER XL 

MRS. WEBB MAKES THE BEST USB OP HER 

TIME. 

II TRS. WEBB, as has been seen, was a 
manceuvring woman ; a woman who 
preferred the little crooked turnings and 
byways to the straight high-road of truth ; 
and yet if circumstances had not, so to 
speak, played into her hands, she might 
have hesitated to plan and scheme out for 
herself her present conduct. 

When a letter from Captain Wenlock to 
VOL. in. 10 



146 ROOKSTONE. 



Janet reached her, she hesitated what to do 
with it, but after losing a post she sent it 
on to Hotel des Princes. 

Early on the second day Louisa returned. 
Scarlet fever had declared itself in the vil- 
lage near which she was staying, and al- 
though her friends assured her she would 
run no risk by remaining, she preferred, 
as she said, "to take care of her- 
self.'' 

Mr. and Mrs. Webb were engaged to 

. 

dine with an old Mend. They came home 
early. There were lights in the drawing- 
room, and when Mrs. Webb asked if her 
daughter was sitting up for them, she was 
told that Captain Wenlock was there. It 
was such a pleasant bit of news, that she 
quite forgot to be surprised that her well- 



MRS. WEBB. 147 



trained Louey shoiild receive gentlemen in 
her mother's absence. 

Mrs. Webb hurried up-stairs. For the 
moment she really forgot the note Janet 
had left in her charge, and as if Captain 
Wenlock, too, were in a conspiracy against 
her memory, he did not ask a single ques- 
tion relative to Janet. 

Louisa had told him, as her mother had 
told her, that her cousin was with Mrs. 
Dawson, Janet having settled with Mrs. 
Webb that her journey in search of Mary 
was not to be mentioned to any one except 
Henry. 

Captain Wenlock had come direct from 
the railway-station to Vincent Square ; he 
had arrived there about an hour before 
Mrs. Webb's return, and when Louisa told 

10.2 



148 ROOKSTONE. 



liim of Janet's absence, he felt so sure that 
he should find a letter from her at his lodg- 
ings that he did not care to ask questions 
about her from the Webbs. 

Lately, if he could possibly avoid it, he 
never mentioned Janet's name to Mrs. 
Webb. 

Next morning's post brought a letter to 
Vincent Square, addressed, in Janet's hand- 
writing, to Captain Wenlock. Mrs. Webb 
was alone in the room when the letters 
were brought in, and she put this one in 
her pocket. 

" If I'm to keep this absurd business a 
secret from Louey," she said, " I must not 
let her see the Paris post-mark." 

Louey came down to breakfast, bright, 
animated, happy, quite unlike the dull 



MRS, WEBB. 149 



listless girl of the past two months. She 
talked incessantly of Henry Wenlock, and 
of what he had said to her. 

" He is coming to-night, mamma, to try 
a new song I have brought from the 
country ; he has such a charming voice ;" 
and then she gave a silly little senti- 
mental sigh, and drooped her head grace- 

folly. 

*^ How lovely she is," thought the fond 
mother. "No wonder he admires her. 
There must have been something special 
in his manner last night, for my Louey is 
not the sort of girl to fancy a man's admi- 
ratioi^ when it's all on her own side, dear 
me, no.'' 

The day wore on. Louisa's spirits were 

unflagging, and towards evening she was 



150 ROOKSTONE. 



plainly under the excitement of expecta- 
tion. 

"Poor child!" her mother thought; 
" I'm afraid she is really attached to him, 
and yet why should I fear such a thing ? 
Louey would never care really for a man 
unless he cared for her. Have I not always 
said that it was only duty that held Henry 
to Janet ? If these two are left to them- 
selves for a week, I believe he will see the 
fearful sacrifice he is contemplating." 

And then she stood thinking. 

Janet's first note lay safely in her desk, 
and the other letter was still in the pocket 
of her morning gown. Must she give them 
to Captain Wenlock, or should she wait the 
result of the evening ? If he reaUy seemed 
happy with Loiiisa, why should she dis- 



MRS, WEBB, 161 



turb his enjoyment by. the mention of 
Janet ? 

Mrs. Webb had been deceitftil, and spite- 
ful, and worldly. She had allowed many 
tall weeds to grow unchecked for years, but 
a deliberate act of dishonesty was new to 
her. Her conscience spoke out loudly, and 
she hesitated, and then the evil powers to 
whose dominion she had yielded with, so 
little struggle spoke out louder still. She 
stood there hesitating, and as she hesitated 
a compromise suggested itself. 

" I see my way plain now," she said to her- 
self. " I shall put both letters in my pocket ; 
but there can certainly be no occasion to pro- 
duce them until he asks about Janet." 

She gave a sigh of relief, and took both 
letters down-stairs with her. 



162 ROOKSTONE, 



She sat longer than usual with her hus- 
band, after dinner ; even when she heard 
Henry Wenlock arrive, she did not at once 
go up-stairs. 

By the time she reached the drawing- 
room he was at the pianoforte, trjdng over 
new songs with Louisa. 

" And really they look so perfectly happy 
together, I have no heart to interrupt 
them." 

She took up her embroidery. She was 
indefatigable at needlework. 

Captain Wenlock came and spoke to her 
when the song was finished, but he said nob 
one word of Janet. Louisa stayed at the 
piano, singing. 

** Won't you come and try some duets ?" 
she said, when her song was over. 



MRS, WEBB. 163 



He went to the piano again. He was 
glad to get away from Mrs. Webb. He 
did not want to speak of Janet. He was 
both vexed and puzzled about her. It 
seemed to him that eccentricity might be 
carried too far, and that her present con- 
duct was inexplicable. 

He had called at Mrs. Dawson's, and had 
learned that she was out of town with Miss 
Wolferston, but was expected home in a 
day or two. What could Janet's silence 
mean ? When he reached Vincent Square 
that evening, he asked Louisa what had 
become of Christy, and learned that he 
had started that morning for the seaside 
with Thompson. 

He felt hurt and depressed ; but he loved 
music passionately, and it was a real plea- 



154 ROOKSTONE. 



sure to sing to any one who admired and 
understood his voice as Louisa did. She 
was so kind, too, humouring his mood . 
keeping on singing and playing, instead of 
expecting him to talk. He had had no 
idea how nice she was : hitherto she had 
seemed to him frivolous and silly, but it 
was impossible to think this now ; and 
when he bade her "good-night," his eyes 
were fiill of gratitude. 

" Come again soon, and get that last song 
perfect," she said, in a gentle, earnest voice ; 
and he thought what a dear little unselfish 
girl she was, to devote herself in this way 
to his amusement and improvement. 

He was going, when a thought suddenly 
occurred to him. 

"Did you forward a letter I wrote to 
Janet ?" he said to Mrs. Webb. 



MRS. WEBB. 155 



Mrs. Webb flushed slightly. "Yes, I 
forwarded it." 

'^ Thank you ; good-night," and he went 
away, leaving his hostess much relieved, 
and very grateful to have been spared the 
necessity of producing the letters ; for she 
had decided during the evening that un- 
less he showed curiosity to know what had 
become of Janet, she might keep her own 
counsel. 

If she had quite understood Henry Wen- 
lock, she would not have feared his ques- 
tioning. He would have submitted to any 
torture of doubt or vexation, rather than 
he would permit Mrs. Webb to see that he 
was displeased with Janet, or ignorant of 
her movements. He went away more and 
more perplexed, but he hoped to find a 



156 ROOKSTONE. 



letter at his lodgings. There was no use 
in any self-torment. He had had a very- 
pleasant evening ; Louey was a nice 
amiable Uttle girl, and what a charming 
voice she had ! 

He reached his lodgings, hurried up- 
stairs, but when he had struck a light 
there was no letter to be seen. What 
could it mean, imless Janet had returned 
that evening ? 

" I shall go to Mrs. Dawson's again to- 
morrow, and then if she is not back I shall 
wait a couple of days. If I have no news 
by that time, I must make up my mind to 
cross-question Mrs. Webb. I hope I may 
be spared this necessity." 



AT MONT DO RE, 157 



CHAPTER XIL 



AT MONT DORE. 



TTjlOR the first few days Mary gave her- 
self up to passionate sorrow, and 
then came a sort of resigned sullenness, 
but her husband seemed not to resent 
either. He wanted the subject of Janet 
dismissed, and he was resolved not to say 
a word which might revive it. He had 
cause enough for anxiety just now, with- 
out the unhappy estrangement that had 
grown up between himself and Mary. 



168 ROOKSTONE. 



He knew well enough he had only to 
speak out plainly to ejQfect a complete re- 
conciliation ; but if he did this, Mary 
might repeat the question which had so 
wounded him. No, he must endeavour to 
bury the past out of sight without any 
spoken reference to it. 

He wanted Mary's love again as it had 
once been his. He was devoted and tender ; 
but her sorrow did not yield as he hoped it 
would have yielded. 

They stayed a week at Fontainebleau, 
and then he proposed to return to Paris, 
for he felt sure that if Janet failed to find 
them in Normandy she would go back to 
England, but when he made this proposal 
to Mary she shrank from the noise and 
bustle of the great city. 



AT MONT DORE, 169 



He thought he would try the effect of 
constant change of scene. He took her to 
Bourges with the intention of exploring 
Auvergne, but Mary found no interest in the 
quaint old citizen palaces so fiill of memories 
of the most disastrous period of French his- 
tory. Even when they reached Auvergne, 
the wild picturesque scenery of that region 
of extinct volcanoes seemed lost on her. 

At times Richard grew impatient of her 
silent apathy, but a glance at her sweet 
face checked him. She was no longer 
sullen or unloving. There was at times so 
wistfiil an anxiety in her eyes that he could 
scarcely keep from questioning her. 

It was a fortnight since they quitted 
Paris. They were staying at Mont Dore- 
les-bains. In the morning Mary had been 



ICO ROOKSTONE. 



out riding with her husband ; they had 
returned to the hotel, and were just going 
downstairs to dinner, when she suddenly 
faiated. 

Her husband was terribly alarmed; he 
had a horror of foreign doctors, and there 
was no English one to be had. 

He told his wife, as soon as she was some- 
what recovered, that she had over-fatigued 
herself She looked at him earnestly. 

" No, it is not that, Richard. I want to 
be at home again." 

He kissed her and soothed her with 
tender words, but he gave her no promise 
of returning. 

Later in the day, when they were sitting 
out in the charming promenade beside the 
river, she recurred to the subject. 



AT MONT BORE. 161 

" Richard, I cannot stay here. This place, 
I know, is full of beauty, but it oppresses 
me.' All these strange rents and fissures 
in the mountains . the mountains them- 
selves, with their weird, barren summits 
and wooded sides . are so unreal, so unlike 
all I have been used to ! If you will not 
take me to England, let me at least go 
nearer the coast." 

She looked beseechingly at him, but she 
saw no yielding ia his face. 

"This is mere waywardness," he said. 

" As long as you are in France it cannot 

signify what part of the coimtry you are 

in. I did not think you so fanciful, dar- 

ling." 

" I think it is more than a fancy, 

Richard ; it is a longing, an impulse 1 can 
VOL. ni. 11 



162 ROOKSTONE, 



no longer resist. You yourself settled to 
go to Normandy when we left Paris. I see 
that in more than one Norman town there 
are English residents, and consequently " . 
she hesitated, and nervous fear of his anger 
checked the words on her tongue, but the 
overmastering impulse bore her on. " I 
must say it, dearest, even if you think me 
foolish; I might find an English church 
and an English clergyman there." 

He tinned away, but she clasped both 
hands roimd his arm ; she knew he could 
not break away from her before so many- 
witnesses ; for although the seats were 
widely separated there were several of the 
hotel visitors on the promenade. 

" Oh, Richard, if you could know ho^r 
utterly miserable I am, how strangely and 



% 



AT MONT BORE. 163 

awfully my wickedness and weakness have 
been brought before me, you would let me 
go to church again." 

He was very angry ; she knew that by 
his frown and his silence. But if Mary had 

understood himian nature better she would 
have taken comfort from this very anger ; 
she would have known that where anger is 
there is inward combat, and she would 
have thought it a far more healthftd and 
hopeful sign than the cold sneering cyni- 
cism with which Richard had hitherto re- 
pressed any earnest feeling. 

"Come down by the river-side," she said, 
'' we shall be alone there,'' and she walked 
on. He followed her, spite of himself. He 
was surprised at this new development of 
his wife's mind ; she was no longer the 

11.2 



164 ROOKSTONE. 



docile child he had married, and yet he 
felt he loved her more dearly than ever. 

" But I am not going to yield to a fit of 
fanatical enthusiasm," he said; "if Mary 
once turns canting, all hope of peace be- 
tween us is over. I will have no parsons 
coming preaching reformation to me ; not 
one of them shall ever set foot in my house 
. they only come to beg . ^a pack of lazy, 

canting hypocrites." 

They were alone again now, close to the 

bridge, and the frowning summit of the 
Capucin rock seemed to be bending for- 
ward to look at them. Mary stopped, and 
waited for her husband to come up to 
her. 

" Richard, I have not told you all, I 
could not before those people ; but ever 



AT MONT BORE, 165 

since baby died I have been thinking why 
he was taken from me, and I know now . 
it has come to me so clearly, so convinc- 
ingly, that I am sure it is the truth ; he 
was taken from me for two reasons . one 
was my great sin, my wilftd disbelief of my 
mother's warnings, and then my weakness 
in giving up all she had taught me ; and 
the other " . ^the tears rained down so fast 
that she could no longer see her husband's 
tace . " the other was a mercy sent me . ^he 
was taken away, darling, because I had no 
power to train him rightly; he has been 
spared from growing as weak and wicked 
as I am.'' 

Her husband put his arm round her. 

" You are not wicked, Mary. I will not 
have you call yourself so ; and even sup- 



166 ROOKSTONE. 



posing you were wicked, had I no part in 
the child, or have you learned to consider 
me so great a reprobate that you feel 
thankfiil he has no chance of growing up in 
my steps T 

She hid her eyes on Richard's shoulder. 
She knew the answer he expected to this 
appeal, and yet she could not make it. 
She only repeated her request to be taken 
to Normandy. 

Suddenly it flashed upon him that she 
guessed Janet had gone there to look for 
her, and the suspicion that she was still 
pining after her sister steeled him against 
any yielding. 

" No, Mary, I look upon all this as mere 
weakness, probably increased by your ill- 
ness this morning. I shall not take you to 



AT MONT BORE. 167 

Normandy; and even if we were there, 
don't imagine for an instant that I'll have 
any cant or nonsense in my house. I am 
just as I always was, so you have no cause 
of complaint. If you choose to alter, that 
is not my business. Come, the damp is 
rising from the river ; you ought to have 
been indoors half an hour ago." 

But Mary had conquered the first, the 
most difficult part of her request, the speak- 
ing it at all ; she was not now going to 
yield hope easily. 

" Richard, I must either go back to 
Rookstone, or you must take me to Nor- 
mandy.'' He shook his head. " If you 
will not do either," she said, very ear- 
nestly, "I must think you are wronging 
me, and I shall try to find Janet ; I 



168 ROOKSTONE. 



Bhall write to her to come to me at 
once." 

Richard had to struggle hard for self- 
control ; he had turned round at her words 
and grasped both her hands in his ; but she 
stood fearless, her lovely blue eyes bent on 
him full of mingled love and sorrow, and 
yet there was in her whole attitude an 
expression of earnest purpose he had never 
seen in her before. He felt instinctively 
that his anger might frighten her, but 
that it could exercise no restraming 
power. 

" I will never help you to see Janet." 

And then he drew her arm into his, and 

they walked homewards, both of theni 

silent ; Mary because she found no words 

to urge her petition, so entirely had her 



AT MONT DORE, 169 



pleading exhausted her, and Richard be- 
cause he dared not trust himself to speak, 
lest a few cruel words might shatter the 
love he had been trying to rebuild during 
these past days. 

Just as they reached one of the quaintly 
piled-up masses of Roman debris in the 
promenade, a French gentleman who had 
walked and talked with Richard on the 
previous day came up. 

" Ah, Monsieur Wolferston, will you do 
to me a great service ? I have here a letter 
from England on business . important busi- 
ness, monsieur ; and I regret to say to you 
that I cannot arrive to comprehend that 
properly. If madame will permit . " and 
bowing and floiuishing his hat about six 
times more than was necessary, the French- 



170 ROOKSTONE, 



man placed himself beside Bichard, and 
pulled the letter from his pocket. 

" Go on slowly, and I will overtake you, 
Mary." 

She moved away ; she was so very hope- 
less, so despairing, that it seemed to her she 
did not care what became of her. 

She had gone on a little way ; a man waa 
standing just behind another of the ruin 
heaps, and she started at coming upon hivn 
so suddenly. It was Leroux. 

He had heard of her illness in the morn- 
ing, and seeing her now turn quite pale, he 
feared she was going to faint again. 

" What is it, madame ?" . he raised his 
hat respectfiilly . "will you lean against 
this ruin T 

" No, thank you," she said, faintly ; but 



AT MONT LORE. 171 

she stood still, for the sudden fright had 
set her heart beating wildly. "Leroux/*^ 
she said, for the man stood still also, look- 
ing as if he expected her to faint, " when 
we left Paris, did you say we were going to- 
Normandy T 

" But yes, madame, I had supposed na 
other thing." 

" And do you think if . if you were to go 
ojff to Normandy, you would find my sister 
there T 

Leroux glanced quickly at her : she waa 
very pale, but her eyes glittered with ex- 
citement. He shrugged his shoulders, and 
rubbed his white haads. 

" Ah 5a, madame, what will you ? I can 
go to Normandy to-morrow if you will, and 
perhaps I may find Mees Janet, perhapa 



172 ROOKSTONE. 



not ; how can I say it ? but the result will 
be the same. Monsieur will be angry with 
me, and do you think, madame, he will let 
you see mademoiselle, your sister?" He 
snapped his fingers at such a manifest 
absurdity. '' No, madame ; all he wiU do, 
he will run away more fast than ever, and 
leave mademoiselle plant^e 1^; but, ma- 
dame, all the same for that, I will go to 
Normandy and make the search you desire. 
Never was it said of Frangois Leroux that 
he refuse for any fear of man to obey the 
order of a lady !" 

Neither of them had heard approaching 
footsteps, and at Leroux's last words 
Richard stood beside them. 

" Stay here till I come back," he said to 
Leroux ; and then, taking his wife's hand 



AT MONT DO RE. 17a 



and drawing it througli his arm, he led her 

silently to the entrance of the inn, and told 

 

her to go up to her room at once. 

Then he went back to Leroux. 

" You are a spy, I find . an imtrustworthy 
scoundrel ; tell me what I owe you, and 
never let me see your face again." 

It was well for Leroux that the place 
they stood in was not unfrequented ; all 
the pent-up anger which Mary had kindled 
in her husband burst its bonds now. 

The man was scared as he looked in his 
master's face ; but still he could not submit 
tainely to this insult. 

" I am not a scoundrel, Mr. Wolferston ; 
if you had no secrets you would not be 
always in suspect. A spy ! people who 
have nothing to conceal do not fear spies." 



174 ROOKSTONE. 



And then lie walked away. Something 
in Richard's eyes warned him he had said 
enough. In another half-hour the French- 
man had received his wages, and had de- 
parted. He knew that it would be useless 
to try to see Mrs. Wolferston ; compassion 
for her, and stUl more anger against his 
master, determined him to find her sister 
without any loss of time. 



LERO UX'S JO URNEY. 176 



CHAPTER XIII. 



LEROUX'S JOURNEY. 



-[^EEOUX started for PariB tut night 

Till now he had not dishked his 
master. Mr. Wolferston's altered manner 
had been very irritating ; but Leroux 
could have borne unkind treatment better 
than hard words. It was derogatoiy to 
be called a spy and a scoundrel ; it had 
roused the tiger-blood inherent in some 
Frenchmen, and he vowed not to rest 
till he had taken revenge on Richard 



176 ROOKSTONE. 



Wolferston. He was resolved to find 
Mademoiselle Janet ; he was sure she 
would repay his expenses, still he must 
not be extravagant. He travelled all 
night, he got a hasty and cheap meal in 
Paris, and then went on to Rouen, tired as 
he was. His body was tired, but he had 
kept his brains awake by occasional cups of 
strong coffee. 

It seemed to him that the only way of 
tracing Janet would be to represent him- 
self as a poHce emissary, and thus to gain a 
sight of the visitors' book at the different 
hotels. He did not find much difficulty in 
doing this ; but he visited three of the 
principal inns in Rouen, and searched dili- 
gently through the arrivals of the past 
month, without finding any trace of Miss 



LEEO UTS JO URNEY. Ill 

Wolferston. At the fourth hotel he tried 
a new system. He began to be afraid of 
identifying himself too much in one char- 
acter in Rouen, he might draw the obser- 
vation of the police on him. When he pre 
sented himself at this fourth inn, he thought, 
from its quiet, well-to-do appearance, that 
it was the most probable of any to aflford 
the information he wanted--he merely an- 
nounced himself in search of some friends . 
EngHsh ladies. 

His notion was that if Miss Wolferston 
had followed her sister, she had come 
abroad alone with Thompson, for he had 
heard that English young ladies were far 
more independent than French ones ; but 
stiU he would not commit himself to the 
description " a lady and her maid." 

VOL. ni. 12 



178 ROOKSTONE. 



At this hotel he asked to see the pro- 
prietor himself, and a stout, blue-eyed Nor- 
man came out of a little side room into the 
entrance passage, . 

"English ladies, . we have so many of 
them, monsieur." 

" But these must have been here, there 
is a fortnight ; one of them, a yoimg lady, 
not tall, named Wolferston. I am sure 
that she has been here." 

The Norman's bold bald forehead wrin- 
Ued. 

" English names are neither to be pro- 
nounced nor remembered,'' he said, and 
then he shrugged his shoulders, and added, 
*' but what will you ?" 

Leroux paused. He had made up his 
mind to find traces of Janet here, and the 



LEROUX'S JOURNEY. 179 

man had not positively affirmed that he 
knew nothing about her. 

"Is her name in your book?" he said. 
'' She would of course write that herself." 

" Mais oui," answered the host, with the 
peculiar Norman twang which is so un- 
mistakable. " Monsieur can accompany me 
into the salle, and there it is probable we 
shaU find the book." 

Leroux could hardly restrain his eager- 
ness while the Norman's fat fingers tra- 
velled slowly down the pages ; his mercurial 
Parisian temperament prompted him to 
look for himself, but he thought it might 
create suspicion to do this unasked. 

" Here is an English name . what barba- 
rous names this people has." 

The Norman pointed to Mrs. Dawson's, 

12.2 



180 ROOKSTONE, 



about half-way down the column he had 
been examining. 

Leroux bent down instantly ; it seemed 
to him magical, when just below the name 
to which the Norman pointed, he read that 
of Janet Wolferston. 

" La voil^ ! it is she, that is exactly the 
lady that I seek for. Is she here now ?'' 

" We have no one who has been in the 
house a fortnight ; I do not remember this 
lady, but at that period I think om: visi- 
tors seldom stayed more than a night." 

Leroux's eyes had travelled across the 
page, and he saw that though these names 
were entered as arriving from Paris, the 
place to which they were going was left 
blank. He was as wise as he was before ; 
he had come to Rouen for nothing but the 



LERO UTS JO URNEY. 181 

satisfaction of knowing that Janet had 
really been there. 

The Norman was kind-hearted, spite of 
his reserve, and the blank disappointment 
in Leroux's face touched him. 

" I do not talk to EngHsh ladies, mon- 
sieur," he said, smiling ; " I do not under- 
stand their language, and the way they 
speak French is tiresome to me ; but my 
wife, Madame Le Petit, she speaks Engy 
lish, and she likes to speak it, so she 
always talks all she can to foreigners; I 
will ask her to speak to you of these 
ladies." 

Madame appeared in a well-fitting black 
dress, and a muslin cap trimmed with blue ; 
she was not pretty, but she had an indes- 
cribable charm of manner and appearance 



182 ROOKSTONE, 



which betrayed to Leroux that she came 
from the capital. 

His heart warmed to her at once, and he 
proceeded to question her about Miss 
Wolferston ; he described Janet's appear- 
ance minutely, for Madame Le Petit had 
also shaken her head at the idea that she 
was likely to remember an English name. 

When he came to the description of her 
face, madame's eyes brightened. 

" Mais-oui-oui-oui, very certainly yes, 
monsieur ; I have it now : a face and head 
of cameo . ^is it not so ? . ^and a small per- 
son and blue eyes. Bah ! I have been ex- 
pecting you this long time, monsieur ; but 
I thought you would be English; and, 
pardon, but you are not the person I 
imagined mademoiselle meant." 



LERO UX'S JO URNEY. 183 

In his utter surprise, Leroux had nearly 
denied the possibility that Janet had des- 
cribed him, but he had lived a life of too 
much adventure to be easily thrown off his 
balance. 

'* Mademoiselle has then mentioned me 
to you ?" 

" But yes " . she felt in her pocket . 
" Bon, I must look in my armoire, it will 
be put away there. But mademoiselle gave 
to me a letter for the gentleman which 
should inquire for her." 

A letter ! He contented himself with a 
bow ; while madame trotted up-stairs again. 
He dared not speak, for fear of compro- 
mising in some way the false character he 
was representing. 

Miss Wolferston had expected a friend* 



184 ROOKSTONE. 



and had left a letter for him. Bon ! In 
this letter she would of course have told 
her friend where she was going ; the friend 
had not come. Well, then, the letter was 
for Leroux . ^he had a right to know the 
movements of Miss Wolferston, when he 
had so important a secret to communicate 
to her. 

It was rather disconcerting when madame 
reappeared with a letter in her hand to find 
that she had mastered the address. 

" But this is not for a French gentleman, 
so it is not for you, Monsieur, it is for 
Monsieur Wenlock." 

Leroux's ready wit helped him now ; to 
take his real character would sound more 
probable than any invention. 

You are right, madame, I am not Mon- 



li 



LEROUX'S JOURNEY. 186 

sieur Wenlock, and yet [I came for that 
letter ; I am the servant of Monsieur Wen- 
lock, my master ; he is at Dieppe, and he 
have sent me for Miss Wolferston's letter 
that he may know where he is to join her. 
She is, as you probably have heard, making 
the voyage of La Normandie to find her 
sister. She did not find her sister here, 
did she r 

" No ; but she has demanded if a lady of 
her name have been here . " 

"C'est juste . ^it is that," said Leroux, 
triumphantly ; " her sister is married to 
her cousin, so they are of the same name V 

And then, with a profusion of thanks and 
bows, he put the letter in his pocket, and 
walked away, before the black-eyed hostess 
had half tired of talking to him. 



186 ROOKSTONE. 



" Ang^lique," said her husband, gravely^ 
"hast thou not given up that letter toa 
easUy ?" 

Madame was thinking so herself, but 
then it was quite another matter to own 
to her husband that she had been in the 
wrong, so she shrugged her shoulders 
scornfully. 

" Ma foi ! Pierre ; go to thy accounts^ 
my angel, and leave me to manage my 
affairs." 

Leroux stepped into the nearest cafe, 
and opened the letter. In it, as he ex- 
pected, Janet told Captain Wenlock the 
next place to which she and Mrs. Dawson 
were going. He did not quite imderstand 
the letter, but stUl he made out that Cap- 
tain Wenlock was about to become Miss 



LERO UX'S JO URNEY, 187 

Wolferston's husband ; and it seemed to 
him that several sentences in it showed that 
the writer was very anxious to get back to 
London. 

" I have no time to lose/' he said. 

He went back again to Mantes ; there he 
again found a letter which he appropriated ; 
but at Evreux, the next town to which he 
was directed, the mistress of the hotel was 
a Scotchwoman, and she gave him to un- 
derstand in broad Glasgow accent, which 
sorely puzzled him, that he was not the 
person to whom the letter she had in 
charge was addressed. Here was a di- 
lemma ; however, he must cal culate Janet's 
probable route by the towns she had visited 

thus far. 

For three days and three nights he tra- 



188 ROOKSTONE. 



veiled incessantly. He had the feculty of 
sleeping as soundly in a railway carriage as 
in his bed ; and although some part of the 
way had to be accomplished in a diligence^ 
he managed to sleep even in that jolting 
progress. 

At last he found himself, in the early 
morning, in Caen. He had visited all the 
large towns of Normandy, and several in 
Brittany. Once or twice he had again 
found traces of Janet and her companions, 
but here he was completely baffled. 

Worn out and disappointed, he tiuned 
into an inn to get some refreshment. He 
ate and drank heartily, and when he had 
done this, it seemed to him that he must 
take some repose . he was so utterly over- 
powered with weariness. He sat at the 



LEW UX'S JO URNEY. 18^ 

table dozing, while tlie gargon cleared away 
the remains of his meal; and when the 
man asked him if he should bring coffee, he 
said " Yes," for the excuse of sitting still a 
little longer. He was soon sound asleep. 

Some loud talking roused him. Two 
English people, a lady and gentleman, had 
come into the salle and were seated opposite 
to him, waiting for their breakfast. 

" It is one of the most absurd notions 
that can come into any one's head." 

" But, my dear," said the wife, fondling 
her little plinnp hands, "that is exactly 
why it might come into Janet Wolferston's. 
Mrs. Webb tells me she grows more and 
more eccentric." 

"Well, it beats me." Mr. Buchanan 
settled his collar, and jingled his knife 



190 ROOKSTONE. 



against a wine-glass to hiury breakfast. 
" I think twelve mortal hours from Havre 
to Southampton quite long enough, without 
enduring three hours beforehand in a 
wretched little cockle-shell of a French 
steamer. River passage, indeed ! I know 
what the mouth of a river is; the fresh 
water's uneasy at mixing with the salt, or 
some rubbish, and the consequence is that 
everybody else is made extremely uneasy. 

*^ I should not have recognised Janet if 
Mrs. Dawson had not waved her hand so 
vehemently at me. I was just looking 
round me at the Basin, and all that, and 
then I saw them . " 

Leroux could hardly wait till the round 
mouth had closed, and then with many bows 
he begged to ask Mrs. Buchanan a few 



i> 



LERO UX'S JO URNEY. 191 

questions. All his fatigue had vanislied : 
his veins seemed filled with new fresh 
blood, as he listened to her tidings. 

Miss Wolferston was on her way back to 
England. Mrs. Buchanan had seen her 
leave Caen at nine o'clock by the " Ome " 
steamer, bound for Havre ; but, to his joy, 
Leroux remembered that the steamer for 
Southampton did not start till nearly mid- 
night. If he went to Honfleur by rail, and 
thence on to Le Havre, he could easily be 
in time to intercept Janet's return to South- 
ampton, for he did not believe Miss Wolfer- 
ston would go back to England if she knew 
her sister was still in France. 



192 ROOKSTONE. 



CHAPTER XIV. 



FOUND. 



ItyrRS. DAWSON was tired out. Se- 
cretly she felt very wrathful against 
her companion ; but there was something in 
Janet's earnest, devoted love for her sister, 
in the uncomplaining patience with which 
she bore all these repeated disappointments, 
that subdued her aunt's discontent from 
much outward expression. 

"Although I think she might have 
known her own mind better in respect of 



FOUND. 193 



time ; for as to gowns, I brought but two 
with me . one on, one off . and with no one 
to brush or see to me, Fm ashamed to look 
at myself in the glass with my clothes on, 
they so stand in dust, not to speak of the 
immentionable horrors which, take every 
care you will, gowns . the skirts of them, I 
should say . ^have a habit of contracting in 
travelling abroad. Oh, dear me, and bon- 
net strings ! I might buy new ones, to be 
sure, so I might ; but then Janet is so on 
the high stilts, thinking of nothing all day 
long but Mary, I do believe that if I were 
to ask her to go into a shop to buy bonnet 
strings she would think me trifling and 
lose her opinion of me for ever, and if I had 
the strings I could not sew them on 
without Mitchell to fix them. I wonder 

VOL. III. 13 



194 EOOKSTOj^^K 



what Mitchell will think when she sees 
these ; they are more like haybands than 

ribbon, twisted into wisps, and so &ded, 
that they are as much like dirty white as 
lavender. Oh, dear me, it is a comfort to 
think we shall be at home to-morrow. I 
say, Janet," . she saw her niece approach- 
ing . *^ aren't you glad we came out here ; 
it was just seeing that said in ' Murray ' 
made me propose it, ^Frascati, outside the 
walls on the seashore' . it is so pleasant, 
and the yoimg trees are so lovely, and 
the sea looks beautiful through them, 
doesn't it ? come and sit here, child, the air 
will do you worlds of good." 

They had left Caen that morning, and 
had reached Havre about twelve o'clock, 
and had come out to Frascati at once, as 



FOUND. 195 



Mrs. Dawson declared it impossible to stay- 
in Havre. The weather was warm for the 
end of April, and it was very pleasant to sit 
out in the gardens within sight of the sea. 

" IVe left my tatting in that little room 
where we breakfasted," said Mrs. Dawson ; 
"or, I should say, where we looked at our 
breakfest. Eating after that steamboat 
journey was out of the question. If ever 
I trust myself in such another morsel of a 
boat as that * Ome ' steamer, I deserve to 
go down in it. Pigs and cows, too ! Oh, 
Janet, it seems a week ago ; it was dreadful 
to feel so ill for nothing. I shall let Mary 
know, some day, the list of sufferings I have 
gone through for her . dear me, dear me !" 

Mrs. Dawson went away to find her 
tatting. ^^.^^^ .^^t still looking over the 




196 ROOKSTONE. 



sea; she felt very unhappy. Had she 
done aU she could ? Was she not giving 
up this search because she could no 
longer bear Henry's silence, rather than 
because she had no hope of finding her 
sister ? She did not know. She was ready 
to give up her own life, her own happiness 
entirely, if she could bring Mary's husband 
to confess the truth about the will, and her 
sister's beseeching words had inspired her 
with the conviction that Mary too suspected 
Richard. But though this conviction and 
obedience to her mother's dying words 
had led her on thus earnestly, Henry's 
obstinate silence was very hard to bear. 

For several days after leaving Paris Janet 
had not written to him, in the hope that 
he had returned to London and would 



FOUND. 197 



follow her when he received the note she 
had left for him ; but when day after day 
of her jfiraitless quest passed away, and 
Henry neither came nor wrote, her heart 
grew sadly heavy, and it became very hard 
work to pursue her inquiries for her sister 
with the same zeal with which she had 
begun them. Had she been alone it would 
have been an easier task, but Mrs. Dawson, 
although very kind, was a wearisome com- 
panion from her perpetual questioning. 

Besides this, and the weariness of actual 
fatigue, Janet was heart-sick too from con- 
stant disappointment. Here and there she 
had got a glimmer of hope ; but this had 
soon proved fallacious. She had not found 
decided proof of Mary's presence in any of 
the towns she had visited. And now, as 



198 ROOKSTONE. 



she sat looking out over the sea, she con- 
fessed to herself that she had spent all this 
time in a fruitless search for her sister; 
and meantime she had deeply offended 
Henry. She had written to him twice 
within the last few days, and asked him 
to write to her at Havre ; but they had 
inquired to-day at the post-office without 
success. 

She must go home, she had no right to 
grieve and wound him thus ; and yet in 
every letter she had asked his sanction to 
her journey. 

She had suspected Richard Wolferston 
of fraud ; but it never occurred to her to 
suspect Mrs. Webb's honesty in the matter 
of delivering her own letters to Henry 
Wenlock. The greatest comfort she could 



FOUND. 199 



give herself was, that she might have 
missed his letters on the road. 

Once she thought of writing to Mrs. Webb 

to explain her continued absence and to ask 
for news ; but she could not bring herself to 
confess to her cousin that she had not 
received one letter from Henry since her 
departure. However it was over now, she 
should be in London to-moiTow morning. 

A flock of school-girLs came trooping back 
from the beach ; happy, bright-faced crea- 
tures, who looked as if the genial sunshine, 
flooding the garden and burnishing the 
wide-spreading sea into a sheet of trembling 
gold, was their natural element. 

Janet sighed as they passed her, they 
reminded her of Mary. 

X 

" I have found you at last, mademoiselle." 



200 ROOKSTONE. 



Janet started. Leroux was standing 
beside her, he had come out of the hotel 
while she sat watching the yoiuig girls. 

She was too much surprised to speak, 
and there was no need ; Leroux was eager 
to tell his story. 

"Mademoiselle, I 'ave been following 
you every day, till I 'ave lost my 'ope, and 
I begin to think you were gone to London ; 
but this morning at Caen I hear certain 
news, and I 'ave come as fefit as possible. 
Madame Wolferston 'ave asked me to go 
and bring you to her, and I 'ave promised 
I will do so, and then Mr. Wolferston 
become very angry, and I leave him and 
madame at Mont Dore-les-Bains, which 
is in Auvergne, mademoiselle, so . so fex 
off; and then I have voyaged day and 



FOUND. 201 



night too : I never stop till I find you to 
give you tlie message of madame." 

Janet listened attentively. 

*' Then do you think if we were to leave 
this place at once I should find my sister 
at Mont Dore V 

Leroux looked at her for a moment with 
keen disappointment. 

" Ma foi !" he said to himself ; ^* what 
egotists are these English ! She does not 
say ' Thank you a hundred times, Leroux ;' 
or ' What can I do to recompense the zeal 
and perseverance you have shown?' She 
but asks for her sister ; it is insupportable." 
Then aloud, " Ah, mademoiselle, I do not 
think it ; monsieur will at once guess that 
I shall bear you the message of his wife, 
and he will travel quickly from Auvergne." 



202 ROOKSTONE. 



" Well, then, what is to be done ?" 

Janet did not say this as if she were 
helpless and needed coimseL A look in 
the Frenchman's face told her he had yet 
more to commxmicate. 

Leroux bowed ; it soothed his wounded 
self-love to be appealed to. 

" Mademoiselle will return to Paris, and 
stay there ; and I will go along with her and 
watch the railway station for Auvergne. I 
am sure that Madame Wolferston cannot 
voyage quickly, and I do not think they 
will reach the capital before to-morrow; but 
mademoiselle, if I could be sure of seeing 
you alone and not 'aving some interruption, 
there is a secret of importance I will con 
fide to you." 

It seemed to Janet that already this man 



FOUND. 20a 



had been admitted too freely to tlie confi-^ 
dence both of herself and her sister. She 
answered very stiffly : 

** Anything you have to say can be said 
here ; but if the secret concerns youi* late 
master, I had rather not hear it." 

She looked roimd anxiously for Mrs. 
Dawson, but the poor lady was still in the 
sitting-room seeking her tiny fireigment of 
tatting under a heap of hats and railway 
rugs. Leroux looked for a moment before 
he answered. 

" Mees Wolferston," he said, and a very 
sarcastic smile curved his moustaches, " you 
are a very good young lady indeed, and you 
think aU the world is good like youi-self. 
Bon ! it is pi easant for young ladies to think 
so ; but, mademoiselle, if you think it is ta 



204 ROOKSTONE. 



tell you where is your sister I come all this 
long way, from Auvergne to Paris, from 
Paris to Normandie . and, mademoiselle, if 
I had not this morning found you, I had 
also gone from Normandie to London . 'you 
make a mistake, the most great mistake of 
your life. No, Mees Wolferston, I 'ave 
been insult . ^insult in a manner which is 
insupportable to my honour " . ^he tapped 
his chest vehemently, and drew himself to 
his ftill height . " and the person who 'ave 
insult me is not an honest man as I am, no, 
mademoiselle ; he is an impostor, a thief ; 
he 'ave taken to himself the inheritance of 
others." 

** Good gracious me, Janet, what is all 
this rhodomontade this man is saying T 

Leroux had seen Mrs. Dawson coming 



FOUND. 205 



down the steps of tlie verandah into the 
garden ; but he felt what he was saying far 
too deeply to be stopped by any scruple of 
being overheard. His great fear had been 
that Janet would rise up and go away 
before he ended. He gave her no chance 
of replying to Mrs. Dawson ; he pulled a 
roll of paper out of his pocket, and handed 
it to Miss Wolferston. 

" I make no accusation I cannot prove, 
there is the proof of what I have said." He 
said this rapidly in French, then he folded 
his arms as only a Frenchman can, and 
stood looking at Janet. 

She was very pale, for she had at once 
guessed what it was that she held in her 
hand . the fatal will, which had hastened 
her mother's death ; but, with aU the recol- 



206 ROOKSTONE. 



lections that crowded back on her, she did 
not lose her presence of mind, nor her 
memory of Mr. Painson's words, that 
Richard Wolferston was not a man to be 
driven by any publicity to confess the 
fireiud, if he had committed it. 

'* Indeed," she said. "Aimt Dawson, 
this person has business to settle with 
me. You can follow me," she said to 
Leroux, and she walked quietly along the 
garden to a bench opposite the one on which 
she had been sitting. 



AT CAEN. 207 



CHAPTER XV. 

AT CAEN. 

'^^ /^OULD we not stay here another 
night, Richard ? I feel so weak and 
tired, I am sure it would be best." 

" Impossible, you must not give way, and 
you will soon feel aU right again ; we shall 
not travel for several days after we come to 
our next resting-place. You were all 
anxiety to get to Normandy last week." 

Richard Wolferston spoke harshly ; he 
had not forgiven his wife's last endeavour 



208 ROOKSTONE. 



to see her sister in spite of him ; and yet 
he longed to be at peace with Mary; he 
was more unhappy than she was. 

Mary looked up at him, and her answer 
died away unspoken. How ill and changed 
he was ! In the four days that had passed 
since Leroux left them at Mont Dore, her 
husband had aged years. It seemed to 
her, as she continued to look earnestly at 
him, that something had happened to 
change him very much since he left her 
half an hour ago. 

" Nothing has been impacked,'^ he said, 
and while he spoke he put a few small 
necessaries into the travelling-bag, "and 
therefore we may as well start at once ; you 
will have a much better chance of a good 
room at Caen by arriving there early." 



AT CAEN. 209 



It was a relief to Idm that Mary did not 
answer ; lie thought she was sullen, but he 
had no time to soothe her or give any 
explanation of his sudden haste. 

They had reached Paris late on the pre- 
vious evening, and had lefb their luggage 
at the station. 

Late in the afternoon, when he had gone 
down to give directions about it, he had 
passed Janet in the street. She had not 
seen him, he felt sure of that ; but although 
he had taken the precaution to go to a 
different hotel, it would be unsafe to remain 
in Paris, and he hastened home to Mary, 
and told her he meant to go on to Caen 
that evening. 

It seemed to Richard that as Janet had 

doubtless gone to Normandy in search of 
VOL. m. 14 



210 ROOKSTONE. 



them, she would not be likely to return 
there. He hoped she was merely passing 
through Paris on her way to London. 

He had heard that Caen was a quiet, 
clean city, much less frequented by Eng- 
lish travellers than Rouen, and that it was 
very healthy. 

He thought of this, of everything he 
could snatch at, to keep his mind off the 
one topic, and he succeeded, till they were 
at last fairly on their way to Caen. Then 
he sank back in a comer of the carriage as 
weak as if he had just left a sick room. 
The unexpected shock of seeing Janet's fece 
after all his care and diligence ; the suffocat- 
ing sense of dread with which he remem- 
bered that if her eyes had not been turned 
in another direction she must have seen 



AT CAEN. 2J1 



Mm, must have known of Mary's presence 
in Paris, overpowered him, and made him 
tremble as if an ague fit had passed over 
him ; his hands were cold and death-like ; 
it seemed as if faintness were stealing over 
him. 

He roused himself by a sudden effort, 
slid his hand into his traveUing-bag, and 
puUing out a flask, took a long draught. 

Mary saw him do this, and she shud- 
dered. When first she married Richard, he 
had seemed to her abstemious, but lately 
she had remarked a change; his manner 
had been strangely variable, rousing from 
deep gloom to feverish excitement, and she 
had attributed this to his firequent recourse 
to stimulants. 

He began to recover himself. What a 

14-2 



212 ROOKSTONE. 



coward lie was gi-owing ! Why did he not 
stay and face Janet? And yet he grew 
pale at the thought, and the troubled sus- 
picion came back to his eyes . the suspicion 
that had made Mary so unhappy. 

On that day when she had repeated ta 
him old Kitty's words, spoken in the grassed 
drive, he had gone into the study and had 
looked for the will in the davenport. It 
seemed to him that Mary might have 
learned more from the old woman than she 
had repeated, and that she might share 
Janet's curiosity, and try to see this docu- 
ment. 

He opened the drawer . the will waa 
not there ; he searched for it vainly ; how 
could it have disappeared? The window 
was stUl fast ; he had bolted it on the night 



AT CAEN. 213 



of Janet's visit to tlie study. The key, he 
was certain, had never left his own posses- 
sion ; he examined the locks of both the 
doors, they did not seem to have been tam- 
pered with. He did not know where to 
seek, or whom to suspect. 

Janet must have taken the will, and he 
had hurried away from England to prevent 
any chance of her again trying to see her sis- 
ter. Lately he had suspected Mary herself. 

In his secret heart he believed his wife had 
found the wiU and kept it ; and in this case 
he was safe, so long as he could keep her from 
Janet. If Janet heraelf had taken it, she 
would have put it into Mr. Painson's hands, 
and the old lawyer would have traced him 
by this time. If he could only get possession 
of it once more, he would let the sisters 



214 ROOKSTONE. 



meet ; surely his influence must be stronger 
with Mary than Janet's could ever be, and 
life was becoming insupportable without his 
wife's confiding tenderness. 

They did not reach Caen till late in the 
evening. Mary pleaded fatigue and went 
to bed at once. Richard had strange wild 
dreams, he talked incoherently. Mary was 
too ill to sleep, and she trembled at some of 
his words. What could they mean ? Old 
Kitty's warning came back to her with 
awful distinctness. 

Her husband thought she was still sleep- 
ing when he left the room next morning. 

He was glad of fresh morning sunshine,, 
and pre-occupied as he was, he could not 
help glancing up and down the street, with 
its quaint gabled houses nodding at each 



AT CAEN. 215 



other from opposite sides of tlie way, and 
framing in at one end the double spires of 
William the Conqueror's famous cathedral- 
grave, and at the other the graceful tapering 
flfeche of the beautiful church of St. Pierre. 
And yet, though he was glad of the cool 
refreshing air, no pulse in Richard Wolfer- 
ston quickened with thankfulness for any 
of the beauties of Nature or Art on which 
he gazed. The window opposite was full 
of delicious spring Bowers, but he did not 
notice them. As he walked towards the 
cathedral, here and there in the busy 
thoroughfare he caught glimpses, through 
low stone-browed iron gates, of luxuriant 
gardens, gay with the exquisite apple-blos- 
soms of Normandy. But he was dead, in- 
sensible to all; the beauties of Nature 



216 ROOKSTONE. 



came as his dinner came ; he never 
troubled himself as to the special cause any- 
more than he returned heart-felt thanks 
for daily food and clothing. 

He was discontented with life ; aU he had 
thought most worth having had, like the 
blackberries the child sees on the hedge- 
top, dwindled as soon as reached. Was it 
possession, he asked himself, that tarnished 
everything ? or was it that his idea of hap- 
piness and enjoyment was more extensive 
than the world had power to satisfy ? He 
had come strangely near the truth, and 
something in this last thought pressed so 
strongly on his mind that he had to make 
an effort to get rid of it. 

He walked rapidly back to the inn. 

The entrance passage led into a large 



AT CAEN. 217 



courtyard, round which, ran an open bed- 
room gallery ; a white-capped femme de 
chambre was leaning over the balustrade of 
this as he came in from the street. 

" Monsieur, monsieiu*," she caUed out, 
*' come here at once, you are wanted." 

He rushed up the staircase, and the 
woman went on before him, and opened 
the door of Mary's room. 

She lay on the bed white as death. 

" What is it, my darling ?" he said, vehe- 
mently. "What has happened to you? 
what have you been doing ?" 

He looked roimd ; the landlady and an 
old woman were standing near the bed. 

" Oh, Richard, are you come ?" said Mary, 
faintly.' 

The women went away, the elder one 
warning him to be careftd and quiet. 



218 ROOKSTONE. 



Then he guessed how it was with his- 
wife, and he cursed his own imprudence in 
exposing her to so much fatigue. 

She lay so still, so very white, her eyes 
closed. 

She opened them presently. "I have 
been very ill, darling. Darling" . she tried 
to speak more earnestly . " there is a curse 
upon us, we shall never have a living child. 
Oh, Richard, if you saw the terror I am in 
at the thought of dying here alone, you 
would bring a clergyman to see me." The 
terrified expression in her eyes shocked him, 

" My darling, you are not alone, am not I 

here ?" So helpless a look came on her 
face that he was cut to the heart. Had it 
come to this ! Even Mary shrank from 
what she thought his wickedness. He 



AT CAEN, 21^ 



went on hoarsely, "Yon are not dying, 
Mary ; you cannot die while I hold you close 

to my heart ; my darling, my own love, no 
power shall take you from me. I will never 
speak harshly to you again ; you shall be 
bright and happy as you used to be at 
Rookstone." 

He had clasped her in his arms in a sort 
of despair, for the hue on her face was 
death-like ; she tried to speak again, but 
her words came more faintly. 

" Richard, if you love me you will do 
what I ask," and then her eyes closed. 

For a moment he thought she was dead, 
but he felt that her heart was still beating. 

At the door he foimd the landlady and 
the pitying femme de charabre, and bidding 
them stay beside his wife till his return, he 



220 ROOKSTONE. 



hastened to the street in which he had 
learned the Enghsh chaplain lived. 

He knocked a long time, and at last a 
shrivelled old man opened the door. 

" Monsieur Harper is absent ; he will not 
be back for some days ; he has been very 
ill ; he is gone to TrouviUe." 

Meantime Mary had revived ; she asked 
for her husband, and had been told his 
errand. The news revived her. Could it 
be that Richard was changing . ^that God's 
mercy was so great that she was to be 
granted, after aU her long and wilftd 
estrangement, yet another opportimity of 
leading a new and better life ? Her eyes 
were strained eagerly on the door when her 
husband came iu. 

He saw at once the change for the better 



AT CAEN. 221 



in her looks, and he shrank from what he 
had to tell. 

" Is he coming T she said, eagerly. 

He was obliged to tell her the truth, and 
as she listened the light died out of her 
eyes, the faint tinge of colour fled from 
cheeks and lips, and that look of mysteri- 
ous terror which had alarmed her husband 
returned. 

" It was not to be ; I have put it off too 
long ; I have lived without religion, and I 
must die without any help . I do not know 
how to die." 

Her voice grew louder with her excite- 
ment. The landlady had lefb the bedside 
at Richard's entrance ; she came up to him 
now and touched his arm. 

"Monsieur, you must get a doctor for 



222 ROOKSTONE. 



madame;" and she whispered, "Do you 
know how ill she is ?" 

She did not understand the conversation 
hetween this unhappy pair ; she thought 
Mr. Wolferston had gone to fetch a doctor 
just now, and it seemed to her, instead of 
that, that he was wilfully killing his wife 
by the evident agitation he had caused by 
talking to her. 

Richard was frantic. Why had he told 
Mary the truth ! He might have said the 
clergyman was following him . ^have framed 
any excuse to gain time. 

He stood looking at his wife, powerless 
to speak or move. 

The sharp-witted Frenchwoman saw her 
advantage ; she held him by the arm and 
led him out into the gallery, and told him 



AT CAEN. 223 



where to find the doctor. Then she slipped 
back again into Mary's room and locked the 
door, resolved to keep out as . long as pos- 
sible the imbecile of an Englishman, bent 
on frightening his wife to death. 

Richard hurried down-stairs too over- 
wrought to notice that a vehicle was clat- 
tering over the round stones of the court- 
yard. He was passing out into the street 
and he heard his name called, but he only 
hurried on the faster. It seemed to him 
as if Mary's life and death hung in the 
balance, and that on his speed rested the 
issue. 



224 ROOKSTONE, 



CHAPTER XVL 

THE SHADOW OF DEATH. 

TT was Janet's voice that Richard had 
heard, although he had not recognised it. 

Mary's iUness had been so sudden, and 
the women of the hotel had been so con- 
stantly in her room, that down-stairs it had 
scarcely been rumoured, and when Janet 
asked to be taken at once to her sister the 
garon led the way along the bedroom gal- 
lery, and knocked at the door. 

Janet had waited to let Mrs. Dawson 



TEE SHADOW OF DEATH. 226 

choose her rooms, and left her in them, so 
that nearly a quarter of an hour had elapsed 
since Richard's departure, before she reached 
Mary's bedchamber. 

The landlady's scared face when she 
opened the door frightened her. The 
woman tried to stop her, but Janet pushed 
past her and went up to the bedside. 

" Madame is dead," said the femme de 
chambre, and she wrung her hands, sob- 
bing. 

Mary looked death-hke; the excitement 
had been succeeded by a sort of senseless 
stupor, and she lay there as pale and as 
ghastly as when Richard had first re- 
turned. 

It was a dreadful shock for Janet, but 
she did not lose her presence of mind. 

VOL. III. 15 



226 ROOKSTONE. 



She sent away the sobbing fenune de 
chambre, and then, with the landlady's 
help, she succeeded in restoring her sister' 
to consciousness. 

Maiy showed no surprise at seeing Janet, 
but she signed to her to send the landlady 
away. 

**You must not speak, dearest," Janet 
whispered, " or I shall have to go too." 

There was silence for a while, but a tran- 
quil look had come over the younger sister's 
face. 

" Janet," she whispered, " I shall not get 
better till I have spoken." 

There was such a wistful pleading in her 
eyes that tears sprang into Janet's ; she 
bent down to listen. 

" Janet, I have been very weak and 



THE SHADOW OF DEATH. 227 

wicked ; but it is not only that, it is about 
Eichard I want to speak. I cannot tell 
you all, but he is quite changed. Since my 
first baby died he has never smiled, he is 
so strange . so unhappy; it seems to me 
that he has some dreadful secret ; or is it 
because he has left off loving me ? Tell me 
what I must do, Janet, or I shall die . I 
caonot go on living like this." 

" Hush, dearest ! or you will make 
yourself still more ill." 

And then she did not know what more 
to say. 

Maiy's words brought terrible confirma- 
tion of her own suspicions of Richard ; but 
she could not breathe them to his wife. 

"Have you prayed for Richard?" she 

said, gently. 

15.2 



228 ROOKSTONE. 



Mary shook her head. 

" I dare not, I am too wicked," she said^ 
sadly ; "besides, Janet, do you think it would 
be any use ? . ^the prayers of such as I am 
now could not be heard. Pray for me, 
Janet, and pray for Richard too ; God will 
hear you, for you have not forsaken him.'* 

Tears ran down her pale face. Janet 
was alarmed at this agitation, but her 
sister's imploring eyes constrained her to 
obey. 

She knelt down beside the bed and 
prayed aloud fervently for both her sister 
and her husband. 

Richard had not been able to find the 
doctor at his house ; he was sent from one 
place to another, and finally was obliged to 
be content with a promise that Monsieur 



THE SHADOW OF DEATH. 229 

Bouchard should visit his wife as soon as 
he came home. 

" I will go back to Mary," he thought ; 
" if she is not better I must try and find 
some one else, although this seems the only 
man of any skill here." 

He opened his wife's door very gently ; 
Janet was kneeling by the bed, and he 
heard her words. 

His heart swelled strangely, and tears 
sprang in his eyes, but he dashed them 
away and closed the door again. 

Janet beside Mary at last ! weU, it mat- 
tered little now ; though he could neither 
face Janet nor speak to her. It was a rehef 
to feel that Mary was in safe hands . that 
the responsibility of watching over her no 
longer rested only on him. 



230 ROOKSTONE. 



The look of his wife's pale sad fece was 
more than he could bear. He paced up and 
down the gaUery ; he took neither rest nor 
food ; but he coiild not bring himself to re- 
enter his wife's room. 

Mary was growing weaker. 

At last in the afternoon Dr. Bouchard 
came. He looked a quiet, sensible man^ 
and Janet felt more hopeftd when she saw 

Not hopeful for long ; the doctor looked 
at Mary, felt her pulse, asked a few ques- 
tions, and beckoned Janet to follow him to 
the door. 

" Is that the lady's husband I met on 
the stairs ?" he asked. 

" Yes." 

" Well, then, it is necessary he should 



TEE SHADOW OF DEATH. 231 

be told ; you must tell him, mademoiselle, 
that there is no hope of saving his wife, 
she is dying ; I can do nothing for her." 

The doctor hurried away after he had 
promised, at Janet's earnest request, to 
come again in the evening, and then she 
was lefb to obey his orders. 

Her own sorrow was as nothing before 
the agony she was bid to inflict. For a 
moment it seemed to Janet as if she 
could not carry this news to Mary's husband. 

While she stood at the open door hesi- 
tatingly, Richard appeared again at the end 
of the gallery. 

She went quickly up to him. She never 
knew how she forced herself to the task, 
but in another instant she was holding 
Hichard's unwilling hand between both 



232 ROOKSTONE. 



hers, and repeating to Hm as tenderly and 
gently as she could the doctor's words. 

He broke away from her before she had 
ended, and when in an agony of terror she 
followed him, he was standing beside 
Mary's bed. 

Whether he had agitated his wife by his 
vehemence, or whether her increasing 
weakness had tended to this result, could 
not be known, but Mary sighed deeply,, 
and then sank into so profoimd an in- 

sensibOity that no efforts could revive 
her. 

Richard flung himself down on the sofe. 

in a paroxysm of remorse. 

"I have killed her . ^both her and her 
children, for it is their loss that has broken 
her heart." 



THE SHADO W OF BE A TH. 233 

Janet tried to soothe and quiet him, but 
he turned his fiice away. 

Presently he burst forth again. 

" She is taken away from me to punish 
me; how could such a wretch make her 
happy T 

And then came dead silence . ^the silence 
of suppressed agony, almost as terrible as 
that other silence which Janet trembled 
to think was even now changing into 
death. 

Some few times she tried to moisten 
Mary's lips ; in vain, she was dead to any 
power of movement. 

As the sunlight faded a chilled drearinesa 
fiUed the silent room. 

The hours passed on ; Richard lay mo- 
tionless on the sofa. It had grown dark. 



234 ROOKSTONE. 



and Janet stole across the room to kindle a 
light. 

The movement roused Richard. 

He came up to her and grasped her 
arm. 

" You, at least, are happy ; you have no 
self-reproach,'' he said ; " Janet, if she ever 
wakens again I will tell you all you want 
to know. What value do I set on any- 
thing if I lose her V 

He lefb the room abruptly. His words 
had been so strange and sudden that Janet 
scarcely realised them. She had a Him 
consciousness of some great cause for 
thankfulness, but her heart was too fall of 
deep anxiety for her young sister to com- 
prehend fiilly what it was that Richard 
had said to her. 



THE SHADOW OF DEATH 235 

The trance continued; but for a feint 
pulsation she would have thought that 
Mary had indeed been taken to her Rest. 

There was a light tap at the door, and 
the doctor entered. This time he was far 
longer in examining his patient. 

It seemed to Janet as if her own heart 
stood still till he spoke. He turned round 
sharply towards her, and at the change in 
his face her heart gave a bound that told 
how strongly hope had lingered in it. 

He looked grave but no longer dis- 
turbed. 

" There has been a great change since I 
was here," he said ; " if madame awakens 
it will be, I hope, to live ; but I do not 
mean to affirm positively that she will 
awaken ; that depends on the natural 



236 ROOKSTONE. 



strength of constitution, but I think you 
may hope. I will tell monsieur as I go 
downstairs." 

He said the last words very gently. 
The delicate-looking English girl . for 
fatigue and anxiety had robbed Janet of 
all her bloom . seemed to him fex too 
yoimg and inexperienced to be in charge of 
so serious an iUness, and also of such an 
impracticable brother-in-law. 

"Monsieur will have another patient 
soon," said the landlady, when the doctor 
came out into the gallery again. "The 
husband of madame has not eaten all day . 
he only walks always up and down." 

" It is not what I should have expected 
of an Englishman," the doctor answered, as 
Madame Chuquet dutifully attended him 



THE SHADOW OF DEATH, 237 

to the entrance of the court-yard. " Eng- 
lishmen keep their feelings in their pockets, 
they never let wives or any one else know 
they have any feelings." 

Janet heard the bedroom door open 
softly, but she did not look roimd. 

A horrible dread came to her that if 
Mary's life should be taken Richard might 
fall back again into even a more hopeless 
state. 

" But this must be a temptation," she 
thought. *M am forgetting my darling 
mother's lessons; surely all trials come 
direct from our Heavenly Father, and will 
and must bring us nearer to Him if we give 
ourselves entirely to His guidance," but 
that " if" was full of doubt and trouble. 

The night wore on, sometimes kneeling 



238 ROOKSTONE. 



beside her lifeless sister, tlie tears streamings 
hotly on her clasped hands; sometimes 
bending forward, straining her ears to catch 
the slightest change in the almost imper- 
ceptible breathing ; so the early twihght 
foimd Janet when it crept in and began to 
make things visible in the large, tawdrily- 
furnished room, creeping in its stealthy, 
steady fashion till it reached even the 
comers which had been so fuU of inky 
blackness. Janet's face looked pale and 
worn in the grey cold hght; she got up 
and wrapped a warmer shawl round her, 
for her limbs ached with cold. Then 
almost imconsciously her head sank on 
the pillow beside which she sat, and she 
slept. 

Meanwhile Richard kept his watch. Up 



THE SHADOW OF HEATH. 239 

and down, up and down tlie gallery, long 
after every footfall liad died away in tlie 
deserted streets . after even tlie arrivals by 
the night train had subsided into repose . 
he kept pacing up and down. 

He could not have slept, even if he had 
sought another sleeping-room. The thought 
of life without Mary was the torture gnaw- 
ing at his heart ; a torture that made him 
desperate. Why had this happened ? Why 
was all joy to be taken from his life ? And 
then he said to himself how Httle of real 
happiness there had been in the last few 
weeks ; and the misery had been his making 
. all his. He went on pacing up and 
down. 

Suddenly came back to him, as from 
far-off years, the sweet gentle face of Mary's 



240 ROOKSTONE. 



mother, on that day at Rookstone when 
she had asked him not to try to win her 
daughter's love ; it came back with awful 
impressiveness, and with it thoughts of his 
own past hfe came, dream-Hke, in scattered 
fragments, which mingled as he tried to 
piece them together, in hazy imdefined con- 
ftision, as the lines of a building in a dis- 
solving view merge into the rigging and 
spars of a shipwrecked vessel. His own 
mother came in these memories ; he remem- 
bered beatings from her in childhood, and 
then . ^slight as the memory was, it yet 
remained. a shrinking from her incoherent 
speech and bloated face. Then came 
school-Hfe ; a school where all was stem 
strictness and prying surveillance, where no 
act of himself or his comrades was free and 



THE SHADOW OF DEATH. 241 



uncontrolled, where a boy's word was not 

held sacred. 

He remembered how he had rebelled 
against this constant suspicion and watch- 
fiilness, and then how he had found deceit 
and subservience more usefiil than resist- 
ance. It was in this school he knew 
that he had learned to detest religion 
and what seemed to him its dry, dull, 
harsh ways ; and then again memory 
grew clouded, and he had a confiised 
vision of a long whitewashed room, 
with clusters of young heads bent over 
desks and slates, and texts in large bold 
type at intervals on the waUs. One of 
these texts stood out clearly, and it seemed 
to Richard Wolferston to be branding itself 

on his very heart. He winced under the 
VOL. in. 16 



24S EOOKSTONR 



pain it gave. '' K any man cause one of 
these little ones to offend, it were better 
for him that a mill-stone were cast about 
his neck, and that he were drowned in the 
depths of the sea." 

He quickened his walk np and down; 
the words burned deeper and deeper into 
his soiiL He saw them, and yet they were 
close upon him, whispering into his ears. 



PERPLEXITY. 243 



CHAPTER XVIL 



PERPLEXITY. 



A ND all tliis while Henry Wenlock had 
not received one line from Janet, 
nothing to explain her strange absence and 
silence. 

On his third visit to Vincent Square he 
questioned Mrs. Webb. It was a severe 
mortification to expose to any one so pre- 
disposed to judge harshly, that Janet had 
acted wrongly, but he felt that Mrs. Webb 
might possess some clue, or she might sug- 

16.2 



244 ROOKSTONE. 



gest somethiiig. He had called several times 
at Mrs. Dawson's, and had invariably re- 
ceived the answer, " Mistress is away from 
home . ^is expected home in a few days." 
When he asked where she was travelling 
he got no satisfection. Spite of this he 
sent two letters to Janet, under cover to 
Mrs. Dawson, " to be forwarded," and still 
the sHence went on. 

He found Mrs. Webb alone in the draw- 
ing-room. 

" Have you heard from Janet ? Is she 
coming home ?" 

" I know nothing of Janet's movements." 
Mrs. Webb looked grave, and felt imcom- 
fortable. She could not give up those 
letters to Henry now, they were ten days 
old. 




PERPLEXITY. 245 



" But I suppose site told you what her 
plans were before she started ?" He spoke 
impatiently. 

Mrs. Webb looked aggrieved. "Once 
for all, I reaUy am not answerable for Janet. 
I suppose she has a right to do as she likes 
without consulting you or me either ; you 

know she is safe in Mr. Painson's hands. 

 

The day you left London, or the next, Tm 
sure I forget which, Janet went to Mr. 
Painson, and the next morning, to my sur- 
prise, whHe I was dressing, I saw her 
arrive here in a cab soon after eight o'clock, 
and then I think it was the morning after 
that that she went off to France with Mrs. 
Dawson, and she has not written to me 
since." 

" To France !" exclaimed Wenlock ; " do 



246 ROOKSTONE. 



you mean that Janet has gone abroad with- 
out consulting me, and that you have 
known it, and have not told me T 

It was necessary to him to vent his anger 
on some one, and Mrs. Webb knew this, 
although she affected surprise. " EeaUy," 
she said, stiffly, " I must refiise to enter 
into any discussion on the subject. How 
could I suppose you were ignorant of 
Janet's movements ? You have never 
asked a question about Janet since she 
went away, and you must remember that 
hitherto you have always resented any 
observations I have thought it my duty to 
make on Janet's conduct ; it seems strange 
that you should expect me to force the 
subject on you ; and yet now, because I do 
not at once blame her, you are also dis- 



PERPLEXITY. 247 



pleased. I begin to think lovers are best 
left to settle their own disputes." 

She indulged in her little tittering laugh. 
He made no answer, he did not know what 
to say. 

"But/'. Mrs. Webb had softened her 
voice till it was almost tender . " there may 
be a letter at your lodgings ? Janet might 
have been travelling for the first week or 
so; but within these last few days you 
surely would have heard from her. Shall 
I give you the address of the hotel at 
Paris? That is the only information 
she gave me about her movements. I 
forwarded the letter you sent to that 
hotel." 

Captain Wenlock was still utterly be 
wildered. 



248 BOOKSTONE. 



" But surely Janet told you how long she 
should be away ?" he said. " She must 
have known I could not spare her just now." 

" You mean so near your marriage ?" 
Mrs. Webb looked pityingly at the tall 
handsome man, bent, as she thought, on 
sacrificing himself. '^ I gave you once 
before my opinion on the subject of Janet's 
feelings towards you, and I would rather 
not recur to that subject. I think now aa 
I thought then. So far as I can remember,. 
Janet simply gave me the address of the 
Paris hotel, and said she should not stay 
there very long, but she vouchsafed no 
farther information . reaUy, I have told you 
aU I know." 

This was in answer to the earnest, 
searching look he bent on her, and she 



PERPLEXITY, 249 



could meet it fearlessly, for so fax she was 
speaking the truth. Janet had spoken 
those words ; Paris was the place where 
she hoped to find Mary ; she had not 
counted on going farther when she left 
Vincent Square. 

Wenlock stood thinking a few minutes 
longer. 

" Thank you/' he said, and he shook her 
hand heartily. "You must excuse me, 
I am a sad impatient fellow, I know, but 
there is something about this business 
which I cannot understand. I won't stay, 
thank you ; I'm best alone to-day." 

"Come to-morrow, then," she said, 
smiling ; " come every day, and then if a 
letter comes here from Janet you are sure 
to get it at once." 



260 ROOKSTONE. 



And Henry Wenlock went away. 

Could this woman have been right all 
through? She had not spoken spiteftdly 
just now, she had been disposed to take 
Janet's part against him. Well, he knew 
where to write to Janet now, for if she 
had only given the one address it was 
plain she meant to make Paris her head- 
quarters. 

He would write to her at once ; he had 
been fooled long enough ; he would ask her 
in plain words whether she wished to 
become his wife because she loved him, or 
whether she was only fulfilling her old pro- 
mise from a sense of duty. And if she 
said " Yes " to this last question, what 
would happen ?. he paused, he could not 
answer himself at once. 



PERPLEXITY. 261 



All brightness seemed to fade out of his 
future: all the hopes and plans of so 
many many months clouded suddenly ; but 
he was too angry, too outraged to listen to 

any regrets. Janet was no longer the 
Janet he had loved so dearly. What 
security had he in the love of a woman 
who obstinately refiised him her confidence, 
who had, as he remembered bitterly now, 
the very last time they were together, 
refused to yield her will to his ? He would 
wait the issue of this letter, and if it were 
that which he feared it would be, he would 
try to forget the happiness he had pro- 
mised himself. 

The suspense that followed the acting- 
out of this resolution was not easy to bear. 
It was a relief to pass his evenings in 



252 ROOKSTOSE. 



Yinoent Square, and Louisa deroted heraelT 
more and more to please Mm. So &r as 
her friyolons, shallow nature could love, 
she loved Henry, and the hidden affection 
gave a soft charm to her manner which won 
him greatly. He was more and more mi- 
happy, and sore-hearted, as day after day 
went on and no answer came to his lett^ : 
he had set aU feelings of pride aside in writ- 
ing it ; he had poured out a&esh the story 
of his love to Janet, and asked her if she 
could not and would not return it. Her 
silence seemed to him worse than a de- 
cided refusal would have been. Ah ! she 
had reftised him once, as he well remem- 
bered now : why had he not taken warn- 
ing then ? 

And evening after evening Mrs. Webb 



/ 



PERPLEXITY. 263 



watched the pair at the piano growing 
more and more interested in each other, 
and she said to herself that if matters 
went on as favourably for only a few days 
longer, Janet Wolferston might come home 
in safety. 



2*4 BOOKSTOST^ 



CHAPTER XVm 



TjlXHAUSTED, wonMmt in mmd and 
body, Richard had Iain down at last 
outside Mary's door, and had sank at once 
into a deep, heavy sleep. More than once 
during his lonely pacing up and down the 
gallery he had gently looked into the bed- 
chamber, but he had seen nothing to indi- 
cate that any change had come. 

In giving him this new hope, the doctor 
had cautioned him so severely on the dan- 




AT LAST. 255 



ger of any sudden awakening, that Bicliard 
had not dared to go up to the bedside even 
to look at his wife. 

It was market day in Caen, and there 
were plenty of sounds in the busy street 
before the household of the Hotel St. 
Barbe was stirring: donkey-carts jogging 
over the stones with their many-coloured 
vegetable cargo, rosy onions and brilliant 
orange carrots, and cabbage of many kinds, 
fringed with tufts of herbs ; shriU-voiced 
women in their snowy skull-caps, with 
cockscomb frill of lace a-top . ^a poor sub- 
stitute for the time-honoured Normandy 
caps of their grandmothers . ^were shouting 
" Pommes, mes beUes pommes " as they 
pushed long trays of shrivelled apples along 
the street. 



266 ROOKSTONE. 



Mary's room was at the back of the 
house, so the sounds scarcely reached it ; 
but though Richard lay in the open gal- 
lery, he slept on through all, till the step 
of the gargon de chambre passed him on 
his way down-stairs. He sprang up in 
sudden surprise at finding himself where 
he was, and stared so wildly, that the gar- 
den went down and confided to the stable- 
man . pumping just now in the court- 
yard . ^that the English monsieur was mad. 

Memory soon brought back the past 
night to Richard Wolferston. He was stiff 
and sore from lyiQg out there on the hard 
boards ; but yet he felt less wretched than 
when he had laid himself down on them. 
He bent his head to listen. All was silent 
in the bed-room. He opened the door 



AT LAST. 25: 



gently and went in. Janet's head lay on 
the pillow beside her sister s : his entrance 
had not wakened her. The room was fiill 
of light, and he went softly up to the bed 
and looked at Marj^ Her face was still pale, 
but the painful fixed expression had left it. 
How young and childlike she looked, her 
dimpled lips just parted by her breathing ! 

Thoughts, new and earnest thoughts, 
fiUed his heart as he looked on this fair 
young girl, so pure and sinless, as he told 
himself, when she had absolutely given 
herself to him . for good or evil . which ? 
Again he stood thinking. His face grew 
strangely convulsed; good and evil were 
battling fiercely. As he stood gazing on 
the lovely sleeping face, the eyes opened 
gently, and Mary smiled at him, and 

VOL. lit. 17 



258 ROOKSTONE. 



stretched out her hand towards him. The 
man's whole nature heaved in a mighty 
struggle, and then he feU down on his 
knees by the bed-side, and burst into a 
passion of tears. 

The sound roused Janet. It seemed 
to her . that she was dreaming ; she 
heard Richard's voice . broken, choked 
. but still she could make out what he 
said,. "Thank God ! thank God 1'' 



The doctor had pronounced himself per- 
fectly satisfied with \hQ state of the 
patient ; he stayed beside her until 
Madame Chuquet was installed in Janet's 

place. 

*' If you do not repose yourself, made- 
moiselle, you too will be lQ," the doctor said. 



AT LAST. 259 



Janet left the bed-room, but she was not 
allowed to obey the doctor immediately ; 
she found Richard waiting for her outside 
in the gallery. 

"You know what I promised you," he 
said ; " T am ready to keep my word, but 
it seems to me quite possible that this new 
mood I am in may not last. You had 
better come with me into this room at once, 
I may change my mind in an hour's time." 

There was a bitter unbelief in himself in 
his words ; but it seemed to Janet natural 
that so proud and reserved a man should 
wish to hide his real feelings. He led the 
way into a small sitting-room at the other 
end of the gallery, and drew forward an 
easy-chair for Janet. He did not seat him- 
self, he stood leaning against the white- 

17.2 



260 EOOKSTONE. 



panelled wall, his back to the light, his 
eyes shaded with one hand. 

" I suppose you have heard," he said, 
"why my father was disinherited? and 
why, instead of being brought up at Rook- 
stone, I struggled through all the first part 
of my life an orphan and an outcast ? Of 
course you have been told the story. Pain- 
son would take care to inform you of it. 
My grandfather had much to answer for. 
My father died when I was a boy, and my 
other parent had never been acknowledged 
by my relatives, and therefore could not be 
expected to have any liking for them. I 
grew up with the belief that Rookstone 
was mine by right, and that your father 
kept possession of it, knowing it not to be 
his. He wrote to me asking me to come to 



AT LAST. 261 



England^ and claiming me as his cousin, 
and I accepted his invitation. I was de- 
termined to expose his injustice. I had 
often thought of coming before, but I had 
to support my mother, and there were 
reasons why I did not want to bring her to 
England with me, and I was not rich 
enough to provide for her in California; 
but she had died when Christopher wrote 
to me. Before I ever saw your father I 
went to the family soUcitor's oflSce ; these 
people had always paid me the income 
allowed by my grandfather, so I knew all 
about them. I saw Mr. Painson, and I 
tell you frankly, Janet, that I have never 
been able to forgive the way in which he 
explained to me the reasons for my grand- 
father's conduct. No doubt I irritated him 



262 ROOKSTONE. 



by my suspicions of Christopher, and he did 
not spare my father's memory. I came out 
of the oflSce with the full knowledge of my 
father's errors, and a determined resolution 
to be revenged on Painson for having made 
me acquainted with them. I had disliked 
youi' father because I considered he had 
kept me out of my lawfiil rights, now I 
hated him because I saw no chance of wrest- 
ing Rookstone from him. 

"When I saw your father, my hatred 
died out, it was impossible not to be friends 
with him, but still I did not forgive him 
for occupying my place. 

" I soon made up my mind that Mary 
should be my wife, and if Christy had not 
come in my way, I should never, I think, 
have done that which I did do. I had dis- 



AT LAST. 263 



covered your mother's dislike to my attach- 
ment. It exasperated me, for I had soimded 
your father, and I knew he would not 
oppose it. I had by this time ousted Pain- 
son, and had got the management of the 
property into my own hands. Till then I 
had hardly known how I coveted Rookstone, 
but the longing grew daily. Your father was 
too easy, too generous, to improve the pro- 
perty as I wished. I believe I have a special 
gift that way, and it seemed to me terrible 
that so much opportunity should be wasted. 

"Janet, do you remember one evening 
when I came down by appointment ? It 
was to take your father's instructions about 
liis will." 

He broke off and looked at his listener. 
She had turned very pale ; but she said 



264 ROOKSTONE. 



" Yes " in a firm voice. Her whole soul was 
wrought up to listen. 

" On that evening your mother's manner 
galled me beyond endurance ; when I went 
into the study with Christopher, he asked me 
if he might tell her the story of my father's 
disinheritance, and I refiised. It had always 
been kept secret, and I felt indignant with 
him for wanting to expose this family dis- 
grace to a stranger. My manner annoyed 
him, and when I left Rookstone next morn- 
ing, it seemed to me that his wife had in- 
fected him with her coldness. At dinner, 
too, on the previous evening, I saw that she 
prevented me from sitting beside Mary, and 
he made no effort to help me as he had often 
done before. In the week that followed, the 
devil got the better of me. I dare say. 



AT LAST, 265 



Janet, you think, as your mother thought, 
that because I despise outward religious 
forms and ordinances, I am a thorough un- 
believer . there you are wrong. I don't 

quite know what I believe ; but I have not 
chosen to submit to what seemed to me 
mere human teaching. I dare say I'm not 
much better now, but last night I learned 
one lesson at any rate. Well, at the end 
of a week I came to Rookstone again. The 
last time I walked through the park I had 
almost cursed little Christy for standing 
between me and its possession . on this day 
the very sight of the place tortured me. I 
came into the saloon filled with evil, ranco- 
rous thoughts ; your' mother was sitting 
there alone, and, as if the tempter had set 
her on to do it, she spoke to me about my 



266 ROOKSTONE. 



love for Mary. I believe I began by re- 
proaching her with coldness ; but she went 
on to tell me she disapproved of my attach- 
ment, and wished it ended. Ended ! Just 
as if it was a thing I could take off and put 
by like a glove . ^love that had grown into 
an absorbiQg passion. I had paved the 
way for the fraud I contemplated, but I 
had left myself the possibility of leaving it 
undone. It seemed to me that your 
mother's sentence shut the door on this 
possibility ; I took it as a warrant for what 
I did afterwards. 

" Now listen, Janet, for here is the end. 
The wUl your father instructed me to pre- 
pare was the draft that you, and I believe 
your mother also, found in Christopher's 
study. I read it over to him, and then. 



AT LAST, 267 



when he rose up to ring the bell for the 
servants who came to sign it, I changed it 
for the one by virtue of which I possess 
Rookstone ; which, during that week, the 
devil had put into my head to draw up 
also. 

" Now you see, perhaps, why I told you 
the truth, and could persist in it, when I 
said the signatures were genuine." 

Janet sat still Hstening ; but Richard 
waited for her to speak. 

" Yes, I imderstand," she said at last ; 
"but why did you keep the real draft of 

the will r 

"Why, indeed! I suppose what you 
would call my good angel had not quite left 
me even then. I had a sort of notion that 
I might die before Christy, a.nd die child- 



568 BOOKSTONE. 



less after all ; and in that case I meant him 
to know that his father had not inten- 
tionally disinherited him. The will left 
there told no tales, for it was imsigned ; 
but I kept the study fastened, for in the 
same drawer, if you had looked for it, you 
would have found a letter in my hand- 
writing, with the necessary explanations. 
Just before I left Rookstone the will disap- 
peared ; the letter I have with me." 

He looked at her, she fancied, as if to 
question her, and she answered at once, . 

" The will was brought to me two days 
ago." 

" Ah !" he said ; but he made no further 
comment. 

There was a silence, and then Richard 
sat down and covered his face with his 
hands. 



AT LAST. 269 



The next moment Janet's arms were 
roimd his neck, and he felt her kisses on 
his forehead. 

"You are my own brother now," she 
whispered; "God will comfort and help 
yoa" 

" Don't think I have told you this for 
your sake, or for Christy's." His voice was 
hoarse and broken. " It seemed to me that 
unless I confessed aU, Mary would be 
taken away, and I don't care for life with- 
out her." 



270 MOOKSTONE. 



CHAPTEK XIX. 



PEACE. 



TTENRY WENLOCK had given Janet 
up, or rather he had come sadly to 

the conclusion that she had given him up. 
She had not answered the letter he had 
sent her at the Hotel des Princes. 

" There is no use in any farther humilia- 
tion," he said, bitterly. 

He tried to put the thought of Janet 
from him ; the bitter sorrow and mortifica- 
tion were too much, and yet he could not 



PEACE. 271 



fully realise that this hope in which he had 
so long lived was taken from him, and that 
he must plan his life afresh. 

Mrs. Webb pressed him to come to 
^yincent Sqilare, and he went there evening 
rafter evening, and she soon foimd out that 
he had not heard from Janet. It soothed 
Henry to listen to Louisa's songs, and to 
Louisa's kind, gentle words. It kept him 
from the bitter thought of Janet's felsehood. 

One morning he received a note from 
Mrs. Webb. 

" Will you come earlier than usual to- 
day ?" she wrote ; " come in the afternoon. 
I want specially to see you." 

He went to Vincent Square. Mrs. Webb 
had not come in from her walk, but she 
.would be in directly. 



272 ROOKSTONE. 



Louisa was in the drawing-room reading. 

" I did not know you ever read ;" Wen- 
lock had grown into a brotherly way of 
teazing Louisa. "I thought you only 
practised and did fancy work." 

Listead of the laugh he expected, Louisa 
bent her head over her book and looked 
miserable. 

" What's the matter ?" he went and sat 
down by her. " Come, Louisa, you are not 
aflfronted. I was only joking. I think 
you a " 

But here Louisa hid her face with the 
book and actually sobbed. 

Henry Wenlock was very soft-hearted y 
he bent over the sobbing girl. 

" Come, come, what is it ? What have I 
done to vex you, Louey ?" 



PEACE. 273 



But Louey's sobs increased. He bent 
still closer over her, perplexed and grieved 
to have caused all this agitation. 

The door opened, and Mrs. Webb came 
in. 

She stood still, with a very puzzled look 
on her face. 

" Louisa." 

Mrs. Webb took no notice of Henry 
Wenlock's greeting. 

" Louisa, you had better go upstairs. I 
want to speak to Captain Wenlock." 

Louisa's face was very red indeed, but 
she obeyed and went away. 

Mrs. Webb seated herself, and then she 
looked at Henry Wenlock with a most 
provoking smile. 

He was confused, annoyed, and alto- 
VOL. ni. 18 



274 ROOKSTONE. 



gether upset by the false position in which 
Mrs. Webb's sudden entrance had placed 
him. 

" WeU," she said, in her teazing voice, 
" what can you have been saying to make 
Louey cry, I wonder. I thought, you know, 
you were such excellent friends. '' 

" So we are," and then he stopped. 

Mrs. Webb looked grave. 

*' I have taken no notice," she said, " but 
of course I have seen what has been going 
on, and I think it is time to ask you to ex- 
plain yourself." 

"Explain myself I don't understand you." 

'' KeaUy, Captain Wenlock," Mrs. Webb 
sat stiffly upright, " I should have thought 
my question a very natural one. When a 
man persists in paying regular, almost 



PEA CE. 275 



daily, attentions to a young lady, marked 
attentions too, there is usually only one 
meaning to be attached to his behavioiu*. 
I conclude your engagement with Janet 
Wolferston is over, and, if so, I can see but 
one motive for your visits here ; in any case 
it is plain that you have been trying to win 
my dear child's affections, and it is of course 
quite time that I should ask whether you 
have done so in definite words." 

" I !'' . Henry stood conscience-struck ; he 
asked himself what he had been doing. 
*^I have said nothing of the kind to 
Louisa." 

" Poor dear, loving child !" 

Mrs. Webb put her handkerchief to her 
eyes. 

" You must excuse me, Captain Wen-^ 

18.2 



276 ROOKSTONE. 



lock, if I have seemed premature, but you 
see I am a mother, and a tender mother 
too. I know how deeply Louisa treasures 
up looks and words, and'' . ^her manner 
changed to a sudden sternness . "I can 
only say if you have been trifling with this 
depth of feeling, you are not the person I 
supposed you to be. I thought you the 
soul of honour, CaptaSn Wenlock, or I 
should not have welcomed you here." 

The room went round with Henry ; he 
was truly vexed, discomfited, bewildered 
even by Mrs. WebVs representation of his 
conduct, but he felt on dangerous ground ; 
he resolved not to answer her now. 

" I confess you have surprised me very 
much," he said, " and I must think over all 
you have been saying by myself I believe 



PEACE. 277 



you axe mistaken, but I shall know better 
when I have thought the matter over." 

Mrs. Webb hesitated. If she let him go 
without any decided proposal for Louisa he 

 

might never come back ; she looked at him, 
there was a straightforward determination 
in the yoimg man's face that brought back 
an imcomfortable memory of those letters 
lying in a locked-up drawer. 

"Very well," she said, gravely, "you 
imderstand I have only spoken to fulfil my 
duty as a mother. You will let me hear 
from you as soon as possible, for," she 
twinkled her eye-lashes to keep in some 
imaginary tears, " my darling Louey's happi- 
ness is my most pressing care." 

Henry Wenlock went back to his rooms. 
He sat down before his writing-table, put 



278 ROOKSTONE, 



both elbows on it, plunged his fingers into 
his hair as if to keep it rom straying into 
his brains, and set himself to think out 
this dilemma. 

Dared he hope that Janet could ever be 
his wife? 

He still sometimes caught at a gleam of 
hope ; his letter might have gone astray, 
but it was only a gleam, and it clouded 
over at once, even if she had not heard 
from him, she could have written. 

Yes . the terrible doubt which had first 
tormented him, on the night that Janet 
refused to become his wife, was now a sad 
certainty. Janet had found herself unable 
to love him. Her first feelings for him, 
before he went to India, had been a mere 
girlish liking ; re-union had shown her 



PEACE. 279 



that he was not that which she had, during 
their separation, imagined him to be. Janet 
did not love him, and she had resolved 
not to marry him. 

" But even then," the poor fellow clasped 
his hands together, and bowed his head on 
them, " even if she despises me . even 
if I am altogether unworthy of her love, 
this treatment of me is so utterly unlike 
her. Janet must be strangely changed to 
consider it necessary to run away from me, 
and from every one, to avoid marrying me. 
Janet, as I still believe in her, would not 
have done this ; she would have faced me ; 
she would have told me her changed feel- 
ings ; she would have blamed herself in- 
stead of punishing me. She would not 
have gone away without a word, I am 



280 ROOKSTONE. 



sure she would not ; there must be some- 
thing to account for her silence ; even if 
she could not love me, she would have 
thought of my suffering ; she would have 
blamed herself whoUy." 

He started up impatiently. Why had 
he not seen all this sooner ? He knew it 
was because he had turned angrily from all 
thought . ^he had resolutely refused to fetce 
this sorrow at aU . he had taken every 
means he could to drive reflection away. 

" I cannot believe it, and I will not. K 
Janet has so acted, she must have been 
untrue from the beginning ; I could not have 
been so completely deceived except by a very 
artful woman." 

He walked up and down the room less 
impatiently. Mrs. Webb's home question 



PEACE. 281 



had done him good. The mist of wra,th 
and disappointment which had lately pos- 
sessed him had cleared away. 

"If Janet is not true, then the whole 
world and everything in it, is one great 
falsehood." 

He had sat down at his writing-table to 
think over his note to Mrs. Webb ; but he 
could not please himself with what he wrote. 

" My brain is scarcely clear now . ^to- 
morrow I shall be able to see things as 
they really are." 

He took up his hat ; he could not stay 
indoors brooding over his perplexities. He 
met his landlady on the stairs. 

"A note for you, sir. The lady would 
not give it to the servant. She asked me 
to bring it you myself." . 



282 ROOKSTONE. 



Henry's first thought was of Mrs. Webb ;. 
he opened the note indignantly, then his 
eyes fastened on the writing with ahnost 
dehrious joy. 

He looked at the landlady. 

" The lady is waiting at the door, sir, in 
a carriage. There are two ladies." 

He pushed the woman aside, and then 
sprang down stairs. 

Mrs. Dawson -bent forward from the car- 
riage and began an elaborate invitation; 
but Henry Wenlock did not look at her. 

He helped, almost lifted Janet out. 

" You'll excuse me now, won't you, Mrs. 
Dawson ? I'll only keep Janet half-an-hour, 
and then I'll bring her to Harley Street." 

He told the coachman to drive home, and 
then he took Janet upstairs. 



PEACE. 28a^ 



He asked no questions . ^he had her there 
safe in his arms again. Just then he cared 
for nothing else. 

Janet tried to begin her story, but he 
only stopped her mouth. 

"Now I have you safe, darling, it does 
not matter how I lost you." And then 
they both kept still, in that hush of per* 
feet happiness which some folks never 
know. It was quite half-an-hour before 
they remembered time or Mrs. Dawson. 

Janet's first words of explanation showed 
Mrs. Webb's treachery ; and Henry saw ^ 
the trap that had been set for him. 

"You must not go back to Vincent 
Square," he said ; " I shall expose that 
woman's conduct." 

" I won't go back there, darling. But 



284 ROOKSTONE. 



jou must not say anything to Mrs. Webb. 
We are so happy, why should we torment 
anyone . we need not see her, you know, 
we could not . poor woman, she will be sorry 
some day. Her own conscience will be her 
best punishment,'' said Janet. 

" She deserves punishment, those sort 
of women ought to be pimished." He was 
not satisfied ; it seemed to him that Mrs. 
Webb deserved to be exposed. However 
just then he could not refuse Janet anything. 

" Remember this, darling, next Tuesday I 
claim you just as if this journey had not 
come between ; if the gowns are not ready 
that is no fault of mine . gowns are not 
necessary for happiness, are they, darling? 
FU have no more delays. I shall not be- 
lieve you are mine tiQ we are actually off 
to Scotland." 



PEACE. 285 



And so on the Tuesday they were mar- 
ried. 

They had decided on going to Scotland 
for their marriage journey, and they went 
there. 

Two days after their return Janet was 
told that a person wanted her. 

" I was to say Thompson, ma'am, as the 
name you'd know her best by." 

Janet was puzzled. Her visitor came in 
curtseying and blushing. 

" I said Thompson, ma'am, at least, that 
is to say that you might guess . ^" she 
seemed in a fluttered state of nervousness ; 
" but I've changed it. I am Madame Le- 
roux." The soimd of the name was plainly 
encouraging. She drew herself up and 
looked quiet. 

You don't mean you have married that 



a 



286 ROOKSTONE. 



Frenchman," said Janet hastily, and then 
she stopped. 

" Well, ma'am," the dressmaker bridled, 
^* I always was partial to foreigners, and you 
see, ma'am, I didn't know what to do . 
Alphonse . Monsieur Leroux, I mean, 
wouldn't take no for an answer, for, of 
course. Miss Wolferston . I beg pardon, to 
be sure, I should say Mrs. Wenlock, ma'am, 
. ^we've both changed our names . I didn't 
say yes at once, dear me, no ma'am, 
and then my partner. Miss Briggs, she 
said that * Madame ' would look so well 
on the cards and the door-plate, and help 
the business ; so you see, ma'am, it cut two 
ways," . she smUed, she felt satisfied with 
the way she had made out her case, . 
*^and there was no help for it." 



PEACE. 287 



Mrs. Wenlock smiled too. " I hope you 
will be very happy." She shook hands 
with her old servant. " I think you will 
have a kind husband. I shall not forget 
that Monsieur Leroux was verv kind to me 
when I was in France, and very clever in 
helping me to find Mrs. Wolferston. I don't 
think we should have found her without 
your husband's advice." 

"So he says, ma'am. The truth is he 
.came with me . he would like to pay his 
respects to you, ma'am, if you would allow 
it." 

Leroux came in ; he looked quieter and 
more respectable, Janet thought, but still 
she could hardly help smUing at the con- 
trast between the sharp-eyed, keen-witted 
Frenchman, and placid, middle-aged, dowdy 



288 ROOKSTONE. 



Thompson, though to-day Madame Leroux's 
dowdiness had made an effort at smarten- 
ing, she looked something like a Dorking 
hen with a macaw's feather here and there. 

" Madame " . Monsieur Leroux laid his 
hand upon his heart and bowed . " it 'ave 
come into my mind that you may in some 
moments feel a disquietude that your affairs 
and the affairs of the family of Wolferstone 
should be by me spoken about and 
disclosed. Madame, that is one reason I 
'ave in marrying my so charming wife . 
we are only married a week ago . I say to 
myself, Alphonse Leroux, there is an old 
and very respectable family which have a 
secret, and they do not wish the manner 
and history of this secret to be spoken 
about. Well, madame, I look round and 



PEACE. 289 



I see there is myself/' lie checked the 
names off on his fiit fore-finger, "and 
there is Madame Thompson, and that is 
the whole of the persons who are ac- 
quainted with it. There is perhaps, also, 
Madame Kittie, but then she is very old 
woman, and also she do not, I think, speak 
so good English as easily can be under- 
stood. It seem then to me well for your 
sake, madame " . ^he bowed again to Janet 
. "to give way to the natural inclination 
of my 'eart" . a devoted glance at his wife 
. "and ask Madame Thompson to make 
me 'appy; and therefore I come to tell 
you the result, madame, of my solicitude 
for the family of Wolferston." 

Here he waited for Mrs. Wenlock to. 
speak. 

VOL. TIT. 19 



ROOKSTONE. 



" The secret is over," said Janet, coldly. 
" Mr. Wolferston does not intend to return 
to England. I hope you will make my old 
friend happy, Monsieur Leroux ; she de- 
serves a very good husband." 

" Ah, madame, my life will be devoted 

to her 'appiness." 



" Poor Thompson " . Janet was telling 
her husband of this visit . " I am afimd if 
she had not a comfortable home, and some 
dependence on Chiisty, * that Frenchman 
would not have thought of marrying her." 

Janet never kept another secret from her 
husband, and by the way in which she 
defers to his slightest wish, no one would 
guess she had ever been called "strong- 
minded and self-willed." 



PEACE. 291 



Christy is master of Rookstone now . 
Richard Wolferston at once relinquished 
all right to it. He and Mary live in Ger- 
many, where he holds an appointment. 

They are not rich, and they are as yet 
childless. Richard is still wayward, . 
troubled with stormy doubts, but he is 
changed in all ways for the better. They 
are both more truly happy than when they 
were in possession of Rookstone. 



THE END. 
