MISS MISANTHROPE. 



CHAPTJEK. 1. 

MISS MISANTHROPE. 

THE little towTi of Dukes-Keeton, in one of the more northern 
of the midland counties, had in its older days two great 
claims to consideration. One was a park, the other a sweetmeat. 
The noble family whose name had passed through many generations 
of residence at the place had always left their great park so freely 
open to every one that it came to be like the common property of 
the public ; and the town had grown into fame by the manufacture 
of the sweetmeat which bore its name almost everywhere in the 
track of the meteor-flag of England. But as time went on various 
other places took to manufacturing the sweetmeat so much better, 
and selling it so much more successfully than " Keeton," as the 
town was commonly called, could do, that " Keeton " itself had 
long since retired from the business, and was content to import 
the delicacy, which still bore its own name, in consignments of 
canisters from Manchester or London. During many years the 
heir of the noble family had deserted the park, and had never 
come near it or near England even, and everything that gave the 
town a distinct reason for existence seemed to be passing rapidly 
into tradition. It had lain out of the track of the railway system 
for a long time, and when the railway system at length enclosed 
it in its arms the attention seemed to have come too late. All 
the heat of life appeared to have chilled out of Dukes-Keeton 
in the meantime, and it lay now between two railways almost 
as inanimate and hopeless a lump as the child to whom the Erl- 
king's touch is fatal in his father's arms. 

The park, with its huge palace-hke, barrack-like house, not a 
castle, and too great to be called merely a hall, lies almost im- 
mediately outside the town. From streets and shops the visitor 
passes straightway through the gates of the great enclosure. 

B 



2 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

Every stranger who has seen the house is taken at once to see 
another object of interest. In the centre of the park was a 
broad clear space, made by the felling and removing of every 
tree, until it spread there sharp and hard as a burnt-out 
patch in a forest. Gravel and small shells made the pavement 
of this space, and thus formed a new contrast with the turf, the 
grasses, and the underwood of the park all around. In the 
midst of this open space there rose a large circular building: a 
tower, low in height when the bulk enclosed by its circumference 
was considered, and standing on a great square platform of solid 
masonry with steps on each of its sides. The tower itself reminded 
one of the tomb of Cecilia Metella, or some other of the tombs 
that still stand near Rome. It was, in fact, the mausoleum which 
it had pleased the father of the present owner to have erected for 
himself during his lifetime. He lavished money on it, cared 
nothing for the cost of materials and labour, planned it out 
himself, watched every detail, and stood by the workmen as they 
toiled. Within he had prepared a lordly reception-room for his 
dead body when he should come to die. A superb sarcophagus 
of porphyry, fit to have received the remains of a Csesar, was there. 
When the work was done and all was ready the lonely owner 
visited it every day, unlocked its massive gate, and went in, and 
sat sometimes for hours in his own mausoleum. He was growing 
insane, people thought, in these later days, and they counted on 
his soon becoming an actual madman. So far, however, he 
showed no greater madness than in wasting his money on a 
huge tomb, and wasting so much of his time in visiting it prema- 
turely. The tomb proved a vanity in a double sense. For the 
noble owner was seized with a sudden mania for travel, and 
resolved to go round the world. Somewhere in mid-ocean he 
was attacked by fever, or what alarmed people called the plague, 
and he died, and his body had to be committed without much 
delay or ceremonial to the sea. He had built his monument to 
no purpose. He was never to occupy it. It stood a vast and solid 
gibe at the vanity of its founder. 

Over the great gate through which the mausoleum was entered 
were three heads sculptured in stone. One was that of a man in 
the prime of manhood, with lijjs and eyebrows contracted and 
puckered, forehead wrinkled, and eyes full of anxious strain, all 
telling of care, of pain, of sleepless struggle against difticulty, 
watchfulness to ward off danger. This was life. The next was the 
face of the same man with the eyes closed and the cheeks sunken, 
and the expression of one who had fallen into sleep from pain . 
the struggle and agony gone indeed, but their sliadow still 



MISS MISANTHROPE. 3 

resting on the brows and the lips : and that of course was Death. 
The third piece of carving showed the same face still, but now 
with clear eyes looking broadly and brightly forward, and with 
features all noble, serene, and glad. This was Eternity. These 
three faces were the wonder and admiration of the neighbour- 
hood, and had been for now some years back employed to solve 
the problem of existence for all the little lads and lasses of 
Keeton who might otherwise have failed sometimes to see the 
harmonious purpose working in all things. The sculptor had it 
all his own way, and took care that Life should have the worst 
of it. Keeton was in almost all its conditions a place of rather 
sleepy contentment, and its people could be trusted to take 
just as much of the moral as was good for them, and not to carry 
to extremes the lesson as to the discomfort and dissatisfaction of 
the probationary life-period. Otherwise there might perhaps be 
a chance that impressionable, not to say morbid, persons would 
desire to hurry very rapidly through the dark and anxious vestibule 
of Life in order to get into the broad bright temple of Eternity. 

Some thought like this was passing through the mind of Miss 
Minola Grey, who sat on the steps of the tomb and looked up into 
the faces illustrative of man's struggle and final success. Life had 
long been wearing a hard and difficult appearance to her, and she 
would perhaps have been glad enough sometimes if she could have 
got into the haven of quiet waters which in the minds of so many 
people and in so many symbolic representations is made to stand 
for Eternity. She was a handsome, graceful girl, rather tall, fair- 
haired, with deep blueish-grey eyes which seemed to darken as 
they looked earnestly at any one . eyes which might be described 
in Matthew Arnold's words as " too expressive to be blue, too 
lovely to be grey" . with a broad forehead from which the hair was 
thrown back in disregard of passing fashions. Perhaps it was her 
attitude, as she leaned her chin upon her hand and looked up at 
the mausoleum . perhaps it was the presence of that gloomy 
building itself . that made her face seem like an illustration of 
melancholy. Certainly her face was pale and a little wanting in 
fullness, and the lips were of the sort that one can always think 
of as tremulous with emotion of some kind. This was a beautiful 
summer evening, and all the park around was green, sunny, and 
glad. The little dry, bare spot on which the tomb was built 
seemed like a grey and withering leaf on a bright branch. And 
the figure of the girl was more in keeping with the melancholy 
shadow of the mausoleum than the joyousness of the sun and 
the trees and the whole scene all around. 

Indeed there was a good deal of melancholy in the girl's mind 



4 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

at that moment. She was taking leave of the place : she had come 
to say it a farewell. That park had been her playground, her studio, 
her stage, her world of fancy and romance and poetry since her 
infancy. She had driven her brother as a horse there, and had 
played with him at hunting lions. She had studied landscape drawing 
there from the days when a half staggery stroke with some blotches 
out of it was supposed to represent a tree, and a thing shaped like 
the trade mark on Mr. Bass's beer bottles stood for a mountain. 
As she grew up, she came there to read and to idle and to think. 
There she revelled in all the boundless fancies and extravagant 
ambitions of a clever, half-poetic child. There she was in turn the 
heroine of every book that delighted her, and the heroine of stories 
which had never been put into print. Heroes of surpassing beauty, 
strength, courage, and devotion, had rambled under these trees for 
years with her, nor had the new comer's presence ever been made 
a cause of jealousy or complaint by the one whom his coming dis- 
placed. They were a strange procession of all complexions and 
garbs. Achilles the golden-haired had been with her in his day, 
and so had the melancholy Master of Ravenswood ; and the young 
Djalma, the lover of Adrienne, of the "Juif Errant," forgotten of 
English girls to-day ; and Nello, the proud gondolier lad with the 
sweet voice, who was loved by the mother and the daughter of the 
Aldinis ; and the unnamed youth who went mad for Maud ; and 
Henry Esmond, and Stunning Warrington, and Jane Eyre's 
Rochester, and ever so many else. Each and all of these in turn 
loved her, and was passionately loved by her, and all had done 
gTeat things for her ; and for each she had done far greater things. 
She had made them victorious, crowned them with laurels, died for 
them. It was a peculiarity of her temperament that when she 
read some pathetic story it was not at the tragic passages that 
her tears came. It was not the deaths that touched her most. 
It was when she read of bold and generous things suddenly done, 
of splendid self-sacrifice, of impossible rescue and superhuman 
heroism, that she could not keep down her feelings and was glad 
when only the watching untell-tale trees could see the tears in 
her eyes. 

She had, however, two heroes chief over all the rest whose story 
she found it impossible to keep apart, and whom she blended 
commonly into one odd compound. These were Hamlet and 
Alceste, the " Misanthrope " of ^Nloliere. It was sometimes Alceste 
who offered to be buried quick with OpheHa in the grave ; and it 
was often Hamlet who interjected his scraps of poetic cynicism 
between the pretty and scandalous prattlings of Celimene and her 
petticoaterie. But perhaps Alceste came nearest to the heart of 



MISS MISANTHROPE. 5 

our young maid as she grew up. She said to herself over and over 
again that " C'est n'estimer rien qu'estimer tout le monde." She 
refused "d'un coiur la vaste complaisance qui ne fait de merite 
aucune difference," and declared that " pour le trancher net, I'ami 
du genre huniain n'est point du tout mon fait." No doubt there was 
unconscious or only half conscious affectation in this, as there is in 
the ways of almost all young people who are fond of reading : and 
her way of thinking herself a girl-Alceste would probably have 
vanished with other whims, or been supplanted by fancies of imi- 
tation caught from other models, if everything had gone well with 
her. But several causes conspired as she grew into a woman to make 
her think very seriously that Alceste was not wrong in his general 
estimate of men and their merits. She was intensely fond of her 
mother, and when her mother died her father married again, his 
second wife being a young woman who put him under the most 
absolute control, being not by any means an ill-natured person, 
but only strong-willed, serene, and stupid. Then her brother, to 
whom she Avas devoted, and who was her absolute confidant, went 
away to Canada, declaring he would not stand a stepmother, and 
that as soon as his sister grew old enough to put away domestic 
control he would send for her ; and he soon got married and 
became a prominent member of the Dominion Legislature, and in 
none of his not over-frequent letters said a word about his promise 
to send for her. Now her father was some time dead ; her step- 
mother had married Mr. Saulsbury, an elderly Nonconformist 
minister, who was shocked at all the ways of Alceste's admirer, 
and with whom she could not get on. It would take a very sweet 
and resigned nature to make one who had had these experiences 
absolutely in love with the human race, and especially with men ; 
and Alceste accordmgly became more dear than ever to Miss 
Grey. 

Now she was about to leave the place and to open of her own 
accord a new chapter of life. She had to escape at once from 
the dislike of some and the still less endurable liking of others. 
She was determined to go, and yet as she looked around upon the 
place and all its dear sweet memories filled her, it is no wonder 
if she envied the calmness of the face that symbolised eternal rest. 
At last she broke down and covered her face with her hands and 
gave herself up to tears. 

Her quick ears, however, heard sounds which she knew were 
not those of the rustling woods. She started to her feet and dried 
her eyes hastily. Straight before her now there lay the long broad 
path through the trees which led up to the gate of the mausoleum. 
The air was so exquisitely pure and still that the footfall of a person 



6 M/SS MISANTHROPE. 

approaching could be distinctly heard by the girl although the new- 
comer was yet far away. She could see him, however, and recognise 
nim, and she had no doubt that he had seen her. A thought of 
escape at first occurred to her ; but she gave it up in a moment, for 
she knew that the person approaching had come to seek her, and 
must have seen her before she saw him. So she sat down again 
defiantly and waited. She did not look his way, although he raised 
his hat to her more than once. 

As he comes near we can see that he is a handsome, rather stiff- 
lookmg man, with full formal dark whiskers, clearly cut face, 
and white teeth. His hat is very shiny. He wears a black frock 
coat buttoned across the chest, and dark trousers and dainty little 
boots and grey gloves, and has a diamond pin in his neck-tie. He 
is Mr. Augustus Sheppard, a very considerable person indeed in the 
town. Dukes-Keeton, it should be said, has three classes or 
estates. The noble owners of the park and the guests whom they 
used to bring to visit them in their hospitable days made one estate. 
The upper class of the town made another estate ; and the working 
people and the poor generally made the third. These three classes 
(there were at present only two of them represented in Keeton) were 
divided by barriers which it never occurred to any imagination to 
think of getting over. Mr. Augustus Sheppard was a leading man 
among the townspeople. His father was a solicitor and a land-agent 
of old standing, and Mr. Augustus followed his father's profession, 
and now did by far the greater part of its work. He was a mem- 
ber of the Church of England of course, but he made it part of 
his duty to be on the best terms with the Dissenters, for Keeton 
was growing to be very strong in Dissent of late years. Mr. 
Augustus Sheppard had done a great deal for the mental and other 
improvement of the town. It was he who got up the Mutual 
Improvement Society, and made himself responsible for the rent of 
the hall in which the winter course of lectures, organised by him, 
used to take place ; and he always gave a lecture himself every 
season, and he took the chair very often and introduced other 
lecturers. He always worked most cordially with the Reverend 
Mr. Saulsbury in trying to restrict the number of public-houses, and 
he was one of the few persons whom Mrs. Saulsbury cordially 
admired. He had a word of formal kindness for every one, and 
was never heard to say an ill-natured thing of any one behind his or 
her back. He was vaguely believed to be ambitious of worldly suc- 
cess, but only in a proper and becoming way, and far-seeing people 
looked forward to finding him one day in the House of Commons. 

As he came near tlie mausoleum he raised his hat again, and 
then the girl acknowledged his salute and stood up. 



MISS MISANTHROPE. 7 

" A very lovely evening, Miss Grey." 

" Yes," said Miss Grey, and no more. 

" I have been at your house, Miss Grey, and saw your people ; 
and I heard that possibly you were in the park. I thought perhaps 
you would have been at home. When I saw you last night you 
seemed to believe that you would be at home all the day." This 
was said in a gentle tone of implied reproach. 

" You spoke then of walking in the park, Mr. Sheppard." 

" And I have kept my word, you see," Mr. Sheppard said, not 
observing the implied reason for her change of purpose. 

" Yes, I see it now," she answered, as one who should say " I 
did not count upon it then." 

Of all men else, Minola Grey would have avoided him. She 
knew only too well what he had come for. She would perhaps have 
disliked him for that in any case, but she certainly disliked him on 
his own account. His formal and heavy manners impressed her 
disagreeably, and she liked to say things that puzzled and startled 
him. It was a pleasure to her to throw some paradox or odd 
saying at him and watch his awkward attempts to catch it, and theu 
while he was just on the point of getting at some idea of it to 
bewilder him with some new enigma. To her he seemed to be 
what he was not, simply a sham, a heavy piece of hypocrisy. 
Formalism and ostentatious piety she recognised as part of the 
business of a Nonconformist minister, in whom they were excusable, 
as his grave garb would be, but they seemed insufferably out of 
place when adopted by a layman and a man of the world who 
was still young. 

" I am glad to have found you at last," Mr. Sheppard said, with 
a grave smile. 

" You might have found me at first," Minola said, quoting 
from Artemus Ward, "if you had come a little sooner, Mr. 
Sheppard. I have only lately escaped here." 

" I wish I had known, and I would have come a great deal 
sooner. May I take the liberty of sitting beside you ? " 

" I am going to stand, Mr. Sheppard, but that need not prevent 
you from sitting." 

" I should not think of sitting unless you do. Shall we walk a 
little among the trees ? This is a gloomy spot for a young 
lady." 

" I prefer to stand here for a little, Mr. Sheppard, but don't let 
me keep you from enjoying a walk." 

" Enjoying a walk ? " he said, with a grave smile and solemn 
emphasis. " Enjoying a walk. Miss Grey and without you ? " 

She deUberately avoided meeting the glance with which he was 



8 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

endeavouring to give additional meaning to this polite speech. She 
knew that he had come to make love to her ; and though she was 
longing to have the whole thing done with, as it must be settled 
one way or the other, she detested and dreaded the ordeal, and 
would have put it off if she could. So she did not give any sign 
of having understood or even heard his words, and the opportunity 
for going on with his purpose, which he had hoped to extract, was 
lost for the moment. In truth, Mr. Sheppard was afraid of this 
girl, and she knew it, and liked him none the more for it. 

" I have been studying something with great interest, Mr. 
Sheppard," she began, as if determined to cut him off from his 
chance for the present. " I have made a discovery." 

" Indeed, Miss Grey ? Yes . I saw that you were in deep con- 
templation as I came along, and I wondered within myself what 
could have been the subject of your thoughts." 

She coloured a little and looked suddenly at him, asking herself 
whether he could have seen her tears. His face, however, gave 
no explanation, and she felt assured that he had not seen them. 

" I have found, Mr. Sheppard, that some of the weaknesses 
of men are alive in the insect world." 

" Indeed, Miss Grey ? Some of the affections of men do indeed 
live, we are told, in the insect world. So beautifully ordained is 
everything " 

'' The affectations I meant, not the affections of men, Mr. 
Sheppard. Could you ever have believed that an insect would be 
capable of a deliberate attempt at imposture ? " 

" I should certainly not have looked for anything of the kind, 
Miss Grey. But there is unfortunately so much of evil mixed up 
with all" 

" So there is. I was going to tell you that as I came here and 
passed through the garden my attention was directed . is not that 
the pi^jper way to put it ? " 

"To put it. Miss Grey?" 

" Yes ; my attention was directed to a large, heavy, respectable 
blue-bottle fly. He kept flying from flower to flower and burying 
his stupid head in every one in turn and making a ridiculous noise. 
I watched his movements for a long time. It was evident to the 
meanest understanding that he was trying to attract attention and 
was hoping the eyes of the world were on him. You should have 
seen his pretence at enjoying the flowers and drinking in sweetness 
from them . and he stayed longest on the wrong flowers ! " 

'* Dear me ! Now why did he do that? " 

" Because he didn't know any l)ctLer, and lie was trying to 
make us think he did." 



MISS MISANTHROPE. 9 

" But, Miss Grey . a fly . a blue-bottle ! Now really. how did 
you know what he was thinking of ? " 

" I watched him closely . and I found him out at last. Have 
you not guessed what the meaning of the whole thing was ? " 

" Well, Miss Grey, I can't say that I quite understand it just 
yet ; but I am sure I shall be greatly interested in hearing the 
explanation." 

" It was simply the imposture of a blue-bottle trying to pass 
himself off as a bee ! It was man's aftectation put under the 
microscope ! " 

Mr. Sheppard looked up at her in the hope of catching from 
her face some clear intimation as to whether she was in jest or 
earnest and demeaning himself accordingly. But her eyes were 
cast down, and he could not make out the riddle. Driven by 
desperation, he dashed in, to prevent the possible propounding 
of another before he had time to come to his point. 

" All the professions of men are not affectations, Miss Grey ! 
Oh no : far from it indeed. There are some feelings in our 
breasts which are only too real ! " 

She saw that the declaration was coming now and must be 
confronted. 

" I have long wished for an opportunity of revealing to you 
some of my feelings, Miss Grey, and I hope the chance has now 
arrived. May I speak } " 

" I can't prevent you from speaking, Mr. Sheppard." 

" You will hear me ? " 

He was in such fear of her and so awkward about the terms 
of his declaration of love that he kept clutching at every little straw 
that seemed to give him something to hold on to for a moment's 
rest and respite. 

" I had better hear you, I suppose," she said, with an air of 
profound depression, " if you will go on, Mr. Sheppard. But if 
you would please rr.e, you would stop where you are and say no 
more." 

" You know what I am going to say. Miss Grey . you must have 
known it this long tmie. I have asked your natural guardians and 
advisers, and they encourage me to speak. Oh, Miss Grey . I 
love you . may I hope that I may look forward to the happiness 
of one day making you my wife ? " 

It was all out now, and she was glad. The rest would be easy. 
He looked even then so prosaic and formal that she did not 
believe in any of his professed emotions, and she was therefore 
herself unmoved. 

" No, Mr. Sheppard," she said, looking calmly at him, straight 



lo MTSS MISANTHROPE. 

in the face. " Such a day will never come. Nothing that I have 
seen in life makes me particularly anxious to be married ; and I 
could not marry you." 

He had expected evasion, but not bluntness. He knew well 
enough that the girl did not love him, but he had believed that he 
could persuade her to marry him. Now her point-blank refusal 
completely staggered him. 

" Why not, Miss Grey ? " was all he could say at first. 

"Because, Mr. Sheppard, I really much prefer not to marry 
you." 

" There is not anyone else ? " he asked, his face for the first 
time showing emotion and anger. 

The faint light of a melancholy smile crossed Minola's face. 
He grew more angry. 

" Miss Grey . now, you must tell rne that ! I have a right to 
ask . yes : and your people would expect me to ask. You must 
tell me thai." 

" Well," she said, " if you force me to it, and if you will have 
an answer, I must give you one, Mr. Sheppard. I have a lover 
already, and I mean to keep him." 

Mr. Sheppard was positively shocked by the suddenness and 
coolness of this revelation. He recovered himself, however, and 
took refuge in unbelief 

" Miss Grey, you don't mean it, I know . I can't believe it. 
Why, I have known you and seen you grow up since you were 
a child. Mrs. Saulsbury couldn't but know" 

" Mrs. Saulsbury knows nothing of me : we know nothing of 
each other. I have a lover, Mr. Sheppard, for all that . do you 
want to know his name? " 

" I should like to know his name, certainly," the breathless 
Sheppard stammered out. 

" His name is Alceste" 

" A Frenchman ! " Sheppard was aghast. 

" A Frenchman, truly . a French gentleman . a man of truth 
and courage and spirit and honour and everything good, A man 
who wouldn't tell a lie or do a mean thing, or flatter a silly 
woman, or persecute a very unhappy girl . no, not to save his soul, 
Mr. Sheppard. Do you happen to know any such man ? " 

" No such man lives in Keeton." He was surprised into 
simple earnestness. " At least I don't know of any such man." 

" No ; you and he are not likely to come together and be 
very familiar. Well, Mr. Sheppard, that is the man to whom I am 
engaged, and I mean to keep my engagement. You can tell Mrs. 
Saulsbury if you like." 



MISS MISANTHROPE. n 

" But you haven't told me his other name." 

*' Oh . I don't know his other name." 

" Miss Grey ! Don't know his other name?" 

" No : and I don't thmk he has any other name. He has but 
the one name for me, and I don't want any second." 

" Where does he hve, then. may I ask ? " 

" Oh yes . I may as well tell you all now, since I have told 
you so much. He only lives in a book, Mr. Sheppard ; in 
what you would call a play," she added with contemptuous ex- 
pression. 

" Oh, come now . I thought you were only amusing your- 
self." A smile of reviving satisfaction stole over his face. 
" I'm not much afraid of a rival like that, Miss Grey . if he is my 
only rival." 

" I don't know why you talk of a rival," the young woman 
answered, with a scornful glance at him ; " but I can assure you 
he would be the most dangerous rival a living man could have. 
When I find a man like him, Mr. Sheppard, I hope he will ask me 
to marry him ; indeed, when I find such a man I'll ask him to 
marry me . and if he be the man I take him for he'll refuse me. I 
have told you all the truth now, Mr. Sheppard, and I hope you 
will think I need not say any more." 

" Still I'm not quite without hope that something may be done," 
Mr. Sheppard said. " How if I were to study your hero's ways and 
try to be like him. Miss Grey ? " 

A great brown heavy velvety bee at the moment came booming 
along, his ponderous flight almost level with the ground and not far 
above it. He sailed in and out among the trees and branches, now 
burying himself for a few seconds in some hollow part of a trunk 
and then plodding through air again. 

" Do you think it would be of any use, Mr. Sheppard," she 
calmly asked, " if that honest bee were to study the ways of 
the eagle ? " 

" You are not complimentary, Miss Grey," he said, reddening. 

" No : I don't believe in compliments : I very much prefer truth." 

" Still there are ways of conveying the truth . and of course I 
never professed to be anything very great and heroic " 

He was decidedly hurt now. 

" Mr. Sheppard," she said, in a softer and more appealing tone, 
** I don't want to quarrel with you or with anybody, and please don't 
drive me on to make myself out any worse than I am. I don't care 
about you, and I never could. We never could get on together. I 
don't care for any man . I don't like men at all. I wouldn't marry 
you if you were an emperor. But I don't say anything against you ; 



12 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

at least I wouldn't if you would only let me alone. I am very un- 
happy sometimes . almost always now ; but at least I mean to make 
no one unhappy but myself." 

" That's what comes of books and poetry and solitary walks and 
nonsense ! Why can't you listen to the advice of those who love 
you?" 

She turned upon him angrily again. 

*' Well, I am not speaking of myself now, but of your . 
your people, who only desire your good. Mr. Saulsbury, Mrs. 
Saulsbury " 

" Once for all, Mr. Sheppard, I shall not take their advice ; and 
if you would have me think of you with any kindness at all, any 
memory not disagreeable and . and detestable, you will not talk to 
me of their advice. Even if I had been inclined to care for you, 
Mr. Sheppard, you took a wrong way when you came in their name 
and talked of their authority. Next time you ask a girl to marry 
you, Mr. Sheppard, do it in your own name." 

He caught eagerly at the kind of negative hope that seemed 
to be held out to him. 

"If that's an objection," he began, "I assure you that I came 
quite of my own motion, and I am the last man in the world to 
endeavour to bring any unfair means to bear. Of course it is not 
as if they were your own parents, and 1 can quite understand how 
a young lady must feel " 

" I don't know much of how young ladies feel," Minola said 
quietly, " but I know how I feel, Mr. Sheppard, and you know it 
too. Take my last word. I'll never marry you. You only waste 
your time, and perhaps the time of somebody else as well . some 
good girl, Mr. Sheppard, who would be glad to marry you and 
whom you will be quite ready to make love to the day after to- 
morrow." 

Her heart was hardened against him now, for she thought him 
mean and craven and unmanly. Perhaps according to her familiar 
creed she ought rather to have thought him manly, meanness being 
man's proper attribute. She did not beHeve in the genuineness of 
his love, and in any case no thought was more odious to her than 
that of a man pressing a girl to marry him if she did not love him 
and was not ready to meet him half way. 

There was a curious contrast between these two figures as they 
stood on the steps of that great empty tomb. The contrast was all 
the more singular and even the more striking because the two might 
easily have been described in such terms as would seem to suggest 
no contrast. If they were described as a handsome young man 
(for he was scarcely more than thirty) and a handsome young woman 



THE EVE OF LIBERTY. 13 

the description would be correct. He was rather tall, slie was 
rather tall ; but he was formal, severe, respectable, and absolutely 
unpicturesque . she was picturesque in every motion. His well- 
made clothes sat stiffly on him, and the first idea he conveyed was 
that he was carefully dressed. Even a woman would not have 
thought, at the first glance at least, of how she was dressed. She 
only impressed one with a sense of the presence of graceful and 
especially emotional womanhood. The longer one looked at the 
two the deeper the contrast seemed to become. Both, for example, 
had rather thin lips ; but his were rigid, precise, and seeming to 
part with a certain deliberation and even difficulty. Hers appeared, 
even when she was silent, to be tremulous with expression. After 
a while it would have seemed to an observer, if any observing eye 
were there, that no power on earth could have brought these two 
into companionship. 

" I won't take this as your final answer," he said, after one or 
two unsuccessful efforts to speak. " You will consider this again, 
and give it some serious reflection." 

She only shook her head, and once more seated herself on the 
steps of the monument, as if to suggest that now the interview was 
over. 

" You are not walking homeward ? " he asked. 

"I am staying here for awhile." 

He bade her good morning and walked slowly away. A rejected 
lover looks to gi-eat disadvantage when he has to walk away. He 
ought to leap on the back of a horse, and spur him fiercely and 
gallop off ; or the curtain ought to fall and so finish up with him. 
Otherwise, even the most heroic figure has something of the look 
ot one sneaking off like a dog told imperatively to " go home." 
Mr. Sheppard felt very uncomfortable at the thought that he probably 
did not seem dignified in the eyes of Miss Grey. He once glanced 
back uneasily, but perhaps it was hardly a relief to find that she 
was not looking in his direction. 



CHAPTER II. 

THE EVE OF LIBERTY. 

Miss Grey remained in the park until the sun had gone down, 
and the stars, with their faint light, seemed as she moved home- 
ward to be like bright sparkles entangled among the higher branches 



14 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

of the trees. She had a great deal to think of, and she troubled 
herself little about the mental depression of her rejected lover. 
All the purpose of her life was now summed up in a resolve to get 
away from Keeton and to bury herself in London. 

She knew that any opposition to her proposal on the part of 
those who were still supposed to be her guardians would only 
be founded on an objection to it as something unwomanly, 
venturous, and revolutionary, a.nd not by any means the result of 
any grief for her going away. Ever since her mother's death and 
her father's second marriage she had only chafed at existence, 
and found those around her disagreeable, and, no doubt, made 
herself disagreeable to them. She had ceased to feel any respect 
for her father when he married again, and he knew it and became 
cold and constrained with her. Only just before his death had 
there been anything like a revival of their affection for each other. 
He had been a man of some substance and authority in his town, 
had built houses, and got together property, and he left his 
daughter a not inconsiderable annuity as a charge upon his pro- 
perty, and placed her under the guardianship of the elderly and 
respectable Nonconformist minister, who, as luck would have it, 
afterwards married his young widow. Minola had seen so many 
marriages during her short experience, and had disliked two at 
least of them so thoroughly, that she was much inclined to say 
with one of her heroes that there should be no more of them. 
For a long time she had made up her mind that when she came of 
age she would go to London and live there. She still wanted a 
few months of the time of independence, but the manner in which 
Mr. Augustus Sheppard was pressed upon her by himself and 
others made her resolve to anticipate the course of the seasons a 
little, and go away at once. In London she made up her mind 
that she would lead a life of enchantment : of delightful and 
semi-savage solitude, in the midst of the crowd ; of wild inde- 
pendence and scorn of all the ways of men, with books at her 
command, with the art galleries and museums, of which she had 
read so much, always within easy reach, and the streets which 
were alive for her with such sweet and dear associations all around 
her. 

Miss Grey knew I^ondon well. She had never yet set foot in 
it, or been anywhere out of her native town ; but she had studied 
London as a general may study the map of some country which 
he expects one day to invade. Many and many a night, when all 
in the house but she were fast asleep, she had had the map of 
London s[)read out before her, and had puzzled her way through 
endless iniricucies of its streets. Few women of her age, or of 



THE EVE OF LIBERTY. 15 

any age, actually living in the metropolis, had anything like the 
knowledge of its districts and its principal streets that she had. 
She felt in anticipation the pride and delight of being able to go 
whither she would about London without having to ask her way of 
anyone. Some particular association identified every place in her 
mind. The living and the dead, the romantic and the real, 
history and fiction, all combined to supply her with labels of 
association, which she might mentally put upon every quarter and 
district, and almost upon every street which had a name worth 
knowing. As we all know Venice before we have seen it, and 
when we get there can recognise everything we want to see 
without need of guide to name it for us, so Minola Grey knew 
London. It is no wonder now that her mind was in a perturbed 
condition. She was going to leave the place in which so far all 
her life, literally, had been passed. She was going to live in that 
other place which had for years been her dream, her study, her 
self-appointed destiny. She was going to pass away for ever from 
uncongenial and odious companionship, and to live a life of sweet, 
proud, lonely independence. 

The loneliness, however, was not to be literal and absolute. In 
all romantic adventures there is companionship. The knight has 
his squire, Rosalind has her Celia. Minola Grey was to have her 
companion in her great enterprise. It had not occurred to her 
to think about the inconvenience or oddness of a girl living 
absolutely alone in London, but without any forethought on 
her part the kindly destinies had provided her with a comrade. 
Having lingered long in the park and turned back again and 
again for another view of some favourite spot, having gathered 
many a leaf and flower for remembrance, and having looked up 
many times with throbbing heart at the white, trembling stars that 
would shine upon her soon in London, Miss Grey at last made up 
her mind and passed resolutely out at the great gate and went to 
seek this companion. She was glad to leave the park now in any 
case, for in the fine evenings of summer and autumn it was the 
custom of Keeton people to make it their promenade. All the 
engaged couples of the place would soon be seen there under the 
trees. When a lad and lass were seen to walk boldly and openly 
together of evenings in that park, and to pass and repass their 
neighbours without effort at avoiding such encounters, it was as 
well kno\vn that they were engaged as though the fact had been 
proclaimed by the town-crier. A jury of K eeton folk would have 
assumed a promise of marriage and proceeded to award damages 
for its breach if it were proved that a young man had walked 
openly for any three evenings in the park with a girl whom he 



ifi MISS MISANTHROPE. 

afterwards declined to make his wife. Minola did not care co 
meet any of the joyous couples or their friends, and even already 
the _ twitter of voices and the titter of feminine laughter were 
beginning to make themselves heard among the darkling paths 
and across the broad green lanes of the park. 

From the gates of the park one passed, as has been said already, 
almost directly into the town. The town itself was divided in 
twam by a river, the river spanned by a bridge which had a certain 
fame from the fact of its having been the scene of a brave stand 
and a terrible slaughter during the Civil Wars after Charles the 
First had set up his standard at Nottingham. To be sure there 
was not much left of the genuine old bridge on which the fight 
was fought, nor did the broad, flat, handsome, and altogether 
modern structure bear much resemblance to the sort of bridge 
which might have crossed a river in the days of the Cavaliers. 
Residents of Keeton always, however, boasted of the fact that one 
of the arches of the bridge was just the same underneath as it had 
always been, and insisted on bringing the stranger down by devious 
and grassy paths to the river's edge in order that he might see for 
himself the old stones still holding together which had perhaps 
been shaken by the tramp of Rupert's troopers. On the park side 
of the bridge lay the genteeller and more pretentious houses, the 
semi-detached villas and lodges and crescents of Keeton ; and 
there, too, were the humbler cottages. On the other side of the 
bridge were the business streets and the clustering shops, most of 
them old-fashioned and dark, with low beetling fronts and narrow 
panes in the windows, and only here and there a showy and modern 
establishment, with its stucco front and its plate glass. The streets 
were all so narrow that they seemed as if they must be only pas- 
sages leading to broader thoroughfares. The stranger walked on 
and on, thinking he was coming to the actual towTi of Dukes- 
Keeton, until he walked out at the other side and found he had left 
it behind him. 

Minola Grey crossed the bridge, although her own home lay 
on the side nearest the park, and made her way through the 
narrow streets. She glanced with a shudder at one formal official- 
looking house of dark brick which she had to pass, and the door 
of which bore a huge brass plate with the words " Sheppard and 
Sheppard, Solicitors and Land Agents." Another expression of 
dislike or pain crossed her handsome, pale, and emotional face 
when she passed a little lane, closed at the farther end by the 
heavy sombre front of a chapel, for it was there that she had. 
even still to pass some trying unsympathetic hours of the Sunday 
listening to a preacher Avliose elouucnce was rather too familiar 



THE EVE OF LIBERTY. 17 

to her all the week. At length she passed tlie front of a large 
building of light-coloured stone, with a Greek portico and row 
of pillars and high flight of steps, and which to the eye of any 
intelligent mortal had " Court House " written on its very face. 
Miss Grey went on and passed its front entrance, then turning 
down a narrow street of which the building itself formed one 
side, she came to a little open door, went in, ran liglitly up a flight 
of stone steps, and found herself in dun and dimly lighted corridors 
of stone. 

A ray or two of the ev-ening light still flickered through the 
small windows of the roof. But for this all would seemingly have 
been dark. Minola's footfall echoed through the passages. The 
place appeared ghostly and sad, and the presence of youth, grace, 
and energetic womanhood was strangely out of keeping with all 
around. The whole expression and manner of Miss Grey brightened, 
however, as she passed along these gaunt and echoing corridors. 
In the sunlight of the park there seemed something melancholy in 
the face of the girl which was not in accord with her years, her 
figure, and her deep soft eyes. Now in this dismal old passage of 
damp resounding stone she seemed so joyous that her passing 
along might have been that of another Pippa. The place was not 
very unlike a prison, and an observer might have been pleased to 
think that, as the light step of the girl passed the door of each 
cell and the flutter of her garments was faintly heard, some little 
gleam of hope, some gentle memory', some breath of forgotten 
woods and fields, some softening inspiration of human love, was 
borne in to every imprisoned heart. But this was no prison : 
only the Court House where prisoners were tried ; and its rooms, 
occupied in the day by judges, lawyers, policemen, public, suitors, 
and culprits, were now locked, empty, and silent. 

Minola went on, singing to herself as she went, her song grow- 
ing louder and bolder until at last it thrilled finely up to the stone 
roofs of the grim halls and corridors. For Minola was of that 
temperament to which resolve of any kind soon brings the excite- 
ment of high spirits, and she sang now out of sheer courage and 
purpose. 

Presently she stopped at a low, dark, oaken door vshich looked 
as if it might admit to some dingy lumber-room or closet ; and 
this door opened instantly and she was in presence of a pretty 
and cheerful little picture. The side of the building where the 
room was set looked upon the broadest and clearest space in the 
town, and through the open window could be seen distinctly the 
glassy grey of the quiet river and even the trees of the park, a 
dark mass beneath the pale summer sky. Although the room was 

c 



1 8 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

lit only by the twilight, in which the latest lingering reflection ot 
the sunset still lived, it looked bright to the girl who had come 
from the heavy dusk and gloom of the corridors with their roof- 
windows and their rows of grim doors. A room ought to look 
bright, too, when the visitor on just appearing on its threshold is 
rushed upon and clasped and kissed and greeted as " You dear 
dear darling." Such a welcome met Miss Grey, and then she was 
instantly drawn into the room, the door of which was closed behind 
her. 

The occupant of the room who thus welcomed Minola was a 
woman not far short probably of forty years of age. She was 
short, she was decidedly growing fat, she had a face which ought 
from its outlines and its colour to be rather humorous and mirth- 
ful than otherwise, and a pair of very fine, deep, and consequently 
somewhat melancholy eyes. These eyes were the only beauty of 
Miss Mary Blanchet's face. She had not good sight, for all their 
brightness. When any one talked with her at some little distance 
across a room, or even across a broad table, he could easily see by 
the irresponsive look of the eyes . the eyes which never quite found 
a common focus with his even during the most animated inter- 
change of thought . that Miss Blanchet had short sight. But 
Miss Blanchet always frankly and firmly declined to put on 
spectacles. " I have only my eyes to boast of, my dear," she said 
to all her female advisers, " and I am not going to cover them 
with ugly spectacles, you may be sure." Hers was a life of 
the simplest vanity, the most innocent affectation. Her eyes 
had driven her into poetry, love, and disappointment. She was 
understood to have loved very deeply and to have been deserted. 
None of her friends could quite remember the lover, but every one 
said that no doubt there must have been such a person. Miss 
Blanchet never actually spoke of him, but she somehow suggested 
his memory. 

Miss Blanchet was a poetess. She had published by subscrip- 
tion a volume of verses, which was favourably noticed in the local 
newspapers and of which she sent a copy to the Queen, whereof 
Her Majesty had been kindly pleased to accept. Thus the poetess 
became a celebrity and a sort of public character in Dukes- 
Keeton, and when her father died it was felt that the town ought 
to do something for one who had done so much for it. It made 
her custodian of the Court House, entrusted with the charge of 
seeing that it was kept clean, ventilated, water-besprinkled, that 
when assizes came on the judges' rooms were fittingly adorned and 
that bouquets of flowers were placed every morning on the bench 
behind which they sat. This place Miss Blanchet had held for 



THE EVE OF LIBERTY. 19 

many years. The rising generation had forgotten all about her 
poetry, and indeed as she seldom went out of her own little domain 
had for the most part forgotten her existence. 

When Minola Grey was a little girl her mother was one of Miss 
Mary Blanchet's chiefest patronesses. It kvas in great measure by 
the influence of Minola's father that Miss Blanchet obtained hei 
place in the Court House. Little Minola thought her a great 
poetess and a remarkably beautiful woman, and accepted some- 
how the impression that she had a roaiantic and mysterious love 
history. It was a rare delight for her to be taken to spend an 
evening with Miss Blanchet, to drink tea in her pretty and well- 
kept little room, to walk with her through the stone passages of 
the Court House, and hear her repeat her poems. As Minola grew 
up she outgrew the poems, but the afi'ection survived; and after her 
mother's death she found no congenial or sympathetic friend any- 
where in Keeton but Mary Blanchet. The relationship between 
the two curiously changed. The tall girl of twenty became the 
leader, the heroine, the queen ; and Mary Blanchet, sensible little 
woman enough in many ways, would have turned African explorer 
or joined in a rebellion of women against men if Miss Grey had 
given her the word of command. 

" I know your mind is made up, dear, now that you have 
come," Miss Blanchet said when the first rapture of greeting was 
over. 

Minola took off her hat and threw it on the little sofa with the 
air of one who feels thoroughly at home. It may be remarked as 
characteristic of this young woman that in going towards the sofa 
she had to pass the chimney-piece with its mirror, and that she did 
not even cast a glance at her own image in the glass. 

"Mary," she asked gravely, " am I a man and a brother that 
you expect me to change my mind ? You are not repenting, I 
hope?" 

" Oh no, my dear. I have all the advantages, you know. I am 
so tired of this place and the work . dear me ! " 

" And I hate to see you at such work. You might almost as 
well be a servant. Years ago I made up my mind to take you out 
of this wretched place as soon as I should be of age and my own 
mistress." 

" Well, I have sent in my resignation, and I am free. But I 
am a little afraid about you. You have been used to every 
luxury . and the carriage . and all that." 

" One of my ambitions is to drive in a hansom cab. Another 
is to have a latch-key. Both will soon be gratified. I am only 
sorry for one thing." 

c 2 



20 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

" What is that, dear ? " 

" That we can't be Rosahnd and Celia ; that I can't put on 
man's clothes and liberty." 

" But you don't Uke men . you always want to avoid them." 

Miss Grey said nothing in defence of her own consistency. 
She was thinking that if she had been a man she would have 
been spared the vexation of having to listen to Mr. Augustus 
Sheppard's proposals. 

" I suspect," Miss Blanchet said, " that people will say we 
are more like Don Quixote and Sancho Panza." 

" Which of us the Sancho?" 

" Oh, I, of course ; I am the faithful follower." 

" You . poor little poetess, full of dreams and hopes and 
unselfishness ! Why, I shall have to see that you get something 
to eat at tolerably regular intervals." 

" How happy we shall be ! And I shall be able to complete 
my poem ! Do you know, Minola," she said, confidentially, " I do 
believe I shall be able to make a career in London. I do indeed ! 
The miserable details of daily life here pressed me down, down," 
and she pressed her own hand upon her forehead to illustrate the 
idea. " There in freedom and quiet I do think I shall be able 
to prove to the world that I am worth a hearing ! " 

This was a tender subject with Miss Grey. She could not bear 
to disturb by a word the harmless illusion of her friend, and yet 
the almost fierce truthfulness of her nature would not allow 
her to murmur a sentence of unmeaning flattery. 

" One word, Mary," she said ; " if you grow famous, no 
marrying . mind ! " 

Little Miss Blanchet laughed and then grew sad, and cast her 
eyes down. 

" Who would ask me to marry, my dearest? And even if they 
did the buried past would come out of the gTave . and " . 

She slightly raised both hands in deprecation of this mournful 
resurrection. Minola changed the subject and said : 

" Well, I have all to go through with my people yet." 

"'J'hey won't prevent you?" Miss Blanchet asked anxiously. 

" They can't. In a few montlis 1 should be my own mistress ; 
and what is the use of waiting? Besides, they don't really care . 
except for the sake of showing authority and proving to girls 
tliat they ought to be contented slaves. They know now that I 
am no slave. I do believe my esteemed stepfather . or step- 
stepfather, if there is such a word . would consent to emancipate 
me if he might do so with the proper ceremonial . the slap on 
the check." 



THE EVE OF LIBERTY. 21 

The allusion was lost on Miss Blanchet. 

" Mr. Saulsbury is a stern man indeed," she said, "but very 
good ; that we must admit." 

" All good men, it seems, are hard, and all soft men are bad."^ 

"What of Mr. Augustus Sheppard?" Miss Blanchet asked 
gently. " How will he take your going away ? " 

" I have not asked him, Mary. But I can tell you if you care 
to know. He will take it with perfect composure. He has about 
as much capacity for foolish affection as your hearthbroom there." 

" I think you are mistaken, Minola . I do indeed. I think 
that man is really " 

"Well. Is really what?" 

" You won't be angry if I say it." 

Minola seemed as if she were going to be angry, but she looked 
into the little poetess's kindly wistful eyes, and broke into a laugh. 

" I couldn't be angry with you, Mary, if I had ten times my 
capacity for anger . and that would be a goodly quantity ! Well, 
what is Mr. Sheppard really . as you were going to say?" 

" Really in love with you, dear." 

" You kind and believing little poetess . full of faith in simple 
true-love and all the rest of it ! Mr. Sheppard likes what he con- 
siders a respectable connection in Keeton. Failing in one chance, 
he will find another, and there is an end of that." 

" I don't think so," Miss Blanchet said gravely. " Well, we 
shall see." 

" We shall not see hi77i any more. We shall live a glorious, 
lonely independent life. I shall study humanity from some lofty 
garret window among the stars. London shall be my bark and my 
bride, as the old songs about the Rovers used to say. All the weak- 
nesses of humanity shall reveal themselves to me in the people 
next door to us and over the way. I'll study in the British 
Museum ! I'll spend hours in the National Gallery ! I'll lie under 
the trees in Epping Forest ! I think I'll go to the gallery of a 
theatre! Liberie, liberie ch'erieV And Miss Grey proceeded to 
chant from the " Marseillaise " with splendid energy as she walked 
up and down the room with clasped hands of mock-heroic 
passion. 

" You said something about a man and a brother just now, 
dear," Miss Blanchet gently interposed. " I have something to 
tell you about a man and a brother. My brother is back again in 
London." 

Miss Blanchet made this communication in the tone of one 
who is trying to believe that the news will be welcome. 

" Your brother ? He has come back?" Miss Grey did not 



22 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

like to add " I am so sorry," but that was exactly what she would 
have said if she had spoken her mind. 

" Yes, my dear . quite reformed and as steady as can be, and 
going to make a great name in London. Oh, you may trust to 
him this time, you may indeed." 

Miss Grey's handsome and only too expressive features showed 
signs of profound dissatisfaction. 

" I couldn't help telling him that we were going to live in 
London . one's brother, you know." 

" Yes, one's brother," Miss Grey said, with sarcastic emphasis. 
"They are an affectionate race, these brothers ! Then he knows 
all about our expedition ? Has he been here, Mary?" 

" Oh, no, dear ; but he wrote to me . such beautiful letters ! 
Perhaps you would like to read them ? " 

Miss Grey was silent, and was evidently fighting some battle 
with herself At last she said . 

" Well, Mary dear, it can't be helped, and I dare say he won't 
trouble to come very often to see 2{s. But I hope he will come 
as often as you like, for you might be terribly lonely. I don't 
care to know anybody. I mean to study human nature, not to 
know people." 

" But you have some friends in London, and you are going 
to see them." 

" Oh . Lucy Money ; yes. She was at school with me, and we 
used to be fond of each other. I think of calling to see her, but 
she may be changed ever so much, and perhaps we shan't get on 
together at all. Her father has become a sort of great man 
in London, I believe . I don't know how. They won't trouble 
us much, I dare say." 

The friends then sat and talked for a short time about their 
project. It is curious to observe that though they were such 
devoted friends they looked on their joint purpose with very dif- 
ferent eyes. The young woman, with her beauty, her spirit, and 
her talents, was absolutely sincere and single-minded, and was 
going to London with the sole purpose of living a free secluded 
life, without ambition, without thought of any manner of success. 
The poor little old maid had her head already filled with wild 
dreams of fame to be found in London, of a distinguished brother, 
a bright career, publishers seeking for everything she wrote, and 
ner name often in the papers. Devoted as she was to Miss Grey, 
or perhaps because she was so devoted to her, she had already 
been forming vague but delightful hopes about the reformed 
brother which she would not now for all the world have ventured 
to hint to her fiicnd. 



=3 

CHAPTER III. 

THE MAN WITH A GRIEVANCE. 

Late that same night a young man stepped from a window in 
one of tlie rooms on the third floor of the Hotel du Louvre in Paris, 
and stood in the balcony. It was a balcony in that side of the hotel 
which looks on the Rue de Rivoli. The young man smoked a 
cigar and leaned over the balcony. 

It was a soft moonlight night. The hour was late and the 
streets were nearly silent. The latest omnibus had gone its way, 
and only now and then a rare and lingering voiture clicked and 
clattered along, to disappear round the corner of the place in 
front of the Palais Royal. The long line of gas lamps looking 
a faint yellow beneath the hotel and the Louvre Palace across 
the way seemed to deepen and deepen into redder sparks the 
farther the eye followed them to the right as they stretched on to 
the Place de la Concorde and the Champs Elyse'es. To the left 
the young man leaning from the balcony could see the Tower of 
St. Jacques standing darkly out against the faint pale blue of the 
moonlighted sky. The street was a line of silver or snow in the 
moonlight. 

The young man was tall, thin, dark, and handsome. He was 
unmistakably English, although he had an excitable and nervous 
way about him which did not savour of British coolness and com- 
posure. He seemed a person not to take anything easily. Even 
the moonlight and the solitude and the indescribably soothing and 
philosophic influence of the contemplation of a silent citv from the 
serene heights of a balcony did not prevail to take him out of 
himself into the upper ether of mental repose. He pulled his long 
moustaches now and then until they met like a kind of strap 
beneath his chin, and again he twisted their ends up as if he desired 
to appear fierce as a champion duellist of the Bonapartist group. 
He sometimes took his cigar from his lips and held it between his 
fingers until it went out, and when he put it into his mouth again 
he took several long puffs before he quite realised the fact that he 
was pu fling at what one might term dry stubble. Then he pulled 
out a box of fusees and lighted his cigar in an irritated way, as if 
he were protesting that really the Fates were bearing down upon 
him rather too heavily, and that he was entitled to complain at last. 

" Good evening, sir," said a strong full British voice that 
sounded just at his elbow. 



24 ^J^^SS MISANTHROPE. 

The young man, looking round, saw that his next door neigh- 
bour in the hotel had likewise opened his window and stepped 
out on his balcony. The two had met before, or at least seen 
each other before once or twice. The young man had seen the 
elder with some ladies at breakfast in the hotel, and that evening 
he and his neighbour had taken cofiiee side by side on the 
boulevards and smoked and exchanged a few words. 

The elder man's strong, rather undersized, figure showed very 
clearly in the moonlight. He had thick, almost shaggy, hair, of an 
indefinable dark brownish colour . hair that was not curly, that was 
not straight, that did not stand up, and yet could evidently never 
be kept down. He had a rough complexioned face, with heavy 
eyebrows and stubbly British whiskers. His hands were large and 
reddish-brown and coarse. He was dressed carelessly . that is, 
his clothes were evidently garments that had cost money, but he 
did not seem to care how he wore them. Any garment must fall 
readily into shapelessness and give up trying, to fit well on that 
unheeding figure. The Briton did not seem exactly what one 
would at once assume to be a gentleman. Yet he was not vulgar, 
and he was evidently quite at his ease with himself. He looked 
somehow like a man who had money or power of some kind, and 
who did not care whether people knew it or did not know it. 
Our younger Briton had at the first glance taken him for the 
ordinary English father of a family, travelling with his womankind. 
But he had not seen him for two minutes at the breakfast-table 
before he observed that the supposed heavy father was never in 
a fuss, had a way of having all his orders obeyed without trouble 
or misunderstanding, and, for all his strong British accent, talked 
French with entire ease and a sort of resolute grammatical accuracy. 

" Staying in Paris ?" the elder man said . he too was smoking. 
when the younger had replied to his salutation. 

" No ; I am going home . I mean I am going to England . 
to-morrow." 

" Aye, aye ? I almost wish I were too. I'm taking my wife 
and daughters for a holiday. T don't much care for holidays 
myself 1 hadn't time for enjoyment of such things when I could 
enjoy them, and of course when you get out of the way of enjoying 
yourself you never get into it again; it's a sort of groove, I suppose. 
Anyhow, we don't ever enjoy much, our people. You are English, 
1 suppose?" 

" Yes, I am English." 

" Wish you weren't ? I see." 

Indeed the tone in which the young man answered the question 
seemed to warrant this interpretation. 



THE MAN WITH A GRIEVANCE. 25 

" Excuse me; I didn't say that," the young man said, a little 
sharply. 

"No, no; I only thought you meant it. We are not bound, 
you know, to keep rattling up the Rule Britannia always among 
ourselves." 

" I can assure you I am not at all inclined to rattle the Rule 
Britannia too loudly," the young man said, tossing the end of his 
cigar away and looking determinedly into the street with his hands 
dug deeply into his pockets. 

The elder man smoked for a few seconds in silence, and looked 
up and down the long straight line of street. 

" Odd," he said abruptly. " I always think of Balzac when I 
look into the streets of Paris, and when I give myself time to 
think. Balzac sums up Paris for me." 

" Yes," said the younger man, talking for the first time with 
an appearance of genuine interest in the conversation; "but 
things must be greatly changed since that time even in Paris, you 
know." 

" Changed? Not a bit of it. The outsides, of course. The 
Lou-vTe over there was half a ruin the other day, and now it's 
getting all right again. That's change, if you like to call it so. 
But the heart of things is just the same. Balzac stands for 
Paris, believe you me." 

" I don't believe a word of it . not a word ! I mean . excuse 
me . that I don't agree with you." 

" Yes, yes : I understand what you mean. I'm not offended. 
Well?" 

" Well . I don't believe a bit that men and women ever were 
like that. You mean to tell me that people were made without 
hearts in Paris or anywhere else ? Do you believe in a place 
peopled by cads and sneaks and curs . and the women half again 
as bad as the men ? " 

The young man grew warm and the elder drew him out, and 
they discussed Balzac as they stood in the balcony and looked 
down on silent moonlighted Paris. The elder man smoked and 
smiled and shrugged his shoulders good-humouredly. The younger 
was as full of gesture and animation as if his life depended on 
the controversy. 

" All right," the elder said at last. " I like to hear you talk, 
but Paris is Balzac to me still. Going to be in London some 
time?" 

" i suppose so : yes," in a tone of sudden depression and dis- 
content. 

" I wish we might meet some time. I live in London, and 



26 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

I wish you would come and see me when we get back from 
our . holiday, we'll call it." 

The young man turned half away and leaned on the balcony 
as if he were looking very earnestly for something in the direction 
of the Champs Elyse'es. Then he faced his companion suddenly 
and said . 

" I think you had much better not have anything to do with 
me; I should only prove a bore to you, or to anybody." 

"How is that?" 

" Well^n short, I'm a man with a grievance." 

" Aye, aye ? What's your grievance ? \\'hom has it to do wnth ? " 
The young man looked up quickly as if he did not quite under- 
stand the brusque ways of his new acquaintance, who put his 
questions so directly. But the new acquaintance seemed good- 
humoured and quite at his ease, and evidently had not the least 
idea of being rude or over inquisitive. He had only the way of 
one apparently used to ordering people about. 

" My grievance has to do with the Government," the young 
man said with a grave politeness, almost like self-assertion. 

" Government here : in France?" 

" No, no : our own Government." 

"Aye, aye? What have they been doing? You haven't 
invented anything. new cannon . flying machine . that sort of 
thing?" 

" No : nothing of that kind . I wish I had . but how did you 
know ? " 

" How did I know what?" 

" That I hadn't invented anything." 

*' Why, I knew it by looking at you. Do you think I shouldn't 
know an inventor? You might as well ask me how I know a man 
has been in the army. Well, about this grievance of yours?" 

" I dare say you will know my name," the young man said 
with a sort of reluctant modesty, which contrasted a little oddly 
with the quick movements and rapid talk that usually belonged to 
him. Then his manner suddenly changed and he spoke in a 
tone of something like irritation, as if he had better have the 
whole thing out at once, and be done with it." My name is 
Heron . Victor Heron." 

"Heron . Heron?" said the other, turning over the name 
in his memory. " Well, I don't know I am sure . I may have 
heard it . one hears all sorts of names. But I don't remember 
just at the moment." 

Mr. Heron seemed a little surprised that his revelation had 
produced no eflect. He had made up his mind somehow 



THE MAN WITH A GRIEVANCE. 27 

that his new friend was mixed up with pohtics and pubhc 
ati'airs. 

"You'll remember Victor Heron of the St. Xavier's Settle- 
ments ? " he said decisively. 

" He'-on of the St. Xavier's Settlements? Ah, yes, yes. To be 
sure. Yes, I begin to remember now. Of course, of course. 
You're the fellow who got us into the row with the Portuguese 
or the Dutch, or who was it? About the slave trade, or some- 
thing? I remember it in the House." 

" I am the fool," Mr. Heron went on volubly . " the block- 
head, the idiot, that thought England had principles, and honour, 
and a policy, and all the rest of it ! I haven't lived in England 
very much. I'm the son of a colonist . the Herons are an old 
colonial famih- . and you can't think, you people always in 
England, how romantic and enthusiastic we gel about England, 
we silly colonists, with our old-fashioned ways. When I got that 
confounded appointment . it was given in return for some old 
services of my father's . I believe I thought I was going to be 
another sort of Raleigh, or something of the kind." 

"Just so; and of course you were ready to tumble into any 
sort of scrape. You were called over the coals . snubbed for 
your pains?" 

" Yes . I was snubbed." 

" Of course : they'll soon work the enthusiasm out of you. 
But that's a couple of years ago . and you weren't recalled?" 

" No. I wasn't recalled." 

"Well, what's your grievance then?" 

" ^Vhy . don't you see? . my time is out . and they've dropped 
me down. My whole career is closed . I'm quietly thrown over . 
and I'm only twenty-nine ! " The young man caught at his mous- 
tache with nervous hands and kicked with one foot against the 
rails of the balcony. He gazed into the street, and his eyes 
sparkled and twinkled as if there were tears in them. Perhaps 
there were, for Mr. Heron was evidently a young man of quicker 
emotions than young men generally show in our days. He 
made haste to say something, apparently as if to escape from 
himself. 

" I am leaving Paris in the morning." 

" Then why don't you go to bed and have a sleep?" 

" Well, I don't feel like sleeping just yet." 

" You young fellows never know the blessing of sleep. I can 
sleep whenever I want to . it's a great thing. I make it a rule 
though to do all my sleeping at night, whenever I can. You 
leave Paris in the morning? Now that's a thmg I don't like to 



28 AflSS MISANTHROPE. 

do. Paris should never be seen early in the morning. London 
shows to best advantage early ; but Paris . no ! " 

"Why not?" ISIr. Heron asked, stimulated to a little 
curiosity. 

" Paris is a beauty, you know, a little on the wane, and wanting 
to be elaborately made up and curled and powdered and pamted, 
and all that. She's a little of a slattern underneath the surface, 
you know, and doesn't bear to be taken unawares . mustn't be 
seen for at least an hour or two after she has got out of bed. 
All the more like Balzac's women." 

Perhaps the elder man had observed Mr. Heron's sensitiveness 
more closely and clearly than Heron fancied, and was talking on 
only to give him time to recover his composure. Certainly he 
talked much more volubly and continuously than appeared at first 
to be his way. After a while he said, in his usual style of blunt 
but not unkindly inquiry . 

" Any of your people living in London ? " 

" No . in fact I haven't any people in England. few relations 
now left anywhere." 

" Like Melchisedek, eh ? Well, I don't know that he was 
the most to be pitied of men. You have friends enough, I 
suppose?" 

" Not friends exactly . acquaintances enough, I daresay . 
people to call on, people who remember one's name and who ask 
one to dinner. But I don't know that I shall have much time 
for cultivating acquaintanceships in the way of society." 

" Why so ? What are you going to London to do ? " 

"To get a hearing, of course. To make the whole thing 
known. To show that I was in the right, and that I only did 
what the honour of England demanded. I trust to England." 

" What's England got to do with it? England is only so many 
men and women and children all concerned in their own affairs 
and not caring twopence about you and me and our wrongs. 
Besides, who has accused you ? Who has found fault with you ? 
Your time is out, and there's an end." 

" But they have dropped me down. they think to crush me." 

" If they do it will be by severely letting you alone : and what 
can you do against that? You can't quarrel with a man merely 
because he ceases to invite you to dinner : and that's about the 
way of it." 

" I'll fight this out for all that." 

" You'll soon get tired of it. It's beating the air, you know. Of 
course, if you want to annoy the Government you could easily 
get some ol us to take up your case . no difticulty about that. 



THE MAN WITH A GRIEVANCE. 29 

and make you the hero of a grievance and a debate and 
so on." 

" I want nothing of the kind ! I don't want any one to trouble 
himself about me, and I don't care to be taken in hand by any 
one. If Englishmen -will not listen to a plain statement of right, 
why then But I know they will." 

The conviction itself was expressed in the tone of one who 
by its very assertion protests against a rising doubt and tries 
to stifle it. 

" Very good," said the other. " Try it on. We shall soon see. 
I have a sort of interest in the matter, for I had a grievance 
myself and I have still, only I went about things in a different 
way . looking for redress I mean." 

"What did you do?" 

"It's a longish story, and quite a different line from yours, 
and it would bore you to hear, even if you understood it. I got 
into the House and made myself a nuisance. I put money 
in my purse ; it came in somehow. I watch the department that 
I once belonged to with the eye of a lynx. Well, I shall look 
out for you and give you a hand if I can, always supposing it 
would annoy the Government . any Government . I don't care 
what." 

Mr. Heron looked at him with wonder and incredulity. 

" Terrible lack of principle, you think ? Not a bit of it ; I'm 
a strong politician : I stick to my side through thick and thin. 
But in their management of departments, you know . contracts, 
and all that . Governments are all the same ; the natural enemies 
of man. Well, I hope to see you. I am going to have a sleep. 
Let me give you my address . though in any case I think we are 
certain to meet." 

They parted with blunt expression of friendly inclination on 
the one side and a doubtful, half-reluctant acknowledgment on 
the other. Heron remained standing in his balcony looking at 
the changes of the moonlight on the silent streets and thinking 
of his career and his gi'ievance. 

The nearer he came to England the colder his hopes seemed 
to grow. Now upon the threshold of the country he had so 
longed to reach he was inclined to linger and loiter and to 
put off his entrance. Everything that was so easy and clear a 
few thousand miles off began to show itself perplexed and 
difficult. "When shall I be there?" he used to ask himself on 
his homeward journey. "What have I come for?" he began to 
ask himself now. 

Times had indeed changed very suddenly with Victor Heron. 



30 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

He had come into the active world perhaps rather prematurely. 
When very young, under the guidance of an energetic and able 
father who had been an administrator of some distinction in 
England's service among her dependencies, he had made himself 
somewhat conspicuous in one of the colonies ; and when an 
opportunity occurred, after his father's death, of offering him 
a considerable position, the Government appointed him to 
the administration of a new setdement. It is hardly necessary 
for us to go any deeper into the story of his grievance than 
he has already gone himself in a few words. Except as an 
illustration of his character, we have not much to do with the 
story of his career as an administrator. It was a very small 
business altogether; a quarrel in a far-off, lately appropriated, 
and almost wholly insignificant scrap of England's dominions. 
Probably Mr. Heron was in the wrong, for he had been 
stimulated wholly by a chivalrous enthusiasm for the honour 
of England's principles and a keen sense of what he considered 
justice. The Government had dealt very kindly with him in 
consideration of his youth and of his father's services, and had 
merely dropped him down. 

This to a young man like Heron was simply killing with 
kindness. He could have stood up stoutly against impeachment, 
trial, punishment, any manner of exciting ordeal, and commanded 
his brave heart to bear it. But to be quietly allowed to go his 
way was intolerable, and, being accused of nothing, he was rushing 
back to England to insist on being accused of something. A 
chief of any kind in a small dependency is a person of over- 
whelming greatness and importance in his own sphere. Every 
eye there is literally on him. He diffuses even a sort of impression 
as if he were a good deal too large for his sphere, like the 
helmet of such portentous size in the court-yard of Otranto. 
To come down all at once to be an ordinary passenger to 
England, an ordinary "No. 257, au 3me " at the Hotel du 
Louvre in Paris, an obscure personage getting out at the 
Charing Cross Station and calling a hansom, nobody caring 
whence he has come or capable, even after elaborate reminder, of 
calling to memory his story, his grievance, or his identity . 
that is something to try the soul of a patient man. Mr. 
Heron was not patient. 

He was a young Quixote out of time and place. He never 
could let anything alone. He could not see a grievance without 
trying to set it right. The impression that anybody was being 
wrongerl or cheated affected and tormented him as keenly as a 
discordant note or an mharmonious arrangement of colours might 



THE MAN WITH A GRIEVANCE. 31 

disturb persons of loftier artistic soul. In the colonies queer old 
ideas survive long after they have died out of England, and the 
traveller from the parent country often comes on some ancient 
abstraction there as he might upon some old-fashioned garment. 
Heron started into life with a full faith in the living reality of 
divers abstractions which we in England have long since dissected, 
analysed, and thrown away. He believed in and spoke of 
Progress and Humanity and brotherhood and such like vague- 
nesses as if they were real things to work for and love. People 
who regard abstractions as realities are just the very persons 
to turn solid and commonplace realities into shining and splendid 
abstractions. Young Heron regarded England not as an island 
with a bad climate where some millions of florid men made 
money or worked for it, but as a sort of divine influence inspiring 
5routh to noble deeds and patriotic devotion. He was of course 
the very man to get into a muddle when he had anything to do 
with the administration of a new settlement. If the muddle had 
not lain in his way he would assuredly have found it. 

He had so much to do now on his further way home in helping 
elderly ladies on that side who could not speak French, and on 
this side who could not speak EngUsh : in seeing that persons 
whom he had never set eyes on before were not neglected at 
buffets, left behind by trains, or overcharged by waiters : in giving 
and asking information about everything, that he had not much 
time to think about the St. Xavier's Settlements and his personal 
grievance. When the suburbs of London came in sight with their 
trim rows of stucco-fronted villas and cottages and their front 
gardens ornamented with the inevitable evergreens, a thrill of 
enthusiasm came up in Heron's breast, and he became feverish 
with anxiety to be in the heart of the great capital once again. 
Now he began to see familiar spires and domes and towers, 
and then again huge unfamiliar roofs and buildings that were 
not there when he was in London last, and that puzzled him 
with their presence. Then the train crossed the river, and he 
had glimpses of the Thames and Westminster Palace and the 
Embankment with its bright garden-patches and its little trees, 
and he wondered at the ungenial creatures who see in London 
nothing but ugliness. To him everything looked smiling, beautiful, 
alive with hope and good omen. 

Certainly a railway station, an arrival, a hurried transaction, 
however slight and formal, with a Customs officer, are a damper 
on enthusiasm of any kind. Heron began to feel dispirited, 
London looked hard and prosaic. His grievance began to show 
signs of breaking out again amid the hustling, the crowd, the 



32 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

luggage, and the exertion, as an old wound might under exactly 
similar circumstances if one in his haste and eagerness were to 
strain its hardly closed edges. 

It was when he was in a hansom driving to his hotel that Heron, 
putting his hand in his waistcoat pocket, drew out a crumpled card 
which he had thrust in there hastily and forgotten. The card bore 
the name of 

"Mr. Crowder E. Money, 

Victoria Street, 

Westminster." 

Heron remembered his friend of Paris. "An odd name," 
he thought ; " I have heard it before somewhere. I like him ! 
He seems a manly sort of fellow." 

Then he found himself wondering what Mr. Money's daughters 
were like, and wishing he had observed them more closely in 
Paris, and asking whether it was possible that girls could be 
pretty and interesting with such an odd name. 



CHAPTER IV. 

** OH, MUCH-DESIRED PRIZE, SWEET LIBERTY ! " 

The summer had gone and much even of the autumn, and 
Miss Grey and her companion were settled in London. Minola 
had had everything planned out in her mind before they left 
Dukes-Keeton, and little Miss Blanchet was positively awed 
by her leader's energy, knowledge, and fearlessness. The first 
night of their arrival in town they went to a quiet, respectable, 
old-fashioned hotel, well knoAvn of Keeton folk, where Miss 
Grey's father used to stay during his visits to London for many 
years, and where his name was still remembered. Then the two 
strangers from the country set out to look for lodgings, and Miss 
Grey was able to test her knowledge of London, and satisfy her 
pride of learning, by conducting her friend straightway to the 
region in which she had resolved to make a home for herself. She 
had been greatly divided in mind for a while between Kensington 
and the West Centre; between the neighbourhood of the South 
Kensington Museum, the glades of the gardens, and all the charms 
of the old Court sul)url), and the temptations of the National 
Gallery, the Jirilish Museum, and the old-fashioned squares and 
houses around the latter. She decided tor the British Museum 



*'0H, MUCH-DESIRED PRIZE, SHEET LIBERTY/'' 33 

qxiarter. Miss Blanchet would have preferred the brightness and 
the air of fashion which belonged to Kensington ; but Miss Grey- 
ruled that to live somewhere near the British Museum was more 
like living in London, and she energetically declared that she 
would rather live in Seven Dials than out of London. 

To find a pleasant and suitable lodging would ordinarily have 
been a difficulty; for the regular London lodging-house-keeper 
detests the sight of women, and only likes the gentleman who 
disappears in the morning and returns late at night. But luckil)', 
there are Keeton folk everywhere. As a rule, nobody is born 
in London, " except children," as a lady once remarked. Come 
up to London from whatever little Keeton you will, you can find 
your comjiatriots settled everywhere in the metropolis. Miss Grey- 
obtained from the kindly landlady of the hotel . who had herself 
been born in Keeton, and was married to a Glasgow man . a choice 
of Keeton folk willing to receive respectable and well-recommended 
lodgers . "real ladies" especially. Miss Grey, being cordially- 
vouched for by the landlady as a real lady, found out a Keeton 
woman in the West Centre who had a drawing-room and two 
bedrooms to let. 

Had Miss Grey invented the place, it could not have suited 
her better. It was an old-fashioned street, running out of a 
handsome old-fashioned square. The street was no thoroughfare. 
Its other end was closed by a solemn, sombre structure with a 
portico, and over the portico a plaster bust of Pallas. This was an 
institution or foundation of some kind which had long outlived the 
uses whereto it had been devoted by its pious founder. It now 
had nothing but a library, a lecture-halJ, an enclosed garden 
(into which, happily for her, the windows of IMiss Grey's bedroom 
looked), an old fountain in the garden, considerable funds, a board 
of trustees, and an annual dinner. This place lent an air of severe 
dignity to the street, and furthermore kept the street secluded and 
quiet by blocking up one of its ends and inviting no traffic. 
The house in which our pair of wanderers was lodging was itself 
old-fashioned, and in a manner picturesque. It had broad old 
staircases of stone, and a large hall and fine rooms. It had once 
been a noble mansion, and the legend was that its owner had 
entertained Dr. Johnson there, and Sir Joshua Reynolds, and 
that Mrs. Thrale had often been handed up and down that 
staircase. Minola loved association with such good" company, 
and it may be confessed went up and down the stairs several times 
for no other purpose whatever than the pleasure of fancying herself 
following in the footsteps of bright Mrs. Thrale, with whose wrongs 
Miss Grey, as a misanthrope, was especially bound to sympathise. 

D 



34 ^f-^SS MISANTHROPE. 

The drawing-room happily looked at least aslant over the grass 
and the trees of the square. Minola's bedroom, as has been said, 
looked into the garden of the institution, with its well-kept walks, 
its shrubs, and its old-fashioned fountain, whose quiet plash was 
always heard in the seclusion of the back of the house. Had the 
trunks of the trees been just a little less blackened by smoke, 
our heroine might well have fancied, as she looked from her 
bedroom window, that she was in some quaint old abode in a 
quiet country town. But in truth she did not desire to encourage 
any such delusion. To feel that she was in the heart of London 
was her especial delight. This feeling would have brightened and 
glorified a far less attractive place. She used to sit down alone 
in her bedroom of nights, in order to think quietly to herself, 
" Now I am at last really in London ; not visiting London, but 
living in it." There at least was one dream made real. There 
was one ambition crowned. " Come what will," she said to 
herself, " I am living in London." \\\ London and freedom she 
grew more and more healthy and happy. As a wearied Londoner 
might have sought out, say Keeton, and found new strength and 
spirits there, so our Keeton girl, who was somewhat pale and thin 
when she sat on the steps of the ducal mausoleum, grew stronger 
and brighter every day in the West Central regions of London. 

A happier, quieter, freer life could hardly be imagined, at least 
for her. She spent hours in the National Gallery and the Museum ; 
she walked with Mary Blanchet in Regent's Park, and delighted 
to find out new vistas and glimpses of beauty among the trees 
there, and to insist that it was ever so much better than any place 
in the country. As autumn came on and the trees grew barer, and 
the skies became of a heavier silver grey, Minola found greater 
charms in their softened half tones than the brighter lights of 
summer could give. Even when it rained . and it did rain some- 
times . who could fail to see the beauty, all its own, of the green 
grass, and the darker stems and branches of trees, showing faintly 
through the veil of the mist and the soft descending shower? 
It was, indeed, a delightful Arcadian life. Its simplicity can 
hardly be better illustrated than by the fact, that our adventurous 
jjair of women always dined at one o'clock . when they dined at 
all . off a chop, except on Sundays, when they invariably had a 
cold fowl. 

Much as Miss Grey loved London, however, it \vas still a 
place made up of men whom she considered herself bound to 
dislike, and of women who depended far too much on these 
men. Therefore, she made studies of scrajjs of London life, 
and amused herself by satirising them to her friend. 



**0H, MUCH-DESIRED PRIZE, SWEET LIBERTY P' 35 

" I have accomplished a chapter of London, Mary," she said 
one evening before their reading had set in ; "I have completed 
my social studies of our neighbours in Gainsborough Place" . a 
little street of shops near at hand. " I am prepared to give you 
a complete court guide as to the grades of society there, Mary, so 
that you may know at once how to demean yourself to each and 
all." 

" Do tell me all about it ; I should very much like to know." 
"Shall we begin with the highest or the lowest ?" 
" I think," Miss Blanchet said with a gentle sigh, expressive of 
no great delight in the story of the lower classes, " I would rather 
you began low down, dear, and got done with them first." 

" Very well ; now listen. The lowest of all is the butcher. He 
is a wealthy man, I am sure, and his daughter, who sits in the little 
office in the shop, is a good-looking girl, I think. But in private 
life nobody in Gainsboroiigh Place mixes with them on really 
cordial terms. Their friends come from other places; from butchers' 
shops in other streets. They do occasionally interchange a few 
courtesies with the family of the baker; but the baker's wite, 
though not nearly so rich, rather patronises and looks down upon 
Mrs. Butcher." 

" Dear me," said the poetess, " what odd people ! " 
" Well, the pastry-cook's family will have nothing to do, except 
in the way of business, with the butcher or the baker; but they 
are very friendly with the grocer, and they have evenings together. 
Now, the two little old maids, who keep the stationer's shop where 
the post office is, are very genteel, and have explained to me more 
than once that they don't feel at home in this quarter, and that 
their friends are in the \Vest End. But they are not well off, 
poor things, I fear, and they like to spend an evening now and 
then with the family of the grocer and the pastry-cook, who are 
rather proud to receive them, and can give them the best tea and 
Madeira cake ; and both the little ladies assure me that nothing 
can be more respectable than the families of the pastry-cook 
and the grocer . for their station of life, they always add." 

" Oh, of course ! " Miss Blanchet said, who was listening with 
great interest as to a story, having that order of mind to which 
anything is welcome that offers itself in narrative form, but not 
having any perception of a satirical purpose in the whole explana- 
tion. Minola appreciated the " of course," and somehow became 
discouraged. 

"Well," she said, "that's nearly all, except for the family of the 
chemist, who live next to the little ladies of the post office, and 
who only know even them by sufferance, and would not for all the 

D2 



36 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

world have any social intercourse with any of the others. It's de- 
lightful, I think, to find that London is not one place at all, but 
only a cluster of little Keetons. This one street is Keeton to the 
life, Mary. I want to pursue my studies deeper, though ; I want to 
find out how the gradations of society go between the mothers of 
the boy who drives the butcher's cart, the baker's boy, and the 
pastry-cook's boy." 

" Oh, Minola dear ! " 
" You think all this very unpoetic, Mary, and you are shocked 
at my interest in these prosaic and lowly details. But it is a study 
of life, my dear poetess, and it amuses and instructs me. Only for 
chance, you know, I might have been like thai, and it is a grand 
thing to learn one's own superiority." 

" You never could have been like that, Minola ; you belong 
to a different class." 

" Yes, yes, dear, that is quite true, I belong to the higher classes 
entirely; my father was a country architect, my stepfather is a 
Nonconformist minister . these are of the aristocracy everywhere." 

" You are a lady . a woman of education . Minola," the poetess 
said, almost severely. She could not understand how even Miss 
Grey herself could disparage Miss Grey and her parentage in 
jest. 

" I can assure you, dear, that one of the pastry-cook's daughters, 
whom I talked with to-day, is a much better-educated girl than I 
am. You should hear her talk French, Mary. She has been 
taught in Paris, dear, and speaks so well that I found it very hard 
to understand her. She plays the harp, and knoAvs all about 
Wagner; I don't. I like her very much, and she is coming here 
to take tea with us." 

The poetess was not delighted with this kind of society, but 
she never ventured to contradict her leader. 

" You can talk to everyone, 1 do really believe," she said. 
" I find it so hard to get on with people. with some people." 

" I feel so happy and so free here. I can say all the cynical 
things that please iwQ.you don't mind . and I can like and dislike 
as 1 choose." 

" I am afraid you dislike more than you like, Minola." 

" 1 think I could like anyone who had some strong purpose 
in life ; not the getting of money, or making a way in society. 
There are such, I suppose ; 1 don't know." 

" When you meet my brother, I am sure you will acknowledge 
that he has a purpose in life which is not the getting of money," 
said Miss Blanchet. "But you don't like men." 

Minola made no reply. Poor little Miss Blanchet felt so 



''OH, MUCH-DESIRED PRIZE, SWEET LIBERTY t" 37 

kindly to all the race of men, that she did not understand how 
any woman could really dislike them. 

" I am going to do something that will please you to-morrow," 
Miss Grey said, feeling that she owed her companion some atone- 
ment for not warming to the mention of her brother. " I am 
positively going to hunt out Lucy IMoney. They must have re- 
turned by this time." 

This was really very pleasant news for Miss Blanchet. She had 
been longing for her friend to renew her acquaintance with Miss 
Lucy Money, about whom she had many dreams. It did not 
occur to Mary Blanchet to question directly even in her own mind 
the decrees of Miss Grey, or to say to herself that the course of 
life which they were leading was not the most delightful that could 
be devised. But, if the little poetess could have ventured to 
translate vague yearnings into definite thoughts, she would, perhaps, 
have acknowledged to herself a faint desire that the brilliant 
passages of the London career she had marked out for herself in 
anticipation should come rather more quickly than they just now 
seemed likely to do. At present there was not much difference 
perceptible to her between London and Dukes- Keeton. Nobody 
came to see them. even her brother had not yet presented him- 
self. Her poem did not make much progress ; there was no great 
incentive to poetic work. Minola and she did not know any 
poets, or artists, or publishers. Mary Blanchet's poetic tastes 
were of a somewhat old-fashioned school, and did not include 
any particular care for looking at trees, and fields, and water, and 
skies, although these objects of natural beauty were made to figure 
in the poems a good deal in connection with, and illustrative of, 
the emotions of the poetess. Therefore the rambles in the park 
were not so delightful to her as to her leader ; and when the 
evening set in, and Minola and she read to each other, Mary 
Blanchet was always rather pleased if an opportunity occurred for 
interrupting the reading by a talk. She was particularly anxious 
that Minola should renew her acquaintance with her old school- 
fellow, Miss Lucy Money, whose father she understood to be 
somehow a great sort of person, and through whom she saw 
dimly opening up a vista, perhaps the only one for her, into 
society and literature. But the Money family were out of town 
when our friends came to London, and Miss Blanchet had to 
wait; and, even when it whs probable that they had returned. 
Miss Grey did not seem very eager to renew the acquaintance. 
Indeed her resolve to visit Miss Money now was entirely a good- 
natured concession to the evident desire of Mary Blanchet. 
Minola saw her friend's little ways and weaknesses clearly and 



38 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

smiled now and then as she thought of them, and h'ked her none 
the less for them. rather, indeed, felt her breast swell with kind- 
liness and pity. It pleased her generous heart to gratify her 
companion in every way, to find out things that she liked and 
bring them to her, to study her httle innocent vanities that she 
might gratify them. What little dainties Mary Blanchet liked 
to have with her tea, what pretty ribbons she thought it became 
her to wear, these Miss Grey was always perplexing herself about. 
When she found that she liked to be alone sometimes, that she 
must have a long walk unaccompanied, that she must have thoughts 
which Mary would not care to hear, then she felt a pang of re- 
morse, as if she were guilty of a breach of true camaraderie^ and she 
could not rest until she had relieved her soul by some special 
mark of attention to her friend. On the other hand, Mary Blanchet, 
for all her dreams and aspirations, was a sensible and managing 
little person, who got for Miss Grey about twice the value that 
she herself could have obtained out of her money. This was a 
fact which Minola always took care to impress upon her com- 
panion, for she dreaded lest Miss Blanchet should feel herself a 
dependant. Miss Blanchet, however, in a modest way, knew her 
value, and had besides one of the temperaments to which de- 
pendence on some really loved being comes natural, and is 
inevitable. 

So Minola set out next day, about three o'clock, to look up her 
schoolfellow. Miss Lucy Money. She went forth on her mission 
with some unwillingness, and with a feeling as if she were abandon- 
ing some purpose, or giving up a little of a principle, in doing so. " I 
came to London to live alone and independent," she said to herself 
sometimes, " and already I am going out to seek for acquaintances. 
Why do I do that? I want strength of purpose. I am just like 
everybody else," and she began, as was her wont, to scrutinize her 
own weaknesses, and bear heavily on them. For, absurd as it may 
seem, this odd young woman really did propose to live alone . . 
herself and Mary Blanchet . in London until they died. Alone, 
that is, so far as social life and acquaintanceships in society were 
concerned. Vast and vague schemes for doing good to her 
neigiibours, and for striving in especial to give a hel])ing hand to 
troubled women, were in Miss Grey's plans of life ; but society, 
so called, was to have no part in them. It did not occur to her 
that she was far too handsome a girl to be allowed to put herself 
thus under an extinguisher or behind a screen. When people 
looked after her as she passed tiirough the streets, she assumed 
that they noticed some rustic peculiarity in her dress or her hat, 
and slie felt a contempt for them. Her love of London did not 



''OH, MUCH-DESIRED PRIZE, SWEET LIBERTY/" 39 

imply a love of Londoners, whom in general she thought rude and 
given to staring. But even if she had thought peo])le were looking 
at her because of her figure, her face, her eyes, her superb hair, 
she would have felt a contempt for them all the same. She had a 
proud indifference to personal beauty, and looked down upon 
men whose judgment could be affected by the fact that a woman 
had finer eyes, or brighter hair, or a more shapely mould than 
other women. 

Once Minola was positively on the point of turning back, and 
1 enouncing all claim on the acquaintanceship of her former school 
companion. She suddenly remembered, however, that in con 
demning her own fancied weakness she had forgotten that her visit 
was undertaken to oblige Mary Blanchet. " Poor Mary ! I have 
only one little acquaintanceship that has anything to do with 
society, and am I to deny her that chance if she likes it ? " She 
went on rapidly and resolutely. Sometimes she felt inclined to 
blame herself for bringing Mary Blanchet away from Keeton, 
although Mary had for years been complaining of her life and 
her work there, and beseeching Miss Grey not to leave her 
behind when she went to live in London. 

It was a beautiful autumn day. London looks to great ad- 
vantage on one of these rare days, and Miss Grey felt her heart 
swell with mere delight as she looked from the streets to the sky 
and from the sky to the streets. She passed through one or two 
squares, and stopped to see the sun, already going down, send 
its light through the bare branches of the trees. The western sky 
was covered with grey, silver-edged clouds, w4iich brightened into 
blots of golden fire as they came closer in the track of the sun. 
The air was mild, soft, and almost warm. All poets and painters 
are full of the autumnal charms of the country ; but to certain 
oddly constituted minds some street views in London on a fine 
autumn day have an unspeakable witchery. Miss Grey walked 
round and round one of the squares, and had to remind herself 
of her purpose on IVIary Blanchet's behalf in order to impel her- 
self on. 

The best of the day had gone, and the early evening was 
looking somewhat chill and gloomy between the huge ramparts of 
the Victoria Street houses by the time that Miss Grey stood in 
that solemn thoroughfare, and her heart sank a little as she 
reached the house where her old school friend lived. 

" Perhaps Lucy Money is altogether changed," Miss Grey said 
to herself as she came up to the door. " Perhaps she won't care 
about me ; perhaps I shan't hke her any more ; and perliaps her 
mamma will think me a dreadful person for not honouring my 



40 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

stepfather and stepmother. Perhaps there are brothers . odious, 
slangy young men, who think girls fall in love with them. Oh, 
yes, here is one of them." 

For just as she had rung the bell a hansom cab drove up to 
the door, and a tall, dark-complexioned young man leaped out. 
He raised his hat with what seemed to Miss Grey something the 
manner of a foreigner when he saw her standing at the door, and 
she felt a momentary thrill of relief because, if he was a foreigner, 
he could not be Lucy Money's brother. Besides, she knew very 
well that the great houses in Victoria Street were occupied by 
several tenants, and there was a good hope that the young man 
might have business with the upper story, and she with the ground 
floor. 

The young man was about to ring the bell, when he stopped, 
and said . 

" Perhaps you have rung already? " 

" Yes, I have rung," Miss Grey coldly replied. 

*'This is Mr. Money's, I suppose?" 

" Mr. Money lives here," she answered, with the manner of 
one resolute to close the conversation. The young man did not 
seem in the least impressed by her tone. 

"Perhaps I have the honour of speaking to Miss Money?" 
he began, with delighted eagernpss. 

" No. I am not Miss Money," she answered, still in her clear 
monotone. 

No words could say more distinctly than the young man's ex- 
pression did, " I am sorry to hear it." Indeed, no young man 
in the world going to visit Mr. Money could have avoided wishing 
that the young lady then standing at the door might prove to 
be Miss Money. 

The door opened, and the young man drew politely back to 
give Miss Grey the first chance. She asked for Miss Lucy Money, 
and the porter rang a bell for one of Mr. Money's servants. Miss 
Grey had brought a card with her, on which she had written 
over her engraved name, " For Lucy Money," and beneath it, 
" Nola," the short rendering of " Minola " which they used to 
adopt at school. 

Then the porter looked enquiringly at the other visitor. 

" If Mr. Money is at home," said the latter, " I should be glad 
to see him. I find I have forgotten my card-case, but my name 
is Heron . Mr. Victor Heron; and do, please, try to remember it, 
and to say it rightly." 



41 

CHAPTER V. 

MISS grey's first call. 

Mr. Money's home, like Mr. Money himself, conveyed to the 
intelligent observer an idea of quiet, self-satisfied strength. Mr. 
Money had one of the finest and most expensive suites of roonis 
to be had in the great Victoria Street buildings, and his rooms 
were furnished handsomely and richly. He had servants in 
sober livery, and a carriage for his wife and daughters, and a 
little brougham for himself. He made no pretence at being 
fashionable . rather, indeed, seemed to say deliberately, " I am a 
plain man and don't care twopence about fashion, and I despise 
making a show of being rich ; but I am rich enough for all I want, 
and whatever money can buy for me I can buy." He would not 
allow his wife and daughters to aim at being persons of fashion had 
they been so inclined, but they might spend as much money as 
ever they pleased. He never made a boast of his original poverty, 
or the humbleness of his bringing up, nor put on any vulgar show 
of rugged independence. The impression he made upon every- 
body was that of a completely self-sufficing . we do not say self- 
sufficient . man. It was not very clear how he had made his 
money. He had been at the head of one of the working depart- 
ments under the Government, had somehow fancied himself ill- 
treated, resigned his place, and, it was understood, had entered 
into various contracts to do work for the Governments of foreign 
States. It was certain that Mr. Money was not a speculator. His 
name never appeared in the directors' list of any new company. 
He could not be called a City man. But it was certain that he 
was rich. 

Mr. Money was in Parliament. He was a strong Radical in 
theory, and was believed to have much stronger opinions than he 
troubled himself to express. There was a rough, scornful way 
about him, as of one who considered all our existing arrangenients 
merely provisional, and who in the mean time did not care to 
occupy himself overmuch with the small differences between this 
legislative proposition and that. It was not on political subjects 
that he usually spoke. He was a very good speaker, clear, direct, 
and expressive in his language, always using plain, effective words, 
and always showing a perfect ease in the finishing of his sentences 
There was a savour of literature about him, and it was evident in 
many indirect ways that he knew Greek and Latin much better 



42 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

than most of the University men. The impression he produced 
was that of a man who on most subjects knew more than he 
troubled himself to display. It seemed as if it would take a very 
ready speaker indeed to enter into personal contest with Mr. 
Money, and not to get the worst of it. 

He was believed to be very shrewd and clever, and was known 
to be liberal of his money. People consulted him about many 
things, and to some extent admired him ; some were a little afraid 
of him, and, in homely phrase, fought shy of him. Perhaps he was 
thought to be unscrupulous; perhaps his blunt way of going at the 
very heart of a scruple in others made them fancy that he rather 
despised all moral conventionalities. Whatever the reason was, 
a certain class of persons always rather distrusted Mr. Money, and 
held aloof even while asking his advice. No one who had come 
in his way even for a moment forgot him, or was confused as to 
his identity, or foiled to form some opinion about him, or could 
have put clearly into words an exact statement of the opinion he 
had formed. 

On this particular day of autumn Mr. Money was in his study 
reading letters. He was talking to himself in short, blunt sentences 
over each letter as he read it, and put it into a pigeon-hole, or 
tore it and threw it into the waste-paper basket. His sentences 
were generally concise judgments pronounced on each correspon- 
dent. "Fool!" "Blockhead !" "Justso; I expected that of you !" 
"Yes, yes; he's all right." "That will do." Sometimes a com- 
ment, begun rather gruffly, ended in a good-natured smile ; and 
sometimes Mr. Money, having read a letter to the close with a 
pleased and satisfied expression, suddenly became thoughtful, and 
leaned upon his desk, drumming with the finger-tips of one hand 
upon his teeth. 

A servant interrupted his work by bringing him a message and 
a name, Mr. Money looked up, said quickly, " Yes, yes ; show 
him in!" and Mr. Victor Heron was introduced. 

Mr. Money advanced to meet his visitor with an air of cordial 
welcome. One peculiarity of Mr. Money's strong, homely face 
was the singular sweetness of the smile which it sometimes wore. 
The full lips parted so pleasantly, the white teeth shone, and the 
eyes, that usually seemed heavy, beamed with so kindly an air, 
that to youth at least the infiuence was for the moment irresistible, 
Victor Heron's emotional face sparkled with responsive expres- 
sion. 

" Well, well ! glad to sec you, glad to see yon. Knew you would 
come. Sliove away those blue-books and sit down. We haven't 
long o;ot back ; but I tried to find you, and couldn't get at your 



M/SS GREY'S FIRST CARL. 43 

address. They didn't know at the Colonial Institute even. And 
how are you, and what have you been doin;^ with yourself? " 

" Not mu.h good," Heron replied, thinking as usual of his 
grievance. " I couldn't succeed in seeing anybody." 

" Of course not, of course not. I could have told you so. 
People are not yet coming back to town, except hard-working 
fellows like me. Have you been cooling your heels in the ante- 
chambers of the Colonial Office ? " 

" Yes, I have been there a little ; not much. I saw it was no 
use just yet, and that isn't a kind of occupation I delight in." The 
young man's face reddened with the bare memory of his vexation. 
" I hate that sort of thing." 

" To go where you know people don't want to see you ? Yes, 
it tries young and sensitive people a good deal. They've put you 
off?" 

" As I told you, I have seen nobody yet. But I mean to 
persevere. They shall find I am not a man to be got rid of in that 
way." 

Mr. Money made no observation on this, but Avent to a drawer 
in his desk, and took out a little book with pages alphabetically 
arranged. 

" I have been making enquiries about you," he said, " of 
various people who know all about the colonies. Would you like 
to hear a summary description of your personal character? Don't 
be offended . this is a way I have; the moment a person interests 
me and seems worth thinking about, I enter him in my little book 
here, and sum up his character from my own observation and from 
what people tell me. Shall I read it for you ? I wouldn't, you may 
be sure, if I thought you were anything of a fool." 

This compliment, of course, conquered Heron, who was other- 
wise a good deal puzzled. But there was something in Mr. 
Money's manner with those in whom he took any interest that 
prevented their feeling hurt by his occasional bluntness. 

" I don't know myself," Heron said. 

" Of course you don't. What busy man, who has to know 
other people, could have time to study himself? That work might 
do for philosophers. I may teach you something now, and save 
you the trouble." 

" I suppose I ought to make my own acquaintance," said Heron 
resignedly, while much preferring to talk of his grievance. 

*' Very good. Now listen. 

*' Heron, Victor. . Formerly in administration of St. Xavier's 
Settlements. Got into difficulties ; dropped down. Education 
good, but Hterary rather than business-like. Plenty of pluck, but 



44 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

wants coolness. Egotistic, but unselfish. Good deal of talent 
and go. Very honest, but impracticable. A good weapon in 
good hands, but must take care not to be made a plaything." 

Heron laughed. " It's a little Hke the sort of thing phreno- 
logists give people," he said, " but I think it's very flattering. I 
can assure you, however, no one shall make a plaything of me," he 
added with emphasis. 

" So we all think, so we all tliink," Mr. Money said, putting 
away his book. " Well, you are going on with this, then ? " 

" I am going to vindicate my conduct, and compel them to 
grant me an enquiry, if you mean that," Nothing on earth shall 
keep me from that." 

"So, so ! Very well, we'll talk about that another time . 
many other times; and I may give you some advice, which you 
needn't take if you don't like, and I shan't be offended. Now, 
I want to introduce you to my wife and my girls, and you must 
have a cup of tea. Odd, isn't it, to find men drinking tea at five 
o'clock in the afternoon? Up at the club, any day about that 
hour, you might think we were a drawing-room full of old spinsters, 
to hear the rattling of tea-cups that goes on all around." 

He took Heron's arm in a friendly, dictatorial way, and con- 
ducted him to the drawing-room on the same floor. 

The drawing-room was entered, not by opening a door, but by 
v/ithdrawing some folds of a great, heavy, dark green curtain. Mr. 
Money drew aside part of the curtain to make way for his friend ; 
and they both stopped a moment on the threshold. A peculiar, 
sweet, half-melancholy smile gave a strange dignity for the moment 
to Mr. Money's somewhat rough face, and he gently let the 
curtain fall. 

"Wasn't there some great person, Mr. Heron . Burke, was 
it ? . who used to say that whatever troubles he had outside, all 
ceased as he stood at his own door ? Well, I always feel like that 
when I lift this curtain." 

It was a pretty sight, as he again raised the curtain, and led 
Heron in. The drawing-room was very large, and was richly, 
and as it seemed to Heron somewhat oddly, furnished. The light 
in the lower part was faint and dim, a sort of yellowish twilight, 
procured by softened lamps. The upper extremity was steeped 
in a far brighter light, and displayed to Heron, almost as on a 
stage, a little group of women, among whom his quick eye at once 
saw the girl who had come up to the door at the same time with 
him. She was, indeed, a very conspicuous figure, for she was 
seated on a sofii, and one girl sat at her feet, while another stood 
at the arm of the sofa, and bent over her. An elderly lady, with 



Af/SS GREY'S FIRST CALL. 45 

voluminous draperies that floated over the floor, was redining on 
a low arm-chair, with her profile turned to Heron. On a fancy 
table near, a silver tea-tray glittered. A daintily dressed waiting 
maid was serving tea. 

" Take care of the floor as you come along," said Money. 
" We like to put rugs, and rolls of carpet, and stools now in all 
sorts of wrong places to trip people up. That shows how artistic 
we are ! Theresa, dear, this is my friend, Mr. Heron." 

" I am glad to see you, Mr. Heron," said a full, deep, melan- 
choly voice ; and a tall, slender lady partly rose from her chair, 
then sank again amid her draperies, bowed a head topped by a 
tiny lace cap, and held out to Heron a thin hand covered with 
rings, and having such bracelets and dependent chainlets, that, 
when Heron gave it even the gentlest pressure, they rattled like 
the manacles of a captive. 

" We saw you in Paris, Mr. Heron," the lady graciously said, 
" but I think you hardly saw us." 

" These are my daughters, Mr, Heron, Theresa and Lucy. 
I think them good girls, though full of nonsense," said Mr. Money. 

Lucy, who had been on a footstool at Miss Grey's feet, gathered 
herself up, blushing. She was a pretty girl, with brown, frizzy hair, 
and wore a dress which fitted her so closely from neck to hip, that 
she might really have been, to all seeming, melted or moulded into 
it. The other young lady, Theresa, slightly and gravely inclined 
her head to Mr. Heron, who at once thought the whole group 
most delightful and beautiful, and found his breast filled with a 
new pride in the loved old England that produced such homes 
and furnished them with such women. 

" Dear, darUng papa," exclaimed the enthusiastic little Lucy, 
swooping at her father, and throwing both arms round his neck, 
" we have had such a joy to-day, such a surprise ! Don't you see 
anybody here ? Oh, come now, do use your eyes." 

" I see a young lady whom I have not yet the pleasure 
of knowing, but whom I hope you will help me to know, 
Lucelet." 

Mr. Money turned to ISIiss Grey with his genial smile. She 
rose from the sofa and bowed, and waited. She did not as yet 
quite understand the Money family, and was not sure whether she 
ought to like them or not. They impressed her at first as being 
far too rich for her taste, and odd and afiected, and she hated 
affectation. 

" But this is Nola Grey, papa . my dearest old schoolfellow 
when I was at Keeton ; you must have heard me talk of Nola 
Grey a thousand times." 



46 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

So she dragged her papa up to Nola Grey, whose colour grew 
a little at this tempestuous kind of welcome. 

" Dare say I did, Lucelet, but Miss Grey, I am sure, will excuse 
me if I have forgotten ; I am very glad to see you. Miss Grey . 
glad to see any friend of Lucelet's. So you come from Keeton ? 
That's another reason why I should be glad to see you, for I 
just now want to ask a question or two about Keeton. Sit 
down." 

Miss Grey allowed herself to be led to a sofa a little distance 
from where she had been sitting. Mr. Money sat beside her. 

"Now, Lucelet, I want to ask Miss Grey a sensible question 
or two, which I don't think you would care twopence about. Just 
you go and help our two Theresas to talk to Mr. Heron." 

" But, papa darling. Miss Grey won't care about what you call 
sensible subjects any more than I. She won't know anything 
about them." 

"Yes, dear, she will ; look at her forehead." 

.' Oh, I have looked at it ! Isn't it beautiful ?" 

" I didn't mean that," Mr. Money said with a smile ; " I m.eant 
that it looked sensible and thoughtful. Now go away, Lucelet, 
like a dear little giil." 

Miss Grey sat quietly through all this. She was not in the 
least offended. ]\Ir. Money seemed to her to be just what a man 
ought to be . uncouth, rough, and domineering. She was amused 
meanwhile to observe the kind of devotion and enthusiasm with 
which Mr. Heron was entering into conversation with Mrs. Money 
and her elder daughter. That was just Avhat a man ought to be . a 
young man . silly in his devotion to women, unless perhaps where 
the devotion was to be accounted for otherwise than by silliness, as 
in a case like the present, where the unmarried women might be 
presumed to have large fortunes. So Miss Grey liked the whole 
scene. It was as good as a play to her, especially as good as a 
play which confirms all one's own theories of life. 

" England, Mr. Heron," said Mrs. Money in her melancholy 
voice, " is near her fall." 

"Oh, Mrs. Money, pray pardon me . England! you amaze 
me . I am surprised . do forgive me . to hear an Englishwoman 
say so ; our England with her glorious destiny !" The young man 
blushed and grew confused. One might have thought his mother 
had been called in question, or his sweetheart. 

Mrs. Money shook her head and twirled one of lier bracelets, 

"She is near her fall, Mr. Heron! You cannot know; you 
have lived faraway, and do not see what 7*:'^ see. She has i)roved 
faithless to her mission." 



MISS GREY'S FIRST CALL. 47 

"Something . yes . there I agree," Mr. Heron eagerly inter- 
posed, thinking of the St. Xavier's Settlements. 

" She was the cradle of freedom," Mrs. Money went on. "She 
ought to have been always its nursery and home. What have we 
now, Mr. Heron? A people absolutely in servitude, the principle 
of caste everywhere triumphant . corruption in the aristocracy . 
corruption in the city. No man now dares to serve his country 
except at the penalty of suffering the blackest ingratitude." 

Mr. Heron was startled. He did not know that Mrs. Money 
was arguing only from the assumption that her husband was a very 
great man, who would have done wonderful things for England if a 
perverse and base ruling class had not thwarted him and treated 
him badly. 

" England," Theresa Money said, smiling sweetly, but with a 
suffusion of melancholy, " can hardly be regenerated until she is 
once more dipped in the holy well." 

" You see, we all think ditierently, Mr. Heron," said the eager 
Lucy, " Mamma thinks we want a republic. Tessy is a saint, 
and would like to see roadside shrines." 

"And you?" Heron asked, pleased with the girl's bright eyes 
and winning ways. 

" Oh, I . I only believe in the regeneration of England through 
the renascence of art. So we all have our difterent theories, you 
see, but we all agree to differ, and we don't quarrel much. Papa 
laughs at us all, when he has time. But just now I am taken up 
with Nola Grey. If I were a man, I should make an idol of her. 
That lovely statuesque face, that figure. like the Diana of the 
Louvre ! " 

Mr. Heron looked and admired, but one person's raptures 
about man or woman seldom awaken corresponding raptures in 
other and mipartial breasts. He saw, however, a handsome, lady- 
like girl, who conveyed to him a sort of chilling impression. 

" She was my schoolfellow at Keeton," Lucy went on, " and 
she was so good and clever that I adored her then, and I do now 
again. She has come to London to live alone, and I am sure she 
must have some strange and romantic story." 

Meanwhile Mr. Money, who prefaced his enquiries by telling 
Miss Grey that he was always asking information about something, 
began to put several questions to her concerning the local magnates, 
politics, and parties of Keeton. Minola was rather pleased to be 
talked to by a man as if she were a rational creature. Like most 
girls brought up in a Nonconformist household in a country to\\Ti, 
she had been surrounded by political talk from her infancy, but, 
unlike most girls, she had sometimes listened to it and learned to 



48 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

know what it was all about. So she gave Mr. INIoney a good deal 
of information, which he received with an approbatory " Yes, yes," 
or an enquiring " So, so," every now and then. 

" You know that there's likely to be a vacancy soon in the 
representation . member of Parliament," he added by way of 
explanation. 

" I know what a vacancy in the representation means," Miss 
Grey answered demurely, " but I didn't know there was likely to 
be one just now. I don't keep up much correspondence with 
Keeton. I don't love it." 

"Why not?" 

" Oh, I don't know." 

He smiled. 

" You are smiling because you think that a woman's answer? 
So it is, Mr. Money, and I am afraid it isn't true, but 1 really 
didn't think of what I was saying. I do know why I don't care 
much about Keeton." 

" Yes, yes ; well, I dare say you do. But to return, as the 
books say . do you know a Mr. Augustus Sheppard ? " 

She could not help colouring slightly. " Yes, I know him," 
and a faint smile broke over her face in spite of herself. 

" Is he strong in Keeton ? " 

"Strong?" 

" Well liked, respectable, a likely kind of man to get good 
Conservative support if he stood for Keeton? You don't know, 
perhaps ? " 

" Yes, I think I do know. I believe he wishes to get into Par- 
liament, and I am sure he is thought highly of. lie is a very 
good man, a man of very high character," she added emphatically, 
anxious to repair the mental wrong-doing of thinking him ridiculous 
and tiresome. 

Just at this moment Mr. Heron rose to take his leave, and Mr. 
I\Ioney left the room with him, so that the conversation with Miss 
Grey was broken off. Then Lucy came to Nola again, and Nola 
was surrounded by the three women, who began to lay out various 
schemes for seeing her often and making London pleasant to her. 
Much as our lonely heroine loved her loneliness, she was greatly 
touched by their spontaneous kindness, but she was alarmed by it 
too. 

A card was brought to Mrs. Money, who passed it on to Lucy. 

" Oh, how delighful ! " Lucy exclaimed. " So glad he has 
come, mamma ! Nola, dear, a poet, a real poet! " 

But Nola would not prolong her visit that day even for a poet. 
A very handsome, tall, dark-haired man, who at a distance seemed 



MISS GREY'S FIRST CALL. 49 

boyishly young, and when near looked worn and not very young, 
was shown in. For the moment or two that she could see him, 
Minola thought she had never seen so self- conceited and affected 
a creature. She did not hear his name or a word he said, but his 
splendid dark eyes, deeply set in hollows, took in every outline 
of her face and form. She thought him the poet of a school-girl's 
romance made to order. 

Minola tore herself from the clinging embraces of Lucy, with 
less difficulty, perhaps, because of the poet's arrival, to whose 
society Lucy was clearly anxious to hasten back. It so happened 
that Mr. Money had kept Mr. Heron for a few minutes in talk, 
and the result was that exactly as Miss Grey reached the door, 
Mr. Heron arrived there too. They both came out together, and 
in a moment they were in the grey atmosphere, dun lines of houses, 
and twinkling gas-lights of Victoria Street. Minola would much 
rather have been there alone. 

Victor Heron, however, was full of the antique ideas of man's 
chivalrous duty and woman's sweet dependence, which still lingered 
in the out-of-the-way colony where he had spent so much of his 
time. Also, it must be owned that he had not yet quite got rid of 
the sense of responsibihty and universal dictatorship belonging to 
the chief man in a petty commonwealth. For some time after his 
return to London he could hardly see an omnibus-horse fall in the 
street without thinking it was an occasion which called for some 
intervention on his part. Therefore, when Miss Grey and he stood 
in the street together, Mr. Heron at once assumed that the young 
woman must, as a matter of course, require his escort and 
protection. 

He calmly took his place at her side. Miss Grey was a little 
surprised, but said nothing, and they went on. 

" Do you live far from this, Miss Money ? " he began. 

" I am not Miss Money . my name is Grey." 

" Of course, yes . I beg your pardon for the mistake. It was 
only a mistake of the tongue, for I knew very well that you were 
not Miss Money." 

" Thank you." 

" And your first name is so very pretty and peculiar that I 
could not easily have forgotten it." 

" I am greatly obliged to my godfathers and godmothers." 

" Did you say that you lived in this quarter, INIiss Grey?" 

" No . I did not make any answer ; I had not time." 

" I hope you do not live very near," the gallant Heron observed. 

" Why do you hope that?" Miss Grey said, turning her eyes 
upon him with an air of cold resolution, which v/ould probably have 



50 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

proved very trying to a less sinceie maker of compliments, even 
though a far more dexterous person than Mr. Heron. 

" Of course, because I should have the less of your company." 

" But there is no need of your coming out of your way for me. 
I don't require any escort, Mr. Heron." 

" I couldn't think of letting a lady walk home by herself. 
That would seem very strange to me. Perhaps you think me old- 
fashioned or col Dnial ? " 

" I have heard that you are from the colonies. In London 
people have not time to keep up all these pretty forms and cere- 
monies. We don't any longer pretend to think that a girl needs 
to be defended against giants, or robbers, or mad bulls, when 
crossing two or three streets in open day." 

" Well, it is hardly open day now ; it is almost quite dark." 

"The lamps are lighted," Miss Grey observed. 

" Yes, if you call that being lighted ! You have such bad gas 
in London. Why does not somebody stir up people here, and 
put things to rights ? You seem to me the most patient people in 
all the world. I wish they would give me the ruling of this place 
for about a twelvemonth." 

" I wish they would." 

" Do you ? " and he looked at her with a glance of genuine 
gratitude in his dark eyes, for he thought she meant to express 
her entire confidence in his governing power, and her wish to 
see him at the head of affairs. Miss Grey, however, only meant 
that, if he were engaged in directing the municipal government of 
London, he would probably be rather too busy to walk with her. 

" Yes," he went on, " you should soon see a change. For 
instance," . they v/ere now at the end of Victoria Street, near the 
Abbey . " I would begin by having a great broad street, like this, 
running right up from here to the British Museum . you know 
where the British Museum is, of course ? " 

" Yes ; I live near it." 

" Do you really ? I am so glad to hear that. I have been 
there lately very often. How happy you Londoners are to have 
such glorious places. In that reading-room I felt inclined to 
bless England." 

Miss Grey was now particularly sorry that she had said anything 
about her place of residence. Still it did not seem as if much 
would have been gained by any reticence unless she could actually 
dismiss her companion i)ercmptorily. Mr. Heron was evidently 
(juitc resolved to be her escort all the way along. He was clearly 
under the impression that he was making himself very agreeable. 
The good-natured youth believed he was doing quite the right 



Af/SS GREY'S FIRST CALL. 51 

thing, and meant it all for the very best, and therefore couKl not 
suppose that any nice girl could fail to accept his attendance in a 
kindly spirit. That Miss Grey must be a nice girl he was perfectly 
certain, for he had met her at Mr. Money's, and Money was 
evidently a fine fellow, a very fine fellow. Miss Grey was ver/ 
handsome too, but that did not count for very much with Herou. 
At least, he would have made himself just as readily, under the 
circumstances, the escort of little Miss Blanchet. 

So he talked on about various things . the Moneys, and what 
charming people they were ! the British Museum, what a noble 
institution ! the National Gallery, how hideous the building ! . 
why on earth didn't anybody do something? . the glorious destiny 
of England . the utter imbecility ot the English Government. 

It was not always quite easy to keep up with his talk, for the 
streets were crowded and noisy, and Mr. Heron talked right on 
through every interruption. When they came to crossings where 
the perplexed currents and counter-currents of traffic on wheels 
would have made a nervous person shudder, Mr. Heron coolly 
took Miss Grey's hand and conducted her in and out, talking all 
the while as if they were crossing a ball-room floor. Minola 
made it a point of honour not to hesitate, or start, or show that 
she had nerves. But when he began to run into politics he always 
pulled himself up, for he politely remembered that young ladies 
did not care about politics, and so he tried to find some prettier 
subject to talk about. Miss Grey understood this perfectly well, 
and was amused and contemptuous. 

" I suppose this man must be a person of some brains and 
sense," she thought. '' He was in command of something somewhere, 
and I suppose even the Government he calls so imbecile would 
not have put him there if he were a downright fool. But, because 
he talks to a woman, he feels bound only to talk of trivial things." 

At last the walk came to an end. " Ah, I beg pardon, you 
live here," Mr. Heron said. " May I have the honour of calling 
on your family ? I sometimes come to the Museum, and, if I 
might call, I should be delighted to make their acquaintance." 

" Thank you," Miss Grey said coldly, " I have no family. My 
father and mother are dead." 

" Oh, I am so sorry ! I wish I had not asked such a question." 
He looked really distressed, and the expression of his eyes had tor 
the first time a pleasing, softening effect upon Miss Grey. 

" We lodge here, all alone. A lady . an old friend of mine . 
and I. We have no acquaintances, unless Lucy Money's family 
may be called so. We read and study a great deal, and don't go 
out, and don't see anyone." 

E 2 



52 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

" T can quite understand," Mr. Heron answered with grave 
sympathy. " Of course you don't care to be intruded on by 
visitors. I thank you for having allowed me the pleasure of 
accompanying you so far." 

He spoke in tones much more deferential than before, for he 
assumed that the young lady was lonely and poor. There was 
something in his manner, in his eyes, in his grave, respectful voice, 
which conveyed to Minola the idea of genuine sympathy, and 
brought to her, the object of it, a new conviction that she really 
w-as isolated and friendless, and the springs of her emotions were 
touched in a moment, and tears flashed in her eyes. Perhaps 
Mr. Heron saw them, and felt that he ought not to see them, 
for he raised his hat and instantly left her. 

Minola lingered for a moment on the doorstep, in order that 
she might recover her expression of cheerfulness before meeting 
the eyes of Miss Blanchet. But that little lady had seen her 
coming to the door, and seen and marvelled at her escort, and now 
ran herself and opened the door to receive her. 

" My dear Minola, do tell me who that handsome young man 
was ? What lovely dark eyes he had ! Where did you meet him ? 
Is he young Mr. Money ? " 

The poetess's susceptible bosom still thrilled and throbbed at 
the sight, or even the thought, of a handsome young man. She 
could not understand how anybody on earth could avoid liking 
handsome young men. But in this case a certain doubt and 
dissatisfaction suddenly dissolved a way into her instincti\e 
gratification at the sight of Minola's escort. A handsome and 
young Mr. Money might prove an inconvenient visitor just at 
present. 

Minola briefly told her when they were safe in their room. 
IMiss Blanchet was relieved to find that he was not a young I\Ir. 
Money, for a young Mr. IMoney, if there were one, would doubtless 
be rich. 

" Isn't he wonderfully handsome ! Such a smile ! " 

"I hardly know," Minola said, distressedly; "perhaps he is. 
I really didn't notice. He goes to the Museum, and I must exile 
myself from the place for evermore, or I shall be always meeting 
him, and be forced to listen politely to talk about nothing. Mary 
Blanchet, our days of freedom are gone ! We are getting to know 
people. I foresaw it. What shall we do ? We must find some 
other lodgings ever so far away." 

"Do you like Miss Money, dear?" Mary Blanchet asked, 
timidly. 

" Lucy? Oh, yes; very much. But there is Mr. Money, and 



IS THIS ALCESTE? 53 

Ihey are going to be terribly kind to us, and they have all manner 
of friends; and what is to become of my indei)endence? Mary 
Blanchet, I will not bear it ! I will be independent ! " 

" I have news for you, dear," Miss Blanchet said. 

" If it please the destinies, not news of any more friends f 
Why, we shall be like the hare in Gay's fable, if we go on in this 
way." 

" Not of any more friends, darling, but of one friend. My 
brother has been here." 

" Oh ! " 

" Yes ; and he is longing to see you." 

Minola sincerely wished that she could say she was longing 
to see him. But she could not say it, even to please her friend 
and comrade. 

" You don't want to see him," said Mary Blanchet, in piteous 
reproach. 

" But you do, dear," Miss Grey said, " and I shall like to see 
any one, be sure, who brightens your life." 

This was said with full sincerity, although at the very moment 
the whimsical thought passed through her, "We only want Mr. 
Augustus Sheppard now to complete our social happiness." 



CHAPTER VI. 

IS THIS ALCESTE? 

Minola's mind was a good deal disturbed by the various little 
events of the day, the incidents and consequences of hei first visit 
in London. She began to see with much perplexity and dis- 
appointment that her life of lonely independence was likely to 
be compromised. She was not sure that she could much like the 
Moneys, and yet she felt that they were disposed and determined 
to be very kind to her. There was something ridiculous and painful 
in the fact that Mr. Augustus Sheppard's name was thrust upon 
her, almost at the first moment of her crossing for the first time a 
strange threshold in London ; then there was Mary Blanchet's 
brother turning up ; and Mary Blanchet herself was evidently falling 
off from the high design of lonely independence. Again, there 
was Mr. Heron, who now knew where she lived, and who often 
went to the British Museum, and who might cross her path at any 
hour. Sweet, lonely freedom, happy carelessness ot action, farewell ! 



54 ^//5^ MISANTHROPE. 

Mr. Heron was especially a trouble to Minola. The kindly, 
grave expression on his face when he heard of her living alone 
declared, as nearly as any words could do, that he considered her 
an object of pity. Was she an object of pity? Was that the light 
in which any one could look at her superb project of playing at a 
lifelong hohday ? And if people chose to look at it so, what did 
that matter to her ? Are women, then, the slaves of the opinion 
of people all around them ? " They are," Minola said to herself 
in scorn and melancholy. " They are ; wc are. I am shaken to 
my very soul, because a young man, for whose opinion on any 
other subject I should not care anything, chooses to look at me 
with pity ! " 

The night was melancholy. When the outer world was shut 
out, and the gas was lighted, and the two women sat down to 
work, and talk, nothing seemed to Mmola quite as it had been. 
The evident happiness and purring high spirits of the little poetess 
oppressed her. Mary Blanchet was so glad to be making 
acquaintances, and to have some prospect of seeing the inside 
of a London home. Then Minola's kindlier nature returned to 
her, and she thought of Mary's delight at seeing her brother, and 
how unkind it would be if she, Minola, did not tiy to enter into 
her feelings. Her mind went back to her o\\ti brother, to their 
dear early companionship, when nothing seemed more natural 
and more certain than that they two should walk the world arm- 
in-arm. Now all that had come to an end . faded away somehow ; 
and he had gone into the world on his own account, and made 
other ties, and forgotten her. But if he were even now to come 
back, if she were to hear in the street the sound of the peculiar 
whistle with which he always announced his coming to her . 
oh, how, in spite of all his forgetfulness and her anger, she would 
run to him and throw her arms round his neck ! Why should not 
Mary Blanchet love her brother, and gladden when he came? 

"What is your brother like, Mary dear?" she said gently, 
anxious to propitiate by voluntarily entering on the topic dearest 
to her friend. 

" Oh, very handsome . very, very handsome ! " 

Miss Grey smiled in spite of herself 

" Now, Minola, I know what you are smiling at ; you think it 
is my sisterly nonsense, and all that, but wait until you see." 

" I'll wait," Minola said. 

Miss Grey did not go out the next day as usual, although it 
was one of the soft, amber-grey, autumnal days that she loved, 
and the Regent's Park would have looked beautiful. She remained 
nearly all the morning in her own room, and avoided even Mary 



IS THIS ALCESTE? 55 

Blanchet. Some singular change had taken place -within her, for 
which she could not account, otherwise than by assuming that it 
was begotten of the fear that she would be drawn, willingly or 
unwillingly, into uncongenial companionshij), and must renounce 
her liberty. She was forced into a strange, painful, self-questioning 
mood. Was the whole fabric of her self-appointed happiness and 
independence only a dream, or worse than a dream, an error? 
So soon to doubt the value and the virtue of the emancipation 
she had prayed for and planned for during years ! Not often, 
perhaps, has a warm hearted, fanciful, and spirited girl been 
pressed down by such peculiar relationships as hers at Keeton 
lately ; a twice-removed stepfather and stepmother, absolutely 
uncongenial with her, causing her soul and her youth to congeal 
amid dull repression. Whr>t wonder that to her all happiness 
seemed to consist in mere freedom and unrestricted self-develop- 
ment? And now . so soon . why does she begin to doubt the 
reality, the fuliilment of her happiness? Only because an im- 
pulsive and kindly young man, whom she saw for the first time, 
looked pityingly at her. This, she said to herself, is what our self- 
reliance and our emancipation come to after all. 

It was a positive relief to her, after a futile hour or so of such 
questioning, when Mar)- Blanchet ran upstairs, and with beaming 
eyes begged that Minola would come and see her brother. " He 
is longing to see you . and you will like him . oh, you will like 
him, Minola dearest ! " she said beseechingly. 

Miss Grey went downstairs straightway, without stopping to 
give one touch to her hair, or one glance at the glass. The little 
poetess was waiting a moment, with an involuntary look towards 
the dressing-table, as if Miss Grey must needs have some business 
there before she descended, but ISIiss Grey thought of nothing of 
the kind, and they w-ent downstairs together. 

Minola expected, she could not tell why, to see a small and 
rather withered man in Mary Blanchet's brother. \\'Tien they were 
entering the drawing-room he was looking out of the window, and 
had his back turned, and she was surprised to see that he was 
decidedly tall. When he turned round, she saw that not only was 
he handsome, but that she had recognised the fact of his being 
handsome before. For he was unmistakably the ideal poet of 
school-girls whom she had met at Mr. Money's house the da}- 
before. 

The knowledge produced a sort of embarrassment to begin with. 
Minola was about to throw her soul into the sacrifice, and greet her 
friend's brother with the utmost cordiality. But she had pictured 
to herself a sort of Mary Blanchet in trousers, a gentle old- 



56 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

fashioned, timid person, whom, perhaps, the outer world was apt 
to misprize, if not even to snub, and whom therefore it became 
her, Minola Grey, as an enemy and outlaw of the common world, 
to receive with double consideration. But this brilliant, self- 
conceited, affected, oppressively handsome young man, on whom 
she had seen Lucy Money and her mother hanging devotedly, was 
quite another sort of person. His presence seemed to overcharge 
the room ; the scene became all compound of tall bending form 
and dark eyes. 

" I am glad to see you, Mr. Blanchet," Miss Grey began, 
determined not to be put out by any self conceited poet and 
ideal of school-girls. " I must be glad to see you because you 
are Mary's brother." 

" You ought rather to be not glad to see me for that reason," 
he said, with a deprecating bow and a slight shrug of the shoulders, 
" for I have been a very neglectful brother to Mary." 

"So I have heard," Miss Grey said, "but not from Mary. 
Slie always defended you. But 1 have seen you before, Mr. 
Blanchet, have I not ? " . 

" At Mrs. Money's, yesterday ? Oh, yes ; I only saw you, 
Miss Grey. I went there to see you, and only in the most literal 
way got what I wanted." 

" But, Herbert, you never told me that you were going, or 
that you knew Mrs. Money," his sister interposed. 

" No, dear ; that was an innocent deceit on my part. You 
told me that Miss Grey had gone there, and as I knew the Moneys, 
I hurried away there without telling you. I wanted to know what 
you were like, Miss Grey, before seeing my sister again. I hope 
you are not angry? She is so devoted to you, that she painted 
you in colours the most bewitching ; but I was afraid her friendship 
was carrying her away, and I wanted to see for myself when she 
was not present." 

Miss Grey remained resolutely silent. She thought this be- 
ginning particularly disagreeable, and began to fear that she should 
.never be able to like Mary Blanchet's brother. " Oh, why do 
women have brothers ? " she asked herself There seemed some- 
thing dishonest in Mr. Blanchet's proceeding, despite the frank 
completeness of his confession. 

" Well, Herbert, confess that I didn't do her justice . didn't 
do her common justice," the enthusiastic Mary exclaimed. 

" If Miss Grey would not be offended," her brother said, " T 
would say that I see in her just the woman capable of doing the 
kind and generous things I have heard of" 

" Yes ; but we mustn't talk about it," the poetess said, with 



IS THIS ALCESTEf 57 

tears of gratefulness blinking in her eyes, " and we'll not say a 
word more about it, Minola ; not a word, indeed, dear." And 
she put a deprecating little hand upon Minola's arm. 

Then they all sat down, and Herbert Blanchet began to talk. 
He talked very well, and he seemed to have put away most of the 
airs of affectation which, even in her very short opportunity of 
observation, Minola had seen in him when he was talking to the 
Money girls. 

" You have travelled a great deal," Miss Grey said. " I envy 
you." 

" If you call it travelling. I have drifted about the world a 
good deal, and seen the wrong sides of everything. I make it 
pay in a sort of way. When any place that I know is brought 
into public notice by a war or something of the kind, I write 
about it. Or if a place is not brought into any present notice by 
anything, I write about it, and take a different view from anybody 
else. I have done particularly Avell \vith Italy, showing that Naples 
is the ugliest place in all the world ; that the Roman women have 
shockingly bad figures, and that the climate is wretched from the 
Alps to the Straits of Messina." 

" But you don't think that? " Mary Blanchet said, wonderingly. 

" Don't I ? Well, I don't know. I almost think I do for 
the moment. One can get into that frame of mind. Besides, 
I really don't care about scenery. I don't observe it as I pass 
along. And I like to say what other people don't say, and to see 
what they don't see. Of course I don't put my name to any of 
these things ; they are only done to make a living. I live on such 
stuff as that. I live for Art." 

" It is glorious to live for Art," his sister exclaimed, pressing 
her thin, tiny hands together. 

Mr. Blanchet did not seem to care much about his sister's 
approval. 

" My art isn't yours, Mary," he said with a pitying smile. 
" Pictures of flowers and of little children saying their prayers, 
and nice poems about good young men and women, are your 
ideas of painting and poetry, I am sure. You are a lover of 
the human race, I know," 

" I hope I love my neighbours," Mary said earnestly. 

" I hope you do, dear. All good little women like you ought 
to do that. 'Do you love your neighbour. Miss Grey ?" 

" I don't care much for any one," Miss Grey answered decisively, 
*' except Mary Blanchet. But I have no particular principle or 
theory about it, only that I don't care for people." 

Although Miss Grey had Alceste for her hero, she did not like 



S8 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

sham misanthropy, which she now fancied her visitor was trying to 
display. Perhaps, too, she began to think that this misanthropy 
rather caricatured her own. 

Miss Blanchet, on the contrary, was incHned to argue the ques- 
tion and to pelt her brother with touching commonplaces. 

" The more we know people," she emphatically declared, " the 
more good we see in them. In every heart there is a deep spring 
of goodness. Oh, yes ! " 

" There isn't in mine, I know," he said. " I speak for myself" 

" For shame, Herbert ! How else could you ever feel impelled 
to try and do some good for your fellow-creatures?" 

" But I don't want to do any good to my fellow-creatures. 
I don't care about my fellow-creatures, and I don't even admit that 
they are my fellow-creatures, those men and those women too 
that one sees about. Why should the common possession of two 
legs make us fellow-creatures with every man, more than with every 
bird? No, I don't love the human race at all." 

" This is his nonsense, Minola ; you won't believe a word of 
it," the little poetess eagerly said, divided between admiration 
and alarm. 

" You good little innocent dear, is it not perfectly true ? What 
did I ever do for you, let me ask ? There, Miss Grey, you see as 
kind an elder sister as ever lived. I remember her a perfect mother 
to me. I dare say I should have been dead thirty years ago but 
for her, though whether I ought to thank her for keeping me alive 
is another thing. Anyhow, what was my way of showing my 
gratitude ? As soon as I could shake myself free, I rambled about 
the world, a very vagrant, and never took any thought of her. We 
are all the same, Miss Grey, believe me . we men." 

" I can well believe it," Miss Grey said. 

" Of course you can ; in all our dealings with you women we 
are just the same. Our sisters and mothers take trouble without 
end for us, and cry their eyes out for us, and we . what do we 
care? I am not worse than my neighbours. If you ask me, 
Do I admire my fellow-man ? I answer frankly, No, not I. What 
should I admire him for?" 

"One must live for something," the little poetess pleaded, 
much perplexed in her heart as to what Miss Grey's opinion might 
be about all this. 

" Of course. One must live for art ; for music and poetry, and 
colours and decoration." 

"And Nature?" Mary Blanchet gently insinuated. 

" Nature . no ! Nature is the buxom sweetheart of ploughboy 
poets. We only affect to admire Nature because people think we 



IS THIS ALCESTEf 59 

can't be good if we don't. No one really cares about great cauli- 
flower suns, and startling contrasts of blazing purple and emerald 
green. There is nothing really beautiful in Nature, except her 
decay; her rank weeds, and dank grasses, and funereal evening 
glooms."' 

While he talked this way he was seated on the piano stool, 
with his face turned away from the piano, on wliose keys he touched 
every now and then with a light and seemingly careless hand, 
bringing out only a faint note that seemed to help the conversation 
rather than to interrupt it. He was very handsome, Minola could 
not help thinking, and there was something in his colourless face 
and deep eves that seemed congenial with the talk of glooms and 
decay. Still, true to her first feeling towards all men, Minola was 
disposed to dislike him, the more especially as he spoke with an 
air of easy superiority, as one who would imply that he knew how 
to maintain his place above woman in creation. 

" I thought all you poets affected to be in love with Nature," 
.she said ; " I mean, you younger poets," and she emphasised the 
word " younger " with a certaua contemptuous tone, which made 
it just what she meant it to be . " smaller poets." 

" Why, younger poets?" 

" Well, because the elder ones, I think, really were in love 
with Nature, and didn't affect anything." 

He smiled pityingly. 

" No," he said decisively, " we don't care about Nature . 
our school." 

"I am from the country : I don't think I know what your school is." 

" We don't want to be known in the country ; we couldn't 
endure to be known in the country." 

"But Fame?" Minola asked; "does Fame not go outside 
the twelve-mile radius?" 

" Oh, Miss Grey, do pray excuse me, but you really don't under- 
stand us ; we don't want fame. What is fame ? Vulgarity made 
immortal." 

"Then, what do you publish for?" 

He rose from his seat, and seized his hair with both hands, 
then constrained himself to endurance, and sat down again. 

" My dear young lady, we don't publish, we don't intend to 
publish. No man in his senses would publish for us if we were 
never so well inclined. No one could sell six copies. The great, 
thick-headed public couldn't understand us. We are satisfied that 
the true artist never does have a public, or look for it. The 
public can have their Tennysons, and Brownings, and Swinburnes, 
and Tuppers, and all that lot " 



6o MISS MISANTHROPE. 

" That lot ! " broke in Miss Blanchet; mildly horrified, " that 
lot ! Browning and Tupper put together ! " 

" My dear Mary, I don't know one of these people from another ; 
I never read any of them now. They are all the same sort of thing 
to me. These persons are not artists ; they are only men trying 
to amuse the public. Some of them, I am told, are positively fond 
of politics." *. 

"Don't your school care for politics?" Miss Grey asked, 
now growing rather amused. 

" Oh, no, we never trouble ourselves about such things. What 
can it matter whether the Reform Bill is carried . is there a 
Reform Bill going on now ? . I believe there always is . or what 
becomes of the Eastern question, or whether New Zealand has 
a constitution ? These are questions for vestrymen, not artists; we 
don't love man." 

" There I am with you," Miss Grey said; "if that alone were 
qualification enough, I should be glad to be one of your fraternity, 
for I don't love man ; I think he is a poor creature at his best." 

" So do I," said the poet, turning towards her with eyes m which 
for the moment a deep and genuine feeling seemed to light up; 
*' the poorest creature, at his best ? Why should anyone turn aside 
for a moment from his path to help such a thing ? What does it 
matter, the welfare of him and his pitiful race ? Let us sing, and 
play, and paint, and forget him and the destiny that he makes 
such a work about. Wisdom only consists in shutting our ears 
to his cries of ambition, and jealousy, and pain, and being happy 
in our own way, and forgetting him." 

Their eyes met for a moment, and then Minola lowered hers. 
In that instant a gleam of sympathy had passed from her eyes into 
his, and he knew it. She felt a little humiliated somehow, like a 
proud fencer suddenly disarmed at the first touch of his adversary. 
For as he was speaking scorn of the human race, she was saying to 
herself, " This man, I do beUeve, has suffered deeply. He has 
found people cold, and mean, and selfish . as / have . and he 
feels it, and cannot hide it. I did him wrong ; he is not a fribble 
or sham cynic, only a disappointed dreamer." The sympathy which 
she felt, showed itself only too quickly in her very eloquent eyes. 

Herbert Blanchet rose after an instant of silence and took his 
leave, asking permission to call again, which Miss Grey would 
have gladly refused if she could have stood up against the appealing 
looks of Mary. So she had to grant him the permission, thinking 
as she gave it that another path of her liberty was closed. 

Mary went to the door with her brother, and, much to Minola's 
gratification, remained a long time talking with liim there. 



IS THIS ALCESTE? 6t 

Miss Grey went to the piano and began to sing . softly to her- 
self, that she might not be heard outside. The short autumnal 
day was already closing in London. Out in the country there 
would be two hours yet of light before the round, red sun went 
down behind the sloping fields, with the fresh upturned earth, and 
the clumps of trees, but here, in West Central regions of London, 
the autumn day dies in its youth. The dusk already gathered 
around the singer, who sang to please or to soothe herself. In any 
troubled mood Miss Grey had long been accustomed to clear her 
spirits by singing to herself; and on many a long, dull Sunday at 
home . in the place that was called her home . she had committed 
the fraud of singing her favourite ballads to slow, slow time, that 
they might be mistaken for hymns and pass unreproved. Her 
voice and way of singing made the song seem like a sweet, plaintive 
recitative ; just the singing to hear in the " gloaming," to draw a 
few people hushed around it, and hold them in suspense, fearful 
to lose a single note and miss the charm of expression. In truth, 
the charm of it sprang from the fact that the singer sang to express 
her own emotions, and thus every tone had its reality and its 
meaning. When women sing for a listening company, they sing 
conventionally, and in the way that some teacher has taught, or in 
what they believe to be the manner of some great artist; or they 
sing to somebody or at somebody, and in any case they are away 
from that truthfulness which in art is simply the faithful expression 
of real emotion. With Minola Grey singing was an end rather 
than a means; a rehef in itself, a new mood in itself; a passing 
away from poor and personal emotions into ideal regions, where 
melancholy, if it must be, was always divine, and pain, if it would 
intrude, was purifying and ennobling. So, while the little poetess 
talked with her brother in the dusk, at the doorway, with the gas- 
lamps just beginning to light the monotonous street, Minola was 
singing herself into the pure blue ether, above the fogs, and 
clouds, and discordant selfish voices. 

She came back to earth with something like a heavy fall, as 
]\Iary Blanchet ran in upon her in the dark and exclaimed . 

'. Now, do tell me . how do you like my brother ? " 

To say the truth. Miss Grey did not well know. " I wonder is 
he an Alceste ? " she asked herself. On the whole, his coming had 
made an uncomfortable, anxious, uncanny impression upon her, 
and she looked back with a kind of hopeless regret on the days 
when she had London all to herself, and knew nobody. 



62 MJSS MISANTHROPE. 

CHAPTER VIL 

ON THE BRIDGE. 

There was one walk of which Minola Grey was especially fond, 
and which she loved to enjoy alone. It led by a particular track 
through Regent's Park, avoiding for the most part the frequented 
paths, and bringing her at one time to the summit of a little mound 
or knoll, from which she could look across broad fields, where 
sheep were grazing, and through clumps of trees and over hedges, 
and from which, by a happy peculiarity, all sight of the beaten 
and dusty avenues of the park were shut out. The view from this 
little eminence was perhaps most beautiful on a moist and misty 
day. There the soft, loving, artistic breath of the rain-charged 
clouds breathed tenderly on the landscape, and effaced any of the 
harsher, or meaner, or in any way more prosaic details. There 
the gazer only saw a noble expanse of deliciously green grass and 
darker hedge-rows, and trees of dun and grey, and softly-mottled 
moss-grown trunks, and here and there a bed of flowers, and all 
under a silver-grey atmosphere that almost seemed to dissolve 
while the eye rested on it. When Minola had looked long enough 
on the scene opening below the mound, she then usually pursued 
her course by devious ways until she reached one of the bridges 
of the canal, and there she made another halting-place. The 
scene from the canal- bridge, unlike that from the mound, looked 
best on a bright, breezy day, of quick changing lights and shadows. 
Then the brown water of the canal sparkled and gladdened in the 
sun, and Minola, leaning over the little bridge, and fixing her eyes 
on the water as it rippled past the nearer bank, might enjoy, for 
the hour, the full sensation of one who floats in a boat along a 
stream, and watches the trees and the grasses of the shore. The 
place was quiet enough, and rich enough in trees and shrubs and 
little reeds quivering out of the water, to seem, at least in Minola's 
pleased eyes, like a spot on the bank of the canal far m the country, 
while yet there was to her the peculiar and keen delight of knowing 
herself in London. Sometimes, too, a canal-boat came gliding 
along, steered by a stalwart and sunburnt woman in a great straw 
bonnet, and the boat and the woman brought wild and delicious 
ideas of far-off country places, with woods and gipsies, and fresh, 
half savage, half poetic life. Minola extracted beautiful pictures 
and much poetry and romance from that little bridge over the 
discoloured canal, creeping through the heart of London. 



ON THE BRIDGE. 63 

The population of London . even its idlers . usually move along 
in tracks and grooves, ^\'here some go, others go ; where few go, 
at last none go. It is wonderful what hours of almost absolute 
solitude Minola was able to enjoy in the midst of Regent's Park. 
Voices, indeed, constantly reached her : the cries and laughter of 
children, the shoutings of cricketers, the dulled clamour of the 
metropolis itself. These reached her as did the bleating of sheep 
and the tinkle of their bells, the barking of dogs, and occasionally 
the fierce, hoarse, thrilling growl or roar of some disturbed or im- 
patient animal in the Zoological Gardens near at hand. But many 
and many a time Minola lounged for half an hour on her Httle 
knoll or on her chosen bridge, without seeing more of man or 
woman than of the lions in their cages on the other side of the 
enclosure. There was a ]Darticular hour of the day, too, when the 
park in general was especially deserted, and it appears almost 
needless to say that this was the time selected usually by Miss Grey 
for her rambles. It was sometimes a curious, half sensuous pleasure 
for her thus alone amid the murmur of the trees, to fancy herself, 
for the moment, back again within sight of the mausoleum at 
Keeton, where she had spent so many wear)' and solitary hours, 
and then awaking, to rejoice anew in her freedom and in London. 

It was a fortunate and kindly destiny which assigned to our 
heroine a poetess for a companion. Much as she loved occasional 
solitude, Minola loved still better the spirit of fi-deHty to the obliga- 
tions of true camarada-ie: and if Miss Blanchet had had any manner 
of work to do, from the mending of a stocking to the teaching of a 
school, in which Minola could possibly have assisted her, Minola 
would never ha\'e thought of leaving her to do the work alone. 
Or even if Miss Blanchet had work to do in which IMinola could 
not have helped her, but to which her presence would be any 
manner of encouragement, Minola would have stayed \a\\\ her, 
and never dreamed of play while her companion had to be at 
work. But we may safely appeal to all the poets of all time to say 
whether anybody ever desired companionship while engaged in the 
composition of poetry. Sappho herself could have well dispensed 
with the society of Phaon at such a moment. It is true that 
Corinne threw off some of her grandest eliusions in full face of 
an admiring crowd, and recited them not only with Lord Nelvil 
but at him. Corinne, however, was of the imi)rovisatrice class, to 
which Mary Blanchet did not profess to belong, and we own, 
moreover, to a constant suspicion that Corinne must have sat up 
late for many previous nights getting her improvisations by heart. 
At all events Miss Blanchet was not Corinne, and required seclu- 
sion, and much thought, and comparison of rhymes, and even 



64 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

looking out in dictionaries, in order to the composition of her 
poems. At the present time Minola was well aware that her friend 
had a new collection of poems on hand, and that the poems would 
be churned off with less difficulty if the author were occasionally 
left to herself for an hour or two. Therefore Minola was free to 
go into Regent's Park, with untroubled conscience and light heart. 
The woman who was not a poet revelled in the rustling branches 
and the sight of the soft grass, and was filled with glad visions and 
dreams by the flowing even of a poor, clouded, slow canal-stream, 
and was rapt into the ideal at the sight of a reed growing in the 
water and shaken by the wind. The poetess remained at home 
in a dull room, and hammered out rhymes with the help of a 
dictionary. 

But, to do Minola justice, she was not wholly given up, even in 
these free and lonely hours, to the sweet, innocent sensuousness that 
fills certain beings when amid trees and the sounds of flowing 
water. She had many scruples about the possible selfishness of 
her life, and wondered whether it was not wrong thus to live, and 
whether it was not through some fault of hers that no opportunity 
presented itself to her of doing any good for man or woman. She 
asked herself sometimes whether she had not been impatient and 
wilful in her dealings with the people at home . she still, when in 
a self-questioning and penitential mood, thought and spoke of 
Keeton as "home" . and whether she had not done wrong in 
leaving the material enclosure of any place bearing even by tradi- 
tion the name of home, for a life of freedom which some censors 
might have thought unwomanly. There are metaphysicians who 
hold that, although man of his nature has no intuitive knowledge, 
yet that the accumulative experience of generations supplies 
gradually for men as they are born a something which is like intui- 
tion to start with, and which they could not now start clear of. 
So the experiences or the traditions of generations form a sort of 
factitious and accumulated conscience for women independent of 
any abstract or eternal laws, and amounting in strength to some- 
thing like intuition. Over this shadow they cannot leap. Minola, 
filled as she was with a peculiarly independent spirit, and driven by 
circumstances to consider its indulgence a right and even a duty, 
could not keep from the occasional torment of a doubt whether 
there must not be something wrong in the conduct of any woman 
who, under any circumstances, leaves voluntarily, and while she is 
yet under age, the home of her childhood, and takes up her abode 
among strangers, without guardians, mistress of herself, and in 
lodgings. 

Perhaps some such ideas were in Minola's mind when she left 



ON THE BRIDGE. 65 

Mary Blanchet, a few mornings after the meetings described in the 
last chapter, and set out for a pleasant lonely walk in Regent's 
Park. Perhaps it was the very pleasure of the walk, and the 
loneliness, now missed for some days, that made her dread being 
selfish, and sent her downward into a drooping and penitent 
reaction. "This will never do," she kept thinking; "I ought to 
try to do something for somebody. I am growing to think only 
of myself . and I broke away from Keeton because I was getting 
morbid in thinking about myself" ' 

It was in tliis remorseful condition of mind that she approached 
her favourite mound, longing for an hour of quiet delight there, 
and half ashamed of her longing. When she had nearly reached 
its height, she discerned that the fates had seemingly resolved to 
punish her for her love of solitariness, by decreeing that her chosen 
retreat should that day be occupied. There was a seat on which 
she usually sat, and now a man was there. That was bad enough, 
but she could in an ordinary case have passed on, and sought 
some other place. Now, however, she saw that that was denied 
to her ; for the intruder was Mr. Victor Heron, and at the sound 
of her footstep he looked round, recognised her, and was already 
coming towards her, with hat uplifted, and courteous bow. 

The very rapid moment of time between Minola's first seeing 
Mr. Heron, and his recognising her, had enabled her quick eyes 
to perceive that when he thought himself alone he was anything 
but the genial and joyous personage he appeared in company. 
At first Miss Grey's attention was withdrawn from her own dis- 
appointment by the air of melancholy, and even of utter despon- 
dency, about the face and figure of the seated man. He sat 
leaning forward, his chin supported by one hand, his eyes fixed 
moodily on the ground ; he seemed to have no manner of concern 
with sky or scene, and his dark-complexioned face gave the im- 
pression of one terribly at odds with fortune. Minola felt almost 
irresistibly drawn towards one who seemed unhappy. Her harmless 
misanthropy went out at a breath in the presence of any man who 
appeared to suffer. 

But the change which came over Mr. Heron when he saw her 
can only be likened to that which would be made by the sudden 
illumination of a house that a second before was all dark, and 
seemingly tenantless. He came to meet her with sparkling eyes 
and delighted expression. Mr. Heron, it should perhaps be ex- 
plained, considered himself so much older than Miss Grey, so 
entirely an experienced, mature, not to say outworn man, that he 
did not think of waiting to see whether Miss Grey was inclined 
to encourage a renewal of the acquaintance. He considered it his 

F 



66 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

duty to be polite and friendly to the pretty girl he had met at 
Money's, and whom he assumed to be poor, and wanting in 
friends. 

" How fortunate I am to meet you here to-day ! " he said. 
" You remember me, I hope. Miss Grey? . I haven't called you Miss 
Money this time. Come, now . don't say you have forgotten me." 

" I could not say I had forgotten you, for it would not be 
true, Mr. Heron." 

" Thank you ; that was very prettily said, and kindly." 

" Was it ? I really didn't mean it to be either pretty or kind . 
only the truth." 

" I see, you go in for being downright, and saying only what 
you mean. I am very glad. So do I, and I am very much 
delighted to meet you here. Miss Grey. Come, you won't say 
as much for me ? " 

" I cannot say that I was glad to see anybody just here ; this 
place is almost always deserted, except by me." 

" You come here often, and you are sorry to have your retreat 
broken in upon ? Don't hesitate to say so. Miss Grey, and I will 
promise not to come into this part of the Park . or into any part of 
the Park for that matter . any more. Why should I disturb you? " 

He spoke with such earnestness and such evident sincerity that 
Minola began to feel ashamed of her previous ungraciousness. 

" That would be rather hard upon you, and a little arrogant on 
my part," she said, smiling. " The Park isn't mine ; and, if it were, 
I am sure I could not be selfish enough to wish to shut you out 
from any part of it. But I am in the habit of being a good deal 
alone ; and I fear it makes me a little rude and selfish sometimes. 
I was thinking of that just as I came up here and saw you." 

'. Then you saw me before I saw you?" 

" Oh, yes." 

" I am afraid you must have seen a very woe-begone personage." 

" Yes ; you seemed unhappy, I thought." 

" There is something sympathetic about you, Miss Grey, for 
all your coldness and loneliness." 

"Surely," said Miss Grey, " a woman without some feeling of 
sympathy would be hardly fit to live." 

" You think so ? " he asked, quite earnestly and gravely ; " so 
do I . so do I indeed. Men have little time to sympathise with 
men . they are all t<»o busy with their own aftairs. What should 
we do but for the sympathy of women ? Now tell me, why do you 
smile at that ? I saw that you were trying not to laugh." 

" I could not help smiling a little, it was so thoroughly masculine 
a sentiment" 



ON THE BRIDGE. 67 

" Was it ? How is that, now ? " Ilis direct way of propounding 
his questions rather amused and did not displease her. It was 
hke the way of a rational man talking with another rational being 
. a style of conversation which has much attraction for some 
women. 

" Well, because it treated women so honestly as creatures only 
formed to make men comfortable, by coming up and sympathising 
with them wlien they are in a humour for sympathy, and then re- 
tiring out of the way into their corner again." 

"I can assure you, Miss Grey, that never has been my idea. 
Nothing of the kind, indeed. To tell the truth, I have not known 
much about the sympathy of women and all that. I have lived 
awfully out of the world, and I never had any sisters, and I hardly 
remember my mother. I know women chiefly in poems and 
romances, and I believe I generally adopt the goddess theory. In 
honest truth, most women do seem to me a sort of goddesses." 

" You will not be long in England without unlearning that 
theory," Miss Grey said. " Our writers seem to have hardly any 
subject now but the faults and follies of women. One might some- 
times think that woman was a newly-discovered creature that the 
world could never be done with wondering at." 

" Yes, yes ; I read a good deal of that sort of thing out in the 
colonies. But I have retained the goddess theory so far, at 
least. Mrs. Money seems to me a sort of divinity. Miss Money 
is a born saint ; she ought to go about with a gilt plate round 
her head. Miss Lucy Money seems like a little angel of light. 
Are you smiling again ? I do assure you these are my real 
feelings." 

" I was not smiling at the idea, but only at the difference 
between it and the favourite ideas of most people at present, even 
of women about women." 

"May I walk a Httle with you," Mr. Heron said, "or will 
you sit and rest here, if you are tired, and we will talk ? Don't 
stand on formality and send me away, although I will go if you 
like, and not feel in the least offended. But if we might talk for a 
while, it would give me great pleasure. You said just now that 
you did not wish to be selfish. It will be very unselfish and very 
kind if you will let me talk to you a little. I felt very wretched 
when you came up, quite in a suicidal frame of mind." 

" Oh, no ! Pray don't speak in that way. You do not mean 
it, I am sure." 

" In one sense I do mean it . that is, it is quite true that I 
should not have thrown myself intc the water or blown my brains 
out ; that sort of thing seems to me like abandoning one's post 



68 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

without orders from head-quarters. But I felt in that condition 
of mind when one can quite understand how such things are done, 
and would be glad if he were free to follow the example. For 
me that is a great change in itself," the young man added with some 
bitterness. 

"What can I do for him?" Miss Grey asked herself mentally. 
" Nothing but to show him the view from the canal bridge. 
There is nothing else in my power. . There is a very pretty view 
a short distance from this," she said; "a view from a bridge, 
and I am particularly fond of looking from bridges. Should 
you like to walk there?" 

"I should hke to walk anywhere with you," Victor Heron 
said, with- a look of genuine gratefulness, which had not the faintest 
breath of compliment in it, and could only be accepted as frank 
truth. 

Perhaps, if Miss Grey had been a town-bred girl, she might 
have hesitated about setting out for a companionable walk in the 
Park with a young man who was almost a stranger to her. But, as 
it was, she appeared to herself to have all the right of free action 
belongmg to one in a place of which the public opinion can in no 
wise touch her. She acted in London as freely as one speaks 
with a friend in a foreign hotel room, where he knows that the 
company around are unable to understand what he is saying. In 
this particular instance, however, Minola hardly thought about 
the matter at all- There was something in Heron's open and 
emotional way which made people almost at the first meeting 
cease to regard him as a stranger. Perhaps, if Minola had thought 
over the matter, she might have cited in vindication of her course 
the valuable authority of Major Pendennis, who, when asked 
whether Laura might properly take walks in the Temple Gardens 
with Warrington, eagerly said, " Yes, yes, begad, of course, you go 
out with him. It's like the country, you know ; everybody goes 
out with everybody in the Gardens ; and there are beadles, you 
know, and that sort of thing. Everybody walks in the Temple 
Gardens." Regent's Park, one would think, ought to come under 
the same laws. There are beadles there, too, or guardian function- 
aries of some sort although it may be owned that in their walk 
to and from the canal bridge Heron and Minola encountered 
none of them. 

It is doubtful whether Heron, at least, would have noticed 
such a personage even had he come in their way, for the young 
man talked nearly all the time, except when he paused for an answer 
to some direct question, and he seldom took his eyes from Minola's 
face. He was not staring at her, or broadly admiring her; nor, 



ON THE BRIDGE. 69 

indeed, was there anything in his manner to make it certain that 
he was admiring her at all, as man conventionally is understood 
to admire woman. But he had evidently put Miss Grey into the 
place of a sympathetic and trusted friend, and he talked to her 
accordingly. She was amused and interested, and she now and 
then kept making little disparaging criticisms to herself, in order 
to sustain her place as the cool dcpreciator of man. But she was 
very happy for all that. 

One characteristic peculiarity of this sudden and singular 
acquaintanceship ought to be mentioned. When i)eople still 
read "Gil Bias " they would have remembered at once how the 
waiting-woman received delightfully the advances of Gil Bias, 
believing him to be a gentleman of fortune, and how Gil Bias paid 
great court to the waiting-woman, believing her to be a lady of 
rank. The pair of friends in Regent's Park were drawn together 
by exactly opposite impulses : each believed the other poor and 
unfriended. Minola was under the impression that she \\as giving 
her sympathy to a ruined and unhappy young man, who had failed 
in life almost at the very beginning, and was now friendless in 
stony-hearted London. Victor Heron was convinced that his 
companion was a poor orphan girl, who had been sent down by 
misfortune from a position of comfort, or even wealth, to earn 
her bread by some sort of intellectual labour, while she lived in 
a small back room in a depressed and mournful quarter of London. 

He told her the story of his grievance ; it may be that he 
even told her some parts of it more than once. It was a strange 
sensation to her, as she walked on the soft green turf, in the 
silver-grey atmosphere, to hear this young man, who seemed to 
have lived so bold and strange a life, appealing to her for an 
opinion as to the course he ought to pursue to have his cause set 
right. The St. Xavier's Settlements do not geographically count 
for much, and politically they count for still less. But when Mr. 
Heron told of his having been administrator and commandant 
there ; of his having made treaties with neighbouring kings (she 
knew they were only black kings); of his having tried to put down 
slavery, and to maintain what he persisted in believing to be the 
true honour of England ; of war made 00 him, and war made by 
him in return . while she listened to all this, it is no wonder if 
our romantic girl from Dukes-Keeton sometimes thought she was 
conversing with one of the heroes and master-spirits of the time. 
He made the whole story very clear to her, and she thoroughly 
understood it, although her imagination and her senses were some- 
times disturbed by the tropic glare which seemed to come over the 
places and events he debcribed. At last they actually came to be 



70 JI//SS MISANTHROPE. 

standing on the canal bridge, and neither looked at the view they 
had come to see. 

" Now, what do you advise ? " Heron said, after having several 
times impressed some particular point on her. "I attach great 
.importance to a woman's advice. You have instincts, and all 
that, which we haven't; at least so everybody says. Would you 
let this thing drop altogether, and try some other career, or would 
you fight it out ? " 

" I would fight it out," Minola said, looking up to him with 
sparkling eyes, " and I would never let it drop. I would make 
tiiem do me justice." 

"Just what I think; just what I came to England resolved to 
do. I hate the idea of giving in ; but people here discourage me. 
Money discourages me. He says the Government will never do 
anything unless I make myself troublesome." 

" Well, then, why not make yourself troublesome ? " 

" I have made myself troublesome in one sense," he said, with 
a vexed kind of laugh, " by haunting ante-chambers, and trying to 
force people to see me who don't want to see me. But I can't 
do any more of that kind of work; I am sick of it. I am ashamed 
of having tried it at all." 

" Yes, I couldn't do that," Minola said gravely. 

" Then," Heron said, with a little embarrassment, " a man . a 
very kind and well-meaning fellow, an old friend of my father's 
. offered to introduce me to Lady Chertsey . a very clever woman, 
a queen of society, I am told, who gets all the world . of politics, 
I mean . into her drawing-room, and delights in being a sort of 
])Ower, and all that. She could push a fellow, they say, wonderfully 
if she took any interest in him. But I couldn't do that, you know." 

"No?. why not?" 

" Well, I shouldn't care to be introduced to a lady's drawing- 
room with the secret purpose of trying to get her to do me a 
service. There seems something mean in that. Besides, I have 
a cause. at least, I think I have . which is too good to be served 
in that kind of u'ay. If I can't get a hearing and justice from the 
( iovernment of England and the people of England for the sake of 
right and for the claims I have, I will never try to get it through . 
oh, well, perhaps I ought not to say what I was going to say." 

" Why not?" Minola asked again. 

" I mean, perhaps I ought not to snv it to yon." 

*' I don't know, really. Tell me what it is, and then I'll tell 
you whether you ought to say it." 

He laughed. " Well, I was only going to say that I don't care 
to have my cause served by petticoat inlluence." 



ON THE BRIDGE. 71 

*' I think you are quite right. If I were a man I shouU 
think petticoat intiuence in such a matter contemptible. But 
why should you not like to say so ? " 

" Only because I was afraid you might think I meant to 
speak contemptuously of the influence and the advice of women. 
I don't mean anything of the kind. I have the highest opinion of 
the advice of women and their influence, as I have told you already; 
but I couldn't endure the idea of having a lady, who doesn't know 
or care anything about me and my claims, asked by somebody to 
say a word to some great man or some great man's wife, in order 
that I might get a hearing. I am sure you understand what I 
mean. Miss Grey." 

" Oh, yes, I never should have misunderstood it ; and I know 
that you are quite right. It would be a downright degradation." 

" So I felt. Anyhow, I could not do it. Then there remains 
the making myself troublesome, as Money advises " 

"Yes, w4iat is that?" 

*' Getting my case brought on again and again in the House 
of Commons, and having debates about it, and making the whole 
thing public, and so forcing the Government either to do me 
justice or to satisfy the country that justice has already been 
done," he said bitterly. 

"That would seem to me a right thing to do," Miss Grey 
said ; " but I know so little, that I ought not to offer a word of 
advice." 

" Oh, yes, I should trust to your feelings and instincts in such 
a case. Well, I don't like, somehow, being in the hands of 
politicians and party men, who might use me and my cause only 
as a means of annoying the Government . not really from any 
sense of right and justice. I don't know if I make myself quite 
understood ; it is hard to expect a lady, especially a young lady, to 
understand these things." 

" I think I can quite understand all that. We are not so 
stupid as you seem to suppose, Mr. Heron." 

" Stupid ! Didn^t I tell you of my goddess theory?" 

" Some of the goddesses were very stupid, I always think. 
Venus was stupid." 

" Well, well ; anyhow you are not Venus." 

" No, indeed." 

" In that sense, I mean. Then I do succeed in making 
myself understood ? " 

" Oh, yes ! " She could see that he was looking disappointed 
at her interruption and her seeming levity, which was indeed 
only the result of a momentary impulse to keep up to herself her 



72 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

character as a scorner of men. ** I think I understand quite 
clearly that you fear to be made the mere instrument of politicians ; 
and I think you are quite right. I did not think of that at first, 
but, now that you explain it, I am sure that you are right." 

He nodded approvingly. " Then comes the question," he 
said, " what is to be done ? " 

Leaning against the bridge, he thrust his hands into his pockets, 
and stood looking into her face, as if he were really waiting for 
her to solve the pioblem for him. 

"That is entirely beyond rne," she said. "I know nothing; 
I could not even guess at what ought to be done." 

" No ? Now, here is my idea. Why not plead my cause 
myself?" 

" Plead the cause yourself ! Can that be done ? " 

" Yes ; myself . in Parliament." 

Minola's mind at once formed and framed a picture of a 
stately assembly, like a Roman Senate, or like the group of King 
Agrippa, Festus, Bernice and the rest, and Mr. Heron pleading 
his cause like Cicero or Paul. The thing seemed hardly con- 
gruous. It did not seem to her to fall in with modern 
conditions at all. Her face became blank ; she did not well 
know what to answer. 

"Are people allowed to do such things now, in England?" 
she asked, . " to plead causes before Parliament?" 

An odd idea came up in her mind, that perhaps by the time 
this strange performance came to be enacted, Mr. Augustus 
Sheppard might be in Parliament, and Mr. Heron's enthusiastic 
eloquence would have to be addressed to him. She did not 
like the idea. 

" You don't understand," Heron said. " You really don't, 
this time. What I mean is to get into Parliament . be elected 
for some place, and then stand up and make my own fight for 
myself." 

She kindled at the idea. 

" Oh, yes, cf course ! How stupid I am not to see at once ! 
That is a splendid idea ; the very thing I should like to do if I 
were a man and in your place." 

" You really think so ? " 

" Indeed, I do. But, then " . and she hesitated, for she feared 
that she had been only encouraging him to a wild dream . " does 
it not cost a great deal of money to get into Parliament ? " 

" No ; I think not ; not always, at least. I should look out 
for an opi)ortunity. I have money enough . for me. I'm not 
a ricli man, Miss Grey, but my father left me well enough off, as 



ON THE BRIDGE. 73 

far as that goes ; and you know that in a place Hke St. Xavier's 
one couldn't spend any money. There was no way of getting rid 
of it. No, my troubles are none of them money troubles. I only 
want to vindicate my past career, and so to have a career for the 
future. I ought to be doing something. I feel in an unhealthy 
state of mind while all this is pressing on me. You understand?" 

" I can understand it," Miss Grey said, turning to leave the 
bridge, and bestowing one glance at the yellow, slow-moving water, 
and the reeds and the bushes of which she and her companion had 
not spoken a word. " It is not good to have to think of 
oneself. But you are bound to vindicate yourself; that I am 
sure is your duty. Then you can think of other things . of 
the public and the country." 

" He is rich," she thought, "and he is clever and earnest, in 
spite of his egotism. < Of course he will have a career, and be 
successful. I thought that he was poor and broken-down, and 
that I was doing him a kindness by showing sympathy with him." 

They went away together, and Heron, delighted with her 
encouragement and her intelligence, unfolded splendid plans of 
what he was to do. But Minola somehow entered less cordially 
into them than she had done before, and Mr. Heron at last became 
ashamed of talking so much about himself. 

" I hope we shall meet again," he said, as she stopped 
significantly at one of the gates leading out of the Park, to intimate 
that now their roads were separating. " I wish you would allow 
me to call and see you. I do hope you won't think me odd, or 
that I am presuming on your kindness. I am a semi-barbarian, 
you know . have been so long out of civilisation . and I haven't 
any idea of the ways of the polite world." 

" Nor I," said Minola; " I have come from utter barbarism . 
from a country town." 

" But I do hope we shall meet again, for you are so sympathetic 
and kind." 

She bade him good-day, and nodded with a friendly smile, 
but made no answer to the repeated expression of his hope, and 
she hastened away. 

Heron could not endure walking alone just then. He hailed 
a hansom and disappeared. 

" How vain men are ! " Minola thought as she went her 
way. " How egotistic they all are ! " Of course she assumed 
herself to have obtained a complete knowledge of all the characters 
of men. " How egotistic he is ! Of course he tells his whole 
story to every woman he meets. Lucy Money no doubt has it by 
heart." 



74 ^/A?^ MISANTHROPE. 

She did not remember for the moment that her own favourite 
hero, Alceste, was hkewise somewhat egotistic and effusive, and 
that he was very apt to pour out the story of his wrongs into the 
ear of any sympathetic woman. But she was disappointed with 
herself and her friend just now, and was not in a mood to make 
perfectly reasonable comparisons. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

A " HELPER OF UNHAPPY MEN." 

Mrs. Money had one great object in life. At least, if it was 
not an object defined and set out before her, it was an instinct : 
it was to make people happy. She could not rest without trying 
to make people happy. The motherly instinct, which in other 
women is satisfied by rushing at babies wherever they are to be 
seen, and ministering to them, and fondling them, and talking 
pigeon-English to them, exuberated in her so far as to set her 
trying to do the mother's part for all men and women that came 
within her range, even when their years far exceeded hers. There 
was one great advantage to herself personally in this : it kept 
her content in what had come to be her own sphere. One cannot 
go meddling in the affairs of duchesses and countesses and 
Ministers of State, with whatever kindly desire of setting every- 
thing to rights and making them all happy. People of that class 
give themselves such haughty airs that they would rather remain 
unhappy in their own way than obtain felicity at the hand of 
some person of inferior station. So Mrs. Money believed ; and 
])erhaps one secret cause of her dislike to the aristocracy (along 
with the avowed conviction that the aristocratic system had 
somehow misprised and interfered with her husband) was the 
feeling that if she were among them they would not allow her to 
do anything for them. She therefore maintained a circle of which 
she vvas herself the queen and patroness and Lady Bountiful. 
She busied herself about everybody's affairs, and was kind to 
everybody, without any feeling of delight in the mere work of 
patronising, but out of a sheer pleasure in trying to make people 
happy. Naturally she made mistakes, and the general system of 
her social circle worked so as to occasion a continual change, a 
passing away of old friends and coming in of new. As young 
men rose in the world and became independent, as girls got 



A "HELPER OF UNHAPPY MEN." 75 

married and came to consider themselves supreme in their o\\r\. 
sphere, they tended to move away from Mrs. Money's influence. 
Even the grateful and the generous could not always avoid this. 
For beginners in any path of life she was the specially-appointed 
helper and friend ; and next to these she might be called the 
patron saint of failures. In her circle were young poets, painters, 
lawyers, novelists, preachers, ambitious men looking out for seats 
in Parliament, or beginners in Parliament ; also there were the grey 
old poets whom no one read ; the painters who could not get 
their pictures exhibited or bought; the men who were in Parliament 
ten or twenty years ago, and got out and never could get in again ; 
and the inventors who could not impress any government or 
capitahst with a sense of the value of their discoveries. No 
front-rank, successful person of any kind was usually to be found 
in Mrs. Money's rooms. Her guests were the youths who were 
putting their armour on for the battle, and the worn-out cam- 
paigners who had put it off, defeated. 

"Naturally, when INIinola Grey came in Mrs. Money's way, 
the sympathy and interest of the kindly lady were quickened 
to their keenest. This beautiful, motherless, fatherless, proud, 
lonely girl . not so old as her own Theresa, not older than her 
own Lucy . living by herself, or almost by herself, in gloomy 
lodgings in the heart of London. how could she fail to be an 
object of Mrs. Money's deep concern? Of course Mrs. Money 
must look into all her aftairs, and find out whether she was poor ; 
and in what sort of way she was living; and whether the people 
with whom she lodged were kind to her. 

Mary Blanchet's pride of heart can hardly be described when 
an open carriage, wnth a pair of splendid greys, stopped at the 
door of the house in the no-thoroughfare street, and a footman got 
down and knocked ; and it finally appeared that Mrs. Money, 
Mis5 Money, and Miss Lucy Money had called to see Miss Grey. 
Miss Grey, as it happened, was not at home, although the servant 
at first supposed diat she was ; and thus the three ladies were 
shown into Minola's sitting-room, and there almost instantly 
captured by Miss Blanchet. We say "almost" because there 
was an interval long enough for Lucy to dart about the room from 
point to point, taking up a book here, a piece of music there, an 
engraving, a photograph, or a flower, and pronouncing everything 
delightful. The room was old-fashioned, spacious, and solid, very 
imlike the tiny apartments of the ordinary West-end lodging ; and, 
what with the flowers and the books, it really looked rather an 
attractive place to enthusiastic eyes. Miss Money kept her eyes 
on the ground for the most part, and professed to take little notice 



76 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

of the ordinary adornments of rooms ; for Miss Money was a 
saint, and was furthermore engaged to a man not far from her 
father's years, who, having made a great deal of money at the 
parHamentary bar, was now thinking of entering the Church, and 
had already set about the building of a temple of mediseval style, 
in the progress of which Miss Money naturally was deeply 
interested. 

Miss Blanchet was in a flutter of excitement as she entered 
the sitting-room. As she was crossing its threshold she was 
considering whether she ought to present a copy of her poems 
to each of the three ladies or only to Mrs. Money, and whether 
she ought to tender the gift now or send it on by the post. The 
solemn eyes and imposing presence of Mrs. Money were almost 
alarming, and the trailing dresses and feathers of all the ladies 
sent a thrill of admiration and homage into the heart of the poetess 
. everything was so evidently put on regardless of expense. Little 
Mary had always been so poor and so stinted in the matter of 
wardrobe that she could not help admiring these splendidly- 
dressed women. Mary, however, luckily remembered what was 
due to the dignity of poetic genius, and did not allow her homage 
to show itself too much in the form of trepidation. She instantly 
put on her best company manners, and spoke in the sweetly- 
measured and genteel tone which she used to employ at Keeton, 
when she had occasion to interchange a word with the judges, 
or the sheriffs, or some eminent counsel. 

" Minola will be home in a few moments . a very few," Miss 
Blanchet said. " Indeed, I expect her every minute. I know she 
would be greatly disappointed if she did not see you." 

" Oh, I am not going without seeing Nola !" said Lucy. 

" I am Minola's friend," Mary explained with placid dignity. 
" I may introduce myself. My brother, I know, has already 
the honour of your acquaintance. I am Miss Blanchet." 

" Mr. Herbert Blanchet's sister?" Mrs. Money said, in melan- 
choly tone, but with delighted eyes ; " this is indeed an unex- 
pected and a very great pleasure." 

" Why, you don't mean to say you are Herbert Blanchet's 
sister?" Lucy exclaimed, seizing both the hands of the poetess. 
" He's the most delightful creature, and a true poet, oh, yes, a 
man of genius!" 

The eyes of Mary moistened with happiness and pride. 

" Herbert Blanchet is my brother. He is much younger than 
I; I need hardly say that. I used to take care of him years ago, 
almost as if I were his mother. We were a long time separated ; 
he has been so much abroad." 



A "HELPER OF UNHAPPY MEN." 77 

The faithful Mary would not for all the world have suggested 
or admitted that their long separation was due to any indifterence 
on the part of her brother. Indeed, at the moment she was not 
thinking of anything of the kind, only of his genius, and his beauty, 
and his noble heart. 

" He never told me he had a sister," Mrs. Money said, " or 
I should have been delighted to call on you long ago, Miss 
Blanchet, It is your brother's fault, not mine. I shall tell him 
so." 

*' He did not know that I was coming to London," Mary 
was quick to explain ; " he thought I was still living in Keeton. 
I only came to London with Minola." 

"Oh! You lived in Keeton, then, always, along with Miss 
Grey?" 

" How delightful ! " Lucy exclaimed, desisting from her occu- 
pation of opening books and turning over music ; " for you can 
tell us all about Nola, and her love story." 

" Her love story ? " Mrs. Money repeated, in tones of melan- 
choly enquiry. 

" Her love story ! " Miss Blanchet murmured tremulously, and 
wondering who had betrayed Minola's secret. 

" Oh, yes," said Lucy decisively. " I know there's some love 
story . something romantic and delightful. Do tell us, Miss 
Blanchet." 

Even the saint-like Theresa now showed a mild and becoming 
interest. 

" It's not exactly a love story," Miss Blanchet said, with some 
hesitation, not well knowing what she ought to reveal and what 
to keep back. " At least, it's no love affair on Minola's part. She 
never was in love . never. She detests all love-making . at least, 
she thinks so," the poetess said, with a gentle sigh. " But there 
was a gentleman, who was very much in love with her." 

" Oh, she must have had heaps of lovers ! " interposed Lucy. 

Miss Blanchet then told the story of Mr. Augustus Sheppard, 
and how he was rich and handsome. at least, rather handsome, she 
said . and how he wanted to marry Mmola ; and her people very 
much wished that she would have him, and she would not ; and 
how at last she hastened her flight to London to get rid of him. 
All this was full cf delightful interest to Lucy, and still further 
quickened the kindly sympathy of Mrs. Money. Then Mary 
Blanchet went into a long story about the death of Minola's 
mother and the second marriage of Minola's father, and then the 
father's death and the stepmother's second mamage, and the dis- 
comfort of the home which fate had thus provided for ISIinola. 



78 ^f/SS MISANTHROPE. 

3he expatiated upon the happiness of the sheltered life !Minola 
had had while her mother was living, and the change that came 
upon her aftenvards, until the only doubt jNIrs. Money had ever 
entertained about Minola . a doubt as to the perfect propriety and 
judgment of her coming to Hve almost alone in London. vanished 
altogether, and she regarded our heroine as a girl who had been 
driven from her home, instead of having fled from it. 

Mrs. Money delicately and cautiously approached the subject 
of Minola's means of subsistence. On this point no one could 
enlighten her better than Miss Blanchet, who knew to the sixpence 
the income and expenditure of her friend. Well, Minola was not 
badly off for a girl, Mrs. Money thought. A girl could live nicely 
and quietly, like a lady, but very quietly, on that. Besides, some 
rich man would be sure to fall in love with her. 

" But she ought to have a great deal of money," the poetess 
eagerly explained, very proud of her leader's losses. " Her father 
was a rich man, quite a rich man, and he had quarrelled with her 
brother, and she ought to have all the money, only for that second 
man-iage." Indeed, Miss Blanchet added the expression of her 
own profound conviction that there must have been some queer 
work . some concealment or something . about Mr. Grey's 
property, seeing that so little of it came to IMinola. 

" ril get Mr. Money to look into all that," Mrs. Money said 
decisively. " He understands all about these things, and nothing 
could be hidden from him." 

Miss Blanchet modestly intimated that she had confided her 
suspicions to her brother, and begged him to try and find out 
something. 

" Oh, he never could understand anything about it ! " Lucy 
said. " Poets never know about these things. It's just in papa's 
line. He'll find out. They can't baftle him. I know they have 
been cheating Nola . I know they have ! I know there's a will 
hidden away somewhere, making her the rightful heir or whatever 
it is." 

" About this gentleman . this lover. Is he a nice person ? " 
Mrs. Money began. 

"Mr. Augustus Sheppard?" Mary asked, mentioning his name 
for the first time in the conversation. 

"Augustus Sheppard! Is that his name?" Lucy demanded 
eagerly. "Why, then, papa knows him I Indeed he docs. I do 
declare papa knows everything ! " 

" Why do you think, dear, that he knows this gentleman?" 

" Because I heard him asking Nola about Mr. Augustus Shep- 
pard the other day, mannna, in our drawing-room." 



A "HELPER OF UNHAPPY MEN." 79 

" He couldn't have known this, I think," Miss Blanchet said. 

" Oh, no, I suppose not ; but he knows him, and he'll tell us 
all about him. Why wouldn't Nola have him, Miss Blanchet?" 

"He is rather a formal sort of person, and heavy, and not the 
least in the world poetic or romantic ; and Minola does not like 
him at all. She doesn't think his feelings are very deep ; but there 
I am sure she is wrong," the poetess added emphatically. " She 
has never had occasion to make a study of human feelings as 
others have." 

"You think he has deep feelings?" Mrs. Money asked, turning 
the full light of her melancholy eyes upon Mary, and with her 
whole soul already in the question. 

" Oh, yes ; I know he has. I know that he will persevere, 
and will try to make Minola marry him still. He is a man I 
should be afraid of, if he were disappointed. I should indeed." 

" Mamma, don't you think w^e had better have Nola to stay 
with us for a while?" Lucy asked. "Miss Blanchet could 
describe him, or get a photograph, and we could give orders that 
no such man was ever to be admitted, if he should call and ask 
to see her. Some one should always go out with her, or she 
should only go in the carriage. I dread this man ; I do indeed. 
Miss Blanchet is quite right, and she knows more than she says, 
I dare say. Such terrible things have happened, you know. I 
read in the paper the other day of a young man who fell in love 
with a girl . in the country it was, I think, or in Spain perhaps, or 
somewhere . and she would not marry him ; and he hid himself 
with a long dagger, and when she was going to church he stabbed 
her several times." 

" I don't think Mr. Augustus Sheppard would be likely to do 
anything of that kind," Miss Blanchet said. " He's a very re- 
spectable man, and a steady, grave sort of person." 

"You never can tell," Lucy declared. "When those quiet 
men are in love and disappointed, they are dreadful ! I've read 
a great many things just like that in books." 

"Well, dear," Mrs. Money said, "we'll ask your papa. If he 
knows this gentleman . this person . he can tell us what sort of 
man he is. It doesn't seem that he is in London now." 

" He may have come to-day," said Lucy. 

Miss Theresa looked at her watch. 

" Mamma dear, I don't think Miss Grey is coming in just yet, 
and it's growing late, and I have to attend the Ladies' Committee 
of the Saint Angulphus Association, at four." 

" You go, mamma, with Theresa," Lucy exclaimed. "I'll wait ; 
I must see Nola. I begin to be alarmed. It's ver}- odd her 



8o MISS MISANTHROPE. 

staying out. I think something must really have happened. That 
man may have been in town, waiting somewhere. You go ; when 
I have seen Nola, and am satisfied that she is safe, I can get 
home in the omnibus, or the underground, or the steamboat, or 
somehow. I'll find my way, you may be sure." 

" My dear," her mother said, " you were never in an omnibus 
in your life." 

"Papa goes in omnibusses, and he says he doesn't care 
whether other people do or not." 

" But a lady, my dear " 

" Oh, I've seen them in the streets full of women ! They 
don't object to ladies at all." 

" But my dear young lady," Miss Blanchet pleaded, " there 
is not the slightest occasion for your staying. Mr. Sheppard isn't 
at all that kind of person. Minola is quite safe. She is often out 
much later than this, although I confess that I did expect her 
home much earlier to-day." 

" I'll stay till Nola comes," the positive little Lucy declared, 
" unless Miss Blanchet turns me out ; and there's an end of that. 
So, mamma dear, you and Tessy do as you please, and never mmd 
me." 

"When Minola does come " Mary Blanchet began to say. 

" When she does come ? " Lucy interrupted in portentous 
accents. " Say if she does come. Miss Blanchet." 

" When she does come, please don't say anything of Mr. 
Sheppard. Of course she would not like to think that we spoke 
about such a subject." 

" Oh, of course, of course ! " all the ladies chorused, with 
looks expressive of immense caution and discretion ; and in true 
feminine fashion all honestly assuming that there could be nothing 
wrong in talking over anybody's supposed secrets so long as the 
person concerned did not know of the talk. 

" I see Miss Grey," said the quiet Theresa suddenly. She 
liad been looking out of the window to see if the carriage was 
near. As a professed saint she had naturally less interest in 
ordinary human creatures than her mother and sister had. 

" Thank Heaven ! " Lucy exclaimed. 

" Dear Lucy ! " Theresa interposed in tones of mild remon- 
strance, as if she would suggest that not everybody had a right 
to make reference to Heaven, and that Heaven would probably 
resent any allusion to it by the unqualified. 

" Well, I am thankful that she is coming all the same ; but I 
wish you wouldn't call her Miss Grey, Tessy. It seems cold and 
unfriendly. Call her Nola, please." 



IN SOCIETY. 8 1 

Mary Blanchet went to the door, and exchanged a brief word 
or two with Minola, in order that she might be prepared for lier 
visitors. Minola came in, looking very handsome, with her colour 
heightened by a quick walk home, and the little excitement of her 
morning. 

" How lovely you are looking, Nola dear ! " Lucy exclaimed, 
after the first greetings were over. " You look as if you had been 
having an adventure." 

" I have had a sort of adventure," Minola answered with a 
faint blush. 

The one thought went through the minds of all her listeners, 
at the same moment, and it shaped itself into a name . " Mr. 
Augustus Sheppard." All were silent and breathless. 

" It was not much," Minola hastened to say. " Only, I met 
Mr. Victor Heron in Regent's Park, and I have been walking with 
him." 

Most of her listeners seemed relieved. 

" I wish I had met him," Lucy blurted out ; " he is very hand- 
some, and I should like to have walked with him. Oh, what 
nonsense I am talking ! " and she grew red, and jumped up and 
looked out of the window. 

Then they all talked about something else ; and the visit closed 
with a promise that Minola and Mary Blanchet would present 
themselves at one of Mrs. Money's little weekly receptions out of 
season, which was to take place the following evening ; and after 
which Mrs. Money hoped to decoy them into staying for the 
night. Mary Blanchet went to bed that night in an ecstasy of 
happiness, only disturbed now and then by a torturing doubt as 
to whether Mrs. Money would be equally willing to receive her if 
she had known that she had been the keeper of the court-house 
at Keeton ; and whether she ought not to forewarn Mrs. Money 
of the fact ; and whether she ought not, at least, to call Minola's 
attention to the question, and submit it to her judgment. 



CHAPTER IX. 

IN SOCIETY. 

Mr. Money was not a very regular visitor at his wife's little 
receptions out of the season. In the season and when they had 
larger and more formal gatherings, he showed himself as much 



82 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

as was fitting and regular; for many of the guests then were 
virtually his guests, persons who desired especially to see him, and 
of whose topics he could talk. A good many foreign visitors were 
there usually . scientific men, and railway contractors, and en- 
gineers, and shipbuilders, from Germany, Italy, and Russia, and of 
course the United States, who looked upon Mr. Money as a person 
of great importance and distinction, and would not have cared 
anything about most of Mrs. Money's guests. 

The foreigners were curiously right and wrong. Mr. Money 
was a person of importance and distinction. Every Londoner 
who knew anything knew his name, and knew that he was clever 
and distinguished. If a Russian stranger of rank were dining 
with a Cabinet minister, and were to express a wish to see and 
know Mr. Money, the minister would think the wish quite natural, 
and would take his friend down to the lobby of the House of 
Commons, and make him acquainted with Mr. Money. We have 
all been foreigners, ourselves, somewhere, and we know how our 
longing to see some celebrit}^ as we suppose, of the land we are 
visiting, some one whose name was familiar to us in England, has 
been occasionally checked and chilled by our finding that in the 
celebrity's own city no one seems to have heard of him. There 
are only too many celebrities of this kind which shine, like the 
moon, for those who are a long way off. But Mr. Money was a 
man of mark in London, as well as in St. Petersburgh and New 
York. Therein the foreigners found themselves right. Yet Mr. 
Money's position was somewhat peculiar for all that, in a manner 
no stranger could well appreciate. The Cabinet minister did not 
ask Mr. Money to meet his friend at dinner; or, at all events, 
would never have been able to say to his friend, "Money? Oh, 
yes ! Of course you ought to know him. He is coming to-morrow 
to dine with us . won't you come and meet him?'' The most the 
Cabinet mmister would do would be to get up a Httle dinner- 
party, suitably adjusted for the express purpose of bringing his 
friend and Mr. Money together. It would be too much to say 
that Mr. Money was under a cloud. There rather seemed to be a 
sort of faint idea abroad that he ought to be, or some day would 
be, under a cloud, and no one knew why. 

No such considerations as these, however, would have affected 
the company who gathered round Mrs. Money in the out-of- 
season evenings, or could have been appreciated by them. They 
were, for the most part, entirely out of Mr. Money's line. He 
came among them irregularly and at intervals ; and if he found 
there any man or woman he knew or was taken with, he talked to 
him or her a good deal, and perhaps, it it were a man, he carried 



IN SOCIETY. 83 

him and one or two otliers off to his own study or smoking-room, 
where they discoursed at their ease. Sometimes Lucelet was sent 
to her papa, if he was not making his appearance in the drawing- 
room, to beg him to accomphsh some such act of timely interven- 
tion. Somebody, perhaps, presented himself among Mrs. Money's 
guests who was rather too solid, or grave, or scientitic, or political, 
to care for the general company, and to be of any social benefit 
to them ; or some one, as we have said, in whose eyes Mr. Money 
would be a celebrity, and Mrs. Money's guests counted for nothing. 
Then Lucy went for her father, if he was in the house, and drew 
him forth. He was wonderfully genial with his womankind. 
They might disturb him at any moment and in any way they 
chose. He seemed to have as little idea of grumbling if they 
disturbed him as a Newfoundland dog would have of snapping at 
his master's children if they insisted on rousing him up from his 
doze in the sun. 

Mr. Money talked very frankly of his daughters and their 
prospects sometimes. 

" My girls are going to marry any one they like," he would 
often say; "the poorer the better, so far as I am concerned, so 
long as they like the girls and the girls like them." As chance 
would have it, a rich man fell in love with Theresa, and she in her 
quiet, sanctimonious way loved him, and that was settled. 

" Now, Lucelet, look out for yourself," Mr. Money would say 
to his blushing daughter. "If you fall in love with some fine 
young fellow, I don't care if he hasn't sixpence. Only be sure, 
Mrs. Lucelet, that you are in love with him, and that he is in love 
with you, and not with your expectations." 

Lucelet generally smiltd and saucily tossed her head, as one 
who should say that she considered herself a person quite qualitied 
to make an impression without the help of any expectations. 

" I sometimes wish the right man would come along, Lucelet," 
Mr. Money said one day, throwing his arm round his pretty 
daughter's shoulder, and drawing her to him. 

" Papa ! do you want to get rid of me so soon ? I wonder at 
you. I know I don't want to get rid of you." 

" No, no, dear ; it isn't that. Never mind ; where's your 

mamma? Just run and ask her" and Mr. Money started 

something else, and put an end to the conversation. 

Mr. Money's idea with regard to the future of his daughters 
did not fail to become known among his acquaintances in general, 
and would doubtless have drawn young men in goodly numbers 
around his home, even if Lucelet were far less pretty than she 
really was. But, in any case, Mrs. Moriey loved to be friendly to 

G2 



84 A//SS MISANTHROPE. 

young people, and her less fonnal parties were largely attended, 
almost always, by the young. Miss Theresa's future husband did 
not come there often. He had known the family chiefly through 
Mr. Money and Parliament ; and, coming once to dine with Mr. 
Money, he fell fairly in love with the dove-like eyes and saintly 
ways of Theresa. Theresa was therefore what her father would 
have called " out of the swim." She looked tolerantly upon her 
mother's little gatherings of poets en herbe, artists who were great 
to their friends, patriots hunting for constituencies, orators who 
liad not yet caught the Speaker's eye, and persons who had tried 
success in all these various paths and failed. She looked on them 
tolerantly, but her soul was not in them ; it floated above them in 
a purer atmosphere. It was now, indeed, floating among the spires 
of the church which her lover was to build. 

One peculiarity seemed common to the guests whom Mrs. 
jNIoney gathered ariamd her. On any subject in which they felt 
the slightest interest they never felt the slightest doubt. The air 
they breathed was that of conviction ; the language they talked was 
that of dogma. The men and women they knew were the greatest, 
most gifted, and most beautiful in the world ; the men and women 
they did not know were nothing . were beneath contempt. Every 
one had what Lowell calls an " I-turn-the-crank-of-the-universe 
air." In that charmed circle every one was either a genius 
destined yet to move the world, or a genius too great for the dull, 
unworthy world to comprehend. It was a happy circle, where 
success or failure came to just the same. 

All in a flutter of delight was Mary Blanchet when preparing to 
enter that magical circle. She was going at last to meet great men 
and brilliant women. Perhaps, some day, she might even come to 
be known among them . to shine among them. She could never 
be done embracing Minola for having brought her to the gate of 
that heaven. She spent all the day dressing herself and adjusting 
her hair ; but «s the hours went on she became almost wretched 
from nervousness. When it was nearly time for them to go she 
was quivering with agitation. They went in a brougham hired 
specially for the occasion, because, although Mrs. Money offered 
to send her carriage, and Mary would have liked it much, Minola 
would hear of nothing of the kind. Mary was engaged all the 
way in the brougham in the proper adjustment of her gloves. At 
last they came to the place. Minola did the gentleman's part, 
and handed her agitated companion out. Mary Blanchet saw a 
strip of carpet on the pavement, an open door with servants in 
livery standing about, blazing lights, brightly-dressed women 
going in, a glimpse of a room with a crowd of people, and 



IN SOCIETY. 8s 

then Minola and she found themselves somehow in a ladies' 
dressing-room. 

" Minola, darling, don't go in without me ; I am quite ner- 
vous . I should never venture to go in alone." 

Minola did not intend to desert her palpitating little com- 
panion, who now indeed clung to her skirts and would not let her 
go had she been inclined. Miss Blanrhet might have been a 
young beauty just about to make her debut at a ball, so anxious 
was she about her appearance, about her dress, about her com- 
plexion ; and at the same time she was so nervous that she could 
hardly compel her trembHng fingers to give the finishing touches 
which she believed herself to need. Minola looked on wondering, 
puzzled, and half angry. The poetess was unmistakably a little, 
withered, yellowing old maid. She had not even the remains of 
good looks. No dressing or decoration possible to woman could 
make her anything but what she was, or deceive any one about 
her, or induce any one to feel interested in her. The handsome, 
stately girl who stood smiling near her was about to enter the 
drawing-room quite unconcerned as to her own appearance, and 
iiideed not thinking about it ; and the homely little old maid was 
quite distressed lest the company generally should not sufficiently 
admire her, or should find any fault with her dress. 

" Come along, you silly poetess," said Minola at last, breaking 
into a laugh, and fairly drawing her companion away from the 
looking-glass ; " What do you think anybody will care about you 
or me ? We'll steal in unnoticed, and we shall be all right." 

" It's the first time I ever was in London society, Minola dear, 
and I'm quite nervous." 

"It's the first time I ever was in London society, and I'm not 
a bit nervous. No one knows us, dear . and no one cares. So 
come along." 

She fairly carried Mary Blanchet out of the dressing-room, 
along a corridor lined with seats, on which people who had been 
in the drawing-room and had come out, were chattering, and 
flirting, and lounging . and at last over the threshold of the 
drawing-room, and into the presence of the hostess. A few 
friendly words were got through, and Minola dragged her com- 
panion along through the crowd into the recess formed by the 
window, where there were some unoccupied seats. 

" Now, Mary, that's done. The plunge is made, dear ! We 
are in Society ! Let us sit down here . and look at it." 

" This," said Mary faintly." this, at last, is Society." 

" I suppose it is, dear. At least it will do very well for you 
and me ; we should never know any difference. Imagine all these 



25 JI//SS MISANTHROPE. 

people marquises and countesses, and what more can we want to 
make us happy ? They may be marquises and countesses, for all 
I know," 

'* I should think there must be some great poets, and autliors, 
and artists, Minola. I am sure there must be. Oh, there is my 
brother ! " 

In effect Mr. Herbert Blanchet had already fixed his keen 
dark eyes on Minola, and was making his way up to her retreat, 
rather to Minola's distress. He addressed Minola at once with 
tliat undefinable manner of easy and kindly superiority which he 
always adopted towards women, and which, it must be owned, 
impressed some women a great deal. To his sister he held out, 
while hardly looking at her, an encouraging hand of recognition. 

" Have you seen Delavar's picture ? " he asked Minola. 

" No ; who is Delavar?" 

"Delavar? He was the greatest painter of our time^ . at 
least, ot his school, for I don't admit that his school is the true 
one." 

" Oh, is his picture here?" 

*' In the other room . yes. He painted it for Mr. Money . for 
Mrs. Money rather I should say, and it has just been sent home. 
Come with me, and I will show it to you." 

" And Mary ? " 

" We'll come back for Mary presently. The rooms are too 
full. We couldn't all get through. If you'll take my arm, Miss 
Grey ! " 

Minola rose and took his arm, and they made their way slowly 
through the room. They moved even more slowly than was neces- 
sary, for Herbert Blanchet was particularly anxious to show off his 
companion and himself to the fullest advantage. The moment 
Minola entered the room he saw that she was the handsomest girl 
there, and that her dressing was simple, graceful, and picturesque. 
He knew that before a quarter of an hour had passed eveiybody 
would be asking who she was, and he resolved to secure for himself 
tlie effect of bemg the first to parade her through the rooms. He 
was a singularly handsome man . as has been said before, almost 
oi)i)resGively handsome ; and a certain wasted look about his eyes 
and cheeks added a peculiar and striking effect to his appearance. 
He was dark, she was fair ; he was a tall man, she was a rather tall 
girl ; and if his face had a worn look, hers had an expression of 
something like habitual melancholy, which was not perhaps in 
keejiing with her natural temperament, and wliich lent by force or 
contrast an additional charm to her eyes when they suddenly lit 
up at the opening of any manner of animated conversation. No 



IN SOCIETY. 87 

corTibination could be more effective, Mr. Blanchet felt, than that 
of his appearance and hers ; and then she was a new figure. So 
he ])assed slowly on with her, and he knew that most peo{)le looked 
at them as they passed. He took good care, too, that they should 
be engaged in earnest talk. 

" I am delighted to have you all to myself for a moment, Miss 
Grey . to tell you that I know all about your goodness to Mary. 
That is why I would not bring her with us now. No . you must let 
me speak . I am not offering you my thanks. I know you would 
not care about that. But I must tell you that I know what you 
have .-lone. I have no doubt that you are her sole support. poor 
Mary ! " 

" I am her friend, Mr. Blanchet . only that." 

" Her only friend too. Her brother has not done much for her' 
To tell you the truth. Miss Grey, it isn't in his power now. You 
don't know the struggles of us, the unsuccessful men in literature, 
who yet have faith in ourselves. I am very poor. My utmost effort 
goes in keeping a decent dress-coat and buying a pair of gloves ; 
I don't complain . I am not one bit deterred, and I only trouble 
you with this confession, because, whatever I may have been in the 
past, I had rather you knew me to be what I am . a wretched, 
penniless straggler . than believe that I left my sister to be a burden 
on your friendship." 

" Mary is the only friend I have," said Minola. " It is not 
wonderful if I wish to keep her with me. And you will make a 
great success some time." 

He shook his head. 

" If one hadn't to grind at things for bare living one might do 
something. I am not bad enough, or good enough : and that's 
the truth of it. I dare say if I were mean enough to hunt after 
some woman with money I might have succeeded as well as others 
. but I couldn't do that." 

" No, I am sure you could not." 

*' I am not mean enough for that. But I am not high-minded 
enough to accept my path, and be content with it and proud ot it. 
Now I shan't bore you any more about myself. I wanted you to 
know this that you might not think too harshly of me. I know 
you felt some objection to me at first ; you need not try politely to 
deny it." 

'' Oh, no ; I don't want to deny it. I prefer trutli to politeness 
a great deal. I did think you had neglected your sister ; but really 
I was not surprised. 1 believe other men do the same thing." 

" But now you see that I have some excuse ? " 

"I am glad to hear it, Mr. Blanchet." 



88 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

" Glad to hear that I am so wretchedly poor, Miss Grey ? " be 
said, with a smile, and bending his eyes on her. " Glad to hear 
that your friend's brother is such a failure ? " 

" I would rather a thousand times hear that you were poor 
than that you were heartless. I don't call it a failure to be poor. 
I should call it a failure to be selfish and mean." 

She spoke in a low tone, but very earnestly and eagerly ; and 
she suddenly thought she was speaking too eagerly, and stopped. 

" Well," he said, after a moment's pause, " here is the picture. 
We shall get to it presently, when these people move away." 

They had entered, through a curtained door, a small room, 
which was nearly filled with people standing before a picture, and 
admiringly criticising it. Minola, with all her real or fancied 
delight in noting the jealousies and weaknesses of men and women, 
could hear no words of detraction or even dispraise. 

" Is the painter here ? " she asked of her companion in a 
whisper. 

" No ; I haven't seen him. Perhaps he'll come in later on." 

"Would you think it cheap cynicism if I were to ask why they 
all praise the picture ? . why they don't find any fault with it." 

" Oh, because they are all of the school, and they must support 
their creed. Our art is a creed to us. I don't admit that I am 
of Delavar's school any more ; in fact. I look upon him as a heretic. 
He is going in for mere popularity ; success has spoilt him. But 
to most of these people here he is still a divinity. They haven't 
found him out yet." 

" Oh ! " 

This little exclamation broke from Minola as some people at 
length struggled their way outward, and allowed her to see the 
whole of the picture. 

'' What is it called ? " she asked. 

*' Love stronger than Death." 

The scene was a graveyard, under a sickly yellow moon rising 
in a livid and greenish sky. A little to the left of the spectator 
was seen a freshly opened grave. In the foreground were two 
figures . one that of a dead girl, whom her lover had just haled 
froin her cofiin, wrapped as she was in her cerements of the tomb; 
the other that of the lover. He had propped the body against the 
broken hillock of the grave, and he was cnanting a love song to it 
which he accompanied on his lute. His face suggested the last 
stage of a galloping consumption, further enlivened by the fearsome 
light of insanity in his eyes. Some dreary bats flopped and lolloj^jcd 
through the air, and a few sympathetic toads came out to listen 
to the lay of the lover. The cypresses appeared as if they swayed 



IN SOCIETY. 89 

and moaned to the music ; and the rank weeds and grasses were 
mournfully tremulous around the sandalled feet of the forlorn 
musician. 

Minola at first could not keep from shuddering. Then there 
followed a shocking inclination to laugh. 

" What do you think of it? " Blanchet asked. 

"Oh, Idon'thke it at all." 

.' No ? It is trivial. Mere prettiness ; just a striving after draw- 
ing-room popularity. No depth of feeling ; no care for the realistic 
power of the scene. Pretty, pleasing . nothing more. Surface 
only ; no depth." 

" But it is hideous," Minola said. 

" Hideous ? Oh, no ! Decay is loveHness ; decay is the soul 
of really high art when you come to understand it. But there is no 
real decay there. That girl's face is pretty waxwork. There's no 
death there," and he turned half away in contempt. " That is what 
comes of being popular and a success. No ; Delavar is done. 1 
told him so." 

" He is quite new to me," said Minola, " I never heard of 
him before." 

" He's getting old now," Blanchet said. " He must be quite 
thirty. Let me see . oh, yes ; fully that. He had better join the 
pre-Raphaelites now ; or send to the Royal Academy ; or hire a 
gallery and exhibit his pictures at a shilling a head. I fancy they 
would be quite a success." 

Some of this conversation took place as they were making their 
way through the crowd with the intention of entering the drawing- 
room again. Minola was greatly amused and in a manner interested. 
The whole thing was entirely new to her. As they passed into the 
corridor, there were one or two vacant seats. 

" Will you rest for a moment ? " Blanchet said, motioning 
towards a seat. 

" Hadn't we better go back for Mary ? " 

" We'll go back j)resently. She is very happy ; she loves above 
all things observing a crowd." 

Minola would have liked very much to observe the crowd her- 
self and to have people pointed out to her. Blanchet, however, 
though he saluted several persons here and there, did not seem par- 
ticularly interested in any of them. Minola sat down for a while to 
please him, and to show that she had no thought of giving herself 
airs merely because she was enabled to be kind to his sister. 

Blanchet threw himself sidelong across his chair and leaned 
towards Minola's seat. He knew that people were looking at him 
and wondering who his companion was, and he felt very happy. 



90 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

" I wish I might read some of my poems to you, Miss Grey," 
he said. " I should Uke to have your opinion, because I know it 
would be sincere." 

" I should be delighted to hear them, but I don't think I sliould 
venture to give an opinion ; my opinion would not be worth 
anything." 

" When may I come and read one or two to you and Marj' ? 
To-morrow afternoon ? " 

" Oh, yes ; we are staying here to-night, but we shall be at 
home in the afternoon. Are these published poems ? Pray, excuse 
me . I quite forgot ; you don't publish. You don't care for fame . 
the fame that sets other people wild." 

He smiled, and slightly shrugged his shoulders. 

" We don't care for the plaudits of the stupid crowd," he said ; 
" that is quite true. We don't care for popularity, and to have our 
books lying on drawing-room tables, and kept by the booksellers 
bound in morocco ready to hand, to be given away as gift- books to 
young ladies. But we should like the admiration of a chosen few. 
The truth is, that I don't pul)lish my poems because I haven't the 
money. They would be a dead loss, of course, to any one who 
printed them ; I am proud to say that. I would not have them 
printed at all if they couldn't be artistically and fitly brought out ; 
and I haven't the money, and there's an end. But if I might 
read my poems to you, that would be something." 

Minola began to be full of pity for the poor poet, between whom 
and possible fame there stood so hard and prosaic a barrier. She 
was touched by the proud humility of his confession of ambition 
and poverty. Three sudden questions flashed through her mind. 
" I wonder how much it would cost ? and have I money enough ? 
and would it be possible to get him to take it?" 

Her colour was positively heightening and her breath becoming 
checked by the boldness of these thoughts, when suddenly there was 
a rushing and rustling of silken skirts, and Lucy Money, disengag- 
ing herself from a man's arm, swooped upon her. 

" You darlingest dear Nola, where have you been all the night ? 
I have been hunting for you everywhere ! Oh . Mr. Blanchet ! I 
haven't seen you before either. Have you two been wandering 
about together all the evening ? " 

Looking up, Minola saw that it was Mr. Victor Heron who had 
been with Lucy Money, and that he was now waiting Avith a smile 
of genial friendliness to be recognised by Miss Grey. It must be 
owned that Minola felt a little embarrassed, and would rather . 
though she could not possibly tell why . not have been found deep 
in confid'itial talk with Herbert Blanchet. 



'' THE POET IN A GOLDEN AGE WAS BORN" 91 

She gave Mr. Heron her hand, and told him. which was now 
the truth . that she was glad to ste him. 

" Hadn't we better go and find Mary?" Blanchet said, rising 
and glancing slightly at Heron. " She will be expecting us." 

" No, please don't take Miss Grey away just yet," Victor said, 
addressing himself straightway, and with eyes of unutterable cor- 
diality and good-fellowship, to the poet. " I haven't spoken a 
word to her yet ; and I have to go away soon." 

" I'll go with you to your sister, Mr. Blanchet," said Lucy, 
taking his arm forthwith. " I haven't seen her all the evening, and 
1 want to talk to her very much." 

So Lucy swept away on Mr. Blanchet's arm, looking very fair, 
and petite, and pretty, as she held a bundle of her draperies in one 
hand, and glanced back, smiling and nodding out of sheer good 
nature at Minola. 

Victor Heron sat down by Minola, and at once plunged into 
earnest talk. 



CHAPTER X. 

" THE POET IN A GOLDEN AGE WAS BORN." 

Victor Heron did not leave Mrs. IMoney's quite as soon as 
he had intended. He had made a sort of engagement to meet 
some men in the smoking-room of his club : men wnth whom 
he was to have had some talk about the St. Xavier's Settlements. 
But he remained talking with Minola for some time ; and he talked 
with Lucy and with other women, young and old, and asked many 
questions and made himself very agreeable, and, as was his wont, 
thought everyone delightful, and enjoyed himself very much. Then 
]\Ir. Money chanced to look in, and, seeing Heron, bore him away 
for a while to his study, to talk with him about something very, very 
particular. Mr. Money saw Herbert Blanchet and only performed 
with him the ceremony which Hajji Baba describes as '" the shake- 
elbows and the fine weather," and then made no further account of 
him. Mr. Blanchet seeing Heron invited to the study, and knowing 
from his acquaintance with the household what that meant, con- 
ceived himself slighted, and was angry. Mr. Money always looked 
upon Blanchet as a sort of young man whom only women were 
ever supposed to care about, and who would be as much out of 
place in the private study of a politician and man of bubiness as a 
trimmed petticoat. 



92 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

There was, however, some consolation for the poet in the fact 
that he had Minola Grey nearly all to himself He secured this 
advantage by a dexterous stroke of policy, for he attached himself 
to his sister and did his best to show and describe to her all the 
celebrities ; and Minola, only too glad, came and sat by Mary, 
and they made a very happy trio. Herbert was inclined to look 
down upon his sister as a harmless, old-fashioned little spinster, 
who would be much better if she did not try to write poetry. He 
felt convinced for a while that Minola must have the same opinion 
of her in her secret heart, and would not think the less of him for 
showing it just a httle. But when he found that Miss Grey took 
the poetess quite seriously, and had a genuine affection for her, his 
sister's value rose immensely in his eyes ; he paid her great atten- 
tion, and, as has been said, he had his reward. 

It grew late ; the rooms were rapidly thinning. Minola and 
Miss Blanchet were to remain at Mrs. Money's for the night. 
Blanchet could not stay much longer and had risen to go away, 
when Victor Heron entered. He came up to speak to Minola, and 
Minola introduced him to her particular friend and cajnarade, Miss 
Blanchet ; and he sat beside Miss Blanchet and talked to her for 
a few moments, while Blanchet took advantage of the opi^ortunity 
to talk again with Minola. Then Mr. Heron rose, and Herbeit 
rose, and Mary Blanchet, growing courageous, told Heron that 
that was her brother and a great poet, and in a very formal old- 
fashioned way, begged permission to make them acquainted. Mr. 
Heron was a passionate admirer of poetry, and occasionally, 
perhaps, tried the patience of his friends by too lengthened citations 
from Shakespeare and Milton, but in modern poetry he had not got 
much later than " The Arab physician Karshish," which he could 
recite from end to end ; and " In Memoriam," of which he knew 
the greater part. He was, however, modestly conscious that his 
administrative engagements in the colonies had kept him a little 
behind the rest of the world in the matter of poetry, and it did 
not surprise him in the least that a very great poet, whose name 
had never before reached his ears, should be there beside him in 
Mrs. Money's drawing-room. He felt delighted and proud at 
meeting a poet and a poet's sister. 

It so happened that after saying his friendly good-night to his 
hostess . a ceremony which, even had the rooms been crowded, 
Mr. Heron would have thought it highly rude and unbecoming to 
omit . our fallen ruler of men found himself in Victoria Street 
with Mr. Blanchet. 

" Are you going my way? " Heron asked him, with irrepressible 
sociability ; " I am going up Pall Mall and into Ticcadilly, and I 



.« THE POET IN A GOLDEN AGE WAS BORN:' 93 

snail be glad if you are coming the same way. Are you going to 
walk ? I always walk when I can. May 1 offer you a cigar ? I think 
you will find these good." 

Herbert took a cigar, and agreed to walk Heron's way : which 
was, indeed, so far as it went, his own. Heron was very proud to 
walk with a poet. 

" Yours is a delightful calling, sir," he said ; " excuse me if I 
speak of it. I remember reading somewhere that one should never 
talk to an author about his works. But I couldn't help it : we 
don't meet poets in some of our colonies ; and your sister was 
kind enough to enlighten my ignorance and tell me that you were 
a poet. I always thought that a charming anecdote of Wolfe re- 
citing Gray's Elegy, and telling his officers he would rather have 
written that than take Quebec. Ay, by Jove, and so would I ! " 

Mr. Blanchet had never heard of the anecdote, and had by no 
means any clear idea as to the identity or exploits of Wolfe. But 
he was anxious to know something about Heron, and therefore he 
was determined to be as companionable as possible. 

" You must not believe all my sister says about me. She has 
an extravagant notion of my merits in every way." 

" It must be delightful to have a sister," Victor Heron said, 
enthusiastically. "Do you know, I can't imagine any greater 
happiness for a man than to have a sister. I envy you, Mr. 
Blanchet." 

Heron was in the peculiar position of one to whom all the 
family relationships present themselves in idealised form. He had 
never had sister or brother ; and a sister now rose up in his imagi- 
nation as a sort of creature compounded of a simplified Flora 
Maclvor and a glorified Ruth Pinch. His novel-reading in the 
colonies was a little old-fashioned, like many of his ideas, and his 
habit of frequently using the word " sir " in talking with men whom 
he did not know very familiarly. 

Mr. Blanchet was not disposed, from his knowledge of Mary 
Blanchet, to hold the possession of a sister as a gift of romantic or 
inestimable value. To say the truth, when Victor spoke so warmly 
of the delight of having a sister, he too was not setting up the 
poetess as an ideal. He was thinking rather of Miss Grey, and 
what a sister she would be for a man to confide in and have always 
with him. 

Meanwhile Herbert, with all his self-conceit, had common sense 
enough to know that it would not do to leave Heron to find 
out from others that the great poet Blanchet had yet to make his 
fame. 

" My sister and I have been a long time separated," he said ; 



94 M/SS MISANTHROPE. 

" she lived in the country for the most part, and I had to come 
to London." 

" Of course. The only place for a man of genius ; a grand 
stage, Mr. Blanchet . a grand stage." 

" So, of course, Mary is all the more inclined to make a sort of 
hero of me. You must not take her estimate of me, Mr. Heron. 
She fancies the outer world must think just as she does of every- 
thing I do. I am not a famous poet, Mr. Heron, and probably 
never shall be. I belong to a school which does not cultivate 
fame, or even popularity." 

" I admire you all the more for that. It always seems to me 
that the poet degrades his art who hunts for popularity . the poet 
or anybody else for that matter," added Victor, thinking of his own 
unpopular performances in St. Xavier's Settlements. " I am de- 
lighted to meet you, Mr. Blanchet. I have seen so much hunting 
after popularity in England that I honour any man of genius who 
has the courage to set his face against it." 

" My latest volume of poems," Blanchet said firmly, " I do not 
even mean to publish. They shall be printed, I hope, and set 
out in a manner becoming them . becoming, at least, what I think 
of them ; but they shall not be hawked about book-shops, and 
reviewed by self-conceited ignorant prigs." 

"Quite right, Mr. Blanchet; just what I should like to do 
myself, if I could possibly imagine myself gifted like you. But 
still you must admit that it is little to the credit of the age that a 
poet should be forced thus to keep his treasures from the public 
eye. Besides, it may be all very well, you know, in your case or 
mine ; but think of a man of genius who has to live by his poems! 
It's easy talking for men who have enough . my enough, I confess, 
is a pretty modest sort of thing . but you must know better than 
I that there are young men of genius . ay, of real genius . trying 
to make a living in London by writings that perhaps their own 
generation will never understand. That is what seems to me the 
hard thing." Mr. Heron grew quite animated. 

The words sent a keen pang through Blanchet's heart. His new 
acquaintance, whom Blanchet assumed to be confoundedly wealthy, 
evidently regarded him as a person equally favoured by fortune, 
and thereforeonly writing poetry to indulge the whim of his genius. 
Herbert Blanchet had heard from the Money women in a vague sort 
of way that Mr. Heron had been a governor of some place; it might 
have been Canada or India for aught he knew to the contrary ; and 
he assumed that he must be a very aristocratic and self-conceited 
person. Blanchet would not for the world have admitted at that 
moment that he was poor ; and he shuddered at the idea that Heron 



- THE POET IN A GOLDEN AGE WAS BORN." 95 

might somehow learn all about Mary Blanchet's official position in 
the court-house of Dukes-Keeton. For all the dignity of poetry 
and high art, Mr. Blanchet was impressed with a painful conscious- 
ness of being small, somehow, in the company of Mr. Heron. It 
was not merely because he supposed Heron to be wealthy, for he 
knew Mrs. Money was rich and that Lucy would bean heiress, and 
yet he was always ciuite at his ease with them, and accustomed to 
give himself airs and to be made much of ; but it occurred to him 
that Mr. Heron's family, friends, and familiar surroundings would 
probably be very difterent from his ; and he always found himself 
at home in the society of women, whom he knew that he could 
impress and impobC on by his handsome presence. Yes, he felt 
himself rather small in the society of this pleasant, simple, un- 
pretending \oung man, who was all the time looking up to him as 
a poet and a child of genius. 

Greatly pleased was the poet and child of genius when Victor 
Heron asked him to come into his rooms and smoke a cigar before 
going to bed. 

" You don't sleep much or keep early hours, I dare say, Mr. 
Blanchet ; literary men don't, I suppose ; and I only sleep when I 
can't help it. Let us smoke and have a talk for an hour or two." 

" Night is my day," said Blanchet. " I don't think people 
who have minds can talk well in the hours before midnight. When 
I have to work in the day I sometimes close my shutters, light my 
gas, and fancy I am under the influences of night." 

" I got the way of sitting up half the night," said Victor simply, 
" from living in places where one had best sleep in the day ; but I 
am sure if I were a poet I should delight in the night for its own sake." 

There was something curious in the feeling of deference with 
which Heron regarded the young poet. He considered Blanchet as 
something not quite mortal, or, at all events, masculine ; something 
entided to the homage one gives to a woman and the enthusiasm 
one feels to a spiritual teacher. Blanchet did not seem to him 
exactly like a man ; rather like one of those creatures compounded 
of fire and dew whom we read of in legend and mythology. The 
feeling was not that of awe, because Blanchet was young and good- 
looking, and wore a dress coat and white tie, and it is impossible 
to have a feeling of awe for a man with a white tie. It was a 
feeling of delicate consideration and devotion. Had some rude 
person jostled against or otherwise insulted the poet as they passed 
along, Victor would have felt it his duty to interpose and resent 
the affront as promptly as if Minola Grey or Lucy Money were the 
object of the insult. To his unsophisticated colonial mind the 
poet was the sweet feminine voice of the literary grammar. 



96 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

Heron occupied two or three rooms on the drawing-room floor 
of one of the streets running out of Piccadilly. He paid, perhaps, 
more for his accommodation than a prudent young man beginning 
the world all over again would have thought necessary; but Heron 
could not come down all at one step from his dignity as a sort of 
colonial governor, and he considered it, in a manner, due to the 
honour of England's administrative system that he should maintain 
a gentlemanlike appearance in London whilst still engaged in 
fighting his battle . the battle which had not yet begun. Besides, 
as he had himself told Minola Grey, his troubles thus far were 
not money troubles. He had means enough to live like a modest 
gentleman even in London, provided he did not run into ex- 
travagant tastes of any kind, and he had saved, because he had 
had no means of spending it, a good deal of his salary while in the 
St. Xavier's Settlements. He had engaged a servant when he esta- 
blished himself in his lodgings; and his condition seemed to 
Blanchet, when they entered the drawing-room together, and the 
servant was seen to be quietly busy in anticipating his master's 
wants, to be that of an easy opulence whereof, in the case of young 
bachelors, he had little personal knowledge. It was very impres- 
sive for the moment. Genius, and originality, and the School 
quailed at first before respectability, West-End rooms, and a man- 
servant. 

The adornments of the room were, to Mr. Blanchet's thinking, 
atrocious. They were, indeed, only of the better-class London- 
lodgings style ; mirrors and gilt and white and damask. There 
were doors where there ought to have been curtains, carpets where 
artistic feeling would have prescribed mats or rugs ; there were no 
fans, not to say on the ceiling, but even on the walls. The only 
suggestion of art in the place was a plaster cast of the Venus of 
the Louvre which Heron himself had bought, and which in all 
simplicity he adored. Mr. Blanchet held, first, that all casts were 
nefarious, and next, that the Venus of Milo as a work of art was 
beneath contempt. One of the divinities of his school had done 
the only Venus which Art could acknowledge as her own. This 
was, to be sure, a picture, not a statue ; but in Mr. Blanchet's 
mind it had settled the Venus question for ever. The Lady 
Venus was draped from chin to toes in a snuff-coloured gown, 
and was represented as seated on a rock, biting the nails of a 
lank, greenish hand ; and she had sunken cheeks, livid eyes, and 
a complexion like that of the prairie sage-grass. Any other Venus 
made Herbert Blanchet shudder. 

The books scattered about were dispiriting. There were 
Shakespeare, Byron, and Browning. Mr. Blanchet had never read 



**THE POET TN A GOLDEN AGE WAS BORN." 9-/ 

Shakespeare, considered Byron below criticism, and could hardly 
restrain himself on the subject of Browning. There were histories, 
and Mr. Blanchet scorned history ; there were Blue-books, and 
the very shade of blue which their covers displayed would have 
made his soul sicken. It will be seen, therefore, how awful is the 
impressive less of respectability when, with all these evidences of 
the lack of xrtistic taste around him, Mr. Blanchet still felt himself 
dwarfed somehow in the presence of the occupier of the rooms. 
It ought to oe said, in vindication of Mr. Heron, that the poor 
youth was in nowise responsible for the adornments of the rooms, 
except in so far as his plaster cast and his books were concerned. 
He had never, up to this moment, noticed anything about the 
lodgings, excep* that the rooms were pretty large, and that the 
locality was convenient for his purposes and pursuits. 

The two young men had some soda and brandy, and smoked 
and talked. Blanchet was the poorest hand possible at smoking 
and drinking, but he swallowed soda and brandy in repeated doses, 
while his host's glass lay still hardly touched before him. One 
consequence was that his humbled feeling soon w- ore off, and he 
became eloquent on his own account, and patronising to Heron. 
He set our hero right upon every point connected with modern 
literature and art, whereon it appeared that Heron had hitherto 
possessed the crudest and most old-fashioned notions. Then he 
declaimed some of his own shorter poems, and explained to Heron 
that there was a conspiracy among all the popular and successful 
poets of the day to shut him out from public notice, until Heron 
felt compelled, by a sheer sense of fellow-feeling in grievance, to 
start up and grasp his hand, and vow that his position was en- 
viable in comparison with that of those who had leagued themselves 
against him. 

" But you must hear my last poem ; you shall \\e3iX it," Herbert 
said magnanimously. 

" I shall be delighted ; I shall feel truly honoured," murmured 
Victor in perfect sincerity. " Only tell me when." 

" The first reading . let me see . yes, the Ji?-st reading is 
pledged to Miss Gre3% No one," the poet grandly went on, " can 
hear it before she hears it." 

" Of course not . certainly not ; I shouldn't think of it," the de- 
throned ruler ofSt.Xavier's Settlements hastened to interpose. "What 
a noble girl Miss Grey is ! You know her very well, I suppose ? " 

" I look upon her," said the poet gravely, " as my patron 
saint." He threw himself back in his chair, raised his eyes to 
the ceiling, murmured to himself some words which sounded like 
a poetic prayer, and swallowed his soda and brandy. 

H 



98 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

Victor thought he understood, and remained silent. His heart 
swelled with admiration, sympathy, and an entirely innocent, un- 
selfish envy. 

" Still," the poet said, rising in his chair again, " there is no 
reason why you should not hear the poem at the same time. I am 
going to-morrow to read the poem to Minola . to Miss Grey . and 
Mary. I am sure they will both be delighted if you will come with 
me and hear it." 

" I should like it of all things, of course ; but I don't know 
whether I ought to intrude on Miss Grey. I understood from her 
that she rather prefers to live to herself. Avith her friends, of 
course . and that she does not desire to have visitors." 

'. You may safely come with me," the poet proudly said. " I'll 
call for you to-morrow, if you like." 

Victor assumed that he might safely accept the introduction of 
his new acquaintance, and the appointment was made. 

If Mr. Heron could under any possible circumstances have 
been brought to admit to himself that the society of a poet was a 
little tiresome, he might perhaps have acknowledged it in the 
present instance. The good-natured youi.g man was quite content 
for the present to sink aiad even to forget his own grievance in 
presence of the grievances of his new acquaintance. His own 
trouble seemed to him but small in comparison. What, after all, 
was the misprizing of the political services of an individual, in the 
face of a malign or stupid lack of appreciation which might deprive 
the world and all time of the outcome of a poet's genius ? Heron 
began now to infer that his new friend was poor, and the convic- 
tion made him more and more devotedly sympathetic. He was 
already dimly revolving in his mind a project for the publication 
of Blanchet's poems at the risk or expense of a few private friends, 
of whom he was to be the foremost. Some persons have a genius, 
a heaven bestowed faculty, for the transfer of their own responsi- 
bilities and cares to other minds and shoulders. Already two 
sympathetic friends of a few hours' standing are separately taking 
thought about the publication of Mr. Blanchet's poems without 
risk or loss to Mr. Blanchet. Still, it must be owned that Mr. 
Blanchet's company was growing a little of a strain on the attention 
of his present host. Blanchet knew absolutely nothing of politics 
or passing events of any kind in the outer world, and did not 
afreet or pretend to care anything about them. Indeed, had he 
been a man of lar^e and liberal information in contemporary 
history, he would in all probability have concealed his treasures 
ol knowledge, and affected an absolute and complacent ignorance. 
Outside the realms of what he called Art, Mr. Blanchet thousht 



THE GA V SCIEXCE IN A NEW ILLUSTRATION. 99 

it utterly beneath him to know anything ; and within his own 
realm he knew so much, and bore down with such a terrible dog- 
matism, that the ordinary listener sank oppressed beneath it. 
Warmed and animated by his own discourse, the poet poured 
out the streams of his dogmatic eloquence over the patient Heron, 
who strained e\ery nerve in the effort to appreciate, and in the 
honest desire to acquire, exalted information. 

At last the talk came to an end, and even Blanchet got some- 
how the idea that it was time to be going away. Victor accom- 
panied him as far as the doorway, and they stood for a moment 
looking into the silent street. 

" You haven't far to go, I hope ? " 

*' No, not far ; not exactly far," the poet answered. " I'll find 
a cab, I dare say. To-morrow, then, you'll come with me to Miss 
Grey's? You needn't have any hesitation ; you will be quite wel- 
come, I assure you. I'll call for you." 

"Come to breakfast, then, at twelve." 

" All right," the complacent Blanchet answered, his earlier awe 
having given place to an easy famiHarity ; " I'll come." 

He nodded, and went his way. Victor Heron looked for a 
while after his tall, slender, and graceful figure. 

" He's a handsome fellow," Heron said to himself, " and a 
poet, and I can easily imagine a girl being in love with him, or 
any number of girls. She is a ver}' fine girl, quite out ot the 
common track. She must be very happy. I almost envy him. 
No, I don't ; what on earth have I to do with such nonsense ? " 

He returned to his room, and sat thinking for a while. All 
his political worrying and grievance-mongering seemed to have 
lost character somehow, and become prosaic, and unsatisfying, and 
vapid. It did not seem much to look forward to, that sort of thing 
going on for ever. 



CHAPTER XL 

THE GAY SCIENCE IN A NEW ILLUSTRATION. 

Mary Blanchet was, for the time, one of the happiest women 
on the earth, when she had to bestir herseh, on her returning home 
next day, to make preparations for the test-reading of her brother's 
poems. To hear Herbert's poems read was a delight which could 
only be excelled by the pride and joy of having them read to such 



loo MISS MISANTHROPE. 

an audience. She had so long looked up to Minola as a leader 
and a princess, that she at last came to regard her as the natural 
arbitress of the destiny of anyone belonging to the Blanchet family. 
In some vague way she had made up her mind that, if Miss Grey 
only gave the word of command, the young poet's works must go 
forth to the world, and going forth must of course be estimated at 
their proper worth. Her pride was double-edged. On this side, 
there was the poet-brother to show to her friend \ on that side, the 
friend who was to be the poet- brother's patroness. Her "animula 
vagula, blandula," floated all that day on the saffron and rose 
clouds of rising joy and fame. 

Nor was her gratification at all diminished when Herbert 
Blanchet called very early to crave permission to bring Mr. Heron 
with him, and when he obtained it. Blanchet had thought it 
prudent not to rely merely on the close friendship with Miss Grey 
of which he had spoken a little too vauntingly to Victor the night 
before, and it seemed to him a very necessary precaution to call 
and ask permission to introduce his friend. He was fortunate 
enough to find INIinola not only willing, but even what Mary 
might have thought, if she had considered the matter, suspiciously 
willing, to receive Mr. Heron. In truth, Minola had in her mind 
a little plot to do a service to Mary Blanchet and her brother in 
the matter of the poems, and she had thought of Mr. Heron as 
the kindliest and likeliest person she knew to give her a helping 
hand in the carrying out of her project. Mary, not thinking any- 
thing of this, was yet made more happy than before by the pro- 
spect of having a handsome young man for one of the audience. 
As has been said already, she had the kindliest feelings to handsome 
young men. Then the presence of another Hstener would make 
the thing quite an assembly ; almost, as she observed in gentle 
ecstasy more than once to Minola, as if it were one of the poetic 
contests of the Middle Ages, in which minstrels sang and peerless 
ladies awarded the prize of song. 

So she busied herself all the morning to adorn the rooms and 
make them fit for the scenes of a poet's triumph. She started 
away to Covent Garden and got pots of growing flowers and 
liandfuls of " cut flowers," to scatter here and there. She had an 
old guitar which she disposed on the sofa with a delightfully artistic 
carelessness, having tried it in all manner of positions before she 
decided on the final one, in which the forgetful hand of the 
musician was supposed to have heedlessly dropped it. All the 
books in the prettiest bindings . especially poems . she laid about 
in conspicuous places. Any articles of apparel . bonnets, wraps, 
and such like, that might upon an ordinary occasion have been 



THE GA V SCIENCE IN A NEW ILLUSTRATION. loi 

seen on tables or chairs . were carefully stowed away in their 
proper receptacles . except, indeed, for a bright-coloured shawl, 
which, thrown gracefully across an arm of the sofa, made, in con- 
junction with the guitar, quite an artistic picture in itself. Near 
the guitar, too, in a moment of sudden ins])iration, she arranged 
a glove of Nola's . a glove only once worn, and therefore for all 
pictorial effect as good as new, \vhile having still the pretty shape 
of the owner's hand expressed in it. What can there be, Marv 
Blanchet thought, more winsome to look at, more suggestive of ail 
poetic thought, than the carelessly-lying glove of a beautiful girl ? 
But she took good care not to consult the owner of the glove on 
any such point, dreading with good reason Minola's ruthless scorn 
of all shams and pre-arranged affectations. 

Mary was a little puzzled about the art fixtures, if such an ex- 
pression may be used, of the room ; tlie framed engravings, w-hich 
belonged to the owner of the house and were let with the lodgings, 
of which they were understood to count among the special attrac- 
tions. She had a strong conviction that her brother would not 
admire them, would think meanly of them, and say so ; and al- 
though Minola herself now and then made fun of them, yet it did 
not by any means follow that she should be pleased to hear them 
disparaged by a stranger. About the wall-paper she was also a 
little timorous, not feeling sure as to the expression which its study 
might call into her brother's critical eye. She could not, however, 
remove the engravings, and doing anything with the paper was 
still more completely out of the question. There was nothing for 
it, therefore, but to hope that his poetry and his audience would 
so engross the poet, as to deprive his eyes of perception for cheap 
art and ill-disciplined colours. 

There was to be tea, delightfully served in dainty little cups, 
and Mary could already form in her mind an idea of the graceful 
figure which Minola would make as she offered her hospitality to 
the poet. An alarm, however, began to possess her as the day 
w'ent on about the possibility of Minola not being home in time 
for the reception of the strangers. In order that she might have 
the place quite to herself to carry out her little schemes of decora- 
tion, the artful poetess had persuaded Minola not to give up her 
usual walk in the park ; and now suppose Minola forgot the hour, 
or lost her way, or was late from any cause and had not time to 
make any change in her walking dress, or actually did not come 
in until long after the visitors had arrived ! \Miat on earth was 
she, Mary, to do with them ? 

This alarm, however, proved unfounded. Minola came back 
in very good time, looking healthy and bright, w-ith some rain- 



I02 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

drops on her hair, and patting away with good-humoured con- 
tempt all suggestions about an elaborate change of dress. Miss 
Blanchet would have liked her leader to array herself in some sort 
of way that should suggest a queen of beauty or princess of culture 
or other such imposing creature. At all events, she would have 
liked trailing skirts and much perfume. She only sighed when 
Minola persisted in showing herself in very quiet costume. 

The rattle of a hansom cab was heard at last . at last, Mary 
thought . in reality a few minutes before the time appointed ; and 
the poet and Mr. Heron entered. The poet was somewhat pale, 
and a httle preoccupied. He had a considerable bulk of manu- 
script in his hand. The manuscript was in itself a work of art, 
as he had already explained to Victor. Each page was a large 
leaf of elaborately rough and expensive paper, and the lines of 
poetry, written out with exquisitely careful penmanship, occupied 
but a small central plot, so to speak, of the field of white. The 
margins were rich in quaint fantasies of drawing by the poet 
himself and various artists of his brotherhood. Sometimes a 
thought, or incident, or phrase of the text was illustrated on the 
margin in a few odd, rapid strokes. Sometimes the artist, without 
having read the text, contributed some fancy or whimsy of his 
own ; sometimes it was a mere monogram, sometimes a curious 
perplexed pictorial conceit : now, merely the face of a pretty 
woman, and again, some bewildering piece of eccentric sym- 
bolism, about the meaning whereof all observers differed. It must 
be owned that, as Minola looked at these ornaments of the manu- 
script, she could not help feeling a secret throb of satisfaction at 
the evidence they gave that the reading would not be quite so long 
as the first sight of the mass of paper had led her to expect. 

Mr. Blanchet did not do much in the way of preliminary con- 
versation. He left all that to Minola and Victor ; and the latter 
was seldom wanting in talk when he believed himself to have sym- 
pathetic listeners. It should be said that the well-ordered guitar- 
effect proved a failure, for Mr. Blanchet, soon after entering the 
room, flung himself into what was to have been a poetic attitude 
on the sofa, and came rather awkwardly on the guitar, and was a 
little vexed at the thought of being made to seem ridiculous. 

Everyone was anxious that a beginning of the reading should 
be made, and no one seemed to know exactly how to start it. 
Suddenly Mr. Blanchet arose, as one awakened from a dream. 

" May I beg. Miss Grey, for three favours ? " 

Minola bowed, and waited. 

" first. I cannot read by daylight. My poems are not made 
for day. They need a peculiar setting. May I ask that the 



THE GAY SCIENCE IN A NE\\^ ILLUSTRATION. 103 

windows be closed, and the lamps lighted ? I see you have 
lamps.' 

" Certainly, if you wish ; " and ]\Iinola promptly rang the bell. 

" Thank you very much. In the second place, I would ask that 
no sign of approval or otherwise be given as I read. The whole 
must be the impression, not any part. It must be felt as a whole, 
or it is not felt at all. Until the last line is read no judgment can 
be formed." 

This was discouraging and even depressing, but everybody 
promised. Minola in particular began to fear that poets were not 
so much less objectionable than other men, as she had hoped. She 
could not tell why, but as she listened to the child of genius, she 
was filled with a strange memory of Mr. Augustus Sheppard. 
Everything that seemed formal and egotistic reminded her of Mr. 
Augustus Sheppard. 

" Then," continued Herbert, " when I have finished the last 
line, you will, perhaps, allow me to leave you at once, without 
formality, and without even speaking? I ask for no sudden judg- 
ment ; that I shall hear another time , too soon, perhaps," and he 
indulged in a faint smile. " But I prefer to go at once, when I 
have read a poem ; it is a peculiarity of mine," and l>e passed his 
hand through his hair. " Reading excites me, and I am over- 
wrought. It may not be so with others, but it is so with me." 

" I can quite understand," the good-natured Victor hastened 
to say. " Quite natural . quite so. I have often worked myself 
into such a state of excitement, thinking of things . not poetry, of 
course, but colonial afiairs, and such dry stuff . that I have to go 
out at night, perhaps, and walk in the cool air, and recover 
myself. Don't you feel so, sometimes, Miss Grey ? " 

" Oh, no; I am neither poet nor politician, and I have nothing 
to think about." At the moment she thought Blanchet a sham, 
and Heron rather a weak and foolish person for encouraging him. 
What would you have of men ? 

" I have felt so, often," Man,' Blanchet said, wath a gentle sigh. 

Miss Grey did not doubt that people felt so ; that everybody 
might feel so under appropriate conditions. It was the deliberate 
arranging of preliminaries by Mr. Blanchet that vexed her; it 
seemed so like aft'ectation aiid play-acting. She was prepared to 
think his poetry rubbish. 

It was not rubbish, however ; not mere rubbish, by any means. 
Mr. Blanchet had a considerable mastery 01 the art ot arranging 
together melodious and penetrating words, and he caught up 
cleverly and adopted the prevailing idea and purpose of the small, 
new group of yet hardly known artists in verse and colour to whom 



I04 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

it was his pride to belong. His poems belonged to what might 
be called the literature of disease. In principle, they said to cor- 
ruption, " Thou art my father," and to the worm, " Thou art my 
mother and my sister." They dealt largely in graves and corpses, 
iind the loves of skeletons, and the sweet virtues of sin, and the 
joys of despair and dyspepsia. They taught that there is no truth 
but paradox. Mr. Blanchet read his contributions with great 
effect ; in a voice now wailing, now threatening, now storming 
fiercely, now creeping along in tones of the lowest hoarseness. 
What amazed Minola was, to hnd that any man could have so 
little sense of the ridiculous, as to be able to go through such a 
performance in a small room before three people. In a crowd 
there might be courage ; but before three ! It was wonderful. 
She felt horribly inclined to laugh ; but the gleaming eyes of the 
poet alighted on hers and fastened them every now and then ; 
and poor Mary, too, she knew, was watching her. 

It was very trying to her. She endeavoured to fill her mind 
with serious and sad thoughts ; and she could not keep herself 
from thinking of the scene in Richter's Flegdjahre, where the kin 
of the eccentric testator are trying in fierce rivalry who shall be 
the first to shed a tear for his loss, in presence of the notary and 
the witnesses, and thereby earn the legacy to which that exas- 
perating condition was attached. After all, it is probably easier to 
restrain a laugh than to pump up a tear, especially when the 
coming of the tear must bring the drying glow of a glad success 
with it. Minola's condition Avas bearable ; and indeed, when she 
saw the genuine earnestness of the poet, her inclination to laugh 
all died away, and she became filled with pity and pain. Then she 
tried hard to admire the verses, and could not. At first the con- 
ceits and paradoxes were a little startling, and even shocking, and 
they made one listen. But the mind soon became attuned to them 
and settled down, and was stirred no more. Once you knew that 
Mr. Blanchet liked corpses, his peculiarity became of no greater 
interest than if his liking had been for babies. When it was made 
clear that what other people called hideousness, he called beauty, 
it did not seem to matter much more than honest Faulconbridge's 
determination, if a man's name be John, to call him Peter. 

The poet sometimes closed his eyes for a minute together, and 
pressed his hand U])on his brow, while drops of perspiration stood 
distinctly on his livid forehead. But he took breath again, and 
went on. He evidently thought his audience could not have enough 
of it. The poem was, in fact, a chaplet of short poem-beads. 
Many of its passages had the peculiarity that the}"^ came to a 
sudden end exactly when the listeners supposed that the interest 




-^ 



^ 



THE GA y SCIENCE IN A NEW ILLUSTRATION 105 

of the thing was only going to begin. When a page was ended 
the poet hlted it, so to speak, with the sudden eftbrt of one hand 
and arm, as though it were something heavy hke a shield, and then 
flung it from him, looking fixedly into the eyes of some one of the 
three listeners the while. This formality impressed Mary Blanchet 
immensely. It seemed the very passion and wrestling of poetic 
inspiration ; the prophetic fury rushing into action through the 
prophet. 

Minola once or twice glanced at the face of Victor Heron. At 
first it was full of respectful and anxious attention, animated now 
and then by a sudden flicker of surprise. Of late these feelings 
and moods had gradually changed, and after a while the settling- 
down condition had clearly arrived. At length Miss Grey could 
see that, while Mr. Heron still maintained an attitude of the most 
courteous attention, his ears were decidedly with his heart, and 
that was far away . with his own grievance and the St. Xavier's 
Settlements. 

At last it was over. The close, for all their previous prepara- 
tion, took the small audience by surprise. It came thus : . 

I asked of my soul . What is death ? 
I asked of my love . What is hate ? 
I asked of decay . Art thou life? 
And of night. Art thou day? 
Did they answer ? 

The poet looked up with eyes of keen and almost fierce inquiry. 
The audience quailed a little, but, not feeling the burden of re- 
sponse thrown upon them, resumed their expectant attitudes, 
waiting to hear what the various oracles had said to their poetic 
questioner. But they were taken in, if one might use so homely 
an expression. The poem was all over. That was the beginning 
and the end of it. The poet flung away his last page, and sank 
dreamy, exhausted, back into his chair. A moment of awful 
silence succeeded. Then he gathered up his ihuminated scrolls, 
rose from his chair, bowed gravely, and left the room. Mary 
Blanchet hurried after him. 

Minola was perplexed, depressed, and remorseful. She thought 
there must be something in the productions which made their author 
so much in earnest, and she was afraid she had not seemed attentive 
enough, or that Blanchet had detected her in her early inclination 
to smile. There was an embarrassed pause when Victor and she 
were left together. 

" He reads very well," Heron said at last. " A capital reader, I 
think . don't you? He throws his soul into it. That's the great 
thing.-' 



ro5 MrSS MISANTHROPE. 

" It is," said Minola, " if it's much to throw . Oh, I don't know 
ivhat I mean by that. But, how do you hke the poems; ? " 

" Well, I am sure they must be very fine. I should rather hear 
the judgment of some one else. I should like to hear you speak 
first. You tell me what you think of them, and then I'll tell you, 
as the children say." 

" I don't care about them," said Minola, shaking her head 
sadly. " I have tried, Mr. Heron ; but I can't admire them. I can't 
see any originality, or poetry, or anything in them. I could not 
admire them . unless a command came express from the Queen to 
tell me to think them good." 

"So you read the AlisatitJirope . Moliere's Misanthrope'^" 
Victor said eagerly . having caught in a moment Minola's 
whimsical allusion to the duty of a loyal critic when under royal 
command. 

" Yes, I used to pass half my time reading it ; I have almost 
grown into thinking that I have a sort of copyright in it ; Alceste 
is my chief hero, Mr. Heron." 

" I wish I were like him," said Mr Heron. 

" I wish you were," she answered gravely. 

" But I am not . unfortunately." 

" Unfortunately," she repeated, determined to pay no com- 
pliment. 

" You must let me come some day and have a long talk with 
you about Moliere," Victor said, nothing discouraged, having 
wanted no compliment, nor thought of any. 

" I shall be delighted : you shall talk, and I will listen. I am 
so glad to find a companion in Mohere. But I wish I could have 
admired Mr. Blanchet's poems. I prefer my own ever so much." 

" Your own ! " The audacious self-complacency of the 
announcement astonished him, and seemed out of keeping with 
Miss Grey's character and ways. " Do you write poems ?" 

" Oh, no ; if I did, I don't think I could admire them." 

" But how then . what do you mean ? " 

" Well, one can feel such poetry in every blink of sunshine even 
in this West Centre, and every breath of wind, and every stray 
recollection of some great book that one has read . when one was 
young, you know. That poetry is never brought to the awful test 
of being written down and read out. I do so feel for Mr. Blanchet; 
I sui)pose his poems seemed glorious before they were written out." 

" But I think they seem glorious to him even still." 

"They do . and to Mary. Mr. Heron, tell me honestly and 
without affectation . are you really a judge of poetry?" 

'. Not I," said Heron. *' I adore a lew old poets and one or 



THE GAY SCIENCE IN A NEW ILLUSTRATION. 107 

two new ones, but I couldn't tell why . and those that I admire 
everybody else admires too, so that I can't pretend to myself that 
I have any original judgment. My opinion, Miss Grey, isn't worth 
a rush." 

" I am very glad to hear it . very. Neither is mine. So you see 
we may be both of us quite mistaken about Mr. Blanchet's poems." 

" Of course we may . I dare say we are : in fact, I am quite 
sure we are," said Heron, growing enthusiastic. 

" Anyhow, it is possible. Now, I have been thinking" 

" Yes, you have been thinking ? "' 

" I don't know whether I am only going to prove myself a busy- 
body ; but I am so fond of Mary Blanchet." 

" Yes : quite right ; so am I . I mean, I like her very much. 
But what do you think of doing ? " 

" Well, if one could do anything to get these poems published 
or brought out in some way . if it could be done without Mr. 
Blanchet's knowledge, or if he could be got to approve of it, and 
was not too proud ? " 

" All that I have been thinking of already," Victor said. " I 
do think it's a shame that a fellow shouldn't have a chance of 
fighting his battle for the want of a few wretched pounds." 

" How glad I am now that I spoke of this to you 1 Then if 1 
get up a little plot, you'll help me in it ? " 

" I'll do everj'thing . delighted." 

" But first you must understand me. This is for my dear old 
friend Mary Blanchet . not for Mr. Blanchet : I don't particularly 
care about him, in that sort of way, and I fancy that men generally 
can take care of themselves ; but I can't bear to have Mary Blanchet 
disappointed, and that is why I want to do something. Now will 
you help me ? . I mean, will you help me in my way ? " 

" I \vill help in any way you like, so long as I am allowed to 
help at all. But I don't quite understand what you mean." 

" Don't you ? I wish you did without being told so very, very 
clearly. Well, my Mary Blanchet is proud ; and though she might 
accept for her brother a helping hand from me, it would be quite a 
different thing where a stranger was concerned. In plain English, 
Mr. Heron, whatever money is to be paid must be paid by me ; or 
there shall be no plot. Now you understand." 

" Yes, certainly ; I quite understand your feelings. I should 
have liked" 

" No doubt : but there are so many things one could have liked. 
The thing is now, will you help me . on my conditions ?" 

" Of course I will : but what help can I give, as you have 
ordered thin£[s ? " 



io8 MISS MISANTHROPE, 

" There are ever so many things to do which I couldn't do, 
and shouldn't even know how to go about : seeing publishers and 
printers, and all that kind of work." 

" All that I'll do with pleasure ; and I am only sorry that you 
limit me to that. May I ask, Miss Grey, how old are you ? " 

" What on earth has that to do with the matter ? Shall you 
have to give the publishers a certificate of my birth ? " 

"No, it's not for that. But you seem to me a very young 
woman, and yet you order people and things as if you were a 
matron." 

Minola smiled and coloured a little. " I have lived an odd 
and lonely sort of life," she said, " and never learned manners : 
perhaps that is the reason. If I don't please you, Mr. Heron . 
fiankly, I shan't try." 

There was something at once constrained and sharp in her 
manner, such as Heron had not observed before. She seemed 
changed somehow as she spoke these unpropitiatory words. 

" Oh, you do please me," he said ; " sincere people always 
please me. Remember that I, too, admire the Misanthrope." 

" Yes, very well ; I am glad that you agree to my terms ; . and 
we are fellow-conspirators." 

" We are, and" 

"Stop ! here comes Mary." 

Mary Blanchet came back. Her face had a curiously depreca- 
ting expression. She herself had been filled with wonder and 
delight by the reading of her brother's poems ; but she had known 
Minola long enough to be as sensitive to her moods and half- 
implied meanings, as the dog who catches from one glance at his 
master's face the knowledge of whether the master is or is not in 
a temper suited for play. Mary had done her very best to reassure 
her brother ; but she had not herself felt quite satisfied about 
Minola's admiration. 

" Well?" Mary said, looking beseechingly at Minola, and then 
appealingly at Victor, as if to ask whether he would not come to 
the rescue : '' Well ? " 

'' We have been talking," Minola said, with a resolute effort, 
"we have been talking . Mr. Heron and I . about your brother's 
poems, Mary ; and we think that the public ought to have a 
chance of judging of them." 

" Oh, thank you ! " Mary exclaimed, and she clasped her hands 
fervently. 

" Ves, Mr. Heron says he is clear about that." 

" I was sure Mr. Heron would be," said Mary, with becoming 
pride in her brother. She was not eager to ask any more questions, 



THE GA V SCIENCE IN A NEW ILLUSTRA TION. 109 

for she felt convinced that when Minola Grey said the poems 
ought to go before the pubHc, they would somehow go ; and she 
saw fame for her brother in the near distance. She thought she 
saw something else, too, as well as fame. The interest which 
Minola took in Herbert's poems must surely betoken some interest 
in Herbert himself. Mary knew well enough, too, that there is 
nothing which so disposes some women to love men as the 
knowledge that they are serving and helping the men. This 
subject of love the little poetess had long and quaintly studied. 
She had followed it through no end of pomes and romances, and 
lain awake through long hours of many nights considering it. She 
had subjected it to severe analysis, bringing to the aid of the 
analysing process that gift of imagination which it is rarely per- 
mitted to the hard scientific enquirer to employ to any purpose. 
She had pictured herself as the object of all manner of wooings, 
under every conceivable variety of circumstances. Love by sur- 
prise ; love by the slow degrees of steady growth ; love pressed 
upon her by ardent youth ; gravely tendered by a dignified 
maturity which, until her coming, had never known such passion ; 
love bending down to her from a castle, looking up to her from the 
cottage of the peasant ; . love in every form had tried her in fancy, 
and she had pleased and vexed herself in conjuring up its various 
effects upon her susceptibility. But the general result of the 
poetess's self-examination was to show that the love which would 
most keenly touch her heart would be that which was born of 
passion and compassion united. He, that is to say, whom she 
had helped, and patronised, and saved, would be the man she best 
could love. Perhaps Mary Blanchet's years had something to do 
with this turn of feeling. The unused emotions of the maternal 
went, in her breast, to blend with and make up the equally un- 
satisfied sentiments of love : and her vague idea of a lover was that 
of somebody who should be husband and child in one. 

Anyhow the result of all this, in the present instance, was that 
Mary felt a sudden and strong conviction that to allow Minola 
Grey to do Herbert a kindly service was a grand thing gained 
towards inducing Minola to fall in love ^vith him. 

So the three conspirators fell to making their arrangements. 
The parts were easily divided. Mr. Heron was to undertake the 
business of the aftair, to see publishers and printers and so forth ; 
Mary Blanchet was to undertake, or at least endeavour, to obtain 
the consent of her brother, whose proud spirit might perhaps 
revolt against such patronage, even from friendly hands. Miss 
Grey was to bear the cost. It was soon a very gratifying thing 
to the conspirators to know that no objection whatever was likely 



no MISS MISANTHROPE. 

to come from Mr. Blanchet The poet accepted the proffered 
favour not only with readiness but with joy, and was particularly 
delighted and flattered when he learned from Mary . what Mary 
was specially ordered not to tell him . that Miss Grey was his lady 
patroness. He was to have been allowed vaguely to understand 
that friends and admirers . whose name might have been Legion 
. were combined to secure justice for him. But Mary, in the 
pride of her heart, told him all the truth, and her brother was 
greatly pleased and very proud. The only stipulation he made 
was that the poems should be brought out in a certain style, with 
such paper, such margins, such bindings, and so on : according to 
the pattern of another poet's works, whereof he was to furnish a 
copy. 

"She will be rich one day, Mary," he said, "and she can 
afford to do something for Art." 

" Will she be rich? " Mary asked eagerly. " Oh, I am so glad ! 
She ought to be a princess ; she should be, if I were a queen." 

" Yes, she'll be rich . what you and I would call rich," he said 
carelessly. " Everything is to be hers, when the stepmother dies ; 
and I believe she is in a galloping consumption." 

" How do you know, Herbert ? " 

"You asked me to enquire, you know," he said, "and I did 
enquire. It was easily done. Her father left his money and things 
to his second wife only for her life ; when she dies, everything 
comes to your friend ; and I hear the woman can't live long. 
Keep all that to yourself, Mary." 

" I am sure Minola doesn't know anything about it. I know 
she never asked nor thought of it." 

" Very likely, and the old people would not tell her. But it's 
true for all that. So you see, Mary, we can afford to have justice 
done to these poems of mine. If they are stones of any value, let 
them be put in proper setting or not set at all. I am entitled to 
ask that much." 



CHAPTER XII. 

" LOVE, THE MESSENGER OF DEATH." 

Victor Heron seemed to Minola about this time in a fair way 
to let his great grievance go by altogether. He was filled with it 
personally when he had time to think about it, but the grievances 



^LOVE, THE MESSENGER OF DEATH." in 

of somebody else were always coming across his path, and drawing 
away his attention from his own aftairs. Minola very soon noticed 
this peculiarity in him, and at first could hardly believe m its 
genuineness ; it so conflicted with all her accepted theories about 
the ingrained selfishness of man. But by watching and studymg his 
ways which she did with some interest, she found that he really had 
that unusual weakness, and she was partly amused and partly 
annoyed by it. She felt angry with him now and then for neglecting 
his own task, like another Hylas, to pick up every little blossom of 
alien grievance flung in his way. She pressed on him with an 
earnestness which their growing friendship seemed to warrant the 
necessity of his doing something to set his cause right or ceasing 
to tell himself t'.iat he had a cause which called for justice. 

It would not be easy to find a more singular friendship than that 
which was growing up between Miss Grey and Victor. She received 
him whenever he chose to come and see her. Many a night when 
Mary Blandiet and she sat together he would look in upon them 
as he went to some dinner-party, or even as he came home from 
one, if he had got away early, and have a few minutes' talk with 
them. He came often in the afternoon, and if Minola did not 
happen to be at home, he would nevertheless remain and have a 
long chat with Mary Blanchet. He seemed always m good 
humour with himself and everybody else, except m so far as his 
grievance was concerned, and always perfectly happy. It has been 
already shown that, although quite a young man, he considered 
himself, by virtue of his experience and his public career, ever so 
much older than Minola. Once or twice he sent a throb of keen 
delight through Mary Blanchet's heart by speaking of something 
that'' "I can remember, Miss Blanchet, and perhaps you may 
remember it. but Miss Grey couldn't of course." To be put on 
anything Hke equal ground with him as to years was a delightful 
experience to the poetess. It was all the more delicious because 
there was such an evident genuineness in his suggestion. Of course, 
if he had meant to pay her a compliment. such as a foolish person 
might be pleased with, but not she, thank goodness. he would 
have pretended to think her as young as Minola. But he had 
done nothing of the kind ; and he evidently thought that she was 
about the same age as himself 

At aU events, and it was more to the purpose, he set down Miss 
Grey as belonging to quite a difterent stage of growth from that to 
which he had attained. He thought her a handsome and very 
clever girl, who had the additional advantage over most other girls 
that she was rather tall, and that he therefore was not compelled to 
stoop much when speaking to her. He liked women and girls 



112 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

generally. He hardly ever saw the woman or girl he did not like. 
]f he had known that a woman was insincere or affected, he would 
not have liked her; but then he never knew it; he never saw it; 
it never occurred to him. Anybody could have seen th:it he was 
a man who had no sisters or girl-cousins. The most innocent and 
natural affectations of womanhood were too deep for him to see. 
There really was a great deal of truth in what he had said to 
IMinola about his goddess theory as regarded women. He made 
no secret about his greatly admiring her . thinking her very clever 
and fresh and handsome. He would without any hesitation have 
told her that he hked her best of all the women he knew, but then 
he had often told her that he liked other women very much. He 
seemed therefore the man whom a pure and fearless woman, even 
though living in Minola's odd condition of semi-isolation, might 
frankly accept as a friend without the slightest fear for the tranquillity 
of his heart or of hers. Minola, too, had always in her own breast 
resented with anger and contempt the idea that a man and woman 
can never be brought together and allowed to walk in the beaten 
way of friendship without their forthwith wandering off into the 
thickets and thorny places of love. All such ideas she looked 
upon as imbecility, and scorned. " I don't like men," she used 
to say to herself and even to others pretty freely. "I never saw a 
man fit to hold a candle to my Alceste. I never saw the man 
who seemed to me worth a woman's troubling her heart about." 
She began to say this of late more than ever, and to say it to 
herself, especially when the day and the evening had closed and 
she was alone in her own room. She said it over almost as if it 
were a sort of charm. 

The business of the poems now gave him many occasions to 
call, and one particular afternoon Victor called when, by a rare 
chance, Mary Blanchet happened to be out of doors. Minola had 
had it on her mind that he was not pushing his cause very earnestly, 
and was glad of the opportunity of telling him so. He listened 
with great good humour. It is nearly as agreeable to be lectured 
as to be praised by a handsome young woman who is unaffectedly 
interested in one's welfare. 

" I .shall lose my good opinion of you if you don't keep more 
steadily to your purpose." 

" But I do keep steadily to it. I am always thinking of it." 

" No; you allow anything and everything to interfere with you. 
Anybody's affairs seem more to you than your own." 

Victor shook his head. 

" That isn't the reason," he .said. " I wish it were, or anything 
half so good. No; the truth is, that I get ashamed of the cursed 



''LOVE, THE MESSEXGER OF DEATH." 113 

work of trying to interest people in my affairs who don't want to 
take any interest in them. I am a restless sort of person and must 
be doing something, and my own business is now in that awful 
stage when there is nothing practical or active to be done with it. 
I find it easier to get up an appearance of prodigious activity 
about some other person's affairs. And then, Miss Grey, I don't 
mind confessing that I am rather sensitive and morbid . egotistic, 
I suppose . and if anyone looks coldly on me when I endeavour 
to interest him in my own affairs, I take it to heart more than if 
it were the business of somebody else I had in hand." 

" But you talked at one time of appealing to the public. Why 
don't you do that ? " 

" Get people to bring my case on in the House of Commons?" 

*' Yes ; why not ? " 

*'It looks like being patronised and protected and made a client 
of." 

" Well, why don't you try and get the chance of doing it your- 
self." 

He smiled. " I still do hold to that idea. or that dream. 1 
should like it very much, if one only had a chance. But no 
chance seems to turn up ; and one loses heart sometimes." 

" Oh, no," Minola said earnestly, " don't do that." 

" Don't do what ? " 

He had hardly been thinking of his own words, and he seemed 
a little surprised at the earnestness of her tone. 

" Don't lose heart. Don't give way. Don't fall into the track 
of the commonplace and become like every one, else. Keep to 
your purpose, Air. Heron, and don't be beaten out of it." 

" No ; I haven't the least idea of that, I can assure you : quite 
the contrary. But it is so hard to get a chance, or to do anything, 
all at once. Everj'thing moves so slowly in England. But I have 
a plan . we are doing something." 

" I am very glad. You seem to me to be doing nothing for 
yourself." 

" Do I ? I can assure I am much less Quixotic than you 
imagine. Now, I am so glad to hear that you still like the Parlia- 
mentar}"- scheme, because that is the idea that I have particularly at 
heart, and if the idea comes to anything there are some reasons 
why you should take a special interest in it." 

"Are there really? May I be told what they are?" 

" Well, the whole thing is only in prospect and uncertainty just 
yet. The idea is Mone/s, not mine ; he has found out that there 
is going to be a vacancy in a certain borough," and Victor smiled 
and looked at her, " before long ; and his idea is, that I should 

I 



ii4 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

become a candidate, and- tell the people my whole story right out, 
and ask them to give me a chance of defending myself in the 
House. But the thing is not yet in shape enough to talk much 
about it. Only I thought you would be glad to know that I 
haven't thrown up the sponge all at once." 

Minola did not very clearly follow all that he had been saying ; 
partly because she was beginning to be afraid that to put herself 
into the position of adviser and confidante to this young man was a 
scarcely becoming performance on her part. Her mind was a little 
perturbed, and she was not a very good listener then. Some people 
say that women seldom are good listeners ; that while they are 
playing the part of audience they are still thinking how they look 
as performers. Anyhow, Minola was now growing anxious to escape 
from her position. 

" I am so glad," she said vaguely, " that you are doing some- 
thing, and that you don't mean to allow yourself to be beaten." 

" I don't mean to be, I assure you," he said, a little surprised 
at her sudden coolness. " I shouldn't like to be. That isn't my 
way, I hope." 

" 1 hope not too, and I think not ; 1 wish I had such a pur- 
pose. Life seems to me such a pitiful thing . and in a man 
especially . when there is no great clear purpose in it." 

"But is a man's trying to get himself a new appointment a 
great clear purpose? " he asked with a smile. He was now trying 
to draw her out again on the subject, having been much pleased 
with the interest she seemed to take in him, and a little amused 
by the gravity with which slie tendered her advice. 

" No, but yours is not merely trying to get an appointment. 
You are trying to have justice done to your past career and to 
get an opjjortunity of being useful again in the same sort of way. 
You don't want to lead an idle life, lounging about London. Mr. 
Blanchet has his poems ; Mr. Money has . well, he has his 
business, whatever it is, and he is in Parhament." 

At this moment the servant entered and handed a card to 
Minola. A gentleman, she said, particularly wished to see Miss 
Grey, but he would call any time she pleased to name if she could 
not see him at present. Minola's cheek grew red as she glanced at 
the card, for it bore the name of Mr. Augustus Sheppard, and it 
had the words pencilled on it : ''Wishes particularly to see you . 
has important business." Her lips trembled. Nothing could be 
more embarrassing and painful than such a visitation. The dis- 
agreeable memory of Mr. Sheppard and of the part of her life to 
which he belonged had been banished from her thoughts, at least 
except for occasional returning glimpses, and now here was Mr. 



''LOVE, THE MESSENGER OF DEATH:' irs 

Sheppard himself in London, and asserting a right to see lier. 
She could not refuse him, for he did, perhaps, come to her with 
some message from those in Keeton who still would have called 
themselves her family. Mary Blanchet had only just gone out, 
and Minola was left to talk to Mr. Sheppard alone. For a 
moment she had a wild idea of begging Victor Heron to stay and 
bear her company during the interview. But she put this thought 
away instantly, and made up her mind that she had better hear 
what ISIr. Sheppard had to say alone. 

" Show the gentleman in, Jane," she said, as composedly as 
she could. " A friend . at least, a friend of my people, from my old 
place, Mr. Heron." 

Heron was looking at her, she thought, in a manner that 
showed he had noticed her embarrassment. 

" Well, I must wnsh you a good morning," Mr. Heron said ; 
" be sure I shan't forget what you were saying." 

" Thank you . yes ; w^iat was I saying ? " 

" Oh, the very good advice you were giving me ; and I propose 
to hear it all out another time. Good morning." 

" Don't go for a moment, pray don't," she asked with an 
earnestness which surprised Victor. " Only a moment . I would 
rather you didn't go just yet." 

The thought suddenly went through her that Mr. Sheppard 
was the very man to put an exaggerated meaning on the slightest 
thing that seemed to hint at secresy of any kind, and that she had 
better take care to let him see, face to face, what sort of visitor 
was with her when he came. Victor was glad in any case of the 
chance of remaining a few moments longer, and was in no par- 
ticular hurry to go so long as he could think he was not in any- 
body's way. 

Victor Heron stood, hat in hand, on the hearth-rug near the 
chimney-piece. As Mr. Sheppard entered, Heron was the first 
person he happened to see, and the entirely unexpected sight sur- 
prised him. He glanced confusedly fronl Heron to Minola before 
he spoke a word, and his manner, always stiff and formal, seemed 
to acquire in a moment an additional incubus of constraint. 
Victor Heron had something about him which did not seem 
exactly English and which to a provincial mind might well suggest 
the appearance of a foreigner . a Frenchman. Mr. Sheppard had 
never felt quite satisfied in his own mind about that mysterious 
rival of whom Minola spoke to him on the memorable day when 
he saw her last. She had told him that her Alceste was only " a 
man who lived in a book, Mr. Sheppard . in what you w^ould call 
a play." How well he remembered the very words she used, and 

1 2 



ii6 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

the expression of contempt on her lips as she used them ! And 
he had got the book . the play . and read it ; toiled through it, 
and found that there was an Alceste in it. So far she had told the 
truth, no doubt ; but might not the Alceste have a living embodi- 
ment, or might she not have found since that time a supposed 
realisation of her Alceste, and might not this be he . this hand- 
some, foreign-looking young man, who was lounging there as coolly 
and easily as if the place belonged to him ? For a moment an 
awful doubt filled his mind. Cculd she be married ? was that her 
husband? 

" Miss Grey ? " he said in hesitating and questioning tone, as 
that of one who is not quite clear about the identity of the person 
he is addressing ; but Mr. Sheppard was only giving form uncon- 
sciously to the doubt in his own mind, Are you still Miss Grey ? 

The words and their tone were rather fortunate for Minola. 
They amused her and seemed ridiculous, although she did not 
guess at Mr, Sheppard's real meaning, and they enabled her to get 
back at once to her easy contempt for him. 

" You must have forgotten my appearance very soon, Mr. 
Sheppard," she said, in a tone which carried the contempt so 
lightly and easily that he probably did not perceive it, " or I must 
have changed very much, if you are not quite certain whether I 
am Miss Grey. You have not changed at all ; I should have 
known you anywhere." 

" It is not that," Mr. Sheppard said with a little renewal of 
cheerfulness. " I should have known you anywhere, Miss Grey. 
You have not changed, except indeed that you have, if that were 
possible, improved. Indeed, I would venture to say that you have 
decidedly improved." 

" Thank you : you are very kind." 

"It would be less surprising if you, Miss Grey, had had some 
difficulty in recognising me. Fortune, perhaps, has withdrawn some of 
her blessings from others only to pour them more lavishly on you." 

" I feel very well, thank you ; but I hope fortune has not been 
robbing any Peter to pay Paul in my case. You, at least, don't 
seem to have been cheated out of any of your good health, Mr. 
Slieppard." 

While he made his little formal speeclics Mr. Sheppard con- 
tinued to glance sidelong at Victor Heron. Mr. Heron now left 
his place at the chimney-piece, and came forward to take his leave. 

" Must you go?" Minola asked with as easy a manner as she 
could assume. She dreaded a iete-d,-tcte with Sheppard, and she 
fllso dreaded to let it be seen that she dreaded it If Mary 
Jjlanchet would only come ! 



"LOVE, THE MESSENGER OF DEATH:' 1 17 

An expedient occurred to her for putting off the dreaded con- 
versation yet a moment, and giving Mary Blanchet another chance. 

" I should like my friends to know each other," Minola said, 
with a gaiety of manner which was hardly in keeping with her 
natural ways. " People are not introduced to each other now, I 
believe, when they meet by chance in London, but we are none of 
us Londoners. Air. Sheppard comes from Keeton, Mr. Heron, 
and is one of the oldest friends of my family." 

Mr. Heron held out his hand with eyes of beaming friendliness. 

*' Mr. Heron?" Sheppard asked slowly, " Mr. Victor Heron?" 

"Victor Heron, indeed 1" 

" Mr. Victor Heron, formerly of the St. Xavier's Settlements?"' 

Heron only nodded this time, finding Mr. Sheppard's manner 
not agreeable. Minola wondered what her townsman was thinking 
of, and how he came to know Heron's name and history. 

" Then my name must surely be known to you, Mr. Heron. 
The name of Augustus Sheppard, of Dukes-Keeton ? " 

" No, sir," Lleron replied, " I aui sorry to say that I don't re- 
member to have heard the name before." 

" Indeed ! " Mr. Sheppard said, with a formal smile, intended to 
be incredulous and yet not to seem too plainly so; "yet we aie 
rivals, Mr. Heron." 

Minola started and coloured. 

" At least, we are to be," Mr. Sheppard went on . " if rumour 
in Dukes-Keeton speaks the truth. I am not wrong in assuminj^ 
that I have the honour of addressing the future Radical . -I mean 
Liberal . candidate for that borough ? " 

" Oh, that's it ! " Heron said carelessly, " yes, yes : I didn't 
know that rumour had yet troubled h(rself about the matter so 
much as to speak of it truly or falsely. But, of course, since you 
have heard it, Mr. Sheppard, it's no secret. I have some ideas 
that way. Miss Grey. I intend to try whether I can impress vour 
tov/nspeople. This gentleman, I suppose, is on the other side." 

" I am the other side," Mr. Sheppard said gravely. " I am to 
be the Conservative candidate . I was accepted by the party as the 
Conservative candidate, no matter who the Radical may be." 

" Well, Mr. Sheppard, we shall not be the less good friends, I 
hope," Heron said cheerily ; " I can't be expected to wish that 
the best man may win, for that would be to wish failure for myself, 
but I wish the better cause may win, and in that you will join me. 
Good morning, Miss Grey ! " 

The room seemed to grow very chilly to ^Minola when his bright 
smile and sweet courteous tones were withdrawn, and she was left 
v/ith her old lover. 



ii3 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

* 

There was not much in Sheppard's appearance to A'in her back 
to any interest in him. He did not compare advantageously with 
Victor Heron. When Heron left the room, the light seemed to 
have gone out ; Heron was so fresh, so free, so sweet, and yet so 
strong, full of youth, and spirit, and manhood, a natural gentleman 
without the insipidity of the manners of society. Poor Augustus 
Sheppard was formal, constrained, and prosaic ; he had not even 
the dignity of austerity. He was not self-sufficing ; he was only 
self-sufficient. As he stood there he was awkward, and almost 
cowed. He seemed as if he were afraid of the girl, and Minola 
was woman enough to be angry with him becavise he seemed afraid 
of her. He was handsome, but in that commonplace sort of way 
which in a woman's eyes is often worse than being ugly. Minola 
felt almost pitiless towards him, although the girl's whole nature 
was usually full of pity, for, as has already been said, she did not 
believe in his afi'ection, and thought him a thorough sham. He 
stood awkwardly there, and she would not relieve him from his 
embarrassment by saying a word. 

" Well, Miss Grey," he began at last, " I suppose you hardly 
expected to see me." 

" I did not know you were in town, Mr. Sheppard." 

" I fear I am not very welcome," he said, with an uncomfort- 
able smile ; "but your mother particularly wished me to see you." 

" My mother, Mr. Sheppard ! " Minola grew red with pain and 
anger. 

" I mean your stepmother, of course . the wife of your father." 

" Once the wife of my father ; now the wife of somebody else." 

" Well, well ! at all eveins, the person who might be naturally 
supposed to have the best claim to some authority . or influence ; 
influence, let us say . over you." 

" Has Mrs. Saulsbury sent you to say that she thinks she ought 
to have some influence over me ? " 

" Oh, no," he answered with that gentle deprecation of anger 
which is usually such fuel to anger's fire. " Mrs. Saulsbury has 
given up any idea of the kind long since . quite long since, I 
assure you. I think, if you will permit me to say it, that you were 
always a little unjust in your judgment of Mrs. Saulsbury. She 
is a true-hearted and excellent woman." 

Minola said nothing. Perhaps she felt that she never had been 
quite in a position to do impartial justice to the excellence and the 
true-heartedness of Mrs. Saulsbury. 

" But," Mr. Sheppard resumedj with a gentle motion of his 
[lands, as if he would wave away now all superfluous and hopeless 
controversy, "That is not what I came to sav." 



*'LOVE, THE MESSENGER OF DEATH." 119 

Minola bowed slightly to signify that she was glad to know he 
was coming to the point at last. 

" Mrs. Saulsbury is in very weak health, Miss Grey ; something 
wrong with the lungs, 1 fear." 

Minola was not much impressed at first. It was one of Mrs. 
Saulsbury's ways to cry "wolf ! " very often as regarded the con- 
dition of her lungs ; and up to the time of Minola's leaving, people 
had not been in serious expectation of the wolf's really putting his 
head in at the door. 

Mr. Sheppard saw in Minola's face what she did not say. 

*' It is something really serious," he said. " Mr. Saulsbury 
knows it, and every one. You have not been in correspondence 
with them for some time, Miss Grey." 

" No," said Miss Grey . " I wrote, and nobody answered my 
letter." 

" T am afraid it was regarded as . as" 

" Undutiful perhaps ? " 

" Well, . unfriendly. But Mrs. Saulsbury now fears . or rather 
knows, for she is too good a woman to fear . that the end 
is nigh, and she wishes lo be in fullest reconciliation with every 
one." 

" Oh, has she sent for me? " IMinola said, with something like 
a cry, all her coldness and formality vanishing with her contempt. 
" I'll go, Mr. Sheppard, oh yes, at once ! I did not know . I never 
thought that she was really m any danger." 

Poor Minola ! with all her wild-bird freedom and her pride in 
her lonely independence and her love of London, there yet re- 
mained in her that instinct of home, that devotion to the principle 
of family and authority, that she would have done homage at such 
a moment, and with something like enthusiasm, to even such a 
simulacrum of the genius of home as she had lately known. Some- 
thing had passed through her mind that very day as she talked with 
Heron, and feared she had talked too freely ; something that had 
made her think with vague pain of yearning on the sweetness of a 
sheltered home. Her heart beat as she thought, " I will go to 
her . I will go home ; I will try to love her." 

Mr. Sheppard dispelled her enthusiasm. " Mrs. Saulsbury did 
not exactly express a wish to see you." 

" Oh ! " 

" In fact, when that was suggested to her . I am sure I need 
hardly say that I at once suggested it . she thought, and perhaps 
wisely, that it would be better you should not meet." 

Minola drew back, and stood as Mr. Heron had been standing 
near the chimney-piece. She did not speak. 



120 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

" But Mrs. Saulsbury begged me to convey to you the 
assurance of her entire and cordial forgiveness." 

Minola bowed gravely. 

" And her hope that you will be happy in life and be guided 
towards true ends, and find that peace which it has been her 
privilege to find." 

Minola bore all this without a word. 

" What shall I say to her from you?" he asked. " Miss Grey, 
remember that she is dying." 

The caution was not needed. 

" Say that I thank her," said Minola, in a low subdued tone 
" Say that, after what flourish your nature will, Mr. Sheppard. I 
suppose I was wrong as much as she ; I suppose it was often my 
fault that we did not get on better. Say that I am deeply grieved 
to hear that she is so dangerously ill, but that I hope . oh, so 
sincerely ! . that she may yet recover." 

Mr. Sheppard looked into her eyes with puzzled wonder. Was 
she speaking m affected meekness ; or in irony, as was her wont? 
Was the proud, rebellious girl really so gentle and subdued ? 
Could it be that she took thus humbly Mrs. Saulsbury's pardon ? 
Yes, it seemed all genuine. There was no constraint on the lines 
of her lips ; there was no scorn in her eyes. In truth, the sympa- 
thetic and generous heart of the girl was touched to the quick. 
The prospect of death sanctified the woman who had been so hard 
to her, and turned her cold self-complacent pardon into a blessing. 
If the dying are often the most egotistic and self-complacent of all 
human creatures, and are apt to make of their very condition a 
fresh title to lord it for the moment over the living . as if none had 
ever died before, and none would die after them, and therefore the 
world must pay special attention and homage to them . if this is 
so, Minola did not then know it or think about it. 

The one thing on earth which Mr. Sheppard most loved to see 
was v/oman amenable to authority. He longed more passionately 
than ever to make Minola his wife. 

" There is something else on which I should like to have your 
permission to speak," he said; and his thin lips grew a little 
tremulous. " But I could come another time, if you preferred." 

" I would rather you said now, Mr. Sheppard, whatever you 
wish to say to me." 

" It is only the old story. Have you reconsidered your deter- 
mination . you remember that last day . in Keeton? I am still the 
same." 

" So am I, Mr. Sheppard." 

" But things have changed . many things ; and you may want 



"LOVE, THE MESSENGER OF DEATHS 121 

a home ; and you may grow tired of this kind of hfe. and I 
shan't be a person to be ashamed of, Minola ! I am gomg to be m 
Parhament, and you shall hear me speak-and 1 know I shall get 
on. I have great patience. I succeed m everythmg. I really do. 
She smiled sadly and shook her head. 

" In everything else, I do assure you, so far. and I may even 
in that : I must, fot I have set my heart upon it." 

She turned to him with a glance of scorn and anger. But his 
face was so full of genuine emotion, of anxiety and passion and 
pain, that its handsome commonplace character became almost 
poetic. His hps were quivering ; and she could see drops ot 
moisture on his shining forehead, and his eyes were positively 
glittering, as if in tears. . t 1 ,. j 

" Don't speak harshly to me," he pleaded, " for I don t deserve 
it I love you with all my heart, and to-day more than ever. a 
thousand times more. for you have shown yourself so generous 
and forgiving. and. and like a Christian." _ _ 

Then for the first time the thought came, a conviction, into 
her mind." He really is sincere ! " A great wave of new com- 
passion swept away all other emotions. 

" Mr Sheppard," she said, in softened tones, I do ask of you 
not to say any more of this. I couldn't love you, even if I tried 
and why should you wish me to try? I am not worth all this- 1 
tell you with all my heart that 1 am not worth it, and that you 
would think so one day if I were foolish enough to. to listen to 
you. Oh ! indeed you are better without me. ^^ I wish you every 
success and happiness. I don't want to marry." 

" Once," he said, "you told me there was no one you cared tor 
but a man 'in a book. I wonder, is that so now?" 

In spite of herself, the colour rushed into Minola s face. It 
was a lucky question for her, however unlucky for him, because it 
recalled her from her softer mood to natural anger. 

" You can believe me in love with anyone you please to select 
in or out of a book, \\x. Sheppard, so long as it gives you a reason 
for not persecuting me with your own attentions. I like a man in 
a book better than one out of it ; it is so easy to close^the book 
and be free of his company when he grows disagreeable.' 

She did not look particularly like a Christian then, probably, 
in his eyes. He left her, his heart bursting with love and an-er 
When Mary Blanchet returned, she found Minola pale and 
haggard, her eyes wasted with tears. 



122 MJSS MISANTHROPE. 

CHAPTER XIII. 

A MAN OF THE TIME. 

Several days passed away, and Minola heard no more from 
Mr. Sheppard. She continued in a state of much agitation ; 
her nerves, highly strung, were sharply jarred by the news of the 
approaching death of Mrs. Saulsbury. It was almost like watchmg 
outside a door, and counting the slow, painful hours of some 
lingering life within, while yet one may not enter and look upon 
the pale face, and mingle with the friends or the mourners, but is 
shut out and left to ask and wait : it was like this, the time of sus- 
pense which Minola passed, not knowing whether the wife of her 
father was alive or dead. As is the way of all generous natures, it 
was now Minola's impulse to accuse and blame herself because 
there had been so little of mutual forbearance in her old home at 
Keeton. She kept wondering whether things might not have gone 
better, if she had said and done this or that ; or, if she had not 
said and done something else. Full of this feeling, she wrote a 
long emotional letter to Mr. Saulsbury, which she begged of him 
to read to his wife, if she were in a condition to hear it. The 
letter was suftused with generous penitence and self-humiliation. 
It was a letter which perha]:)S no impartial person could have read 
without becoming convinced that its writer must have been in the 
right in most of the controversies of the past. 

The letter did not reach the eyes or ears for which it was 
particularly intended. Minola received a coldly forgiving answer 
from Mr. Saulsbury . forgiving her upon his own account, which 
was more than Minola had sought,. but adding, that he had not 
thought it desirable to withdraw, for a moment, by the memory of 
earthly controversies, the mind of his wife from the contemplation 
of that well-merited heaven which was opening upon her. Great 
goodness has one other advantage in addition to all the rest over 
unconverted error . it can, out of its own beatification, find a 
means of rebuking those with whom it is not on terms of friend- 
ship. The expected ascent of Mrs. Saulsbury into heaven became 
another means of showing poor Minola her own unworthiness. 
Mr. Saulsbury closed by saying that Mrs. Saulsbury might linger 
)et a little, but that her apotheosis (this, however, was not his 
word) was only a (luestion of days. 

There was nothing left for Minola but to wait, and now accuse 
and now try to justify herself Many a time there came back to 



A MAN OF THE TIME. 123 

her mind the three faces on the mausoleum in Keeton, the 
symbols of Life, Death, and Eternity ; and she could not help 
wondering whether the mere passing through the portal of death 
could all at once transfigure a cold, narrow-minded, peevish, ego- 
tistical human creature into the soul of lofty calmness and ineffable 
sweetness, all peace and love, which the sculptor had set out in 
his illustration of Humanity's closing state. 

Meantime, she kept generally at home, except for her familiar 
walks in the park, and her now less frequent visits to the British 
Museum and to South Kensington. Lucy Money, surprised at 
her absence, hunted her up, to use Lucy's own expression, and 
declared that she was looking pale and wretched, and that she 
must come over to Victoria Street, and pass a day or two there, 
for companionship and change. Mary Blanchet, too, pressed 
IMinola to go ; and at last she consented, not unwilling to be 
taken forcibly out of her self-inquisition and her anxieties for the 
moment. She had made no other acquaintances, and seemed 
resolute not to make any ; but there was always something pecu- 
liarly friendly and genial to her in the atmosphere of the Moneys' 
home. The whole family had been singularly kind to her, and 
their kindness was absolutely disinterested. Minola could not but 
love Mrs. Money, and couM not but be a litde amused by her ; 
and there was something very pleasing to her in Mr. Money's 
strong common sense and blunt originality. Minola liked, too, 
the curious little peeps at odd groupings of human lite which she 
could obtain by sitting for a few hours in Mrs. Money's drawing- 
room. All the Schwdrmerei of letters, politics, art, and social life 
seemed to illustrate itself " in little " there. 

Minola, when she accompanied Lucy to her home, was taken 
by the girl up and down to this room and that to see various new 
things that had been bought, and the two young women entered 
Mrs. Money's drawing-room a little after the hour when she usually 
began to receive visitors. A large lady, who spoke with a very 
deep voice, was seated in earnest conversation with Mrs. Money. 

" This is my darling, sweet Lucy, I perceive," the lady said in 
tones of soft rolling thunder as the young women came in. 

" Oh ! Lady Limpenny ! " 

" Come here, child, and embrace me ! But this is not your 
sister? My sight begins to fail me so terribly; we must expect it, 
Mrs. Money, at our time of life." 

Lucy tossed her head at this, and could hardly be civil. She was 
always putting in litde protests, more or less distinctly expressed, 
against Lady Limpenny's classification of Mrs. Money and herself 
as on the same platform in the matter of age, and talking so openly 



124 ^!!SS MISANTHROPE. 

of " their time of life." In truth, Mrs. Money was still quite a 
young-looking woman, while Lady Limpenny herself was a re- 
markably well-preserved and even handsome matron, a little 
perhaps too full-blown, and who might at the worst have sat fairly 
enough for a portrait of Hamlet's mother, according to the popular 
dramatic rendering of Queen Gertrude. 

" No ; this young lady is taller than Theresa. I can see that, 
although I have forgotten my glass. I always forget or mislay my 
glass." 

" This is Miss Grey . Miss Minola Grey," said Mrs. Money. 
" Lady Limpenny, allow me to introduce my dear young friend, 
Miss Minola Grey." 

" Dear child, what a sweet pretty name ! Now tell me, dearest, 
where did your people find out that name ? I should so like to 
know." 

*. I think it was found in Shakespeare," Minola answered ; " it 
was my mother's choice, I believe." 

" A name in the family, no doubt. Some names run in families. 
I dare say you have had a . what is it? . Minola . in your family 
in every generation. One cannot tell the origin of these things . I 
have often thought of making a study of family names. Now, my 
name . Laura . there never was a generation of our family; we are 
the Atomleys . there never was a generation of the Atomleys without 
a Laura. Now, how curious, in my husband's family . Sir James 
Limpenny . in every generation one of the girls was always called 
by the pet name of ' Chat.' Up to the days of the Conquest, I do 
believe . or is it the Confessor, perhaps ? . you would find a Chat 
Limpenny." 

"There is a Chat Moss somewhere near Manchester," said Lucy 
saucily, still not forgiving the remark about the time of life, " We 
crossed it once in a railway." 

" Oh, but that has nothing to do with it, Lucy darling . nothing 
at all. I am speaking of girls, you know . girls called by a pet 
name. I dare say that name was in my husband's family . oh, 
long before the place you speak of was ever discovered. But now, 
Miss Grey, do pray excuse me again . such a very charming name . 
Minola ! but pray do excuse me, may I ask is that hair all your 
own ? One is curious, you know, when one sees such wonderful 
hair." 

" Yes, Lady Limpenny," Minola said imperturbably ; " my hair 
is all my own." 

" I should think Nola's hair was all her own, indeed," Lucy 
struck in. " I have seen her doing it a dozen times ; not likely 
that she would put on false hair." 



A MAN OF THE TIME. 125 

" But, my sweet child, I do assure you that's nothing now," the 
indomitable Lady Limpenny went on, " Almost everybody wears 
it now . it's hardly any pretence any more. That's why I asked 
Miss Grey . because I thought she perhaps wouldn't mind, seeing 
that we are only women, we here. And it is such wonderful hair . 
and it is all her own ! " 

" Yes," murmured Lucy, " all her own ; and her teeth are her 
o%\Ti too ; and even her eyes." 

" She has beautiful eyes indeed . you have, my dear," the good- 
natured Lady Limpenny went on, having only caught the last part 
of Lucy's interjected sentence. " But that does not surprise one ; 
at least, I mean, when we see lovely eyes, we don't fancy that the 
wearer of them has bought them in a shop . but hair is very dif- 
ferent, . and that is why I took the liberty of asking this young 
lady. But now, my darling Theresa Money, may I ask again about 
your husband ? Do you know that it was to see him particularly I 
came to-day . not you. Yes, indeed ! But you are not angry with 
me . I know you don't mind ; I do so want to have his advice on 
this very, very important matter." 

" Lucy, dear, will you ask your papa if he will come down for 
a few moments . I know he will . to see Lady Limpenny." 

Mr. Money's ways were well known to Lady Limpenny, He 
grumbled if disturbed by a servant, unless there was the most 
satisfactory and sufficient reason, but he would put up with a great 
deal of intrusion from Lucelet. The very worst that could happen 
to Lucelet was to have one of her pretty ears gently pulled. So 
Lucy went to disturb him unabashed, although she knew he was 
always disposed to chaff Lady Limpenny. 

" But you really don't mean to say that you are going to part 
with all your china . with your uncle's wonderful china ? " Mrs. 
Money asked, with eyes of almost tearful sympathy, resuming the 
talk which IVIinola's entrance had disturbed. 

" My darling, yes ! I must do it ! It is unavoidable." 

Minola assumed that this was some stor)' of sudden nnpoverish- 
ment, and she could not help looking up at the lady with wondering 
and regretful eyes, although not knowing whether she ought to have 
heard the remark, or whether she was not a little in the way. 

Lady Limpenny caught the look. 

" This dear young lady is sympathetic, I know, and I am sure 
she loves china, and can appreciate my sacrifice. But it ought not 
to be a sacrifice : it is a duty . a sacred duty." 

" But is It ? " Mrs. Money pleaded. 

" Dearest, yes ! My soul was in danger. I was in danger 
every hour of breaking the First Commandment 1 My china was 



126 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

becoming my idolatry ! There was a blue set which was corning 
between me and Heaven. I was in danger of going on my knees 
to it every day. I found that my whole heart was becoming ab- 
sorbed in it! One day it was borne in upon me; it came on me 
like a flash. It was the day I had been to hear Christie and 
Manson " 

"To hear what?" Mrs. Money asked in utter amazement. 

" Oh, what have I been saying ? Christie and Manson ! My 
dear, that only shows you the turn one's wandering, sinful thoughts 
will take ! I mean, of course, Moody and Sankey ; . what a shame 
to confuse such names." 

" Oh, Moody and Sankey," Mrs. Money said again, becoming 
clear in her mind. 

" Well, it flashed upon me there that I was in danger ; and I 
saw where the danger lay. Darling, I made up my mind that 
moment ! When I came home, I rushed . positively rushed . into 
Sir James's study. 'James,' I said, 'don't remonstrate, pray don't; 
my mind is made up . I'll part with all my china.' " 

" Dear me ! " Mrs. Money gently observed. " And Sir James 
. what did he say ? " 

''Well," Lady Limpenny went on, with an air of disappoint- 
ment, ''he only said 'All right,' or something of that kind. He 
was writing, and he hardly looked up. He doesn't care." And 
she sighed. 

" But how good he is not to make any objection ! " 

"Yes, oh yes ; he is the best of men. But he thinks I won't 
do it, after all." 

Mrs. Money smiled. 

" Now, Theresa Money, I wonder at you ! I do really. Of 
course I know what you are smiling at . you, too, believe I won't 
do it. Do you think I would sacrifice my soul . deliberately 
sacrifice my soul . even for china? You, dearest, might have 
known me better." 

" But would one sacrifice one's soul ? " 

" Darling, with my temperament, yes ! Alas, yes ! I know 
It ; and, therefore, I am resolved. Oh, here is Mr. Money. But 
not alone!" 

Mr. Money entered the room, but not alone, indeed, for there 
came with him a very tall man, whom Minola did not know ; and 
then, a little behmd them, Lucy Money and Victor Heron. Mr. 
Money spoke to Lady Limpenny, and then, with his usual friendly 
warmth, to Minola ; and then he presented the new-comer, Mr. 
St. Paul, to his wife. 

Mr. St. Paul attracted Minola's attention from the first. He 



A MAN OF THE TIME. 127 

was very tall, as has been said, but somewhat stooped in the 
shoulders. He had a perfectly bloodless face, with keen, bold 
blue eyes ; his square, rather receding forehead showed deep 
horizontal lines when he talked, as if he were an old man ; and 
he was nearly bald. His square chin and his full firm lips were 
bare of beard or moustache. He might at times have seemed an 
elderly man, and yet one soon came to the conclusion that he was 
a young man looking prematurely old. There was a curious hardi- 
hood about him, which was not swagger, and which had little of 
carelessness, or, at all events, of joyousness, about it. He was 
evidently what would be called a gentleman, but the gentleman 
seemed somehow to have got mixed up with the rowdy. Minola 
promptly decided that she did not like him. She could hear ]\Ir. 
St. Paul talking in a loud, rapid, and strident voice to Mrs. Mone)', 
apparently tellmg her, off-hand, of travel and adventure. 

Lady Limpenny had seized possession of Mr. Money, and was 
endeavouring to get his advice about the sale of her china, and 
impress him with a sense of the importance of saving her soul. 
Minola was near Mrs. Monev, and had just bowed to Victor 
Heron, when Mr. St. Paul turned his blue eyes upon her. 

" This is your elder daughter, I presume," he said ; " may I be 
introduced, Mrs. Money? Your husband told me she was not so 
handsome as her sister, but I really can't admit that." 

Mrs. Money was not certain for a moment whether her 
daughter Theresa might not have come into the room, but when 
she saw that he was looking at Miss Grey, she said, in her deep 
tone of melancholy kindness, . 

" No, this is not my daughter, Mr. St. Paul ; and even with all 
a mother's partiality, I have to own that Theresa is not nearly so 
handsome as this young lady. Miss Grey, may I introduce Mr. 
St. Paul ? Miss Grey comes from Dukes-Keeton. Mr. St. Paul 
and you ought to be acquaintances." 

" Oh, you come from Dukes-Keeton, INIiss Grey ! " and he 
dropped Mrs. Money, and drew himself a chair next to Minola. 
" So do I . I believe I was born there. Do you like the old 
place ? " 

" No ; I don't think I like it" 

" Nor I ; in fact, I hate it. Do you live there now?" 

She explained that she had now left Keeton for good, and was 
living in London. He laughed. 

" I left it for good long ago, or for bad. I have been about 
the world for ever so many years ; I've only just got back to town. 
I've been hunting in Texas, and rearing cattle m Kansas . that sort 
of thing. I left Keeton because I didn't get on with my people." 



128 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

Minola could not help smiling at what seemed the odd 
similarity in their history. 

" You smile because you think it was no wonder they didn't get 
on with me, I suppose ? I left long ago . cut and run long before 
you were born. My brother and I don't get on ; never shall, I 
dare say. I am generally considered to have disgraced the family. 
He's going back to Keeton, where he hasn't been for years ; and 
so am I, for a while. He's been travelling in the East, and living 
in Italy, and all that sort of thing, while I've been hunting buffaloes 
and growing cattle out West." 

" Are you going to settle in Keeton now ? " Miss Grey asked, 
for lack of anything else to say. 

" Not I ; oh, no ! I don't suppose I could settle anywhere 
now. You can't, I think, when you've got into the way of 
knocking about the world. I don't know a soul down there now, 
I suppose. I'm going to Keeton now chiefly to annoy my brother." 
And he laughed a laugh of half-cynical good humour, and thrust 
his hands deep into his pockets. 

" A Christian purpose," Miss Grey said. 

" Yes, isn't it ? We were always like that, I assure you ; the 
elders and the youngers never could hit it off . always quarrelling. 
I'm one of the youngers, though you wouldn't think so to look at 
me, Miss Grey? Do look at me." 

Miss Grey looked at him very composedly. He gazed into 
her bright eyes with undisguised admiration. 

" Well, I'm going to thwart my good brother in Keeton. He's 
coming home, and going to do all his duties awfully regular and 
well, don't you know ; and first of all, he's going to have a regular, 
good, obedient Conservative member . a warming-pan. Do you 
understand that sort of thing ? I beUeve the son of some honest 
poor-rate collector, or something of that sort . a fellow named 
Sheppard. Did you ever hear of any fellow in Keeton named 
Sheppard? . Jack Sheppard, I shouldn't wonder." 

" I know Mr. Augustus Sheppard, and he is a very respectable 
rnan." 

" Deuce he is ! but not a lively sort of man, I should think." 

" No ; not exactly lively." 

" No ; he wouldn't suit my brother if he was. Hope he isn't a 
friend of yours? Well, we're going to oppose him for the fun of 
the thing. How very glad my brother will be to see me. I am 
afraid I pass for a regular scamp in the memories of you Keeton 
people. You must have heard of me. Miss Grey. No ? Before 
your time, I sup])ose. Besides, I didn't call myself St. Paul then ; 
I took on that name in America ; it's my mother's family name; . 



A MAN OF THE TIME. 



129 



that's how you wouldn't remember about me, even if you had 
heard. You know the mausoleum in the park, I dare say ? " 

" Very well indeed. It used to be a favourite place with me." 

" Ah, yes, my last offence was shooting off pistols there, aiming 
at the heads over the entrance, you know. One of them will carry 
my mark to his last day, I believe." 

"Yes; I remember noticing that the face of Death has a mark 
on it . a small hole." 

He laughed again. 

" Just so. That's my mark. Poor fiither ! It was the great 
whim of his life to build that confounded thing, and he didn't 
enjoy it after all. My brother, I am told, ]jroposes to occupy part 
of it in good time. They won't put me there, you may be sure." 

" Your brother is the Duke ? " Minola said, a faint memory 
returning to her about a wild youth of the family who had had to 
leave the army in some disgrace, and went away somewhere 
beyond seas. 

"Yes; I thought I told you, or that Money had mentioned it. 
Yes; I was the good-for-nothing of the family. You can't imagine, 
though, what a number of good-for-nothings are doing well out 
Denver City way, out in Colorado, ^^'hen I was there, there were 
three fellows from the Guards, and some fellows I knew at Eton, 
all growing cattle, and making money, and hunting buftalo, and 
potting Indians, and making themselves generally as happy as 
sandboys. I've made money myself, and might have made a lot 
more, I dare say." 

Mr. St. Paul evidently delighted to hear himself talk. 

" It must be a very dangerous place to live in," Minola said, 
wishing he would talk to somebody else. 

" Well, there's the chance of getting your hair raised by the 
Indians. Do you know what that means . having your hair 
raised ? " 

" I suppose being scalped." 

"Exactly. Well, that's a danger. But it isn't so much a 
danger if you don't go about in gangs. That's the mistake fellows 
make, they think it's the safe thing to do, but it isn't. Go about 
in parties of two, and the Indians never will see you . never will 
notice you." 

Minola's eyes happened at this moment to meet those of 
Heron. 

" You know Heron ? " 

" Oh, yes ; very well." 

" A good fellow . very good fellow, though he has such odd 
philanthropic fads about niggers and man and a brother, and all 

K 



I30 MTSS MISANTHROPE. 

that sort of thing. Got into a nice mess out there in St. Xavier's, 
didn't he?" 

" I heard that his conduct did him great honour," Minola said 
warmly. 

" Yes, yes . of course, yes; if you look at it in that sort of way. 
But these black fellows, you know, it really isn't worth a man's 
while bothering about them. They're just as well oif in slavery 
as not . deuced deal better, I think ; I dare say some of their 
kings and chiefs think they have a right to sell them if they like, 
I told Heron at the time I wouldn't bother if I were he. Where's 
the use, you know? " 

"Were you there at the time?" Minola asked, with some 
curiosity. 

" Yes, I was there. I'd been in the Oregon countr}% and I met 
with an accident, and got a fever, and all that ; and I wanted a 
little rest and a mild climate, you know ; and I made for San 
Francisco, and some fellows there told me to go to these Settle- 
ments of ours in the Pacific, and I went. I saw a good deal of 
Heron . he was very hospitable and that, and then this row came 
on. He behaved like a deuced young fool, and that's a fact." 

" He was not understood," said Minola, " and he has been 
treated very badly by the Government." 

" Of course he has. I told him they would treat him badly. 
They wouldn't understand all his concern about black fellows . 
how could they understand it? Why didn't he let it alone? The 
fellow who's out there now, you won't find him bothering about 
such things, you bet . as we say out West, if you will excuse such 
a rough expression, Miss Grey. But of course Heron has been 
treated very badly, and we are going to run him for Dukes- 
Keeton." 

Several visitors had now come in, and Mr. Heron contrived to 
change his position and cross over to the part of the room where 
Minola was. 

"Look here. Heron," Mr. St. Paul said, "you have got a 
staunch ally here already. Miss Grey means to wear your colours, 
I dare say . do they wear colours at elections now in England ? . 
I don't know . and you had better canvass her for her influence in 
Keeton. If I were an elector of Keeton, I'd vote for the Pope or 
the Sultan if Miss Grey asked me." 

Meanwhile, Lady Limpenny was pleading her cause wnth Mr. 
Money. It may be said that Lady Limpenny was the wife of a 
physician who had been knighted, and who had no children. Her 
iuishand was wholly absorbed in his professional occupations, and 
never even thought of going anywhere with his wife, or concerning 




^ 

^ 



^ 



A MAN OF THE TIME, 131 

himself about what she did. He knew the Money women pro- 
fessionally, and except professionally he could not be said to know 
anybody. Lady Limpenny, therefore, indulged all her whims freely. 
Her most abiding or most often recurring whim was an anxiety for 
the salvation of her soul, but sne had passionate flirtations mean- 
while with china, poetry, flowers, private theatricals, lady-helps, and 
other pastimes and questions of the hour. 

"You'll never part with that china," Mr. Money said; "you 
know you can't." 

" Oh, but my dear Money, you don't understand my feelings. 
You are not, you know . an old friend may say so . you are not a 
religious man. You have not been penetrated by what I call re- 
ligion . not yet, I mean." 

" Not yet, certainly. Well, why don't you send to Christie 
and Manson's at once ? " 

" But, my dear Money, to part with my china in that way, to 
have it sent all about the world perhaps ? Oh, no ! I want to 
part with it to some friend who will let me come and see it now 
and again." 

'. Have you thought of this. Lady Limpenny? Suppose, when 
you have sold it, you go to see it now and then, and covet it . 
covet your neighbour's goods, perhaps long even to steal it. Where 
is the spiritual improvement then? " 

" Money ! You shock me ! You horrify me ! Could that be 
possible ? Is there such weakness in human nature ? " 

"Quite possible, I assure you. You have been yourself de- 
scribing the influence of these unregulated likings. How do you 
know that they may not get the better of you ui another way ? 
Take my advice, and keep your china. It will do you less harm 
in your owm possession than in that of anybody else." 

" If I could think so, my dear Money ! " 

" Think it over, my dear Lady Limpenny ; look at it from this 
point of view, and let me know your decision . then we can talk 
about it again." 

Lady Limpenny relapsed for a while into reflection, with a 
doubtful and melancholy expression upon her face. Money, how- 
ever, had gained his point, or, as he would himself have expressed 
it, " choked her off" for the moment. 

'. I don't like your new friend," said Minola to Victor. 

" My new friend ? Who's he ? " 

" Your friend Mr. St. Paul." 

" Oh, he isn't a new friend, or a friend at all. He is rather an 
old acquaintance, if anything." 

" Well, I don't hke him." 

K 2 



132 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

'' Nor I. Don't let yourself be drawn into much talk with him." 

" No ? Then there is somebody you don't like, Mr. Heron. 
That's a healthy sign. I really thought you liked all men and all 
women, without exception." 

" Well, I am not good at disliking people, but I don't like 
///;//, and I didn't like to see him talking to you." 

"Indeed? Yet he is a political ally of yours and of Mr. 
Money now." 

" That's a different thing ; and I don't know anything very bad 
of him, only I had rather you didn't have too much to say to him. 
He's a rowdy, that's all. If I had a sister, I shouldn't care to have 
him for an acquaintance of hers." 

" Is it a vice to know him ? " 

"Almost, for women," Heron said abruptly; and presently, 
having left Minola, interposed, as if without thinking of it, between 
Lucy Money and St. Paul, who was engaging her in conversation. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

A MIDNIGHT CONFIDENCE. 

Mr. St. Paul stayed to dinner that day, being invited by Money 
without ceremony, and accepting the invitation in the easiest way. 
Victor Heron declined to remain. The family and Minola, with 
Mr. St. Paul, made up the party. St. Paul was very attentive to 
Mrs. Money, who appeared to be delighted with him. He talked 
all through the dinner . he hardly ever stopped ; he had an adven- 
ture in Texas, or in Mexico, or in the South Sea Islands, apropos 
of everything ; he seemed equally pleased whether his listeners 
believed or disbelieved his stories, and he talked of his own affairs 
with a cool frankness, as if he was satisfied that all the world must 
know everything about him, and that he might as well speak 
bluntly out. He could not be called cynical in manner, for 
cynicism presupposes a sort of affectation, a defiance, or a de- 
liberate pose of some kind, and St. Paul seemed absolutely without 
aftectation. completely self-satisfied and easy. Victor had spoken 
of him as "a rowdy, that's all." But that was not all. He was . 
if such a phrase could be tolerated . a " gentleman rowdy." His 
morals and his code of honour seemed to be those of a Mexican 
horse-stealer, and yet anybody must have, known that he was by 
birth and early education an English gentleman. 



A MIDNIGHT CONFIDENCE. 133 

.' I don't think I know a soul about town," he said. " I looked 
in at the club once or twice . always kept up my subscription 
there during my worst ot times . and 1 didn't see a creature- 1 could 
recollect. 1 dare say the people who know my brother won't care 
to know me. I did leave such a deuce of a reputation behind me ; 
and they'll all be sure to think I haven't got a red cent. a penny, 
I mean. There they are mistaken. Somehow, the money-making 
gift grows on you out West." 

"Why don't you settle down?" Money asked. "Get into 
Parliament, marry, range yourself, and all that. make up with your 
brother, and be all right. You have plenty of time before you yet." 

" My good fellow, what do you call plenty of time ? Look at 
me . I'm as bald as if I were a judge." 

" Oh, bald ! that's nothing. Everybody is bald nowadays." 

*' But I'm thirty-five ! Thirty-five. think of that, young ladies ! 
a gi-izzled, grim old fogey . what is it Thackeray says? . all girls 
know Thackeray. Who on earth would marry me ? My brother 
and his wife have given me such a shockingly bad character. Some 
of it I deserved, perhaps ; some of it, I didn't. They think I have 
disgraced the family name, I dare say. What did the family name 
do for me, I should like to know? Out in Texas we didn't care 
much about family names." 

" I entirely agree with your view of things, Mr. St. Paul," Mrs. 
Money said, in her soft melancholy tone. " England is destroyed 
by caste and class. I honour a man of family who has the spirit 
to put away such ideas." 

" Oh, it would be all well enough if one were the eldest brother, 
and had the money, and all that. I should like to be the Duke, I 
dare say, well enough. But I can't be that, and IVe been very 
happy hunting buftaloes for months together, and no one but an 
old Indian to speak to. I don't disgrace the Duke's family name, 
for I've dropped it, nor any courtesy title, for I don't use any. I 
believe they have forgotten me altogether in Keeton. JNIiss Grey 
tells me so." 

"Excuse me," Minola said, "I didn't say that, for I didn't 
know. I only said I didn't remember hearing of you by your 
present name ; but I didn't know any of the family at the Castle. 
We belonged to the towns-people, and were not likely to have 
much acquaintance with the Castle." 

" Except at election time . I know," St. Paul said, with a laugh. 
" Well, I'm worse off now, for they won't know me even at election 
time." 

Then the talk went off again under St. Paul's leadership, and 
almost by his sole effort, to his adventurous hfe, and he told many 



134 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

stories of fights with Indians, of vigilance committees, of men 
hanged for horse-steahng, and of broken-down Enghsh scamps, 
who either got kihed or made their fortune out West. A cool 
contempt for human life was made specially evident. " I like a 
place," the narrator more than once observed, " where you can kill 
a man if you want to and no bother about it." Perhaps still more 
evident was the contempt for every principle but that of com- 
radeship. 

After dinner Mr. St. Paul only showed himself in the drawing- 
room for a moment or two, and then took his leave. 

" Papa," Lucy said instantly, " do tell us all about Mr. St. 
Paul." 

"Are you curious to know something about him. Miss Grey?" 
!Money asked. 

" Well, he certainly seems to be an odd sort of person. He is 
a little like what I should imagine a pirate of romance." 

" Not a bad hit. He is a sort of pirate out of date. But he 
represents, with a little exaggeration, a certain tendency among 
jounger sons to-day. Some younger sons, you know, are going 
into trade ; some are working at the bar, or becoming professional 
journalists ; some are rearing sheep in Australia, and cattle in 
Kansas and Texas. It's a phase of civilisation worth observing, 
Miss Grey, to you who go in for being a sort of little philosopher." 

" Dear papa, how can you say so ? Nola does not go in for 
being anything so dry and dreadful." 

" The tendencies of an aristocracy must always interest a 
thoughtful mind like Miss Grey's, Lucy," Mrs. Money said gravely. 
'. There is at least something hopeful in the mingling of classes." 

"In young swells becoming drovers and rowdies?" Money 
observed. " Hum ! well, as to that" and he stopped. 

"I think I am a little interested in him," Minola said; "but 
only personally, not philosophically." 

" Well, that's nearly all about him. He was a scamp, and he 
knocked about the world, and settled, if that can be called settling, 
out West for a while ; and he has made money, and I hope he has 
sown his wild oats ; and he has come home for variety, and, I 
think, to annoy his brother. I met him in Egypt, and 1 knew him 
in England too ; and so he came to see me, and he found a sort of 
old acquaintance in Heron. That's all. He's a clever fellow, 
and not a bad fellow in his way. I dare say he would have made 
a very decent follower of Drake or of Raleigh if he had been born 
at the right time." 

Minola's attention was drawn away somewhat from the charac- 
ter, adventures, and philosophical interest of Mr. St. Paul to 



A MIDNIGin CONFIDENCE. 135 

observe some peculiarity in the manner of Lucy Money. Al- 
though Lucy had set out by declaring herself wildly eager to 
know something about St. Paul, she very soon dropped out of 
the conversation, and drew listlessly away. After a while she sat 
at the piano, and began slowly playing some soft and melancholy 
chords. Minola had been observing something of a change in 
Lucy this present visit, something that she had not seen before. 
Mr. Money presently went to his study ; the women all dispersed, 
and Minola sat in her bedroom, and wondered within herselt 
whether anything was disturbing Lucy's bright little mind. 

It was curious to note how Lucy Money's soft ways had won 
upon Minola. Lucy twined herself round the affections of the 
stronger girl, and clung to her. Mrs. Money was pleased, amused, 
and touched by the sight. The calm Theresa was a little annoyed, 
considering Lucy to show thereby a lack of the composure and 
dignity befitting a woman; and Mary Blanchet was sometimes 
disposed to be jealous. Minola herself was filled with affectionate 
kindness for the overgrown child, not untempered with a dash of 
pity and wonder. She was sometimes inclined to address the girl 
in certain lines from Joanna Baillie, forgotten now even of most 
readers of poetry, and ask her, " Thou sweetest thing that e'er 
didst fix its lightly-fibred spray on the rude rock, ah ! would'st 
thou cling to me ? " For whatever the outer world and its lookers- 
on may have thought of her, it is certain that Minola did still 
believe herself to be cold, unloving, hard to warm towards her 
fellow-beings. The unrestrained, unaffected love ot Lucy filled 
her at once with surprise and a sweeter, softer feeling. 

So v/hen she heard the patter of feet at her door she hardly had 
to wait for the familiar tap and the familiar voice to know that 
Lucelet was there. Minola opened the door, and Lucelet came 
in with her hair all loosely around her, and her eyes sparkling. 

" May I sit a little and talk ? " and, without waiting for an 
answer, she coiled herself on the hearthrug near the chair on which 
iSlinola had been sitting. " You sit there again, Nola. Are you 
glad to see me ? " 

"Very, very glad, Lucy dear." 

" Do you love me, master ? . no ? " For Minola had, among 
other things, been teaching Lucy to read Shakespeare, and Lucy 
had just become enamoured of Ariel's tender question, and was 
delighted to turn it to her own account. 

" Dearly, my delicate Ariel," said Minola, carrying on tlie 
quotation ; and Lucy positively crimsoned with a double delight, 
having her quotation understood and answered, and an assurance 
of affection given. 



136 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

" Wliy don't you let down your hair, Nola ? Do let me see it 
now completely down. I'll do it . allow me." And she sprang 
up, came behind Minola, and " undid " all her hair, so that it fell 
around her back and shoulders. Minola could hardly keep from 
blushing to be thus made a picture of and openly admired. 
" There, that is perfectly beautiful ! You look like Lady Godiva, 
or like the Fair One with the Golden Locks, if you prefer that. 
Did you ever read the story of ' The Fair One with the Golden 
Locks,' when you were a little girl ? Oh, please leave your hair 
just as it is, and let me look at it for a while. Do you remember 
Lady Limpenny's nonsense to-day?" 

Minola allowed her to please herself, and they began to talk ; 
but after the first joy of coming in, Lucy seemed a little distraite, 
and not quite like herself She fell into little moments of silence 
every now and then, and sometimes looked up into Minola's face 
as if she were going to say something, and then stopped. 

Minola saw that her friend had something on her mind ; but 
thought it best not to ask her any questions, feeling sure that if 
Lucy had anything she wished to say, Lucy would not keep it long 
unsaid. 

After a moment's pause, " Nola ! " 

" Yes, dear." 

*' You don't much like men in general? " 

" Well, Lucy dear, I don't know that anybody much likes men 
in general, or women either. Good Christians say that they love 
all their brothers and sisters, but I don't suppose it's with a very 
ardent love." 

" But you rather go in for not liking men as a rule, don't you?" 

Minola was a little amused by the words "go in for not liking 
men." They seemed to be . what she knew Lucy never meant 
them for . a sort of rebuke to the affectation which would formally 
pose itself as misanthropic. Minola had of late begun to entertain 
doubts as to whether a certain amount of half-conscious egotism 
and affectation did not mingle in her old-time proclamations of a 
dislike to men. 

" I think I rather did go in for not liking men, Lucy ; but I 
think I am beginning to be a little penitent. Perhaps I was rather 
general in my ideas ; perhaps the men I knew best were not very 
fair specimens of the human race ; perhaps men in general don't 
very much care what I think of them." 

'* Any man would care if he knew you, especially if he saw you 
with your hair down like that. But, anyhow, you don't dislike all 
men ? " 

" Oh, no, dear. How could I dislike your father, Lucelet?" 




" There, that is perfedly beautiful i 



A MIDNIGHT CONFIDENCE. 137 

"No." Lucy said, looking round with earnest eyes; "who could 
dislike him, Nola ? I am so fond of him ; I could say almost 
anything to him. If you knew what I have lately been talking to 
him about, you would wonder. Well, but lie is not the only man 
you don't dislike ; I am sure you don't dislike Mr. Heron." Her 
eyes grew more enquiring and eager than before. 

.'No, indeed, Lucy; I don't think anyone could dislike him, 
either." 

" I am delighted to hear you say so ; but I want you to say 
some more. Tell me what you think of Mr. Heron ; I am curious 
to know. You are so much more clever than I , and you can un- 
derstand people and see into them. Tell me exactly what you see 
in Mr. Heron." 

" Why do you want to know all this, Lucy ?" 

" Because I want to hear your opinion very particularly, for vou 
are not a hero-worshipper, and you don't admire men in general. 
Some girls are such enthusiastic fools that they make a hero out of 
ever)'- good-looking young man they meet. But you are not like 
that, Nola." 

" Oh, no ! I am not like that," Nola echoed, not without a 
thought that now, perhaps, there were moments when she almost 
wished she were. 

" Well, then, tell me. First, do you think Mr. Heron handsome?" 

" Yes, Lucy ; I think he is handsome " 

*' Then, do you like him? Do tell me what you think of him." 

" In the name of heaven," Minola asked herself, " why should 
I not speak the truth in answer to so plain and innocent a 
question?" She answered quietly, and looking straight forward 
at the fire, 

" I like INIr. Heron very much, Lucy. I don't know many 
men . young men especially. . but I like him better than any 
young man I have met as yet." 

"As yet ! Yes, yes ; I am glad to hear you say that," Lucy 
said, with beaming eyes, and growing good-humouredly saucy in 
her very delight. " As yet ! Yes, you put that in weU, Nola." 

"How so, dear?" 

" Oh, you know. Because of the one yet to present himself ; 
the not impossible He . nearly impossible, though . who is to be 
fit for my Nola. I tell you 1 shall scrutinise him before I allow 
his pretensions to pass. Well, now, about Mr. Heron?" 

" I think him a very brave, generous, and noble-hearted young 
man, I think he has not a selfish thought or a mean purpose 
about him, and I think he has spirit and talent ; and I hope one 
day to hear that he has made himself an honourable name." 



IS*? MISS MISANTHROPE. 

Lacy turned now to Minola a pair of eyes that were moist 
with tears. 

"Tell me, Nola," . and her voice grew a little tremulous . 
" don't you think he is a man a woman might fall in love with ? " 

There was a moment's silence, and Lucy leaned upon Nola's 
knees, eagerly looking into her face. Then Nola answered, in a 
quiet, measured undertone, 

" Oh, yes, Lucy ; I do indeed. I think he is a man a woman 
might fall in love with." 

" Thank you, Nola ; that is all I wanted to ask you." 

There was another pause. 

"Nola !" 

" Yes, Lucy." 

" You don't ask me anything." 

" Perhaps, dear, because there is nothing I want to know." 

" Then you do guess ? " 

" Oh, yes, dear, I do guess." 

"Well. but what?" 

" I suppose . that you are . engaged to Mr. Heron." 

Lucy started up with her face all on fire. 

" Oh, no, Nola, dear darhng ! you have guessed too much. 
I wish I had told you, and not asked you to guess at all. We're 
not engaged. Oh, no. It's only . well, it's only . it's only that I 
am in love with him, Nola. Oh, yes, so much in love with him 
that I should not like to live if he didn't care about me . no, not 
one day ! " Then Lucy hid her head in Minola's lap and sobbed 
like a little child. 

Perhaps the breakdown was of service to both the girls. It 
allowed poor Lucy to relieve her long pent-up feelings, and it gave 
Minola time to consider the meaning of the revelation as com- 
posedly as she could, and to think of what she ought to say and do. 

Lucy presendy looked up with a gleam of April brightness in 
her eyes. 

" Do you think me foolish, Nola, for telling you this?" 

" Well, dear, I don't know whether you ought to have told it 
to me." 

" I couldn't do without telling it to somebody, Nola. I think 
I must be like that king I read about somewhere . I forget his 
name; no, I believe it was not the king, but his servant. who had 
to tell the secret to some listener, and so told it to the reeds on 
the sea-shore. If I had not told this to somebody, I must have 
told it to the reeds." 

Mmola almost wished she had told it to the reeds. There 
were reeds enoucrh beneath tlie little bridge which Nola loved in 



A MIDNIGHT CONFIDENCE. 139 

Regent's Park, and had they been possessed of the secret, she 
might have looked over the bridge for ever, and dreamed dreams 
as the lazy water flowed on beneath, and even noted and admired 
the whispering reeds, and they would never have whispered tha«- 
secret to her. 

" I tliink pa]">a guesses it." Lucy said. " I am sure he does, 
because he talked to me of . oh, well, of a different person, and 
asked me if I cared about him, and I told him that I didn't. He 
said he was glad, for he didn't much like him ; but that I should 
marry anyone I liked . alwaj s provided, Nola, that he happened 
to like me, which doesn't at all follow. I know papa likes Mr. 
Heron." 

" Then, Lucy, would it not be better to tell Mr. Money?" 

" Oh, Nola ! I couldn't tell him that . I could tell him almost 
anything, but I couldn't tell him that. Are you not sorry for me, 
Nola? Oh, say you are sorry for me! The other day . it only 
seems the other day . I was just as happy as a bird. Do say you 
are sorry for me." 

" But, my dear, I don't know why there should be any sorrow 
about it. Why should not everything prove to be perfectly 
happy?" 

" Do you think so, Nola ?" 

She looked up to Nola with an expression of childHke anxiety. 

"Why should it not be so, Lucy? If I were a man, I should 
he very much in love with you, dear. You are the girl that men 
ought to be in love with." 

There was a certain tone of coldness or constraint in Minola's 
voice which could not escape even Lucy's observation. 

" You think me weak and foolish, I know very well, Nola, be- 
cause I have made such a confession as this. For all your kind- 
ness and your good heart, I know that you despise any girl who 
allows herself to fall in love with a man. You don't care about 
men, and you think we ought to have more dignity, and not to 
prostrate ourselves before them ; and you are quite right. Only 
some of us can't help it." 

"No," said Minola sadly; " I suppose not." 

" There ! You look all manner of contempt at me. I should 
like to have you painted as the Queen of the Amazons . you would 
look splendid. But I may trust to your friendly heart and your 
sympathy all the same, I know. You will pity us weaker girls, and 
you won't be too hard on us. I want you to help me." 

" Can I help you, Lucy ? Shall I ask Mr. Heron if he is in 
love with you? I will, if you like." 

" Oh, Nola, what nonsense ! That only shows how ridiculous 



140 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

you think me. No, I only mean that you should give me your 
sympathy, and let me talk to you. And . you observe things so 
well . ^just to use your eyes for my sake. Oh, there is so much a 
friend may do ! And he thinks so much of you, and always talks 
to you so freely." 

Yes, Minola thought to herself ; he always talks to me very 
freely . we are good friends. If he were in love with Lucy, I dare 
say he would tell me. Why should he not ? She tells me that she 
is in love with him . that is a proof of her friendship. 

We can think in irony as well as speak in it, and Minola was 
disposed at present to be a little sarcastic. She did not love such 
disclosures as Lucy had been making. There seemed to be a lack 
of that instinctive delicacy in them, which, as she fancied, might 
be the possession of a girl were she brought up naked in a South- 
Sea islet. Fresh and innocent as Lucy was, yet this revelation 
seemed wanting in pure self-respect. Perhaps, too, it was in 
keeping with Minola's old creed to believe that this was just the 
sort of girl whom most men would be sure to love. At any rate, 
she was for the moment in a somewhat bitter mood. Something 
of this must have shown itself in her expression, for Lucy said, in 
a tone of frightened remonstrance, 

" Now, Nola, I have told you all. I have betrayed myself to 
you, and if you only despise me and feel angry with me, oh, what 
shall I do ? Isn't it strange . you both came the same day here . 
you and he, for the first time . I mean the first time since I saw 
you at school. Am I to lose you too ? " 

There was something so simple and helpless in this piteous 
appeal, with its implied dread of a love proving hopeless, that no 
irony or anger could have prevailed against it in Minola's breast. 
She threw her arm round the child's neck, and petted and soothed 
her. 

" Why should you lose both . why should you lose either?" 
Minola said. " I can promise you for one, Lucy dear ; and if I 
could promise you for the other too, you might be sure of him. 
He must be a very insensible person, Lucy, who fails to appreciate 
you. Only don't make it too plain, dear, to anyone but me. 
They say that men like to do the love-making for themselves . 
and you have not the slightest need to go out of your way. Tell 
me . does he know anything ot this ? " 

" Oh, no, Nola." 

" Nor guess anything at all ? " 

*' Oh, no, . 1 am sure not . I don't think so. You didn't guess 
anything . now, did you ? . and how could he ? " 

Minola felt a little glad to hear of this . for the dignity of 



A MORNING CONFIDENCE. 14I 

womanhood, she said to herself. But she did not know how long 
it would last, for Lucy was not a person likely to accomplish great 
efibrts of self-control for the mere sake of the abstract dignity of 
womanhood. For the moment, all Minola could do was to express 
full sympathy with her friend, and at the same time to counsel her 
gently not to betray lier secret. Lucy went to her bedroom at last, 
much fluttering and quivering, but also relieved and encouraged, 
and she fell asleep, for all her love-pains, long before Minola did. 
" She will be very happv," Minola sat thinking, when she was 
alone " She has a great deal already. A loving father and mother 
and sister ; a happy home, where she is sheltered against every 
thing ; a future all full of brightness. He will love her. I sup- 
pose She's very pretty, and sweet, and clmgmg ; and he is 
simple and manly, and would be drawn by her pure, winning 
ways . and men like him are fond of women who don't profess to 
be strong. Well, if I can help her, I will do so. it will be some- 
thing to see her completely happy, and him too." 

Whereupon, for no apparent reason, the tears sprang mto 
Minola's eyes, and she found a vain wish arising in her heart that 
she had never renewed her acquaintance with Lucy IMoney, never 
been persuaded by ^Liry Blanchet to visit her, never stood upon 
her threshold and met Victor Heron there. 

" Why not wish at once that I had never been born ? " she 
said, half tearful, half scornful of her tears. " One thing is as easy 
now as the other, and as useful, and not to have been born would 
have saved many idle hours and much heartache." 



CHAPTER XV. 

A MORNING CONFIDENCE. 

Minola rose next morning with a bewildering and oppressed 
sense of disappointment and defeat. The whole of her scheme of 
life had given way. Her little bubble- world had burst. All her 
plans of bold independence and of contented life, of isolation from 
social trammels, and freedom from woman's weaknesses, had 
broken down. She had always thought scorn of those who said 
that women could not feel friendship for men without danger of 
feeling love. and now, what was she but a cruel mocking evidence 
of the folly of her confidence ? Alas, no romantic school-girl could 
h:ive fallen more suddenly into love than Minola had done. There 



142 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

was but one man whom she ha:l ever seen with whom she had 
coveted a friendship, and she now knew, only too well, that in h.er 
breast the friendship had already caught fire, and blazed into love. 
Where was Alceste now, and the Alceste standard by which she 
had proposed to test all men and women, well convinced before- 
hand that she would find them wanting ? She could not even 
flatter herself that she had been faithful to her faith, and that if 
she had succumbed at the very outset it was because the nrst- 
comer actually proved to be an Alceste. No, she could not 
cram this complacent conviction into her mind. Victor Heron 
was a generous and noble-hearted )'oung man, she felt assured; 
but she had not fallen in love with him because of any assu- 
rance that he was like the hero of her girlhood. She made no 
attempt to deceive herself in this way. In her proud resent- 
ment of her weakness she even trampled upon it with undeserved 
scorn. " I fell in love with him," she said to herself, " just as 
the silliest girl falls in love . because he was there, and I couldn't 
help it." 

It was not merely Lucy's revelation which had forced upon 
Minola a knowledge of her own feelings. This had perhaps so 
sent conviction home as to render illusion or self-deception im- 
possible any longer, but it was not that which first told her of her 
weakness. That had long been more and more making itself 
known to her. It was plain to her now that since the first day 
when she stood upon the bridge with him in the park, and looked 
into the canal, she had loved him. " Oh, why did I not know it 
then ? " she asked, wearily, of herself. " I could have avoided 
him . have never seen him again . and it might so have come to 
nothing, and at least we should not have to meet." 

Amid all her pain of the night and the morning, one question 
was ever repeating itself, " Will this last ? " That the fever which 
burned her was love . genuine love . the regular old love of the 
romances and the poets . she could not doubt. She knew it be- 
cause it was so new a feeling. Had she walked among a fever- 
stricken population, refusing to believe in the danger of infection, 
and satisfied that the fearless and the wise were safe, and had she 
suddenly felt the strange pains and unfamiliar heats, and found 
the senses beginning to wander, she would have known that this 
was fever. The pangs of death are new to all alike when they 
come, but those who are about to die are conscious . even in their 
last moments of consciousness . tliat this new summons has the one 
awful meaning. So did Minola know only too well what the 
meaning was of this new pain. "Will it last?" was her cry to 
herself. " Shall I have to go through life with this torture always 



A MORNING CONFIDENCE. 143 

to bear? Is it true that women have to bear this for years and 
years. that some of them never get over it? " 

" Oh, I shall never get over it . never, never ! " she cried out 
in bitterness. She was very bitter now against herself and fate. 
She did not feel that it is better to love vainly than not at all. 
Indeed, such consoling conviction belongs to the poet who philo- 
sophises on love, or to the disappointed lover who is already 
beginning to be consoled. It does not do much good to anyone 
in the actual hour of pain. Minola cordially and passionately 
wished that she had not loved, or seen anyone whom she could 
love. She was full of wrath and scorn for herself, and believed 
herself humbled and shamed. Her whole life was crossed ; her 
quiet was all gone ; she was now doomed to an existence of per- 
petual self-constraint and renunciation, and even deception. She 
had a secret which she must conceal from the world as if it was a 
murder. She must watch her words, her movements, her very 
glances, lest any sudden utterance, or gesture, or blush, should 
betray her. She would wake in the night in terror, lest in some 
dream she might have called out some word or name which had 
roused Mary Blanchet in the next room, and betrayed her. She 
must meet Victor Heron, Heaven knows how often, and talk with 
him as a friend, and never let one gleam of the truth appear. She 
must hear Lucy Money tell of her love, and be the confidante of 
her childlike emotions. Not often, perhaps, has a proud and 
sensitive girl been tried so strangely. " I thought I hated men 
before," she kept saying to herself. " I do hate them now ; and 
women and all. I hate him most of all, because I know that I so 
love him." 

AW this poor Minola kept saying or thinking to herself that 
morning as she listlessly dressed. It is not too much to say that 
the very air seemed changed for her. She had only one resolve 
to sustain her, but that was at least as strong as her love, or as 
death . the resolve that, come what would, she must keep her 
secret. _ Victor Heron believed himself her friend, and desired to 
be nothing more. No human soul but her own must know that her 
feeling to him was not the same. She would have known the need 
of that resolve even if she had never been entrusted with poor dear 
little Lucy's secret. But the more calmly she thought over that 
little story, the more she thought it likely that Lucy's dream might 
come to be fulfilled. 

The world . that is to say, the breakfast-room and the Money 
family. had to be faced. The family were as pleasant as ever, 
except Lucy, who was pale and seemed troubled, and at whom her 
father looked once or twice keenly, but without making any remark. 



144 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

" I have had a letter from Lady Limpenny already this moni- 
ing," Mr. Money observed. 

All professed an interest in the contents of the letter, even 
Theresa. 

Mr. Money began to read: 

" Thank you a thousand times, my dear Money " 

" We are very friendly, you see, Miss Grey," he said, breaking 
off. " But it's not any peculiar friendship for me. She always 
calls men by their names after the first interview." 

" She generally addresses papa as ' my dear,' without' any 
proper name appended," said Lucy, who did not much like Lady 
Limpenny. " She always likes the men of a family, and always 
hates the women." 

" Lucy, my dear," her mother pleaded, " how can you say so ! 
Laura Limpenny and I are true friends." 

" She is giving us good help with our schools and our church," 
Theresa Money said ; " and Reginald " (Theresa's engaged lover) 
" thinks very highly of her." 

" She always praises men, and they all think highly of her," 
Lucy persisted ; " and it is something to be Lady Anything." 

" I assure you, Miss Grey," Mrs. Money said, " that Lady 
Limpenny is the most sincere and unpretending creature. She is 
not an aristocrat . she has nothing to do with aristocracy ; if she 
had, there could be little sympathy, as you may well believe, be- 
tween her and me, for you know my convictions. The aristocracy 
of this country are its ruin ! When England falls . and the hour 
of her fall is near . it will not be due to beings like Laura Lim- 
penny." 

"There I agree with you, dear," Mr. Money gravely said. 
" Shall I go on ? " 

He went on. 

" Thank you a thousand times, my dear Money, for your wise 
and Christianlike advice. I will keep my china. I am convinced 
now that my ideas of yesterday were wrong, and even sinful. I had 
a charming talk with a dear cesthetic man last evening, after I saw 
you, and he assures me that my china is a collection absolutely 
unique ; and that, if I were to part with it, Mrs. Ue Vallancey 
would manage, at any cost, or by any contrivance, to get hold of 
it ; and your darling wife knows how I hate Mrs. De Vallancey. 
I now feel that it is my duty to keep the china, and that a love for 
the treasures of art is in itself an act of homage to the Great 
Creator of all. 

" My sweetest love to your darling wife and angel-girls. Kind 
regards to the young lady with the hair; and when you see our 



A MORNING CONFIDENCE. 145 

dear friend Heron, do tell him that I expect him to cail on me 
very soon. " ^^ver yours 

.^ " Laura Limpenny." 

" ' Our dear friend Heron ! ' " exclaimed Lucy, in ^surprise and 
ano-er " Does she know Mr. Heron so well as that?" 

"« She met him here, yesterday, for the first time," Mr. Money 
said- "but that's quite enough for Lady Lmipenny. She has 
taken a violent liking to him already, and enrols hnn among lier 
dear friends. Seriously, she would be rather a useful person or 
Heron to know. She knows everyone, and will do anythmg. Her 
husband attends all the old women ofquahty, and a good many 
of the young women too. I shouldn't be surprised if Sir James 
Limpenny. or his wife. could get Heron a hearing from some 

great personage." « t j -* 

" I am sure he won't do that," said Lucy warmly. I don t 

believe Mr. Heron would condescend to be helped on in that sort 

° ^^"Why not?" Minola asked. "I think Lady Limpenny is a 
more creditable ally than a person like Mr. St. Paul. If a man 
wants to succeed in life, I suppose he must try all the usual arts. _^ 

" I didn't think you would have said that of Mr. Heron, Mola, 
said Lucy, hurt and wondering. 

Nola did not think she would have said it herself twelve hours 
ago Why she said it now she could not tell. Perhaps she was 
womanish enough to feel annoyed at the manner m which Lucy 
seemed to appropriate Victor Heron's cause, and womanish enough, 
too, to relieve her mind by saying disparaging things of him. 

Mr. Money's eyes twinkled with an amused smile. 

.' See how you wTong a man sometimes, you ladies . even the 
most reasonable among you. Heron is more Quixotic than you 
think Miss Grey. I have had a letter from him this very morning 
about St. Paul. I'll read it if you like. it need not be kept secret 

from anybody here." , , , , i .. a 

Mrs. Money and Lucy earnestly asked to have the letter read, 
and Mr. Monev read it accordingly:. 

"My dear Money,. I don't like St. Paul, and I wontriiarch 
through Coventry with him. I think he is unprincipled and dis- 
creditable, and if I can't get in for Keeton without his helping- 
hand, I'll stay out of Keeton, and that's all about that. I know 
you will agree with me when you think this over. Excuse haste 
and abruptness. I want to make my position clear to you withou 
any loss of time, " Yours faithfully, 

.^ " Victor Heron." 



146 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

" Now, Nola, you see you were wrong," the triumphant Lucy 
exclaimed. ' 

"I do not hke Mr. St. Paul," the quiet Theresa observed. 
" He seems to me godless and demoralised. He spoke in the 
lightest and most scoffing way of the labours of the Church among 
the heathen populations." 

" I liked him," Mrs. Money sighed. " I liked him because he 
had the spirit to resign his rank and fling away his title." 

" I think his rank rather resigned him," Mr. Money observed. 
" Anyhow, one must in the ordinary world consent to take up with 
a scamp now and then. Heron says he won't have anything to do 
with St. Paul, and Lucy undertakes to say for him that he won't 
be patronised by Lady Limpenny. I ask you all calmly, as civi- 
lised and Christian beings, how is a young fellow to get on in 
London who won't consent to be helped by scamps and old 
women ? " 

" Mr. Heron represents a political cause," the eager Lucy 
began. 

Her father looked quietly round at her. 

" Why, Lucelet, my dear, when did you come to know any- 
thing about political causes, or to care about them? I thought 
you only cared for the renascence of art . isn't it renascence you 
call it ? I understood that politics were entirely beneath the notice 
of all your school. Pray tell me, Mistress Politician, to which 
side of politics your father belongs ? " 

" Oh, papa, for shame ! What nonsense ! As if I didn't know. 
Of course you are a Liberal . an advanced Liberal." 

"Good; and our friend Heron?" 

" An advanced Liberal too. Of course I know that you are 
on his side." 

" That I am on his side ? That he is on my side wouldn't do, 
I suppose, although I am somewhat the elder, and am in Parlia- 
ment while he is not, and is not particularly likely to be if he 
continues to be so squeamish. What are tlie political views of our 
young friend the artist, the poet, tlie bard, or whatever you 
please to call him ? " 

" Mr. Planchet ? " . Lucy slightly coloured. 

" Mr. Blanchet, yes. Am I on his side ? " 

" Oh, he has no side. He knows nothing of politics," Lucy 
said, contemptuously. 

"Stupid of him, isn't it?" 

" Very stupid. At least, I suppose so: T don't know. Oh, yes; 
I think every man ought to understand politics." 

Ml. Money smded, and let the subject drop. 



A MORAING COAFIDENCE. 147 

Wlien breakfast was over, Mr. Money suddenly said, 
"Miss Grey, you always profess to know something about poli- 
tics. Anyhow, you know something about Keeton folks, and you 
can give me some useful hints about their ways with which I can 
instruct our dear friend Heron, as Lady Limpenny calls him. 
Would you mind coming to my study for a quarter of an hour, 
away from all this womankind, and answering me a few ques- 
tions?" 

Minola was a litde surprised, but showed no surprise, and only 
said that she would be delighted, of course, Mr. Money offered 
her his arm with a somewhat old-fashioned courtesy which con- 
trasted not unbecomingly with his usual cheery bluntness of manner 
to women and men alike. 

" Not many ladies come here. Miss Grey," Money said, offer- 
ingher a chair when they were in the study. " Lucelet looks in 
ver)' often, to be sure, but only as a messenger ; she doesn't come 
into council." 

"Do I come into council?" Minola asked, with a smile and 
a little of heightened colour. " I shall feel myself of great impor- 
tance." 

" Well, yes, into council. First about yourself. I have been 
looking into your affairs a little. Miss Grey. don't be angry ; we 
are all fond of you in this house, and you don't seem to have 
anyone in particular to look after your interests." 

" It was very kind and good of you. I have not many friends, 
Mr. Money ; but I am afraid the word ' interests ' is rather too 
large for any affairs of mine. Have I any interests ? Mary Blan- 
chet understands all my affairs much better than 1 do." 

" Yes, they may be called interests, I think. You know that 
anybody who likes can find out everything about people's wills, 
and all that. Do you know anything about your father's will ? "_ 

" No," Minola said, with a start, and feeling the tears coming 
to her eyes. " I don't, Mr. Money. At least, not much. I know 
that he left me some money . so much every year ; not much . it 
would not be much for Lucy. but enough for me and Mary 
Blanchet. Mary Blanchet manages it for me, and makes it go 
twice as far as I could. We never spend it all . I mean, we 
haven't spent it all this year. I sliould never be able to manage or 
to get on at ail only for her." 

Minola spoke with eagerness now, for she was afraid that 
she was about to receive some of the advice which worldly people 
call wise, and to be admonished of the improvidence of sharing 
her Uttle purse with Mary Blanchet. 

" And, indeed, 1 ought to do something for her. something 



148 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

particular," she hastened to add, for she was seized with a sudden 
fear that Mr. Money might have heard somewhere of her resolve 
. to have Mr. Blanchet's poems printed at her own expense, and 
might proceed to remonstrate with her. 

Mr. Money smiled, seeing completely through her, and only 
thinking to himself that she was a remarkably good girl, and that 
he much wished he had a son to marry her. 

" Do you know what I was thinking of? " he asked bluntly. 
" I am sure you were thinking about me, for you laughed . at 
my ignorance of business ways, I. suppose?" 

" Not at all ; I was thinking that I should like to have a son, 
and that I should like you to marry him." 

Minola laughed and coloured, but took his words as they were 
meant, in all good humour and kindness. 

" If you had a son, Mr. Money, I am sure I would vasxry him 
if you asked me, and he " 

" Thank you. Well, I am only sorry I can't take you at your 
word. But that wasn't exactly what I brought you here to tell you. 
What I want to tell you is this. You are likely to have a good 
deal of property ot one kind and another, Miss Grey. Your father, 
I find, made a good deal of money in his time, and saved it ; 
bought houses and built houses; bought up annuities, insurances, 
shares in companies . all manner of things. He only left his 
property to his present wife tor her use of what it brings every 
year during her life. At her death it all comes to you, and I'm 
told she can't live long." 

" Oh, but she may. I hope and pray that she may," Minola 
exclaimed. " It seems shocking to watch for a woman's death, 
especially when we were not very friendly to each other. I don't 
want the money ; I have enough, quite enough. I shouldn't know 
what to do with it. I don't care much about new dresses, and 
bonnets, and the fashions, and all that ; and what could I do with 
money, living alone in my quiet way? I think a girl of my age, 
living all to herself, and having much money, would be perfectly 
ridiculous. Why could not her husband get it, if the poor creature 
dies ? That would be only right. I am sure he may have it 
lor me." 

" He mayn't have it for me, though," Mr. Money said. " You 
have no one, it seems to me, to look after your interests, and 
I'll take the liberty to do so, for lack of a better, whether you 
like it or not. However, we can talk about that when the time 
comes." 

Minola gave a sort of shudder. 

" When the time comes ! Tl)at seems so dreadful : as if we 



A MORNING CONFIDENCE. i49 

\\eie only waiting? for the poor woman to be dead to snatch at 
whatever she left behind her. Mr.^ Money, is there really no other 
way ? . must I have this property ? " 

" If she dies before you, yes. it will come to you. Of course 
you know that it isn't great wealth in the London sense. It won't 
constitute you an heiress in the Berkeley Square sense, but it will 
give you a good deal of miscellaneous property for a young woman. 
Well, as to that, I'll see that you get your rights ; and the only 
thing I have to ask is just that you will not do anything decided, 
or anything at all, in this business without consulting me." 

"Oh, indeed, I can faithfully promise you that. I have no 
other friend whom I could possibly consult, or who would take any 
interest in me." 

" Come, now, I can't believe that. If you wish, you can be 
like the young lady in Sheridan's song.friends in all the aged 
you'll meet, and lovers in the young." 
" I don't want to be like her in that." 
'' In having friends in all the aged ? " 

" Oh, I don't know ; in anything. I am well content with 
the friends I have." 

"Well, some of them, at least, are well content with you. 
Now, Miss Grey, I want to speak to you of something that con- 
cerns me. You and my daughter Lucy are great friends ? " 
Minola almost started. 
" I am very fond of Lucy." 

" And she is very fond of you. We all are, for that matter. 
Did you ever hear of an old Scottish saying about a person 
having a face like a fiddle. not in shape, you know, but m power 
of attracting people, and rousing sympathy ? " 

"Yes. I think I remember it in some of Scott's novels. 
" Very well. I think you have a face like a fiddle ; all our 
sympathies are drawn to vou. Now, that is why I speak to you of 
something which I wouldn't talk about to any other woman of your 
age. not even to my own daughter Theresa, an excellent creature, 
but not over sympathetic. I am very fond of my Lucelet. She 
isn't strong ; she hasn't great intelligence. I know my little goose 
is not a swan, but she is very sweet, and sensitive, and loving; the 
most aff"ectionate little creature that ever was made happy ox un- 
happy by a man. I am morbidly anxious about her happiness. 
Now you are her friend, and a thousand times cleverer and stronger 
than 'she, and she looks up to you. She would tell you anything. 
Has she told you anything lately?" 
Minola hesitated. 
" Oh, you needn't hesitate, or think of any breach of confidence- 



ISO MISS MISANTHROPE. 

You may tell me. I could get it all from herself in a moment. 
It isn't about that I want to ask you. Well, I'll save you a.ll 
trouble. She has told you something." 

" She has." 

" She is in love !" 

Minola assented. 

Mr. Money ran his hand through his hair, got up, and walked 
a turn or two up and down the study. 

" The other day she was a child, and cared for nobody in the 
world but her mother and me. Now a young fellow comes along, 
and, like the Earl of Lowgave's lassie in the old song, she does 
not love her mammy nor she does not love her daddy." 

"Oh, but I don't think that at all," Miss Grey said earnestly. 
" No girl could be fonder of her father and mother." 

Mr. Money smiled good-humouredly, but with a look of pity, 
as one who corrects an odd mistake. 

" I know that very well, Miss Grey, and I was not speaking 
seriously, or grumbling at my little lassie. But it does astonish 
us elderly parents, when we find out all of a sudden that there are 
other persons more important than we in the eyes of our little 
maidens, and we may as well relieve our minds by putting the 
feeling into words. Well, you know the hero of this little 
romance ? " 

Minola was looking steadily at the fire, and away from Mr. 
Money. She did not answer at once, and there was a pause. The 
suddenness of the silence aroused her. 

" Oh, yes, ]\Ir. Money. I know who he is," she said, without 
looking round. 

" Very well. Now comes the delicate part of my questioninsr. 
Of course you can't be expected to read the secrets of other 
people's hearts, and I suppose you are not in his confidence." 

" No, indeed," she said very quietly. 

" No . you couldn't tell how he feels towards my Lucelet ? " 

Minola shook her head. 

"If 1 were a man, I am sure I should be in love with her," she 
Saiil. 

"You think so ? Yes, perhaps so ; but in this case, somehow 

Well, Miss Grey, another question, and then I'll release you: and 
speak to me frankly, like a true girl to a plain man, who treats her 
as such. Is there any woman, as far as you know, who is more 
to him than Lucelet ? " 

Mr. Money had now come near to where Minola was sitting. 
He stood leaning against the chimney-piece, and looking fixedly 
into her face. At first she did not even understand the meaning of 



CHASTELARD. 151 

his question. Then suddenly she felt that her cheeks began to 
burn and her heart to beat. She looked up in wonder and pain, 
but she saw so much of earnestness and anxiety in Mr. Money's 
face that it would have been impossible not to understand and 
respect his purpose. In his anxiety for his daughter's happiness 
his whole soul was absorbed. Minola's heart forgot its own 
pain for the moment. Her own memory of a father was not of 
one thus unselfishly absorbed. She answered without hesitation 
and with quiet self-possession, 

" Oh, no, Mr. Money. I know of no such woman. So far as I 
can guess, none such exists." 

Mr. Money drew a deep breath, and his eyes brightened. 

" Miss Grey," he said, " I think any other woman in the world 

would have told me she wasn't in Mr. , in his, secrets, or given 

me some evasive or petulant answer. I thank you a thousand times. 
AVe may then . I may . pursue without compunction my match- 
making schemes. They are not very selfish ; they are only for 
Tucelet's happiness. I would ask one of my office clerks to marry 
her if she loved him and he was likely to make her happy ; and 
I would set them up in life. You may guess, then, whether this 
idea pleases me. But I confess I didn't think . well, of course, 
your assurance is enough, but I began to think of something 
different." 

Minola rose to go away. 

" One word, Miss Grey. Pray don't say anything to my wife 
about this. She is the truest and kindest of women, as you know, 
but she can't understand keepmg anything a secret, and she always 
begs of us to leave her out of the smallest plot of the most 
innocent kind, because she must let it all out prematurely. Now 
I'll release you, and you have, at all events, one friend in life to be 
going on with . friend among the aged I mean : the rest will come 
fast enough." 

With a bewildered head and a bursting heart, Minola found 
her way to her own room. 



CHAPTER XVI. 

CHASTELARD. 

" So you are really going to be an heiress, my dearest ? " Mary 
Blanchet said to Minola, when our heroine was settled at home 



152 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

again. "I knew you ought to be, and would be if right were 
done ; but right so often isn't done. My brother will be so glad 
to hear it ! . but not as other people might be glad, you know." 
For Mary began to be afraid that by a hasty word she might be 
tilling the heart of her friend with suspicion of her brother. 

" I don't knovv, Mary. Mr. Money, and others I suppose, say 
so. I wish it were not true ; I am all right as things are, and I 
hate the idea of gaining by this poor woman's death. I think I 
should not feel so if we had been friends, and if I could think 
that it was like a kindly gift from her, and that she wished me to 
have it. But it is all so different. And then, what do I want of 
it?" 

" One can do so much good with money," said little Mary, 
sighing. She was thinking of her brother. 

" Yes, that is true," Minola said, thinking of Mary herself and 
of what she might perhaps do for her. " But don't tell anyone 
about this, Mary . not even your brother . if you can well help 
it," Minola added, knowing what little chance there would be of 
Mary's keeping such a thing secret from her brother. " It is all 
uncertain and only talk as yet, you know." 

" These things are never secret, dearest," Mary said, with a 
wise shake of the head. " Men always get to know of them. I 
think the birds of the air carry the news abroad that a woman has 
money, or that she has not;" and Mary sighed again gently. 

" Do you see much of an alteration in the ways of men towards 
me already, Mary ? Do they hang around me in adoring groups ? 
Do they lean enraptured over me as I sweep the chords of the 
harp ? Do they who whispered that I sang like the crow before, 
now loudly declare that my voice puts the nightingale out of 
conceit with his own minstrelsy ? " 

" Now you are only talking nonsense, dear ; for we know so 
few men . and then you don't play the harp, and you never 
sing in company. But, if you ask me, I think I do see some 
difference." 

" Already, Mary ? " 

" Well, yes, I think so ; in one instance at least. Not, surely, 
that you were not likely to have attentions enough paid to you 
in any case, if you cared about them or encouraged them, and 
that, even if you hadn't a sixpence in the world . but still" 

" But still it does enhance one's charms, you think ? Come, 
Mary, tell me the name of this mercenary admirer. Depend 
upon it, all his arts shall fail." 

" You are only laughing at me still, dearest ; but there is some- 
thing in it, I can tell you, for all that. It is not my idea alone, I 



CHASTELARD. 153 

can assure you. What do you think of a duke's brother for an 
admirer, Minola ? " 

Little Mary Blanchet was a crafty little personage. She thought 
she could not too soon begin working for her brother's cause by 
trying to throw discredit on the motives of all other possible 
wooers. She had observed when going now and then to the 
house of the Moneys, during the last few days, that the returned 
cadet of the one great ducal house whereof she had any knowledge 
was there every day, and that he was very attentive to Minola. 
The same remark had been made by Mrs. Money, and had called 
forth an indignant objection from Lucy, who protested against the 
thought of her Nola having a broken-down outcast like that for a 
lover. But Mary, who was almost terrified at the idea of sitting 
down in the same room with any member of the great family 
who owned the mausoleum at Keeton, was not certain how far 
the name of a family like that might not go with any girl, even 
Minola, and believed it not an unwise precaution to begin as 
soon as possible throwing discredit on his purposes. 

Minola tried not to seem vexed. She had liked to talk to Mr. 
St. Paul when he came, as he did every day of her stay in Victoria 
Street. She had liked it because it gave her no trouble in thinking, 
and it saved her from having to talk to others with whom she 
might have felt more embarrassed, and because it turned away 
attention from what might perhaps have otherwise been observed 
. as she feared, at least . by too keen eyes. If Mary must suspect 
anything, it was a relief to find that she only suspected this, and 
Minola tried to make merry with her about her absurdity. But 
in her secret heart she sickened at such talk, and such thoughts, 
and felt as if the very shadow of the fortune which was expected 
for her, falling already on her path, was making it one of new pain 
and of still less accustomed shame. 

" Poverty parts good company, used to be said," Minola 
thought; "a little money seems much more likely to part good 
company in my case." 

Yet that there aie advantages in a command of money was 
soon made very clear to Minola. When she returned from a 
walk a day or two after, she found a specimen copy of Herbert 
Blanch et's poems awaiting her, with a letter from Victor Heron. 
The letter was somewhat awkward and rueful. Mr. Heron explained 
that, by her express instructions, he had allowed Blanchet to have 
it all his own way in the arrangement of the style of his appearance 
in paper and print ; and that the cost had become something far 
greater than he had anticipated. 

" You should never have been troubled about this," Victor 



154 ^^I^S MISANTHROPj^. 

went on to say, " but that you made me promise that you alone 
should pay for this thing ; I wish I hadn't made any such promise, 
or consented that Blanchet should have his way in the business. 
To think of a grown man, who has seen the world, leaving a 
matter of money and business in the hands of a girl and a 
poet ! Blanchet has been going it." 

Minola in all her trouble found room for wonder, delight, and 
something like alarm in looking at the superb edition in which the 
poems of Mr. Blanchet were to go before a world scarcely pre- 
pared for so much artistic gorgeousness. All that vellum ])aper, 
rare typography, costly and fantastic binding, and lavish illustration 
could do for poetry had been done, without stint, on behalf of 
Herbert Blanchet. The leaves were as thick as parchment and 
as soft as satin. Only a very few lines of verse appeared on each 
broad luxurious page. Every initial letter of a sentence was a 
fantastic design. The whole school of Blanchet's artistic friends 
had rushed into combination to enrich the pages, the margins, 
and the covers, with fanciful illustration. If they only had been 
great or even successful and popular artists, the book might have 
been worth its weight in gold. Unfortunately, Mr. Blanchet's 
artistic friends were not yet great or famous. The outer world . 
that world, which, in the opinion of the school, was wholly com- 
posed of dullards and Philistines . knew as yet nothing about 
these artists, and neither blamed them nor praised them. The 
volume was as large in its superficial extent as an ordinary 
atlas, and some of the poems which occupied a whole page were 
not more than four lines in length. The whole thing seemed 
truly, in the words of a poet whom Mr. Blanchet especially 
despised, "all a wonder and a wild desire." 

Thinkingof herself as the patroness and in some sort the parent 
of such a volume, Minola felt some such mixture of pride and 
timidity as a modest girl might own who has suddenly been made a 
princess, and is not quite certain whether she will be able to sup- 
port her position with becoming nerve and dignity. 

There came a little letter, too, from the poet himself. It ran in 
this fashion : . 

Dear Patroness and Queen, . The Poet has not dared to send in unfitting 
casket the offering which your approval has made precious. The poems which 
aie adchtssed to you must at least offer themselves in fonn not unworthy to 
be touched by your hand. 

In all devotion yours, 

Herbert Blanchet. 

Nor did the volume want a poetical dedication. The second 
leaf coniaincd the following : . 



CHASTELARD. iSS 

Unto my Lady Patroness and Queen. 

Upon iny darkness may there well befall 

Light of all darkness, darkness of all light ; 
Starlire of amber, dew of deathlike sheen ; 
Waters that burn, pale fires that sicken all, 

And shadows all aglow with saffron light; 
But comes my lady, who is Glory's queen. 
And all the bright is dark, and pallid dark the bright. 

Min.ola read this dedication again and again, puzzled, amused, 
angry, hardly knowing whether to laugh or to cry. " Am I Glory's 
queen ? " she asked of her own soul. " And if I am, am I letting 
light or darkness in upon my poor poet ? Am I depriving him 
of the amber, the dew, and the saffron light, or not ? Is it praise 
or blame, this dedication ? I suppose it must be praise, but I 
don't think anybody could tell from its words. Oh, my dear 
little Mary Elanchet, why must you have a brother? . and why 
must that brother be a poet ? " 

There was one consolation the dedication did not set forth her 
name, and nobody could know who the lady patroness of the poet 
might be. Minola felt inclined to be offended that she should be 
in any way brought into this folly, but she was not certain whether 
remonstrance or complaint might not be more ridiculous than 
utter silence. After all, nobody knew anything about her or 
cared, she said. If she were to complain in any way, it would only 
grieve poor Mary, whom the thought that her brother could have 
offended her friend and leader would drive well-nigh distracted. 
" What does it matter if I am made a little ridiculous in my own 
eyes ? " she asked herself. " It is only in my own eyes, I suppose. 
Mary will look on it all as delightful ; her brother of course means 
it for the best, and thinks it superb poetr\' ; and there is no one 
else likely to care either way. It is not much to be a little more 
ridiculous in my own eyes than I have already made myself." 

Perhaps . perhaps . let it be said with hesitation and much 
caution . there was something not wholly unwelcome to our heroine 
in the idea that she could be Glory's queen and all the rest of it 
to any human creature, not lo say any poet, just now. She felt 
humbled and deeply depressed. In her own eyes she was lowered 
by what she knew of her own heart. Her pride had received a 
terrible w'ound, almost a death-wound. The little world she had 
made so proudly for herself had all crumbled into dust. It is not 
wonderful if at such a time there should be, in spite of her sense 
of the ridiculous and her senses generally, a certain soothing 
influence in the fact that there still was some one in whose eyes 
she appeared a person of account and even of dignity. At all 
events, let it be frankly said that, when the first shock and stir 



156 MISS MISANTHROPiC. 

of the ridiculous were passed, Minola was not inclined to think 
more harshly than before of the poor poet who called her his 
patroness and his queen. As to the expense of the publication, 
she was a little startled at first, but that sensation very quickly 
passed away. She was not enough of a woman of business yet to 
care about the cost of anything so long as she had the money to 
pay. It would run her hard in her first year of independent life 
to pay this much; but then she could pay it and live somehow, 
and it would only be a case for strict economy in the future for 
some time. Besides, it seemed that, whether she would or not, 
she was likely to have much more money than she wanted or could 
use for any purposes of her own. Then she was further stimulated 
to carelessness by Mr. Heron's letter. 

" If he thinks I care about money, or the cost of serving a 
friend, he is mistaken," she said ; " his caution and his protes- 
tations are thrown away on me." 

For she was much inclined to be unjust and harsh in her mind 
towards Heron now. He had committed, all unconsciously, a 
terrible offence. He had, without knowing it, made her fall in 
love with him. So she made the best of the whole affair, cost, 
dedication. Glory's queen, and all ; and when Mar}' Blanchet came 
to look at the precious volume, and to go into raptures over it, 
Minola did her very best to seem contented, and not even to 
suggest a criticism, or to ask what this or that meant. She re- 
minded herself that the late Lord Lytton had written con- 
temptuously of the " fools on fools " who " still ask what Hamlet 
means." 

" This may be as far off" from me as Hamlet from other 
people," she told herselfi "Why confess myself a fool by asking 
what anything means ? And in any case Mary Blanchet would not 
know any better than I." 

By this resolve she made one woman happy. 

But it was not only a woman on whom she had conferred 
happiness. Herbert Blanchet was as happy as even his sister 
could have wished him to be. The head of the poet swam in 
delight. He had never before been so proud and blest. He hung 
over his volume for hours ; he could hardly get away from it. 
When he left it for a moment and tried to escape from its fasci- 
nations he found himself drawn back again into its presence. 
He touched fondly its soft satiny leaves as though they were the 
cheek of Beauty ; he pressed his own cheek against them ; he 
committed all the follies which we understand and admire in the 
immemorial raptures of the young lover or the father of the first- 
born. 



CHASTELARD. 157 

"They must see this," he cried aloud. " They can't overlook 
a volume like this." "They" being, of course, that public whose 
opinion he had always despised . those critics whose praise he had 
always declared to be the worst censure to a man of true genius. 

To do our poet justice, it must be owned that there was in his 
breast for the first time a deep, strong feeling of gratitude. That 
emotion came there with a strange ovenvhelming force, like that 
of intoxication to a man always rigidly sober before. If Minola 
had had him crowned a king, she could hardly have done any 
greater thing for him. Few men on earth can ever have had their 
dearest ambition so sweetly gratified as it was the lot of Herbert, 
the poet, to find his ambition gi^atified now. To have his poems 
so set before the world would have been a glory and a rapture, no 
matter though the patron's hand had been that of a withered old 
man or some fat fmmp of a dowager ; but to be thus lifted to his 
longed-for pedestal by the hand of a young and beautiful woman 
was something which he had never dreamed of asleep, and seldom 
allowed even into the dreams of his wild, vain waking hours. The 
emotion called up by the experience was as new as the experience 
itself. Mr. Blanchet felt profoundly grateful. In that moment of 
excitement he would probably, if need were, have laid down his 
life for Minola. 

If Minola had known what strange effect had been wrought in 
the breast of her poet, she would assuredly have thought her money 
well laid out, even although she had wanted it far more than 
she did. " To making a man happy, ten pounds," is the peculiar 
entry on which a famous essay in the Spectator was founded. To 
make a man grateful for the first time is surely a nobler piece 
of work than to make him merely happy, and it ought fairly to cost 
a good deal more. Minola had made a man for the first time both 
grateful and happy. The work was a little expensive in this case, 
but what miser will say that the money was thrown away ? 

It is not likely, however, that Minola would have been quite so 
much delighted if she could have known all the feelings that her 
generous, improvident patronage had awakened in the poet's breast. 
For Mr. Blanchet knew women well, he thought ; and he did not 
believe that mere kindness alone could have impelled Minola to 
such an act of bounty. Nor, making every needful allowance 
for the friendship between Miss Grey and his sister, did he find 
in that a sufficing explanation of Minola's liberality. He set 
himself to think over the whole matter coolly and impartially, and 
he could come to no other conclusion than that Miss Grey admired 
him. He was a handsome fellow, as he knew very well, and tall, 
and romantic in appearance ; what could be more natural than 



i<;8 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

that a poetic young woman should fall in love with him ? He felt 
sure that he had fallen in deepest love with her, but it is doubtful 
whether he was yet in a condition to analyse his own excited 
feelings very clearly. It is certain that he was madly in love with 
his poems, with their gorgeous first edition, with the pride and the 
prospect of the whole affair; and of course Hkewise in love with 
the patroness to whom he was indebted for so much of a strange 
delight. But how much was love of himself and how much of 
Minola he did not take time to consider. 

There was an artistic and literary association to which Blanchet 
belonged, and amid which he passed most of his nights. It was 
not exactly a club, for it had neither definite rules nor even a 
distinct habitation. It was a little sect rather than a club. It was 
an association of men who believed each in himself, and all, at 
least for the present, in each other. Their essential condition of 
existence was scorn of the world's ways, politics, and theories of 
art. They held that man himself was a poor creature, unworthy of 
the artist's serious consideration. All that related to the well- 
being of that wretched animal in the way of political government 
they looked down upon with mere contempt. The science which 
professed to concern itself about his health, the social philosophy 
which would take any account of his moral improvement, were 
alike ridiculous in the eyes of this aesthetic school. If, however, 
any uninitiated person should imagine that in setting up art as the 
only serious business of life they were likely to accept any common 
definition of art, he would find himself as open to their scorn as if 
he had tried to improve a bad law or subscribed to the funds 
of some religious organisation. Art with them was their own art. 
The enlightened parson Thwackum, in "Tom Jones," observes 
that " When I mention religion I mean of course the Christian 
religion, and when I speak of the Christian religion I mean the 
Protestant religion, and when I speak of the Protestant religion 
I mean the religion of the Church of England." It was in this 
spirit that the confraternity to which Mr. Blanchet belonged 
defined art. They only meant their own particular sect ; out of 
that there was no salvation. Art, it is said, hath no enemy but 
the ignorant. These artists, however, were the enemies of all art 
but their own. 

At the present these genial brothers regularly met of nights 
in the lodgings of one of them, who happened to have a large 
studio in the West-Central region of London, where so much of 
this unfishionable story happens to be cast. Victor Heron had 
many tinK^s been told of the genius that burned by night in that 
favoured haunt, and had expressed a modest wish to be allowed to 



CHASTE LARD. 159 

pass for an hour within its light. Mr. Blanchet was glad of the 
opportunity of introducing such a fri nd ; for it somehow seemed 
as if the consideration of any member ot the fraternity was enhanced 
among his brothers not a litde by the fact that he could introduce 
into their midst some distinguished personage from the despised 
outer world. With them Victor Heron might very well pass for a 
distinguished pubhc man, as, in fact, he already did, with no design 
of his own that way, in the eyes of Herbert Blanchet. To Victor 
the school was all composed of gifted and rising men, whom it was 
a pride to know or even to meet. To the school, on the other hand, 
Victor was a remarkable public man, a tremendous " swell," who 
had done some wondrous things in some far-off countries, and 
who, for all they knew at the time, might be regarded by the world 
as the prospective Prime Minister of England. 

There was a peculiar principle of reciprocity tacitly recognised 
among these brothers in art. No one of them would admit that 
there was anything which his brother knew and he did not know. If 
one of them read an author for the first time, and came to meet 
his fellows proud of his freshly-acquired knowledge, he found no 
man among them who would admit that he had not from his birth 
upwards been equally familiar with the author in question. It 
would be easy, surely, some one may say, to expose such pretension. 
Just so; of course it would. But when one brother had shown 
to-night that his friends had never read Schopenhauer, and in 
point of fact could not read him if they tried, who should guarantee 
that same brother against a similar exposure of his own harmless 
little false pretences to-morrow when he professed to know all about 
Euripides ? It was not found convenient in this little circle to 
examine too closely into the pretensions of each other. " Live 
and let live " was the motto of the school, so far as their esoteric 
professions were concerned. 

There was indeed a legend that some malign person, acquainted 
with the peculiarities of tlie school, had once compelled them to 
invent a patron poet. It was done in this fashion : the malign 
person talked confidently and fluently to one of the order con- 
cerning a French poet, whom he described as a gifted aposde of 
. a kindred school, and whom he was pleased to name De Patroque. 
The youth thus talked to was not to be outdone, or even to be 
instructed. He gave out that he had long had his eyes fixed 
reverendy on the genius of the gifted De Patroque. He talked 
largely, not to say bouncmgly, of the great De Patroque among his 
friends, who, not to be outdone in their turn, talked to him and to 
others of the new aposde. The fame of De Patroque grew and 
grew, until at last ill-natured persons affirmed that several essays 



i6o MISS MISANTHROPE. 

on his genius, and fraternal hymns of honour, were composed for 
him by the admirers of his mythical career. 

To this select circle Mr. Blanchet had for some time proposed 
to introduce his friend Victor Heron. On the very day when the 
first copies of the gorgeous poems were submitted to privileged 
eyes, Mr. Blanchet called on his friend. He found the friend a 
little put out by the unexpected lavishness of the manner in which 
the poetic enterprise had been carried on. 

" This will be an awfully expensive business, I'm afraid," Heron 
said, in an embarrassed tone, for he felt that it was a sort of pro- 
fanation to talk of money matters with a young poet. " I wish you 
had let me do this thing myself, Blanchet. I'd not have minded so 
far as I'm concerned. But I don't know about her, you see . she 
may not have much money. Then, young ladies are generally so 
enthusiastic ; she may not have thought of what the thing would 
cost." 

" You need not think about that," Herbert said loftily. " Miss 
Grey will be a rich woman one of these days " 

" But I don't see that that much alters the matter, although I 
am decidedly glad to hear it for her own sake, if it will make her 
any happier than she is now . which, I take it, is not by any means 
certain. But I don't see throwing away her money without her 
knowing all about it any the more." 

"Throwing away her money?" Herbert asked, in tones of 
lofty protest. 

" Well, I don't mean that, of course," the good-natured Heron 
hastened to explain in all sincerity. " You know very well, my 
dear Blanchet, what I think of your merits and 3 our poems, and 
of all true poets. I know that it is an honour for anyone, whether 
man or woman, to be allowed to help a poet to come out before 
the world and make a success. I only wish I had had the chance 
of doing such a thing for you ; but this young lady, you know, I 
don't feel quite certain whether I ought to have spent her money 
so freely." 

" I can reassure you, I think," the poet said, with chilling 
dignity ; " I should never have allowed anyone to do anything for 
me without having satisfied myself that it was done in the un- 
stinting spirit of friendship, and by some one whom such kindness 
would not hurt." 

" All right ; I am glad to hear you say so, of course, but you 
won't wonder at my scruples, perhaps " 

" Your scmples, my dear fellow, do you infinite honour," Mr. 
Blanchet said, with a slight dash of irony in his tone, which Heron 
did not at the moment perceive, being in truth engrossed by some 




>2 






^ 



.^ 



^ 



CHASTELARD. i6i 

Other thoughts. " But you may accept my assurance that tliere is 
no further occasion for them, and we will, if you please, change 
the subject." 

Victor did not feel by any means well satisfied that tliere was 
no occasion for scruple, nor did he at all like his poetic friend's 
way of looking at the matter. Bat he reflected that Blanchet might 
after all have good warrant for what he had said, and that it was 
not for him to cavil at the generosity of a rich girl . if she were 
rich . towards a poor poet. 

So they went along, the poet and his distinguished political 
friend, to the scene of the artistic and literary gathering, which the 
latter was so proud to see, and the former so proud to show. 

We have all read in story about the effect of some little magic 
word, which once spoken makes that which was lovely before seem 
but loathly, and what was kindly wisdom sound like fatuous malig- 
nity. Was there some such ill-omened charm w^orking all that 
night on Victor Heron ? Nothing seemed to him like what he had 
expected. He was not impressed as he had felt sure he would be 
by the poets and other sons of genius. They did not seem to con- 
stitute an assembly of noble minds in whose midst he was to feel 
such reverence as the rude Gauls of history or legend felt in the 
presence of the Roman senators. The thoughts that he heard did 
not strike him as celestial in their origin. There was a good deal of 
disparagement and denunciation of absent authors and artists, 
which, if the talkers had not been men of genius, Victor would 
certainly have thought ill-natured and spiteful. There seemed, at 
least to his untutored mind, to be little more than a technical relish 
of art in all they said. It was not art they cared for, but only a 
clique and its tricks. A group of discontented spinsters girding at 
their younger sisters who were married could hardly have shown 
themselves more narrow-minded and malign. The effect on Victor 
was profoundly depressing. It was like that which might be 
wrought upon a youth who, after gazing in rapture on the per- 
formance of some queen of classic tragedy, is at his earnest desire 
taken to see her in her private life, and finds her slatternly of dress, 
mean of speech, wholly uninspired by her art, and only taking a 
genuine pleasure in disparagement or slander of her ri\als. 

If Victor had known the world better, he w^ould have known 
that much, very much, of all this was but the mere affectation and 
nonsense of youth. These young men were as yet among the 
" odious race of the unappreciated." Yet a little, and some of 
them will make a success, and will have the credit of the world 
for what they do, and they wall turn out good fellows, kindly, 
true, and even modest. Nothing makes some young men so 



1 62 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

insufterably conceited and aggressive as the idea that they are 
not successful, and that people know it. There are many of us 
mortals with whom prosperity only agrees. On the other hand, 
some of these youths wall fail early, completely, and wholesomely 
in their artistic attempts, and will find out the fact for good, and 
will retire from the field altogether, and settle down to something 
else, and make a success, or at least a decent living, in some other 
way of life ; and will forget all the worser teaching of their earlier 
days, and will look back without bitterness on the time when they 
tried to impress a dull world, and will have no feeling of hatred 
for those who have done better, but will marry and bring up chil- 
dren, and be Philistines and happy. Youth has only cue season 
. luckily for a good many of us, who are decent fellows enough 
as long as we are content to be ourselves, and can do without 
affectation. 



CHAPTER XVII. 

" UNDER BONNYBELL'S WINDOW-PANES." 

But there was something more in Victor Heron's feeling of 
depression that night than came from the mere fact that he had 
found a few young artists not quite such heroic spirits as he thought 
they ought to be. It was the demeanour of Herbert Blanchet 
that especially spoiled the evening for him. In truth, the head 
of the poet was not a strong one, and was very easily turned by 
any little stimulant of whatever kind. His volume of poems this 
night affected all his being. He felt sure that he was at last about 
to force himself upon the recognition of the world, and he made 
up his mind that Miss Grey was in love with him. He conveyed 
hints of his approaching good fortune to his companions ; and he 
received at first, with benign courtesy, their compliments on the 
success that seemed to await him in life and love. But when 
some too forward person suggested that he could possibly guess 
at the name of the heiress whose heart and hand were to bless 
the lucky poet, then Blanchet became gravely and even severely 
dignified. 

" You will excuse me, Mellifont," he said grandly, the brandy 
and soda having, as was the wont of any such liquor taken by our 
poor poet, gone straight upward to his head, "you will excuse me, 
I am sure, if I say, this is not exactly a subj'Xt for jocularity, or 



'< UNDER BONNYBELUS window-panes." 163 

even, permit me to add, for general conversation, although among 
friends. My distinguished triend, Mr. Heron, will, I am sure, 
exactly appreciate what I say. Things may not be so completely 
settled as to make it proper that they should be spoken of as if . 
as if, in short, they were settled; you will excuse me, Mellifont, my 
dear fellow . you will excuse me." 

Victor Heron thought it time for him to go, and rose accord- 
ingly, and Mr. Blanchet insisted on accompanying him down the 
stairs and to the door of the house. 

" I thought it right, you know," the over-dignified poet said, 
" to put a stop to that sort of thing. Men have no right to make 
such mferences. I should have no right myself to assume that 
things were settled in that sort of way. It is not just to others . 
to another, at least. You appreciate my motives, I am sure, 
Heron, my dear friend ? " 

" I don't know that I even quite understand what your friend 
was talking about," said Heron coldly. " But if it was about any 
lady, I should think such conjecturing highly improper and im- 
pertinent ; and I should be rather inclined to put a stop to it even 
more quickly." 

" Quite my idea . I am glad you entirely concur with me, and 
approve of the course I have taken. But of course you would do 
so. I knew I could count on your approval. By the way, you 
know Mellifont ? " 

" The man you talked to just now ? " 

" Yes, Mellifont . a very good fellow, though a little too fond of 
talking. I have had to reprove him more than once, I can tell you. 
But a very good fellow for all that, and one of the only true artists 
now alive. He is a composer you must hear him play some 
bits from his opera. He is at work on an opera, you know . or 
perhaps you have not heard? " 

" I have not heard . no. I am rather out of the way of such 
things, I fear," said Victor, beginning to feel, in spite of himself, 
a certain awe of a man who could compose an opera, and think- 
ing that, after all, a certain allowance must be made for the genius 
of one who could do such things. 

" Oh, you must hear some of it soon ! We feel satisfied that 
it will sound the death-knell of all the existing schools of music. 
They are all wrong, sir, from first to last, from Mozart to Wagner 
. all wrong except Mellifont." 

Victor was for the moment really staggered by the genius of 
this great man. 

" What IS his opera to be called?" he asked, not venturing' 
to hazard any compromising observation. 



:64 M/SS MISANTHROPE. 

" The Seven Deadly Sins. It is to be in seven acts, and each 
act is to give an entirely new illustration of a deadly sin . which 
Mellifont will show to be the only true virtues of mankind. It 
will make a revolution, I can tell you." 

Victor thought it could hardly fail to do that if it were at all 
successful in the object set out by its author. 

" It is to have seven heroines," the jioet went on, still at the 
door, and refusing to allow Victor to depart : " Lot's daughters . 
let me see . Messalina, Locusta, Jezebel, I think, Theodora, and 
[ believe Mrs. Brownrigg. It will be a splendid thing." 

It was not easy for Victor to get away, for the poet had to tell 
him of other great works of art that were in the contemplation of 
members of the school. At length Blanchet released him, thanking 
nim grandly for the assistance he had lent to the bringing out of his 
book, but adding even more grandly some words that fell painfully 
on Victors ear. 

" I hope to be independent of publishers and of drudgery be- 
fore long ; I fancy . I rather believe it depends upon myself, and 
I think I owe it to my own genius to raise myself above the 
necessity of drudgery. I could then do something worthy of my- 
self, and the few whose praise I value." 

Victor escaped at last and walked away. He was in a very 
discontented mood; an unusual thing for him. He could not help 
believing that there must be, or at least might be, something in the 
idea which Blanchet so evidently wished people to receive. He 
feared that there must be something more than mere kindly patro- 
nage in Miss Grey's generosity towards Blanchet. The thought 
was strangely disagreeable to him. He could not think with 
patience of such a girl being in love with such a man. He was 
now disposed to exaggerate the demerits of the poet, and to 
believe anything mean of one who could take a girl's money and 
give out as an excuse for taking it that she was in love with him. 
" If I had a sister," he thought, " and any fellow were to give such 
hints about her, I wonder how I should like it, and I wonder how 
much of it I should stand ! " 

He felt sorry, very sorry, for Minola, and perhaps a little angry 
with her too for allowing to any man the chance of suggesting 
such things. The more he thought of her and all he had seen of 
her, the less she seemed fitted for such a lover as Mr. Blanchet. 
She had impressed Victor greatly by her manners, her fresh and 
frank character, and the simple, trusting generosity which was her 
transparent attribute. He began to look on the poet now as a 
mere fortune-hunter, who was fastening upon the girl because of 
the money which he expected her to have. He did not know how 



** UNDER BONNYBELL'S WINDOW-PANES." 165 

consuming a passion is the vanity of the small artistic mind . the 
mind which has art's ambition only, and not art's inspiration. 
Mr. Blanchet was not a fortune-hunter in the ordinary sense. His 
poems were to him as yet much dearer than any fortune. He was 
drawn to Minola, not because she had money, but because, having 
money, she was willing to spend some of it in bringing out his 
poems in a handsome edition. 

Our hero's Quixotic temper was thoroughly roused by the 
thought of some wrong which he fancied was about to be done 
to Minola. He was not one of those lucky beings who can let 
things alone. He never could let things alone. Had he had the 
gift of those who can, he would just then have been governor of 
some rising colony, and would have been in a fair way of promo- 
tion. He was tormented by the thought that there was something 
he ought to do to save Minola from some vaguely terrible fate, 
and by not being able to see what the something was which lay 
within his power to do. Before he had walked many yards he 
had worked himself into the idea that a plot of some sort was in 
preparation to entrap Minola into a marriage with one who, poet 
or not, was wholly unworthy of her. 

His energetic spirit at length suggested something to be done. 
It was not, perhaps, a vtry practical or useful stroke of policy, but 
it was the only thing which occurred to him, and the only thing 
which he did just then. He started off at full speed to walk under 
the windows of the house where Miss Grey was living. It was 
now fully midnight, and of course he had not the slightest idea 
of seeing Minola, and, indeed, would have been greatly embar- 
rassed if he had seen her. But he started off, nevertheless, to walk 
under her windows with as eager a step and as steady a purpose 
as if he were really hastening to rescue her from some imminent 
danger. It was only a short walk from where he then was to 
Minola's lodgings ; but Heron was so eager in his purpose that the 
way seemed miles, which he was covering with hasty strides. 

When he reached the house where Minola lived, the aspect of 
the place was just such as, if he had been a lover, he might have 
expected or desired to find. The house was all in darkness save 
for one window. There was a looking-glass in that window, 
making it plain to the least observant of human creatures that it 
must be the window of a bedroom. How could a lover doubt 
that that must be the window of the room which was hers, and 
that she then watched the stars of midnight, and that she thought 
of love, and that her soul was, as Jean Paul puts it, in the blue 
ether? For the moment Victor Heron found himself wishing that 
he were a lover . were the lover of whom the lady, fancy-fixed, 



i66 A//SS MISANTHROPE. 

in that one lighted room, might be thinking. But if it were Minola's 
room, he thought, she certainly had not him or any memory of 
him in her mind. It was a clear, soft midnight, and the moon 
that shone on the near roof of the British Museum seemed as 
poetic and as sad as though it fell on the ruins of the Parthenon 
No practice in colonial administration can wholly squeeze the 
poetic and the romantic out of the breast of a young man of 
Heron's time of life. xVs he stood there, his grievance seemed as 
far off as the moon herself, but not by any means so poetic and 
beautiful. He paced up and down, feeling ver}' young and odd, 
and unlike his usual self He was happy in a queer, boyish way 
that had a certain shamefaced sensation about it, as when a youth 
for the first time drinks suddenly of some sparkling wine, and 
leels his brain and senses all aflame with delicious ecstasy, and is 
afraid of the feeling although he delights in it. 

It was a natural part of the half-fantastic chivalry of his 
character that he should have felt a sort of satisfaction in thus for 
the moment being near Minola, as if by that means he were in 
some sort protecting her against danger. If at that time any 
softer and warmer feeling than mere friendship were mingling 
itself with Heron's sensations, he did not then know it. He 
thought of the girl as a sweet friend, new to him, indeed, but very- 
dear, in whose happiness he felt deeply interested, and over whom 
he had taken it into his head that he had a right to watch. She 
seemed to be strangely alone in the world of London, and in- 
deed, to be at the same time not suited for anything in London 
but just such isolation. He never could think of her as mixing in 
the ordinary society of the metropolis. He could not think of her 
as one of the common crowd, following out mechanically the 
registered routine of the season's amusements, listening to the 
commonplace talk, and compliments, and cheap cynicism of the 
drawing-room and the five o'clock tea. To him she appeared 
as different from all that, and as poetically lifted above it, as if she 
were Hawthorne's Hilda, high up in her Roman tower, among her 
cloves, and near to the blue sky. Except in the home of the 
Moneys, Heron had never seen Minola in anything that even 
looked like society ; and there was a good deal of the odd and 
the fresh in that home which took it out of the range of the com- 
monplace, and did not interfere with his poetic idealisation of 
ISlinola. Her presence and her way of life appeared alike to him 
a poetic creation. So quiet, self-sufficing a life, alone in the midst 
of the crowd, such simple strength of purpose, such a tranquil 
choice of the kind of existence that suited her best, such gene- 
rosity, and such gracious loving kindness, . all this together made 



*' UNDER BONNYBELUS WINDOW-PANES." 167 

up a picture which had a natural fascination for a chivalrous young 
man, who had never before had time to allow the softer and 
more romantic elements of his nature any chance of expression. 
It may be that for the present Minola was to him but the first 
suggestion of an embodiment of all the vague, floating thoughts 
and visions of love and womanhood that must now and then cross 
the spiritual horizon of evsry young man, no matter how closely 
he may be occupied Avith colonial affairs and the condition of the 
coloured races. The hero of a French story, whereof there is not 
otherwise overmuch good to be said, speaks with a feeling as 
poetic as it is true w'hen he says that in the nightingale's song 
he heard the story of the love that he ought to have known, 
but which had not yet come to him. Perhaps in the eyes and 
in the voice of Minola, Victor Heron unconsciously found this 
story told for him. 

However that might be, it is certain that Heron found a 
curious satisfaction this night in passing again and again before 
jNIinola's door, and making beheve to himself as if he were 
guarding her against danger. He might have remained on guard 
in this way, Heaven knows how long . for, as we know, he was 
not fond of early going to bed . but that he suddenly " was aware," 
as the old writers put it, of another watcher as well as himself 
It was unmistakable. Another man came up and passed slowly 
once or tNvice under the same windows, and on the side of the 
street where Heron had put himself on guard. Then the new- 
comer, observing, no doubt, that he was not alone, had crossed 
to the other side of the street, and Heron thought he was only a 
chance passer and was gone altogether. Presently, however, he 
crossed the road again, and stood a short distance away from 
Heron as if he w^ere watching him. Now, though Victor Heron 
was not a lover, he had just as much objection as any lover could 
have to being seen by observant eyes when watching under a girl's 
window. The mere thought recalled him at once to chilling 
commonplace. He was for going away that moment; all the 
delight was gone out of his watching. But he was a little curious 
to know if the new-comer were really only a casual stranger whom 
his movements had stirred into idle curiosity. So he went straight- 
way down the street and passed the unwelcome intruder. He 
felt sure the face of the man was known to him, although he 
could not at first recall to mind the person's identity. He felt 
sure, too, by the way in which the man looked at him and then 
turned suddenly off, that the new-comer had recognised him as 
well. This was tormenting for the moment, as he went on per- 
plexing himself by trying to think who it was that he had seen in 



1 68 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

this unexpected and unwished-for way. He walked slowly, and 
looked back once or twice. He could not see his disturber any 
more. The man had either gone away or was, perhaps, standing 
in the shadow of a doorway. Suddenly an idea flashed upon 
Heron. 

"Why, of course," he exclaimed, "it's he! I ought to have 
known ! It's the man from Keeton . the hated rival." 

By " hated rival," however, Heron did not mean a rival in love, 
but only in electioneering ; for he now knew that it was Mr. Shep- 
pard he had seen, and he remembered how Mr. Sheppard, v/hen 
he met him in Minola's room, had seemed oddly sullen and un- 
willing to fraternise. This was the reason why Heron called him 
the hated rival. His own idea of a rival in an election contest was 
that of a person whom one ought to ask to dinner, and treat with 
especial courtesy and fair offer of friendship. 

Suddenly, however, another idea occurred to him. 

"What on earth can he be doing there," he asked, "under her 
window? Can it be possible that he, too, is a lover? " 

He, too ? Who, then, was the lover . the other lover ? Heron 
did not believe, and would not admit, that Blanchet was a genuine 
lover at all. The whole theory of Victor's duty to watch under 
Minola's windows was based on the assumption that Blanchet was 
no true lover, but a cunning hunter of fortune. Why, then, ask, 
Was Mr. Sheppard, too, a lover? Heron did not at the moment 
stop to ask himself any such question, but, after a while, the ab- 
surdity of his words occurred to him, and he was a little amused at, 
and a good deal ashamed of, his odd and hasty way of putting the 
question. 

" Why shouldn't he be there as well as I ?" he said. " Why 
should he be a lover any more than I ? " 

Then he began to assure himself that the hated rival must have 
been there only by chance ; and it is doubtful whether, if he had 
thought much longer over the question, he would not have ended 
by convincing himself that nothing but the merest chance had 
brought him, too, under Minola's window-panes. 

It was, indeed, Minola's window under which he had been 
watching ; and she, too, was watching, and never dreamed that he 
was so near. She looked from her window not long after he had 
gone, and saw the street all lonely, and felt lonely herself, and 
shuddered, thinking that life would ever be a dreary piece of work 
for her. It is a melancholy feet that all that time, and even long 
after she had gone in shuddering from the window, ])oor Sheppard 
was standing in a doorway at the oi)posite side of the street, and 
that she not only never saw him, but never thought of him. Her 



"COUNSEL BEWRAYED." 169 

tnoughts were of Victor Heron, and of her own folly and her own 
love . that love which seemed such folly, which was so hopeless, 
which she knew, or, at least, believed, it was a sort of treason 
against friendship to indulge, although in absolute secret. 

In Uhland's pretty poem called "Departure" a youth is going 
on his wanderings, and his comrades escort him a little on his way, 
and as they go along they pass beneath the windows of a pretty 
girl. The lad looks up, and would fain, if he might, have a rose 
from her hand, and yet tells himself that he would not have it . 
for to what end to have the rose, when she whom he loved cared 
nothing for him, and the rose would only wither with him, and to 
no purpose ? When he has gone, the girl strains her eyes after him 
in grief, and wonders what the world is to be to her now that he 
she loved is going far away, and never knew of her love. A few 
timely words might have spared all the heart-ache, no doubt ; but 
it will be a very different world from that which we have known 
when all the words that might have been timely are spoken in 
time, or even when the feelings that might prompt the time'y 
words have learned their own meaning at the right moment to give 
it breath. 



CHAPTER XVni. 

"counsel bewrayed." 

The next morning Heron rose with a distinct purpose of doing 
something to put Minola on her guard. His purpose to do 
something was much more clear than his knowledge of what he 
had better do. Anyhow, he thought he would go and see Minola, 
and say something to her. When he began to speak, he would 
probably hit upon the thing to say. As he might have put it 
himself, Providence would pull him through somehow. The first 
thing was to get to speech of Minola. This, at least, ought not 
to be hard to compass. 

His first idea was simply to go to her house and ask to see her. 
But when he was near the scene of his mounting guard the past 
night he began to think of the difficulties that would be put in his 
way if anyone else were present. How, for example, could he pos- 
sibly say what he specially wanted to say if Mary Blanchet were 
present, or were even coming and going in and out of the room, as 
she was almost sure to be ? On the other hand, how could he 



170 MJSS MISANTHROPE. 

formally ask for a private conversation with Minola without stirring 
all manner of absurd curiosity and conjecture ? At the very least, 
Mary Blanchet would be sure to ask, when he had gone, what he 
had come to say ; and that would, under the circumstances, be 
rather embarrassing for Minola. He gave up, therefore, the idea 
of seeing Miss Grey at her own house. 

Another plan at once occurred to him. He knew how often 
Minola walked in Regent's Park . he would go and walk there 
about the time which she usually chose, and he would go again 
and again until he met her. So he started oft" for the Park, greatly 
relieved in mind to be doing anything. All the time there was a 
good deal of work on his own account which he might, and, if he 
had been at all a sensible young man, would, have been doing. 
The time that he was spending in trying to ward off from Minola 
a supposed danger might, if properly used, have procured him an 
interview with a Cabinet Minister, or paved the way for easy 
success at the future election for Keeton. There were twenty things 
which Mr. Money had often told him he must do if he would have 
the faintest hope of any success in anything ; and all these things 
he was utterly neglecting because he chose to think that he was 
called on to give some advice to a girl who perhaps would repay 
him with little thanks for his officious attempt at interference. 

He walked slowly through the Park, along the paths which he 
knew that she loved, and made for the canal. It was a soft, grey 
day, with no sky seen. The air was surcharged with moisture ; 
but it was not raining, and the grass was only as if a heavy dew 
had settled on it. The soft breath that floated over the fields was 
warm and languid. Only three colours were to be seen all across 
the Park : the gi'een of the grass, the grey of the clouds, or of the 
one cloud rather, and the dull black of the tree-trunks. These 
colours, indeed, were softened, and shaded away, and blended into 
eacli other, with indefinable varieties of tone and delicate inter- 
changes of effect. It was just the day to make a certain class of 
observer curse the stupid and foggy monotony of the English 
climate. It was the day, too, to gladden the heart of a certain 
refined class of artist with whom delicate effects of tone and shade 
are precious and familiar. Certainly it might be called a day of 
poetic cloud. To Victor, who had long been used to the unwinking 
steadiness of a tropical sun, there was something specially refreshing 
and delightful in the grass, the trees, and the cloud. He found 
himself yearning in heart for a life which would leave him more 
time and thought for the skies, the trees, and the grass. 

Suddenly the scene vanished from his eyes, and he only saw 
Minola Cirey. He was now approaching the canal, and he saw her 



"COUNSEL BEWRAYED." 171 

leaning over the bridge and looking into the water. It was early 
in the day . too early for the nursemaids and the children and the 
ordinary walkers, and there was no one but Minola now in Heron's 
sight. 

The girl, as she leaned on the railing of the bridge and looked 
into the water, might have been adopted by any artist as a model- 
figure of Melancholy. If Victor had been less in a hurry with 
everything . if he had remained where he then was and looked 
at her unperceived for a few moments, Heaven knows what in- 
spiration of ideas, what reveaiings about himself and her, might 
have come into his mind. But Victor waited for nothing . seldom 
m life gave himself much time to think ; and, in any case, would 
have had an instinctive objection to even a moment's unperceived 
watching of a meditating girl. He was so rejoiced at the readiness 
.with which his desire to meet her had been gratified, that he 
thought he could hardly seize his chance too soon. In his eager- 
ness he even forgot that the task he had undertaken was rather 
embarrassing, and that he had not yet made up his mind as to 
what he was going to say. He was by Minola's side in a moment. 

She was so much surprised and startled that Victor was quite 
ashamed of having come upon her in such a sudden way. He had 
forgotten that all women have nerves, and get startled in ways 
unknown to men. At least, he assumed it must be for some 
reason of this kind that Minola seemed so much disturbed when 
he came up, but he certainly had not supposed that girls so clever 
and healthy as Miss Grey were usually troubled with nerves. 

Minola recovered herself very soon, however, and got rid of 
all appearance of mere nervous embarrassment, although there 
was for a while a certain constraint in her manner. 

" Have you been long here ? " he asked. 

" Not very long ; at least, it did not seem long. I like to be 
here at this time ; there are so few people." 

" Yes ; I knew you were likely to be here about this time if 
you were coming at all to-day," he said ; an awkward remark, as 
it suggested that he had come expressly to meet her. 

" I come here at all manner of times," she said ; " but I think 
I like this time the best." 

" You are not going any farther, I suppose ? " 

" No ; I thought of turning back now, and going home." 

" I'll walk a little way with you, if you will allow me?" 

Of course she had no objection 10 make. They had walked 
in that place often before, and it was a matter of certainty that 
when they did meet they would walk together. He need hardly 
have asked her if she would allow him to walk with her now. 



172 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

So they turned and walked a little off the beaten track, and 
under the trees. When they had walked a certain distance in one 
direction Victor turned round and she turned with him, as if she 
were merely obeying his signal of command. It has already been 
said more than once that Mr. Heron always went on as if he were 
ever so much older than she, and belonging, indeed, to a ditferent 
stage of life He bore himself as a man of forty or thereabouts 
might do with a young woman of Minola's age. 

" How do you like Blanchet's book?" he asked abruptly. 

" It is ver}^ beautiful, I suppose ; it's a little too ornamental and 
fantastic perhaps for my taste ; but I suppose that is in keeping with 
the style of the poems ; and /le is delighted with the book." 

'' it has cost a great deal of money . much more than it ought 
to have cost ; I don't like the thing at all." 

" But think of the joy given to the poet. It is surely not very 
dearly bought at the price. I never knew of a man so happy." 

" Yes, yes ; that is all very well for him " 

" It is very well for me too, Mr. Heron . to be able to do a 
kindness for any human creature. I dare say it has given me as 
much pleasure as it has given him, and made me quite as proud 
too . and is not that something to gain ? " 

" Still, I can't help feeling uneasy about this thing. It has cost 
a heap of money, much more than I ever supposed it would, and I 
seem as if I had brought you into all the expense." 

" How could that be, Mr. Heron? I expressly wished Mr 
Blanchet to do as he pleased ; and he understood me exactly as I 
wished him to do. You had nothing to do with it" 

" Oh, yes ! I had something to do with it ; and then . excuse 
me . you are rather young perhaps " 

" Perhaps I can't be expected to know my o^^"n mind ; or ought 
not to be trusted with the spending of my own money ? " 

" No, I didn't mean that ; but you might not have known 
exactly what you were being let in for ; and it is a good deal of 
money for a girl to pay." 

" And in fact you don't think a girl ought to be allowed to 
spend her money without some wise person of the superior sex to 
guide her hand ? Thank you very much, Mr. Heron, but I think 
I may have my own way in this at least. I have often told you 
that I left Keeton because I could not stand the control of wiser 
and better persons than myself. I am not at all a good girl, Mr. 
Heron ; I never said I was. The counsels of the wise are sadly 
thrown away on me, I fear." 

She spoke in a hard and ungenial tone, which he had not 
heard her use before. He could not help looking at her with 



"COUNSEL BEWRAYEDr 173 

an expression of wonder. She saw the expression and under- 
stood it. 

"You are shocked at my want of sweet feminine docility? I 
ought not to have any ideas of my own, I suppose ? " 

" No; I am not shocketl, and I am not at all such a ridiculous 
person as you would seem to suppose, and I have none of the 
ideas you set down to me ; but you don't seem quite like yourself, 
and you speak as if you were offended with me for something." 

"Offended? . oh, no; how could I possibly be offended? I 
am very much obliged, on the contrary, for the trouble you take 
for one who seems to you quite unable to take care of herself." 

Victor did not like her tone. There was something aggressive 
in it. He was not experienced enough in the ways of society to 
cry content to that which grieved his heart, and his thoughts 
therefore showed themselves pretty clearly in his face. 

" I don't like Blanchet's taking all this money," he said, after a 
moment of silence. " I don't think a man ought to take such a 
helping hand as that from . well, from " 

" From a woman, you were going to say? Why not from a 
woman, Mr. Heron ? Are Ave never to do a kind thing, we unfor- 
tunate creatures, because we are women and are young ? " 

" No; I don't say that; but there are things it may become a 
woman to do, and which it doesn't quite so well become a man to 
profit by. I don't think Blanchet " 

" Mr. Blanchet seem.s to have a higher idea of what a woman's 
friendship may be than you have, Mr. Heron. He does not see 
any degradation in allowing a woman to hold him out a helping 
hand when he wants one. I like his ideas better than yours. You 
say you would have done this little service for him if you had been 
allowed. Why should there be any greater degradation to him 
in having it done by me ? At all events, you can't wonder if I 
don't see it all at once." 

" Of course, if you are satisfied and pleased, there is nothing 
more to be said in the matter." 

" I am satisfied and pleased . why should I not be ? I asked 
a friend to let me do something to help him, and he answered me 
just in the spirit in which I spoke. Of course I am glad to find 
that there is even one man who could take a friendly offer in a 
friendly way. There are not many such men, I suppose ?" 

Victor could not help smiling at her emphatic way of expressing 
her scorn of men. 

" I do believe you have really turned yourself misanthropical 
by reading ' Le Misanthrope,' " he said 

"Well, why should there not be a wom.an Alceste? . although 



174 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

I never knew any woman in real life more worthy to be classed 
with him than the men we meet in real life are. Miss Alceste, I 
think, would sound very pretty. I wish I could think myself entitled 
to bear such a name.'' 

" Or Miss Misanthrope," he suggested. " How would that do 
for a young lady's name ? " 

" Admirably, I think. That would get over all the difficulty, 
too, and save foolish persons from thinking that one was setting 
up for another Alceste. I should like very much to be called 
Miss Misanthrope." 

" If you go on as you are doing, you will soon be entitled to 
bear the name," said Victor gravely. " At the present moment, 
I don't know that I should much object to that." 

" No ? I am glad that anything I am likely to do has a chance 
of pleasing you. But why should you not object just at present? 
Why not now as well as at any other time ? " 

" Because I should hke you to be a litde misanthropical just 
now, and a little distrustful . of men, that is to say. Miss Grey." 

She coloured slightly, although she had no idea of his meaning 
yet. 

" I always thought you were full of trust in the whole human 
race, Mr. Heron ; I thought you liked everybody and believed in 
everybody. Now you tell me to distrust all mankind." 

" I didn't say that." 

" No ? Some particular person, then ? " 

" Some particular person, perhaps. At least, I don't mean 
exactly that," Heron hastened to explain, his conscience smiting 
him at the thought that perhaps after all he might be suggesting 
unjust suspicions of an absent man who was a sort of friend. " I 
only mean that you are very generous and unselfish, and that there 
might be persons who might try to make use of your good-nature, 
and whom perhaps you might not quite understand. I don't know 
whether I ought to speak about this at all." 

" Nor I, Mr. Heron, I am sure; for I really don't know what 
youare speaking of, or what mysterious danger is hanging over me. 
But I hope there is something of the kind, for I should so like to 
resemble a heroine of romance." 

" There is not anything very romantic in prospect so far as 
I know," he said, now almost wishing he had said nothing, and 
yet feeling in his heart a serious fear that Minola might be led to 
put too much faith in Blanchet. " But if I might speak out freely, 
and without any fear of your misunderstanding me or being 
offended, there is something, Miss Grey, that I should very much 
like to say." He spoke in an uneasy and constrained way, forcing 
himself on to an ungracious task. 



'* COUNSEL BEIVRAYED." 175 

" You have been preaching distrust to me, Mr. Heron, and you 
have been finding fault generally with all women who trust any- 
body. To show you how your lessons are thrown away on me, 
I shall certainly trust you as much as you like, and I shall not 
misunderstand anything you say, nor be offended by it." There 
was something of her old sweet frankness in her manner as she 
spoke these words, and Heron was warmed by it. 

" Well," he said at last, " you are a girl, and young, and living 
almost alone, and people tell me you are going to have money. 
You have promised to excuse my blunt way of talking out, haven't 
you ? I almost wish for your sake, as you like to live this kind 
of life, that you had just enough of money to live upon and no more ; 
but I hear that that is not the case, or at all events is not to be. 
Well, the only thing is that people who I think are not true, and 
are not honest, and who are not worthy of you in any way 
whatever, may try to make you think that they are true, and 
sincere, and all the rest of it." 

"Well, Mr. Heron, what if they do?" 

" You may perhaps be persuaded to believe them." 

" And even if I am, what matter is that ? I had much rather 
be deceived" in such things than know the truth, if the truth is to 
mean that people are all deceitful." 

" I don't think you want to understand me," he said. 

" Indeed I do ; I only want to understand you ; but I fail as 
yet. Why not speak out, Mr. Heron, like a man and a brother? 
If there is anything you want me to know, do please make me 
know it in the clearest way." 

She was growing impatient. 

" You will have lovers," he said, driven to despair when it 
seemed as if she could not understand a mere hint of any kind; 
" of course you must know that you are attractive and all that . 
and if you come to have money, you will be besieged with fellows 
. with admirers, I mean. Do be a little distrustful . of one at 
least ; I don't like him, and I wish you didn't . and I can't very 
well tell you why, only that he does not seem to me to be manly 
or even honest." 

She coloured a little; but she also smiled faintly, for she still 
did not understand him. 

" I suppose I must know the man you mean, Mr. Heron ; for 
I think he is the only man I ever heard you say anything against, 
and I have not forgotten. But what can have made you think 
that I needed any lecture about him ? I don't suppose he ever 
thought about me in that way in his life, or would marry one of my 
birth and my bringing up even if I asked him. And in any case, 



176 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

Mr. Heron, I would not marry him even if he asked me. But 
what a shame it seems to arrange in advance for the refusing of 
a man who never showed the faintest intention of making an 
offer ! " 

At first Heron did not quite understand her. Then he sud- 
denly caught her meaning. 

" Oh, that fellow ? I didn't mean him. I never could have 
supposed that you were likely to be taken in by him." 

" To do him justice, Mr. Heron, he never seems to have any 
thought of taking anyone in. Such as he is, he always shows 
himself, I think." 

" Oh, I don't care about him " 

" Nor I, Mr. Heron, 1 assure you. But whom, then, do you 
care about . in that sense ? " 

" I distrust a man who takes a woman's money in a thoughtless 
and selfish way," Heron said impetuously. " That is a man I 
would not trust. Don't trust him. Miss Grey; believe me, he is a 
cad . I mean, a selfish and deceitful fellow. I can't bear the 
thought of a girl like you being sacrificed . or sacrificing yourself, 
as you might do perhaps, and I tell you that he is just the sort of 
man . . " 

" Are you speaking of Mr. Blanchet now, Mr. Heron ? " Her 
tone was cold and clear. She was evidently hurt, but determined 
now to have the whole question out. 

" Yes, I am speaking of Blanchet, of course . of whom else 
could I be speaking in such a way ? " 

" Mr. Blanchet is my friend, Mr. Heron ; I thought he was 
a friend of yours as well" 

" Well, I thought he was a manly, honest sort of fellow . I 
don't think so now," Victor went on impetuously, warming himself 
as he went into increasing strength of conviction. " I know you 
will hate me for telling you this, but I can't help that. I am as 
much interested in your happiness as if . as if you were my sister 
. and if you were my sister I would just do the same." 

It would, indeed, be idle to attempt to describe the course of 
tlie feelings that ran through Minola's breast as she listened to the 
words of this kind which he continued to pour out. But out of 
all that swept through her . out of shame, surj^sC; anger, grief . 
the one thought came ujjpermost, and survived, and guided her 
. the thought that she had only to leave Heron's appeal un- 
answered, and her secret was safe for ever. 

She made up her mind, and was self-contained and composed 
to all appearance again. 

" Let us not say any more about this, Mr. Heron ; I am sure 



MR. ST. PAUL'S MYSTERY. \.TJ 

you mean it as a friend ; and I never could allow myself to feel 
oftended by anything said in friendship. I am sorry you have such 
an opinion of Mr. Blanchet. I have a much better opinion of him ; 
I like him better than I like most men ; but you know we have 
just agreed that T ought to be called ' Miss Misanthrope/ and I 
assure you I mean to do my very best to deserve the name. 
No . please don't say any more. I had rather not hear it, indeed ; 
and if you know anything of women, Mr. Heron, you must know 
that we never take advice on these matters. No ; trust to my 
earning my name of Miss Misanthrope, but don't tell me of the 
demerits of this or that particular man ; I had rather hate men 
in the general than in all the particular cases . and how long we 
must have talked about this nonsense, for here is the gate of the 
Park ; and Mary Blanchet will be thinking that I am lost ! " 

They almost always parted at this park gate. This time he felt 
that he must not attempt to go any farther with her. She smiled 
and nodded to him with a manner of constrained friendliness, and 
went her way; and Heron's heart was deeply moved, for he feared 
that he had lost his friend. 



CHAPTER XIX. 

MR. ST. PAUL'S MYSTERY. 

Two events occurring almost together affected a good deal some 
of the people of this story. The first was the death of Mrs. 
Saulsbury. 

Miss Grey was at once invited by the lawyers who had the 
charge of her father's affairs to visit Keeton, in order to become 
fully acquainted with the new disposition of things in which she 
had so much interest. Thereupon Mr. Money announced that, as 
Miss Grey had no very close friend to look after her interests, he 
was resolved to put himself in the place of a parent or some 
near relation, and go with her and see that all her interests 
were properly cared for. Minola was unwilling to put him to so 
much trouble and loss of time, well knowing ho\v absorbed in 
business he was ; but he set all her remonstrances aside with blunt, 
good-humoured kindness. 

" Lucy is coming with us," he said, " if you don't think her 
in the way; it might be pleasant for you to have a companion." 

" I should so much like to go with Nola," pleaded Lucy. 

" Oh, I shall be delighted if Lucy will go," Minola said, not 



178 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

well knowing how to put into words her sense of all their kindness. 
It was really a great relief to her to have Lucy's companionship in 
such a visit. Mary Blanchet did not like to go back even for a 
few days to Keeton. The poetess objected to seeing ever again 
the place where she considered that art and she had been de- 
graded by her servitude in the Court-house. So the conditions 
of the visit were all settled. 

But there arose suddenly some new conditions which Minola 
had never expected. The long-looked-for vacancy at length oc- 
curred in the representation of Keeton. The sitting member 
announced his determination to resign his seat as soon as the 
necessary arrangements for such a step could be put into effect. 
It was imperative that Victor Heron should lose no time m 
throwing himself upon the vacant borough. Mr. Money and 
Lucy rattled up to Minola's door one morning breathless with the 
news. Lucy's eyes were positively dancing with excitement and 
delight. 

" It seems to me that there's going to be a regular invasion 
of your borough, Miss Grey," Mr. Money said. " We're all going 
to be there. You see that you are under no manner of obligation 
to me. I must have gone down to Keeton in any case ; it's one 
of the lucky things that don't often befall a busy man like me to 
be able to kill the two birds with the one stone. I must take care 
of our friend Heron as well as of you. He would be doing some 
ridiculous thing if there were no elder to look after him. He is 
as innocent of the dodges of an English election as you are of 
the ways of English lawyers. So we'll be all together ; that wiU 
be very pleasant. Of course we'll not interfere AWth you . you shall 
be just as quiet as you like while we are doing our electioneering." 

What could Minola say against all this arrangement, which 
seemed so satisfactory and so delightful to her friends? It was 
not pleasant for her to be brought thus into a sort of companionship 
with Victor Heron. But it would be far less pleasant, it would 
indeed be intolerable and not to be thought of, that she should 
in any way raise an objection or make a difficulty which might 
hint of the feelings that possessed her. 

" After all, what does it matter ? " she asked herself as Mr. 
Money was speaking. " I shall have to suffer this kind of thing 
in some way for half my life, I suppose. It is no one's fault but 
my own. Why should I disturb the arrangements of these kind 
people because of any weaknesses of mine ? If women will be 
fools, at least they ought to try to hide their folly. This is as good 
practice for me as I could have." 
. So she told Mr. Money and Lucy that any arrangement that 



MR. ST. PAULS MYSTERY. 179 

suited them would suit her, and that she would be ready to go the 
moment he gave the word. Then Mr. Money liastened away to 
look after other things, and Lucy remained behind " to help Nola 
with her preparations," as she insisted on putting it, but partly, as 
Minola felt only too sure, to talk with her about Victor Pleron. 

Since Heron had oftered her his advice in the Park, and she had 
put it aside, Minola and he had only met once or twice. Then he 
had attempted, the first time of their meeting, to renew his apolo- 
gies, and she had put them lightly away, as she already had done 
the advice, and had given him to understand that she wished to 
hear no more of the matter. She had hoped that by assuming a 
manner of indifference she m.ight lead him to forget the whole 
affair. But he did not understand her, and really believed that 
he had lost her friendship for ever by the manner in which he 
had spoken against Herbert Blanchet. He was troubled for her 
much more than for himself, believmg, or at least fearing, that 
she had set her heart on a man unworthy of her. He kept away 
from her therefore, assuming that his society was no longer welcome, 
and resolute not to intrude on her. 

Minola had hoped that the worst was over, and that he and 
she were likely to settle gradually and unnoticed by others into 
a condition of ordinary acquaintanceship. This melancholy hope, 
to her a cruel necessity in itself, but yet the best ho[)e she could 
see now left for her, was likely to be disturbed for a while by this 
ill-omened visit to Keeton. 

Minola was busy making her preparations for going to Keeton, 
and with a very heavy heart. Everything about the \isit was now 
distressing to her. The occasion was mournful ; she dreaded long 
talks and discussions with Mr. Saulsbury ; she dreaded meeting 
old acquaintances in Keeton ; she shrank from the responsibilities 
of various kinds that seemed to be thrust upon her. When she 
left Keeton she thought she had done with it for ever. Where 
was the free life she had arranged for herself? Nothing seemed to 
turn out as she had expected. 

Meanwhile Mary Blanchet and Lucy Money were both de- 
lighted, and in their different ways, at the prospect of Minola's visit 
to Keeton. Mary saw her leader and patroness come back rich, 
and ready to be distmguished and to confer distinction. Lucy 
Money had the prospect of variety, of a holiday with Minola 
whom she loved, and of being very often in the society of Victor 
Heron. Minola was, if anything, made additionally sad by the 
thought that it was not in her power to share their feelings, and 
the fear that she might seem a wet blanket soinetimes on their 
happiness. 



I So MISS MISANTHROPE. 

lAicy had been with her all the morning, helping her with Mary 
to make preparations for the journey. Minola was glad when it 
was found that some things were wanting, and Lucy and Mary 
oftered to go out and buy them in Oxford Street. 

Minola was enjoying the sense of being alone, and was, at 
the same time, secretly accusing herself of want of friendship be- 
cause she enjoyed it, when a card was brought to her, and she was 
told that the gentleman said he wanted to speak to her, if she 
pleased, " rather particular." The card was that of Mr. St. Paul. 
He had never visited Minola before, nor was she even aware that he 
knew where she lived. She was surprised, but she did not know 
of any i eason why she might not see him. She hastened down to 
her sitting-room, and there she found Mr. St. Paul, as she had 
found Mr. Blanchet once before. Mr. St. Paul looked even a 
stranger figure in her room than Mr. Blanchet had done, she 
thought. He seemed far too tall for the place, and had a heedless, 
lounging, half-swaggering way, which appeared as if it were com- 
pounded of the old manner of the cavalry man and the newer 
habits of the Western hunter. Nothing, however, could have 
been more easy, confident, and self-possessed than the way in 
which he came forward to greet Minola. If he had been visiting 
her every day for a month before, he could not have been more 
friendly and at his ease. 

" How d'ye do, Miss Grey? Just in time to see you, I suppose, 
before you go ? I've been down to Keeton already. I'm going 
down again . I mean to make my mark there somehow." 

Minola thought, with a certain half-amused, half- abashed feeling, 
of the remarks she had heard concerning herself and Mr. St. Paul, 
but she did not show any embarrassment in her manner. Indeed, 
Mr. St. Paul was not a person to allow any one to feel much 
embarrassment in his presence. He was entirely easy, self-satisfied, 
and unaffected, and he had a way of pouring out his confidences 
as though he had known Minola from her birth upwards. 

" I hope you found a pleasant reception there." 

" Yes, well enough for that matter. I find my brother and his 
wife are not anything like so popular as I was given to understand 
that they were. I saw my brother in London . didn't I tell you ? . 
before I went down to Keeton, you know." 

" No, I did not know that you had seen him ; I hope he was 
glad to see you, Mr. St. Paul ? " 

" Not he ; I dare say he was very sorry I hadn't been wiped 
out by the Indians. Do you know what being wiped out means?" 

" Yes, I think I could guess that much. I suppose it means 
being killed ? " 



MR. ST. PAUL'S MYSTERY. x8i 

*.. Of course. I mean to teach you all the slang of the West ; 
I think a nice girl never looks so nice as when she is talking good 
expressive slang. Our British slang is all unmeaning stuff, you 
know ; only consists in calling a thing by some short vulgar word . 
or some long and pompous word, the fun being in the pompous- 
ness ; but the Western slang is a sort of picture-writing, don't you 
know? -a kind of compressed metaphor, answering the purposes 
of an intellectual peminican or charqui. Do you know what these 
things are. Miss Grey ? " 

" Oh, yes ; compressed meats of some kind, I suppose. But 
I don't think I care about slang very much." 

" You may be sure you will when you get over the defects of 
your Keeton bringing-up. But what was I going to tell you ? 
Let me see. Oh, yes, about my brother and his wife. The honest 
Keeton folks seem to have forgotten them. But I was speaking, 
too, about my going to see my brother in town. Oh, yes, I went 
to see him ; he didn't want me, and he made no bones about 
letting me know it. He thinks I have disgraced the family ; it 
was quite like the scene in the play . whose play is it? . I am sure 
I don't remember . where Lord Foppington's brother goes to see 
him, and is taken so coolly. I haven't read the play for more 
years than you have lived in the world, I dare say, but it all came 
back upon me in a moment. I felt like saying ' Good-bye, 
Foppington,' only that he would never have understood the allu- 
sion, and would think I meant to say he was a ' fop,' which he 
is not, bless him." 

" Then your visit did not bring you any nearer to a reconcilia- 
tion with your brother ? " 

" Not a bit of it . pushed us farther asunder, I think. The 
odd thing was that I told him I wanted nothing from him, and 
that I had made money enough for myself in the West. You 
would have thought that would have fetched him, wouldn't you ? 
Not the least in life, I give you my word." And Mr. St. Paul 
laughed good-humouredly at the idea. 

"I am sorry to hear it," said Minola. "I think there are 
quarrels and spites enough in the world, without brothers joining 
in with all the rest." 

" Bad form, isn't it . -don't you thmk? But I don't suppose 
in real life brothers and sisters ever do care much for each other . 
do you think they do ? I haven't known any such cases ; have 
you?" 

Minola could not contribute much from her owm family history 
to demonstrate the affection and devotion of brothers; but she had 
no idea of agreeing in the truth of Mr. St. Paul's philosophic re- 
flections, for all that. 



iS2 A/ISS MISANTHROPE 

" I believe what you say is true enough as regards the 
brothers, but I can't admit it of the sisters." 

" Come, now, you don't really believe that nonsense, I know." 

" Believe what nonsense? That sisters may be fond of their 
brothers sometimes ? " 

" No, I don't mean that ; but that there is any real difference 
between men and women in these ways . that men are all bad and 
women all good, and that sort of thing. One's as bad as the 
other, Miss Grey. When you have lived as long in the world as 
I have, you'll find it, I tell you. But I don't find much fault 
with either lot. I think they are both right enough, all things 
considered, don't you know?" 

" I am sure Mary Blanchet is devoted to her brother," Miss 
Grey said warmly. 

"That little old maid? Well, now, do you know, I shouldn't 
wonder. That's just the sort of woman to be devoted to a brother; 
and, of course, he doesn't care twopence about her." 

" Oh, for shame ! " said Minola, not, however, feeling quite 
satisfied about the strength of Herbert Blanchet's affection for his 
sister, even while she felt bound, for Mary's sake, to utter her 
protest against his being set down as wholly undeserving. 

" But, I say," Mr. St. Paul observed, " what a fool he is ! I 
don't think I ever saw a more conceited cad and idiot." 

" He is a very particular friend of mine, Mr. St. Paul," Miss 
Grey began. " At least, his sister is one of my oldest friends." 

" Yes, yes ; just so. The good old spinster is a friend of yours, 
and you try to like the cad-brother on her account. All quite 
right, of course. I should say he was just the sort of fellow to 
borrow the poor old girl's money, if she had any." 

" Oh, Mary has no money, and I am sure, if she had, she would 
be only too glad to give it to him." 

" Very likely ; anyhow, he would be only too glad to take it, 
you may be sure. But I df>n't want to say anything against your 
friends, Miss Grey, if you don't like it. Only women generally do 
like it, you know . and then, you may say anything you please, 
in your turn, against any of my friends or relatives. I shan't be 
offended one bit, I can assure you." 

Minola had nothing to say, and therefore said notliing. Her 
new ac(]n;iintance did not allow any silence to spring up. 

"Talking of friends," he said, "there is one of your friends 
who politely declines any hcljnng hand of mine in the election 
business at Keeton, although 1 think I could do him a good turn 
with some of the fellows who are out of humour with m\ brother. 
Our Quixotic young friend will have none of the help of brothers 



MR. ST. PAULS MYSTERY. 183 

who qnan-el with brothers, it seems. Easy to sec that he never 
had a brother." 

" Mr. Heron is a man of very sensitive nature, I beheve," 
Minola said ; " he will not do anything that he docs not think 
exactly right, Mr. Money says." 

" Yes, so I hear. Odd, is it not? Heron always was a con- 
founded young fool, you know. He got into all his difficulties 
by bothering about things that oughtn't to have concerned him 
one red cent. Well, he won't have my disinterested assistance. 
There again he is a fool, for I could have done something for 
him, and Money knows it . it was partly on Money's account that 
I thought of taking up Heron's side of the affair, because, so far 
as I am concerned, anybody else would do me just as well so 
long as he opposed my brother's man." 

" I can quite understand that Mr. Heron would not allow him- 
self to be made a mere instrument to work out your quarrel witli 
your brother. I think he was quite right." 

The good-humoured St. Paul laughed. 

" All very fine, Miss Grey, and it does for a lady uncommonly 
well, no doubt ; but, if you want to get into Parliament, it won't do 
to be quite so squeamish. I am sure I should be only too happy 
to get the help of Cain against Abel or Abel against Cain, if I could, 
in such a case." 

" Most men would, I dare say," Minola answered, with as much 
severity as she could assume under the possible penalty of Mr. St. 
Paul's laughter. " But I am glad that there are some men, or 
that there is one man, at least, who thinks there is some object 
in life higher than that of getting into Parliament." 

"Oh, as far as that goes, I quite agree with you. Miss Grey; 
I shouldn't care twopence myself about a seat in Parliament . a 
confounded bore, I think. But if you go in for playing a game, 
why, you ought to play it, you know." 

"But are there not rules in every game? Are there not such 
things as fair and unfair?" 

" Of course, yes ; but I fancy the strong players generally 
make the rules to suit their own ideas in the end. Anyhow, 1 
never heard of anyone playing at electioneering who would have 
hesitated for a moment about accepting the hand I offered to our 
Quixotic young friend." 

" I am glad he is Quixotic," Minola said eagerly. " I Hke to 
think of a man who ventures to be a Quixote." 

" Very sorry to hear it. Miss Grey, for I am afraid you won't 
like much to think about me. Yet, do you know, I came here to 
make a sort of Quixotic offer about this very election." 



1 84 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

" I am glad to hear it ; the more Quixotic it is, the more I shall 
like it. To whom is the offer to be made? . to Mr. Heron?" 

" Oh, no, by Jove ! . excuse me. Miss Grey . nothing of the 
sort. The offer is to be made to you." 

" To me ? " Minola was a little surprised, but she did not 
colour or show any surprise. She knew very well that it was not 
an offer of himself Mr. St. Paul was about to make, but it amused 
her to think of the interpretation Mary Blanchet, if she could have 
been present, would at once have put on his words. 

" Yes, indeed, Miss Grey, to you. I have it in my power to 
make you returning-officer for Keeton. Do you understand what 
that means ? " 

" I know in a sort of way what a retuniing-officer is ; but I 
don't at all understand how I can do his office." 

" I'll show you. You shall have the fate of Keeton as much in 
your hands as if you owned the whole concern . a deuced deal 
more, in fact, than if you owned the whole concern in days of 
ballot like these. I believe you do own a good many of the houses 
there now, don't you?" 

" I hardly know ; but I know that, if I do, I wish I didn't." 

" Very well ; just you try what you can get out of your in- 
fluence over your tenants . that's all." 

" Then how am I to become returning-officer for Keeton?" 

" That's quite another thing. That depends on me." 

"On you, Mr. St. Paul?" 

" On me. Just hsten." St. Paul had been seated in his 
favourite attitude of careless indolence in a very low chair, so low 
that his long legs seemed as if they stretched half-way across the 
room. His position, joined with an expression of self-satisfied 
lawlessness in his face, might have whimsically suggested a sort of 
resemblance to Milton's arch-fiend " stretched out huge at length," 
in one of his less malign humours. He now jumped up and stood 
on the hearth-rug, with his back to the fireplace, his slightly 
stooping shoulders only seeming to make him look taller than 
otherwise, because they might set people wondering as to the height 
he would have reached if he had only stood erect and made the 
most of his inches. His blue eyes had quite a sparkle of excited 
interest in them, and his prematurely bald forehead looked oddly 
infantine over these eyes and that keen, fearless mouth. 

" Look here, Miss Grey, it's all m your hands. You know 
both these fellows, don't you? " 

" Both what fellows ? " 

"These fellows who want to get in for Keeton. You know 
them both. Now, which of them do you want to win ?" 



MR. ST. PAULS MYSTERY. l8S 

" What can it matter which way my wishes go. if they went 

^^^.^H^o^v hke a woman ! how very Uke a woman ! " and he laughed. 

« What is hke a woman ? I know when a man says anythmg is 
like a woman, he means to say that it is ridiculous." 

" Well that's true enough ; that is about what we do mean in 
most cases. What I meant in this case was only that you would 
not answer my question. I put a plain direct question to which 
you must have some answer to give, and you only asked me a 
question in return which had nothing to do with mine. 

" Perhaps I have no answer to give. I may have the answer in 
my own mind, and yet not have it to give to anyone else." 

"Oh but you may really give it to me !. m strictest con- 
fidence, I assure you ; no living soul shall ever know from me. 
Come Miss Grey, let me know the truth. It can t possibly do 
you any harm-or anybody harm, for that matter, except the wrong 
man. for I take it for granted that the man you don't favour must 

be the wrong man." ^. . a -a 

" But I don't know that I ought to have anything to do with 

such a matter " , , , . i, . 

" Never mind these scruples ; it's nothing ; there s to be no 
treason in the business, nor any unfair play. It's only this : I 
couldn't get in for the borough myself, even if I tried my best, but 
I can send in the one of the two whom I prefer. or, in this case, 
whom you prefer. I can do this as certainly as anything m this 
uncertain world can be certain." 
" But how could that be?" 

" That it would not suit me to tell you just at present. I know 
a safe way, that's all. In the teeth of the ballot I can promise you 
that. Now, Miss Grey, who is to have the seat? " 
" Are you really serious in all this, Mr. St. Paul ? " _ 
"As serious as I ever was in my life about anything. a good 
deal more serious, I daresay, than I often was about graver things 
and more important men. Now then, Miss Grey, which of these 
tvvo fellows is to sit for Keeton ? " , j . i 

" But why do vou make this offer to me ? " she asked, with 
some hesitation. '"What have I to do with it?" There was 
something alarming to her in his odd proposition, about which he 
was evidently quite serious now. 

" Why do I make the offer to you ? Well, because I snould 
like to please you, because you are a sort of woman I like -a 
regular good eirl, I think, without any nonsense or aftectation about 
you Now, that's the whole reason why I ofter this to you. I 
don't care much myself either way, except to annoy my brother, 



i86 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

and that can be done in fifty other ways without half the trouble 
to me. I was inclined to draw out of the whole affair until I re- 
membered that you knew both the fellows, and I thought you 
might have a wish for one of them to go in in preference to the 
other . they can't both go in, you see . and so I made up my 
mind to give you the chance of saying which it should be. Now 
then, Miss Grey, name your man." 

He put his hands into his pockets and coolly waited for an 
answer. He had not the appearance of being in the least amused 
at her perplexity. He took the whole affair in a calm, matter-of- 
fact way, as if it were the most natural thing in the world. 

Minola was perplexed. She did not see what right he could 
have to control the coming contest in any wa}', and still less what 
right she could have to influence him in doing so. The dilemma 
was one in which no previous experience could well guide her. 
She much wished she had Mr. Money at hand to give her a word 
of counsel. 

" Come, Miss Grey, make up your mind . or rather, tell me 
what you have already made up your mind to, for I am sure you 
have not been waiting until now to form an opinion. Which of 
these two men do you want to see in Parliament ?" 

There did not seem any particular reason why Minola or any 
girl might not say in plain words which of two candidates she 
would rather see successful. 

Mr. St. Paul appeared to understand her difficulty, for he said 
in an encouragmg way . 

" After all, you know, if you had women's rights and all that 
sort of thing you would have to give your vote for one or other of 
these fellows, and 1 dare say you would he expected to take the 
stump for your favourite candidate. So there really can't be any 
very serious objection to your telling me in conlidence which of 
the two you want to win." 

Minola could not see how there could be any objection on any 
moral principle she could think of just then . being in truth a 
little confused and puzzled . to her giving a voice to the wish she 
had formed about the election. 

" It's not the speaking out of my wish that gives me any 
doubt," she said ; " it is the condition under which you want me 
to speak. I seem to be doing something that I have no right to 
do; that is, Mr. St. Paul, if you are serious." 

" I remember reading, long ago," he said, " some Arabian 
Nights' story, or something of the kind, about a king, I think it was, 
who was brought at night to some mysterious place and told to cut 
a rope there, and that something or other would happen, he did 



MR. ST. PAULS MYSTERY. 187 

not know what or when. The thing seemed very simple, and yet 
he dichi't quite like to do it without knowing why and how and 
all about it. It strikes me that you seem to be in the same sort 
of fix." 

" So I am ; just the same. Why can't you tell me what you 
are going to do?" 

" I like that ! Tliat is my secret for the present." 

"And your king. the king in your storv. did he cut the rope at 
last?" 

" I am afraid I have forgotten that ; but I have no doubt he 
did, for he was a reasonable sort of creature, being a man, and I 
know that everything came right with him in the end." 

"Very well ; I accept the omen of your king, and I too will 
cut the rope without asking why. Of course I wish that Mr. Heron 
should be elected. He is a Liberal in politics. Why do you 
laugh when I say that, Mr. St. Paul ? " 

" Well, I didn't know that you cared much for that sort of thing ; 
and women are generally supposed to be reactionaries all the world 
over, are they not ? Well, anyhow, that's one reason, his being a 
Liberal. ^\Tiat next?" 

" I don't know that any next is wanting. But of course I think 
Mr. Heron is a much cleverer man, and is likely to be much better 
able to get on in the House of Commons ; and then he has his 
complaint to make against the Government " 

"Yes; and then?" 

" Then, he is very much liked by people whom I like . and I 
like him very much myself." Minola spoke out with perfect 
frankness, believing that that was the best thing she could do, and 
not showing the least sign of embarrassment. 

Mr. St. Paul laughed. 

" You don't like the other fellow so well ? " he said. 

" I am sure he is a very good man " 

" I'hat's enough ; you need not say another word. We all can 
tell what a critic means when he speaks of some actor as a careful 
and painstaking performer. It's just the same when a woman says 
a man is very good. Then you pronounce for Heron ? " 

" I pronounce for Mr. Heron decidedly, if you call saying what 
I should like to happen pronouncing for anyone." 

" In this case it is of more effect than many other pronuncia- 
mentos. You have elected Heron, Miss Grey, if I am not much 
more out in my calculations than I have been this some time. All 
right, I am satisfied. If you have money to throw away, just back 
what's-his-name? . Sheppard . heavily, and you are sure to get rid 
of it" 



188 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

" And you won't tell me what all this means ? " 

" Not I, indeed ; not likely. Good-day, Miss Grey; you have 
elected your friend Heron, I can tell you. Odd, isn't it, that he 
should come to be elected after all by me ? " 

He bade her good-day again, and strode and shambled out of 
the room and down stairs, leaving Mmola much perplexed and not 
quite pleased, and yet full of a secret wonder and pride at the 
possibihty of her having helped to do Mr. Heron a service. 

" I wonder what he would say if he knew of it?" she asked 
herself, and she could hardly think that he would be greatly de- 
lighted with the promise of such influence. 



CHAPTER XX. 

LOVE AND ELECTIONEERING. 

The soul of Keeton, as a local orator expressed it, was stirred 
to its depths by the events which succeeded. The three estates of 
the town, whereof we have already spoken, were alike concerned 
in the election. Had it never occurred, there would have been 
enough in the death of Mrs. Saulsbury and the rearrangement of 
Mr. Grey's property to keep conversation up among the middle 
grade of Keeton folks. But business like that would not interest 
the park, and of course it had no interest for the working class of 
the town. 1 he election, on the contrary, was of equal concern to 
park, semi-detached villa, and cottage, or even garret. A contest 
in Keeton was an absolute novelty so far as the memory of living 
man could go back. 

It may perhaps be said that the opinion of the class who alone 
concerned themselves about her affairs had been on the whole de- 
cidedly unfavourable to Minola. She had gone as a sort of rebel 
against legitimate authority out of Keeton, and had flung herself 
into the giddy vortex of London life. No one well knew what had 
become of her; and that with Keeton folks was another way of 
saying that she must have rushed upon destruction. Some persons 
held that she must have gone upon the stage. This idea became 
almost a certainty when a Keeton man, being in London on 
business, brought back with him from town a play-bill announcing 
a new opera bouffe in which one of the minor performers was named 
" Miss MatUe Grey." If the good Keeton man had only looked 
in a few other play-bills he would have no doubt found Greys in 
abundance . Matties, Minnies, Nellies, and such-like; Grey being 



LOVE AND ELECTIONEERING. 1S9 

rather a favourite name with young ladies in the profession. But 
he made no such investigation, and it was at once assumed that 
Mattie Grey was Miiiola Grey in disguise. a disguise as subtle as 
that of the famous knight, Sir Tristram, who, when he wanted to 
conceal his identity from all observers and place himself beyond 
all possibility of detection, called himself Sir Tramtrist. 

When, however, it was found that Minola was to have her father's 
property after all, a certain change took place in the opinion of 
most persons s\\\o concerned themselves about the matter. It was 
assumed generally that Mr. Grey was far too good and Christian a 
man to have left his property to a girl who could be capable of 
acting in an opera boiiffe. Then, when Miss Grey in person came 
to the town in the company of so distinguished a man as ISIr. 
Money, even gossip started repentant at the sound itself had made, 
and began to deny that it had ever made any sound at all. Mr. 
Money was a sort of hero among the middle class everywhere. 
He was known to have fought his way up in life, and to be now 
very rich ; and when Miss Grey came into the town in the com- 
pany of Mr. Money and his daughter, the report went about 
forthwith that Minola Grey had got into the very best society in 
London, and that she was going to marry the eldest son of Mr, 
Money, and to be presented at Court. 

Mr. Money had taken a couple of floors of the best hotel to 
begin with. He had brought his carriage with him. a carriage in 
which he was hardly ever known to take a seat when in town. He 
had brought a sort of retinue of servants. He went deliberately 
about making what Mr. St. Paul would have called " a splurge." 
Mr. Money knew his Pappenheimers. He knew that he was well 
known to have sprung from nothing, but he also knew that the 
middle and lower classes of Keeton would have given him little 
thanks if he had tried to please them by exhibiting there a modesty 
becoming his modest origin. He knew well enough that the more 
he put on display, the more they would think of him and of his 
clients. Therefore he put on display like a garment.a garment to 
which he was litde used, and in which he took no manner of 
delight. There was generally a httle group of persons round the 
hotel doors at all hours of the day waiting to see Mr. Money and 
his friends go out or come in. At first Minola positively declined 
to go out at all, except at night ; and the recent death of her 
father's widow gave her a fair excuse for remaining quietly indoors. 
Lucy delighted in the whole affair, and often declared that she 
felt as if she had been turned into a princess. When Mr. Heron 
came down, he too seemed rather to enjoy it. At least, he took 
It all as a matter of course. The experiences of colonial days, 



190 MISS MISANTHROPE, 

when the ruler of a colony, however small it may be, is a person 
of majestic proportions in his own sphere, enabled him to take 
Mr. Money's pomp quite seriously. 

Meanwhile Mr. Augustus Sheppard had got his committee- 
rooms and his displays of various kinds, and was understood to be 
working hard. The election contest, so long looked for, had taken 
everyone a little by surprise when it showed itself so near. It was 
natural that Mr. Sheppard and his friends should feel confident of 
the result. The retiring representative was now an old man. He 
had faithfully served out his time ; he had always voted as his 
patrons wished him to do ; he had never made a speech in the 
House of Commons ; he had never indeed risen to his feet there 
at all, except once or twice to present a petition. The delights 
of a parliamentary career were, therefore, this long time beginning 
to pall upon him. He had been notoriously anxious to get out 
of Parliament. He had been sent into the House of Com.mons by 
the late duke to keep the seat warm until the present duke should 
come of age. But the present duke succeeded to the peerage 
before he came of age, and therefore never had a chance of sitting 
in the House of Commons. The man in possession was allowed 
to remain there through years and years until the present duke 
could be induced to return from abroad and take some interest in 
the political and other affairs of Keeton. His own son was yet 
too young for Parliament, and as the sitting member found himself 
getting too old, and begged for release, there was nothing better to 
do than to get some safe and docile person to take on him the 
representation of the borough for some time to come. Those 
who knew Keeton could recommend no one more fitting in every 
desirable way than Mr. Augustus Sheppard. 

The time was when Mr. Shejjpard would only have had to 
present the orders of the reigning duke to the constituency of 
Keeton and to take his seat in the House of Commons accordmgly 
as if by virtue of a sovereign patent in ancient days. But times 
had changed even in sleepy Keeton. The younger generation had 
almost forgotten their (hikes, it was so long since a chief of the 
house had been among them. Even the women had grown com- 
paratively indifferent to the influence of the name, seeing that it 
had so long been only a name for them. There had been for 
many years no duchesses and their lady daughters to meet at 
flower-shows and charitable bazaars, by the delight of whose face, 
and the sound of whose feet, and the wind of whose tresses, as the 
poet has it, they could be made to feel hajipy and exalted. There 
once were brighter days, when the coming and going of the ladies 
at the Castle gave the women of Keeton a perpetual subject of 



LOVE AND ELECTIONEERING. 191 

talk, of thought, of hope, and of quarrel. Some of the readers of 
this story may perhaps liave spent a little time in small towns on 
the banks of foreign . say ot American . rivers which have a habit 
of freezing up as winter comes, and becoming useless for na\i- 
gation . in fact, being converted from rivers into great Irozeu roads, 
until spring unlocks the flowers and the streams again. Such tra- 
vellers must have noticed what an unfailing topic of conversation 
such a river supplies to those who dwell on its banks. How soon 
will it freeze this season ? On what precise day was it closed to 
navigation last year . the year before . the year before that? In 
what year did it freeze soonest ? Do you remember that particular 
year when it froze so very soon, or did not freeze for such an un- 
precedented length of time ? That was the same year that . no, 
not that year ; it was that other year, don't you remember? The;i 
follow contradictions and disputes, and the elders always remember 
the river having been regularly in the habit of performing some feat 
which now it never cares to repeat. The time of the frost melting 
and the river becoming really a river again is a matter just as 
fruitful of discussion. The stranger is often tempted to wonder 
what the people of that place would have to talk about at all if 
suddenly the river were to give up its trick of freezing, and were to 
remain always as fluent as our owti monotonous Thames. There 
seems to him some reason to fear that the tongues of the people 
would become frozen as the river ceased to freeze. 

Like the freezing and the melting of their river to those who 
lived on its banks, was the annual visit of the ladies of the ducal 
family to the w^omankind of Keeton in Keeton's brighter days. 
Girls were growing up there now who had never seen a duchess. 
The arrival, the length of stay, the probable time of departure, the 
appearances in public, whether more or less frequent than this time 
last year, the dresses worn by the gracious ladies, the persons 
spoken to by them, the persons only bowed to, the unhappy 
creatures who got neither speech nor salutation . it is a fact that 
there was a generation of women growing up in Keeton with whom 
these and such questions had never formed any part of the interest 
of their lives. They could not be expected to take much interest 
all at once and as it were by instinct in the political cause of the 
ducal family. 

There was therefore a good deal of uncertainty about the con- 
ditions of the problem. The followers of the ducal family were 
some of them full of hope. The reappearance of a duke and 
duchess, and their train, might do wonders in restoring the old 
order of things. In Keeton petticoat influence counted for a great 
deal, and in other days those who had the promises of the wives 



iq2 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

hardly thought it worth while to go through the form of .lyking the 
husbands. But now there was a new condition of the political 
\:)roblem even in that respect. The ballot, which had made the 
voter independent of the intiuence of his landlord or his wealthy 
custonier, had converted the power of the petticoat into a sort of 
unknown quantity. There could be litde doubt that the moral 
influence and the traditional control would still prevail with some; 
but he must be a rash electioneering agent who would venture to 
say how many votes could thus be counted on. It is a remarkable 
tribute to the moral greatness of an aristocracy, that the influence 
thus obtained in old days over the wives and daughters of Keeton 
was absolutely unearned by any overt acts of favour or conciliation. 
The later dukes and their families had always been remarkable for 
never making any advances towards the townspeople. None of 
the traders of the town, however wealthy and respectable, found 
themselves or their wives invited to any manner of festivity up at the 
ducal hall. All that the noble family ever did for the townspeople 
was to come at certain seasons to Keeton and allow themselves to 
be looked at. This was enough for the time. The illustrious ladies 
could be seen, and, as has been said, they did sometimes speak a 
word to favoured and envied persons. They were loved for being 
great personages, not for anything they did to win such devotion. 
" Love is enough," says the poet. 

All these considerations, however, rendered it hard to calculate 
the exact chances of opposition in the borough of Keeton. Of 
course revolutionary opinions were growing up, old people found, 
there as well as elsewhere. There was a new class of Conservatives 
springing up whom steady, old-fashioned politicians found it not 
easy to distinguish from the Radicals of their younger days. On 
the other hand, keensighted persons could not fail to perceive that, 
whereas in their youth almost all young men had a tendency to be 
or to fancy themselves Radicals, it was now growing rather the 
fashion for immature politicians to boast themselves Tories, and to 
talk of a spirited foreign policy and the dangers of Cosmopolitanism. 
It would be hard to say how things might turn out, knowing people 
thought, as they shook their heads, and hoped the expected contest 
might not come on for some time. 

Now the contest was at hand. At least, the sitting member 
had positively declared that he would sit no longer, and it was 
announced that the duke was coming to Keeton, and that Mr, 
Augustus Sheppard was to be the duke's candidate. No more 
striking proof could be given of the recent change in the political 
condition of Keeton, than is found in the fact that the adoption of 
Mr. Sheppard as a candidate by the ducal family did not even to 



LOVE AND ELECTIONEERING. 193 

the most devoted and sanguine followers of the great house make 
Mr. Sheppard's election seem by any means a matter of absokite 
certainty. There was a tolerably strong conviction everywhere, 
long before any opposition was announced, that the duke's candi- 
date would not be allowed to walk over the course and right into 
the House of Commons -this time. Nobody in the town would 
oppose the duke, very likely, but the man to oppose would come. 

Now the man actually had come. Victor Heron had issued 
his address, and was in Keeton. His address was original ; he had 
positively refused from the first to make any grand professions of 
superior statesmanship or patriotism. He would tell Englishmen, 
he said, that he was seeking a seat in Parliament as a way of getting 
redress for a great wrong done to him, and through him to some 
of the principles most dear to the country. When he had fought 
his battle in Parliament, and won or lost, he promised that he would 
then place himself in the hands of his constituents and resign the 
seat if they desired. The whole address was frank, odd, original, 
and perhaps seemed a little seif-conceited. The author's absorption 
in his subject was mistaken by many people, as will happen some- 
times, for self-conceit. 

Mr. Sheppard's address, on the contrary, talked only of the good 
old Conser\'ative principles which had made England the envy and 
admiration of all surrounding Slates; of the local interests of Keeton, 
and the candidate's acquaintance therewith ; and of the many 
splendid things done for the town by the noble family who had 
done it the honour to have a park there. 

" I don't think Heron's address reads half badly," 'Mr. iMoney 
said, one evening in the absence of Heron, to his two companions ; 
"on the whole, I shouldn't wonder if it took some people, the 
women particularly. Anything personal, anything in the nature of 
a grievance, is likely to have a good effect on many people, 
especially where the injured personage is young, and good-looking, 
and plucky. I wish the women had the votes here juot for this 
once, for I think we should stand to win if they had." 

" Then, papa, do you think we shan't win now?" Lucy asked. 

Minola looked up eagerly for his answer. 

" Well, Lucelet, I don't like to say ; I am not quite cha:rmed 
with the look of things. I find there are a good many very strong 
Radicals grown up in this place since there was a contest here 
before ; and Heron's not wild enough for them by half They are 
a little of the red-hot-social-revolution sort of thing . the prolctaire 
business, with a dash of the brabbling atheist . the fellows who 
think one is not fit to live if he even admits the possibihty of 
another world, I am afraid these fellows will hold aloof from us 



194 ^J'^SS MISANTHROPE. 

altogether, or even take some whim of voting against us, and they 
may be strong enough to turn the scale." 

Minola hoped that if her friend Mr. St. Paul had really any 
charm by which to extort victory for Heron as he had promised he 
would not forget to use it in good time. But she began to have 
less faith, and less, in the possibility of any such feat. She was a 
little in the perplexed condition of some one of mediaeval times, 
who has entered into a bargain for supernatural interference, and 
is not quite certain whether to wish that the compact may be really 
carried out or that it may prove to have been only the figment of 
a dream. 

" I'm told we ought to have some poems done," Money went 
on to say. " Not merely squibs, you know, but appeals about right 
and justice, and the cause of oppressed humanity, and all that." 

" I'm sure Minola could do some beautifully !" Lucy exclaimed, 
looking beseechingly towards her friend. 

" Oh, no ; I couldn't indeed ! My appeals would be dreadfully 
weak ; they could not rouse the spirits of any mortal creature. 
Now, if we only had Mary Blanchet ! " 

This, it must be owned, was Minola's fun, but it gave an idea 
to Mr. Money. 

" Tell you what," he said, " we ought to have her brother . 
the bard, you used to call him, Lucelet." 

" Oh, no, papa ; indeed I never called him anything of the 
kind. I never did, indeed, Nola." 

" Well, whatever you called him, Lucelet, we can't do better 
than to have him. We'll put Pegasus into harness, by Jove . a 
capital good use to make of him too ! I'll write to what's-his- 
name ? . Blanchet . at once." 

" But I don't think he would like it, papa ; I think he would 
take offence at the idea of your asking him to do poems for an 
election. I don't think he would come." 

" Oh, yes, he would come ! we would make it worth'his while. 
These young fellows give themselves airs, to make you girls admire 
them, that they never think of trying on with men. It would 
be a rather telling thing here, too, if it got about that we had 
brought a real poet specially down from London. I'll write at 
once." 

This seemed rather alarming to Minola. 

" I doubt whether Mt. Heron would much like it," she pleaded. 
" I don't know whellier they are such very good friends just now 
. I am rather afraid." 

" Oh, yes ; of course they must be good friends ! Heron is 
not to have it all his own way in everything, anyhow. He must 



AN EPISODE. 195 

like the idea ; he shall. I'll write without telling him anything 
about it, and Heron couldn't help being friendly to any fellow who 
came under his roof, as one miglit say." 

No one made any further objection. 

" I wish Heron had not been so confoundedly particular about 
St. Paul," Mr. Money went on to say in a discontented tone. 
" That was absurd. St. Paul's no worse than lots of other fellows, 
and in such a thing as this we can't afibrd to throw away any offer 
of support. We have to fight against the duke and his lot anyhow, 
and the help of St. Paul couldn't have done us any harm in that 
quarter, and it might have done us some good in others. 1 
shouldn't wonder if St. Paul had some friends and admirers here 
still ; and it is as likely as not that his being with us might con- 
ciliate a few of the mad Radicals. They might like him just 
because he is against his brother, the duke." 

" But Mr. Heron would not have such help as that," Lucy said, 
in tones of pride. 

" Oh, by Jove ! if you want to carry an election . . . and now, 
1 suppose, if St. Paul has any influence at all, it will be given 
against us." 

Minola thought of her unholy compact, and did not venture to 
say a word on the subject. 



CHAPTER XXI. 

AN EPISODE. 

That was an odd and, on the whole, a wondrous pleasant time. 
In all her mental trouble and perplexity Minola could not help 
enjoying it. It was like a great holiday. like some extravagant 
kind of masquerading or private theatricals. It was impossible 
that one's spirits could go down, or at least that they could remam 
long down, under such circumstances. Life was a perpetual rattle 
and^ excitement ; and the company was full of mirth. Even Victor 
Heron himself, for all his earnestness, went on as if the whole 
affair were some enormous joke. Electioneering appeared to be 
the best sort of pastime devisable. They all sat up until the 
morning concocting appeals to the electors, addresses to this or 
that interest supposed to be affected, attacks on the opposite party 
.not however on Mr. Sheppard personally. squibs about the 
Tories, denunciations of the Ministry, exhortations to the womtn 
of Keeton, the mothers of Keeton, the daughters of Keeton, and 

o 2 . 



196 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

every class in and about Keeton who could be regarded as in the 
least degree open to the impulses of national or patriotic feeling. 
Some of these appeals had to be prepared in the absence and 
without the knowledge of the candidate whom they were intended 
to serve. Heron was so sensitive about what he considered fair 
play, that he was inclined as far as he could to restrain rather 
vmduly even the good spirits of his chief supporters, and not to 
allow them to deal half as freely as they could have wished in the 
weapons of sarcasm and ridicule. Minola was developing quite 
a remarkable capacity for political satire, and Lucy Money was 
indefatigable at copying documents. There were meetings held 
day and night, and Victor sometimes made a dozen speeches in the 
course of a single afternoon. 

Scarcely less eloquent did Mr. Money prove himself to be. He 
never failed when called upon to stand up anywhere and recount 
the misdeeds of the Ministry, and the crimes generally of the 
aristocracy of Britain, in language which went to the very hearts of 
his hearers ; and he had a rough telling humour which kept his 
audience amused in the midst of all the horrors that his description 
of the country's possible ruin might have brought up before their 
minds. Mr. Money took the middle-aged electors immensely ; 
but there could be little doubt that the suffrages of the women, if 
they had had any, would have been given freely in favour of the 
eloquence and the candidature of Victor Heron. 

Sometimes it was delightful when a night came, after all the 
meetings and speech-makings were over . and it happened by 
strange chance that there was nothing more to do in the way of 
electioneering just then ; for then the little party of friends would 
shut themselves up in their drawing-room, and chat and laugh, and 
sing and play on the piano, and make jokes, and discuss all 
manner of odd and fantastic questions, until long after prudence 
ought to have commended sleep. Minola sang whenever anybody 
asked her, although she never sang for listeners in London ; and 
she sang, if she could, whatever her audience wished to hear. 
Lucy played and sang very prettily too. Victor Heron had picked 
up in his colonial experiences and his wanderings about the world 
many sweet, wikl, untutored songs of savage and semi-savage races 
and tribes, and he sang them with a dramatic skill and force for 
which none of his hearers had ever beiore given him credit. The 
little company seemed in fact to be entering into a condition of 
something like wild simplicity and frankness, when all the affecta- 
tions of civilisation were let I'all, and each did everything he could 
to the best effect, unconcerned by forms or by critics. 

To Lucy in esjjecial all this was delightful. It was not an 



AN EPISODE. 197 

effort to her 'co throw herself into the spirit ot the enjoyment as it 
was to Minola. To her the happiness of the present had no alloy. 
Over the passing hours there were no present clouds. In the whole- 
world the two persons she most admired were Victor Heron and 
her father; and these two were the heroes of the occasion, seeming 
to have the eyes of the world on them, and to be the admired of all 
as orators and statesmen. To hear them address cheering crowds 
brought tears ot pride and delight into the eyes of the kind little 
maid. She was glorious in their glory ; their successes were hers. 
Then she had Minola too always with her, and they were all to- 
gether, and walled off from the world into a little commonwealth of 
their own, and had nothing to do but to be great politicians all 
day, and listen to splendid speeches, and at night retire as it were 
into their tent, and be musical and joyous, and full of glorious 
hope. It was all a dream of love and pride to the gentle little 
Lucelet. 

"/Tore than once . ah ! more than twenty times . did Lucy tell 
Mmola that her lather had taken her to the House of Commons, 
and that she had ofcen heard all the good speakers, and that she 
had never heard one who could in her estimation compare with 
Mr. Heron. She had heard Gladstone ; " and, of course, he was 
very good . oh, yes, very good indeed ! . but if you had heard him, 
Nola dear, you would say with me that he is not to be compared 
to Mr. Heron." She had heard Mr. Disraeli too. "oh, yes, many 
times, and he was very clever I " she quite admitted that, " and he 
made people laugh a great deal ." and she had heard Mr. Bright, 
whom her papa always considered the best speaker of all . " but 
wait until you hear them, Nola . and you shall hear them all, 
darling . and you will say yourself that none of them is like Mr. 
Heron. I don't know what it is, but there is something about Mr. 
Heron that none of them seems to have . at least, to my mind, 
Nola dear." 

Indeed, Nola knew well enough that there was for Lucy a 
charm in the eloquence of Mr. Heron which Mr. Gladstone and 
Mr. Bright would have vainly tried to rival. For herself, although 
she may be supposed to have been under the same influence as 
Lucy, she did not rate the eloquence of Mr. Heron quite so highly. 
The charm in her case did not work in just the same way. She 
listened with a certain admiration and surprise to the vivacious, 
earnest, and often highly impassioned speeches that Victor Heron 
threw off daily by the dozen, and she recognised with sincere de- 
light the genuine freshness and force that were in them, and thought 
them a great deal better than she had expected to hear ; but she 
would not have had the least difficulty in admitting that Mr. 



1 98 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

Gladstone and Mr. Bright were probably much finer spenkers than 
Mr. Heron ; and, without having heard either of these orators, she 
was already quite prepared to consider their eloquence as higher in 
order than his. What concerned her far more was that she saw 
nothing in Victor Heron that did not compel her to hold to or to 
increase the opinion she had already formed of his manly and un- 
selfish character. She had hoped in a strange, reluctant way that, 
while seeing so much of him as she must needs do during their 
stay in Keeton, she might see in him, not indeed anything to lower 
her opinion of his courage, and truthfulness, and manhood, but 
some little weaknesses or affectations which, harmless in them- 
selves, might lower him in her mind from his place, and give her 
relief and rest. Yes, she had in her secret heart sometimes longed 
passionately and despairingly to be able thus to dethrone him from 
her heart, and to see him as a young man like another. She was 
suffering so much from the part which she had imposed on herself 
and was determined to play, that she would have welcomed relief 
even at the cost of the overturning of her idol. There were times 
when she almost wished she were able to hate him or to despise 
him, but she could do neither. The more she saw of him, the 
more she was compelled to see that, under that exterior of almost 
boyish impulsiveness and restless energy, there were only too many 
of the qualities which she held to be especially heroic. He was so 
frank and simple, and yet so clever; so full of courage, and yet 
so modest ; so strong, and yet so sweet and gentle. He would not 
flatter Neptune for his trident, she thought, nor Jove for his power 
to thunder. But there is many a man as good as Coriolanus in 
that, who, like Coriolanus, would brag, and bully, and be ''oarsely 
haughty; and Mr. Heron could do nothing like that. To her he 
seemed all kindness and frank, simple sweetness, and she could 
not dethrone him from his place in her heart. 

Perhaps we may well ask ourselves whether the clever and 
sarcastic Minola was not, after all, as extravagant a hero- worshipper 
as little Lucelet ? Is it, to say the least, not quite possible that 
when Lucy believed Victor Heron to be as fine a speaker as 
Demosthenes, she was only exaggerating his merits in one way as 
much as Minola was exaggerating them in another? Is it likely 
that he was by any means that pure and perfect hero, nil strength, 
.\nd truth, and nobleness, that Minola was resolved to believe him? 
To many of us, perhaps, if we had known him, he might have 
seemed a clever, agreeable, honest, but rather simple and im- 
practicable young man, and nothing more. We might have probed 
his character wiih the most impartial and even benevolent puriiose, 
hoping to find there our ideal type ol manhood, and honestlj' found 



AN EPISODE. 19^) 

ourselves unable to see an)'thing of the kind in him. But it may 
be, too, that Minola really did see what we failed to see, and that 
she had got with her love, not a dazzled sight, but clairvoyance. 
Vou cannot make a touchstone of every pebble. The other pebbles 
may do their honest best, and give their judgment, and be wrong. 

This, however, we shall not be able to decide. It has already 
been said in favour of the impartiality of Minola's judgment that 
at least she had done her best to prove it a mistake, and had to 
ratify it against her will. But, right or wrong, it affected her all 
the same. Every day that she passed in Keeton under these 
peculiar circumstances only added to the strength of the feelings 
which oppressed her, and against which she fought her fight in 
vain. 

" I do wish this election would last for ever, Nola dear," Lucy 
said, with a sigh of mingled pleasure and fear. " I never liked 
any part of my life half so well." 

There was, it must be owned, a great deal of pleasure in it for 
Minola as well. The pleasure was a fearful joy, and was mixed 
up with very acute pain ; still, the exhilaration and the delight were 
there. All the time there was a feeling that she was not only 
working with Victor Heron, but for him. It is true that the time 
had many bitter moments ; it is true also that not for years had 
her spirits risen so often to so high a point. 

That was, for instance, a delightful night when they all went 
out to the park, and rambled about there, and looked at the great 
mausoleum. It was near midnight when they set out, for it was 
well-nigh impossible for them to get anytime to themselves at any 
earlier hour. The great gates of the park were closed long before 
that time ; but Minola knew of a little stile at one of the boundaries 
of the park, through which they might easily enter, and this gave 
quite a romantic air of trespassing and law-breaking to the whole 
escapade, which much enhanced its charm. The duke and his 
family had not come to the place, but were expected every day, 
and there was something rather piquant in the notion of thus tres- 
passing on the lands of tlieir political enemy. Mr. Money was 
much amused at the idea of their all being arrested as trespassers^ 
perhaps even as robbers . and brought before some country justice, 
who might take it into his head to render a service to the duke 
and Mr. Sheppard by committing them to prison. They were all 
in the highest spirits. 

The night was one to inspirit any heart. It was soft and warm, 
with a pale, poetic crescent moon just showing itself over the park 
trees, and a planet of shining silver just beneath the crescent of 
the moon, luoking like the emblem of the Ottoman done in light 



200 M/SS MISANTHROPE. 

upon the sky. There was something fantastic, poetic, and a little 
uncanny about this half-moon with the planet just within the en- 
closure of her bow. 

"Can anything be more beautiful ?" Minola asked aloud, and 
in her heart she thought, " I ought to be very happy and very 
thankful. When last I was here, how lonely I was ! . I had hardly 
a friend ; and now, what good, kind friends I have, whom I love, 
and who, I believe, are really fond of me. How ungrateful 1 
should be if I were to repine because I have not everything that an 
idle fancy makes me ask for!" The whole influence of the place, 
the hour, the conditions entered into her soul, and made her think 
life very sweet and gracious then. 

They were standing near the steps of the mausoleum. 

" Now," said Lucy, " there is one thing I should so like just 
at this moment ; it would be delightful." 

" Well, Liicelet, what is it ?" her father asked. ** Is it to have 
several hairs of the duke's beard? Perhaps Mr. Heron will 
pledge himself to get them if you only ask him prettily." 

" Papa, dear, what nonsense !" Lucy was not acquainted with 
the adventures of Sir Huon of Bordeaux. " No ; I only want 
Nola to sing for us just here. It would be delightful in this air 
and at this spot." 

" Don't know that it would do Miss Grey's voice much good 
to be exerted at midnight in the open air, Lucelet." 

" It couldn't do it any particular harm," Minola said, onh too 
happy in her present mood to have a chance of pleasing anybody. 
" My voice is not good enough to get any harm. I am only 
afraid that you may not be able to hear me." 

" We'll come close around you and make a ring, so far as our 
numbers will allow us," Victor said. 

Minola mounted the steps of the mausoleum to get some ad- 
vantage over her audience, as her voice was not strong, and they 
stood below, not in a ring, but in a row. 

" What shall I sing ? " she asked. 

Of course she was only besought to sing any song she pleased ; 
so, rather than keep them waiting and make herself api~>car as if 
she were attaching too much value to a trifle, she sang at once the 
first song that came into her mind. It was the story of the luckless 
lover of Barbara Aflen. 

Minola's voice was singularly fresh, pure, and sweet. It wanted 
strength, and would have sounded to little advantage in a concert 
room. It had some exquisite shades, if we may use such an expres- 
sion, which would have been lost altogether in a great hall and on 
an ordinary audience. Minola, conscious of the lack of strength 




''She looks like Corittm:' 



AN EPISODE. 20I 

m her voice, and yet compelled by her dramatic instincts to seek 
for the fullest expression even when she only sang to please herself, 
had tried to make her singing obey her feelings and her perception 
of poetical meaning by giving its fullest value to every syllable and 
every tone. The songs she sang seemed to have much more in 
them than as they were sung by anyone else. New meanings and 
shades of meaning appeared to come out as the words came from 
her Ups. But it required appreciative listeners to get at the genuine 
beauty of her singing ; and the listeners must not be far away from 
the singer, or, no matter how appreciative, they must lose much of 
the effect. In the open air her voice would usually have failed to 
impress one ; but this night the air was so pure and clear and soft, 
and the whole place was so silent, that tlie voice seemed made f(^r 
the place, the hour, and the atmosphere ; and the voice, indeed, 
became to the ears of some of the audience as if it were a part of 
the scene, an essential condition of its charm. As the song went 
on, the listeners found themselves drawn on to ascend the first stei^ 
of the mausoleum, that they might not lose a syllable of the sweet, 
sad, old-fashioned story thus tenderly and sympathetically told. 

The song was over. No one said a word directly in its praise. 
For a moment, indeed, there was silence. 

"I wish she would not come down from the steps just yet," 
said Lucy. *' Stay a moment, Nola dear ; we shall ask you to sing 
something else if you will. I do like to see her standing there,' 
she explained to her father and Heron ; " she looks like Corinne." 

They asked her to sing something else, and of course she was 
only too glad to please them. This time she chose a little ballad of 
Walter Scott's, to be found in " The Pirate," of which in her young 
days of romance Minola used to be fond. This song she had put 
of her own conceit to the music of a little-known folk-song of the 
border, which seemed to her to suit its spirit and words. It is the 
ballad which gives the betrayed lover's farewell to the " wild feiTy 
which Hacon could brave, when the peaks of the skeny were white 
with the wave," and to the maid who " may look over those wild 
waves in vain for the skitf of her lover, he comes not again." For 
the broken vows, the maiden may fling them on the wild current, 
and the mermaiden may sing them. " New sweetness the/U give 
her bewildering strain; there is one who will never believe them 
again." If Minola had really been a betrayed lover, she could not 
have expressed more simply and more movingly the proud passion 
of a broken heart. As Lucy's face was upturned in the moonlight, 
Victor saw that her eyes were swimming in tears. He Avas greatly 
charmed and touched by her sensitiveness, and felt drawn to her in 
an unusual way. He turned his eyes away, fearing she might 
know that he had seen her tears. 



202 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

Minola came down from the steps silently. As yet, no ore 
had thanked her or said her songs gave pleasure ; but Minola felt 
that she had pleased them, and that they liked her to sing, and for 
the time she was happy. If she could have known that her song 
had brought Victor Heron nearer in feeling than ever he was before 
to her friend Lucy, she would perhaps have felt an added although 
a rather melancholy pleasure in the power of her song. Certainly 
the sensation that passed through Victor's breast as he heard the 
last lines of the song, and looked on Lucy's face, and saw the 
sparkling tears in her eyes, was something new to him, and in 
itself no poor tribute to the influence of the music. 

Mr. Money was the first to speak. 

" Your way of singing, Miss Grey, reminds me of what I once 
heard a very clever man say of the reading of Shakespeare's 
sonnets. He said he never heard them properly read except by a 
man who was dying, like your friend the lover of Barbara Allen, 
and who could hardly speak above his breath." 

" My dear papa, what a compliment to Nola ! " the astonished 
Lucy exclaimed. 

" You don't understand it, Lucelet . Miss Grey does, I am sure, 
and I hope Heron does, although I am not so sure in his case. It 
means that this poor dying poet . he was a poet, didn't I say?" 

" No, indeed you didn't," said Lucy. 

" Oh, yes, he was a poet. Well, this poor dying poet had to 
make such use of his failing voice to express all the meaning of the 
poems he loved above all others, that he would not allow the most 
delicate touch of meaning or feeling to escape in his reading. Now 
you begin to understand, Lucelet ? Miss Grey's singing is as fine 
as that." 

" Oh, if Nola is compared to a poet I don't mind. But a dying 
poet is rather a melancholy idea, and not a bit like Nola. I always 
think of Nola as full of health and life, and everything bright and 
delightful." 

" Still I quite understand what Mr. Money means, and it is a 
great compliment," Minola said. " There must have been some- 
thing wonderful, supernatural, in hearing this dying poet recite 
such lines." 

*' People with great strong voices hardly ever think much of 
what can be done by mere exi)ression," Money remarked. 

"Then we ought to be glad if we have not good voices?" 
Minola asked. 

" Well, yes; in many cases, at least. I think so. It makes 
you sing all the belter." 

" And perha])s they would sing best who had no voice at all." 



AN EPISODE. 203 

"Perhaps so," said Money gravely; " I sliouldn't wonder." 

After this they all laughed, and the moment of sentiment was 
gone. But yet Victor Heron remained very silent and seemingly 
thoughtful. The new and strange sensation which had arisen in 
him from hearing Minola's voice and seeing Lucy's tear-sparkled 
eyes had not faded yet. It perplexed him, and yet had something 
delightful in it. The author of .' Caleb Williams " declared that in 
it he would give to the world such a book that no man who had 
read it should ever be quite the same man again. Such a change 
it happens to more ordinary beings to work unconsciously in 
many men or women. A verse of a ballad, an air played on a 
harp, a chance word or two, the expression of a lip or an eye, an 
all unstudied attitude, shall change a whole life so that never again 
shall it be exactly what it was before. 

" We must be getting home," said Money. " There are speeches 
to be made to-morrow. Heron, my good fellow . there are deputa- 
tions to receive, and I own to being a man who likes to sleep." 

"Just here and just now," said Victor, "the speech-making 
and the deputations seem rather vulgar busiiiess." 

He thought so now very sincerely. A sense of the vulgarity 
and futility of commonplace ambitions and struggles is one of the 
immemorial effects of moonlight, and music, and midnight air, and 
soft skies. But in Heron's case there was something more than 
all this which he did not yet understand. 

'. The tilings have to be got through anyhow," Mr. Money 
insisted, " and these young ladies will be losuig altogether their 
beauty-sleep." 

" Oh, I think the idea of going to sleep on such a night is 
odious, when we might be out under the stars in this delightful 
place !" Lucy exclaimed. "And besides, papa, the truth is that 
Nola and I always sit up together for ever so long after everybody 
else has gone, no matter what the hour may be . and so we might 
as well be here as anywhere else. If our beauty depends on early 
hours it is forfeited long since, and there's no use thinking about it 
now." 

" I know Miss Grey is far too sensible a girl to share any 
such sentiments . so come with me, Miss Grey, and we shall at 
least set a cood example." 

He took Minola's arm and drew it within his own with good- 
humoured mastery, and led her away. Lucy and Victor had 
perforce to follow. They ran after Money and his companion. 
Minola could hear their laughter and the sound of their quick feet 
as they approached. Then when they came near they slackened 
their speed, and lagged a little behind. She could hear the sound 



204 ^/A?^ MISANTHROPE. 

of their voices as they talked. They spoke in low tones, but the 
sweet pure midnight air allowed at least the faint murmur of the 
tones to reach her ear as she walked quickly on, leaning on Mr. 
jMoney's arm, and trying to talk to him about the prospects of the 
coming election. 

" If he loves her, he must tell her so now . here," Minola 
thought. " This surely is the place and the hour for a declaration 
of love, and he does love her . she is so very sweet and good." 

She tried to make herself believe that she was very happy, 
and that she rejoiced to know that Lucy was loved . by him, and 
even that she was rather amused in a high, unconcerned way by 
their love-making. When they had crossed the stile of the park 
and passed into the streets, Victor and Lucy came up with them 
again, and walked by their side. 

" It is done," Minola thought. *' She has heard him now, and 
she has all her wish." Aloud she said, " I suppose you are right, 
Mr. Money, about the ballot . I had not thought much of that, but 
J .nm sure you must be right." 



CHAPTER XXII. 

MR. SHEPPARD'S offer OF SURRENDER. 

Minola heard no word from Lucy that night about Heron. Lucy 
seemed to avoid all speech on any subject that had to do with the 
midnight walk in the park. 

The next day brought Mr. Blanchet, very proud of having been 
sent for, and for the present, at least, filled with the novelty of a 
political contest. As Money had predicted, any objection which 
Heron might have to Blanchet gave way and vanished for the time, 
when Blanchet became in a manner a guest of his. But the poems 
which Blanchet was to contribute to the ( )ntest did not prove a 
great success. They were a little difficult to understand. When 
they were supposed to rouse the souls of Keeton electors on the 
subject of England's honour and duties, they were involved in 
such fantasy of thought and expression, that they would have had 
to be published with a glossary if they were to illuminate by a spark 
of meaning the mind of the acutest voter in the borough. Blanchet 
made, however, rather a picturesque figure on the platforms of 
meetings, and was useful as an attendant on the two young women 
when Money and Heron had to be busy elsewhere; and Mr." 
Money liked, for electioneering eft'ect, the appearance of a large 



MR. SHEPPARUS OFFER OF SURRENDER. 205 

suite. Minola never saw the poet, except before the general com- 
pany. He had consented to come to Keeton solely because he 
thought it would give him more than one opportunity of speaking 
ft word or two to her in private ; and no such chance seemed 
ever likely to present itself tiiere. Minola was utterly unconscious 
of his wish or of its purpose. She did not know that when he 
was invited to Keeton he went to his sister, and told her that the 
happy chance had come at last ; and that she had kissed him with 
tears in her eyes, and prayed for his success. Minola was as 
friendly with him as possible . far more so than she seemed to be 
with Heron, for example ; but he got no such chance of trying 
his fortune as his sister and he had believed to be coming. 

Is there often a political election with such cross-purposes going 
on in the midst of it ? It would almost seem as if all the persons 
more directly concerned were either the planners or the objects of 
some little side game of love. We know what thoughts and hopes 
were formed on Victor Heron's account by poor Lucy and her 
father ; and ISIinola soon learned that the Conservative candidate 
had still a purpose at his heart which no lawful returning-officer 
could gratify. Add to this, to go no further for the present, the 
purpose which we know that Mr. Blanchet had in consenting to 
try the part of Poet Laureate to the Liberal candidate, and we 
shall see that the game was a little complex which all these were 
playing. 

Minola had made a grave mistake in judging the character of 
her discarded lover. She thought him a hypocrite, and he was 
not ; she thought his love for her was all a sham, and it was not. 
He was a slow, formal man ; formal in everything . in his morals 
as well as in his manners. For him the world's standard was all. 
He could not lift his mind above the level of the opinion of 
respectable people. What they said became the law of life to 
him. What they called proper he believed to be proper ; what 
they condemned became m his eyes only deserving of condemna- 
tion. But he was quite sincere in this. What he came by this 
process to regard as wrong he would not have done himself . except 
under such circumstances of temptation or provocation as may 
ordinarily be held to excuse our human nature. 

His love for Minola was very strong. It was the one genuine 
passion of his life. He had made up his mind that he would 
succeed in life, that he would become a person of im;:ortance in 
London, and that he would marry Minola Grey. Nor did her 
refusal much discourage him. After the first pang was over, he 
said to himself that all would come right yet ; that at least she did 
not love anyone else, and that the world would come to him who 



2o6 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

waited, as he had known it to come to himself in other ways 
when he waited before. He had resolved to represent Keeton in 
the House of Commons, and now that resolve seemed to have 
nearly worked out its purpose. But the night when, passing under 
Minola's windows, he saw Victor Heron produced a terrible reaction 
within him. He felt satisfied that Heron must be in love with her, 
and he thought with agony that such a lover was very likely 
indeed to fascinate such a girl. He began to pay repeated visits 
to London in a half secret way, and to watch the movements of 
Minola, and to try to find out all he could about Victor and his 
friends. The thought of having Heron for his rival in both ways, 
in love and in ambition, was almost more than he could bear. 
There seemed something ominous, fateful in it. He became filled 
with a kind of superstitious feeling that if he lost the election he 
must lose all. He hated Heron with a passion that sometimes 
surprised himself. There appeared to him to be something wicked 
in this young man coming from the other side of the earth to 
cross him in his two great desires. His slow, formal nature worked 
itself up into dense consistency of hate. The election contest 
became a relief to him. It was like meeting his rival in battle. 
The fierce joy was heightened when Minola came to Keeton. To 
win under such conditions would be like killing his rival under her 
very eyes. 

It was when at the very height of his hope, and when the anti- 
cipation of revenge was turning our formal moralist into a sort of 
moral Berserker, that a piece of news reached his ears which well- 
nigh changed his purpose. He was told that Victor Heron was 
to marry Mr. Money's daughter, and that that was the reason 
why Money took such interest in the contest. He was assured 
of this on what seemed to him good authority. In fact, the report 
hardly needed any authority to confirm it in his mind. What could 
be more probable ? What could more satisfactorily explain every- 
thing? What other purpose could a man like Money have in 
taking all that trouble about a stranger like Heron ? Mr. Shep- 
pard trembled to think of the mistake he had nearly made. 

So, then, it was not certain that Minola was lost to him, after 
all? A moment before, he Avas only thinking of revenge for an 
irreparable injury. Now hope sprung up again. At the bottom 
of Sheppard's nature was a very large reserve of that self-confidence 
or self-conceit which had carried him so far on his way to 
success ; and he was easily roused to hope again in his chances of 
conquering Minola's objection to him. 

He became suddenly filled with an idea which, in all the thick 
and heat of his preparations for the contest, he determined to 



MR. SHEPPARjyS OFFER OF SURRENDER. 207 

put to proof. By this time it should be said that he had httle 
doubt of how the struggle would go if it were left to be a duel 
between him and Heron. What it cost him to take the step he 
is now taking will be better appreciated if this conviction of his 
is kept in mind. 

Mr. Sheppard dressed one afternoon with even more than 
his usual care, but in style a little difterent from that which he 
commonly adopted. He had got a vague idea that his usual 
manner of dressing was rather too formal to please a girl like 
Minola, and that it was wanting in picturesqueness and in artistic 
effect. He had studied many poems and works of art lately, with 
much pain and patience, and tried to qualify himself for an under- 
standing of those schools and theories of art which, as they were 
said to be new, and were generally out of Keeton's range, he 
assumed to be those of the London circles which Minola was 
reported to frequent. He got himself up in a velvet coat, with a 
tie of sage-green silk and a bronze watch-chain, and a brazen 
porte-bonheur clasping his wrist. He looked like a churchwarden 
masquerading as an actor. Thus attired, he set forth to pay a 
visit to Minola. 

He had met her several times during the settlement of the 
business consequent on the death of Mrs. Saulsbury. He had 
met Mr. Money often, and acted sometimes as the representative 
in business matters of Mr. Saulsbury. He had always demeaned 
himself on such occasions with a somewhat distant courtesy and 
respect, as if he wished to stand on terms of formal acquaintance- 
ship, and nothing more. He was very anxious to get once more 
on such terms with Minola as would allow him to see her and 
speak with her now and then, without her being always on her 
guard against love-making. It seemed clear to him that he had 
better retire for a while from his former position, and try to take 
the attitude of one who, having been refused, has finally accepted 
the refusak His manner did in fact impose upon Minola. Never 
having believed in the reality of his love, she found no difficulty 
in believing that he had easily reconciled himself to disappoint- 
ment, and that he had, perhaps, his eyes turned somewhere else 
already. Whenever they did meet they were friendly, and Minola 
saw no great necessity for avoiding him, except such as might 
seem to be imposed upon her by the fact that her friends were on 
one side of the political contest, while he was on the other. Mr, 
Sheppard even called to see her once or twice about some of the 
affairs of Mr, Saulsbury, and saw her alone, and said no word 
thai, did not relate to matters of business. It was a great relief to 
Minola to see him and not Mr. Saulsbury, and she was even frank 



2o8 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

enough to tell him so. He only said, with a grave smile, that he 
feared she " really never had done justice, never had done quite 
justice," to the motives and the character of Mr. Saulsbury. But 
he admitted that Mr. Saulsbury's austere manners were a httle 
against him. 

No surprise, therefore, was created in the mind of any of our 
friends when one morning Mr. Sheppard's card was brought to 
Minola, and she was told that he wished to speak a few words 
with her. 

Mr. Money had never heard anything about Sheppard's former 
attentions to Minola. He was incUned to think Sheppard a very 
good fellow for takmg any trouble about Minola's affairs at a time 
when he had so much of his own to occupy him. 

So Minola received Mr. Sheppard in one of the sitting-rooms 
of the hotel, and was not displeased to see him. She even asked 
if he would not like to see Mr. Money. This was after he had 
talked to her about the particular object of his coming . some- 
thing relating to what seemed in her mind the interminable 
arrangements about the house property which had fallen to her 
share. 

" I should have no objection to see Mr. Money, ]\Iiss Grey . 
none whatever ; I hope we may be good friends, although Provi- 
dence has decreed that we should be on opposite sides of this 
political controversy. But I am not sure whether under the cir- 
cumstances it would be agreeable to all parties if I were to see 
Mr. Heron, or whether, not being on such terms with him,! ought 
to call on his friend. These are points, Miss Grey, on which you, 
as a lady, might not hke to decide." 

" Oh, I couldn't think of deciding ! " Minola said hastily, for 
she had made her suggestion in obedience to a sudden impulse, 
and was not sure that she had not done something wrong ; " I 
don't know anything about it, and perhaps I ought not to have 
said anything at all." 

" Your suggestion, IMiss Grey, was only in accordance with all 
the impulses ot" your generous nature." Mr. Sheppard still loved 
as much as ever his long and formal sentences. Minola could not 
help wondering how the House of Commons would like such a 
style, if Mr. Sheppard ever got a chance of displaying it there. 

" You do not, I hope," he continued, " disapprove of my 
ambition to distinguish myself in political life ? You know that I 
have for years cherished such an ambition ; that hope still remains 
to me. It is not, surely, an illegitimate or unreasonable hope }" 

" Oh, no, Mr. Sheppard, far from it ; I am sure that I, like 
aU your friends, shall be very glad to hear that you have been 



MR. SHEPPARUS OFFER OF SURRENDER. 209 

successful in your ambition . I think it ought to be the ambition 
of every man who has any talents." 

" Thank you, Miss Grey. You do not, I observe, wish me 
success in this particular contest. That, I suppose, would be too 
much for me to expect ? " 

Minola only shook her head. 

" I am afraid I shall only grieve you in this then," he said, 
dropping his eyes, " for I am certain to win, Miss Grey." 

Minola thought of her unlioly compact, and wished he would 
talk of something else, or, better still, go away. 

" I am sorry you can't both win," she said good-humouredly, 
" then we could all be pleased, and we might say all we liked 
without fear of seeming Tinfriendly to one or the other." She could 
not help feeling that this speech was a little like one of Mr. 
Sheppard's own. 

" I3 it true," Mr. Sheppard asked abruptly, " what people say 
in Keeton . this about Mr. Heron and Miss Money ? " 

" I don't know much about the gossip of Keeton, Mr. Sheppard, 
and it would not have much interest for me . I don't like Keeton." 

" It is not, perhaps, mere gossip. They say that Mr. Heron is 
to be married to Mr. Money's daughter ; that, they say, is the 
reason why we in Keeton are favoured with the personal inter- 
ference of Mr. Money in our local affairs." 

Minola rose, and seemed as if she were resolved that the con- 
versation must end there. 

'' I can't tell you anything about that, Mr. Sheppard ; even 
if I knew anything, which I don't, I could hardly be expected 
to talk about it. It does not concern you or me much, I suppose." 

" It concerns me greatly," he said warmly. " Of course it con- 
cerns me that a stranger should come down here to Keeton inter- 
fering in our affairs, and making discord and confusion where we 
are all inclined to harmony. But I tell you this. Miss Grey, and 
you may tell your friends so, if you like . they haven't a chance 
here, except through you." 

Minola was amazed, and could not help looking up with an 
expression of curiosity. Was this to be another offer to put the 
decision of the contest in her hands ? 

" Yes," he went on, as if he had understood her thought, " it 
shall be in your hands if you wish it. I am very ambitious of 
representing my native town in Parliament ; but I have an ambition 
twenty times stronger than that, and an older ambition too. li 
you wish to see your friends succeed in this affair, declare your 
wish, and I will withdraw to please you. I can find a chance 
somewhere else; I am not likely to fail in anything I set my heart 

P 



2IO MISS MISANTHROPE. 

upon ; and no other man but myself could carry this borough in 
the duke's interest at such a time as this. I can carry it, and if 
we two stand alone . Mr. Heron and I . I am safe to carry it ; 
but if you only say the word, I will give up the place this moment. 
Think of it. Miss Grey . do give it a moment of thought. I don't 
want to bind you to anything ; I don't put any condition ; I only 
ask you to let me do this forjw^." 

His eyes were full of eagerness, and his manner had almost lost 
its formalism. He did not seem to her the man she had ever 
known before. She felt something like respect for him. 

" I could not ask you to do anything of the kind for me, 
Mr. Sheppard," she said gently. " Why should I ? What right 
could I have to allow you to make any sacrifice for me? This 
would be a great sacrifice ; and I suppose a thing a mai;i ought 
not to do for any personal feeling." 

" You are quite right ; you had always a clearer understanding 
than women are supposed to have about these things . I remember 
your father saying so often. It would raise an outcry here against 
me. My own party would denounce me ; I should never be looked 
at by any of the duke's people again. You can hardly think what 
a sacrifice it would be to a man like me. But that's why I offer it. 
I want to make some great sacrifice. I do I . to prove to you that 
I am sincere, and that there is nothing I would not do for you. 
Mind, I am not talking of making a bargain. I only say, if you 
wish me to do this, it shall be done. That's all." 

" I don't wish you, Mr. Sheppard ; it would be most unfair 
and wrong of me to do so. It would be a shameful thing of me, 
I think, and I wish you had not thought of it, although I can't 
help feeUng that I owe you some thanks even for the offer." 

" Think of it. Miss Grey . just think a little more of it. I 
mean it, I assure you ; I mean it all. Let him have the seat if 
it pleases Mr. Money and his daughter, and if you want to please 
them. It v/ill be all your doing, mind ' I should be glad to 
make Mr. Money's acquaintance more than I have done; I have 
no ill-will to Mr. Heron ; why should I have ? I am not in love 
with Miss Money," he added, with rather a sickly smile, that it 
pained Minola to see. 

" I don't need to think it over, Mr. Sheppard ; I know alreadj' 
what I ought to say. I could not ask you to do such a thing for 
me, or allow you to do it it I could prevent you. I don't under- 
stand much about such things, but it seems to me that what you 
propose would be dishonourable to you. No, Mr. Sheppard; go 
on and fight out your fight . why should you not? We may be 
Iriends all of us just the same." 



MR. SHEPPARD'S OFFER OF SURRENDER. 21 r 

" I want to do this for you . to show you that I am sincere in 
all that I . all that I ever said to you." 

Minola felt a colour coming on her cheeks. 

" I can believe you to be sincere without such a proof as that," 
she said. 

" But do you . do you ? I could be content if I thought you 
did believe that. Tell me that you do believe that." 

" Why should I not believe it ? I have always heard you 
spoken of as a man of the highest character " 

" It isn't that," he said cutting off her words abruptly ; " it 
is not that I am speaking about. You know it is not Ihat ! I 
want you to tell me whether you believe that I am sincere in 
loving you." 

" I thought we were never to speak of this again," she said, 
and she was moving almost in alarm towards the door. He quietly 
stood in her way and prevented her. 

" I never said so. I told you I would not give up my hope, 
and I don't mean to give it up. I told you in the park here, the 
first day that I spoke out . I told you that I would not give up, 
and I will not. I love you always ; I did from the time when you 
were a child, and I was not so very much more. I am slow some- 
times, but when I get a feeling like that it never leaves me. I 
know you used to laugh at me and to make fun of me, but I didn't 
care much about that, and I don't care. It wasn't a very generous 
thing to do, knowing what you did about me. No, no, Minola, you 
shan't go yet ; indeed you shan't. You must hear me now, once 
for all." 

" If it will be once for all, Mr. Sheppard ; if you will promise 
me that " 

" No, no ! I'll promise nothing. I'll never give up this hope, I 
tell you fairly ; never, never, Minola. Yes, you used to laugh at 
me, and it wasn't generous ; but who expects generosity from a 
woman? . and in any case it couldn't change the feelings of a man 
like me to you . no, not if you treated me like a dog. You don't 
know what it is to be insanely in love with some one who does 
not care about you. If you did, you could make some allowance 
for me." 

His whole manner was so strange and so wild that it compelled 
the attention of Minola, and almost made her afraid. She had 
never seen in him anything like this before. Some of his words, 
too, fell touchingly and painfully on her ear. Did she, then, not 
know what it was to be foolishly in love without hope of return? 
Did she not ? and ought not what she knew to make her more 
tender towards this man, who, in so strange a way, seemed to be 

p 2 



212 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

only in like case with herself? She ceased to fear Mr. Sheppard, 
or to feel her old repugnance for him. Her manner became gentle 
and even sweet, as she spoke to him, and tried to reason with him. 

" If I ever did laugh at you, Mr. Sheppard, it was only as 
girls who know no better will laugh at people whom, if they only 
did know better, they would respect. I was wrong and silly, and 
I ask your pardon most sincerely. I don't think, Mr. Sheppard, 
I am likely to offend many people by any excess of good spirits 
for the future." 

" You never offended me," he said eagerly; " or, if you did, it 
was only for the moment, and I didn't care. You were welcome 
to say anything you liked, and to laugh at me as much as you 
liked ; you are still. You may laugh at me, Minola, the moment 
my back is turned, if you like. That won't make me love you 
the less, or give up trying to make you change your mind." 

" Why can't we be friends, Mr. Sheppard? I could like you 
much, I am sure now, if you would only let me." 

" No, no ! we never can be friends," he said, taking up his hat, 
as if he felt that it would be useless to say any more then. " We 
might be enemies, Minora . although I can't well think of myself 
as your enemy . but I'll never consent to be your friend." 

" We never can be anything else then," Minola said more 
firmly. " I don't mean to marry ; the man does not live in the 
world," she declared with positive energy, "whom I would marry; 
and I couldn't love you, Mr. Sheppard ; and for heaven's sake, I 
beseech of you, let us not have all this to go over again and again. 
I wonder men can degrade themselves in such a manner . it is 
pitiful ; it is shameful ! " she added. " I would not, if I were a man, 
so lower myself for all the women in the world." 

" There is nothing I would not lower myself to for you . 
nothing I would not do for you. I don't call it lowering myself; 
I am in love with you, and I would do anything to carry my 
point; and I don't give up yet. Don't let it be war to the 
knife between us two, Minola." 

" I want no war, but only peace," she said gently. " I want to 
be your friend, Mr. Sheppard ; I will not be your enemy even if 
you do persecute me." 

He made no further effort to detain her, but opened the door 
for her, and allowed her to go without another word. 

Mr. Sheppard's passion, strong as it was, did not whollyf.doib 
him. He saw that he had gained an advantage worth trying rln 
He saw that Minola had been impressed for the first time with a 
certain respect for him. This was something to have gained, and 
he went away with a feeling of satisfaction. He had offered to give 




^ 

.^ 



>> 



?; 



MR SHEPPARHS OFFER OF SURRENDER. 213 

up one great and, as he believed, almost certain chance of gratifying 
his ambition for her sake. He was perfectly sincere in the offer, 
and he would have been wild with pride and delight if she had 
accepted it. Now that she had refused, he felt that the best thing 
he could do was to light the battle out as she had said herself, and 
win it. "When I defeat her friend, she can't laugh at me then," 
he thought. Mr. Sheppard had not had much experience in the 
ways of women, nor had he studied women and courtship in 
romance or poetry. But he had enough at least of instinctive 
knowledge to understand that power and success count lor more 
usually in the eyes of women than piteous appeal. He went 
home prepared agam for the battle, and again longing for it. 

It is quite true that Minola for her part felt a higher respect for 
him than she had ever known before. Her own experiences had 
taught and had softened her. He really was sincere; he was in 
love, and with her, she now felt. Perhaps a woman can never 
feel merely anger or scorn for one who she believes does really 
love her. The whole bearing of the man had seemed to be 
dignified by genuine emotion. His strange offer had something in 
it that she recognised as chivalrous in a sort of perverted way. 
When Minola used to read " Ivanhoe," and think over all its people 
as if they were living beings whom she either loved or hated, she 
always felt driven in despite of all propriet)' to feel a certain admira- 
tion for the Templar, Brian de Bois Guilbert. Especially was she 
struck with admiration for him when he oftered to throw away 
career and reputation in Europe if Rebecca would love him, and 
go with him to seek out some new sphere of life. The memory of 
these readings and thinkings came oddly back upon her now. 

"This poor Sheppard is a sort of Templar," she could not 
help thinking. "To offend the duke's people is just as great a 
sacrifice for him as for my old friend Bois Guilbert to throw away 
the chances of rising to be Grand Master of his Order. The 
public opinion of Keeton is as much to one hero as the voice of 
Europe to the oLher. Going to look for a new borough is as 
bad a thing perhaps in our days as trying for a new career among 
the Saracens or wherever it was. I begin to think poor Mr. 
Sheppard is as good a hero as anyone else. He is a fool to make 
such an offer, and I suppose it is rather dishonourable . at least, 
it looks a little like that to me . but I suppose all men will twist 
their code of honour a little to suit themselves, and at all events 
it is no worse than the conduct of the Templar, and I used to 
admire him." 

Of course in all this Minola assumed herself to be talking 
ironically, and in fact to be relieving her mind of many sarcasms 



214 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

at the expense of man. But there was a httle of earnest too in her 
enforced jesting. 

" Our rival must have a good deal of time to spare," Mr. Money 
observed when Minola saw him shortly after; "or he must be very 
good-natured to take so much trouble about Mr. Saulsbury's affairs. 
I suspect the truth is that he feels pretty sure of the result." 

" Then you think we have lost ? " Minola asked, dismayed. 

" All except honour, I fear," he answered coolly. " I don't 
see much chance, Miss Grey. The extreme ' Rads ' won't have 
anything to do with us, I am pretty sure. Your Keeton friend 
stands to win unless something wonderful happens." 

" But will those extreme people vote for him . for Mr. Shep- 
pard ? " 

"There's no knowing; you can't count upon these fellows. 
But even if they don't, you see it will come to about the same 
thing . at least, unless they all hold back in a mass, which is not at 
all likely. I think it will be this way : a few of them will vote for 
Sheppard, just because they hate no one so much as a Liberal 
who is not strong enough for them ; and those few will be enough 
to give your Keeton friend the seat." 

Lucy and Minola both looked rather blank at this prospect 
Minola began almost to wish she had taken Sheppard at his word- 
Suddenly Mr. Money was called away by some political fellow- 
worker, who had a face which was like a title-page to some won- 
derful volume of news. 

In a few moments Mr. Money returned full of excitement, 
and holding a paper in his hand. 

" I say, young ladies," he exclaimed, " here's a new incident 
for you ; something sensational, I should say. Here's our friend 
St. Paul coming out himself at the last moment as a candidate for 
Keeton in the Red Republican interest, and denouncing the duke, 
his brother, as if the duke were Cain and he were the ghost of 
Abel." 

" But can he do that, papa ? " asked Lucy indignantly. 

" Can he do what, Lucelet ? " 

" Become a candidate now, dear, at this time?" 

" Why, of course he can . what should hinder him ? The 
nomination isn't until the day after to-morrow." 

" Oh, but I call it so unfair !" 

" My dear little Lucelet, what do you think he cares what you 
call it or what anybody else calls it ? " 

.' Then does this destroy our chances altogether ? " Lucy 
plaintivelv asked. " I always thought he was a treacherous man." 

" Stuff my good little girl; there are no treacheries in politics 



'* MISCHIEF, THOU ART AFOOT." 215 

and elections. But I must think this over a little. I am not 
by any means sure that it may not prove an uncommonly gooil 
thing for us, by Jove. Where's Heron? I must get at him at 
once; and so, young ladies, good-bye for the moment." 

Mr. Money hurried away. Durmg the few moments he had 
stopped to talk to the girls several excited heads had been thrust 
into the room, as if entreating him to come away. 

Minola, too, was not by any means sure that this new incident 
.was not meant to turn to the account of Victor Heron. '1 his, then, 
was clearly Mr. St. Paul's plot. She understood quite enough of 
the explanation Mr. Money had been giving to see that if any of 
the extreme Radical votes could be taken from Sheppard's side the 
chances of Heron would go up at once. She could not doubt that 
Mr. St. Paul knew this still better. She became full of excitement ; 
and, such is the demoralising effect of all manner of competition 
on human creatures, that Minola now found herself wishing that 
the candidate she favoured might win by Mr. St. Paul's device 
or that of anyone else; but win somehow. 



CHAPTER XXIII. 

"mischief, thou art afoot." 

Never was the aspect of a community more suddenly changed 
than that of Keeton from the moment when St. Paul flung himself 
into the contest. Up to that hour a grave decorum had governed 
even its most strenuous eftbrts. There was plenty of speech- 
making, of crowds, confusion, and noise ; but everything was 
in decent order. There were no personal attacks; and the Liberal 
candidate had not allowed a great scope even to the good spirits 
and the humorous powers of all his followers. A somewhat elaborate 
courtesy had been observed between the candidates and their 
leading supporters on both sides. Mr. Heron had always spoken 
with high respect of Mr. Sheppard, who of course had not failed 
on his part to do justice to the personal character of his opponent. 
In fact, as the orators on both sides were in the habit of observing 
about twenty times a day, it was a contest of political principles 
altogether, and by no means a contest of persons. 

All this was now changed. Mr. St. Paul had leaped into the 
arena with a vivacity which proved only too contagious. His 
speeches were alternations of vehement personal abuse and broad, 
audacious humour. Throne, altar, and caste seemed alike to be 



216 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

the targets of his oratory. He was the reddest of all Red Repub- 
licans. He was the typical proletaire of proletaires. Mr. Money 
had denounced the Ministers and the Tories; Mr. St. Paul de- 
nounced the Ministers, the Opposition, the Tories, the Liberals, 
the aristocracy, and the middle-class with equal fervour. The 
employers of labour and the clergy of all denominations came in 
for rattling vituperation at his hands. He assailed the two candi- 
dates and their political professions with good-humoured con- 
tempt. He declared that if the Liberal candidate had a personal 
grievance which he wanted to put right in the contest, he, St. 
Paul, had a personal grievance of a nature far more nearly con- 
cerning the people of Keeton . a grievance against the brother 
who had disowned and cast him off; who had slandered him, 
ousted him from the affections of" his father, driven him into 
exile; but who, thank heaven, could not intimidate him, or turn 
him into a crawling sycophant. He boasted that in spite of his 
brother, who had tried to ruin him, he had made a fortune by his 
own hands and his own brains in the great Free Republic, the 
land where there were no dukes, where all men were equal, where 
there was no hireling State clergy, and no trampling tyranny of 
employers . need he say it was the glorious republic beyond 
the Atlantic? He made dreadful work of the allusion in Mr. 
Sheppard's address to the services rendered to Keeton by the ducal 
family. He indignantly asked of his hearers what a duke had ever 
done for the town. When had a duke pressed the honest hand 
of a Keeton working-man? When had a duke or a duchess 
taken the slightest interest in the poor and virtuous working-women 
of Keeton ? Nay, he asked, when had a Keeton tradesman . and 
the Keeton tradesmen had done more to make the place than 
the dukes . when had a Keeton tradesman or his wife been 
invited inside the doors of the ducal residence ? The very men 
who were fighting the duke's battle to-day would find them- 
selves very lucky indeed if they got even a civil bow from the 
duke or the duchess to-morrow. 

There was quite enough of truth in these hits to make them 
tell. St. Paul managed to "fetch," as he would himself have 
expressed it, a good many among the discontented middle-class 
of the place. But with the proletaire he was a tremendous suc- 
cess. There had been some quarrel lately between the employers 
and the workpeople in the town, in which the latter were finally 
defeated, and the defeat rankled in their hearts, and they were 
glad of any chance of giving vent to their sense of wrong. St. 
Paul was, of course, all the more successful when he denounced 
aristocracy and caste because of his being one of the aristocracy 



''MISCHIEF, THOU ART AFOOT." 217 

and the ruling caste himself. He proudly declared that he had re- 
nounced his courtesy title, and that he stood on his merits as a 
man . a working-man who had worked with his own hands in 
a free land, and made a fortune there by manly energies, and brains, 
and strength. 

One little incident made him more than ever a hero. At 
the second meeting he held . it was in the large room of a great 
public-house . there was a good deal of noisy interruption, which 
seemed to come from one man in especial. He was recognised at 
once as a person employed in some way by Mr. Sheppard: a 
man of great muscle and a sort of local bully. Loud cries of 
"Turn him out!" were raised. The disturber bawled a defiant 
request to the general company to let him know who proposed to 
turn him out. 

St. Paul paused in his flow of eloquence. 

"The honourable elector washes to know," he said, in his 
familiar tone of imperturbable good-humour, "who will turn him 
out? I can tell him at once. I'll turn him out if he interrupts 
again in any way. This meeting is called by me. This hall 
is hired by me. I beg of my friends here not to interfere in 
the slightest. If that honourable elector interrupts again I will 
throw him down those stairs." 

Amid tremendous cheering the intrepid St. Paul resumed his 
eloquent argument. His boisterous enemy at once began his 
interruption all over again. St. Paul stopped. 

" Let no one interfere," he quietly said, " while I put that person 
out of the room." 

He promptly came do\\Ti from the platform, amid vociferous 
cheering and Avild excitement. 

Then followed a tumultuous scene, in which cheering, scream- 
ing, stamping, struggling, swearing, and indescribable noise of all 
kinds deafened every ear. A way was made for St. Paul, who 
advanced towards his antagonist. The latter awaited him in atti- 
tude of utter defiance. St. Paul seized him round the waist and 
a furious stniggle set in. It was not of long endurance, however. 
The local bully was well enough m Keeton "rows." He had 
strength enough and all the skill that Keeton quarrels could teach; 
but St. Paul had had the training of Eton, and Oxford, and London, 
and all the practice of the rugged West. He was the Gamin and 
the Rowdy in one. The outlawry of two hemispheres had taught 
him its arts of defence and offence. He lifted the unlucky and too 
confident disturber clean off his feet. He carried him out through 
frantically-cheering ranks, and he kept his word by literally 
throwing him down the stairs. 



2iS MISS MISANTHROPE. 

Then he came back, good-humoured and cool as ever, and 
he went on with his speech. He was the idol of the Keeton mob 
from that moment forth. He was escorted that night to his hotel 
by a tumultuous throng of admirers, who would probably have 
offered to pull down the ducal hall if the rebel of the ducal family 
had hinted that it would give him any pleasure to see it done. 

All this changed completely the character of the contest. It 
became fierce and turbulent on both sides. Some of the followers 
of Mr. Sheppard tried retaliation, very much against the prudent 
advice of that candidate himself. The few days remaining before 
the election were so furious and riotous, that Mr. Money began 
to think it would be best to send his daughter and Minola home 
to London. Mr. Heron was so much engrossed in his cause and 
his speeches that he hardly heeded the tumults. He had been 
used to rougher scenes, and these made scarcely any impression on 
him. It sometimes seemed to Minola that Mr. Blanchet liked 
the tumult less than anyone; that even Lucy did not shrink from 
it with so much abhorrence. It was natural, she thought, that 
one who was at least of poetic nature, even if he were not a great 
poet, should shrink away from such degrading scenes. She felt 
her half- assumed dislike for men grow more and more into reality 
as she saw these specimens of the way in which they conduct their 
political contests. 

In truth, there had been springing up in sleepy Keeton of late 
years a class of whom the park knew nothing, of whom the middle- 
class knew little more, but which was likely to make a con- 
siderable change in the way of conducting local politics. The 
park and the middle-class heeded nothing, while this rough new 
body was growing into ideas about its own strength, its own wrongs, 
and its own rights. In Keeton, as in other places, people would 
probably have thought it wise to shut away from themselves all 
knowledge of unpleasant facts as long as they could; and if it had 
been hinted that there was a somewhat self-conceited and fierce 
proletaire class growing up in the town during all the years while 
the middle-class were fawning on the dukes and duchesses, and 
the dukes and duchesses were languidly patronising the middle- 
class, the prudent persons would have preferred to hear and say no 
more about such unlikely and disagreeable things. The election 
contest first made it evident that some of the seed grains scat- 
tered by modern socialism had been blown as far as Keeton, and 
had sunk into the soil there and begun to grow up into rugged 
stems and prickly leaves. 

Minola absolutely refused to save herself by flight to London, 
or to belie\e that there could be any danger of serious disturbance. 



**MISCHIEF, THOU ART AFOOT." 219 

If nothing else had kept her from leaving Keeton, her curiosity 
would have been enough. She was intensely anxious to see what 
would come of St. Paul's appearance on the scene. She was almost 
afraid to think of the part she had innocently consented to play. 
She remembered now St. Paul's illustration about the king who was 
summoned to cut the mysterious rope, and she thought that she was 
really in a position very much like his. She was perplexed, amused, 
curious, a litde afraid, but still anxious above all things for Victor 
Heron's success, and determined to see the contest out, come what 
might. 

It was the night before the polling-day. Minola and Lucy were 
alone in their room. Victor Heron and Money were away speech- 
making somewhere. Since the appearance of St. Paul in the strife 
the girls had not gone to many meetings, or left the hotel after 
nightfall. Things were looking rather uncheerful now, and the two 
young women no longer regarded the whole affair as a great 
holiday or masquerade. 

Lucy in especial was melancholy. The litde weather-glass of 
her temperament rose and fell very readily to the changes of the 
atmosphere around her. The two friends were silent for a while. 
Lucy began at last to talk of what filled her mind. 

" I wish this was all over, Nola dear; I have a horrid fore- 
boding as if something were going to happen . something unplea- 
sant, I mean, of course." 

"This room is dull," Minola said. "Come out on the balcony, 
Lucy. The evening is beautiful. It is a sin to sit here and 
not see the sky." 

The girls went into the balcony, and stood there and looked 
out upon the scene. The hotel stood not far from the Court House, 
which Minola used to know so well in former days. The roof of 
the Court and the capitals of some of its white pillars could be 
seen from the balcony. In another direction lay the bridge, a 
little to the right of the girls in the balcony. The place where 
the hotel and the Court House stood was one of the few broad 
openings among the iittle maze of narrow streets which made up 
the town of Keeton. Minola could see the bridge plainly, and 
across the bridge the dark trees of the park. A faint continuous 
murmur was in their ears all the time. It might perhaps be the 
rush of the river, a little louder of sound than was its wont ; but 
Minola fancied it was the noise of shouting mobs somewhere . . 
a noise to which Keeton streets, once so sleepy, were growing of 
late to be somewhat accustomed. This, however, was louder and 
longer than the sound of such popular manifestations as it usually 
reached the hotel. Minola, if she felt any alarm or misgiving, 



220 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

thought the best thing would be not to call her companion's atten- 
tion to the sounds. 

The night was beautiful, as Minola had said. It was yet 
summer, although the evenings were growing short ; no breath 
of autumnal chilliness yet saddened the soft air. 

" I wish they would come back,' Lucy murmured. "I don't 
at all like our being left alone in this way, Nola. I feel as if we 
ought to be afraid. Don't you ? " 

" No, dear; there is nothing to be afraid of." 

" Do you think so really ? Ah! but it is different with you." 

Lucy sighed, and Minola knevv well what she would have said 
if she had spoken out her thoughts. She would have said, " It 
is so different with you ; you can afford to be composed and not 
alarmed, for you have not a father engaged in all this, nor a man 
whom you love." Minola read her thoughts and was silent, 
thinking all the more herself for the silence. 

" Hush, there is somebody," Lucy suddenly said, looking back 
into the room. " There certainly is some one there." 

So there was ; but it was not either of the two Lucy wished 
to see. It proved to be Mr. Blanchet, who had come into the 
room unseen while the girls were in the balcony. Minola felt glad 
to see him on the whole. It was a relief from the melancholy 
monotony of the evening, and of poor Uttle Lucy's bodings and 
fears. 

Herbert Blanchet came out into the balcony in his familiar 
way, the way of a picturesque poet conscious of his poetry and 
his picturesqueness. It was a curious study, if any unconcerned 
observer there and then could have made the study, to notice 
the difference between the manner of Blanchet towards the two 
girls. To Lucy he was easy and even patronising, as if he would 
convey the idea that it was a kindness on his part to make himself 
agreeable to her. But to Minola he went on as if she were his 
acknowledged patroness and the ruler of his destiny. In good 
truth, however, there was not then much of a place for him in the 
mind of either girl. 

" Where have you come from ? Where is papa ? " Lucy asked 
with eagerness. 

" I have not been in the town," he said ; " I was away by 
the river. I heard noises . shouting and all that . and I did not 
care to get among the fellows in their electioneering work. I 
have had rather more than I care for of it. My fellow-man seems 
a particularly offensive creature to me when he is in his political 
and robustious moods. I don't, as a rule, care much about Nature, 
but I prefer her company by far to that of such bellowing humanity 
as we see down yonder." 



''MISCHIEF, THOU ART AFOOT." 221 

" I hope nothing has happened to papa, or to Mr. Heron ? " 

" Oh, nothing has happened, you may be sure ! " the poet 
repUed coolly. " They both rather revel in that sort of thing . it 
seems to be their native element. It won't harm them. In my 
case it is different; I don't belong to the political arena; I have 
nothing to do with the political elevation of my fellow-man. If he 
is to be elevated, I am content ; if not, I am content also." 

" I don't know how any man can be content to stand here in 
a balcony talking to two girls," said Minola, " while there is so 
much excitement down there. I could not, if I were a man." 

" I will go down there if you wisli," he replied with deprecating 
grace, " although I don't know that I could be of much use ; but 
I don't suppose there is any real danger." 

" I did not speak of danger," Minola said, rather con- 
temptuously. " I only meant that there seemed to be some 
manly excitement there. There is no danger. It is not a battle, 
Mr. Blanchet." 

" There was some talk of a row," he answered ; " your friend 
St. Paul seems to have set the people wild somehow. But I should 
not think it would come to anything. Anyhow, Miss Grey, if you 
think I ought to be there, or that I could do any good, you have 
only to send me there." 

" No, no, Mr. Blanchet " . Minola was recovering her good 
humour . " I don't want you to go. But Miss Money was a little 
uneasy about her father, and perhaps we were both disappomted 
that you did not come bringing us some news from the seat of 
war. You see, they won't allow us to go to the front any more." 

Meanwhile the noise grew louder and louder ; it came nearer 
and nearer too. There was a fury in the sound as clearly to 
be distinguished from the shouting to which they were well accus- 
tomed as the obstreperous clamour of boys at play is from the cry 
of pain or passion. 

" Something bad is going on, I know," Lucy said, turning 
pale and looking at Minola. 

Minola and Blanchet both leaned from the balcony, and could 
see a straggling group of women, and boys, and a few men making, 
as in a sort of stampede, for the neighbourhood of the hotel. 
They all kept looking eagerly behind them, as if something were 
coming that way which they feared, and yet were curious, to see. 
These fugitives, if they were to be called so, seemed to increase 
in numbers even as the watchers in the balcony looked out. 

Mr. Blanchet went languidly downstairs to ask what the com- 
motion was about, but could hear nothing more precise in the 
hotel than the rumour that a riot of some kind had broken out in 



222 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

the town, and that there were not poUce enough to put it down. 
He came back to the balcony again. For his own part, he felt no 
manner of curiosity. He had always supposed that there were 
riots at elections, and he assumed that some persons of the lower 
classes generally got their heads broken. There was nothing in 
that to interest him. It might happen even that the candidates 
or their friends sometimes came in for rough treatment ; Mr. 
Blanchet would not have been very much disturbed by that in 
the present case. If Mr. Heron had got hurt he would have 
thought that on the whole it served him right. 

Minola watched eagerly from the balcony. Some affrighted 
people were now running past under the windows of the hotel, for 
the most part women dragging their children after them. Minola 
called out to some, and asked what was happening; but they only 
answered in some inarticulate attempt at explanation, and kept on 
their way. Some men passed almost in as much haste, and 
Blanchet called to them grandly to ask what was "'up." One 
shouted out that there was a terrible row going on in the town, 
got up by the " St. Paul's men," and that the military were sent 
for. Two of Money's servants, one his own man, were seen going 
out of the hotel in the direction of the increasing clamour. Lucy 
cried to them, and asked where they were going, and what had 
happened; but they only returned a respectful reassurance, some- 
thing to the eftect that it was nothing of any consequence, and 
then ran on towards the scene of the supposed disturbance, 
looking as if they thought it of much greater consequence than 
they said. The waiters and other servants of the hotel were 
presently seeii to make preparations for closing the doors and 
windows. . 

" Things are beginning to look serious," said Blanchet, begin- 
ning to look very serious himself. 

" They must not close these windows," Minola said. " I mean 
to stay here and see what happens. If they do close the v/indows, 
I will stay here in the balcony all the same." 

" And so will I, Nola," Lucy exclaimed, looking pale, but 
showing no want of pluck. " Something may have happened to 
papa." 

" I don't know that it would not be better for you ladies to 
go in," J3lanchet gravely urged. " I think. Miss Grey, you can 
hardly do much good here, and you would be quite safe indoors. 
Suppose you go in, and let them close these windows? " 

" You don't seem to understand women's curiosity, Mr. 
Blanchet, if you fancy that Lucy and I could be content to be 
shut up while all you men were in the midst of some exciting 



''MISCHIEF, THOU ART AFOOT." 223 

adventure, and perhaps in most poetic danger." Minola spoke 
with a contempt she cared to make no effort to conceal. She 
thought Mr. Blanchet was selfish, and had no interest in the 
safety of other people. She had not yet formed the suspicion 
which later was forced into her mind. 

Some of the servants of the hotel came to say that they believed 
there was a rather serious riot going on in the town, and that 
it would be prudent to close the windows and have the shutters 
put up, as it was quite possible that stones might be thrown, 
and might do mischief. Both the girls steadily refused to leave 
the balcony. Mr. Blanchet added his remonstrances, but without 
any eft'ect. Minola suggested that the windows might be closed 
behind them as they stood on the balcony, and that Mr. Blanchet 
might, if he pleased, withdraw into the hotel; but she declared that 
Lucy and she would remain in the balcony. 

" I don't believe there is a bit of real danger to us or to any- 
one," she declared. 

" But, my dear young lady," Mr. Blanchet urged, " what pos- 
sible good can you do in any case by remaining in this balcony? 
I don't see how you could help Mr. Money and Mr. Heron, 
supposing them to be in any danger, by staying out there when 
these people evidently want us to come in." 

" For a poet, Mr. Blanchet," Minola said coldly, " you do not 
seem to have much of the dramatic instinct that helps people to 
understand the feelings of other people. Do you think Lucy 
Money could be content to hide herself in a cellar, and wait until 
some one kindly remembered to come and tell her how things 
were going with her father and . her friends ? " 

Minola spoke in immense scorn. 

The argiunent was cut short. The flying crowd had been 
increasing every moment, and now the space before the windows 
of the hotel was thickly studded with people, who, having run thus 
far, appeared inclined to make a stand there, and see what was 
next to happen. The shadows were falling deeply, and it was 
beginning to be difficult to discern features clearly among the 
crowd under the windows. The clamour, the screaming, the noise 
of every kind had been increasing with each moment, until those 
in the balcony might almost have fancied that a battle of the old- 
fashioned kind, before the use of gunpowder, was being fought at 
a little distance. 

Li another moment a small group of persons came hurrying up 
to the door of the hotel in a direction opposite to that from which 
the clamour of strife was heard. Minola could see the uniforms 
of policemen among this hurrying and seemingly breathless group, 
and she thought she recognised one face in their midst. 



224 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

The group consisted of a few policemen, wild with the haste 
and the excitement of their movements, and some civilians mixed 
up with them ; and Minola soon saw that her first conjecture was 
right, and that they were forming a body-guard to protect Mr. 
Augustus Sheppard. She could now see Sheppard's face dis- 
tinctly. It was pale, and full of surprise and wrath ; but there did 
not seem much of fear about it. On the contrary, Mr. Sheppard 
seemed to be a sort of prisoner among his protectors and guardians. 
Apparently they were forcing him away from a scene where they 
believed there was danger for him, and he was endeavouring to 
argue against them, and almost to resist their friendly pressure. 
All this Minola, having tolerably quick powers of observation, 
took in, or believed she took in, at a glance. 

The policemen and some of the civilians with them were 
knocking at the door of the hotel, and apparently expostulating 
with some of the people within. At first Minola could not under- 
stand the meaning of this. Mr. Blanchet was quicker. He 
guessed what was going on, and by leaning as far as his long form 
allowed him over the balcony he was able to hear some of the 
words of parley. 

"I say," he said, drawing back his head, "this is rather too 
good. This fellow . what's-his-name? Sheppard . is the unpopular 
candidate now, and the mob is after him, and these policemen 
are asking the people to take him in here, and bring all the row 
on us. I do hope they won't do that. What do we care about 
the fellow ? Why should we run any risks if the police themselves 
can't protect him ? " 

Mr. Blanchet was very pale. 

" For shame, Mr. Blanchet ! " Minola said indignantly. " Would 
you leave him to be killed ? " 

" Oh, they won't kill him ! you may be sure " 

" No, not if we can save him," Minola said. " These people 
shall take him in ! Lucy, these rooms belong to your father now . 
run to them and insist on their letting him in. I'll go down myself 
and open the doors, and bring him in." 

" They shall let him in," Lucy exclaimed, and ran downstairs. 
Minola was about to follow her. 

" This is very generous," said Blanchet, with a sickly effort 
a composure, *' but it is very unwise. Miss Grey. I don't know 
that in the absence of Mr. Money I ought to allow you to expose 
yourselves to such risks." 

"Try if you can hinder us, Mr. Blanchet ! For shame ! Yes, 
T am ashamed of you. Oh, no, don't talk to me ! I am sorry to 
find that you are a coward." 



ALL THE RIVALS AT ONCE. 225 

With this hard word she left him and ran downstairs. Just 
at this moment he heard the doors opened, in compHance with 
the insistance of Lucy. He heard her say with a certain firm 
dignity, which he had hardly expected to find in the little maid, 
that if any harm were done to the hotel because of Mr. Sheppard 
being taken in, her father would make it good to the owner. Then, 
in a moment, the two girls returned, doing the honours as hostesses 
to Mr. Sheppard. 



CHAPTER XXIV. 

ALL THE RIVALS AT ONCE. 

Mr. Sheppard made what he must have felt to be a sort of 
triumphal entrance. Perhaps he might have said with perfect 
truth, in the language appropriate to election contests, that tiiat 
was the proudest moment of his life. He was almost dragged 
into the room by the two breathless girls, who, in the generous 
delight of having saved him from danger, seemed as if they could 
not make too much of him. He felt Minola's hand on his, as she 
forced him into the room. She would not let him go until she 
had fairly brought him into the room and closed the door behind 
him. For Mr. Sheppard had really resisted witn some earnestness 
the attempt to make him prisoner for his own safety. The genial 
constraint of Minola's hand was a delight. There was, less per- 
ceptibly to himself, another sensation of delight in his heart also. 
He had for the first time in his life been in serious danger, and 
he knew that he had not been afraid. It is no wonder if he felt 
a little like a hero now. 

He came in a good deal flushed, and even, if we may say so, 
rumpled ; but he made a gallant effort to keep up his composure. 
The first sight he met in the room was the pale, pitiful, angry, 
and scowling face of the insulted Blanchet. "Are they going to 
embrace the fellow ? " the embittered poet asked of his indignant 
soul, as he saw the unpopular candidate thus led forward by the 
eager girls. 

Blanchet fell back into a corner, not deigning to say a vvord 
of welcome to the rescued Sheppard. Mr. Sheppard, however, 
hardly noticed him. 

" I am sorry to disturb \'0U, ladies,^' he said ; " and I am 
obliged beyond measure for your kindness. I am not afraid myself 
ot any danger in Keeton, but the police thought some disturbance 

Q 



226 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

might happen, and they insisted on my going out of the streets ; 
but I shall be able to reheve you of this intrusion in a few minutes, 
I feel quite certain." 

" You shan't stir from this place, Mr. Sheppard, until everything 
is perfectly safe and quiet," Minola said. " If necessary, Lucy . 
Miss Money . and I will hold you prisoner until all danger is 
over. We are not afraid either." 

At this moment there was such a renewal of the clamour that 
Mmola could not restrain her curiosity, but, having begged Mr. 
Sheppard to remain where he was, and not show himself, she ran 
into the balcony again. 

The sight she saw was so turbulent, and to her so unusual, 
that for a second or two she could make nothing of it. She saw 
only a confusion of heads and faces, and whirling arms and liglits, 
and men falling, and furious blows interchanged, and the confusion 
was made almost bewildering by the shouting, the screaming, and 
the curses and yells of triumph which seemed to her excited ears 
to fill all the air. At last she got to understand, as if by a kind 
of inspiration, that a fierce mob were trying to break into the 
hotel, and that the police were doing their best to defend it. 
The p)Oor police were getting the worst of it. At the same time 
she was aware of a certain commotion in the room behind her, 
which she felt somehow was occasioned by the efforts of Mr. 
Sheppard to get out at any risk to himself, and the attempts of 
Lucy and some of the servants to dissuade him. To this, however, 
Minola now could pay but slight attention. She felt herself grow- 
ing sick and faint with horror as she saw one policeman struck 
down, and saw the blood streaming from his face. She could 
not keep from a wild cry. Suddenly her attention was drawn 
away even from this ; for in a moment, she cou'd not tell how, 
a diversion seemed to be effected in the struggle, and Minola 
saw that Heron and Mr. Money were in the thick of it. 

Her first impulse was to spring back into the room and tell 
Lucy of her father's danger. Luckily, however, she had sense 
enough to restrain this mad impulse, and not to set Lucy wild with 
alarm to no possible purpose. She saw that Heron, at the head 
of a small, resolute body of followers, had fought his way in a 
moment into the very heart of the crowd, and was by the side 
of the policemen. He dragged to his feet the fallen policeman ; 
he seized with vehement strength one after another of those who 
were pressing most fiercely on the poor fellow ; she could see two 
or three of these in succession flung backwards in the crowd ; 
she could see that Heron had some shining thing in his hand ' 
which siie assumed to be a revolver; and she put her hands to her 



ALL THE RIVALS AT OXCE. 2:7 

cars with a woman's instinctive horror of the sound which she 
expected to follow ; and, when no sound came, she wondered 
why Heron did not use his weapon and defend the police. She 
could see Mr. Money engaged now in furious remonstrance and 
now in furious blows with some of the mob, whom he appeared 
lo drag, and push, and drive about, as if there were no such thing 
m the world as the possibility of harm to himself, or of his getting 
the worst of it. P'or a while the resolute energy of the attempt at 
rescue made by Heron and Money appeared to carry all before 
it ; but after a moment or two the mob saw how small was the 
number of those who were Xrymg to effect the diversion. As 
Minola came to know afterwards, Heron and Money had only 
heard in another part of the town that a riot was going on near 
the hotel, and hurried on with half a dozen friends, arriving just r.t 
a very critical moment. They came by the same way as the police 
and Sheppard had come, and, falling on the mob unexpectedly, 
made for a moment a very successful diversion. But they were 
soon surrounded by the rallying crowd, and Minola saw her two 
friends receive many savage blows, and she wondered in all her 
wild alarm how they seemed to make so little of them, but went 
on struggling, striking, knocking down, just as before. Above a:l 
she wondered why Victor Heron did not use his revolver to 
defend his friends and himself, not knowing, as Victor did, that the 
weapon was good for nothing. At least, it was good tor nothing 
just then but inarticulate dumb show. He had not loaded it, never 
thinking that there was the least chance of his having to use it : 
and, indeed, it was only by the merest chance that he happened 
to have it in his pocket. Such as it was, however, it had done 
him some service thus far; for more than one sturdy rioter hpd 
fallen back in sudden dismay, and given Victor a chance to knock 
his heels from under him when he found the muzzle of the 
revolver close to his forehead. This could not last long. The 
mob began to understand both the numbers and the weapons o\ 
their enemies. The police fought with redoubled pluck and 
energy for a while, but the combatants were all too crowded to- 
gether to allow coolness and discipline to tell, as they miglit have 
done otherwise; and the numbers were overwhelming against our 
friends. Just as Minola saw Victor Heron struck with a stone on 
the head, and saw the red blood come streaming, she heard some 
one beside her in the balcony. 

" Go back, Lucy," she cried ; " go back ! . this is no place for 
you." 

" Is it a place for you, Miss Grey ? " a melancholy voice askcd^ 

Q2 



228 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

" It is not Lucy ; it is I. You said I was a coward, Miss Grey ; 
I'll show you that you have wronged me." 

The poet, for all his excitement, was as grandly theatric as was. 
his wont. He looked calmly over the exciting scene, and tried to 
keep his lips from quivering at its decidedly unpleasant aspect. 
That fierce, savage, unromantic, and even vulgar struggle was in 
truth a hideous whirlpool for a picturesque poet to plunge into. 
Yet was Mr. Blanchet's mind made up. 

" Oh, Mr. Blanchet, they will be killed!" 

"Who.'* . who?" the poet cried, peering wildly down into the 
horrible mob-caldron below. 

"Oh, don't you see?. Mr. Heron, Mr. Heron^and Lucy's 
father ! Oh, merciful heaven, he is down . they will kill him ! " 

" I'll save him," the poet wildly exclaimed ; " I'll save him, 
Miss Grey, or perish with him!" He was armed with a poker, 
which he flourished madly round his head. 

Even at that moment Minola was startled to see Blanchet 
preparing to scramble over the balcony, and flmg himself that way 
into the thick of the fight. 

" Oh, don't, don't ! " she cried to him ; " you will be killed." 

He smiled back a wild smile. 

"At least you shall say I am no coward," he exclaimed ; and 
in another moment he had scrambled over the balcony and dropped 
himself, floundering, poker in hand, on the moving mass of heads 
below. 

At any other moment Minola might have thought of the prayer 
in " Firmilian " for a poet to be sent down from above, and the 
unexpected and literal manner in which the prayer is answered. 
At any other moment, perhaps, she might have found it hard to 
restrain her laughter at the manner in which Mr. Blanchet came 
crashing down on the heads of some of the combatants, and the 
consternation which his descent created among them. At his first 
coming down he carried a dozen or so of combatants tumbling on 
the ground along with him, and Minola in her Rebecca-post of 
observation could see nothing but a confused mass of struggling 
legs and arms. But Mr. Blanchet somehow scrambled to his feet 
again, and he laid about him with his poker in such insane fashion, 
and with such advantage of long arms, that his single and wholly 
untutored [jrowess did really for the moment effect an unexpected 
diversion in favour of those he came to rescue. In a moment 
Minola saw Victor Heron on his feet again ; and she aaw him 
amid all the thick of the affray give Blanchet an encouraging and 
grateful clap on the back ; and then she thought she saw Blanchet 
down again ; and then confusion inextricable seemed to swallow 
up all. 



ALL THE RIVALS AT ONCE. 229 

All this, it will be understood, occupied but a few minutes. 
Suddenly the trampling of horses was heard, and a cry was raised 
that the cavalry were coming. 

"Oh, thank God!" Minola said to herself and to the night air; 
" if it be not too late." 

It was not the cavalry, however, but an interposition which at 
the moment proved as effective. Minola saw some men on horses 
gallop into the thick of the crowd, forcing their way as if human 
beings were not liable to any inconvenient consequences from 
having the hoofs of horses plunging among them. Wild and mad- 
dened as it was, the mob had to pay some little attention to these 
new-comers. One of them, who led the way, kept shouting in 
strident and occasionally shrilly tones a command to all who heard 
him to disperse and " stop the row." His voice and his presence 
were recognised in another moment, and the nearest rioters set 
up a tremendous cheer for him, which others caught up and 
renewed again and again, until Minola might have thought that 
the whole business in which they were engaged was to hurrah for 
the new-comer. Men actually in hand-to-hand fight with some 
policeman or other representative of the cause of order gave up 
for the moment defence or offence, and let the antagonist hammer 
away as he thought fit, while they cheered for their favourite. 
Minola had recognised him already. There was no mistaking 
the bald head, the bold blue eyes, the stooping shoulders, tne 
general air of reckless bravado and good-humour. She could see 
his face and head plainly, for he carried his hat in his hand and 
waved it gallantly at every cheer of the crowd. He forced a way 
right up to the door of the hotel where the thick of the struggle 
was, and in passing under the balcony he looked up and saw 
Minola, and made her a courteous bow. There was some further 
scuffling, clamour, and altercation ; but Minola could see that the 
influence of the popular candidate was all-prevailing, and that the 
battle was over. In a few seconds the crowd began to melt 
away. The air was rent with shouts of civil strife no longer, but 
with repeated cheers for the hero of the night. The police made 
some futile efforts to retain a few prisoners ; but not much seemed 
to come of that. Minola was rejoiced to hear the voice of Mr. 
Money say, in its usual tones of blunt self-possession . 

" Never mind, officers ; you know the names of some of the 
fellows ; you can see to them to-morrow ; better look after your- 
selves just now. Where's the poor fellow who was hurt?" 

In another moment or two Minola found herself out of the 
balcony, and trying to make a way into the room which she had 
quitted, and which seemed now a general resort. First she saw 



12,0 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

Lucy throwing her arms round her father's neck. Then sorrie 
shifting figure intervened, and she saw no more of Lucy, but was 
aware of Victor Heron and Mr. Sheppard exchanging friendly 
words. The room was full of people. She could hear various 
voices declaring that their owners were not in the least hurt ; but 
she could see that Victor Heron had the mark of a large cut on 
the forehead, and that some one was tying Money's arm in a sling. 

" Oh, I'm all right ! " she heard Victor say; " nothing much 
happened to me ; Money came off much worse. But that poor 
policeman . I am greatly afraid he was badly hurt." 

" Never saw such scoundrels," Money observed ; " by Jove, 
Heron, I thought at one time that your grievance was about to 
be settled for ever. It was all that confounded St. Paul's doings." 

At this moment Minola saw the intrepid St. Paul himself enter 
the room. She, standing with her back to the window, saw him 
before anyone else did. 

Mr. St. Paul pushed his way with his easy and indolent hardi- 
hood. 

" I have come to offer an apology to the ladies," he said, 
while everyone turned round amazed at the sound of his voice, 
and he stood meeting with cheery composure the gaze of all the 
eyes, and all their various expressions. " I wish to offer an 
apology to the ladies, w-ho, I am sorry to hear, were alarmed by 
the violence of some of my supporters . of course by no en- 
couragement of mine, as every gentleman here will understand. 
But I am very sorry to hear that Miss Money and Miss Grey were 
alarmed by the little row, and I've come to offer them the assu- 
rance of my regret." 

Victor Heron broke from those around him, and went up to 
St. Paul. 

" Mr. St Paul, I hold you responsible for the whole of what 
has happened to-night," he said. " You set your blackguards 
on to disturb this town, and if any harm comes of it . if that 
poor policeman who has been hurt should come to any grief . you 
shall be accountable for it. I promise you that you shall." 

"We are all rather confused to-night," St. Paul coolly replied, 
" and we are in a humour for making rather sweeping assertions. 
I am sorry you got hurt. Heron, on my honour ; but there's no 
use in making a fuss about these things. I tell you what, my 
good fellow, you owe it to me altogether that you have not had 
your brains knocked out." 

" Your gang of hired bravoes were capable of anything in 
Die way of crime," Heron said ; "but if they hadn't been twenty 
to one we shouldn't have wanted the intervention of their employer. 
Thank God, I put my mark on some of them ! " 



ALL THE RIVALS AT ONCE. 231 

" Uare say you did . that's the way with all you peaceful fellows. 
I'm glad I came in time, however ; and it's no use our losing our 
tempers about the whole affair. It wasn't much of a row, after all." 

" Let me tell you, Mr. St. Paul," Money said, coming to the 
rescue, " that if you think you can carry things off in this way 
you are confoundedly mistaken. You know as well as I do that 
you will never be allowed to hold a seat got by such flagrant and 
such . such infernal intimidation." 

" You may rely upon it, Mr. St. Paul," Mr. Sheppard said, 
likewise interfering in the dispute, " that neither Mr. Heron nor 
I will allow the proceedings of this night to go without a full 
judicial inquiry. Violence, sir, shall never be allowed to triumph 
in the parliamentary elections of this ancient and honourable 
borough." 

" Bravo. Sheppard ; that's very well said, indeed," the incorrigible 
St. Paul observed. " You have evidently been preparing for the 
place of its representative. But wouldn't it be as well, gentlemen, 
to wait until the close of the poll before w^e go into all this ? I have, 
of course, all the confidence w^hich a good cause and the support 
of the people must give a man ; but in such a borough there 
are unfortunately other influences at work, as our friend Sheppard 
knows, and it is just possible that T may not be elected. For the 
present I only came to offer to the ladies the expression of my 
sincere regret that they should have been annoyed or alarmed in 
any way. I don't see Miss Money present ; but I am happy 
enough to see Miss Grey, and I hope she will allow me to offer 
my apologies for what was, however, no fault of mine." 

Minola had kept near her window all this time, and was in 
hope of esca])ing without notice. But Mr. St. Paul coolly made 
his way to her, pushing all intervening persons aside, as if they 
hardly counted for anything in his progress. 

" I hope you don't think all this absurd affair was my personal 
doing," he said, when he was close to her. 

" I hope it w^as not your doing," Minola replied emphatically ; 
" I should think it disgraceful for anyone to have caused so much 
disturbance and done so much harm." 

" Hadn't a thing to do with it, I give you my word. But don't 
you mind these fools . lucky for some of them that I came in 
time." 

" It was disgraceful," said Minola ; " a poor man was very 
much hurt, I am told." 

"It was not a very big row, after all," he observed calmly j 
" I have seen twenty bigger, about which there wasn't half the 
talk. Anyhow, you'll find I have kept my word, Miss Grey ! 
your man stands to win." 



232 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

He made her a polite bow, took in the company generally 
in a friendly salute, and left the room with the same entirely self- 
satisfied good-humour which he had brought in with him. 

Minola felt that in a manner the eyes of the world were on 
her. She went up to Mr. Money, passing Victor Heron on her 
way. 

" Where is Lucy, Mr. Money ? " she asked. 

" Oh, we sent her out of the room ! I really thought I saw 
you going with her. She got frightened when she saw that Heron 
. and myself, I suppose, were a little hurt. She is very nervous, 
and she seemed like fainting." 

" I'll go to her," Minola said. 

She was hastily leaving the room, when Victor Heron stopped 
her. He seemed greatly annoyed at something. 

" What was that fellow saying to you, Miss Grey ? I advised 
you before not to let that man talk to you so much. You are too 
young; you don't understand; but I do wish you would not en- 
courage him. He seems to go on as if he were a personal friend 
of yours. Don't let him, Miss Grey . do have sense and take my 
advice." 

Minola thanked him with a grave and perplexing politeness, 
and made haste to follow Lucy. While she was speaking to, 
or rather listening to. Heron, the eyes of Mr. Sheppard had been 
on them, even as the eyes of Heron had been on her while she 
spoke to Mr. St. Paul. Sheppard saw that her manner to Heron 
was cool and indifferent, and he was glad once more. 

Victor Heron turned away disappointed. As Minola was 
leaving the room, she heard him ask . 

" Where's Blanchet ? Has anyone seen Blanchet? I saw him 
last in the thick of the fight . he came to my help in good time, 
and I hope he isn't hurt. Look for Blanchet, somebody." 

A pang went through Minola's heart. She thought that if any 
harm had befallen the poet it might have been her bitter words 
which drove him m the way of it. " And I was quite unjust to 
him, and he is no coward," she said to herself remorsefully. 



CHAPTER XXV. 

V I C T O R . P ROPOSITI? 

The election was over. All the principal persons with whom we 
are concerned had come back to town. Keeton had nearly 



p ICTOR. PROPOSITI? 23 3 

relapsed, for the time at least, into its ordinary condition. The 
riot, noisy and alarming as it was, had cost no Xx'i^, not even that 
of the poor policeman who seemed most in danger. No doubt 
the seeds of a popular discontent were sown pretty broadly in the 
place, which will bear thorny growth some future day ; but Keeton 
just now seems only the sleepier for the reaction after its unwonted 
excitement. The persons of this story who were concerned in 
the election might be said to be in somewhat similar condition. 
They seemed much the same as before ; but the days in Keeton 
had sown some seeds for them, too, which Avill probably grow into 
influence on all their lives. 

Lady Lim]ienny paid a visit to Mrs. Money. She had not seen 
her friends in Victoria Street since the election, and she was in great 
curiosity to hear something about it, and about some rumours 
indirectly connected with it, which had reached her ears. She 
went early, in order that she might find Mrs. Money alone. 

Mrs. Money might be described as alone, so far as visitors 
were concerned. Only her younger daughter was with her. Lucy 
was looking very pretty, but pale ; and she had a certain restlessness 
of manner and quick brilliancy of eyes which Lady Limpenny 
observed, although usually a woman rather imaginative than actually 
observant. Lady Limpenny smiled and nodded to herself, as it 
might seem ; after the fashion of one who congratulates herself on 
having judged correctly, and who says to her own soul, " Exactly ; 
it is just as I thought it would be." But the smile and nod might 
be taken as partly intended for the general company in this case. 
Lady Limpenny appeared as if she were willing that Mrs. Money 
and her daughter should be taken, in an unacknowledged and 
modest way, into the confidence of her self-congratulations. 

Mrs. Money went eagerly forward to welcome her old friend, 
and was cordially glad to see her, as, indeed, she Avas usually glad 
to see most persons. Lucy, as we know, did not greatly care 
for Lady Limpenny. She had now to submit to a peculiarly tender 
embrace, which she did with a particularly bad grace, looking all 
the time away from Lady Limpenny, even while she submitted to 
be kissed by her. Then she withdrew to a little sofa of her own, 
and was heard to express a wish that Nola Grey would come 
soon. On hearing this utterance Lady Limpenny looked round 
at her, and smiled and nodded again more benignly than ever. 

" And so our dear friend Heron is in Parliament," Lady Lim- 
penny said, in her soft, thunderous voice. " He is actually an 
M.P. ! I am so glad ; and you have all had such delightful adven- 
tures ! Your names in the papers ! I read it all with such envy. 
Yes ; I always longed to be in an adventure and to have my name 



234 M/SS MISANTHROPE. 

in the papers. I tried to get Sir James to listen to it, but he 
does not care for these things. You were all near being killed ! 
And our friend,* the handsome poet . now, do tell me again what 
his name is . he was lost, and actually supposed to be killed, or 
taken prisoner, or assaulted, or somethmg of the kind. How 
delightful ! I should so like to have been with you." 

" Oh ! Mr. Blanchet was not much hurt," Lucy said in a 
rather scornful tone. '' He only got into the fight somehow ; I 
don't know, I'm sure, what brought him there ; and then he went 
away to London. I think something must have offended him." 

Lucy had seen, and had not forgotten or forgiven, the poet's 
conduct when Mr. Sheppard was brought to the hotel during the 
riot, and she had not seen his subsequent dash into the strife, 
and paid but little attention to what was told her about it. But 
in any case poor Blanchet had long ceased to be a hero of hers. 
There was a time when he was her idol, and when she tried to 
believe in all manner of quaint artistic theories because they were 
his ; and when, if he had expressed an sesthetic opinion that a 
lady ought to wear a coalscuttle on her head, Lucy would have 
fought hard to get her mother's permission to mount the article. 
It is strange, as the once popular song used to say, how a woman 
can think the man a bore, she thought a god before. At least, it 
is strange, perhaps, that she should make the change so soon ; or, 
if it be contended that even that is not strange, it will surely be 
admitted that it is strange she could not contrive or attempt to 
make the change a little less glaringly apparent. One might 
have thought that this good little Lucy had already forgotten 
that she ever looked to Mr. Blanchet with wonder and admiration. 

" Mr. Heron says that Mr. Blanchet was in great danger, 
Lucy, my dear," her mother interposed in remonstrance ; " and 
Minola Grey speaks very highly of his conduct all the time." 

" But why did he disappear in that abrupt sort of way? why 
didn't he tell anyone where he was going?" the pertinacious Lucy 
kept on. "We were all alarmed about him, and all for nothing; 
and we had quite enough to think about without that." 

" But, my dearest darling Lucy, don't you look on a poet 
as different from ordinary people ? I am sure / do. I should not 
like to think of our dear friend . now, do tell me again what is his 
name . I shouldn't like to think of his acting just as everyone else 
would do. Oh, no ; I like a poet to be a poet. I am so pas- 
sionately fond of poetry ; and I have had to give it all up of 
late. I dare not read a poem now." 

" For your soul's sake, Lady Limpenny?" the irreverent Lucy 
asked saucily. 



VICTOR-PROPOSITI? 235 

" Darling, yes. For my soul's sake, as you say. I was for- 
getting all my' higher duties in life, and all that I owe, dearest, to 
the future life, in my love for the poetry of that delightful writer. 
oh, now what ivas his name ?. who wTote that lovely poem m the 
winter tliat evenbody was talking about. My dear, the doctrmes 
taught in that poem were something awful. I do assure you, awful. 
No one could read them long and be assured of safety m the 

higher sphere." , t i.- i 

" I think I remember the book," Mrs. IMoney said ; i think 
yoa lent it to me, Laura ; but it did not strike me as containing 
any doctrines of a dangerous kind. It did, hideed, protest in 
powerful accents against the system under which this country is 
rushing to her destruction." 

" I dare not read it, dearest Theresa ; I dare not, indeed ^; 

it would unhinge my mind. But I dare not read any poems now." 

Lady Lim penny presently rose to go ; but she paused even in 

the act of making her adieux, and, taking Lucy's hand in a manner 

of the tenderest affection, she asked : 

" But now, darling, what is this I hear about you ? Is it true, 
this very delightful pfece of news. at least, delightful if it is true^? 
Do tell me, dearest ; it can't be always kept a secret, you know." 
Lucy tried to get her hand away ; the unconscious Lady 
Limpenny retained it as if she were a privileged lover. Lucy 
could only look away and try to keep as composed as possible. 

"Really, I don't know what you mean, Lady Limpenny ._ I 
don't know what the news is ; and so I don't know whether it is 
delightful or not." 

" You very very naughty, sly little thing ! So you won't tell 
even such an old friend ? "Well, your mamma won't be so naughty, 
I am sure. I'll come in and talk to her to-morrow or next day, 
when I am quite sure that you are not here. Oh, indeed, I will ! 
1 am sure now it is true ; and I offer you my congratulations." 

Mrs. Money seemed as if she would try to interpose some 
protest against Lady Limpenny's conclusions ; but there was no 
possibility of stopping that lady, or of correcting any apprehen- 
sions she might have foraied. She gathered her skirts about her 
and was gone, chattering all the time, before anyone could put 
in a word of explanation, and firmly convinced that she knew all 
the truth about everything, and that her way of exhibiting it must 
have been delightful to everybody. 

Her display of knowledge was certainly not pleasing to Lucy 
Money in this instance. She seemed greatly annoyed, and, when 
Lady Limpenny had gone, she left the room and hid herself away 
somewhere. Mr. Money came home almost immediately, and his 



236 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

wife took the opportunity of expressing some of her fears to him 
about Lady Limpenny's talk and Lucy's way of taking it. 

" She's quite put out by it, Money dear, I do assure you. 
I never saw her so much hurt by anything of the kind before." 

" I wish that silly old Laura Limpenny didn't talk in that 
way," Money said with more earnestness in his manner than the 
talk of Lady Limpenny might have seemed to be worth. " It 
annoys Lucy, of course ; and then, what she said here she will say 
in half a dozen places before the day is over." 

" But, Money dear, it can't always be kept a secret. These 
things always do get talked about. I really don't see what harm 
it does even if they were." 

" No, perhaps not ; in an ordinary case, perhaps not. But 
somehow I don't like it in this case. I wish nothing had been 
said. Do you think Lucelet is quite happy, Theresa?" 

" Surely, dear, I should think so . oh, yes, she must be happy, 
very happy. Of course it is a trial . all girls feel it so, especially 
when they are brought up so much at home." 

Mr. Money seemed unusually grave. He stood and beat time 
on his chin with his fingers. 

" I don't know," he said, " somehow ; but I think everything 
is not quite right with the little girl.' She ts fond of him ? " he 
asked, turning abruptly to his wife. 

" Oh, yes, dear. she adores him." 

" Yes ? You think so ? Well, I am sure I think so too ; 1 
was quite certain of it. Of course she is young, and girls often 
don't know their own minds a bit . no, confound it, nor boys 
either, for that matter. I think at one time she used to be fond 
of that fellow Blanch et ; and now she does not care twopence 
about him. I say, Theresa, if this should be the same sort of 
thing ? " 

" But, my dear, it isn't ; you may be quite sure of that. I can 
tell you that for certain. Why, only look at her eyes when he 
is near! and Lucy has told me again and again that she never 
thought about Mr. Blanchet in that sort of way." 

" Yes, I have watched her, Theresa, as you say, and I have 
looked at her eyes and all that ; and I did believe, certainly, 
that it was quite a different thing this time. If I hadn't thought 
it . my good heavens ! . should I have meddled or made in the 
affair?" 

Mr. Money walked uneasily up and doAvn the room once or 
twice. His wife looked at him anxiously, but she did not quite 
follow his meaning or appreciate his alarms She was indeed, at 
the moment, engaged in thinking whether something could not 



VICTOR. PROPOSITI f 237 

be done to make the life of poor Mr. Blanchet a little more 
happy than it seemed at present to be. She was convinced in 
her heart that Blanchet must be suffering keenly on account of 
Lucy, and, as the helper of unhappy men, she burned with a wish 
to do something for him. She had so completely made up her 
mind that Lucy was having all her desire in life, and, having it, 
must be satisfied, that all her anxiety on her daughter's behalf 
seemed to have come to an end, and her cares properly reverted 
to the outer world. 

" Yes, I thought it was all right." Mr. Money suddenly came 
to a stop in his walk. " I had not the least idea that it was not all 
right ; but then one doesn't know . at least, / don't . whether it 
isn't a peculiarity of girls that when you get for them what they 
want, then, by Jove, they don't want it any more : and I tell you, 
Theresa, I have been thinking of this a good deal lately . in the 
last few days." 

There are, perhaps, women w^ho might have been disposed to 
remark to Mr. Money that anyhow the affair was pretty well all 
his own doing. There are women who possibly would have given 
him no better comfort than the reminder that they had not advised 
him to do the things he had done; and that, perhaps, if he had 
sought the advice of his wife a little more, the result might have 
been more satisfactory. Mrs. Money had no ideas of the kind. 
Even if she had known more clearly than she did the meaning of 
his alarm, it would never have occurred to her to doubt that he 
had done the very best thing possible under any given circum- 
stances. If things went \\Tong after that, it must be the fault of 
the things ; it could not be the fault of Mr. Money. 

The talk w'as interrupted for the present by the arrival of 
visitors, for this was one of Mrs. Money's days of reception. 
Presently Lucy herself returned. Mr. Money drew her aside, and 
asked her one or two casual questions. Then he said suddenly, 
and fixing his eyes on his daughter, without giving her any time 
to think of herself or to conceal her feelings : 

" Isn't Victor coming here to-day, Lucelet ? " 

The eyes of the girl sparkled again as she answered, and his 
eyes watched her answer : 

" Oh, yes, papa dear ; I expect him every moment ; you don't 
think he is not coming, do you ? ". 

The smile that sometimes made Mr. Money's rough face look 
almost handsome came over it as he saw the expression in his 
daughter's eyes. He took Lucy playfully by the chin. 

" I should think he was coming indeed, Lucelet ; I rather 
think you know more about his movements than I do. So Laura 
Limpenny has been talking her nonsense ! " 



238 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

Lucy coloured. 

" Oh, yes, papa dear. I wish that dreadful woman did not come 
here ; she talks of such things ; it is humiliating to hear oneself 
talked about in that way." 

" Oh, that's all, is it ? don't you mind her talk, Lucelet ; it can't 
be helped, anyhow; and remember that if you were a princess 
all the gossips of Europe would be talking about you." 

Then he left his daughter and went to talk to some one e^se, 
somewhat relieved in his mind for the moment. He watched 
his Lucelet, however, all the time. 

Presently he saw her eyes light up and her cheeks colour, aud 
then her eyes droop again ; and she looked wonderfully pretty, 
he thought, . and so, indeed, might anyone else have thought as 
well who happened to see her just then. If any one of us looking 
on might have admired the expression on the pretty girl's crim- 
soning face, what admiration must he have felt for whom that 
brightening colour came and those eyes sparkled? . the king 
for whom . as Lady Castlewood so prettily said . that red flag 
was displayed? For Mr. Money knew, before he had seen any 
new-comer enter the room, that the visitor whose coming caused 
all that brightness was the member for the borough of Keeton. 
Victor Heron had entered the room, and was already talking 
to Lucy. 

Victor, then, had won everything for which he strove, and some- 
thing too for which he had not striven. He had won a brilliant 
and an unexpected victory. Never before in the memory of man 
had the borough of Keeton been represented by a Liberal. 
There was nothing else of any particular interest going on in 
politics, and the attention of the country had really been turned 
for some days very keenly on Keeton. The riot, the family 
quarrel, the fact that Heron had to fight against family influences, 
Tory influences, and the red republicans all at once, had made 
his enterprise seem so dashing that, even if he had lost, he would 
have got a certain repute by it. But, when it was found that he 
had positively won, he became the hero of the hour with the 
public, while with his own party he was a person to be made 
the very most of, and applauded to the echo. No fear of his not 
finding men of mark to take up his grievance now. 

The adventurous St. Paul had kept his word. Nothing but his 
intervention could possibly have carried the place for Victor, or 
kept poor Sheppard out of Parliament. Coming just at the right 
moment, St. Paul hid caught the affections of the fierce democrats, 
the proletairiate with the dash of atheist in it, and had drawn 
the voters away from Sheppard. Many of them had determined 



VICTOR. PROPOSITI? 239 

to give their votes rather for the man whom they called their out- 
spoken enemy. the Tory, that is to say. than for the doubtful 
friend, as every professing Liberal seemed to them to be who 
could not go all the way with the social revolution and them. 
St. Paul captivated enough of them to leave Sheppard solely to the 
support of the thorough Tories, who had no grievance against the 
duail family ; and the result was that Victor Heron won the election, 
or had it thus won for him without his knowledge or consent. Not 
the faintest suspicion of "a put-up thing" existed in any mind. 
It Avas perfectly well known in Keeton and elsewhere that Victor 
Heron had positively refused to have anything to do with St. Paul, 
and that they had all but quarrelled ; and, indeed, the general 
opinion was that St. Paul had undertaken his candidature for the 
sake of spoiling Victor's chance. He fancied, people thought, 
that the extreme "rads" or "reds" might give their votes to 
Victor for lack of any stronger Liberal, and he therefore cut m 
between merely for the sake of destroying the game of the man 
who would not accept his assistance. A great many people were 
amused at his folly and his odd miscalculation; and even Money 
wondered how he could have been so badly advised, and how 
be could have failed to see that in what he did he was playing 
Victor's game and not spoiling it. 

Victor Heron, then, has w^on, and is on the high road to be a 
political and a social success, and to have his grievance set right 
now, if he cares about it or has time to think about it any more. 
It is said that he is to be married to Mr. Money's pretty daughter, 
who will have a great fortune, people are certain ; to say nothing 
of the fact that Money has no son, and that at his death most of 
his property will probably go to his rising son-in-law. Truly does 
young Heron seem to many persons a man who has dropped from 
the clouds to fall into fortune. A disappointed politician of sixty 
who started with splendid self-conceit, good abilities, and very 
fair chances, and wnth all has come to nothing, draws the moral of 
his personal failure from the story he hears of Victor Heron's suc- 
cess. " You see, he can do what I never could do," he says ; " he 
can entertain the party. I defy any man to make his way in 
political life in a country like this if he has not the means to 
entertain his party, and this fellow will be able to do that with the 
girl's fortune and what Money must leave him some time." 

It is true, then, what the people say. what Lady Limpenny 
has been so broadly hinting at? It was, then, as Minola Grey sup- 
posed? See, she herself has just come in, and is talking with 
Mr. Money now. She seems full of spirits ; at least, she is talking 
in a very animated way. A lady who is present has already 



240 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

remarked, in a low tone, to another lady, that she thinks Miss Grey 
talks too much, and is too sarcastic for a young person. Was it 
as Minola supposed, and did the influence of the moonlight and 
the walk home that night in the park at Keeton prove too much 
for the inflammable heart of Victor Heron? No ; that night had 
passed over, and although Heron had felt the influence of the 
place, the hour, and the circumstances, he had not been able to 
understand his own feelings clearly enough to give them expression 
in words or in acts. It was when he came in fresh from the 
excitement of the Keeton riot, and when he saw that Lucy, who 
with all her love for her father had borne up gallantly against 
the sight of his hurts, became faint the moment she caught a 
glimpse of Heron's wounded face, and had to be taken from the 
room . it was then that the truth was borne in upon Heron for the 
first time, and he was made aware that Lucy Money loved him. 
He was almost overwhelmed by the discovery. This was some- 
thing of which he had never thought. It was all true what he had 
said to Minola Grey that long-past day in Regent's Park^he had 
really had a sort of goddess theory about women. He had lived 
so much out of the world of fashion, and of what we call life, 
that he had no chance of having his ideal destroyed. If the few 
Englishwomen whom he met in a far colony . the wives and 
daughters of elderly, experienced officials, and such like . were not 
all that his fancy painted womanhood, he had always the con- 
^.iction to fall back upon that these were not fair illustrations of 
the maids or the matrons of merry England at home. He had 
always thought of a woman as a being whom a man courted and 
served, and at last, by immense exercise of devotion and merit of 
all kinds, persuaded to listen while he told her of his deep and 
reverent love. It had not occurred to him to think that some- 
times, even among the maids of merry England, the woman makes 
the lo\-e, and the man only puts up with it. When it flashed upon 
his mind that Lucy Money loved him, he was like one to whom 
some wholly new and unexpected conditions of life have suddenly 
revealed themselves. He felt, in a strange sort of way, stricken 
humble by the thought that so sweet and good a girl could love 
him, and wish to trust her life into his hands. Is it any wonder if, 
in the flush of his shame and his gratitude, he told himself that 
l:e was in love with her ? 



241 

CHAPTER XXVI. 

" LUCKLESS love's INTERPRETER." 

The event in which so much success had fallen to the share 
of Victor Heron had not, on the whole, turned out badly for his 
rival, Mr. Sheppard. The latter had lost the election, it is true, 
but he had made a certain repute for himself as a Conservative 
candidate. He was now before the eyes of his party and the 
country as one who had fought a good fight, who had made sacri- 
fices for his cause, and who therefore ought to be considered when 
another vacancy brought an opportunity of choosing and supporting 
a candidate. Mr. Sheppard's name was in the political playbill, 
and that was something. After the defeat of Novara, Count 
Cavour, then only a rising politician, remarked that Piedmont had 
gained enough to compensate for all her losses in having got the 
right to hoist the national flag. Mr. Sheppard had got by his 
defeat the right to hoist the flag of his party, to be one of 
its bearers, and that was something. He was now looked upon 
everywhere as a man sure to be seen in Parliament before long. 

Mr. Sheppard made arrangements for the carrying on of his 
business by other hands than his, and he came to live in London. 
He took handsome lodgings in a western street, not far from where 
Victor Heron lived. He was elected a member of a new Conser- 
vative club, and apparently he went about the task of getting 
into society, at least into the political dinner-parties and crowded 
drawing-rooms of society. In that which he had set out to himself 
as the great object of his life he was not, as we have seen, by any 
means despondent. He saw that he had greatly risen in the good 
opinion of Minola Grey. She had never been so kind ana 
respectful to him as during the contest at Keeton. Always before 
she had treated him with contempt, which she took no trouble to 
hide; then, for the first time, she had shown some respect and 
even regard for him. He settled himself in London, a hopeful 
and almost a confident man as regarded alike his ambition and 
his love. He could afford to wait, he said to himself. He culti- 
vated as much as possible the acquaintanceship of Mr. Money and 
of Victor Heron, whom, it is needless to say, he no longer regarded 
with any feelings of jealousy. Mr. Money and every one else 
admitted that nothing could be more manly and creditable than 
Sheppard's manner of taking his defeat. Minola seldom heard 
him spoken of but with respect. 

The women are not many on whom the public opinion of those 

R 



242 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

immediately around them has no influence in determining their 
estimate of a man. Minola began to see that there were quaUties 
in her old lover for which she had not given him credit. This, 
indeed, she had seen for herself during the contest at Keeton. He 
had, at all events, a certain manly dignity, even if he was slow and 
formal. She may, too, have been impressed in certain moods with 
the strength and patience of his feelings for her. In some melan- 
choly moments she felt a sympathy for him, and found a sort of 
sad amusement in admitting to herself that she and her old lover 
were alike in one part of their destiny, at all events. But she was 
sincerely glad to hear that Sheppard was beginning to go out a 
good deal, and she had a strong hope and conviction that in society 
he must very soon get over his old feelings for her. All that was 
natural enough, she thought, when they both lived in the country, 
and he knew very few women; but here in London he must meet 
with many girls a thousand times more attractive . so she was 
honestly convinced . than she could possibly appear even to the 
most prejudiced eye, and he would soon get over the weakness 
that exalted a country girl into a heroine and a goddess. He 
would meet with women who knew the world . the world of 
politics and of society . who could assist a man in his public 
career and in his natural ambition, and some one of whom would 
doubtless be found to marry him. The thought gave Minola sin- 
cere gratification. 

Some of this is told a little in anticipation ; for we are, as yet, 
in the first few weeks that followed the Keeton election. There 
is one, nay, there are two, of the personages most prominent to 
our eyes in that contest, of whom we have some account to render 
before the story resumes its regular march. 

Poor Herbert Blanchet found himself a man sadly changed in 
his own estimate when the subsidence of the riot in the Keeton 
streets left him stranded high and dry, and still alive. Not only 
was he alive, but he was absolutely uninjured. The dignity of the 
slightest wound was not on him to make him interesting. All that 
commotion that had seemed to him so terrible that his very soul 
shrank from it, turned out to be, so far as he was concerned, more 
innocent and harmless than a schoolboy game of wrestling. He 
had been ridiculous when shrinking from the riot, and he now felt 
that he must have been ridiculous when by sheer force he mastered 
his quivering nerves and threw himself literally into it. In the very 
thick ot the battle, and when he came to Heron's aid, he thought 
he saw an inclination to good-humoured laughter on Heron's face 
at the sight of him and his weapon. When the riot was over, 
and the crowd began to disperse, and the Liberal leaders went 



''LUCKLESS LOVES INTERPRETER:' 243 

into the hotel, nobody took any notice of him. He seemed to be 
of no account in the eyes of any one. Men whose companion he 
had been during his share of the campaign in Keeton passed him 
rapidly by and did not seem to recognise him ; they were all think- 
ing of other things and other persons, clearly. Even Heron, to 
whose help he had come, did not think it worth his while appa- 
rently to make any inquiry about him. 

We know, of course, that Heron did find time and thought to 
ask about the poet ; but the poet did not know this. The thought, 
however, which most disturbed Blanchet's mind was not that Heron 
had been ungrateful to him, but that clearly, in the mind of men 
like Heron, the whole affair was a matter of no moment . an 
ordinary event at an election, involving an amount of danger such 
as men encounter in their huntings and their other pastimes of 
which Blanchet knew little, and not enough to be seriously thought 
of a moment after it was past. It was, then, for danger such as 
this that the poet had tvnce made himself ridiculous in the eyes of 
Minola Grey. It was for danger like this that he had exposed 
himself to hear from her the bitterest words that man can hear 
from woman. In truth, it is not certain that poor Blanchet was 
really a coward. He had been put suddenly in front of a sort 
of trial entirely new to him, and his physical nerves had shrunk 
from it at first. He had not a virile nature ; he had none of 
the strong animal spirits which carry so many men through all 
manner of danger without giving them time to think about it. He 
had not much, if we may say so, of the English nature in him ; of 
that cool, strong, unimaginative nature which takes all tasks set 
to it very much as a matter of course, and goes at them accord- 
ingly to win or lose. When Nature was making Herbert 
Blanchet, there was for some reason or other a little too much of 
the feminine material put into his composition. We often see 
these shght mistakes on the part of Nature. We meet with a 
tall and bearded creature in whom a superabundance of the feminine 
is always showmg itself; we find some pretty and delicate being 
in whom the judgment, the inclinations, the way of looking at 
things, are all unmistakably masculine. Blanchet had not lived 
a manly life ; he had, indeed, not lived a life that would be whole- 
some for man or woman. It was not, be it understood, harmful 
or immoral, as lives are accounted on our somewhat dwarfed 
and formal principles of social good or harm; but it was a life 
without bracing strength of any kind. It was a life of sickly 
affectations and debauching qonceits. It made sham as good as 
effort. In that sort of Hfe it sufficed to think yourself a great 
person, and to say to your friends that you were so, and there 

R 2 



244 M/SS MISANTHROPE. 

was no occasion for the long, healthy, noble labour that, with 
whatever genius, is needed to develop success. It was a life of 
ghastly groping after originality; a life in which one became 
fantastic, not out of superabundant fancy, but of set purpose. 
The moment an entirely new situation was presented to Blanchet, 
and he was called upon to act under circumstances not previously 
thought out and reduced to theatric form, all the shams were sud- 
denly blown away, and the weakly, naked nature was left shivering 
and shuddering in the rough, unaccustomed air of reality. 

Little Mary Blanchet was sitting alone the day after the riot 
at Keeton. It was drawing on towards evening, and she had her 
books of manuscript out on the table and was at work at her poems. 
She was very particular about the copying of her poems ; she 
began a long poem in a bound volume with ruled leaves, and if, 
in copying, she made any mistake, even of a word, she put that 
volume aside and began another. Therefore the one poem at 
which she was now engaged had already produced several of these 
manuscript books, without itself approaching much nearer to com- 
pletion. She was seated before the work with her pen in her 
mouth and her eyes fixed on tiie ceiling, and was in a little doubt 
between a rhyme which was of excellent sound but doubtful 
grammar, and one of which the grammar was all right but the 
sound was open to challenge. Her own sympathies went 
altogether with the good rhyme, and she was strongly inclined 
to run the risk of being a little superior for once to those narrow 
grammatical rules which offend so many poetesses. While thus, 
like the Achilles of Pope's Homer, " in anguish of suspense 
delayed," she was told that her brother wished to see her. 

Mary sprang up in excitement, let her ink-steeped pen fall on 
her book, thus reducing a new volume to worthlessness, and, 
scarcely stopping even for a plaintive murmur, ran out and brought 
Herbert Blanchet into the room. She was convinced that he must 
have some important intelligence. Could it be that he had pro- 
posed for INIinola, been accepted, and had come back to London 
in all speed to arrange for the wedding ? His face, however, did 
not look like that ; it was haggard and miserable, and the poet 
had evidently not slept the past night. Mary felt her heart sink 
within her as she looked at him. 

Blanchet sat down and passed his hands wildly through his 
unkempt hair . hair that, however, looked so beautiful, Mary 
thought. 

" Well, my sister," he said, with a gloomy effort at being light 
and careless of speech, "I have come back, you see." 

"What has happened, Herbert dear?" the affrighted old maid 
asked; and she trembled all over. 



*' LUCKLESS LOVE'S INTERPRETER.'* 245 

" Nothing i)articular, Mary; only that your brother has made 
a fool of himself." 

Then he smiled in a dismal way, with ghastly lips and livul 
face ; and then he put his hands to his forehead, and burst into 
tears. 

Never was a woman more frightened than poor Mary, She had 
never seen a man in tears before ; she remembered having read 
and shudderingly admired a line in a poem of Mrs. Hemans's, m 
which she, Mary Blanchet, and all the world in general were 
advised not to talk of grief until they had seen the tears of bearded 
men. Poor Mary always thought that the tears of bearded men 
must be something very dreadful to see ; but she never expected 
to see them, for she did not think it possible that Englishmen, 
the only race of men she knew, could shed tears under any pro- 
vocation. Now she was compelled to look on the tears of a bearded 
man whom she dearly loved ; and she found thac Mrs. Hemans's 
suggestions fell far short of the dreadful reality. She tried all she 
could to comfort her broken-hearted brother ; but comfort is par- 
ticularly unavailing when one does not even know the source_ of 
the trouble. It was some time before poor Blanchet could give 
his sister any coherent account of his distress. When the story 
was told, however, it did not seem so hopeless to Mary as she 
had expected. He had not been refused by Minola; he had not 
even proposed to her. She did not attach much importance to 
the fact that Minola had supposed him. wrongfully, of course- 
to be a coward. He could easily prove, if indeed he had not 
done it already, that he was as brave as she, Mary, knew her 
brother must be. It was wrong of Minola to judge so quickly 
and so harshly, and very unlike Minola ; but, after all, what did it 
prove but the deep interest which she took in Herbert? She was 
disappointed when she thought he was not all that she had ex- 
pected. What did that prove but that she had expected great 
things? Well, it was not by any means too late to prove that her 
first expectations were true estimates of Mary's brother. 

It is a tmth that Herbert Blanchet gradually became encou- 
raged, and almost restored, if not to his good opinion of himself, 
yet to his hopes. It was wonderful what a person of importance, 
a wise counsellor, a trusty friend, his sister grew to be in his eyes 
all at once. How long is it since he thought her an absurd little 
old maid in whom no person of artistic soul could possibly feel any 
interest? How long is it since he fully beUeved that, Minola Grey 
was kind to her partly out of pity, and partly because it looked 
picturesque and charming for a handsome young woman to be the 
patroness and friend of an unattractive elderly woman ? Ho.v 



246 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

long is it since he was ashamed of the relationship, and would 
gladly have given Minola to understand that he considered his 
sister only a poor little, old-fashioned person, whose pretences at 
I)oetry and art had his entire disapproval ? And now he wept 
upon her faithful bosom, and drew comfort from her flattering 
but very sincere assurances ; and poured out his feelings over 
and over again ; and asked her to tell him over and over again 
this, that, and the other thing that Minola had said ; and found 
comfort in her talk ; and would rather have been in her com- 
pany that evening than in the centre of the beloved school, or in 
the drawing-room of a lady of rank. If poor little Mary could 
have thought of such a thing as being revenged upon her brother 
for all his long neglect, his selfish desertion of her, she might have 
found herself well avenged that night when he clung to her, and 
hung upon her words, and was only restored to think life worth 
having by her flatteries and her promises that she would do all for 
him, and had good hope to make everything come right even yet. 

So far as Mary was concerned, she had hardly ever been 
so happy. It was enough to make her happy at any time to know 
that she was of importance to her poet-brother. But she had also 
now from him the confession of his passionate love for her friend. 
It had always smote a little on Mary's conscience that, in helping 
her brother in his scheme about Minola, she was not quite certain 
whether, after all, the poet really loved Minola as Mary thought 
Minola deserved to be loved. Now she was satisfied on this point. 
Herbert had poured out his whole heart to her, and had showed 
her that his love for Minola was deep, passionate, eternal. It did 
not occur to Mary to suspect that there could be a woman on earth, 
even Minola, who was capable of rejecting the love of a man 
like Herbert Blanchet. That was Mary Blanchet's happiest night 
thus far in London ; her happiest night thus far in life. 

In his misery Blanchet had told the truth. He was really in 
love with Minola. He had gone in for money and a beautiful 
wife, and he had lost himself hopelessly in the game. His self- 
ronceit had readily made him believe that the handsome, simple 
countiy girl who thought so much of his sister must fall in love 
M ith him. It was only by degrees it dawned upon him that there 
was a clear strength in Minola's character such as he had thought 
no women ever had. He began to see that she was friendly to him, 
but otherwise unconcerned ; and that he was fairly in love with her. 
He began to be ashamed of the pitiful hopes he had formed about 
her money ; he began to be ashamed of a good deal of his cha- 
racter and career. The genuine extravagance of the delight which 
he felt when she enabled him to put his poems before the world 



"LUCKLESS LOVE'S LNTERPRETER."' 247 

in such splendid dress, had almost as strange an effect on him as 
the gift of the bishop's candlesticks on poor Jean Valjean. It 
shook all his previous theories of life and its philosophy, to find 
that there was so much of simple generosity in the world ; 
especially to find it in the heart of a girl over whom his charms 
and his affectations seemed to have no manner of influence. He 
found that he had his world to reconstmct. He went home and 
passed some wretched days. He looked back on his life, its 
theories, its affectations, its pitiful little vanities, and he won- 
dered how he could ever have thought to make genuine poetry out 
of such shams of emotion and simulacra of beauty. It would 
require fairy power indeed to spin such rubbish of straws into gold. 

Still, he had some hopes from Mary and her influence over 
Minola. It had come to that ; his sister now was his chief resource 
and his star of hope. The artful Mary was not long in bringing 
her plans to maturity and to proof. 

" Minola, dear," she said one evening after Miss Grey had 
settled down in London again, "do you really never think of 
getting married ? " 

" Never, Mary ; why should I, if I don't like?" 

" Well, you can't live always alone in this kind of way.'* 

" But I am not living alone in any kmd of way." 

" Not now ; not exactly now. But I may not live, you know; 
I don't feel at all like myself lately ; and I shudder at the idea of 
your being left alone. I am so much older than you, Minola." 

" But, Mary, my dear little poetess, if you think marriage such 
a good thing, why didn't you marry ? " 

Mary sighed, and cast at her leader a look of gende, melan- 
choly reproach. 

" Ah ! there were reasons for my not marrying which happily 
don't exist for you. And then my life would be a \vretched one, 
Minola, but for you. Where are you to get a Minola, dear, when 
you come to be as old as I am now ? " 

The prosjject of growing old never frightens the young. It 
is their conviction that, at worst, they will die before that comes 
about. It was not, therefore, the thought of becoming like Mary 
Blanchet, that made Minola seem melancholy for the moment. 
It was the thought of the weariness that life must have for her 
in any case, young or not. She remained thinking for a second or 
two, until she became conscious that Mary was waiting for her lo 
say something. Then she tried to get rid of the subject. 

"Well, Mary, at all events I need not trouble myself about 
marriage just at this moment ; I don't want to be like the giri in 
the old song, who refused the men before they asked her. No one 
has been asking me lately." 



248 . MISS MISANTHROPE. 

" I know some one," Mary broke out, " who would ask you if 
he dared. I know some one who loves you . who adores you." 

Minola looked round in amazement. It did not occur to her 
at the moment to think of what or whom poor Mary meant. 

Mary rose from her chair and ran to Minola, and threw herself 
on the ground near her in supplication, with her eyes full of tears. 

" It's my brother, Minola ; it's my brother ! He adores you. 
He would die for you. He will die for you if you won't listen to 
him. Oh, do listen to him, darling, and make us all happy ! " 

Minola rose from her chair in such anger as she had seldom 
known before. She was not even particularly careful how she 
extricated herself from Mary's clinging grasp. 

" Are you speaking seriously, Mary?" she asked, in a low tone, 
and with determined self-restraint. 

" Oh, Minola darling, it's only too serious ! He was here the 
other day. He is wretched, he is miserable, because he thinks 
you were angry with him. I thought he would die. I think he 
will die. He didn't want to tell any one ; but a sister's eyes can't 
be deceived. And it's no use, and he so loves you," 

Minola could have found it in her heart to curse Lo^*'^ and all 
his works. This distracting revelation was too much for her. 
It was utterly unexpected. She had never for a moment thought 
of this. Herbert Blanchet had always seemed to her a person to 
help and pity, and sometimes to be angry with and despise. Even 
if she had been a vain girl, it is not likely that the announcement 
of his love would have gratified her vanity. 

" Did he send you to tell me this, Mary?" 

"No, dear," Mary said humbly, losing heart and hope with 
every moment, as she looked into Minola's face, which was pale, 
and cold, and almost hard in its expression, " No, dear ; but I 
thought it would be better, perhaps, if I were just to speak to you 
a little about it first, just to know how you felt, and then I 
might perhaps encourage him or not, you know; and I thought 
tliat might not be so unpleasant, perhaps, Minola." 

" You are right, Mary ; it is much less unpleasant. But I think 
I need not give you any further answer, need I ?" 

Minola's manner was strangely cold and hard. She could not 
help feeling as if there were something like treachery in this secret 
arrangement of brother and sister to try to persuade her into a 
marriage which she would otherwise never have thought of. Both 
brother and sister seemed for the moment mean in her eyes ; and 
Minola hated meanness. 

Mary looked wistfully into her leader's cold, stern face. It must 
be said for Minola that the coldness and sternness came from 



*' WAS EVER WOMAN IN THIS HUMOUR WOOED?" 249 

disappointment rather than from anger. It seemed to her that 
her closest friend had betrayed her. 

" Is there no hope for him?" Mary asked, faintly. 

" I wish you Avould not talk in that foolish way," Minola said 
coldly. " It is not worthy of you. It ought to be no hope to any 
man that a girl who does not love him or think about him in any 
such way should marry him. And if a man is so silly, his sister 
ought to have better wishes for him. / would not degrade my 
brother . if I could say I had one and were fond of him . by 
speaking of him in such a way. I hope your brother has more 
sense, INIary, and more spirit, than you seem to think." 

" He so loves you, Minola ; he does indeed," Mary feebly 
pleaded. 

" If he really loves me . and I hate to use the word, and I 
hate to hear it . I am sorry for him, Mary ; and I am ashamed of 
him, and I feel a contempt for him, and that's all. I hate to think 
ot men grovelling in that way, or of women either; but I do 
think that if women are such idiots, they, generally at least, have 
the spirit to hide their folly and not to degrade themselves." 

" But, Minola, a man must speak some time, you know, or how 
can he tell ?" ]\Iary argued, plucking up a little spirit on behalf of 
her misprized brother. 

" Your brother might have known perfectly well. He must 
have known. What word did I ever say to him that could make 
him think I cared for him ? Do you think, if a girl cares for a man, 
and wants him to know it, she doesn't let him see it ? I believe," 
Minola added, in her bitterness, and with a meaning known only 
to herself, " women have trouble enough to hide their feelings 
even when they don't want them to be known." 

With this word she left the room abruptly, and would hear 
no more. 

So ended poor Mary Blanchet's first attempt to plead the 
love-cause of her brother. 



CHAPTER XXVII. 

"was ever woman in this humour wooed?" 

The days were not pleasant for Minola or Mary which followed 
this disclosure. The two friends for a time did not seem as if 
they were the same persons ; there was a cold constraint between 
them. Minola soon got over her anger to poor Mary, and was 



250 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

only angry with herself for having spoken harshly to the unhappy 
old maid ; but she could not revive the confidence that had existed 
between them before. She felt that between them now was some- 
thing that killed confidence. She tried to speak to her companion 
in tones and words if possible more kindly and friendly than ever ; 
but the genial heart of friendship which makes mere words into 
sweet realities was hardly there any more. 

Mary Blanchet was not very good at disguising her feelings. 
Even from Minola, whom she loved, and of whom she stood in 
some awe, she made little effort to conceal the fact that she felt 
herself a sufferer. The curse in the dead man's eye, which told 
so heavily on the Ancient Mariner, was far more bitter, doubtless, 
than the silent reproach in Mary's eye ; but Minola was much 
oppressed by the latter. She felt as if she had been doing some 
wrong to Mary and to the cause of friendship and common sisterly 
womanhood; and, like all generous natures, she was disposed, 
when the heat of anger and surprise was over, to throw all the 
blame on herself, or at least to be troubled with the fear that she 
must have been to blame. She began to long for a full recon- 
ciliation with Mary. She reproached herself with having brought 
the poetess away from her home and her friends at Keeton; as if 
poor Mary had any home there, or any friends there or elsewhere, 
except Minola herself. 

" I am going to see my brother," Mary Blanchet said one 
evening, not without a gentle reproach in her voice. 

"Yes, Mary? I am glad. You will give him my regards . 
my very kind regards . will you not.-"' 

" Oh, yes ; certainly, if you wish it." This was followed by 
a little sigh, as if Mary would have said, " I don't think there is 
much comfort in that, if that is all." 

Minola looked up and saw the melancholy little face. She 
was greatly touched. She thought of their long friendship, going 
back to the days when she was a little child, and regarded Mary 
as another Elizabeth Barrett. She remembered her own brother 
and her love for him, and her heart was pierced by the expression 
in Mary's face. She went to the poetess and put her arms round 
her neck, and the poor poetess fairly gave way and was drowned 
in tears. 

" It's so unhappy ; it's all so unhappy," sobbed Mary. " I never 
thought it would come to this. I can't bear to think of him so, 
and that he should be so wretched ; I can't, indeed." 

Minola waited for a while to let this grief have way ; and, 
indeed, it must be owned that her own tears were hard enough 
to restrain. Then, wiien the passion of the poetess had a little 



"WAS EVER WOMAN IN THIS HUAf OUR WOOED?" 251 

abated, and Minola thought she could listen to reason, she began 
to reason gently, very gently. 

" I know you blame me for this, Mary, my dear old friend, 
even when you try not to show it. But tell me, Mary, where am 
I to blame ? You know I don't want to marry, and you know 
I ought not to marry any one if I don't . if I don't love him, dear. 
I do not love your brother in that way; and it would be doing 
him a great wrong if I were to marry him merely because I was 
fond of you, you foolish, kmd old Mary, I/e would only feel 
offended by such an idea ; and quite right. I almost wish I could 
marry him, dear, for your sake, and for the sake of all the old 
times and the pleasant days we have had together, and the even- 
ings, and the confidences . all the dear old times ! But you would 
not ask me to do that, Mary.? you would not let me do it, if I were 
inclined?" 

Mary sobbed a doubtful assent to this proposition. It is to 
be feared she felt in her own heart that she would be glad if her 
friend would maiTy her brother on any account. 

" You don't know what it is to me," Mary murmured out, ** to 
see him so unhappy." 

" But, my dear, that won't last always ; he will get over that. 
I am not so foolish, Mary dear, as to believe that there is anything 
in me which your brother will not find in twenty other girls." 

" But that's because you don't believe he has any strong feelings 
at all," Mary said, reproachfully. "You do him wrong, Minola. 
You don't mean it, I know ; but you do him wrong. He has strong 
feelings, indeed he has. Don't you think / know ?" 

Minola might, perhaps, with truth have said that she had 
no profound reliance on Mary's power of reading character even 
in the case of her brother; but she did not touch that point. 

"I am sure he has strong feelings, Mary; I am sure of it now. 
I didn't think so once, perhaps . you are quite right in that . but 
I am sure now that I was mistaken. I have a great regard for 
your brother ; much too great a regard," she added, with a certain 
bitterness in her tone, " to beUeve he could waste much of his Hfe 
in idle regret because a girl like me did not marry him." 

" It's all very well for you, Minola," Mary said, raising her head 
and throwing something like downright anger into her voice ; " it's 
all very well for you, who don't have any of these feelings. You 
don't care for any one . in that way, I mean. You don't care for 
any man. Other people can't have such strong feelings." 

Minola broke down. Why she did so, only the benign powers 
that understand human and especiaUy womanly weaknesses can 
tell ; certainly Minola never could explain. She had gone through 



252 MISS MISANTHROPE 

ordeals, one might have thought, far worse than this, and kept a 
serene face and her secret safe. But there was something in this 
unjust reproach coming from the poor old friend whom she had 
known so long, and for whom she had persistently done so much, 
that quite overcame her. The words found out the very heart of 
her womanhood and her weakness ; the place where her emotions 
had no steel plates of caution ready put on to protect them. Half 
in tears, half in hysterical laughter, she broke away from Mary. 

" Oh, you unjust, silly, foolish old Mary ! It's not true a 
word that you are saying. I am as great a fool as he, and as you, 
and as all the rest, I suppose ! Don't I know what such feelings 
are ? Oh, how I wish I didn't ! " 

JNIary looked up in utter amazement. 

"Why, Minola darling, it can't be " 

" But I tell you it can be and it is, Mary . and now do let 
me alone for the future. Oh, yes, I a;n in love . up to the roots of 
my hair, dear, if you like the words . I can't think of any other. 
There, I have made a fool of myself and humbled myself enough 
for one day, I think ! Now go and see your brother, like a good, 
dear creature, and leave me to myself for a little. Don't ask me 
to tell you any more ; if I ever do tell you any more, it shan't be 
now. I hate and despise myself for all this ; but it's true, Mary, 
as true as death, or any other certain thing you like." 

Then Minola turned away, and resolutely sat down to the piano 
and began to play. Mary knew that there was nothing more to be 
got out of her just then ; and, indeed, she was too much over- 
whelmed by what she had heard to have any clear purpose of 
extorting more. She made her preparations to go out in silence ; 
but the very manner in which she tied her bonnet-strings gave 
expression, somehow, to a sound of wonder. She went out with 
no other good-bye to Minola than was conveyed by a gentle 
pressure on her shoulder as she passed, meant to express all a 
world of renewed sympathy, fellowship, and devotion. 

It could hardly be said that Mary had yet had breathing- 
time enough to allow her to begin forming any conjecture as to 
the person who must needs be involved in Minola's bewildering 
confidence. The revelation itself filled her mind for a while, to 
the exclusion of all other thought. But, as she was going along 
the street, she saw coming towards her a figure which, even with 
her short sight, she thought she recognised. It was that of a man 
taller than any one else she knew, even than her brother, and who 
had stooping shoulders and a walk of lounging complacency . a 
walk as of one who rather fancied that all the street belonged to 
him. When this person came near he raised his hat and made a 



" WAS EVER WOMAN IN THIS HUMOUR WOOED?'' 2^:^ 

bow of recognition to Mary, and then the poetess saw that she 
was not wrong in supposing that it was Mr. St. Paul. He was 
evidently going in the direction of Minola's lodgings. A sudden 
thought flashed upon Mary Blanchet's mind. 

"Can it be //<??" she thought. "I should never have sup- 
posed such a thing. But he was very attentive to her, certainly ; 
and of course he is a man of high family . not like poor Herbert. 
But I never should have thought of him." 

While Mary went her melancholy and meditative way, ]\Ir. 
St. Paul arrived at Minola's door, and asked to see her, adding 
that he came to take leave, and would not keep her long. The 
servants at Minola's lodgings had an immense awe and veneration 
for Mr. St. Paul. When he called there once before and saw 
Minola, on the day of the unholy compact, ]\Iary, having heard of 
the visit, could not keep down the pride of her heart, but let out 
the fact that he was a duke's brother. In that quiet region the 
brothers of dukes are rare visitors, and it was not likely that the 
face and form of this one could have been forgotten. Therefore, 
even if Minola had taken the precaution to say that she would see 
no one that day, it is very doubtful whether the servants would 
have understood this general order to apply to a duke's brother. 
Anyhow, it was intimated to Minola, in tones of some awe, that 
the gentleman who was a duke's brother wanted very particular!) 
to see her. 

IMinola was not in spirits for enjoying the visits of dukes, not 
to say of the brothers of dukes. But she felt that she really owed 
some thanks to Mr. St. Paul ; and she had never seen him since 
the night of the Keeton riot; and if he was really going away, she 
did not wish him to go without a word of thanks from her. It may 
be said, too, that, in spite of all his defects and his odd ways, 
Minola rather liked him. There was a sort of reckless honesty 
about him ; and his talk was not commonplace. So she agreed 
to see him, not without a dread that there might still be traces 
of the tears which had lately been in her eyes. " What does it 
matter,"_ she asked of herself in scorn of her owoi weaknesses, 
"even if he does_ see? I suppose he knows very well that 
women are always in tears about something." 

"Well, Miss Grey," he said as he came in. and he seemed 
positively to grow taller in the gathering dusk, like the genie in the 
story of Bedreddin Hassan . " I haven't seen you since the night 
of the row at Keeton. Wasn't it capital fun ? The poet ran away, 
I hear; they say he never stopped until he reached London." Mr. 
St. Paul laughed his usual good-humoured laugh, and he held, as 
if unconsciously, Minola's hand a moment in his own. His man- 



254 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

ner was never a love-making one, and Minola hardly noticed 
this slight familiarity. 

" Oh, there was no truth in all that!" she said hastily, and not 
without a half-smile. " Mr. Blanchet did nothing of the kind ; 
although, like me, he does not like noisy crowds." 

" Well, I kept my word, you see. Miss Grey. I sent your man 
in, in spite of them all." 

" You did, indeed ; and I ought to feel very much obliged to 
you, and I do feel obliged, Mr. St. Paul ; although my conscience 
is still sadly distressed to know if I did anything very wrong in 
allowing you to do anything of the kind." 

" Don't you mind that ; it's all right ; it was a much more 
honest trick than half the dodges by which elections are won, I 
can assure you. There are always wheels within wheels in these 
affairs, you know. You were in your rightful place too ; in all these 
things there is sure to be a petticoat in the background. It might 
as well be you as any one else . as my sister-in-law, for instance." 

*' And you are going away, Mr. St Paul ? " 

** I think so ; yes. If things don't turn out as I want them to, 
I shall go away again, I think. I don't see what I want here ; I 
have done my duty as a brother, you know, and kept old Shep- 
pard, my brother's man, out of Keeton." 

" Are you going back to America } " 

" In the end, yes ; I suppose so. But not just for the present. 
I feel inclined to take a run through Thibet. I am told by some 
fellows that the yak is the most extraordinary creature ; and the 
place hasn't been used up. You see, Miss Grey, I have enough of 
money one way and another ; and I am inclined to consult my 
own whims now a little. Come, what are you smiling at? " 

" I don't feel inclined to explain, Mr. St. Paul." 

" I'll do it for you . you smile because you think I never did 
consult any whims but my own ; is not that it ? " 

" Yes; if I must give an answer, that was it." 

"Of course; I knew it. What I meant was that I don't intend 
to bother any more just now about the making of money. But I 
do particularly want to be allowed to consult the whims of some 
one besides myself." 

"Indeed?" 

" You say that sarcastically, I know. You don't think much of 
us men, it seems ; at least, you say you don't." 

" Do vou, Mr. St. Paul ? " 

"Do i what?" 

" Think much of men ? " 

** Oh, no, by Jo\e ! if you come to that. I never said I didj 



*' WAS EVER WOMAN IN THIS HUMOUR WOOED?" 255 

*ior women either. But we all like to believe, I suppose, that 
you women think us fine fellows and greatly admire us . that is, 
when you are young. Anyhow, I don't mean to discuss the 
defects of the human race with you just now, Miss Grey. I 
have come for a different purpose. But won't you sit down ? " 

She had not asked him to be seated ; and it seemed like a mild 
rebuke of her lack of hospitality when Mr. St. Paul now handed her 
a chair. But he had no such meaning. He was positively a little 
embarrassed, and did not well know for a moment how to get on. 
Even Minola noticed the fact, and made a good-natured attempt 
to help him out of his difficulty, greatly amazed to find that he 
could have any hesitation about anything. 

" You were saying that you want to consult somebody's whims, 
Mr. St. Paul?" 

" Yes, so I was ; that's what I have come about. I should 
like to be allowed to consult your whims. Miss Grey." 

" That's very kind ; but I don't know that I have any whim 
just at present. When there is another election coming off some- 
where, then, indeed " 

St. Paul laughed. He was holding a chair. He turned it 
and balanced it on two of its legs, and then leaned on the top of 
it with both his hands in such a manner that Minola began to be 
afraid it would give way under his bulky pressure and send him 
prostrate at her feet. The odd attitude seemed, however, to give 
him a little more self-possession. 

"Look here. Miss Grey; let's come to the point. Will you 
marry me ? " 

He now let go the chair and stood upright, looking straight 
at her, or rather, do\vn upon her. 

Minola felt her breath taken away. She actually started. 

*' That's what I am here for. Miss Grey. To come to the point 
at once, will you marry me ? " 

*' To come to the point at once, Mr. St. Paul, I will not." 

" Why not ? " He put his hands into his pockets, and coolly 
waited for an answer. 

" But there are so many reasons * 

" All right ; tell me some of them." 

** But really I don't know where to begin." 

"Well, just think it over ; I can wait. May I take a seat?" 

"Oh, yes ; pray be seated." 

He sat quietly near her. His manner was now once more 
perfectly assured, but, with all his odd roughness, perfectly 
respectful. 

" Now we can talk the matter regularly out, like sensible 
people,' he said. 



256 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

The situation was new, to say the least of it. INIinola began 
to be a httle amused now that she had recovered from the first 
shock of her embarrassment ; and she saw that with such a wooer 
it would be far the wisest policy to talk the matter out as he had 
proposed. So she began to rack her brain, not for reasons against 
accepting the proposal, but for the reason which ought properly 
to come first. 

"To begin with, Mr. St. Paul, I am not sure that you are 
in earnest in such an often" 

" Oh, if that's all, I can easily reassure you. I am confoundedly 
in earnest, Miss Grey ! As you say, I have generally been in the 
habit of pleasing myself more than other people ; and the truth 
is, that nothing on earth would please me now half so much as 
for you to take me as I ofter myself But I think I shouldn't 
make half a bad husband, after all ; and honestly, do you know, 
I don't believe you would be sorry in the end? " 

" But why do you want to marry me ? why not some other 
woman ? why not some one in your own class? " 

" My class ? Fiddle-de-dee ! what's my class ? I am a cattle 
grower from Texas ; I am a land speculator from California. If I 
had been depending on what you call my class, I shouldn't have 
enough now to give a girl bread and cheese, to say nothing of her 
milliner's bill. I have plenty of money, thanks to myselfi I'm 
the son of my own works ; I'm the son of Marengo, as what's- 
his-name . Napoleon . said." 

"But there are so many women whom you must have met 
and who would be suited to you so much better " 

" Look here. Miss Grey ; cut that ! You are the only girl I 
ever saw . I mean, of course, since I was a boy . that I care a 
red cent for. There's something about you that other girls don't 
have. You have no nonsense in you, not a bit ! A man need not 
feel ashamed of caring about you or trying to please you. I saw 
that long ago; you are a woman to do a man some good. You 
are not spoiled by society, and all that rot. I suppose you never 
were in society . what they call society . in your life ? " 

" No, Mr. St. Paul ; I never was. I never was in any house 
in London but Mr. Money's; I suppose that isn't society?" 

*' Well, there it is, you see. I like a girl who is not just the 
same pattern as every other girl. Look here ! I don't say that I 
am madly in love with you in that sentimental way ; I suppose 
that sort of thing does not last at my time of life with a man who 
has knocked about the world as I have ; but I do say that you 
are the pleasantest woman I know, and the cleverest, and I'm sure 
tlie best ; and you are the only woman I would marry." 



« PFAS EVER WOMAN IN THIS HUMOUR IVOOED?" 257 

" But I am afraid, Mr. St. Paul, that we like to be loved in that 
sentimental way, we foolish girls. I don't think I could be quite 
pleased with anything else ; and I am glad you are so candid as 
to tell me the whole truth." Minola now thought she saw a way 
of getting good-humouredly out of the affair without seeming to 
take it too seriously. 

" Not a bit of it ; you are not that sort ; you have too much 
sense for nonsense like that. Why, just listen. 1 was sentimen- 
tally in love before I was quite twenty years old . I wonder what 
age were you then ? . and I was wild to be allowed to marry a 
poor girl, the daughter of the fellow who taught me French. 
Didn't I get into a nice row at home? and the poor girl, they 
hunted her out of the place . my people did . as if she and her 
old father had been mad dogs. I dare say my people were right 
enough in opposing such a marriage ; I dare say I should have 
been tired of her long ago ; but if you want sentimental love and 
so forth, that was my time for it, and that was what it all came to." 

" You are glad now you did not marry her," Minola said ; "you 
will be glad some time that you did not marry me. I will be 
generous to you, Mr. St. Paul ; I will not take you at your word." 

" No, no ! that's all nonsense ; you don't understand. I only 
told you about that to show you how that sort of sentimental love 
is nothing at all. I know what I am about now ; I know my 
o^^^l mind; it would be time for me, by Jove ! Yes; I know my 
own mind." 

" So do I ; and I can't accept your offer, Mr. St. Paul," 

" But you have not told me a single reason yet " 

" I don't want to marry ; I had much rather remain as I am. 
I am not a great admirer of men in general, and I think I am 
more likely to be happy living as I do " 

"If you marry me," he said, "you may live in any part of 
the world you like, and any street you like, and any way you like." 

Minola smiled. " How happily you would pass your life," 
she said, " living in the West Centre of London with me and 
Mary Blanchet ! " 

" Well, if the wandering fit came on me, and I wanted a rush 
half across the world, and you did nat care to come too, you might 
please yourself, and remain here with old Mary until I came back. 
I rather like old Mary ; I met her a few moments ago." 

" I fear it would not do, Mr. St. Paul." 

" You bet it would . I mean, I am quite sure you and I could 
hit it off admirably, if you'll only give us the chance and let 
us try." 

*' But if we tried it, and did not hit it off, what then ?" 

s 



258 UriSS MISANTHROPE. 

" I know we should ; I know it. And do you know, Miss 
Grey, I have often thought that you rather liked me . I don't 
mean the sentimental falling in love, and all that: you are too 
sensible a girl for that ; and I'm not exactly the sort of fellow 
to make a woman feel in that way . but I often thought that you 
rather liked me, and liked to talk to me, and did not look at me 
with horror as if I were a sort of outcast, don't you know ? " 

Minola saw the great virtue of being frank and outspoken 
with tliis strange lover. 

" You are quite right, Mr. St. Paul ; I did rather like you, and 
I do still. I did like to talk with you, and I did not feel any par- 
ticular alarm when you were good enough to talk to me. I fancied 
that you liked to talk to me " 

'' You couldn't well avoid thinking that," he said with a smile; 
" for whenever I saw you in the corner of a room I made for you 
at once. I liked you from the first moment I saw you. Do you 
remember the day I first saw you ? " 

" Oh, yes, Mr. St. Paul ; perfectly well." 

"Come, then; tell me something about it." 

" It was at Mrs. Money's one day. I was there in the drawing- 
room, and you came in with Mr. Money. It is not so long ago 
that I should forget it." Minola had other memories, too, con- 
nected with the day which she did not disclose to Mr. St. Paul, but 
which brought a faint colour into her cheeks. 

" Yes, yes ; that was the day. I had seen one of old Money^s 
daughters . the younger one, the girl that is going to be married to 
that young fool Heron . and when I came into the drawing-room 
I thought you were the other daughter ; and I said to myself that, 
by Jove, Money's elder daughter was worth a dozen of the other, 
and that I shouldn't be half sorry if she would marry me. I 
hadn't spoken a word to you then. So, you see, it is not an idea 
taken up on the spur of the moment." 

" I am greatly obliged to you, Mr. St. Paul " 

He made a dej^recating gesture. Minola went on: 

" And I do feel indeed that you have paid me a compliment, 
and done me an honour. But will you take me at my word, and 
believe that indeed, indeed, I never could accept your offer? 
It is out of the question. Mr. St. Paul . I may speak out with 
you ?. if I were in love with you, I would not marry you " 

"Why not? "he asked almost vehemently, as he confronted 
her. 

" Well, because we are not the sort of people to be married ; 
we have such different ways, and such different friends " 

"By the way," he struck in, "that reminds me . your speaking 



* tVAS EVER WOMAN IN THIS HUMOUR WOOED?" 259 

about friends . of something I wanted to say ; I am glad I have 
thought of it before you made up your mind. It's this . I hear 
you have money, or houses, or something of that kind. Well, 
don't you see, if you marry me, you can give it all, whatever it is, 
to old Mary what's-her-name. I don't want a dollar of it ; I have 
plenty : so just take that into account before you decide." 

" Thank you, Mr. St. Paul. I should have expected some 
generosity from you " 

" It isn't every fellow would do it, take my word for that." 

" No, I suppose not ; if I gave anyone the chance. But I don't 
mean to do so, INIr. St. Paul. If I wished to marry I don't really 
know that I should refuse your offer. I am sure you would be 
more generous than most men, and I do like you; but, indeed, the 
thing is out of the question. We have no tastes or habits in com- 
mon ; and you would be tired of me very soon." 

" Not a bit of it ; we have tastes in common. I don't know 
any woman who can understand a joke so well as you can ; and 
you don't always suppose everybody is in earnest, as women gene- 
rally do. Most women are so dreadfully serious . don't you know? 
. that I find it a trial to talk to them. You are not like that." 

" No," said Minola quietly ; " I don't insist on people always 
being in earnest ; and so I shan't treat you as if you were in earnest 
now." 

" But I am in earnest ; and I tell you what. Miss Grey, you 
must be in earnest too. I must have a serious, deliberate answer 
from you. I tell you on my honour, and on my oath, if you ^vill 
allow me, that you are the only girl in the world I would marry ; 
and I must be treated like a man in earnest, and have a serious 
answer." 

" I have given you my answer already, Mr. St. Paul. I can't 
say anything more." 

"Then you won't have me?" he asked, taking his hat from 
the table on which he had laid it. 

" No, Mr. St. Paul." 

"And this is quite serious and for the very last time? . as 
the children say ; " and he held out one hand towards her. 

She put her hand frankly into his. 

" It is quite serious and for the very, very last time." 

She felt a strong grip on her hand, so strong that it hurt her 
keenly for the moment. But she did not wince or make any 
attempt to draw the hand away. He released it in an instant. 

" Well, I'm sorry," he said, " and that's all about it. I had 
hopes that I might have persuaded you, don't you know? . not 
that I thought a fine girl like you was likely to be in love with a 



26o MISS MISANTHROPE. 

fellow like me ; but that I fancied you could do with me, on the 
whole, better than with some others. You see, I was not too self- 
conceited in the matter, Miss Grey. Well, that's all over, and 
there's an end of it. Good-bye ; I dare say I shan't see you soon 
again. I shall be off" for another run round the world. On the 
whole, I don't see anything better to do just now." 

He was going. 

" I am sorry if I have disappointed you ; I am indeed," she 
said, and held out her hand to him again. 

The bold blue eyes showed a gleam of a softer light in them. 

" Oh, never mind about me, Miss Grey ; I shall come all right, 
you needn't fear. I told you, you know, that I had outlived the 
age when men break their hearts ; and, by Jove, a year ago I 
should have said I had outlived the age when I could ask any 
woman on earth to marry me. But I'll come all right ; and I 
forgive you," he added with a laugh ; " although at my time of 
life we don't like to make fools of ourselves before women. 
Good-bye. If you are in London when I come here next, I'll 
look you up ; and if you want anything done then in the elec- 
tioneering way, I'm your man Hullo ! here's old Mary back ; 

I saw her passing the window. Good morning, Miss Grey ; good 
morning." 

He nodded in his old, familiar, easy way, and was out of the 
room somehow before Mary Blanchet got into it. Minola hardly 
saw how he got away. There was an odd moisture in her eyes 
and a swimming in her head which made it hard for her all at 
once to fall into talk with little Mary. 



CHAPTER XXVIIL 

THE MEMBER FOR KEETON. 

" The member for Keeton ! " How strange it seemed to Minola 
that Victor Heron should thus have come to be connected in 
the mind of everyone with the old home of her youth ! On the day, 
not to be forgotten by her, when she saw him for the first time at 
Mr. Money's door, who could have thought that such a thing as 
that was likely to come to pass ? Ah, who could have thought 
that other things yet more deeply concerning her were likely to 
come to pass? We maybe all excused if sometimes under the 
pressure of some peculiar pain, or in the exaltation of some pecu- 
liar joy, we tell ourselves that there is a special fate in the things 



THE MEMBER FOR KEETON. 261 

that concern us, and that the Destinies have our lives expressly 
in their care to gladden or to punish us. It is something of a con- 
solation apparently to think that this trial, which we find it hard to 
bear, is not such as falls to the chance lot of ordinary mortals, 
but is set out by some special destiny for us alone. To Minola 
there seemed something fateful in the way in which Victor Heron 
had been so often and strangely made to cross her path. " The 
member for Keeton I " . and she had, it would seem, made him 
member for Keeton. In her brighter moments she was some- 
times amazed and amused to think of the extraordinary part she 
had been made to play in the political affairs of her native town. 
If she had been inclined to vanity, she might have found some 
consolation for any disappointment of her own in the homage 
that had been paid to her by such different admirers. But it 
gave her neither pride nor pleasure to know that some men 
admired her whom she could not admire in turn. " Lord, what 
fools these mortals be!" was the thought that often filled her; 
and she cordially applied it to herself as well as to others. In 
truth, her secret love would in any case have kept her pure of vanity. 
Her pain gave her sympathy and made her strong. 

Meanwhile the months went on, and she saw little or nothing 
of the member for Keeton . her member in a double sense : the 
representative of her borough, and returned by herself. The time 
of the honourable gentleman was now pretty fully engaged. He 
had no free hours left for strolls in Regent's Park, even if he had 
been at all inclined to go in that direction. He found himself more 
and more closely occupied by day and night. Victor Heron was 
successful in a double sense; he was a political and a social suc- 
cess. He had spoken in the House of Commons, and he had, by 
universal acknowledgment, made a hit. There is hardly any other 
success so delightful, so rich in immediate effect, left in our modern 
English life. His manner was fresh, easy, and animated, with now 
and then a stronger dash of something that went as near to elo- 
quence as our House of Commons will endure in these days. He 
knew his subject . a question of foreign policy . thoroughly, and 
he was never dry or heavy. Then he became a social success 
as well, and at once. He was invited everywhere. He was envied 
for many things : for his political chances, for his prospects as one 
who would probably be able to " entertain his party," and for the 
prospective possession of the very pretty girl who was seen so 
often with him, who was known to carry with her a large fortune, 
and Avhom he was, eveiybody said, about to marry. 

Heron never knew what an important person he had become 
until he saw the difterence which his altered position made in the 



262 ^f/SS MISANTHROPE. 

number and kind of the letters which he found on his table every 
morning. They lay there in piles ; letters on all manner of poli- 
tical, social, industrial, educational questions ; letters from in- 
ventors, from theorists, from men . oh, how many of these there 
were ! . from men Avith grievances ; not a few from women with 
grievances. He soon found that even to look into half the ques- 
tions of this kind which he was besought to investigate for himself 
would take up his whole time every day and night, making no 
allowance for food or sleep. At first, remembering his own 
grievance, he used to make a desperate effort to grapple with this 
huge bulk of complaint. Then he called in the aid of a secre- 
tary, and tried in this way to accomplish the task, and to be 
member for the aggrieved generally. But even this had to be 
given up. A staff of secretaries would have been necessary to 
get through the mere reading and answering of letters in cases 
with which, when he had mastered their details, he usually found 
that he could do absolutely nothing. This was in itself a dis- 
appointment and a pain to our young Quixote. He found that 
the task of redressing all or half the supposed human \vrong that 
thrust itself querulously upon his notice would have been beyond 
his power, even though his summers to such length of years should 
come as those of the many-wintered crow himself. 

He was approaching, and with every prospect of success, the 
great business which had brought him back to England. He had 
given notice of a motion to call the attention of the House of 
Commons to the whole subject, connected with his administration 
of the St. Xavier's Settlements and to move a resolution on it ; 
and he had obtained a day for the debate, and a very animated 
and interesting discussion was expected. It had been hinted to 
him that if he merely wanted another appointment, and a much 
better one, the Government would be only too delighted to avail 
themselves of his services, and it was gently suggested that there 
never was any intention to visit his former administration with 
any censure whatever. But Victor remained, it is needless to say, 
absolutely deaf to all such suggestions as this. He desired to vin- 
dicate a principle, he said, and not to satisfy any personal interest. 
It is needless, perhaps, also to say that the suggestion was made to 
him in the most cautious and unofficial way. It was made by a 
mediator, who, if Heron had shown any disposition to accept it, 
would soon have put him in the way of receiving an official offer, 
but who the moment it was declined was able to speak of it as a 
personal suggestion or conjecture, only offered in the beaten way 
of friendship, and binding nobody to anything. 

All this made a change in the position of Mr. Heron since 



THE MEMBER FOR KEETON. 263 

the time, not so long ago, when he came to London ahiiost un- 
known, and for a while haunted vainly the ante-chambers of great 
officials, and could not even get 10 speech of them. Victor was 
modest enough, and often thought with a kind of wonder and 
humiliation of the chance he once so nearly ran of sinking down to 
be the mere possessor of a grievance, or one possessed by it, going 
round the world of London pestering people with the tale of a 
wrong in which they felt no manner of interest. He could not but 
feel proud and happy at some moments when he thought of the 
change a short time had brought about for him. He was well 
aware that he owed three-fourths of his success to the advice and 
the energy of Mr. Money. If he had not stepped out on the 
balcony of the Louvre Hotel in Pans that memorable night, he 
might never have met Mr. IMoney, and things might have been 
so different. In all his pride and his gratitude, were there ever 
moments when he was inclined to wish that he had not stepped 
out on that balcony, and that things had been different ? 

Was our young Quixote ungrateful or hard to satisfy ? was he 
morbidly discontented, or mean, or intolerably fickle, or absurdly 
self- conceited ? No ; he was not any of these things. Yet it is 
certain that he was not happy. He had won success ; he seemed 
likely to win much more, and he was already looking back many a 
time, and with genuine bitterness of regret, to the bright days when 
he appeared to be all a failure. Except in moments of excitement, 
Victor Heron was unhappy. He made his moments of excitement 
as many as he could, and he dreaded when they were over. He 
dreaded to be alone ; and even that was not the worst, for there 
was society which gave him more pain than any solitude. When he 
came home of nights he sometimes sat in his chair and leaned his 
chin on his hand, and remained there for an hour thinking. Any- 
one who had seen him at such times would have wisely said that 
the late hours of the House of Commons were telling heavily on 
him already, he looked so haggard. 

He was indeed in a miserable dilemma, if that could by any 
possibility be called a dilemma which seemed to have no alternative, 
or second way to it or out of it. He had made a fearful mistake 
and found it out too late. In an impulse of gratitude, regard, sur- 
prise, generous humiliation, he had believed himself in love with 
Lucy Money . when he saw beyond mistake that she was in love 
with him. For an instant that light seemed to surround her in 
which a man sees the chosen one . the only one, the loved. The 
moment he saw that the sweet, good girl was in love with him, 
it seemed as if Heaven, and gratitude, and fate ordered him to 
marry her, and tor the hour it was easy for him to believe that he 



264 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

loved her. Nor did the glamour pass away all at once. For some 
time yet he continued to believe that he had all he desired in 
life ; that he loved and was happy, and had indeed found measure- 
less content. There may have been even then a sense of unsatisfied 
craving in his heart, as of something missing which he had once 
hoped to find and possess. But he shut all such vague emotions 
down, and pressed the lid of what he told himself were his real 
convictions strongly down upon them. He told himself that he 
was happy. It has come far on the way towards unhappiness 
when a young man has to tell himself that he is happy in the 
woman he is to marr)^ Victor Heron caught himself arguing the 
question sometimes, and started and turned his thoughts another 
way, as some good person might have done in older days if he 
found a diabolical temptation inducing him to blaspheme a saint 
or question his own faith. 

The horizon only began to grow darker as his knowledge oi 
himself and his state of mind grew clearer. Then there followed an 
interval during which he felt like one conscience-stricken. It 
seemed to him that, in admitting to himself what he felt, he was 
doing a wrong to poor Lucy which no kindness and no devotion 
on his part could atone for. Now came fits of devoted attention 
to her, when the poor little maid thought that never had there been 
lover like hers, and her soul floated softly in a golden haze of 
affection and gratitude. Then came what we may call the common- 
sense and worldly mood, when Victor Heron strove to get himself 
to regard his engagement as an ordinary young man of sense would 
doubtless have regarded it. He told himself that, after all, he 
ought to be one of the happiest of men ; that he was going to have 
a charming young wife, as sweet a woman as any in the world. 
He remembered how Coleridge had said that a Desdemona is the 
wife that in his heart every man would like to have. He argued 
with himself about the impossibility of having everything exactly as 
one would appoint it for himself; and he sometimes marvelled 
how so sweet a girl as Lucy ever could have cared about him. On 
the whole he reasoned with himself as a sensitive and unworldly 
young man like him might be supposed to do, vv'ho has in a moment 
of impulse committed himself to a responsibility which he cannot 
any longer even wish to avoid. In truth, it was his grievance 
and not himself that was to blame. His grievance had so possessed 
and absorbed him that he had not had time or thought for anything 
else. He had never asked of his heart what it would have until 
the hour for such a question had gone by. There was left to him 
one general frank resolve, to do his duty and make the very best 
of everything, and make, above all, those happy whose happiness 



THE MEMBER FOR KEETOX. 265 

in any way depended on him. After all, perhaps, marriage is not 
very often undertaken in much better spirit. A man's life, he had 
always heard from wise people, lies for the most part outside home 
and love. 

But the member for Keeton kept clear of Minola Grey. He 
did so rather in obedience to an undefined instinct than to any 
deliberate resolve. He had not searched into his own feelings . 
rather, indeed, he had resolutely kept from all such search. But he 
avoided Minola Grey. Their sudden and sincere friendship had 
suddenly come to an end somehow. He thought that for some 
reason she had lately been displeased with him, and on the whole 
he was not sorrj-. It was better so. He heard of her a great deal 
from Lucy and from others, but he saw her very seldom. 

One afternoon, early, Minola set out to pay a visit to Lucy 
Money. Lucy had written her a reproachful letter because she 
had not come more often lately, and insisting that she must see 
" dear, darling Nola at once, at once" because of something most 
particular on which she wanted her advice " so much, oh, so 
much ! " Minola had not great faith, perhaps, in the importance 
of the matter in hand, but she went promptly to see her friend. 
When she got to the house in Victoria Street she was shown at 
once into the drawing-room, and sat down, expecting every moment 
to hear the light step of Lucelet. But Lucelet had gone out for a 
short time, and had only left instructions that if Miss Grey came 
she was to be shown into the drawing room without a word, lest 
she might go away if she were told in the first instance that she, 
Lucy, was not at home. While Minola was waiting, the member 
for Keeton called ; and the member for Keeton now was hardly 
supposed to ask any question, but to go and come in the house 
as though it were his own. If Lucy was not at home, some other 
member of the family was likely to be, and, if anyone was there, 
it was assumed that Mr. Heron would come in and talk and wait. 

Minola sat down to the piano to beguile the time, and began 
to sing and play to herself in her soft, pure, low tones. She sang 
the song of the lover's farewell to Northmaven, and to the maid 
who was to look over the wild waves in vain for the skiff of him 
who came not again . the song from " The Pirate," which she 
had herself adapted to the music of an old ballad. When Victor 
approached the drawing-room, and heard the sound of the piano, 
he thought at first that Lucy was the performer, and he paused a 
moment to listen, without interrupting her. But as the voice 
reached his ears, he knew its tones and he knew the song, and re- 
membered when he had heard it last . when he had heard it first. 
The blood rushed into his face, and he literally started back. His 



266 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

sensitive lips trembled ; his hands caught at his moustache in hig 
old way when something excited or embarrassed him ; and a 
sound almost like a groan involuntarily broke from him. Oh, 
how unhappy, how wretched he felt that moment ! and how like 
some one guilty of a crime or a deceit, merely because of the pain 
that he could not conceal from himself any more ! At first he drew 
back and was about to go away. But he recovered himself, and 
asked of himself what possible excuse he could give to Lucy when 
she heard that he had actually been in the house, as she must 
hear from the servants, and that he liad gone away without seeing 
her. He assumed that Lucy was in the drawing-room with Minola, 
and at that very moment they might come out and see him re- 
treating as if he were a detected robber. He felt ashamed now 
of the sudden, absurd instinct of flight, and the ignoble, guilty 
suggestions it brought with it. " In Heaven's name," he thought, 
'.' why should I back out ? Why should I not see Miss Grey or 
anybody else ? Am I a fool or a boy ? " He went on and crossed 
the threshold ; and then for the first time he saw that Miss Grey 
was alone. It was too late to retreat, even though she was alone, 
for she had heard his footsteps, and stopped her song and rose from 
the piano, and waited to receive him. 

" Oh . Miss Grey . I hope you are well ! " was the remarkable 
observation with which Victor began. 

" Quite well, thank you," was the appropriate reply. 

There was much embarrassment on both sides. Naturally the 
man was the more embarrassed of the two. On him fell in all duty 
the responsibility of conducting the conversation. Yet, having got 
thus far, he did not seem inclined to try any farther. 

" I thought I should find Lucy in," Minola said, smce it seemed 
clear that she must say something, or let silence settle down upon 
them. 

" I thought she would be here too," he said. " I suppose she 
has gone out." 

This was so obvious an inference that it hardly called for 
addition or supplement of any kind. Minola said, "I suppose 
so," and that attempt appeared likely to come to an end. 

" I hope you like the House of Commons," Minola began 
again. 

" Oh, yes, certainly ; very much ; that is, I like it very well 
indeed. Have you never gone to hear a debate ? " 

" No, never." 

" You must go. Oh, yes, you ought to go ! You could go some 
night with Miss Money." 

"With Lucy?" 



THE MEMBER FOR KEETON. 267 

" Yes, with Lucy I mean, of course." 

He spoke in a sort of irritated way, very unlike the old manner 
of the chivalrous man with a grievance. 

" I should like to go very much," Minolasaitl ; "I should like 
to hear you speak.'' 

" Oh, I shan't speak often ; I shan't speak, perhaps, more than 
once again ; I don't care to be one of the talkers ; I haven't the 
gift to make much of that sort of thing." 

" I heard that you were a great success." 

"Who told you so?" He put the question with some of his 
old directness, but not with the kind of boyish friendHness that 
used to make his simple straightforwardness seem sweet and genial. 
Now his tone sounded almost harsh. Minola began to think that 
his manners were not improving in his parliamentary career. Is it 
possible, she thought, that success is already spoiling him ? 

"Several persons told me," she answered quietly ; "and I read 
it in the papers. I am fond of reading the papers." 

" Several persons told > ou so ? Who were they ? " 

""Well, let me see " Minola became all the more composed 

and mistress of herself in proportion as his manner seemed to grow 
more brusque and odd. " Mr. iSIoney told me, for one ; and of 
course Lucy told me ; but she is prejudiced, and counts for 
nothing; and Mr. Sheppard told me." 

" Do you see him often . Sheppard ? " 

" Not very often." 

"When is he trving for Parliament again ?" 

" I don't know.'' 

" But you wish him success, surely ? " 

" I shall wish him success if it does him any good, or makes 
him at all happy . or improves him in any way," Miss Misanthrope 
said demurely. 

" You think it does not always improve people to be in the 
House of Commons ?" Victor said, with a somewhat forced 
smile. 

" Not always, perhaps ; but I have had so little opportunity of 
judging." 

There was a moment of silence. 

" I don't think I can wait any longer," Victor said. " Are you 
waiting to see Lucy, Miss Grey ? " 

If Minola had spoken out the plain truth, she would have 
said that if he was going to wait she was not, and that if he was 
going away she would stay. Perhaps, if he had spoken out the 
plain truth, he for his part would have said much the same thing. 
As he was evidently going, she said . 



26S JII/SS MISANTHROPE. 

.' Yes, I shall stay until she comes in ; I shall take up a book 
and read ; she will not be very long away, I should think." 

" Will you be kind enough to tell her that I was here, and 
waited for her some time ? " 

" Certainly ; with pleasure." 

He seemed to be going, and yet he did not go ; in truth, he 
was only thinking whether he ought to shake hands Avith her in 
ordinary friendly fashion, or whether he had better make a bow, 
and so take himself off. Not a matter of great moment, it might 
appear, and yet it was enough to torment Heron just then. If he 
seemed cold and distant and unfriendly, would not Miss Grey 
wonder at his manner, and perhaps think him rude and uncivil ; 
or think him changed, and begin to conjecture what the reason of 
the change might be ? If he showed himself friendly in the old 
way, would she become also friendly in the old way ? and would 
not that perhaps be rather more of an ordeal than he could safely 
bear ? But as he glanced towards her he thought he saw a look 
of surprise on her face, and this settled the matter. He could not 
allow her to think him cold or rude ; and why should he not try to 
show himself as a friend ? 

Minola was seated, and had already taken up a book. He went 
up to her and held out his hand. Then he noticed for the first 
time how pale she was looking. 

"Good-morning, Miss Grey," he said ; " I am sorry I have to 
go so soon ; it seems so long since we exchanged a word." 
With this happily-chosen speech he came to a pause. 

A faint colour came over the paleness of her face. 

" You have become a public man now," she said, with desperate 
ease, ''and your time is occupied. But we shall meet sometimes, 
I hope. I shall be always delighted." 

There are incidents of martyrdom, perhaps, with which it is less 
difficult for the sufferer to deal than it was for Minola to assume 
the expression of smiling friendly ease that accompanied these 
words. Even as she spoke them she was thinking of how often 
she had warmly disputed the truth ofThackeray's constant assertion, 
that women are all skilled by nature in hypocrisy. She felt that 
she was then playing the hypocrite with a skill which she would 
once have believed it impossible for her to attain, and with a skill, 
too, which once she would have despised herself for possessing. 

" Do you still walk in Regent's Park sometimes ? " Victor asked. 

" Yes, very often." 

.' I have not been there this long time." 

" Oh, no ; you have no time for that sort of thing now, I am 
glad to think. That is for idlers." 



THE MEMBER FOR KEEJON. 269 

Meanwhile the ceremony of shaking hands had been duly 
executed. Victor was going, when his eyes fell on the book she 
had in her hand. He stopped again. 

"That is Blanchet's volume of poems, isn't it?" he asked. 
" Is it? Oh, yes, of course it is ! I had only just taken it up, 
and I hadn't noticed." She coloured a little, a very little. She 
was somewhat embarrassed by his discovery of the fact that she had 
not known what book she held in her hand. 

"Do you know, Miss Grey, that I always feel some remorse of 
conscience about that book ? It was a shame that you should have 
been allowed to pay all that money ; you ought to have allowed 
some one to share the cost with you at least." 

" But I explained to you at the time all about that ; I could not 
allow my Mary Blanchet to be indebted to anyone but me for 
any kindness. There was some selfishness in that, I know ; but I 
could not help the feeling. And in any case I am sure Mary 
would have been wretched at the idea of anyone doing it but me. 
So it was not all selfislmess on my part." 

" The idea of your doing anything selfish ! I don't believe 
you ever thought of yourself in all your life. Well, you were 
very generous to poor Blanchet ; I hope at least he will not prove 
himself ungrateful." 

" Oh, I don't want him to be grateful ! I dare say he would be 
as grateful as anyone else . any other man, I mean, of course 
. if I wanted him to be." 

Victor smiled the most natural and genuine smile he had yet 
shown during their conversation. 

" Now you want to become the Miss Misanthrope again," he 
said " But it doesn't deceive us who know you, Miss Grey. It was 
I who called you Miss Misanthrope, wasn't it . who suggested the 
name, I mean ? " 

" Yes, I believe it was ; I am very well content with the name, 
and I think myself fairly entided to bear it." 

" Not you," he said. " I knew it didn't apply then, and I know 
it far better now." 

" But to be a Miss Misanthrope isn't to be a criminal." 

*' No ; but you couldn't be a misanthrope, unless in some time 
when there was no possibility left of trying to prove that you loved 
the human race." 

" Which, however, I can assure you, I do not." 

" All the same, you try to help people. Well, good-morning." 

" Here is Lucy," said Minola, looking up ; " I am so glad you 
did not go at once." 

Lucy ran into the room dressed as she had' just come in from 
the carriage. She rushed at Minola and embraced her. 



270 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

" So you were not going to wait for me?" she said breathless, 
and pointing to the hat which Victor held in his hand. " Yes, I 
know you were impatient, like all men, and you were for darting 
away, only dear Nola kept you and would not let you go ! Now 
that was so kind of you, Nola." 

" But, dear, I can't take the compliment or the thanks ; it was 
no doing of mine ; Mr. Heron was just going, only that you came 
in time and stopped him." 

" I did not know when you were coming back, or whether you 
were coming at all," Victor said, "or I shouldn't have thought 
of going away ; but I really have lots of things to do." 

" Well, I am glad to hear that you were growing impatient," 
Lucy said with a smile, " for it looks as if you missed me, Victor ; 
and I like you to miss me when I am away. It was Theresa who 
would have me to go out with her ; and she said that there was 
some committee or something, and that you could not be here to- 
day, Victor . somebody told her." 

Lucy looked very pretty. There was a light of surprise and 
gratification on her face because of the unexpected coming of 
Victor, which almost supplied the place of the expression that 
high intelligence can lend. Minola looked at her with sincere 
admiration, and could not wonder that she had found a lover 
even in a man who might be supposed to seek naturally for a 
level of intellectual companionship higher than hers. But Victor 
was for the moment silent, nor did he and Minola speak to each 
other again until Victor rose to go, saying he had only looked in 
to see Lucy for a moment, and that he had an appointment. 

" Yol. are coming to dinner?" Lucy asked, with a colour of 
anxiety and hope on her pretty face. 

He shook his head. 

*' I am afraid not," he said; " I fancy your father and I must 
put up with a hasty dinner got anyhow this evening, Lucy." 

He was bowing to Miss Grey, and about to go, \\\\t\\ Lucy 
said . 

" Have you two been quarrelling, might I ask? Victor, do you 
generally take leave of Nola in that cool sort of way? Why, you 
used to be such friends." 

" I am sure I hope we are * such friends ' still," Minola began 
with a strenuous effort to be at ease. 

" As good friends as ever," Victor rather awkwardly added. 

" Then, why don't you shake hands ? " inquired the pertinacious 
little Lucy. " Give me thy hand, terrestrial . so," she said, seizing 
one of Victor's hands in hers, and continuing one of the Shakes- 
pearian quotation;: which she had caught up from Minola, and was 



A LOUNGE IN THE PARK. 271 

rather proud to display. " Give me thy hand, celestial . yes, Nola 
darling, you deserve to be called celestial, I think . give me thy 
hand, celestial . so ; " and with pretty and gracious compulsion she 
drew Minola and Victor together, and placed Minola's hand in his 
and made them clasp. 

The friendly clasp was over in a moment. But in that short 
moment the eyes of Minola and of Victor met unavoidably, 
suddenly, for the first time that day, and then were as suddenly 
withdrawn ; and each knew for the first time, and now to the full, 
what a misfortune had fallen on them all ; and Lucy looked from 
one face to the other, anil felt her heart stand still. 



CHAPTER XXIX. 

A LOUNGE IN THE PARK. 

It is true that this man and woman knew by one single meeting 
of the eyes that secret which he had never known before, and 
which she had never dreamed of But each, as we have seen, was 
fatally prepared for the discovery. Each had for some time . one 
of the two for a long time . been brooding over the thought which 
represented one-half of the secret. Each heart was prepared to 
receive the impression of the other. The two natures were ready 
to affect each other as two substances are . as flint and steel are, as 
the burning-glass and the darkened paper. If anyone could have 
asked Minola Grey whether she thought Victor Heron loved her, 
she would have answered, if she thought such a question worth 
answering at all, that he did not ; that he never had cared about 
her except perhaps as a friend. If Victor w^ere asked whether he 
thought Minola cared about him, he would have answered, in all 
good faith, that he believed of late she rather disliked him than 
otherwise. Yet it is certain that each learned the secret of the 
other in the same moment as each glance betrayed its own secret. 
Come what would, from that moment these two were isolated from 
all others by their common knowledge of the truth. 

That was a trying hour for Minola which she spent in Victoria 
Street after Heron had gone. It was not perhaps less trying for 
Lucy ; but Minola did not then know that. Fortunately for both 
of them, Lucy and her mother had an engagement that evening 
which made it impossible for Mrs. Money to press Minola to stay 
long with them. It was lucky, too, that visitors came in, and that 
while Minola was there she and Lucy were not left alone. If 



272 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

Minola had been less distracted than she was, she must have seen 
how very different Lucy's manner was from that which was usual to 
her ; and how she was in alternation of wild, flighty spirits, and 
strange, shy, shrinking despondency. But in truth Minola's soul 
was all engrossed in the terror of the discovery she had made, and 
the necessity of hiding it, of burying it, at all risks. She was so 
little used to concealment or suspicion of any kind that it never 
occurred to her to think that perhaps Lucy might have seen what 
she had seen. Had the two girls been left alone for a moment, 
some revelation, some explanation, must perhaps have come. But 
contrary to her usual way, Lucy did not try to get her friend into 
a separate corner or a separate room with her, and Minola was 
only filled by the one desire to get decently away, out of the 
house, and into the open air. She felt like some one shamed and 
guilty, like some treacherous, deceitful friend who had no right to 
stand beneath that roof any more. There were moments when 
the whole horizon of her hope seemed bounded by the moment 
when she could once more be in the open street, and free of the 
house which had always given her so kind a welcome. 

Victor Heron walked slowly along Victoria Street. The day 
was warm and sunny; the spring was growing rapidly towards 
summer. Even the sombre lines of Victoria Street were cheered 
and gladdened by the bright and youthful beauty of the season and 
of the day. The sense and sight of all this spring loveliness, tan- 
talising often even to happy dwellers in the town, because it told 
them of the delights of the country they could not reach just then, 
sent a new pang into the heart of the distracted Heron. He had 
some appointments to keep, some persons to see, but he was unable 
to think of anything then but himself and his misfortune. He 
sauntered slowly with dragging steps, almost like an invalid, into 
St. James's Park, and sat down there and looked on the ground, 
and appeared for the time to be engrossed in drawing lines on 
the dust of the walk beneath him with the point of his cane. 

He knew it all now. For some time back he had known only 
too well the state of his own feelings. He had known it although 
he shrank, as far as he could, from any search into his heart to find 
what stirred it so, holding it a sort of treason to his engagement 
and to the girl who loved him to ask any question of himself which 
must be a secret from her. But despite of this it had become 
known to him only too well that he had made a terrible mistake 
so far as his own fate was concerned. Yet what was that com- 
pared with what he now knew? This morning his course was 
clear. He had nothing greatly to repent of He believed that 
he could not possibly have had the woman he loved and would 



A LOUNGE IN THE PARK. 273 

have chosen ; it was not much of a sacrifice to many the sweet 
girl who loved him, certainly not wisely, but far too well. But 
now he had the misery of knowing that it was only his own fatal 
and stupid blindness that had stood in the first instance between 
the girl he loved and him. She too was to be a sacrifice. There 
were three unhappy creatures linked together in a cruel bond of 
misfortune, which miglit never have been forged for them but foi 
his astounding folly and darkness. There was no way out of it 
now but with misery to all. He was so tortured by the thought of 
the unhappiness he had brought on others that he had hardly yet 
a sense of mere regret for the happiness that might have been his. 
It was but after some period of distracted emotion that he began 
to be able to think of this. 

Sudden and wholly unexpected as the discovery of the morning 
had been, there was no shadow of a doubt left on his mind as to 
its genuineness. It was an instant . a flash of bewildered, pathetic 
light in a girl's eye that drooped and turned away in the very 
glance, and he was as certain that IMinola Grey and he stood 
isolated from all the world by a reciprocal and hopeless love as 
he was that the sun was now shining on his pain. He had little 
experience in love-making, but he knew this. All now seemed 
clear to him. Every strange word, or mood, or look of Minola 
which had puzzled him in other days was made clear to him now. 
Words and looks that he positively had forgotten came back, 
living and burning, on his memory. All was now made consistent, 
like a well-written tale, like a harmony. Yes ; he might have 
been happy. She would have loved him. She was the only being 
on earth in whose company he had always felt that he could be 
quite himself, and all that was best in him seemed to grow without 
effort. She would have loved him. He would have had in her a 
companion to share every mood, and feeling, and hope. To her 
intellect he could have looked up as well as to her heart. Good 
heavens ! how did he fail to know all that before ? When he 
found that involuntarily there was growing up in him a love for 
every place in which he knew that she walked ; when the sound 
of her footfall brought a joy with it ; when the voice of her singing 
made his heart thrill . how could he have failed even for a 
moment to know that it all meant, not friendship, but love ? 

She knows it all now, he kept thinking. He knew by the 
expression in her eyes that he had betrayed his secret as she had 
betrayed hers. Her life, too, was spoiled. And poor Lucy . the 
affectionate, innocent girl whose unsuspecting little freak of 
playful, childish confidence had of itself brought about all this 
discovery . was there to be no feeling, no pity for her ? The very 

T 



274 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

thought of the simpHcity with which Lucy had brought their 
hands together was a new pain. She seemed so innocent, and he 
seemed so treacherous. In his misery he grievously exaggerated 
his own fault, and thought of his impulsive error as if it weire a 
treason and a crime. 

What fatality sent him into that place to remain there so long ? 
Why did he not shake off all the brooding that was so futile, at 
least until his hours of work were over, and he was free to brood 
and be miserable alone ? What has a busy man, for whom all sorts 
of persons and aftairs are waiting, to do with sentimental regrets 
and the lamentations of a ruined lover . at least, what has he to 
do with them in the daytime ? He was sitting there in a broad 
walk, near the little lake ; and the seat he sat on was just near a 
turn of the walk, so that any promenader might come on him un- 
thinking, and recognise him before he had time either to rise and 
go away or to compose himself into attitude and demeanour less 
likely to attract attention. Poor Victor thought nothing of all 
this. He had forgotten for the time all business, and ap- 
pointments, and constituents, and only knew what had happened 
that morning, and that he was very unhappy and had made others 
so. But, if he committed a breach of duty as a public man in 
thus idling away his time, his error did not go unpunished, for a 
step came near him, and he looked up, and he saw Minola Grey. 
He had just been saying to himself again and again, as one who 
is stamping a resolve down into his mind . " Come what will, let 
anyone suspect what he likes, I must not see her any more." He 
was thinking Avith a certain grim satisfaction of the probability of 
his soon getting some colonial appointment, and of the quickness 
with which he would leave England ; and when he could not help 
asking himself how poor little Lucy would like such exile from 
her family and her friends, he answered firmly that anything 
would be better than the chance of seeing Minola Grey. And 
now he looked up and Minola Grey was there before him, and 
saw him. 

He had stayed too long in that place. For Minola, leaving 
Lucy with a heart bursting to be relieved from the restraint that 
was on it, had remembered just as she was in the street that if 
she went any way in the direction of the House of Commons 
she might very possibly meet Victor Heron, or at least Mr. ISIoney. 
So she turned away, and made up her mind to go through the 
Park and out into Waterloo Place, and home to the West Centre 
by that way. 

She was close upon Victor before she saw him, and they saw 
each other at the same moment. So much change had been 



A LOUNGE IN THE PARK. 275 

made for both of them by that one glance from each in the 
morning, that it did not seem possible to Minola to make any 
attempt at mere acquaintanceship and casual conversation any 
more. She had no time to think ; she did not well know what 
she was doing ; but she was passing Heron without a single word, 
or more than a scared and startled look. 

An instant before, Victor had made up his mind that, come 
what would, he must not meet her any more. Yet, by a strange 
inconsistency, he was made angry by her attempt to pass him 
without a word. He resented it as though it were a casting of 
deliberate scorn on him. For the moment he almost looked on 
]Minola as one might look on an accomplice who turns away from 
his friend in some hour of trial. 

He leaped from his seat and went towards her, and prevented 
her from going any farther. 

" Are you not going to speak to me ? " he asked. 

She stopped and looked down, and tried to seem composed. 
A woman seldom so loses her sense of the proprieties of things 
as not to keep in mind the fact that there are people likely to 
pass by and take account of unusual demeanour. Minola saw, 
too, that Victor Heron was not in a mood to remember that or 
anything else just then, and that for his sake and hers she must 
give some way to his humour. She was trying to compose herself 
to this, when he repeated his question. 

" What shall I say, Wx. Heron ? " she asked gently, and in a 
tone of subdued remonstrance. " I don't see any use in anything 
I can say ; it is all so very unhappy." 

It was strange how they both assumed the reality of the 
discovery that each had made. It was curious how each assumed 
that in the other's mind was a clear understanding of the meaning 
of every word. There was no supposed need of explanation. 
Bet\veen two natures alike so candid there was not the faintest 
attempt at any fencing off the reality. 

Victor turned the way she was going and walked by her side. 
She had no power to prevent him, and was only somewhat relieved 
to find that they were going on. 

There was silence for a moment or two ; then Victor spoke. 

" We are very unfortunate," he said ; and there seemed to 
Minola something almost terrible in the simple aciaiowledgment 
of companionship involved in the little monosyllable " we." 

" We are, indeed," she said, accepting the companionship as an 
acknowledged reality. 

" It war, all my fault," he said; "I was a fool . a blind and foolish 
idiot. I only wish that I alone had to suffer for it. I do, indeed." 

T 2 



276 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

" I am sure you do," Minola said. She knew him too well 
to doubt that it must be an added pain to him, things being as 
they were, that she should feel for him as he felt for her. 

" You blame me for all this, Miss Grey ? " 

"Oh, no ! I don't blame anyone ; yes, I blame myself, but 
only for allowing anyone to know . it would not have been so bad, 
only for that." She stopped ; she feared she had said too much. 

"How long have you known of this?" Victor asked. He 
walked slowly by her side, and looked, not at her, but down at 
the dusty path. It was curious how both spoke without any 
distinct reference to the matter of which they talked. All that 
was assumed between them. Between them now, as between the 
brother and sister in Goethe's tragedy, was to be only the truth. 
That was the necessity of their condition. 

" This long time ; I don't know how long, but very long," she 
answered. There was something peculiarly pathetic in the simple 
humility of her answer. 

A groan came from Victor. A long time . and he had never 
known anything or thought of anything until lately, but rushed 
headlong on like a blind fool. 

" Then all might have been well if I hadn't been a tool and 
a madman!" He struck the point of his walking-cane fiercely 
at the ground, as if he were stabbing at some enemy . himself, 
perhaps. 

Minola plucked up heart to say something, which she thought 
she ought to say. 

" I don't know, Mr. Heron ; I am afraid it would not have 
been much better . somebody would have had to suffer. There is 
. there is Lucy, you know ; we must not forget her." 

" Yes, yes," he said, " we must not forget her ; it is not any 
fault of hers." 

" Oh, no ! " 

" But when you knew this," he said, suddenly looking into 
Minola's face for the first time during this curious promenade, 
"why did you go on as if you never could hke anyone in the 
world ? How was I to know ? Good God ! it never occurred to 
me to think that a woman like you could care for a man like me . 
in that sort of way. Do you remember when I told you one day, 
long ago, that I had a goddess theory about women? Do you 
remember my saying anything like that to you one day?" 

" Oh, yes, Mr. Heron, quite well ! " 

" That was true enough," he said, with a sort of smile. " I 
did think of women like that. I thought of you as if you were a 
goddess, Miss Grey; and I did not beheve it possible that such a 



A LOUNGE IN rHE PARK. 277 

woman as you could care about me. I was quite grateful when 
I found that poor little Lucy was foolish enough to think about 
me ; I was, indeed. But why did you play at being a hater of men 
and all that? Why did you deceive me ? You should not have 
stooped to any such follies. I knew you didn't really hate men 
or hate anybody ; I knew you were a great deal too good for that ; 
but I did believe you were not a girl to care about any of us, in 
that way." 

" I am sorry for any affectation of any kind ; I don't suppose 
any good ever came of it ; but I did believe that my feelings were 
like that, at one time." 

" But when you found that they weren't, then why did you 
keep up such a pretence anymore?" He remonstrated in the 
earnest way of one who believes that he has been heavily wronged. 

" I will tell you . I will tell you all the truth. I suppose we 
ought not to speak in this Avay at all ; I suppose it is like a 
treason to Lucy, and to all our friends ; I feel now almost like 
a traitor. But this is only for once, Mr. Heron, and to settle all ; 
and perhaps we shall both be better, and see our way the clearer 
for having said this . although I came into this place only because 
I was afraid that if I went the other way I might meet you . 
and see how things happen ! " 

She felt ashamed to go on ; it was as if they were culprits. 
He, too, felt humbled to think that she should have had to try to 
avoid him. 

" Well," he said, " you may as well speak out now the whole 
truth, and let us know once for all ; I wish we had been a little 
more outspoken before this, both of us." 

For the moment, in his pain, he seemed to forget that only 
he could have spoken out, and that he had not known truly what 
he would have until it was too late. 

" No, it would have been of no use," Minola said simply ; " at 
least, somebody would have had to suffer. The truth is this, Mr. 
Heron : Lucy told me long ago all that she felt, poor child. She 
trusted all her secret to me ; what could I do after that, but try at 
least to keep my own ? You do not suppose I was to go round 
the world . our little world, I mean . as the girl who was in love, 
and whom nobody cared about ? " There was a natural touch of 
the " Miss Misanthrope" in Minola as she spoke these words. 

" Then this was why you seemed to disUke people . because 
of that?" 

" I didn't see anything else to do." 

They walked on a few steps in silence. 

" It's all hopeless now," Victor said. 



27S MISS MISANTHROPE. 

" Hopeless as far as that goes, but not hopeless otherwise for 
you, Mr. Heron. You will be very happy some time." 

He turned upon her almost angrily. 

" Do you call that happy," he asked, " to be married to a 
woman I don't love, and to know that I might have married the 
woman I do love, and to know that it is all my own fault, and that 
I have done as much wTong and brought as much unhappiness to 
one as to the other ? Do you think that is a prospect for a man to 
look out to, and be happy ? I wish to Heaven I had been killed 
in any of these trumpery affairs out there ! " He tossed his head 
impatiently and contemptuously, as indicating the St. Xavier's 
Settlements, and the slight esteem in which he held his colonial 
career now. " I wish to God I had been killed there and forgotten 
before I ever saw her face or yours ! " 

The intensity of his tone when he spoke the word " forgotten" 
might have served as an indication of his character, for one of 
the passionate dreams of his youth and his manhood had been 
that his name should be remembered somehow, as that of a man 
who had done good work in the service of England. It may be 
that if he had had less of that sort of manly ambition he might 
liave better understood how to see his way in the more familiar 
trials of character. That ambition had supplied for him the place 
of the dreams of love, and of loving women, and of romance, and 
all the rest of it ; and when the new feelings . new to him . camie 
at last, he did not understand them as a commonplace young man 
would have been sure to do. 

Minola listened to him quietly, and let him speak all he cared 
to say just then. She answered after a while : 

" Oh, no, Mr, Heron, I don't mean that; I don't mean that 
you could help feeling this for a w^hile. But you will grow 
reconciled after a little time ; and you know how Lucy describes 
to be loved . anyone must love her, I think ; and then you will 
have a career and success ; and the lives of men are so full and so 
active, and you have so many things to think of; while we " 

She stopped. She did not care to utter the immemorial 
lament, the ever true, ever pathetic, pitiful lament, over the 
narrowness of woman's life, that was wailing in her heart at that 
moment . on that bright spring day in pleasant St. James's Park. 

But the words touched Victor profoundly. He turned away 
from thoughts of self to her. 

" It's true," he said ; " I suppose we have the best of it always ; 
I was thinking of the shame that all this is to me. You don't 
feel that ; you have done wrong to no one." 

** I don't know," Minola answered sadly \ " I tiiink I am 




Jt's the handkerchief, sir, the lady dropped.' 



A LOUNGE IN THE PARK. 279 

doing \\Tong in speaking of all this to you ; I think I must 
have done some wrong when that can come to be possible, and 
when it seems the best thing left to do. I am Lucy's friend ; 
she trusted all her secret to me . and now " 

" There is nothing to be done," Heron said moodily. As if 
it were possible to think of anything that could be done ! 

" Nothing, except to make the best of what is ; and for you 
to make her happ\', and to be a success ; and to go back to the 
House of Commons now ; " she tried to speak in a firm and 
cheery tone. 

" I can't even ask you to remember me " 

" Oh, yes, Mr. Heron ! why not ? If you think it likely that 
I should forget how kind you were and what a friend, then ask 
me to remember you by all means. I shall remember you whether 
you ask me or not." 

"And you," he asked, looking round at her, "do you ask me 
to remember you ? " 

"No ; you will remember me, I know . why should you not? 
We shall have to meet again sometimes, I suppose, and why 
should we not be friends ? " 

He understood her this time. She was making a determined 
effort to replace their relation to each other on the basis of friend- 
ship. She had said all she meant to say about other feelings, 
and how they came to be felt in vain. He respected her decision, 
as indeed he now respected all she said or did. Up to that time 
they had both spoken with a certain shamefacedness and con- 
trition, as if both alike were conscious of degradation in their 
strange and chance confidence. From the time when she spoke 
these words they both became calmer, and looked around with 
less sense of humiliation. 

A hurrying step was heard behind them. Victor stopped and 
turned round. " How is it with me when every noise appals 
me ? " How is it with us when we start at a hurried step on the 
path behind us ? This was a very harmless intruder. It was a 
poor woman who had picked up something, with which she was 
hastening after IMinola. As Victor stopped and she came up with 
him first, she spoke to him in good-natured breathlessness . 

" It's the handkerchief, sir, the lady dropped . your good lady; 
I saw it on the walk, and I said to my husband. It belongs to 
the gentleman or his wife." She handed the kerchief to Victor, 
delighted to have been of any service to anyone. 

IMinola heard the well-meant words as well as Victor. She 
could not keep the colour from her cheeks ; but she took the 
kerchief and was able to thank the poor woman incoherent words, 
and even with a bricrht smile. 



28o MISS MISANTHROPE. 

They only walked a few yards on together. At the first turning 
to which they came Minola stopped. 

" Good-bye, Mr. Heron ; I am going this way." She did not 
give her hand. 

" Good-bye," he said ; and then came towards her and held 
out his hand. She put hers in his ; there was a formal farewell . . 
no pressure which either might feel ; they did not allow their eyes 
to meet this time. Then he went his way and she went hers, 
neither at the moment knowing or thinking whither the ways led j 
and that was all, and all was over. 



CHAPTER XXX. 

"lean'd her breast up till a thorn.*' 

Mr. Money and Victor Heron walked home that night together 
from the House of Commons. It was more than half an hour 
after midnight when they left the House, but both considered 
themselves getting off rather well so early as that, and neither loved 
going to bed at prudent and wholesome hours. Victor v/alked 
with Money to the door of the Victoria Street house, and then 
Money asked him to come in that they might talk a little. " There 
are two or three things I want to talk about," he said, "and we 
are sure to have a quiet hour now." Victor was willing, and 
Money brought him up to his study, where a fire was looking very 
cheery, although the spring was a little advanced, and there were 
cigars and other preparations for making a quiet hour pass 
agreeably. 

" I like this time of night," Money said, " because one is sure 
to be let alone. There can't be any people wanting to see one 
now ; and there are no newspapers and no letters, and all the 
house is in bed. This is about the only time of the day when I 
really feel that I am my own master. Come, take a cigar ; there's 
Apollinaris and anything you like." 

Victor sat down and began to smoke, and they fell to talking 
for a while about things in the House, and the debate on Victor's 
great question, which was soon to come off. 

" By the way," Money said suddenly, " and before I forget, I 
saw our friend, your rival, to-day . Sheppard, you know ; and he had 
something to say to me that I want to ask your opinion about, 
although perliaps it ought to be a sort of secret as yet. What 
would you think of him as a husband for our friend, Miss Grey ?* 



"LEAN'D HER BREAST UP TILL A THORN." 281 

Victor almost started. He looked up so suddenly that Money 
followed unconsciously the direction of his eyes, fancying perhaps 
he had seen some unexpected siglit. 

" Did you tliink you heard some one stirring ? " Money asked. 

" No, I didn't. Well, about Sheppard ?" 

"What would you think of him, I was saying, as a husband 
for ]\Iinola Grey?" 

Heron blew several straight puffs of smoke from his cigar 
before he answered. When he did speak his answer was not 
encouraging. " Absurd," was the remark he made. 

Money smiled. 

"Well, I should have thought so too, perhaps; but I believe 
there is something to be said for the idea after all. This man 
Sheppard came to me in rather a frank and straightforward way 
to-day, and asked me straight out to give him the help of my 
influence in persuading Miss Grey. He did propose for her before. 
Did you know that ?" 

" No, I did not." 

" Nor I, although I dare say my women-folk did. Oh, yes, 
he told me candidly that he had proposed for her not only once 
but twice, or more often perhaps ! " 

" Yes ; and she . what did she say?" Victor seemed to have 
some difficulty about his cigar ; apparently it required tremendous 
puffing to keep it alight. 

" That's a bad cigar, I think, you have got hold of ; an odd 
thing, too, in that box. Throw it away ; have another." 

" No, thanks ; this is all right. Well, what did she say ?" 

" Well, of course, you know, we may easily infer what she 
said when, after his having pressed her in that sort of way, she 
is not Mrs. Sheppard yet." 

" Oh ! " A kind of groan broke from Victor at the bare idea 
of Minola being ]\Irs. Sheppard. " I can't imagine how any man 
can persecute a girl in that way," he went on indignantly. " I 
think he ought to be kicked ; if I were the brother of a girl like 
that I would kick him, by Jove ! " 

" Yes, just so, and perhaps the girl would not thank her brother 
in the least for his kindly intervention. My dear fellow, have you 
never heard that in such things nineteen naysays make one grant ? 
It's all very well for you good-looking fellows,, with a sort of con- 
quering, careless air about you, who find the girls only too glad 
when you ask them . it's all very well for you to talk about not 
persecuting girls. But a man like Sheppard must press his case 
a little or he will have no chance at all. He isn't by any means 
a bad looking fellow either, but he has not the way that takes 



282 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

women ; he must be content to ask, perhaps, and ask again. I 
have a good deal of sympathy for fellows like Sheppard." 

" Well, but what does he want ? He has asked Miss Grey, 
and she refused him . I should think so ; what does he want 
now?" 

*' To ask again and not to be refused, I suppose." 

" But what can you do for him ?" 

"He thinks that if I were to see the thing as he does, and 
to speak to Miss Grey about it, and advise her to think it over as 
favourably as she could, it might perhaps have some influence on 
her. You see, it's all very well just now while she is young, but 
she must grow tired some time or other of the kind of lonely life 
she leads, and she will not make new friends, and we are all in a 
manner breaking up. Theresa will be married very soon, and 
then Lucelet of course ; and when the girls are married, I think 
sometimes of leaving England, Victor, my boy." 

This was said with an air of carelessness, but, at the same 
time, Mr. Money closely watched Heron's face to see how he took 
the announcement. Victor certainly did look surprised. 

''What on earth do you think of doing that for?" 

" Well, you know my interests in a money way are much more 
in other countries than in this. In Russia, for instance, I have 
found people in authority to appreciate the things I do in a way 
that the people here never did. As long as the girls remained 
unmarried, of course, I should never have thought of that ; but 
now, thank God, they are both going to be married in the 
happiest way, and my wife does not care for this country any more 
than I do, and one conlri often see one's children . a journey is 
nothing in our days. and on the whole I don't think I am much 
longer for England if things go as I expect. But there's time 
enough to talk about that," and he seemed a little relieved for 
having got even so far. " The thing I wanted to speak to you 
about now is this business of our friend Sheppard. You don't 
like the idea?" 

" The thing seems to me absurd and preposterous. He is a 
slow, formal, dull sort of Philistine, and to marry him to such a 
girl . good heavens ! how could you think of it?" 

Victor Heron jumped up in his usual excitable way, and began 
to walk up and down the room. 

"Look here," he said, stopping suddenly, "how should you 
like the idea of your own daughter . either of your daughters . 
being married to a man she cared nothing about, and had refused 
again and again ? Put it in that light." 

" But, my good fellow, a girl like that must marrj- some one. 



*'LEAN'D HER BREAST UP TILL A THORN." 283 

She can't help herself. She is handsome and clever, and she has 
some money, and fellows will get around her, and the more 
generous she is the more easily she will be imposed upon. That 
fellow Blanchet has been trying hard to get her to fall in love with 
him. I'd rather trust her happiness a thousand times to a man 
like Sheppard than to a fellow like that. And, do you know? . 
our friend St. Paul actually fell in love with her . downrignt in 
love . and wanted her to marry him, and offered as a proof of his 
sincerity that she should begin by handing over every sixpence 
she has to little Mary lilanchet." 

Heron flung himself down in his seat again, to give due ear to 
this revelation. 

" How do you know?" he asked. 

" St. Paul himself came and told me ; he said she was the 
only girl he ever could have cared about, and that he would have 
given her money enough to make ducks and drakes of in any 
benevolent projects she liked. Confess, Heron, that there must 
have been some thing tempting in that . at least, there would have 
been to most girls. St. Paul, after all, is the son of a duke and 
the brother of a duke, and a clever girl might have hoped to cure 
him of all his nonsense, and bring him to terms with his people 
again, and get him back into society, and get herself there along 
with him. I tell you what . my wife is a terrible Radical and 
all that, and yet I am not by any means certain that if such an 
oft'er had been made to one of our girls a year or so back she 
would not have been delighted at the chance. But our friend 
Minola would not hear of it." 

This was trying news to Victor. He knew only too well, 
because only too late, why Minola refused every love offer that 
could be made. 

" According to all established ideas," Money said, " the girl 
ought to have been in love with some one else ; but that is not 
so, I suppose, in this case. It seems that she knew no one in 
Keeton but this poor Sheppard, He tells me that she told him 
she was in love with nobody but a man in a book . that was while 
she was in Keeton; and here in London she only knew just the 
two or three fellows we have now been talking about; and so far 
as I can see she has refused them everyone in turn. There's 
positively no one left but you, Victor, and I suppose you never 
proposed for her?" Mr. Money smiled good-humouredly. 

" No," Victor replied ] " I never proposed for her." 

" The right man has not come along, I suppose ; but the 
question is, will he ever come ? " 

" Suppose he never comes ?" Victor said, with sudden energy 



28+ MISS MISANTHROPE, 

and jumping from his seat again. " Suppose he never comes, 
what then ? It would be a thousand times better for a girl like 
that to live alone . yes, and die alone . than to marry a man she 
did not love, and to have to drag through life with that sort of 
man or with any man she did not care for in the right way. She 
is too good for him ; she is too good for anyone, for that matter; 
but to marry him would be a shame. Don't have anything to do 
with it, Money ! Think of your own daughters. How would you 
like to have Lucy married to a man she did not care for ? " 

" That would not be the worst," Money said. " There might 
be much worse than that. It might be Lucelet's chance . thank 
God, it isn't . not to be able to love anyone in that sort of way, 
and yet she might marry some good fellow, and make him a good 
little wife, and be happy in the end. No ; it isn't that I should 
dread for Lucelet so much. It would be her marrying a man who 
did not really and truly love her." 

Money said all this in a thoughtful, almost dreamy sort of 
way, holding his cigar in his hand the while. He spoke as one 
might speak of a danger which exists no longer, but of which he 
can hardly think even yet without a certain drear impression ; and 
he ended with a sigh of relief 

" She is saved from that, my boy, thanks to you," he said, and 
he stretched out his hand to Heron, who was near him at the 
moment, pacing up and down in his still unquelled excitement. 

Heron felt his heart torn with pain and shame. He hardly 
knew how to take that outstretched hand. He seemed as if he 
were driven along to say, " It's not true ; I don't deserve your 
confidence, and you and your daughter ought to hate me." What 
might have come of the impulse no one can know, for just at that 
moment the attention of Mr. Money was suddenly drawn away. 

" I certainly heard some one stirring outside the door there," 
he said ; " odd, that. I thought everyone was in bed long ago. 
Stop a moment. Heron ; I will go and see." 

He went to the door and opened it. Heron was hardly even 
listening to his words. 

" Why, it's Lucelet ! " Money exclaimed. " What on earth are 
you doing here, you little creature, at this time of night ? Look 
here, Victor, here's a little eaves-dropper." 

He came into the room, bringing with him the palpitating and 
rather affrighted little Lucy. She blushed crimson red at being 
thus caught, and finding that Victor was with her father. 

" Oh, no, papa . for shame to say such a thing ! I was not 
eaves-dro])ping ; I was only listening to be sure that you were 
alone. At first I thought you were ; and then I heard you 



"LEAN'D HER BREAST UP TILL A THORN." 285 

talking, and I did not know who was with you, and I listened just 
for one moment, in order to be sure." 

" You did not think it was Victor who was with me, I daresay ? " 

*' No ; at least, I didn't think so at first." 

Lucy still looked embarrassed and alarmed. It must be 
owned that Victor Heron did not seem quite at his ease. Money 
was considerably amazed, for he had never had a visitation of this 
kind before. 

" Take a seat with us, I.ucy," Victor said at last, " since you 
have paid us a visit." He handed her a chair. She looked at 
him timidly and only said, " Thank you, Victor," but did not sit 
down. Her father put his hands on her shoulders and scrutinised 
her with a manner of good-humoured authority. 

" So you have not been in bed at all, Lucelet? But that isn't 
anything very new . for you to sit up too late. But what did you 
want, pray, in this part of the building at this hour ? Think of the 
possible shock to our nerves, you foolish young person. Suppose 
we had fancied we saw a ghost and expired of fright ? " 

Lucy smiled a rather wan smile. 

" I wanted to speak to you, papa, and I thought I would sit 
up until you came in . it wouldn't be very late, perhaps ; and then 
I heard you come, and I was not quite certain if you were alone, 
and after a while I came doAvn to try." 

" Was it such very important business, Lucelet, that it would 
not keep until to-morrow ? and must it he told to me in solemn 
seclusion and at the deadest hour of night ? " 

" I thought I should like to see you by yourself, and when you 
were not likely to be disturbed " 

" Likely to be disturbed by anyone but yourself, you mean, I 
suppose, Lucelet ? " 

Lucelet somehow had no mirth in her to-night. She still 
looked scared and uneasy, and unlike herself 

" You have been to the House, Victor ? " she said, as if she 
would turn the conversation away from herself 

Before Victor could answer, Money struck in : 

" Confess, Lucelet," he said, with something like gravity of 
tone, " that you expected Victor here ; and that that was the 
reason why you came stealing down to our midnight conference ? " 

She shook her head. 

" No, indeed, dear; it was not that. I did not expect to find 
Victor here." 

" And I ought not to be here," Victor said, " at such an hour 
as this. You want to talk to your papa, Lucy, and I must not 
interrupt you." He seemed as if about to go. 



286 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

" Oh, it's nothing ! " Money said. " Can't it be told before 
Victor, Lucelet . or can't it wait just a Httle ? VVe were talking of 
something that would greatly interest you, I knov/, when you came 
in ; and since you have given us the benefit of your company at a 
time when you ought to be in bed, I don't object at all to taking 
you into our council. Do you, Victor ? " 

" Oh, no, if Lucy would not rather speak to you now alone. 
I can come in to-morrow, and we can talk of the other matter 



" I think when Lucelet hears what it is, she will not be inclined 
to put it off for any business of her own. It is about Miss Grey, 
Lucelet." 

Lucy looked up with a start, and the colour came again into 
the face that was pale a moment before. 

" About Nola? You have something to say about Nola? " 
" Yes, we have. Will you come into council, Lucelet ? " 
" I don't know . if you wish, yes ; what is it about ?" 
" No, no ; it would be cruelty," said Victor resolutely. " It is 
clear that Lucy is too tired for much consultation ; and as she has 
stayed up for a particular purpose, she ought not to be interfered 
with. No, thank you, Money ; I'll not stay now. It's quite time 
for me to go." 

Lucy made no attempt to induce him to stay. Money looked 
at her and then at Victor in some surprise. 
" Good-night, Lucy," Victor said. 

" Good-night, Victor." She put her little cold and tremulous 
hand into his, and she looked up at him. There was such an 
expression in her eyes as made Victor's heart thrill with pain. 
Their eyes met for a moment, and her look was full of unhappiness. 
There was no complaint in it ; there was no angry protest against 
man, or fate, or heaven, or anything; only such settled unhappiness 
as one might have thought that young and pretty face could never 
be made to show. As she looked into his face, and her hand was 
still held in his, a tear began to gather in the child-like soft eyes, 
and the little lips begnu to quiver. She withdrew her hand 
quickly but not ungently. 

Victor was going; Money rose to accompany him to the door, 
but Victor saw Lucy put her hand upon her father's arm as if to 
detain him; and heat once insisted that Money must not leave his 
room. As Heron went out and closed the door behind him, he 
heard Money say to his daughter : 

" Why, Lucelet, my dear, what is this all about?" 
Victor hastened away lest he might hear any more. He felt 
miserably unhappy. He felt conscience-stricken, although it might 



'*LEAN'D HER BREAST UP TILL A THORN." 2S7 

have puzzled a casuist to say where there could be found anything 
to blame in any part of his conduct in which Lucy was concerned. 
It is much to be feared, however, that in real life only those feel 
the stings of conscience much who have done little to deserve the 
torture. In the realms of poetry and art, indeed, conscience may 
" call her furies forth to shake the sounding scourge and hissing 
snake," and may show "what lesson maybe read beside a sinner's 
restless bed." But in ordinary life the sounding scourge is usually 
only for the sensitive skin of the man or woman who is always 
trying to do right, and the regular sinner sleeps a sleep of infantile 
depth and sweetness. For Victor Heron, although it Avas not 
certain that poor Lucy's melancholy eyes had anything to do .n'ith 
him at all, there was little sleep that night. " Conscience, antici- 
pating time," in the lines from which we have just quotedj 
.' already rues the unacted crime." In Heron's case, conscience 
rued a wrong which it never had been in Heron's heart to do. 



CHAPTER XXXL 

" AND EVEN FOR LOVE WILL BURY LOVE IN EARTH." 

When Minola made that sudden confession to Mary Blanchet 
which was told in a former chapter, she did it under the impulse 
of a feeling which she could no more restrain than she could 
explain it. After it Avas done she was sorry, perhaps, that she had 
made the confession, but she had no fear that it would be 
betrayed. Devoted as Mary was to her i)rother, Minola felt 
certain that she Avould never let one word of such a secret escape 
from her to him; and Minola did not even consider the possibihty 
of her telling it to anyone else. They hardly spoke of it after- 
wards. Minola only once impressed on Mary the necessity of 
keeping it the profoundest secret, which, to do the poetess justice, 
was hardH' necessary. If there was one obligation which Mary 
respected above all others, it was the confidence of a woman's 
love-secret. She became, if possible, more devoted than ever to 
her leader ; first, because the leader had proved herself a very 
woman by having a love-secret, and, next, because Minola had 
confided the secret to her. Mary did not ask who the hero of 
the secret story might be. She easily got to know that Mr. St. 
Paul was not the person ; because by questions and by inferences 
she came to understand that he had really offered himself for the 
place, and had not been accepted. This was a subject of immense 



288 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

delight and pride to Mary. In her wildest dreams of day or night 
she had never hoped for such an honour as to have a friend who 
had refused the son of a duke. No matter about the character 
of the duke's son ; no matter if he was cast off by his own family 
and his own class; all the same he was the son of a duke . nothing 
could alter that. He, then, being out of the way, it was not, per- 
haps, very difficult for the astute Mary to guess at the real person; 
and it did indeed seem to her a great misfortune for her leader to 
have fallen into an attachment so hopeless as that must be. Still, 
the sympathies of Miss Blanchet were alwa)^s rather with hopeless 
than with hopeful attachments. Minola became in her eyes only 
all the more interesting, all the more beautiful, all the more 
womanly and queenly, because of this unhappy love. 

One great advantage Minola gained by her sudden outburst of 
confession was that Mary ceased from that time forth to tell her 
of her brother's love and disappointment. But Minola did not 
know that Mary grew rather more hopeful about her brother than 
before. Since Miss Grey absolutely could not marry the man she 
loved, there was all the more chance that she might resign herself 
to marry some one who at least loved her. AVhen Victor Heron 
was married once for all, then, perhaps, Mary thought, Minola 
might begin to reconcile herself to realities. Herbert Blanchet's 
chance might come then after all. 

Meanwhile a marked change for the better was coming over 
Blanchet himself. He really had been awakened, as a certain class 
of pious person might say, to a sense of the goodness that was in 
life and in some human hearts. He had had these feelings stirred 
within him for the first time by Minola's spontaneous kindness. 
He fell in love with Minola, and he grew ashamed of himself, 
and the pitiful affectations of his life. He asked her to love him, 
and he was refused, as we know, but very kindly and considerately. 
Minola showed, perhaps, only too much consideration for his 
feelings. She assured him that she had no intention to marry, and 
that in any case she could not say she felt for him any of the 
sentiments he professed to feel for her. He went away not with- 
out hope, and he set himself to work to redeem his life from the 
reproach of idleness. Mrs. Money, as we know already, took 
him lately under her special care as helper of unhappy men. 
Perhaps she guessed well enough what were his pains and his hopes. 
He went to see her often, at hours, as she took care it should be, 
when Minola was not likely to be there. Mrs. Money grew more 
and more fond of him as she helped him on, and perhaps thought 
it would not be a bad thing for either if in the end Minola came 
to marry him. "The dear child must marry some one in the 



*^AND EVEN FOR LOVE WILL BURY LOVE." 289 

end," Mrs. Money took for granted, and, as she had means 
enough of her own, why might she not marry this handsome and 
gifted young fellow ? Why might she not come to love him ? Of 
all these ideas Mrs. Money communicated none to her husband, 
for she knew that he had ideas of his own on the same subject 
which were not the same as hers. For once, Mr. and Mrs. 
Money were, as regarded a girl's settlement in life, almost as much 
divided as Mr. and Mrs. Page. Under the influence of her ideas, 
however, Mrs. Money was determined to extend a helping hand to 
the poet. She induced her husband to exert his influence so far 
on Blanchet's behalf as to recommend him to some newspaper 
editors whom Mr. Money knew, and to obtain for his talents as a 
writer of light and brilliant articles a chance of success and pay. 
The poet went to work very steadily. He joined with a literary 
friend to take chambers in the Temple ; he renounced poetry for 
the present, until he should have shown that he really had in him 
a capacity for hard work, and until some inspiration should arise 
compelling him to attempt a poem, and therefore proving him a 
man of at least poetic calling. In truth, the meaning of all this 
was that Blanchet was disappointed, was penitent, was disposed 
to blame himself for his failure hitherto . another and very subtle 
and satisfying mood of self-conceit . and that he was ready to 
plunge from extreme of self-indulgence to extreme of self- 
restraint. 

In all this, however, he was working still with a purpose and a 
hope. He had in his life experienced most things except pros- 
perity. He had fallen on bad chances and into a bad school for 
a petulant and fitful nature like his. He had been left for the 
most part to a companionship which had little regard for the 
manly virtues of character. He had consoled himself for disap- 
pointments and failures by ^\Tapping himself in a ragged mantle ot 
self-conceit, and affectation, and cynicism. It was easier to talk 
and think with scorn of an unappreciating world than to work 
patiently to deserve appreciation. The break-down of all this, 
his strong love for IMinola and her generous kindness, together 
wrought on him so as to dispose him for more wholesome stmggles 
and a fresh life. His self-conceit now worked in a new form. 
He was strongly persuaded that ]\linola was only tr}ing what he 
could do in the way of manly struggle and achievement before 
she listened to him, and he told himself that the present was, after 
all, only a period of probation. 

Once he allowed some hope of this kind to escape him in 
talking with his sister, and she did not wholly discourage it. 
Some faint whisper, some half-breathed, unconscious utterance of 

u 



290 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

hers, filled him, however, with a terrible suspicion. He had never 
before thought of the possibility of Miss Grey loving anyone if she 
did not love him. He always complacently regarded her as he 
regarded fame, as something which, perhaps, has to be wooed amid 
disappointments, and which may not come all at once or without 
trouble, but which was sure to be his portion when he had exerted 
himself enough to deserve it. The new suspicion breathed so un- 
consciously into his mind by poor Mary filled it with a strange 
power. It held him day and night. It turned him suddenly and 
almost completely from his steady work of self-improvement. He 
felt that he could do nothing until he was clear upon that point, 
and he set himself to watch and find out. 

There never could have been a sermon against suspicion and 
against mean watchfulness half so impressive as the sum total of 
what his suspicions and his spyings cost Herbert Blanchet, if he 
only could have known it. Minola had heard of his steady work 
from Mrs. Money as well as from Mary, and she was glad of the 
improvement, and felt a higher respect for him because he had not 
allowed himself to be wholly crumpled up by a disappointment in 
love. When all was first known between her and Victor Heron, 
she felt so miserable and so guilty, that she could have found it in 
her heart to wish she had married anyone, or gone to the other end 
of the world, or drowned herself, rather than have Lucy and 
Heron and herself entangled in such a miserable web of per- 
plexity, and of something like deceit. 

One dim, foggy evening, when spring seemed to have suddenly 
turned back into winter, Minola sat in her room, drearily touching 
some chords on her piano, and meanwhile asking herself, "What 
is to be done now ? what is to come next?" 

" One thing is to be done," she said, speaking aloud and rising 
from the piano. " I am going out, Mary." 

" Isn't it wet and foggy, dear?" Mary asked. Mary never 
saw any use in going out when the weather was not very fine. 

" I don't care, Msxy; I'll battle with the elements. Is not 
that the heroic way of putting it?" 

" I suppose so ; I wish I were a hero, dear." 

" What has become of your poetry, Mary? Your poems ought 
to be your heroism." 

" What has become of them, dear ? Oh, I don't know ! What 
has become of everything?" 

" Yes," Minola said, in irrepressible despondency ; " I wonder 
what has become of everything we cared about, Mary ? I wonder 
what will become of you and me ? " 

Mary sighed. 



'*AND EVEN FOR LOVE WILL BURY LOVE:' 291 

" Oh, you are well enough, Minola dear ! you have youth and 
beauty and everything ; and you could do so much good and 
make people happy, and by making them happy you would be 
happy yourself." 

There was silence for a moment or two. 

" How is your brother, Mary ? " Minola asked abruptly. 

" He is very well, dear," Mary said, looking up timidly. " I 
think he is very well; he does not complain of anything. He is 
working very hard, and he tells me it does him good, and he 
seems very hopeful, I think." 

" I am very glad to hear it; indeed I am, Mary," Minola said 
in an almost penitent tone ; and then she made preparations for 
what she called battling with the elements. 

She went her usual way through the Park, thinking sadly 
enough of the first days when she knew that walk, and when she 
was full of the joy of her newly-acquired independence. It seemed 
to her, knowing all that had passed in that short interval, as if 
no human creature could have shown herself less fitted for inde- 
pendence than she. She began to be sick of her purposeless life, 
which had, so far as she saw, only brought distress on herself and 
on her friends. A woman of the world would have thought little 
of all that had passed . would have thought, perhaps, that nothing 
that could be called anything had passed. But Minola's proud 
spirit and sensitive conscience had not been subdued or seared by 
the ways of the world. She had tried the past chapters of her life, 
and she had condemned them; and from her own sentence there 
was no appeal. 

Soon Miss Misanthrope stood on the bridge that spans the 
canal, her favourite spot. She had come there for quiet and for 
though. The day had been wet and foggy, so much so that at 
one time it seemed impossible for her to get out of doors at all, 
and she dreaded a whole day caged up with Mary Blanchet . at 
least, until she had made up her mind on a question of deep 
moment to her. But the rain ceased to stream and was succeeded 
by a thick, warm log, and Minola did not heed the fog; and so 
she started for her solitary walk. By the time she had crossed the 
Park the fog was beginning to lift, and when she stood on the 
bridge she saw a curious and a very lovely sight. On the canal, 
across it, all along its banks for a certain distance, the heavy, 
damp fog brooded. It brooded thick, and soft, and dank, as 
though the season were early winter instead of late spring rapidly 
melting into summer. It was rather late in the evening ; the ap- 
pearance of the scene was for a certain distance around rather 
that of a November night than of a spring evening, however late. 



292 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

But high up in the heavens, above the region of the fog, the sky 
was clear, was all of a faint delicate blue, and the moon was now 
bright. Immediately beneath Minola's feet, in the water, the 
reflection of the moon was brilliant, and the sluggish ripples were 
glorified in its light. Yet if she allowed her gaze to follow the 
canal, though but a very little way, she came on the fog-bank and 
the region of the mist again. So, if she raised her eyes slowly from 
the canal to the sky, she saw in succession of almost imperceptible 
change the murky hue of the water in the fog, the blackish grey 
of the spectral trees seen dimly through it, and then shades of 
softening grey, until in some manner which the gazer could not 
clearly make out the grey had all given way to the pale blue, and 
at last, following the lighting heaven to the source of light, she 
reached the glittering effulgent yellow in which the moon was 
circled. A strange and beautiful condition of atmosphere and 
sky thus brought the fogs and chilly waters of November and the 
soft blue skies and mild moonlight of May into one picture. 

The picture had this effect upon Minola, that it took her for 

the moment away from her own brooding troubles. It told her, 

too, that, come what would, the beauty of sky and water would 

remain a livmg possession for her. She began to wonder whether, 

after all, we do not exaggerate in our romantic or petulant moods 

those sorrows that are said to be especially of the heart. It 

seemed to her, under the softening and purifying influence of the 

scene around, that there was much left for her to do and -to enjoy 

in life. Hers was a nature of that mould that is peculiarly alive to 

the influences of sky, and scene, and atmosphere . a nature that 

under other conditions of training would have been profoundly 

superstitious, and for which, to adopt the picturesque expression 

of Schiller, the door of the ghost-kingdom would easily open. 

Had she not been brought up in prosaic and well-informed 

England of the midland counties it is probable that the door of 

that ghost-kingdom would always have stood ajar for her, and- that 

amid the commonplace work and joys of every day she would often 

have had sight of the vast lost regions of me supernatural. that 

Eden of fearful fascination from which man, by reason of his eating 

the fruit of the tree of science, has shut himself out. But, even 

as it was, slie retained enough of the thrilling temperament that 

admits of superstition to feel peculiarly influenced, now encouraged, 

and now depressed, by the movement of a cloud, the gleam of a 

star, the sudden, unexpected ripple of water among concealing 

reeds. Therefore as she stood this night, and studied the picture 

all around her, she felt her soul growing exalted, and saw the 

heavy mists of her personal troubles begin to roll away and show 

some gleam of brightness beyond. 



'*AND EVEN FOR LOVE WILL BURY LOVE." 293 

'Wlien she came slowly away she was filled with a resolve. If 
It was not a very wise one, it was at least unselfish, and it was the 
result of the calmest thought she could take, alone and wholly 
uncounselled. She had clearly seen for some time that her first 
theory of life was all a failure. It had completely broken down. 
She brooded hopelessly over this mournful conviction for a while, 
and then, like all beings of healthy, unselfish nature, she began to 
ask herself what was to be done next ? Siie could not give up all 
her life to grieving over the irreparable. It was not enough for 
her to sit down and cry because things had not gone well with 
her. Something must be done ; what was to be done ? 

She could not remain in London and live this kind of life any 
more. It would be intolerable if she had to run the risk of meet- 
ing Victor Heron day after day. She knew well enough his 
sudden energy of nature, and she feared for him more than for 
herself that he might make some effort to break away from the 
pledge that as yet alone held him to poor Lucy. It seemed clear 
to Minola that in the miserable game of cross-purposes they had 
been playing they had left no way out except with unhappiness 
to some one. It was equally clear to her that Lucy ought not to 
be the sufferer. She did not doubt that time would soften or 
wholly remove the eftect of his mistake and his disappointment for 
Victor Heron, and that he would come to love Lucy as she ought 
to be loved, and to be as happy as men can well expect to be. 
When a thing is inevitable she knew that souls with any manhood 
in them will always make the best of it; and she well knew that 
Heron's was a soul filled with genuine manhood. The one thing, 
therefore, most needful to be done was to make the complete 
separation of herself and Victor inevitable. 

At first she had ideas of going to live far away from England. 
She spent more than one musing hour in thinking on the place 
to be chosen for her retreat. She thought of the East, and was 
almost amused at the idea of her being another Hester Stanhope, 
for in her very childish days Hester Stanhope used to be a sort of 
heroine with her. She thought of Rome ; and, indeed, her heart 
yearned for a life wholly given up to Rome. She thought of 
Athens ; and she thought, too, of the fresh, new world across the 
Atlantic, where every new idea and every free assertion of individual 
energy is believed to have a fuller and fairer chance of justifying 
itself than here among us. But there came up amid all these 
dreamings the reflection that, after all, this would be doing little 
good for any mortal but herself. It would only be a sort of 
sensuality of the soul indulged to the full. It was then the 
thought rose in her mind that perhaps it was her duty to make 



294 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

some manner of sacrifice for the happiness of some one else. " I 
cannot be happy myself in my own way," she said to herself; 
'. that is certam. Why should I not try to order things so that, 
by some self-denial, I may yet be the means of making some 
one else more happy than he might otherwise be?" How very 
happy she might make poor Mary Blanchet by marrying her 
brother ! And Blanchet, too, who professed to love her so much 
. and who was surely quite sincere, for Minola had lately learned 
to have great faith in the sincerity of human love . if she could 
make him happy, would it not be a better use to which to put her 
life than to moon it away in the indulgence of a vain lament for 
the unattainable ? There were some gifts in him, and under favour- 
ing auspices they might shine into something really great. Why 
should she not apply her life to the task of endeavouring to give 
them a full development? It seemed to Minola that this would 
be a far better way of spending her youth than surrendering it 
wholly to solitude and her own indulgence in vain regret. One 
dread sometimes made her shudder at the idea. Suppose Victor 
Heron were to think that she never really had had any steady and 
enduring love for him ? Suppose he set her as down as a woman 
of no real heart, no strong emotion at all ? But then came quick 
as a ray of light the conviction, "He will never think that;" and 
afterwards, in melancholy resignation, the reflection, " If he should, 
it is only all the better," 

So she made up her mind. The resolve was an unwise one, no 
doubt. A girl who had known more of the world's ways would 
never have made it . at least, she would never have made it with 
such a purpose and such a hope. A woman of the world might have 
married for money when she could not get the man she loved ; 
she would have married for a home, and a protector, and a settle- 
ment, and all the rest of it; and we should most of us have said 
that she did sensibly and well. She might have married to please 
her father and mother, as the good girls were always taught that it 
was their duty to do in the formal old days, and her filial piety would 
have been aoolauded. But the idea of marrying a poor young man 
without even the excuse of loving him, the idea of marrying him 
merely because he loved her, and she thought she might do him 
good, and make his life happy; this would undoubtedly have 
seemed to all sensible persons not only very absurd, but perhaps 
rather unwomanly as well. Such, however., was the resolve Minola 
made, and it was made deliberately and in honest purpose for the 
right. In the perplexed way of her life she saw nothing better to 
do than this. This would secure the happiness of poor Lucy, who 
tiien would never know that her happiness had been in danger ; 



.^AND EVEN FOR LOVE WILL BURY LOVE:* 295 

it would make Heron's course clear and inevitable ; it would 
perhaps make Blanchet happy ; it would certainly make Mary 
very happy ; and for Minola herself, it would at least give her the 
knowledge that her life was of some use to some human hearts. 
She came away from the Park with a resolve. In that sense she 
was less unhappy than before. 

" I will see Herbert Blanchet. T will trust to his honour and 
his generosity. I will tell him that I love . that I did love . a 
man whom I cannot marry ; and, if he is willing to have me for 
his wife with that knowledge, I shall not hold back any longer." 

"After all, perhaps I shall thus be acting out my part of Miss 
Misanthrope in the spirit and the letter," she said, with a gleam 
of her old humour, as she walked homeward. 

" Mary, I should like to see your brother very much, and as 
soon as he could come," Minola said to her companion that 
evening, as they sat alone, and tried to get up an appearance of 
their old cheerfulness. 

Mary looked up surprised. 

.'' I am sure, Minola, he ought to be only too delighted ; but 
ao you think it would be well to ask him to come?" 

" Would it be any harm ? " 

"He feels such a great deal, j^ou know; or, indeed, I don't 
think you could well know. There are feelings we can all only 
have for ourselves. I am afraid, Minola dear, it would only renew 
his unhappiness, poor fellow. He loves you so much, Minola." 

Minola coloured and felt distressed. Almost her heart failed 
her, but she kept to her purpose. 

" If I wanted to see him very particularly, Mary, don't you 
think he would come then?" 

Mary looked up again in doubled wonder. A wild hope came 
into her mind which she would not dare to express, but which set 
her all trembling and brought the tears into her eyes. 

" Oh, yes, Minola dearest, of coarse he would come ! Of 
course he must know, as well as I know, that you would not bring 
him here to give him needless pain, and that you have- some good 
purpose." 

" I want to say something to him very particularly, Mary, 
which I think now I ought to say. I want to ask him something. 
I don't know how he will answer it ; but I feel that I ought to 
give him the chance of answering it. Now, don't begin puzzling 
your head about it, Mary dear ; you will know it all soon, what 
ever way things turn out ; but at present, dear, it specially con- 
cerns him and me, and I could not tell even you, Mary, until I 
had spoken to him first" 



i^6 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

Mary was a little cast down from her wild hopes. She feared 
that, after all, it was only some explanation Minola proposed to 
give to Herbert, with a view, perhaps, of making him more 
reconciled to his fate, a result about which Mary had but little 
hope. She accepted her part, however, and promised to go and 
see her brother the very first thing in the morning. 

It would be needless to deny that, in thinking over her project 
of self-sacrifice, Minola had thought of other names as Avell as 
that of Herbert Blanchet. She had thought, for instance, of her 
too faithful old lover, Mr. Sheppard ; but she could not see the 
possibility of a life spent with Mr. Sheppard. She did not see that 
she could be of any manner of use to him in his career; rather, 
indeed, she felt that she must necessarily be something of a 
hindrance. Then there was no Mary Blanchet in that case to 
be joined in the objects of the sacrifice. Mr. Sheppard had 
money enough, and wanted no help in that way. Her money 
might enable Blanchet, she thought, to give his genius full sway 
. to give it its head, without regard to prudence, and publishers, 
and pot-boilers. " I suppose he has genius ; I think he has 
genius," she kept saying to herself. If she was to sacrifice herself 
. and this must in any case be an absolute sacrifice . she felt she 
must justify the act to her own heart and conscience by the 
assurance that it Avould do the fullest good in her power to do. 

When Mary, full of doubt and hope, went to see her brother 
next morning, she was startled by the change that appeared to 
have suddenly taken place in him. He seemed to have thrown 
away his hard-working mood, and to be reckless and almost 
ferocious. When Mary told him she had brought him a message 
from Minola, he looked almost as if she had said she brought a 
warrant for his arrest. 

"What does she want of me, Mary? You must know. Come, 
let us hear it ; tell it out." 

" But, Herbert dear, indeed I don't know. She did not tell 
me anything." 

"And you don't guess, my sister?" he asked, with a sickly 
smile that made her uncomfortable to see. 

" No, Herbert. She only said that she wanted to ask you 
a question, and that you ought to have a chance of answering 
it, or somethmg of that kind." 

"Yes, I thought so. Very well, Mary; tell her I will not 
go ; tell her to think anytliing she likes of me . the very worst will 
not be too bad ; but I will not see her." 

He turned his back on his sister. Mary, however, had seen 
him in heroic and in despondent moods often enough not to feel 



**AND EVEN FOR LOVE WILL BURY LOVE." 297 

quite discouraged by this demonstration. She endeavoured to 
argue with him ; and ventured to hint that probably he miglit 
find everything turning out for the very best when he came to 
speak with Minola. 

" You think so ?" he asked, with a laugh. " Very well, Mary, I 
will go ; it may as well be got done with once for all. Come, my 
sister, let us go. Are you to be present at the interview, Mary?" 

"No, Herbert; oh, no! She wants to speak to you alone 
first. But I dare say I shall know some time." 

"I dare say you will; I only w'onder you have not known 
it already. Tell me, Mary ; don't you think one had best tell the 
truth, when it is certain that he must be found out if he tells 
a lie?" 

" Oh, Herbert, what a question I" 

" You think it very absurd, don't you ? Well, Mary, there is 
some sense in it, too. You may be sure I shall answer Miss 
Grey's question very truthfully to-day." 



CHAPTER XXXII. 

LEFT LONELY. 

That was a time of strange and painful emotion during which 
Minola waited for the coming of Blanchet and his sister. There 
were moments when she would have given all the world to be able 
to recall what she had said and done. There were even moments 
of agonising reaction, when she felt inclined to descend the stairs 
softly, and open the door, and go into the street, and disappear for 
evermore somehow from the sight of all w-ho knew her. Once 
or twice she covered her face with her hands as if she felt an 
intolerable shame. Once or twice she burst into tears. She was 
only sustained by the thought that the extraordinary step she had 
resolved on would secure poor Lucy's happiness, and that it 
would make both Mary Elanchet and her brother very happy. 
Other way to make her wretched failure of a life useful to any 
human creature she saw none. She got up and walked about the 
room like some half wild and caged creature, whose limitations 
sometimes become almost unbearable. She was terrified at the 
fate she had brought upon herself ; she looked back with miserable 
regret to the few free and happy days she had spent when she first 
came to London. " Let no w-retched woman ever try to be inde- 
pendent!" she cried out in her bitterness. 



298 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

What a long time they were in coming ! for now she began 

to wish that the interview were over, and anything resolved upon 
that could not be undone. Trifling little things came into her 
mind, and perplexed and distressed her. If, for instance, Mary 
Blanchet should remain in the room ! " If she is there I shall not 
be able to say out what I want to say," Minola thought ; " and if 
she wishes to remain, will she think it strange and wrong if I ask 
her not to stay? If it is all settled, how shall I have to behave to 
him? Will he understand that I am not going to play any love 
part ? If he comes, and I tell him all this, and he is content, then 
will he kiss me, and must I seem willing to be kissed ? Will he 

accept me at all on such terms? " A wild gleam of hope lit 

up within her for a moment, and then died out. " Oh, yes, he 
will accept me . he does not care ! " she said ; and she trembled 
with pain and shame at the strange humiliation she had brought 
upon herself She will never forget the agony of that hour while 
she waited there alone. 

At length they are come. She heard the voice of Mary 
apparently reasoning with Blanchet. Then one point of perplexity 
was presently settled for her, because the door opened and Mr, 
Blanchet came in, and he was alone. Minola heard the soft patter 
of Mary's receding feet. Then a sudden revulsion took place in 
her feelings, and she wished that Mary had come in with her 
brother. It was too late now, however, to think of that, for 
Blanchet was in the room unaccompanied, and came towards her. 

Minola was greatly surprised and even shocked at the appear- 
ance of Blanchet. She would have been still more pained if she 
could have persuaded herself that his present aspect and manner 
were the result of his love, and that she was to blame for having 
brought him to this pass. But there was something sullen and 
almost fierce about him which did not seem even to her inex- 
perienced eyes to speak merely of the pangs of misprized love. He 
looked like a man who has come to meet an accusation and is 
determined to brazen it out. His very manner of saluting her had 
in it something of defiance which was strangely unlike his old 
ways of poetic devotion, when he used to place himself, meta- 
phorically at least, at her feet, and look up to her as his patroness 
and saint. 

Perhaps Minola now wished she had not sent for him. Perhaps 
her mind misgave her as to her purpose of self-sacrifice. Perhaps 
she would gladly have had Mary Blanchet or anyone else in the 
room, to bear her company. 

She had sent for Mr. Blanchet, however, and she had to receive 
him becomingly. It seemed marvellous to her now how she ever 



LEFT LONELY. 299 

could have invited him witli the intention of offering herself to him 
to be his wife. Taking her courage, as the French phrase has 
it, in her two hands, she went to meet Herbert with a friendly 
greeting. 

To her surprise Blanchct did not take her hand when she 
offered it, but made a bow, and placed himself at some distance 
from her, standing near tlie chimney-piece. 

" I know why you have sent for me, Miss Grey," he said, " and 
I had better not take your hand until we understand one another. 
I am told by Mary that you wish to ask me a question. Well, let 
me save you trouble and myself too. I answer the question at 
once. 1 say yes . yes ! " 

Then the poet threw back his dark hair, and stood as one 
who cares not now what is to follow. If he had ever been a 
reader or a stage-struck admirer of Shakespeare, one might have 
supposed that the attitude and look were got up after Othello, 
when he says, " 'Twas I that killed her," and is thenceforth pre- 
pared for the worst. 

This was a mystery to Minola. It seemed absolutely impos- 
sible that he could have learned or guessed at the nature of the 
question she had meant to put to him. It had only been settled 
in her own mind the evening before, and was never whispered, 
even to the reeds along the canal. Nor even if he had known it 
by supernatural inspiration did his tone and manner seem ap- 
propriate to the occasion, and to the answer he had given. 

" 1 don't understand you, IMr. Blanchet, and you can't, I think, 
have any idea of the reason why I asked you to come and see me." 

" Yes, yes ; I know it very well . only too well." 

" Then you must tell me what it is ; for, really, Mr. Blanchet, 
if you know it, I don't." 

Minola seated herself quietly on a little sofa, and waited for 
him to explain all this. His theatrical ways were so absurd and 
offensive in her eyes that they impelled her to fall back upon a 
reserved and distant demeanour. He could hardly have gone 
mad, she thought ; and in any case she now only wished to be 
well out of the whole affair. Minola could not believe that real 
emotion and stage- play could go together in the one part in 
private life, and she judged Blanchet wrongly for this reason. 
There are people in whom the instinct of the theatrical is as 
strong as the common instinct of self-preservation. Blanchet 
was as much in earnest now and as near to actual despair as he 
could be in this life. 

" Oh, yes, I know ! " he said, " and I may as v/ell save you 
all trouble in reproaching me. You need not tell me you despise 



300 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

me, Miss Grey ; you can't despise me more than I despise myself. 
You need not tell me I have been ungrateful ; I know that there 
aever was a more ungrateful wretch on earth. If you could 
care for any thanks from me or believe in their sincerity, I 
would thank you for one thing . for not telling poor Mary any- 
thing about this. It was like your magnanimous nature to do 
this. She will come to know of it some time, I suppose ; but not 
from you . not from you." 

Minola began to be really alarmed and shocked. This was 
no play-acting. His eyes were burning with wild emotion. He 
was in thorough earnest. Her idea was that he must have com- 
mitted some crime and got it into his head that she knew of it. 
She got up and went kindly over to him. He shrank away. 

" We are talking at cross-purposes, Mr. Blanchet ; and I am 
afraid you are going to tell me something I ought not to know. 
You must not say any more . at least, without thinking of what 
you are saying. I have no reproach to make against you, Mr. 
Blanchet; what could I have? , If you have done anything that 
deserves all the reproach you are giving to yourself, I don't know 
anything of it. and indeed I don't believe it." 

" You don't know ; you really don't know ? " and his eyes 
lighted up with a momentary ray of surprise and hope. Then 
he became despairing again. " You are sure to know before 
long ; and I may as well tell you myself" 

" No, no, Mr. Blanchet, I don't want to know ; I have no 
right to know. Pray don't say any more . let us ask Mary to 
come in." He put his hand upon her arm and stayed her. 

" No, no, you must hear it all now ; we had better have an 
end to it. It concerns you. Miss Grey, and you have a right to 
know of it. 'Twas I who saw you and Heron in St. James's 
Park ; it was I who told Lucy Money, and made you seem a 
treacherous friend to her ; 'twas I who did mischief that I sup- 
pose can never be set right, and did it all to the only woman in 
the world who evf r was really kind to me. Yes . what do you 
think of me now?" 

Minola felt herself growing giddy and sick as he talked on in 
his wild way. Little as she understood of what he was saying, 
yet she knew enough to make her feel as if the ground reeled 
beneath her. It was enough that Victor and she had been seen 
and watched and misunderstood by somebody, and that all her 
efforts to make things hapi)y for Lucy were in vain. For the 
moment she did not think of herself She knew that there was 
nothing she had done to be ashamed of, or which two simple 
words to Lucy would not explain. But when that explanation 



LEtT LONELY. 301 

once Degan, where was it to stop ? For the moment she did not 
even think of the degradation to herself in having her movements 
watched, and reported, and misrepresented ; or of the shameful 
ingratitude of Blanchet, whom, an hour ago, she almost looked 
upon as her destined husband. 

Blanchet now stood leaning both his elbows on tire chimney- 
piece, his head turned away from her. 

" Mr. Blanchet," Minola said quietly, " you say you have done 
me some great wrong. There is just one favour you can do me 
now, and that is, to tell me in the simplest words what you saw, 
and what you said of it, and why you came to say it." 

She stood and waited, with a manner seemingly of the most 
perfect composure. Within her breast all was pain, shame, anger, 
and distraction. But she contrived to keep an air of entire self- 
restraint and calmness. It appeared to her that the mere dignity 
of womanhood exacted from her that much of self-control at least. 

Then Blanchet told his story. It was a little incoherent here 
and there, and dashed with theatric expressions of passion and 
despair. But its general purpose was only too clear. He was 
going to call on Mrs. Money that unhappy day, and as he was 
crossing the Park he saw Victor Heron seated, and apparently 
waiting for some one. The poet confessed that, prompted by 
some demon of jealousy and suspicion, he watched, and he saw 
Minola come up, and he saw them meet and saw them walk 
together. Then, still and further inspired by the demon on whom 
he was disposed to throw so much responsibility, he hastened to 
Mrs. INIoney's house ; he learned that Heron had left a full hour 
before Minola ; he even found out that they had parted formally 
from each other ; and then he told Lucy for her private information 
that he had just seen them together in the Park, an hour after 
Heron had left Lucy declaring that he must hasten to the House 
of Commons. 

Minola heard all this, bending her head slightly every now 
and then to signify that she understood his meaning. At the end 
she quietly asked what Lucy had said to the story he told her. 

She looked ver}- pale, Blanchet said ; but she only begged of 
him not to say anything to her mother, and then she v/ent away. 
But he saw too well, he added, that she was struck to the heart by 
what she had heard. Then first, when his rage of jealousy and 
madness had passed away, he began to understand the full 
measure of his shame. When Minola sent for him. to ask him a 
question, as Mary had told him . he felt sure it was to put the 
question of guilty or not guilty. He might as well plead guilty at 
once. It must all come out There must be explanations, and he 



302 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

must stand confessed. That did not trouble him now, he said. 
His one only thought was that Minola had been his best friend in 
all the world, and that he had betrayed her. 

Minola listened to these explanations with a heart in which 
scorn and anger were longing for utterance, but with serene and 
imperturbable composure. Once again she thought to herself, 
" Yes, it is true . women are born hypocrites ;" and she thought, 
too, " I am glad of it just now." 

" Things are not quite so bad as your excited conscience 
would make them out, I hope, Mr. Blanchet," she said, with a half 
smile of contempt. " It was not well done of you to play such a 
part, nor exactly what I should have expected ; but I hope it will 
prove that you have not done much harm to anyone . except to 
your own feelings and conscience, of course. I met Mr. Heron 
by the merest chance that day in the Park, and I never met him 
there or anywhere else except by chance. That can be explained 
in two words, if Miss Money thinks any explanation necessary. 
She will believe anything I tell her or that Mr. Heron tells her." 

Blanchet shook his head. 

"You think she will not beHeve him or me?" Minola asked, 
with quiet contempt. " Oh, yes, Mr. Blanchet, you are mistaken !" 

" I didn't mean to doubt that," the poet said, with downcast 
head. To do him justice he had not the least doubt that either 
Minola or Heron would tell the truth ; his doubt was whether 
the full acknowledgment would be entirely satisfactory to Lucy 
Money ; and Minola guessed his meaning. 

" That, at any rate, can be left to Miss Money's own judgment, 
Mr. Blanchet. I was only anxious to assure you that you have 
not after all done so mucli harm as you seemed to fear just now." 

She looked very cold and cruel. As he turned his eyes to 
hers he caught no light of ancient kindness or pity in them ; only 
a cold and merciless dislike and contempt. He cast one abject, 
I)enitent glance at her, a glance that seemed to implore for some 
merciful consideration. 

" You don't even reproach me," he said, appealing to her with 
outstretched hands of sudden passion and despair. 

" Oh, no ! I have no right to complain of anything you may 
choose to say. You did see me in the Park with Mr. Heron; it 
is quite true. You have said nothing untrue of me ; what right 
have I to complain ?" 

Then she made a slight, hardly perceptible movement . one 
of those movements which it comes by nature to even the least 
affected women to make, and which convey so much witli such 
little effort. It indicated to Blanchet, beyond the possibility of 
mistake, that the interview was at an end. 



LEFT LONEL Y. 303 

" At least try to forgive me," he said despairingly. " I thought 
all you Christians were bound to do that." 

" It is not a question of forgiving," she said with the same 
composed air \ " I have no power to punish, Mr. Blanchet, and I 
don't see why we should speak of forgiving. You don't ask me, 
I suppose, to think just the same of you to-day as I thought 
yesterday ? I could hardly do that, even as a Christian duty." 

As Blanchet was hurrying out of the house he met his sister in 
the hall. She ran to him with inquiring eyes, seeking in his face 
for some sign of coming happiness to all of them. He stopped 
and looked at her, and then a sudden thought seemed to take 
possession of him, and he caught her arm. 

" Come away with me," he said ; " get your things and come 
away this moment. This is no place for you." 

She has refused him again, poor Mary thought. Oh, why 
then did she send for him at all ? 

" But, Herbert, my dear, how can I leave her ? Do you want 
me to go away from Minola for ever?" 

"Yes, yes, for ever. Come away this moment, I tell you. 
I'll take care of you; I'll provide for you, if that is it. But come 
away from this place. We have no right to be here, either of us." 

" What has she said to you, Herbert . what have you done ? " 

"She has said nothing to me ; I wish she had said something 
to me. What have I done ? I have acted like a treacherous 
cad " 

" Oh, Herbert, it can't be ! " 

" It is, I tell you. Come away from this, Mary ; you have no 
right to be here ; come away this moment, I tell you." 

His energy quite overbore poor Mary, She had never seen 
him in such a mood before ; indeed she had never seen anyone 
else in such a mood. She could no more have stood out against 
him than against a storm. But the idea of her going away from 
Minola seemed like an overturning of the world. 

" But won't you tell me what this is all about ? What have you 
done, Herbert? Why must I leave her? How could I live 
without her ? ^^^lat would she say ? " 

" I'll tell you all when you come with me ; I'll tell you nothing 
now. Get your things ; I will give you five minutes . go along, 
Mary, and be quick." 

Mary looked wildly up and doAvn as one who hopes, perhaps, 
that some supernatural intervention may come at the last moment to 
rescue her from a doom which she has no strength to fight against 
herself She looked up the stairs and along the hall, and even to 
the ceiling. Nothing came to save her. She burst into tears. 



304 JII/SS MISANTHROPE. 

" Come," said Herbert, turning his dark eyes on her with a 
wildness in them which she could not trifle with any longer. 

" I'll come, Herbert ; I'll come." 

She ran upstairs ; she rushed into the room where Minola was, 
and clasped Minola in her arms, and clung about her and kissed 
her, and stammered some incoherent words of fondness and good- 
bye, and ran out again before Minola could understand what she 
meant or what she was about to do. In another moment Minola 
heard the street door shut, and going to the window saw Mary 
hurrying off Avith her brother. 

Minola felt dazed by the sudden occurrences of the day. 
She looked after the departing figures of Mary Blanchet and her 
brother, and at first could hardly understand the situation. Then 
she turned and looked into the darkening lonely room, and she 
felt very much alone indeed. 



CHAPTER XXXIII. 

THE MAN WITHOUT A GRIEVANCE. 

The man with the grievance had got his chance at last. His time 
had come. The hopes with which he came over to England, and 
which had so often seemed to fail and fade from him, were likely 
to be realised now. He was about to have a hearing for his cause. 
He was to make his statement in the presence of all England . 
that is to say, from the floor of the House of Commons. The 
night fixed for the hearing of Victor Heron's motion in the House 
had come, and it had excited a great deal of public interest, and 
was certain of a patient consideration. 

The destinies had surely been very kind to Heron since his 
coming to England. He thought of this as he was crossing the 
Park from his lodgings to get to the House of Commons this 
particular evening, and found his nerves becoming tremulous with 
the anticipation of the coming fight, of the speech he had to 
make, and of the success which he felt confident the justice of his 
case must win for it. When he landed in England, under a sort 
of cloud and otherwise obscure, he found at first that it was hardly 
possible to get anyone of influence even to listen to what he had 
to say. He could not now but admire, to use the old phrase, the 
change which had been wrought for him in the condition of things. 
There was a time when he would readily have given ten or twenty 
years of his life for the chance that now was coming so easily to 



THE MAN WITHOUT A GRIEVANCE. 305 

him. He ought to be a proud and happy man. Proud he might 
perhaps have been, were it not that he felt terribly nervous now 
that the time was so near ; but happy he certainly did not feel. 
To be happy in any manner of political success, or at least to 
enjoy it thoroughly, one ought to have no heart, he began to 
think. He was very unhappy ; his unhappiness rose up between 
him and his grievance . between him and his speech. He was 
glad to take refuge in the thought of the inevitable speech, and in 
the nervous trepidation that it called up ; even that was better 
than thinking of other things. He endeavoured to fix his 
attention exclusively on the approaching debate, and to make 
himself believe that the end of all things would come the moment 
it was over. He had gained the great object of his life . at least, 
he stood on the direct way to gain it . and this was the spirit in 
which he received the crowning of his hopes. 

Mr. Augustus Sheppard went down to the House that night to 
hear the debate. It was not a party question, everyone said, and 
he was free to wish that Victor might gain his cause. Indeed, it 
was Victor himself who was obtaining a seat for his former rival to 
hear the debate. Mr. Sheppard quite understood now that it was 
good form to be on friendly terms with a man whom you had 
opposed unsuccessfully at an election. He had some interest, 
too, of his own in the present debate and in Heron's success. 
There was a general impression that if Heron made out a real 
case the Government would certainly give him the very next good 
appointment in the colonial administrations that came to their 
hand ; and Sheppard assumed that that and not a parliamentary 
life would be the object of Heron's ambition. Heron then would 
resign the seat for Keeton which he had only obtained by a fluke ; 
and Mr. Sheppard would have a capital opportunity next time, 
when it was not likely that the odd chances that had defeated him 
could occur again. He felt still a sort of superstitious longing for 
success at Keeton, because it had so long been in his hopes ; and 
he had a faith that if he carried Keeton he would also carry 
Minola Grey, He was, then, in a peculiarly hopeful mood as he 
walked towards the House of Commons the evening of Heron's 
motion. 

Mr. Sheppard was a little too early ; he generally took care to 
be a little early for everything. He was never known to be late 
for an appointment. He began to walk more slowly when he came 
near Westminster Palace, for he saw by the clock on the tower that 
he had plenty of time to spare. He slowly entered Westminster 
Hall, and found himself entangled in a crowd there. A case of 
some public interest was going on in one of the law courts on the 



3o6 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

right of the hall, and people were waiting to see some of the wit- 
nesses pass out; while on the left of the hall others were watching 
to see members of Parliament pass in. Sheppard remembered 
that the case was one in which a good many noblemen were more 
or less interested, and that among others the duke, who was his 
feudatory chief, had expressed some opinion about it, and had 
even been present at some of the sittings of the court. He stood 
a moment, therefore, with a sort of respectful and well-regulated 
curiosity, and he asked a question of one or two persons around 
him ; and it happened that he saw a friend or two passing through 
the crowd, and he interchanged a few words. He pleased himself 
with thinking of the time, now perhaps very near, when people 
would see him passing into the House of Commons with other 
members, and then he began to make his way forward, believing 
it not becoming that a person of such expectations should be seen 
standing in a curious crowd. He was making his way clear of 
the throng v/hen a tall man passed him., whose appearance seemed 
iamiliar to Mr. Sheppard. Mr. Sheppard, however, went on his 
way; but the other stopped and looked after him, and then strode 
in pursuit and speedily overtook him. A hand was laid on Mr. 
Sheppard's shoulder, and a friendly voice was heard in his ear. 

" Hullo, Sheppard . how are you ? Don't bear malice, I hope . 
especially as I lost as well as you." 

Mr. Sheppard turned round and saw a figure which he could 
not mistake. He forgot, however, for the moment some of the con- 
ditions under which the figure chose to present itself to society ; 
and he began in a doubtful and embarrassed tone : 

" Oh, yes ; I beg your pardon, Lord Hugh " 

" I say, Sheppard, cut that ! I have dropped all that sort of 
thing ; I'm the opposite to the dog, don't you know, in the fable : 
he dropped the substance to get at the shadow ; I drop the 
shadow seeing that I can't have the substance ; and I think you'll 
own, Sheppard, that I am the more sensible animal of the two." 

"I am pleased to see you, Mr. St. Paul." 

*' Thank you, Sheppard, it's very kind of you. You don't look 
particularly pleased, and that makes it all the more good of you to 
say it." And ]\Ir. St. Paul laughed his familiar laugh. 

"Well, we met last time under circumstances that don't of 
themselves tend to make men pleased to see each other, Mr. St. 
Paul," Sheppard said ; for he Avas not to be long kept in awe of a 
person of noble family when that person was not resj^ectable in his 
conduct, and was not on good terms with the head ot the house. 

" I don't know ; it was a fair fight, Sheppard ; I lost as well 
as you. I dare say if I had got in, you would have had a petition ? " 



THE MAN WITHOUT A GRIEVANCE. 307 

" I think It highly probable we should have taken some such 
course, Mr. St. Paul. There would certainly have seemed to be 
some justification for such a course." 

" I wonder who would have paid the expenses if there had been 
a petition against me." 

" I should have found the means to pay them, INIr. St. Paul." 

" Found the means, I dare say ; but would not the means have 
been found in my brother's purse, Sheppard ? " 

" I am not dependent on your noble brother, Mr. St. Paul, 
greatly as I respect him, and as everyone must respect him." 

" Quite right, Sheppard ; quite right. But we will not fight 
about that now. I am going off again, and I had rather part 
company on good terms with as many old friends as will do me the 
favour to be civil to me." 

" I thought you had left England, Mr. St. Paul." 

" No ; I am getting off to-morrow or next day ; one has such a 
lot of things to do, don't you know. But, I say, have you heard 
the news about our old friend Money ? " 

" No, I have heard nothing about Mr. Money or his family," 
Sheppard said with some appearance of interest. " Nothing bad, 
I hope. I should be sorry if " 

" Well, that is pretty much as you choose to take it. I should 
not call it bad to leave this confounded country ; but I don't 
know how you may look at the matter." 

'. Is J\lr. Money going to leave the countr}'?" 

** Right away. He has sent in his retiring address to his con- 
stituents. A chance for you there, Sheppard, perhaps. Money 
helped to put a Liberal in for Keeton. you might retaliate by 
getting yourself in for his borough." 

"But why does he take so strange and sudden a step? Not 
any business calamity, surely? " 

" No, no; a business affair, but not a business calamity . unless 
your patriotic soul, Sheppard, sees a calamity in anything done by 
a Briton in the service of a foreign country. Our friend Money is 
going to let the Emperor of Russia have all the benefit of his 
services as an inventor and constructor of engines chiefly used 
in the unchristian work of destruction." 

" Indeed ? You astonish me." 

" Do I ? I am glad of it ; it is something to have anyone 
to astonish with a piece of news. / knew it must come to this 
long ago. It was all very well while ever3i;hing looked peaceful, 
and the lion lying down with the lamb, and all that sort of thing, 
you know. But, by Jove ! we may have a big fight now any day, 
and our friend would soon find he couldn't serve the two masters. 



3o8 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

He's a sensible fellow . Money ; and he makes his choice while he 
can do so decently, without actually seeming to go over to the 
enemy, don't you know. Of course, he is quite right ; we wouldn't 
pay him, and t'other party will ; and why should he not get the 
best pay he can in times like these, Sheppard, my boy? That's 
business, isn't it? We all live by business, you know." 

" Still, I should have thought that there was more of patriotic 
feeling in Mr. Money . and he having sat so long in Parliament 
too " 

" Ah, that's it, you know !" St. Paul said carelessly. " He has 
been behind the scenes, and sees how things are done ; you have 
not as yet. He knows what it all comes to ; he is a sensible 
fellow . Money ; you may be sure he knows uncommonly well 
what he is about, Sheppard. I knew this long time it must come 
to this." 

" And this is beyond doubt ?" Sheppard asked, still dubitating, 
and at the same time tr3ing to follow out a train of ideas applying 
to himself more exclusively. 

" True as Gospel. I have just read his retiring address . in 
which, however, he takes good care, of course, not to be very ex- 
plicit about the cause of his going off; and I have been talking to 
the man who is going to marry his daughter in a few days." 

"Oh, Mr. Heron?" 

" No, not Heron ; the other man . I forget his name, who was 
at the bar, you know . I remember him at Oxford ; the fellow who 
marries the elder sister " 

Mr. Sheppard signified that he understood the meaning of 
Mr. St. Paul's reference. 

" Well, of course, he did not say exactly what I knew to be 
the fact ; but he did not contradict it. I fancy he is not very 
sorry that Money is going out of the country. He wants to be in 
society, you know ; and, of course. Money is not just the sort of 
father-in-law for a man in society." 

" You don't know, Mr. St. Paul," Sheppard said, becoming 
almost friendly in his anxiety to learn all about this affair ; " you 
don't know. I suppose, whom Mr. Money takes with him to 
Russia?" 

" No, I don't know ; only his wife, I suppose. If the other 
girl marries our young friend Heron, it isn't likely she would be 
going off to Russia, I suppose. They say Heron will get a colony 
somewhere. Well, glad to see you, Sheppard ; good-bye." 

" You are very kind, I'm sure, Mr. St. Paul," Sheppard said 
with a certain fervour, for he really thought it was friendly of 
St. Paul to speak to him so good-humourcdly after all that had 



THE MAN WITHOUT A GRIEVANCE. 309 

passed between tliem on tlie memorable night of the riot at 
Keeton. 

St. Paul laughed. 

"I am going to be a great deal more kind to you now, Shep- 
pard ; for I'm going to leave you just in time to save your credit. 
I see my brother coming ; and if you were caught in conference 
with me, you would never set foot inside any house of his again. 
Good bye, Sheppard." 

St. Paul nodded, smiled, and turned away. Sheppard stood 
for a moment and looked after his great stooping form, as it made 
its way out through the crowd, and then he prepared to pay his 
respects to the chief of the ducal house. He felt a little humiliated 
by the parting words of St. Paul, but it must be confessed that it 
was a source of some gladness to him not to be found in parley 
with the disreputable younger brother when the duke came up. 
The duke Avas hurrying by, and only gave Mr. Sheppard a hand to 
shake, and a " How d'ye-do, Sheppard ? " But this was something 
to have got unalloyed by any qualification or suspicion which the 
presence of St. Paul might have infused into it. 

But even while the drj^ cool fingers of the duke were still in 
his momentary possession, Mr. Sheppard was thinking of how 
the disappearance of the Money family from Minola's horizon 
would affect his chances with her. He thought of this as he sat and 
listened to Victor Heron's speech. It may be said, in passing, 
that Sheppard did not greatly admire the speech. It seemed to 
him to want order and finish. He was surprised that Heron should 
have plunged into the subject so directly. ISIr. Sheppard had been 
studying rhetoric of late, and he had formed for himself a very 
clear ideaof how Victors subject ought to be treated. He thought 
the speaker should have begun with a sketch of the growth and 
greatness of England's colonial system ; should have shown how 
the glory of England depends in great measure on the way in 
which she governs her colonies ; should have had a good deal to 
say about the manner in which the great Mr. Pitt had condemned 
slavery ; might even, perhaps, have quoted a passage from Mr. 
Pitt's famous peroration about the sunlight streaming in upon the 
mind of Africa as it did, while he spoke, through the windows of 
the House of Commons ; and thus brought the House, as it were, 
into tune Avith the particular question to be debated that day. 
Victor did nothing of all this, but began in an easy conversational 
tone, and in three sentences was right into the heart of his subject, 
only warming into anything like eloquence as he came to deal with 
occasional passages on which he felt deeply, and then as soon as 
possible resuming the quietly argumentative tone again. The 



3IO MISS MISANTHROPE. 

House seemed to like it evidently, and Sheppard heard people near 
him saying it ^A'as going to be a great success. Mr. Sheppard was a 
little astonished, but felt that he ought to be pleased for more rea- 
sons than one. He was satisfied he could make a far more eloquent 
speech than that ; and if that sort of tiling was successful, he might 
fairly expect to take rank among the great orators of the House when 
he got his chance. 

But he was only thinking of all this at passing moments. For 
the most part his mind was occupied with thoughts of Minola, and 
of the manner in which the departure of the Moneys would affect 
her and by consequence him. If Mr. and Mrs. Money went to 
Russia, and Heron and his wife went to some colony, then Minola 
would be left almost absolutely alone in London. He knew the 
girl too well to think that she would look for new friends. Surely, 
then, she would come to value his steady, faithful love ? He would 
have become a success by that time, and no woman is indifferent 
to success. She would see that in his love there was nothing 
interested or selfish. Indeed, his love for her was not selfish in 
the ordinary sense. It would have surprised both him and her 
to know it, but it was tme all the same that in one respect at least 
he did strongly resemble her beloved Alceste. His extreme love 
went so far as to form wishes against her who was its object : he 
could have wished that she were reduced to miserable condition . 
that Heaven, in giving her birth, had given her nothing . that she 
had neither money nor friends . in order that he might have the 
happiness of seeing her depend for everything upon the helping 
hand of his love. Mr. Sheppard was less acquainted even with 
Tibullus than with Moliere, but the Latin poet had expressed many 
hundreds of years before Alceste the wish that often filled Shep- 
pard, as it had filled Minola's hero, the '' Utiiiam possis uni ?nihi 
bella zn'deri, displiceas aliis ; sic ego tutus era." This wish was 
strong in Sheppard's mind while Victor Heron was addressing 
the House. Indeed, no love from the most romantic and pas- 
sionate lover could have been a better tribute to a woman's worth 
than that of Sheppard for Minola Grey. All her other lovers were 
taking her on mere trust. AH the others were caught by some 
charm in her which they could perhaps not define. She might 
for aught they could tell be in reality something quite different 
from what she seemed to be. Sheppard had known her almost 
from her cradle time ; he saw her faults as the others probably did 
not ; he had often winced under her occasional touches of 
sarcasm ; he knew very well that she had always done injustice to 
him, but he knew how sterling, how sweet, how true was the 
woman's heart that was within her breast j he had seen her tried 



THE MAN WITHOUT A GRIEVANCE. 311 

in all manner of ways, and he had seen that trial always only 
brought out the simple nobility of her nature ; he was as certain 
as he was of life that if once he could induce her to marry him 
she would never have any other thought than how to make him 
happy. In his love there was undoubtedly tliat calculating spirit 
which belonged to all his nature. He sometimes admitted this to 
himself in a manner; for he occasionally said to himself, "Mo 
one else would lose so much in losing her as I should, for no one 
else knows so well what she is worth." 

The debate did not last a very long time. It was over in 
rather a sudden way, Mr. Sheppard thought. As far as he could 
understand, some one on behalf of the Government was put up to 
say that Mr. Heron had done quite the right thing in all he did, 
and that his only mistake was in supposing that there was the 
faintest idea of disapproving of any part of his administration. 
Then Mr. Money got up, and in a few short and very telling sen- 
tences seemed to say that if the Government had felt approval 
they had a very odd way of showing it, and that he thought me 
honourable member for Keeton had much better press his motion 
for inquiry. Then other Opposition members said something to 
the same effect ; and one or two grave and independent members 
on the Ministerial side said something of the same kind ; and then 
at last a very leading member of the Government got up, and 
made the most emphatic assurances of respect and regard for all 
Mr. Heron had done, and declared that the Government were 
quite prepared to accept a simple resolution expressing the 
approval of the House of the manner in which the St. Xavier's 
SetUements had been administered. There was no possibility ot 
fighting any further. Heron had won a complete victory, and the 
whole affair was over. Before Mr. Sheppard had time to rise from 
his seat the House of Commons was occupied with something 
else, and its benches were nearly empty. 

He hurried into the lobby, and had a chance of saying a 
word or two of congratulation to Mr. Heron. Then he saw Mr. 
Money come out, and he pushed his way up to him and held him 
fast. 

" Is this true, Mr. Money, this strange news that I hear ? Is 
it true that you are going to leave old England ? " 

" Quite true, Mr. Sheppard ; at least, that I am going to leave 
old England for a time. I dare say she can muddle on somehow 
without me." 

" And you are going soon ? " 

"As soon as I can get away. I came down here lo-night for 
the last time to give a vote for Heron's motion, if a vote were 



312 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

needed, which you see it was not. You heard the debate ? Didn't 

they get shabbily out of it ? " 

Mr. Sheppard was not thinking much of the debate. 

" I suppose you take some of your family with you to Russia 
Mr. Money?" 

" Some, yes ; but not all." 

" Oh, no ! I know," Mr. Sheppard said, with the air of one who 
understands everything. " I was going to ask whether Miss Grey 
is going with you } " 

" Miss Grey ? No ; why should she go ? " 

" Well, I didn't know ; she and your ladies appear to be such 
friends, and she is so much alone that I thought perhaps " 

" Miss Grey would be only too welcome," Money said gravely, 
'. if she cared to exile herself, Mr. Sheppard ; but I don't think it 
at all likely that she will leave London." 

"Then she will be quite alone?" 

Mr. Money looked Sheppard fixedly in the face with a curious 
expression, in which there v/as a dash of pity. 

" Well, I don't know, Sheppard, I'm sure. Perhaps she will 
not be so much alone after all. Good-night ; if we should not see 
you again, why then good-bye and good luck." 

He wrung Sheppard's hand with a grasp of unusual warmth and 
friendship. There was something in the pressure as of one who 
sympathises or commiserates. It was perhaps because he was 
going away, Mr, Sheppard thought ; and he felt touched by the 
kindness even while he was glad that the Moneys were going 
away, and that Victor Heron was to be married, and doubtless to 
go away too ; for then Minola would be left to him \\ithout a 
friend to come between the two ; and in the end she must marry 
him. 

Mr. Sheppard left the House of Commons and walked to the 
West Centre, and took up his stand for a while under Minola's 
windows, thinking of how much alone she soon must be, and 
having very little idea of how utterly alone she actually was then. 
If Minola could have looked out of her window and seen him ; if 
she could have known of all his faithful watching ; if she could 
have realised the fact that now in her utter loneliness, when all 
others seemed to have gone from her, he still remained and was 
only longing to make himself endurable to her, would she have 
thought of making to him the offer she had so nearly made to 
Blanchet ? It would be rash to conjecture. She was very 
wretched, and life seemed to have no hope any more. The 
desertion of Mary Blanchet had touched her to the very core. It 
is hard to say what the presence of any love and devotion, how- 



THE MAN WITHOUT A GRIEVANCE. 313 

ever formal and inartistic, might not have done at such a time. 
Perhaps had she seen Sheppard in that moment, and had he spoken 
out, the cross-purposes of the story of all their lives might have 
been made complete and inextricable. 

Meanwhile Victor Heron had got rid of most of his con- 
gratulating friends, and stood alone for a moment in a corner 
of the thinning lobby. He had won a success, complete and 
beyond his hopes ; it had been a success for his cause, and with 
that, too, a success for himself. Although Mr. Sheppard had not 
thought very highly of his style of eloquence, it had taken the 
House of Commons completely. He could not possibly doubt 
the reality of the success he had made. Member after member 
came up to grasp his hand and congratulate him, in that spirit of 
fellowship which is so remarkable in the House of Commons. 
Men who were entirely opposed to him in political views. men 
who had never spoken to him before . men who would have 
voted against him if the Government had opposed his motion and 
it had gone to a division, now rushed up to offer him the most 
sincere congratulations on the success of the speech he had made. 
Victor was very emotional as we know, and there were moments 
when he could not reply to these kindly words, and when strange 
lights seemed to twinkle before his eyes, and he only saw _ as 
through a mist. He was proud ; he was humbled. In the pride 
and in the humility, however, there was a dull pain always at his 
heart. He kept thinking of her who had urged hun on again and 
again to perseverance in his course ; who had faith in him when 
no one else had ; who stimulated him to new exertion when no 
one else saw into his heart and his purpose, and believed in his 
success. He might have had her to share in the success ; her 
bright eyes might even now be moistening near his own in the joy 
of this great triumph. In whatever career this might open up to 
him, he might have had her companionship. She would have 
helped him to serve his country, and to leave a name which 
perhaps might be written do\Mi with honour in the list of 
England's servants who had done faithful work. He stood there 
pulling his moustache and thinking ; quite depressed amid all his 
success, and feeling that, if his cause had had a victory, his hfe 
was only a failure. 

While he thus stood, some one who had passed into the House 
of Commons came out into the lobby again ; and an arm was put 
through Heron's, and he heard IMr. Money's voice, and he awoke 
from his melancholy brooding. 

" Will you walk out with me, Heron ? There's nothing going 
on here that you and I are likely to care about. I am going up to 



314 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

Piill I\Iall ; will you walk with me across the Park ? I want to 
speak to you as soon as possible on a matter of some interest to 
both of us." 

Mr. Money's manner was unusually grave. There was no 
need for him to tell Victor that he had something serious to say. 
Victor saw that well enough as he looked in Money's face. Heron 
felt the blood rush into his own face. He seemed to himself 
somehow as one to whom an accusation of guilt is suddenly 
brought home. He did not say a word just then, but allowed 
Money to lead him away ; and they left the lobby together. 

As they were passing down Westminster Hall, Money stopped 
suddenly and turned round : 

" I was fond of this old place," he said ; " I am sorry to leave 
it. I had a sort of ambition to get on here once. Odd, is it not, 
Heron you are just beginning here as I am giving up ? I suppose 1 
shall never cross the floor of the House of Commons again. Well, 
I arn sorry ; but then there are so many things to be sorry for ! " 

He said no more, and they walked in silence out of the great 
Hall and into the streets. 



CHAPTER XXXIV. 

" HE WRUNG BASSANIO'S HAND, AND SO THEY PARTED." 

Mr. Money and Heron crossed the lighted and noisy enclosure 
m front of Westminster Hall, amid the rattling hansoms, the 
flashing lamps of carriages, the rushing and shouting of policemen, 
the cantering up of grooms with horses for the senators who were 
to ride home, the eager crowd going in, coming out, and hanging 
round generally, in the hope of seeing anything. They passed out 
of the enclosure, and across Parliament Square, and so into the 
road through the Park. A contrast was ready for them there. The 
jjlace was all silent, dark, and lonely. Over the broad arid spaces 
that opened out before them, along by the Horse Guards and up 
to where the column on Waterloo Place could be seen faintly 
marking the dark grey sky with its darker grey, there were hardly 
any living figures but their own. Up to this tune they had not 
spoken a word. Then Money began : 

" That's turned out all right, Heron ? You are satisfied, ot 
course, with the way things went ? " 

" Oh, yes ; everything turned out better even than I expected. 
I owe you a great deal for your part in it." 



"//£. WRUNG BASSAN/0'S I/AXD." 315 

"That's nothing. They acted shabbily at first . the Govern- 
ment, I mean ; but they ahvays do ; and it's all the better for you 
that they had to give in so completely. Your speech was capital ; 
a complete success ; everybody says so. You are all right, 
whether you choose to stay in Parliament or whether you don't." 

" I don't know what I shall do," Victor said despondingly. 
He was not thinking much now of his parliamentary success, or 
of his righted grievance. He knew that it was not to talk to him 
about this that Money had brought him this way, and he waited 
for what he knew must be coming ; reluctant to hear it, longing to 
have it out and done with. There was a moment's silence ; then 
Money said, " Oh, you have time enough to think about all that ! " 

This had reference to A^ictor's last answer. Victor had once 
more the pain of expecting that the real business was coming and 
of being deceived. Nothing more was said on that subject ; they 
walked on silent again. Victor was making up his mind to 
abridge his agony by telling Money that he knew what he had 
come to speak about, and begging that they might get to it at 
once ; when at last Mr. Money, after a cough or two, and one 
or two hasty hard pufis at his cigar, began to speak in a voice 
which made Heron quite certain that the real moment had arrived. 

" About this little girl of mine . I am afraid. Heron, we 
have been getting into rather a false position, and I think we had 
better get out of it as soon as we can." 

" Lucy has been speaking to you?" Heron said, in the tone 
of one who has no defence to make. 

" She has. She spoke out very sensibly, I think ; I am glad 
my little maid has so much sense. She has made up her mind." 

'. Made up her mind to what? " 

" She thinks that you and she would make a great mistake if 
you were to get married. You have both made a mistake already, 
and she thinks . and I think. Heron . it would be only making 
things infinitely worse, and incurable in fact, if you were to carry 
on the thing any longer." 

" Why does Lucy think of this ? " 

" She says she is convinced that between you and her there 
is not . well, that there is not that sort of love which would 
make it safe and happy for you to marry. She thinks that there is 
some one you would care for more if you had the chance, and who 
would care more for you . and, in short, she is resolved that you 
and she are both to be set free." 

" Lucy never said a word of this to me . she never complained 
to me of anything . she never spoke of such a thing. Some one 
must have been telling her something " 



3i6 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

" I don't know an)rthing about that . she has not told me, and 
I have asked her no questions. I beUeve the truth is, Heron, that 
she fancies Miss Grey and you would be much better suited 
to each other, and that you made a sort of mistake when you 
thought of her, and that she is now in the way between you and 
her friend ; and she is resolved not to be so any longer." 

" If this is my fault " Heron began. 

" If it is your fault. Heron, it is partly my fault as well, and 
more mine than yours or hers " 

" Oh ! as to her," Heron broke in, " what fault is there in 
her? . except that she fancied for a moment she could care 
about such a fellow as I am, wrapped up in my own trumpery 
affairs and my twopenny grievances. What other fault could 
there be in her ? " 

" "Well, I know there is some fault in me . and I am the cause 
of all this, in a manner, at least. I made a dead set at you. 
Heron ; I confess it. I thought you would make a capital husband 
for my girl ; I own that I did my very best to throw you two 
together. Odd, isn't it, that a man should do such a thing? Her 
mother was as innocent of the whole affair as the child unborn. 
I was the matchmaker. The plot was innocent enough, Heron ; 
for I should have done all the same if you had not sixpence in the 
world, or the chance of getting it ; I should have found the 
sixpences, if Lucy liked you and you her. I liked you, Heron, 
and that's a fact, and I do still ; and I thought you were the sort 
of man to whom I could trust my daughter's happiness when I 
left England, as I always knew I must do sooner or later, and 
went to live in a country which may be at war with this any day. 
Heaven knows when or wherefore. / have grievances enough 
against the governments and the systems of this country, but I 
am Englishman enough to wish that my girls should both be 
married to genuine, loyal lovers of the old country. Well, I am 
disappointed ; but I see that I have myself to blame. I'll take 
Lucy to Russia with me ; she will not stay here, she says, although 
she might stay with her sister, if she would." 

Victor Heron groaned. 

" I wish Lucy and you had never seen me," he said. *' You 
have been the kindest friends to me that man could have . and 
this is how I make you amends ! " 

"Well," said Money, "in helping you on, of course I was 
playing a game of my own part of the time, for I thought I 
was pushing along a husband for my daughter. I don't blame 
you, Heron, one bit ; it would be out of the nature of things that 
a boy and girl should not fancy they were in love with one 



** HE WRUNG BASSANIO'S HAND* 317 

another who were thrown together, as I took care that Lucy 
and you should be. But, mind, I meant you to love each 
other really ; it was no part of my plan to marry my Lucelet to any 
man who was not deep and downright in love with her, and she 
with him. I never calculated on the possibility of both of you 
making a mistake." 

" Then Lucy finds that she has made a mistake ? " Heron 
asked, a strange light of hope burning up within him. If he could 
but think that Lucy wished of her own accord to be free of him, 
he felt that he could be happy once more. 

" Yes," said Money gravely, " my daughter now thinks, Heron, 
that she has made a mistake. She does not think she is as much 
in love with you as she ought to be if you were to be married and 
to be happy ; and I fancy she is a good deal relieved to know or 
to think that you are not in love with her. It will be a case of 
quits and good' friends, I hope, Heron." 

Victor was silent and thoughtful for a moment. He was 
stricken with amazement. It was, indeed, the profoundest relief 
to find that he was positively thrown over by Lucy. But who 
could have believed in such a sudden change ? AH that the 
worst cynics had ever said of woman could not equal this. There 
was something shocking in the thought that he might have been 
married to a girl so light of purpose. He could hardly believe it. 
Certainly, if anyone but Lucy's father had said it, he would have 
denied it angrily. Is it possible, he thought, that women generally 
can be like this ? 

" She has changed her mind very soon," Victor said ; and 
there was a bitterness in his tone which he could not repress. 

"Why she?" Money asked coldly. " Is she the only one? 
You made a mistake, Heron ; so did she, it seems." 

" Well, I am glad to know that Lucy will not suffer much by 
this; I am glad there is to be no breaking of hearts." 

" On either side ; yes, so am I. In truth. Heron, I don't mind 
admitting to you that I fear my little girl is not a very constant 
little person, and that she does not always know her own 
mind. Odd, too; for her mother was and is the most steadfast 
and devoted of women. But there's a great deal of stuff 
talked about the influence and example of parents and so forth. 
No, I don't think Lucelet is a girl who always knows her own 
mind." 

" I should not have thought she was like that," Victor said. 
" No ; you would rather, I suppose, that she cried her eyes 
out when she found that you were not exactly as fond of her 
as she thought you ought to be ? That's the way of us men, 



3tS AflSS MISANTHROPE. 

Heron, I suppose. But I don't mind saying that I am a little 
surprised, too; and I don't know that I am quite pleased. 1 am 
not sure that I wouldn't rather see my girl suffer a little of the 
heart-ache than have so little heart to suffer in. 1 shouldn't have 
thought it of her. But I remember now that she used to be half in 
love with that Blanchet creature at one time. Well, she isn't like 
her mother in that way ; all the happier, perhaps, for her in 
the end." 

They walked on for a while in silence. Each had enough of 
his own thoughts to occupy him. 

" Oh ! one thing I ought to tell you," Money suddenly said, 
and he touched Victor lightly on the arm. " It may interest 
you by and by. When I first laid my plans for you, Heron . these 
plans that have turned out so successful . I had certain ideas of 
my own. I thought, perhaps, there was some one else who had a 
better claim on you than Lucelet, and I took some trouble to find 
out. I had it on the best authority, as the phrase goes, that there 
was no such person; I would not have moved a step otherwise. 
If I moved at all, it was because I was assured that the coast was 
clear." 

" I don't think I quite understand " 

"No? I don't think you quite understood yourself at that 
time. Shall I put it plainer ? " 

" Oh, for Heaven's sake, as plainly as words can make it ! We 
have been playing at cross-purposes quite long enough." 

" Very well," said Money coolly. " I talked to Miss Grey, 
and I asked her directly if she knew of anyone who was likely 
to be nearer to you than Lucelet. I tell you plainly I thought 
you were much more likely to care for her than for Lucelet, and 
that she was a girl far better suited to you. She knew perfectly 
well what I meant; and she answered me." 

Even in the darkness of the night Victor knew that the blood 
was crimsoning his face. He groaned again. 

" Yes, she answered me ; she told me she knew of no such 
woman. I believed her then, and I believe her now. I am 
sure that was what she thought then. It must be owned. Heron, 
my good fellow, that you don't seem exactly to shine in the art of 
knowing your own mind. You were very near making a nice 
muddle of this." 

" I have made a nice muddle of everything. I am ashamed 
to look anyone in the face." 

" You will get over that, I dare say. Don't make a muddle 
again, that's all. You are well out of this, and so are we. I 
am hardly sorry that Lucelet hasn't her mother's steady true heart, 



*'HE WRUNG BASSANWS HAND." 319 

when I think what she might have suffered. Well, that is all about 
it. We have said all we need to say, I think ; for the rest, the 
more silence the better." 

"And I am dismissed?" said Heron, with a melancholy smile. 

'* You are dismissed. It is my daughter's wish that you and 
she should see no more of each other, and under the circumstances 
it is mine. The thing is at an end." 

" Will Lucy not even see me ?'' 

"No ; she is of opinion that it would be much better she and 
you should not meet again, and I think so too. She will always 
think of you with a friendly feeling, and so shall I. Nothing that 
has happened need make you and me anything but friends, I 
hope." 

By this time they had reached the foot of the flight of steps 
that leads up to the column on Waterloo Place. They had been 
walking very slowly. Money came to a stand there as if they 
were to go no farther together. 

'* I am so confused by all this," said Heron, " I don't know 
what to say. I should like to ask Lucy to forgive me ; I want to 
ask you to forgive me. I seem to myself like a criminal, and yet 
I think you ought to have been all more frank with me ; I don't 
know. I am like one in a dream." 

" Better remain in the dream for the present ; the rights and 
wrongs of all this are too puzzling for you or me. All I know 
is, that the thing is over, and that I am disappointed, and that I 
feel somehow it serves me right. I bear you no ill-feeling what- 
ever. Heron ; I hope you feel the same to me. I liked you ; 
we were good friends. I don't like many men ; I am sorry to 
lose you, and the House of Commons, and my little Lucelet's 
settlement in life, which I thought was so secure, and I am glad 
she takes it so easily, and sorry she hasn't feelings a little deeper, 
perhaps ; and altogether I'm somewhat in the condition of the man 
in the old proverb, who had lost a shilling and found sixpence, 
and so makes up his mind that things might have been worse." 

" I don't see how things could very well have been worse," 
Heron said despondingly. 

" Yes, they would have been a great deal worse if Lucelet and 
you had found out all this after you were married and not before, 
and I were away in Russia and couldn't look after my little girl 
any more. Not that you wouldn't be an excellent husband in any 
case. Heron, I'm sure, but it would not be the sort of thing we any 
of us wanted ; and it would be too late to set things right then, 
and it is not now. That's how things might have been worse, 
Heron." 



320 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

"There is something in all this I don't understand at all," 
Heron said vehemently ; " I don't mean as regards you, Money, 
of course; but this sudden change of Lucy's. It isn't like her; 
I can't make it out " 

"My good fellow, would you have it otherwise? Do you 
want to persuade Lucelet to change her mind again and to marry 
you ? I tell you openly, that if there were the least chance of her 
doing so . which there is not . I would not allow her." 

" No, I don't mean that ; but I am sure she must have been 
told something about me . this is so unlike her " 

" What does all that matter ? The affair is best left as it is. 
She says she will not marry you ; you don't want to marry her ; I 
don't want now that you should marry each other. In Heaven's 
name what can we all do better than to say no more about it, 
and shake hands and part ? Do you think it is a state of things that 
is likely to be any the better for asking the why and the wherefore 
of this and that ? I don't. It's all over, Heron, and that's the 
long and the short of it. I am going to a new country, and a new 
country is a new career, they say. I dare say you'll hear some day 
of Lucelet being married to a Russian prince. Anyhow, think of 
us kindly as we shall of you always, and if you can do anything 
here and I over there to keep the two countries on terms of 
friendship, let us do so, in God's name, my boy. I don't want to 
finish up my career by firing upon the old flag or failing to stand 
by the new one ; and so good-bye." 

He held out his hand. Victor took it in silence. Indeed, 
he would have found it hard to say anything very coherent just 
then. 

" Oh ! by the way," Money said, " I was near forgetting. 
You have a cigar-case about you?" 

Victor produced his cigar-case. 

"Give it to me," Money said, "and take mine. It will be 
a friendly exchange, and will remind us of each other if we need 
any reminding. Here . tliat's the cigar-case I had v/hen we met 
and talked together that first night in Paris." 

Heron took the case and gave his own, saying, as well as 
he could, " And this is the one that I had then, too." 

"Ah, yes, I was in hopes it would be so. Well, that's all 
right. You told me then I had better have nothing to do with 
you . don't you remember ? . because you were a man with a griev- 
ance." 

" I wish to Heaven you had followed my advice." 

" No, no, Heron ; don't say that. You are not to blame for 
anything, and we were good friends, and we always shall be I hope, 



A GENERAL BRE A KING-UP. 321 

and we have had some pleasant times together, and I hope to 
hear lots of good news of you in every way. Well, good-bye, 
and whenever either of us pulls out his cigar-case to have a 
smoke, he can't help thinking of the night we first talked together 
in Paris." 

" Yes," Heron said, " and of the last night we talked together 
in London." 

Not another word was said. They shook hands again, and 
went their different ways. Money went up the steps to Waterloo 
Place, and Heron walked slowly along the dark road by the 
railings of the Park, hardly knowing indeed whither he was going. 
If, out of all the sudden confusion, some brighter way was likely 
to open upon him than that which he had of late been so darkly 
treading, it is only justice to him to say that he did not then think 
of that or of anything that directly concerned himself. For the 
moment he only thought of the voice which had always sounded 
so friendly in his ears since first he heard it on the balcony of the 
Paris hotel, which had never told him of anything but friendliness 
and encouragement, and kindness, and which in all probability 
he was never to hear again. Had any other thoughts tried to 
force themselves into his mind, he would have resolutely put them 
away for that hour. The woman whom he loved would surely 
have been the last on earth to blame him, could she have known of 
it, because in that moment he gave up his thoughts to the friend 
he had lost. 



CHAPTER XXXV. 

A GENERAL BREAKING-UP. 

Was Lucy, then, really that fickle light-o'-love that her father 
had regretfully reported her to be ? The answer is a little com- 
plex, as most answers are which seek to explain human character. 
She certainly was no light-o'-love in the sense of having actually 
changed in any of her personal devotion to Heron. She loved 
him very deeply for the present ; and her love was as likely to 
prove an abiding emotion if it had the chances in its favour as 
any sentiment entertained by a girl whose whole nature was 
affectionate and tender rather than strong. But she had for 
some time begun to doubt whether Heron was really devoted 
to her, and whether, if he were not so, they could be very 
happy together. She had begun to see that her presence was 
not necessary to his happiness. Many a time she had noticed 

Y 



322 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

that he ahvays put aside his favourite topics -when he came to talk 
to her. She had tried to get up such pohtical subjects as she 
knew to be interesting to him, but she could not throw her soul 
into them ; and, in spite of all that she could do, she saw that he 
began to think he was boring her when he talked of such things, 
and he persisted in turning to something else. There were times, 
indeed, as we have already said, when Victor, stricken with a 
kind of remorse because he did not love her more, became suddenly 
so attentive and so tender that Lucy was very happy. But even 
then she came by degrees to see that this, too, was only a coming 
down to her level, not a lover's rapturous delight in the society of 
her he loved. In truth, she had had the greatest desire of her 
young life gratified so far, and she found that she was not more 
happy but less happy than before. She began to look forward to 
the future with a deepening dread. 

All this, however, was only a dim apprehension, such as 
might well trouble the soul of any girl about to enter into an 
entirely new way of life, and to give up her happiness into the 
keeping of one who was, after all, comparatively a stranger. Lucy 
had been so happy at home, so closely cared for, so tenderly 
loved by father and mother, that she might well feel a little doubt 
and sinking of the heart at the prospect of leaving for ever the 
nest in which she had been so sweetly sheltered. Her home hfe 
had almost no duties. She was only asked to be happy, and to 
love her father, mother, and sister ; and she could not help doing 
all this in any case. It would not, therefore, be possible that 
she could look out with mere delight to the leading of such a 
home. But if things had gone on in the ordinary course, she 
would, perhaps, have begun to think less and less of the danger of 
not being loved enough by her future husband ; and once they 
were married, she would probably, after a few months, have 
ceased to think about the matter at all. For up to this time 
she had only feared that Victor Heron was not as much in love 
with her as she knew she was with him. The idea had not arisen 
in her mind that he might all the time be in love with some one 
else. 

These fears and doubts came by fits and starts. There 
were bright days when she seemed to wake up in the morning 
with no fears and doubts at all. Such a day was that on which 
she expected and received the visit from Minola. The 'very 
evening before she had been tormented by serious alarms, and 
begun to think that she must lay open her doubts to some 
stronger intelligence than her own, and once for all take counseL 
Inhere was only one friend to whom she could trust such a con- 



A GENERAL BREAKING-VP. 323 

fidence, and on whose heart and judgment she thought she could 
rely, and that was Minola Grey. She wrote to Minola therefore, 
begging her to come to Victoria Street and see her. This was the 
letter of which we have already heard, in which she insisted on 
seeing " dear darling Nola at once, at once," because of something 
" most particular " on which she wanted her advice " so much, oh, 
so much!" Strangely enough, when she had written the letter, 
and thus as she thought made up her mind to seek a confidante 
and counsel, her doubts and dreads seemed to disappear at once. 
On the morning when she expected Minola she rose as happy 
as a bird. She was entirely her old self ; she had no doubts or 
alarms about anything. She felt as she used to do in the childish 
days when she thought her papa was the richest, greatest, and 
most powerful man in all the world, who could give his daughter 
anything she liked to have if it would be good for her. She 
was satisfied about Victor, about herself, about everything. She 
determined that when Nola came she would say nothing about 
the absurd notions that had been in her head and now were com- 
pletely out of it, and that she would devise some excuse for 
having sent for Nola, and they would have a delightful day as ot 
old, and she would talk a great deal to Nola about her coming 
happiness, and the gifts and graces of Victor; and perhaps she 
would ask Nola whether it would be well for her, Lucy, to ketp 
trying to get herself up in politics, or whether Victor would not 
rather be free of her embarrassing attempts to follow him up such 
steep and toilsome, not to say misty, heights ? She was so happy 
and so full of good-nature that she could not refuse her sisrt-r 
Theresa when the latter asked Lury to go out with her for a short 
time. 

Perhaps the least important person in this story came to be 
the one whose chance movement most deeply affected all the 
Qther persons in it. If Theresa Money had not asked her sister 
to go out with her that day, the lives of most of the persons we 
know in these pages would probably have turned out some- 
thing quite different. Lucy could not refuse darling Theresa just 
when they were so soon to separate, in a manner at least, and she 
went out ; and when she came back Minola and Victor Heron 
were together. 

She was so happy and in such high spirits. She loved them 
both so much. She wondered to see them, as she thought, not 
friendly enough to each other. She brought them together and 
made their hands clasp. Then she saw how the colour ran to 
Minola's face, and how her eyes fell, and how Victor Herons 
lips quivered and his hand trembled. She looked from one to 



334 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

the other in surprise, and felt for the moment as if some strong 
electric influence had flung her forcibly out of a circle in which 
they two remained. Yet nothing came of it. They parted and 
went their way, as any mere friends might do. Lucy had not the 
faintest suspicion of any treachery. She was sure that she knew 
all that was to be known. She felt sure that if she was right in 
the terrible conjecture that came into her mind, it was a dis- 
covery for them as well as for her. But she could not persuade 
herself that she had not made a discovery. She was pierced 
through and through by the conviction that that one moment had 
made a change in their lives which nothing on earth could repair. 
She was distraite, wild, almost hysterical, during the remainder 
of Mmola's short visit; and Minola had not left her very long 
when Blanchet came and told the story he had to tell. 

She did not doubt the literal truth of the story, but she did 
not interpret it in Blanchet's way. She was sure it was a chance 
meeting ; but she was sure also that some words must then have 
passed between Minola and Victor which came of the unhappy 
contact she had forced upon them. Her truthful, genial soul go 
at the reality of things at once, and she saw Victor and Minola 
in the Park forming noble, disinterested plans of self-sacrifice 
and of utter silence for her sake. Then her mind was made up. 
She resolved to see her father at once and tell him that she would 
not marry Victor Heron; but she resolved, too, to take the 
burden of the change of mind wholly on herself. She would not 
make her father and mother unhappy by telling of her owa un - 
happiness. If Minola and Victor were fond of each other, as 
now seemed but too sure, she would not offer to give Heron up in 
any way which might allow of a futile and barren rivalry in self- 
sacrifice. She would make it impossible for anyone to interfere 
with the course she had determined to follow. It was only wonder- 
ful to her now how she could have avoided seeing something 
of this before . how it never occurred to her that Minola would be 
a so much more suitable wife for Victor than she could ever be. 
Now it all seemed so obvious and clear. Now she understood 
the strange habitual chilliness which seemed to envelope, like 
an atmosphere, herself and Victor. Now she understood why 
their engagement^ which she had so longed for, brought her so 
little happiness. Now her mind went back to that night when she 
first took Minola into her confidence, and told her of her love for 
Heron. She remembered how cold, and strange, and unlike her- 
self Minola seemed then; and how from that very hour Minola 
had always seemed to avoid the company of Heron, with whom 
she had always before been so friendly; and how sometimes, as 



A GENERAL BREAKING-UP. 325 

Lucy had seen with wonder, Minola had almost appeared to 
dislike him. "When I told her about myself," Lucy now felt 
certain, "she was already in love with him, and from that time 
out she only tried to hide it and to keep away from him." 

Therefore Lucy made her sacrifice, such as it was. Let us 
not undervalue it, even though there had been growing up in her 
mind for some time a conviction that when she and Heron 
became engaged to each other it was the result of a sudden im- 
pulse.of an impulse rather from her than from him, and that it 
was a mistake. She still loved him, not indeed with the depth 
and strength of a more vigorous nature, but very much. She 
would probably have been very happy if married to him. Her 
resolve was not the freak of fickleness, even if her love had not 
the depth of passion. For the hour, at least, she did not believe 
it possible she could ever love another man as she had loved 
Heron, and she never was more deeply impressed with this belief 
than in the moment when she made up her mind to say that 
she loved him no more. 

Now the thing was done. Some days had passed over, and 
Lucy's family were all made aware of the change that had taken 
place, and of the necessity of turning public attention away from 
it as much as possible. They were making preparations for 
Theresa's marriage and for the removal to Russia. Lucy kept up 
her spirits remarkably well, and saw people as if nothing had hap- 
pened. She even remained in the room with her mother one 
afternoon, when Lady Limpenny was announced, although a gentle 
shudder ran through her when she heard the name of the visitor. 
*' She comes to find out all about everything," Lucy said despair- 
ingly, as Lady Limpenny rustled, fluttered, and rattled into the 
room, bringing with her the idea of what Heine called " a tempest 
in petticoats." 

" My dearest Theresa, now do tell me, what is this that all the 
town is ringing with ? I do so want to know, for it is so shocking 
to hear things said that one does not like to hear, and not to be 
able to say if they are true or false." 

" What are the things, Laura?" Mrs. Money asked, in a voice 
the soft, deep melancholy of which had received from recent occur- 
rences an additional depth of melancholy. 

" Oh, well, everything . all sorts of things . you can't have any 
idea ! Is it true that Mr. Money and you are going away to live 
in Russia ? " 

" It is quite true, Laura." 

" And to be an enemy of this country, perhaps, when ever}-- 
body says there is sure to be a war. I declare to you, darling 



326 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

Theresa, I felt when I heard it as if the end of the world were cer- 
tainly coming. I do believe it is coming." 

" I am sure I wish it would come quickly," Lucy interposed. 

*' Now, you dear, darling creature, why should you wish that ? 
Of all persons in the world, you to wish that ! Do tell me why 
you wish to have the end of the world come so quickly? " 

" Because," Lucy answered coolly, " if the end of the world is 
to come at all, I should Uke it to come in my time ; I should like 
to see it, Lady Limpenny." 

" Oh, that's it ? Oh, yes, yes ! But I should be dreadfully 
afraid ; I should not have the courage ; you young people have so 
much courage. I am quite afraid to think of it. But it will come 
very soon, my dear, very soon ; you may depend on that. All the 
signs are there, I am told. Sir James laughs ; he only laughs . 
think of that ! But you are going to live in Russia, all of you, at 
once ? " 

" After Theresa is married," Mrs. Money explained. "She, of 
course, will not go with us." 

" Of course not . of course not, dearest Theresa. And this 
darling girl whom I see before me now . does she go ? " 

"Yes, Lucy goes with us, of course." 

" Indeed ! " Lady Limpenny opened her eyes to their utter- 
most capacity of expansion at this answer, and she prolonged the 
first syllable of her " indeed " so that it resembled some linked 
sweetness of music long drawn out. When she had said the word 
once aloud she appeared to say it over two or three times to herself, 
for she turned and bowed her head with exactly the same wonder- 
ing, enquiring expression which she put on when she indulged in 
her public demonstration of amazement. 

" Oh, yes ! Lucy goes with us, of course. She intends to pick 
up a Russian prince." 

This little pleasantry Mrs. Money had borrowed from her hus- 
band, believing it to be rather a subtle and clever device for 
throwing enquiring people off the scent. 

" Indeed ! A Russian prince. How very nice ! And to have 
a great many serfs, I suppose, like the lady in Les Danischeffs . 
only I know our dear young friend would not be quite so cruel ; 
and, besides, I believe there are no serfs now. But now tell me, 
you dears, how does our distinguished friend in Parliament . Mr. 
Heron, I mean. how does he like this? Won't he be apt to 
quarrel with the Russian prince ? " 

" Oh, dear, no ! " said Mrs. Money ; " why should he ? " 

" Why should he ? Oh, indeed ! Well, now, really, you do 
surprise mc. Why should he? Well, I should have thought . 



A GENERAL BREAKING-UP. 327 

but of course you know best. And so you are all going to leave 
us, and to go to Russia ! And if there should be a war ? I 
thought Mr. Money was too much of a patriot " 

" Mr. Money is a i)atriot,'' his wife solemnly said ; " he is too 
much of a patriot to be able to see his country degraded by an 
aristocratic system which is inconsistent either with her national 
progress or with the progress of humanity. England is not the 
English Government, Laura Limpenny. The English Government 
have always systematically denied to Mr. Money an opportunity 
of making his genius serviceable to his country. His genius has 
no place in this land under such a system. He leaves England; 
but he loves the land and the people ; it is against the system he 
protests." 

" And you are willing to go, Theresa dearest ? " Lady Lim- 
penny asked, feeling herself quite unable to make head against the 
eloquence and power of this speech. 

" I have urged him to go where he will be appreciated, Laura." 

" Well, I shall miss you all, I am sure," Lady Limpenny said 
with a profound sigh ; "but these are the ways of life, I suppose. 
Such changes ! Our dear young friend the poet . I never can. 
think of his name . do tell me, I-ucy darling, what was the name 
of that ver}' charming young man that I used to meet here." 

'^ Mr. Blanchet ? " Lucy said, not very graciously. 

" Mr. Blanchet, of course. They tell me that he has left the 
country . gone to America, they say. He has gone to the far 
West ; that is in America, is it not ? " 

" But is this true ? " Lucy asked. Her pale face coloured at 
the mention of the luckless poet's name. It had bitter associa- 
tions for her. 

" It is true, Lucy dear," her mother answered, looking at the 
girl with kindly, tender eyes ; " I had not time to tell you about 
it," she added significantly, meaning that she had not desired to 
bring up his name unnecessarily to poor Lucy. " He was anxious 
to go ; he thought he could make a career for himself out there, 
and he was anxious to get out of this anyhow; and I spoke to 
your papa, and papa thought he had much better go as soon as 
possible ; and he helped him all he could, with letters of intro- 
duction and all that ; and he has taken his sister with him, and he 
is gone, my dear." 

The helper of unhaupy men did not mention the fact that the 
assistance she and her husband had given to Blanchet was not by 
any means confined to mere letters of introduction, although of 
these too he had goodly store. 

Lucy withdrew to the window, and looked listlessly out. The 



328 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

poor poet ! Once she admired him greatly ; and the memories 
came back of that pleasant girlish time when he was a hero and a 
sort of god in her eyes. Lately, when he had acted with such 
treachery, and brought about such strange confusion, she had 
found some excuse for him because she fancied that perhaps it 
was disappointed love for her that had made him try to set her 
against Heron ; and although the result had been so sad for her, 
yet what woman during all the centuries before and since Lady 
Anne was bom would not look with more lenient eye upon the 
treacheries that were done for love of her ? There was something 
of added loneliness in the knowledge that he too had passed 
beyond the horizon of her history. 

" We hope he will do well in America," Mrs. Money said, 
'* and perhaps become a great man one day, and come back to 
Europe and see his friends, who will be proud of his success, I 
am sure." 

Lucy came forward again, and stood as it were in her mother's 
shadow. Lady Limpenny began again complacently : 

" So you see, Lucy, darling, I was not wrong in all my news, 
and your mother knew this as well as I did. You see everybody 
zs going away; and our young friend too with the odd, pretty 
name, the girl with all the lovely hair, you know . the hair that 
you tell me is really all her own. What is that pretty girl's odd 
name ? I ought to remember it, I am sure." 

Mrs. Money would much rather this pretty girl's name had not 
been brought up just then. But there was no escaping Lady 
Limpenny, and she quietly answered : 

" You mean Miss Grey, Laura . Minola Grey ? " 

" Yes, to be sure ; how could I forget that sweet, pretty, odd 
name ? Minola Grey, of course. And she too has gone away and 
never means to come back any more, I am told." 

" Minola Grey gone away? " Lucy asked in genuine astonish, 
ment. " It can't be, Lady Limpenny ; why should she go away, 
mamma ? Do you know anything of this too ? " 

" No, my dearest," her mother said ; " I know nothing at all 
about it. Are you certain, Laura ? It looks so unlikely, you 
know, that Minola Grey could go anywhere without letting us 
know somethmg about it." 

'* Quite certain, darling Theresa. I have only just been at 
the young lady's lodgings, and so ridiculous I did seem, you can't 
think . oh ! you really can't ! " 

Lucy looked as if she found no difficulty in thinking of Lady 
Limpenny making herself seem ridiculous. 

" Uccause," Lady Limpenny explained, in answer to enquiring 



A GF.YFRAL BREAKING-UP. 329 

looks from Mrs. Money, " the very moment I got to the door I 
forgot the dear young lady's name. I could not remember it. I 
could only ask for the young lady. But of course they knew whom 
I meant, for there was no other young lady living there." 

" Well, but about her . about Minola?" Mrs. Money asked 
A'ith a little impatience. 

" About her? Oh ! yes, yes, to be sure. Well, my dear, they 
told me she had left that place and left London ; and that they did 
not expect her back any more ; they thought she was going to 
live abroad somewhere . Italy, I think." 

" This is extraordinary," Lucy said. " I can't understand it, 
namma ; I'll go at once and see if Minola has really gone." 

" You'll find it all true, darling," Lady Limpenny affirmed, with 
a grave shake of the head. At first it did not seem to her a 
matter of great interest, for she assumed that Miss Grey had simply 
gone to live on the Continent with the knowledge of her friends. 
But now that there was evidently some mystery about it, she was 
disposed to make the utmost possible of the mystery, and to plume 
herself considerably on having been the first to find out the strange 
thing's occurrence. The truth was that Lady Limpenny had gone 
first to see Minola in the hope that, under jiretence of paying her 
a gracious and friendly visit, she could induce Minola to tell her 
more about the Moneys and their present purposes than they 
would be likely to tell of themselves. Lady Limpenny was really 
very fond of the Moneys in her own way ; but she could not 
resist the anxiety to find out, if possible, something more about 
their affairs than they would wish to have known, especially since 
these affairs had become just now matter of rather common specu- 
lation. In Lady Limpenny's eyes, a friend was Mr. Money ; a 
greater friend was Mrs. Money ; but the greatest Iriend of all was, 
the truth . about their private affairs. 

There was nothing more to be got now, however, about the 
affairs of the Moneys or of anybody else, and Lucy had announced 
her intention of going to find out something about Miss Grey. 
It was in Lady Limpenny's mind to offer her companionship, 
when a card was brought to Mrs. Money, who handed it to Lucy, 
saying significantly, "Mr. Sheppard, my dear ; " and Lady Lim- 
penny decided at once to remain and see this visitor, about whom 
she had heard a great deal, and whom, from Mrs. Money's look, 
she at once assumed to be in some way an object of especial 
interest at the present moment. 

Mr. Sheppard looked remarkably pale and perturbed when 
he entered the room. He had of late become well known to 
Mrs. Money, who always regarded him with a peculiar interest 



330 MiSS MISANTHROPE. 

since the day, now seeming so long ago, when she heard from 
Mary Blanchet that he was a lover of Minola Grey. She knew 
too that her husband lately had leaned to the side of Sheppard 
as a possible husband for Minola, while she herself had in 
secret preferred the cause of Herbert Blanchet. She did not 
doubt that Mr. Sheppard's present visit had something to do with 
Minola and the strange story Lady Limpenny had been telling. 

Mr. Sheppard explained that he had not at first had any 
intention of intruding on tht ladies . no emotion or surprise 
could make him forego his formalism of manner . but that as 
he found Mr. Money was not at home, he had taken the liberty 
of paying them a visit. Both ladies expressed themselves as 
greatly delighted. Mr. Sheppard did not get much further, how- 
ever, except into such matters as the weather and the debates 
in Parliament, and Mrs. Money made no effort to draw him into 
any closer converse. Lady Limpenny penetrated the meaning of 
this with that remarkable astuteness on which she prided herself, 
and which she was convinced could never be deceived. " They 
won't speak before me," she said in her own mind. " It's 
something very serious and shocking; Miss Grey has gone off 
and married some dreadful person ; or something has occurred 
which they don't want me to know. But I'll find it all out." 

She had nothing better for it at the moment, however, than 
to take her leave, which she did with many vows that they must 
all see a great deal of each other before they left England. 

" Lady Limpenny is a very dear old friend of mine, Mr. 
Sheppard," Mrs. Money explained, " but I did not wish to speak 
of anything concerning some of our friends in the presence even 
of her. You have come to tell us something about a very dear 
friend, Mr. Sheppard, have you not ? " 

" I have come rather to ask you for some information about 
a very dear friend," Sheppard said, with white and trembling lips, 
as he rose from his seat and came near Mrs. Money. " I have 
come to ask you if you can tell me anything about Miss Grey ? " 

" Nothing at all, Mr. Sheppard, I am sorry to say. I thought 
3'ou had come to relieve our anxiety. Is this true, this story we 
have just been hearing. is it true that she has left London?" 

Sheppard looked from one woman's face to the other. He 
was always naturally suspicious, and at first he could not believe it 
possible that they two were not in some plot against him. 

" Don't you really know?" he asked. "Don't either of you 
ladies really know? Don't you know where she has gone, nor 
why, nor anything about her? Is it possible she can have gone 
away from London and you not know ? " 



A GENERAL BREAKING-UP. 331 

'' I never heard a word about it until a moment ago," Mrs. 
Money said. " I am all in amazement, Mr. Sheppard ; I really 
felt sure that you knew, and were coming with some explanation 
from her, perhaps." Mrs. Money had begun to think that perhaps 
for some inscrutable reason Minola might have consented to 
marry Mr. Sheppard, and gone down into the country or to 
Scotland to do it. 

" From her," Sheppard said, with a sickly smile ; " oh, no ! 
I shall never be entrusted with a message from her. I only want 
to know now who is the person likely to be entrusted with such 
a message. I want you ladies to let me know the worst at once, if 
you can \ it isn't any kindness to keep it from me." 

Mrs. Money only repeated her assurances and her wonder. 
Lucy was standing with her eyes looking on the ground, and a faint 
colour in her cheeks. She did not know anything indeed, but she 
suspected that Minola's disappearance could in any case bode 
little good to the hopes of poor Sheppard. Mrs. Money glanced 
at her daughter with wondering, pitying eyes. 

Sheppard turned to Lucy : " You were her friend, Miss Money 
. her dearest friend. It is impossible she can have left London 
foi good without your knowing something of why she has done so. 
She could not be ungrateful \ nobody that knew her could believe 
that of her. She must have told you . and you may tell me 
something. Don't think me rude or pressing ; you can hardly 
understand my feelings, but still I would ask you to make allow- 
ance for them." 

" Oh, yes, Mr. Sheppard ! " said lAicy gently, her eyes fiUing 
with tears, " I can perhaps understand your feelings ; or, at least, 
I can make allowance for them. But I can't tell you why Nola 
has gone away, if she has gone away. She has not told me any- 
thing ; only I am sure it was with some good purpose, and because 
she thought she was doing right . or was in some one's way . oh, 
indeed, I can't explain, and can hardly guess ! But I do sympathise 
with you, Mr. Sheppard, if you will allow me to speak to you 
plainly and like a friend. and indeed . indeed, there is no use in 
your thinking of Nola. Don't be angiy, mamma, and think that I 
am talking as a girl oughtn't to talk ; I know what I am saying, 
and I would spare Mr. Sheppard useless pain if I could. Ah ! " 

With a start and this exclamation she turned away, for a 
servant at that moment brought her a letter, and she saw that 
it was in the handwriting of Minola Grey. She left the room 
without saying another word. 

" Your daughter knows something which she will not tell," 
Mr. Sheppard said gloomily. 



332 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

" No," Mrs. Money answered ; " she said she knew nothing ; 
but she guesses something, perhaps, which she does not think it 
right to tell. It would be of no use asking her any more questions, 
Mr. Sheppard ; and she is a good deal disturbed at present." 

" Certainly, certainly," Mr. Sheppard hastened to say ; " I 
am quite aware of that : and I have to apologise again for in- 
truding upon you and her at such a time. I may perhaps be 
allowed to congratulate her and you on the happy marriage she 
is about to make with one wlio is so certain of distinction ; and 
indeed I had some hopes, perhaps, that her own happiness would 
render her only more ready to sympathise with one to whom the 
fates have been less kind." 

" Allow me to remove a misconception, Mr. Sheppard," Mrs. 
Money said, turning her deep eyes on him and speaking in tones 
of double-distilled melancholy. " My daughter is not about to 
be married ; she is going to Russia with us ; any reports you may 
have heard to the contrary are entirely untrue." 

" But . I beg your pardon," the aghast Sheppard asked ; " is 
it possible? . is it not true that INIiss Money is to be married to 
Mr. Heron?" 

" It is not true, Mr. Sheppard ; distinctly not true. Whatever 
thoughts of that kind may once have existed, exist, I can assure 
you, no longer. Miss Money is not going to marry anyone . at 
present, at least ; she is going to Russia with her father and me." 

" Then I see it all ! I need not ask any more explanations, 
and I have only to beg pardon again for having intruded upon 
you. I see it all now only too clearly ; I see that I have thrown 
away half my life for nothing, and been made a fool of all the 
time . and this is the end! " 

Mrs. Money looked at him in wonder. He was white with 
anger and excitement. She did not understand him in the least. 
She had not yet been told the full reason of the breaking-off of 
the engagement between Lucy and Heron, and knew no more 
than that Lucy now thought she did not care about him. Her 
mind was therefore filled with a certain pity for the discarded 
lover whom she pictured as suffering greatly in secret, and the 
meaning of Sheppard's words was lost on her. When with a 
formal bow he quitted the room, she could only think that his 
disai)pointment in love must have somewhat disturbed his brain. 

Mr. Sheppard went and walked the Victoria Embankment for 
hours. He was very angry, bitter, and miserable ; and yet he was 
in his secret heart longing to know the worst. He began to be 
ashamed of the manner in which his life was wasting away in 
fruitless pursuit of a girl who he now saw could not be made to 



A GENERAL BREAKING-UP. 333 

care for him. If the worst were over he thought he would begin 
to shake otf some of his passion and be like a man again. The 
worst in his eyes was Avhat he now felt an almost perfect assurance 
that he was soon destined to hear . the news that Minola Grey 
and Victor Heron had been married. Why they should have 
chosen to do this in secret, and by means of a sort of flight, 
instead of in the open light of day, Mr. Sheppard could not 
guess ; but he felt sure that that would be, or was already, the end 
of all that long chapter of his existence. How much of his passion 
had been pure, unselfish love, and how mucli the eager desire of 
a self-conceited and ambitious man to succeed in something he 
had greatly set his heart upon, Mr. Sheppard did not himself 
know, and had never asked of his consciousness. There were 
moments, as we know, but as he did not know, when perhaps if 
chance had set him on to say the right word, or even to present 
himself at the right instant, he might have found himself in pos- 
session of his dearest hope ; and made some one else, and 
perhaps himself, unhappy for life. But the fates had been in 
league with himself against him ; and he was at last growmg weary 
of the long pursuit in which, like the people in a dream who fain 
would run but cannot, he found some vague, insuperable obstruction 
always keeping him back. He was growing ashamed of himself 
It was not in his nature voluntarily and manfully to give up so 
long as there seemed to him the faintest possibility that in any 
moment of good fortune on his side, or of weakness on Minola's, 
he might yet be successful. But in that bitter evening of dis- 
appointment and rage which followed his visit to Mrs. Money, he 
did think many a time that it would be a relief to him when 
the worst was known ; that he would become a different man 
when all this tormenting hope and futile struggle was at an end ; 
and that he might be able to take up his life again and turn it 
to better purpose. It will be a source of consolation to all tender 
natures to know, that after all IVIr. Sheppard is not likely to die of 
a broken heart even if he should lose Minola Grey. 

Meanwhile Lucy in her room had read the letter from Minola. 
It was a letter which it had cost much pain to write and surely 
gave much pain to read. It was full of the proud humihation of 
a spirit that not willingly humbles itself, but which, brought face 
to face with the duty, does it to the full. Only one who like Lucy 
knew already most of the story it had to tell could well have 
understood all or half it meant to say. Minola took much for 
granted ; she was speaking only to the heart of her friend. She 
spoke in the briefest manner possible of her meeting with Heron 
in the Park, and of what Blanchet had told Lucy and had told 



334 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

her about it. She assumed that Lucy would know there was 
nothing in that chance meeting of which anyone had to be 
ashamed . except indeed the unworthy friend who had miscon- 
strued it, and over him, too, Minola passed with the fewest 
words. What the letter was meant to tell was that Minola had 
determined to leave England, and not to return for many, many 
years ; making no pretence at concealment of the truth that she 
did so because of an unhappy, a long-cherished, and a long- 
hidden love. Long since she would have gone away, Minola 
said, but that she dreaded to have her secret guessed at, and 
believed she could otherwise conceal it for ever. So far as the 
letter told, it was but the unhappy love of the writer for a man 
she could not marry. No word in it hinted at the possibility of 
the unhappy love being unhappily too well returned. Minola's 
only thought still was to keep Lucy and Victor Heron together. 

" So now, dear, dear Lucy, good-bye. I shall only be a day 
or two more at Keeton, and shall merely rush through London 
on my way outwards, so that I shan't see you any more for 
the present. But we shall meet again some time, when I have 
got over all this, and am not ashamed of myself or of you any 
more ; and we shall be friends, as we are. I could say ever so 
much more, but to what end, dear ? I leave you to do with my 
wretched secret as you please; to hide it or proclaim it just as 
you like ; only I can't claim for this mood of mind even the 
courage of desperation or the merit of self-inflicted penance, for 
I know well enough all the time how very safe it is in your dear 
little kindly hands. Say whatever you think right for me in the 
way of good-byes and of good wishes to your father, and mother, 
and sister, and to anyone else you think fit ; you could not 
possibly say anything too strong in the way of affection and gra- 
titude from me to all who are close to you and whom you love. 
" Always, dear Lucy, your friend, 

" NOLA." 

As soon as she could do anything for her tears Lucy sat down 
and wrote a few lines to Victor Heron, telling him that Nola 
was at Keeton, and that if he went there at once he might find 
her before she left England, and bidding him go to her, and 
wishing her and him all happiness. This letter she gave to a 
servant, telling him to take a hansom cab and find Mr. Heron 
wherever he was, and give it to him. Then Lucy quietly came 
downstairs and sat by her mother's side, and whispered to her : 

" Mamma, 1 am ready to go to Russia no"*- any time. I think 
we shall be much haooier there than here." 



« WHERE I DID BEGIN, THERE SHALL I EXD." 335 

The letter found Victor Heron in a sort of despair. He had 
written to Minola, and got no answer; he had gone to her old 
place, and found that his letter was still lying there. Nothing was 
known of Minola, except that she had left London, that she was not 
expected there any more, and that it was supposed she had gone 
to live " in France, or Italy, or somewhere ; " and tliat Mary 
Blanchet had gone with her brother to America. 



CHAPTER XXXVI. 

"WHERE I DID BEGIN, THERE SHALL I END." 

When Minola began to realise the fact that Mary Blanchet had 
actually left her, and that she was now for the first time alone in 
very deed, an utter sense of desolation came over her. It showed 
itself first in the shape of complete inaction. She sat down and 
moodily thought, and seemed to have nothing else to do. She 
had never before understood how completely helpless a woman 
may become, nor how much she is compelled by the necessities of 
her being, or by the social laws, or by all together, to be a dependent 
creature. The falling off of Mary Blanchet seemed to be the last 
blow. She had now not a friend left in London, not a friend indeed 
in the world, to whom she could turn for guidance or comfort. 
The mere physical sense of loneliness was something hardly to be 
borne. 

She ought to have found consolation, perhaps sufficient, in 
the knowledge that she had done no wrong, and that her troubles, 
such as they were, had not been the result of any fault of hers. 
But it is to be feared that Minola did not belong to that class of 
persons whose well-regulated minds can always show them when 
they have done no wrong, and who can therefore ^ATap themselves 
up in their comfortable mantle of self-satisfaction and go to sleep, 
as Byron did on the deck of the vessel when the storm was raging 
and he found that he could neither help nor hinder. Minola 
kept racking her mind to know whether she had not in some way 
doncAvrong, and been thus to blame for the troubles that had come 
on her and on so many of her friends. She felt as if in som.e 
way she must have done wrong to Lucy Money. Even when she 
found herself breaking into tears at the defection of Mary Blanchet, 
she went on asking herself whether there must not be something 
strangely defective in her own nature, seeing that she could not 
keep even poor Mary, for whom she had done so much, still faith- 
ful to her. 



336 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

One thing was clear to her during all her depression ; and it 
was that, as soon as she could rally enough of mental strength to 
do anything, she must efface herself from the association of the 
few friends she had known in London. She must absolutely take 
herself away from those to whom her presence henceforth could 
only be an embarrassment. All her scheme of lonely and proud 
independence had been a disastrous failure ; and her only business 
now was to get out of it with the least harm to those she still so 
much loved. If she were absolutely gone out of sight and reach of 
Lucy and Heron, all, she thought, might yet come right. The 
suddenly discovered love of Heron and her, too early seen un- 
known and known too late, would be but an episode in his life, 
to be looked back upon hereafter with kindly, unembittered emo- 
tion. For herself she should at least have always the sweet memory 
that she had loved and been loved when she was young. 

She prepared, therefore, after one miserable night, for what 
she called effacing herself. She had detennined to go and live in 
Rome. It became more and more an idea of hers that she would 
be able to find peace in Rome . that refuge to which so many 
sick hearts are always turning, they know not why. But in the 
mean time there must be arrangements made for enabling her 
project of living at Rome to be conveniently carried out. The 
best thing, therefore, that she could think of was to go down 
to Keeton and consult the lawyer in the hands of whose firm the 
yet unarranged affairs of her father and herself remained. She 
had a pleasant recollection of a motherly, kindly woman, his wife, 
who showed a deep interest in her during her last visit to 
Dukes-Keeton . that visit which was fraught with such momentous 
consequences. She thought, too, she would be glad to have a 
look at Keeton for the last time ; it should, she felt resolved, be 
the very last time. Wherever she might go afterwards, whether 
she remained in Rome or wandered on to some other resting- 
place, she was determined that she would not return to England. 
She remembered one or two pleasant girls in the lawyer's house ; 
and she thought that they would help her among them to make her 
arrangements, and get her some intelligent, well-brought-up Keeton 
lass, who would like to travel and see the world, and be her maid and 
companion, and who would have no brother, or sweetheart, or other 
male attraction of any kind whose memory must be dragged at 
each remove a lengthening chain. It would not take long to make 
these arrangements, and then she would efface herself from England 
for ever. 

She would write, of course, to Lucy and to her mother. But 
not, she thought, until she was fairly out of London, and so far 



« WHERE I DID BEGIN, THERE SHALL I END." 337 

on her way to her project of self-exile. It would be idle to try 
to ignore what had happened, and to go to see the Moneys and 
try to make them believe, or to seem as if they believed, that 
she was leaving England simply because she had taken a whim 
for travel. All that would be absurd now. For her own sake and 
the sake of all others concerned she had only to go out of Flngland 
as soon as possible, and begin for the second time a new life. 
Her arrangements for leaving town were soon made; and one soft 
spring evening she found herself straining her eyes from the window 
of a railway carriage for a last look at the London of her dreams 
and hopes. 

She found in Keeton all the welcome and kindness she had 
expected. She had no trouble in making her arrangements to 
go to Rome. She even went and paid a visit of friendly farewell 
to Mr. Saulsbury, and was civilly received, and tried at first to 
think the civility was warmth. But it soon grew plain, even to 
her disturbed powers of observation, that Mr. Saulsbury regarded 
her resolve to visit Rome as only a preliminary to her passing over 
altogether to the faith of Rome, and therefore could not bring 
himself to receive her on any terms of cordiality. He seemed now 
such an absurd old person to Minola, that she wondered how she 
could ever have been so foolish as to have any misunderstanding 
with him, or to complain of anything he said or did. 

She left him, never in all probability to see him again. He 
felt convinced that he had impressed her rather profoundly at this 
their final interview, and trusted that even in Rome itself some 
of his severe admonitions might reniain in her memory and ring 
in her ears. 

She wrote to Lucy the letter we have already heard of ; and 
then she began to feel as if she had taken leave of all the breathing 
world, and were about to enter a tomb. If she had ever been of 
the faith which so alarmed poor Mr. Saulsbury, it is certain that 
she would have gone to Rome with the resolve to shelter herself 
within one of its sanctuaries. 

A day or two passed away ; and she was almost on the eve of 
her going. She meant to travel so as to reach London at night, 
and only to drive from one station to another, and cross to the 
Continent at once. She got out a map of Rome many a time and 
tried to study it, as once she used to study the map of London, in 
order that when she arrived there she might not be a stranger. 
But she could not recall the old spirit ; and for fellow-traveller 
now she had not her friend Mary Blanchet, but a pretty and red- 
cheeked Keeton girl, who felt no manner of curiosity about Rome 
or any other place. 



338 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

One farewell she had to make, which could not be dispensed 
with. She must see the park and the mausoleum for the last 
time. She must be alone there. She must sit once more on the 
steps of that monument, and think of the past days there, and say 
it a good-bye for ever. She had been very sad there, and the 
sadness endeared it to her now ; she had had sweet dreams and 
bright hopes there, and the place where they had floated round her 
was sanctified like the spot where some ones we have loved lie 
buried. 

It was a calm, beautiful evening as she passed through the 
streets in Keeton and into the park. The business of the town, 
such as it was, was still going on, and she knew that she was 
likely to have the trees all to herself for more than an hour to 
come. She went on to the mausoleum and met no one. 

The voices of the woods were sweet, musical, and melancholy 
in her ears. She allowed the influence of the scene and its 
memories to sink into her soul. As she sat on the steps of the 
monument, she seemed to pass through a series of experiences as 
long drawTi out as those of the Persian king in the story, who 
during his moment's plunge in the water lived whole years of trial, 
and toil, and love, and loss. It was strange, and sweet, to close 
her eyes, and in the murmur of the trees to fancy that she 
heard the laugh of her brother as he and she played together in 
the old time that now for the moment seemed to-day again. 
Then there came back to recollection her girlish days ; her romantic 
fancies and hopes ; the heroes of her imaginary, harmless loves ; 
the weary home-life when no one within the four walls that were 
assumed to constitute her home appeared to care for her any more. 
And then Mary Blanchet, so kind, and quaint, and good ! Ah ! but 
if our lonely heroine meant to enjoy the dreamy, half-sensuous 
delight of her hour among the trees and the associations of her 
childhood, she ought not to have allowed any memory of Mary 
Blanchet to steal in among the recollections ; for with that name 
came all the rest : came the names of the friends she had lost ; 
came with such intensity of regret the thought of the one man 
whom he had so deeply loved, and whom she must never see more. 
One little moment of acknowledged love, one moment with a 
bitterness of secrecy and shame mingled in its passionate, fleeting 
joy . and this was all, and all was over ; and she was going away 
to lead a lonely life of renunciation and repression, and never to 
know one ray of happy love. It was hard ; she was so very 
young. She covered her face with her hands, and gave way to a 
passion of tears. But her tears, even in their starting, brought 
a new and painful memory with them . the memory of the day 



« WHERE I DID BEGIN, THERE SHALL I END." 339 

when she sat on those very steps before, and was resolved to 
leave Keeton, and go to be independent and happy in London ; 
and when poor Sheppard came up through these very trees and 
tried to make her love him. Her heart was softened to him now. 
He and she were in a manner companions in misfortune. She 
reproached herself now for having been cold, and sarcastic, and 
bitter to him tliat day. She wondered how she could have found 
it in her heart to be so hard and unkind to anyone who loved -, 
and she felt inclined to own that she deserved any fate that might 
have come on her since she had been so unsympathetic with 
others. She still kept her head down and her face hidden in her 
hands, and was ashamed, reluctant to look up and meet the soft, 
unpitying brightness of the sun. But she suddenly seemed to 
hear a sound among the trees that made her start, and she raised 
her face all flushed and tear-stained as it was, and, with her eyes 
glittering in grief and alarm, looked eagerly to see if anyone was 
coming, and if she must fly from her refuge. The last day when 
she sat in tears there, she was disturbed by the coming of poor 
Sheppard. He at least was not near to trouble her now. Yet her 
face kept its shamed and startled expression. Her quick ears had 
surely caught some sound v/hich did not belong to the rustlings 
and murmurings of the woods, every distinct voice of which she 
knew and could assign to the oak, or the beech, or the chestnut, 
or the plane that owned it. She stood up, ready to escape if 
anyone should be coming. Yes, surely that was the decided, 
rapid sound of some one approaching through the wood. She 
stood in startled attitude, ready for flight, looking more hand- 
some even than usual in her embarrassment and alarm. Up 
through that very path before her came poor Sheppard that 
day. See, there actually was some one coming . a man ; she 
could see him plainly. He was far enough away yet to allow 
her to make the most dignified retreat possible before he 
could reach the steps of the mausoleum. Did she try to escape ? 
No ; she stood still ; still as a statue, although not indeed so 
pale . her face crimsoned with wonder, dread, insane hope, all 
unspeakable emotion. "Am I losing my reason?" she asked. 
She did not know whether to advance or escape now ; and she 
could not stand any longer, but sat or fell on the steps of the 
mausoleum, and waited there for what was to happen. For there 
was no longer any possibility of mistake or doubt ; and it was 
Victor Heron himself who was coming with rapid steps towards her. 

He was breathless when he came up to her. 

" I knew I should find you here," he said, and he flung himself 
on the steps of the mausoleum beside her. 



340 MISS MISANTHROPE. 

"Wliere is Lucy . has anything happened?" she stammered 

" Many things have happened that concern you and mej I'll 
tell you all, only I must say this first . I am free to tell you how 
I love you, and to ask you to forgive me for not saying this long 
ago, when 1 ought to have known it ; and I have so much to say . 

and " and seated beside her he threw his arm round her, and 

tried to draw her towards him. 

" But Lucy, where is Lucy?" Minola asked, still endeavouring 
to retain her self-command and to withdraw from his clasp. 

" It was Lucy Avho told me you were here, and sent me to you. 
No, Minola, you shall not get away from me now ; no more cross- 
purposes 1 I have come for you. You do love me? You will 
not send me away? No; I'll never leave you again." 

" I was going away," said Minola, trembling, and still bewildered, 
and hardly knowing what she and he were saying. " I was going 
away to Rome for ever, to avoid you all, and leave you and Lucy 
to be happy and free ;" and the tears came into her eyes again, and 
she could not say any more. 

" Oh, you shan't go to Rome, or anywhere, unless I go witn 
you !" he said ; " but I have so much to tell you. Can you listen 
now, and understand, do you think?" 

" Oh. yes, I can ; I am not so absurd ! " she answered; feeling, 
nevertheless, very absurd . if it is absurd to be greatly agitated 
under the influence of a sudden hope that even yet seems a 
bewildering impossibility. 

Then he began to explain in very rapid and incoherent manner, 
and with his natural vivacity and impetuosity intensified a hundred- 
fold by the emotions of the moment. Much of what he said 
only she could well have followed or even guessed at ; some of 
it she allowed to pass by without quite understanding it. The 
burden of it all was clear, however : Lucy had found out that she 
did not really love him, and the breaking off of the engagement 
had come from her and her father. Heron was absolutely free. 

They talked together for a long time. It was strange ; he did 
not, after the few hurried utterances of the first breathless moment, 
say one word about their becoming man and wife. That was 
understood and settled somehow without any further speech. Only 
when he had done his explanation, and made repeated protestations 
of his sorrow for his own blindness and stupidity, and had declared 
half-a-dozen times over that she was the most generous creature 
living to forgive him and endure him, he at last drew her to him 
and kissed her . and their compact was made. 

There were many little intervals of silence. Now that the 
first rush of surprise and emotion was over, the lovers were rather 
shy of each other in their new relations. 



« WHERE I DID BEGIN, THERE SHALL I END: 341 

" I am distressed about Lucy in all this," Minola said " I 
wish she could be happy as well as I." 

Then she became thoughtful, and glanced inquiringly into 
Heron's face. She wondered if he had any glimpse of the suspicion 
that was strong in her mind, and that filled her eyes with new tears, 
and made her think of Lucy as a heroine of romance and a bene- 
factress. No, he had clearly no such thought. 

" Dear, sweet, brave little Lucy ! " broke from Minola's lips. 

" Yes, yes," Victor said, looking up with sparkling eyes, " wasn't 
it spirited and sensible of her ? She found that she really could 
not care about me, and she had the courage and truthfulness to 
say so. Why, another girl would have been afraid of being thought 
fickle, and would just have let the thing go on and made us both 
unhappy for life." 

Minola remained silent for a moment. Some day, she thought, 
she would speak with him of all that again, but not now. 

'. I have to go back to town to-night," he said. " I shall leave 
Keeton at seven, and be in the House in time for the division." 

" I think," she said hesitatingly, " I should like to go to Rome 
still ; I should like to be away from London and from all the 
people we know for a Httle." 

Heron thought for a moment. 

" It would be better, perhaps," he said decisively. " I shall 
be free in a few days, and I will go to you there. Besides, how 
glorious to be married in Rome ! " 

She did not speak. Her heart and eyes were too full. After 
a moment she rose. 

" We must go," she said. 

They both looked around them at the scene, the trees, the 
paths, the mausoleum, in silence. Victor, however, gave his looks 
after a moment to her upturned beautiful face. 

" You are happy, dearest ? " he asked, not doubtingly, but 
for reassurance of the happiness he felt. 

" Oh, yes, only too happy ! I cannot realise it . yet." 

"And you don't dislike men any more?" 

" No," she answered with a brightening face ; and added, 
*' Nor women either," for she was still thinking of Lucy. 

" No more Miss Misanthrope } " he said, and he drew her 
towards him again. 

" No more," she replied, with a blush and a smile ; and, 
hardly knowing what she did, she kissed him. 

Then he gently drew her arm within his, and, as the evening 
R'as beginning to fall, they went out of the park together. 


