SWEET AND TWENTY. 



CHAPTER L 

KODBN AND SON, OF IBONTOWN. 

Kuri augebis nmuerum, genus ferratile, 

Plautus. 

rriHE great ironmaster, Roden, had been 

transformed into Roden & Son. Price 

Roden was one of those men whom we often 

meet with in this iron age ; he had begun 

life with the legendary three halfpence, and 

was now the only man who knew the limit 

of his own wealth. A broad-browed and 

b2 



4 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

square-chested man of fifty, was Price 
Roden at this time; a man whose worst 
ailments all through life had been poverty 
at the commencement, and occasional tooth- 
ache afterwards. 

But what had Price Roden ever cared for 
poverty? . the toothaches of his pros- 
perity had vexed him far worse. He was 
one of those strong men who can live a day 
on a crust . or on no crust, if necessary. 
One thought had Price Roden since he began 
to think . . . that thought was Price Roden 
to the front. That strong resolve of his had 
made him one of the richest men in Eng- 
land, and one of the wisest, in some respects 
. ^whether one of the happiest, this history 
may possibly disclose. At its opening we 
find him in full enjoyment of his highest 
desires. His son, Paul Roden, has just 



BODEN AND SON OF IBONTOWN. 5 

come of age : on that day there is, of course, 
a grand celebration: on that day Master 
Paul is also to be taken into partnership. 

Paul, six inches taller than his sire, but 
as yet much less broad, looks very like him, 
as they stand on the terrace of Boden Hall 
in the sunset, and talk of the day's proceed- 
ings. The ironmaster and his son are alone. 
Paul's mother died long years ago. Price 
Roden was so determined to make his way 
that he never knew half the love his wife had 
for him. He hadn't time. Yet he assuredly 
loved her, in his rather rigid way ; and there 
were moments when a glance at her picture 
would bring tears into his unaccustomed 
eyes. No churl was Price Boden. 

You would not think it, to look at him 
and his son Paul, with the sunset burning 
in the lights of the great house behind them. 



6 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

as they talk over the events of the day. 
Paul is over six feet, dressed in good coun- 
try fashion, brown as a berry, hard as nails. 
You would rather take him to be the son of 
a country squire than of a great ironmaster. 
Paul has many weaknesses blended with his 
unquestionable strength ; one good point has 
he . complete belief in his father, to whom 
he confides all his troubles of youth, save 
only those which regard the opposite sex. 
Bjss and tell won't do, you know. Price 
Roden, who sees pretty clearly, contents 
himself with dropping words of wisdom into 
the ears of his son. He can guess . who 
cannot? . the temptations of a youngster 
who is a kind of prince in a large community. 
But it strikes him, as it would most fathers 
in such a position, that it is possible to say 
too much on any such question. And as to 



RODBN AND SON OF IRONTOWN. 7 

Paul, though people thought it neoessary to 
look after their daughters when he was in 
the neighbourhood^ yet there was something 
in those calm gray eyes of his which might 
have proved to a physiognomist he would not 
be troublesome to the opposite sex unless he 
was greatly tempted. Laziness is often a 
fine substitute for virtue ; and Paul Roden 
had quite as much laziness as his father had 
activity. It is a question of the casuists 
whether the man who likes work or the 
man who doesn't like work does the most 
mischief. It will be found investigated in 
Leo Rheineckkts: Insohbilia SoliUa, vol. xxiii., 
p. 889. One thing is quite certain : Roden 
liked work, and his son liked play. Ex- 
tremes meet, I always maintain; work and 
play are convertible terms : what was work 



1 



8 ttWJUT AID 

to Price Boden would have been phy to his 

80D. 

Tbongh Price Roden saw that his son was 
not exacdy of his own type^ he loved him 
none the less. Price Roden had passed 
through a hard time, had begftn with 
nothing, had made himself a millionaire, had, 
when the period of prosperity reached him, 
softened under its influence. I shall have 
to talk of Irontown by-and-by ... of its 
library, its clubs, its happy arrangements for 
the many thousand men Roden employed. 
He worked out all these things with a 
curious simplicity ; he seemed to have in his 
brain this idea \ I ama iwrhing^man^ and 1 
Hmk I can find out aU that working-men want. 
So he tried. He went in for both mental 
and sensual supplies. Irontown grew to a 
great place, but the master was everywhere. 



BODBN AND SON OF IRONTOWN. 9 

It would have been thought half wrong if a 
girl had married or a baby been christened 
without the master's consent. And usually he 
was present. He loved his people. He 
was one of them. 

There was a struggle in this n^an's mind 
though, and a perplexity ; and his dear son 
Paul was the cause. He, Price Roden, was 
born of the common folk ; he had no accurate 
notion of his father and mother; and here was 
young Paul growing up, the best boy in the 
world, but with quite other ideas. Now what 
would come of Irontown, which he had 
made, under the rule of Paul, whom he had 
begotten ? He loved both ; who shall blame 
him for being sorry that he loved Paul 
better of the twain ? Of course he ought 
to have secured the prosperity of his de- 
pendents without reference to Paul ... so at 



10 SWEET AND TWBNTY. 

least a republican would say. But Price 
Boden, who had begun life as a mere 
labourer, and by sheer force of genius made 
himself a great iron-master^ was unable to 
agree herewith. He thought over the sub- 
ject long and painfully, in connexion with 
the future : and he at length determined 
that his will should allow Paul to do just 
as he pleased. 

He was right. 

Price Roden, who, I dare say, was making 
many thousands a year, might have brought 
up Paul as a country gentleman. He had 
married into a good family, and might have 
found no difficulty in cultivating the society 
of the aristocracy. Many a noble lady 
would not disdain Paul for a son-in- 
law. Beautiful daughters of noble parents 
can be bought for money . ^bought as you 



RODBN AND SON OF IBONTOWN. 11 

would buy a stephanotis for your button-hole 
in Covent Garden. But Price Roden did 
not look at life in this way. He had worked 
hard all his life, and was still working ; and 
instead of bringing up his son in such a way 
that he would wisely spend the money his 
father had amassed, he apprenticed him early 
to the business : looking upon him, in fact, 
as born to carry on the business. If 
Mrs. Roden had lived it might have been 
otherwise. In her life-time there was plenty 
of good society to be found at Roden Hall 
from time to time. Her relations and old 
associates often came to stay there ; but after 
her death there were very few visitors* 
Mr. Roden dropped back into his old way 
of life, caring only for his business. There 
was an occasional gathering of some few rela- 
tions at Christmas ; but, during the rest of 



12 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

the year, the visitors were principally people 
with whom Mr. Roden had some dealings in 
the course of his business. So Paul had 
seen very little of society. He hated the 
business, although he tried to persuade his 
father that he liked it ; for he really cared 
for hit father, and saw how he was wrapped 
up in it. He had at first endeavoured to 
settle down to the plodding life that his 
father had cut out for him ; still, as Horace 
says, 

**' Naturam ezpellaa forca, tamen naqne recniret," 

and Paul was getting restless, and had an 
intense longing to do something different, 
and to meet with some one who understood 
him. The same energetic restless tempera- 
ment had made his father become a great 
man, but Price Roden would not be able to 
sympathize with his son's restlessness, for he 



BODEN AND SON OF IRONTOWN. 13 

could not understand energy being expended 
on anything not connected with iron. Some 
ladies of the neighbourhood had already 
marked down Paul as a good match. 

** You see, my dear," said Lady Barbara 
Chitty to Lady Betty Chatty, over a quiet 
cup of tea, '^ land is always encumbered, but 
iron isn't. Mr. Roden will have a larger 
income than most dukes, and no drawback. 
I should like to find him a wife." 

^^ Hadn't you better find him a grandfather 
first ?" retorts Lady Betty, famous for little 
spiteful sallies. 

'^ 0, grandfathers are quite gone out of 
fashion," says Lady Barbara. "Are you 
quite sure you can remember yours ?" 

He would have been such an unpleasant 
old gentleman to remember with any did- 
tmctness^ having done exactly everything an 



14 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

aristocratic maiden lady's grandfather ought 
not to have done, that Lady Betty did not 
pursue the subject. As to Paul Roden him- 
self, he had not yet troubled about marriage. 
He knew that he would inherit a large for- 
tune ; this, perhaps, made him a trifle selfish 
and careless. He felt that the world was 
at his feet, and that in time he would be 
able to do just as he pleased. So he could 
wait to pick and choose before he need 
marry, and he meant to enjoy himself in the 
meanwhile. Sometimes in his conversations 
with his father, when Mr. Roden was im- 
pressing business on his son, he would 
shew this selfish and careless side of his 
nature. Then the stem old ironmaster 
would come down on him rather sharply ; 
but he could not conceal from him how 



RODEN AND SON OF IRONTOWN. 15 

much he loved him, and Paul was ready to 
take advantage of his love. 

One day, after Paul Roden's coming of 
age, and joining his father as junior partner, 
he was strolling along the lanes which lead 
from Irontown to Westbury. He was think- 
ing ; he was wondering. He had not quite 
made up his mind what he ought to do in 
the world, or whether he and his father 
were quite in accord, or whether either of 
theiu was at all in accord with the mighty 
multitude of working men whom they em- 
ployed. There was thunder in the air. 
There was a whisper that Labour meant to 
defy Capital. The question had agitated 
Irontown: it had, indeed, formed an im- 
portant element in the conversation at the 
dinner given in honour of Paul's majority. 



16 SWEET AKD TWENTY. 

" There are men down here paid to pro- 
duce excitement/' said the Rector, a young 
man^ with plenty of energy, but impossibility 
of experience. 

** It may be so,*' said Price Roden, quietly 
drinking his port. "They must manage 
their own affairs : I will manage mine. If 
they came to me in the good old way, men 
to the master, and told me they had a 
grievance, why, Td lose money to help 
them. IVe been a working-man myself, 
Hunsdon, and I know all they have to 
suffer : but I have more to suffer now than 
I had when I made a pound a week. So 
long as my men came straight to me, I was 
glad to give in, when perhaps I ought not 
to have given in, on the strict principles of 
political economy; but the moment they 



V 



RODBN AND SON OF IBONTOWN. 17 

join a Unioiiy and listen to the nonsense of a 
lot of paid agitators, they may go their own 
way. I'll blow out all my furnaces before 
I concede anything. I have enough to live 
upon. If I hadn't, my son Paul has brain 
enough for us both." 

He gave the boy a pleasant look across 
the brilliant dining-table. 

" Thank you, sir," said Paul Roden. " All 
I have is yours. And I don't think an Eng- 
lishman with brain and muscle need starve 
anywhere. Still I like a country where 
there is beeswing in the port." 

He held his thin globular glass towards 
the light as he spoke. The beeswing was 
obvious. There was poetry in the wine. 

His father was amused. He forgot the 
menace of a strike among his workmen. 

VOL. I. c 



.'U 



18 8W1SXT AKD TWERTT. 

The evening passed easfly. But the mat- 
ter was perplexing Paul Roden's mind next 
day in the Westbuty lanes, when he was 
wandering along carelessly. He oould not 
solve the problem. Which was right, mas- 
ter or man ? Or were both wrong ? The 
lark sang high above him the glorious 
plaudit of earth to its Maker ; wild-flowers 
innumerable were bursting into life. But 
Paul Roden, immersed in political economy, 
passed them unnoticed. What can you ex- 
pect of a gentleman with a difficult problem 
to solve ? 

As he was solving his problem in the lane 
that leads from Irontown to Westbury . 
one of those sinuously winding lanes around 
the turns of which you may meet an enemy 
or a sweetheart . a lane with high hedges, 



RODEN AND SON OF IBONTOWN. 19 

deep ditches, old elms, and many other 
pleasaunces . ^behold 1 an apparition in pink. 
Pink calico, clean, weU-fitted, a pretty girl 
of sixteen inside the arrangement. Paul 
pulled up in a rather absent stride. 
" Well, Sarah, how aYe you?" 

Sarah curtsied demurely, with a " Very 
well, thank you, sir." 

Paul Roden looked at the child, and was 
touched by the yearning of her violet eyes. 
Boy and ^1 both needed something ; but 
what Paul wanted was not a Sarah, and 
Sarah might have been satisfied with some- 
thing less than Paul. Yet, such is the sad 
weakness of human nature, Paul deigned to 
flirt with Sarah on this occasion . . . therein 
making, perhaps, the greatest mistake of his 
life. The little girl got a few kisses under 

c2 



20 SWSET AND TWJBNTJf ; 

the trees. Sarah went home quite pleased 
with her adventure ; Paul went home great- 
ly disgusted with his. 
Yet! 



21 



CHAPTER IL 

THE LimiE OLD LABT OF WE8TBUBY. 

'' The darling delicate maidenhood of age 
I wonhip. I imagine this dear lady, 
Who may hare leen her serenty years, a beauty 
Before I drew the breath of air. I fancy her 
A pretty little girL I mi^^ hare petted hen 
Bat she pets me.'' 

TTTESTBURYwas a borough town some- 
^^ where about the time of Simon de 
Montfort. There is reason to believe that, 
five or six centuries ago, it was a place of 
importance; but it had stood still for all 
those centuries, and, although it sent a 



22 SWEET AND TWENTT. 

member to Parliament, the said member 
was actually nominated by the Lord of the 
Ifanon It was a little town of green 
meadows and clear rivulets, in a hollow 
among the chalk-downs . . . with a curious 
andent church, famed for its stained glass, 
its yew-trees, and its Latin inscriptions. It 
had a drowsy easy existence, and gave no- 
body much trouble. It was just the place 
in which an indolent man might make love, 
or a quiet scholar edit his favourite author. 
But Irontown arose! Some confounded 
fellow found iron just beyond the borough 
limits. It was no humbug, but a real dis- 
covery. Price Roden took it up. He want- 
ed iron just then, for he had contracts for a 
few thousand miles of rail ; and he had in- 
vented a process for doing something or 
Other with iron which I shall not attempt to 



THE UTrLE OIiD IiADT OF WESTBUBT. 23 

describe. Roden went to work with his 
usual energy. Tall chimney-shafts rose 
rapidly. Hills of cinders soon accumulated. 
Fires burnt hotly by night as well as day. 
A few years, and Irontown was a great fact, 
and Boden Hall was built, and around the 
Hall and the furnaces there clustered a 
population of fifteen thousand, all as busy as 
bees. Then Parliament extended the limits 
of the borough of Westbury (whose popula- 
tion was less than fifteen hundred) so as to 
include Irontown : and, of course, the next 
general election sent Price Roden to the 
House as member for Westbury. The 
power of the Lords of the Manor had de- 
parted for ever. 

At this time it was a Lady of the Manor 
. ^Miss Hannah Litton, aged about fifty-five, 
daughter and heiress of Reginald Litton. 



24 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

She lived at Westbury Place, which her 
father had built on the foundations of the 
old Manor House. 

Reginald Litton had lived much in Spain 
and Italy ; he had fanciful notions. When 
he returned home, and found the Manor 
House a dilapidated haunt for rats, he pulled 
it down, and built quite a small place after 
his own free fancy. He left the vast vaults 
and cellars, in some of which were noble 
stores of wine and of old ale. He made a 
quaint quadrangle of rooms round a central 
pattOj which he roofed with glass, and jBUed 
with rare plants ; he ran up irregular tur- 
rets^ and put odd-shaped rooms in unexpect- 
ed corners, and played all sorts of arabesque 
freaks. 

The place quite suited Mistress Hannah 
Litton, at this time Lady of the Manor of 



THE LrrrLE old lady of wkstbuey. 25 

Westbury. Every inch of her, and there 
were not many inches, seemed to support 
that dignity. She had calm gray eyes, and 
a smiling little mouth, unchanged by age 
from what it was when boys thought it only 
too kissable, and a hand soft and plump, 
and a figure like a girl's, and a voice like 
Cordelia's. She wore unusual colours in her 
dress, her favourite being grass-green, with 
falbalas the colour of dying rose-leaves* 
She sprinkled herself with diamonds here 
and there, and carried a long ivory fan, and 
looked altogether like a good fairy. 

She had watched from her oriels, over 
the green lawns of Westbury Place, the tall 
chimneys of Irontown casting black smoke 
into the sweet blue sky. She had seen the 
cinder-mountains grow. She had received 
(and courteously declined) soqjial offers from 



26 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

Price Roden. But, as ill-luck would have 
it, she could not help making Paul's ac- 
quaintance. One day her ponies ran away 
. . . she was driving an open carriage, and 
they shied at a wild-beast van on its way to 
Irontown, and bolted. Paul Roden was 
coming homeward from a walk ; he sprang 
into the road and caught them by their 
head-reins, and threw them on their 
haunches. 

" Thank you, sir," said Miss Litton, very 
coolly. " May I ask your name ?" 

" I am Paul Roden.'' 

"I am Hannah Litton. They used to 
call me Analytical at school. Will you drive 
me home? My wrists are not so strong as 
they xised to be." 

Paul, much amused, drove the old lady 
to Westbury Place, and accepted her invita- 



THE LITTLE OLD LADY OP WBSTBURY. 27 

tion to enter. She entertained him with 
the biscuit of Leman, and with the choicest 
Madeira. She said, 

" T don't like your father's ironworks, Mr, 
Paul Roden, but I like you, and shall be 
glad to see you again, when you feel dis- 
posed for a chat. Young men may learn 
something from old women, though they 
seldom think so." 

This interview resulted in a pleasant ac- 
quaintance. Paul told his father all about 
it, and his father said, 

" 0, go and see the old lady whenever 
you like, my boy. It may save you from 
being too attentive to the girls." 

So Paul went : and Miss Litton and he 
became very good friends. One of their 
amusements was to play chess together : 
the old lady had almost forgotten the game. 



28 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

but when she renewed her memory of it, 
Paul, who thought himself a strong player, 
found it very hard to win. Nor did he find 
it easy to beat her in the slight discussions, 
political some, but chiefly social, which often 
occurred between them. Miss Litton was a 
decided thinker. Paul, an ironmaster's son, 
had, of course, been brought up in the school 
of sound Liberalism ; he adored the trium-» 
viri . Cobden, Bright, Gladstone; he held 
the exciting but rather uncomfortable 
creed, that the first duty of man is to dis-» 
establish anything established that he happens 
to encounter. Hence, when he heard the 
Lady of Westbury talk, he was quite shock- 
ed. She thought the Church of England a 
blessing, and Free Trade a blunder I Paul 
went home astonished at such blindness. 
At the same time, he could not help ad- 



THE LITTLE OLD LADY OF WESTBLHY. 29 

mitting there was some intellectual power in 
an old lady who had won six Muzio gambits 
from him in succession. 

Their acquaintance improved, though Miss 
Litton declined any formal introduction to 
his father ; and, at the time my story began^ 
the old lady had become quite fond of him. 
She made him a present of a gold chron* 
ometer, by some marvellous artist, when he 
came of age. Two days later he walked 
over to thank her. 

This was rather a memorable day for the 
Lady of Westbury. There had reached her 
in the morning a letter from India, written 
by almost the only near relation she had, 
. ^her cousin, Colonel Luttrel. It told her 
that he was coming home in a few years, but 
that, in the meantime, he had sent forward 
his little daughter, Fay, under care of an 



^0 SWSST AND TWCNTV. 

English family, as her health was giving 
way to the climate. He felt sore his cousin 
would take charge of her. 

** Of course I will, the poor little thing !'* 
soliloquized the old lady; ^^but I expect 
shell be a dreadful trouble. I have heard 
they feed Indian children on anchovies and 
bitter beer. And of course shell talk 
nothing but Hindustani. And what a name 
to call the little mortal 1 Fay ! . a couple 
of ns would have made it Fanny ; and its 
are cheap enough. Well, I suppose I must 
take her in, and I suppose Ralph will come 
home some time or other." 

Colonel Luttrel had not married till he 
was forty, having too many other things to 
do. Hence this child of his was young . ^about 
ten, and seemed likely to give way to the 
climate which had killed her mother. Miss 



i 



THE LITTLB OLD LADY OF WBSTBURY. 31 

Hannah Litton, though rather taken aback 
at first, had a pleasant idea of a young girl 
about the house . a sunshiny musical child. 
The old maiden lady is the child's best 
friend. She loves " other folks' children." 

Soon after the post had arrived, Paul 
Roden called to utter his thanks. 

" It was too kind of you, Miss Litton 1" he 
said. 

" There was no kindness in it, Paul. It 
was pure selfishness. It gave me pleasure. 
Didn't it give you pleasure to stop my ponies 
one day, when they were bent on breaking 
my neck? Since. that time you and I have 
become very good friends, and have taught 
one another a lesson or two." 

" Why, how can I have taught you any 
lessons. Miss Litton? I have nothing to 
teach." 



32 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

"You have taught me that an iron- 
master's son may be a gentleman, which I 
didn't believe. And I have taught you that 
an old lady may be almost. but not alto- 
gether . as amusing as a young one." 

Paul laughed. 

"If all old ladies were like you, Miss 
Litton, the young ladies would have a poor 
chance. So far as I am concerned, I don't 
see much of them." 

"Why, you are a boy, Paul Roden," 
quoth Miss Litton, in her energetic fashion. 
" The less you see of girls for the next five 
years the better. Work. Weld iron. Come 
and talk to me. Don't waste your time in 
flirtation with these country girls, that are fit 
for nothing. If you grow as you ought, 
you are worthy of a noble woman. But 
you must make up your mind to grow in 



THE LTTTLB OLD LADT OF WESTBURT. 33 

mind as you have grown in body, and to 
resist all temptation to chatter with the first 
little minx that brings a pink cheek in your 
way." 

Panl, remembering Sarah Daw under the 
elms the afternoon before, felt that he was 
blushing. He shortly took his leave. Not 
long had he gone before Miss Litton was 
asked whether Mrs. Daw could see her. 

Mrs. DaWy whose parents had christened 
her Margery, after the heroine of the nur- 
sery-rhyme, was a hard-working half-starved- 
looking woman of forty, but hard work and 
want of food had made her look much 
older. She was always dressed in other 
people's old clothes, as she never could 
afford to buy new ones : but she turned the 
very oldest of clothes to good account. Her 
husband was the idlest and most gentle- 

VOL. I. D 



34 SWBBT AND TWENTY. 

manly labourer that could be found in the 
county. He had evidently been born for a 
gentleman, and they put him in the wrong 
place. Margery worshipped him, and spent 
hours in washing his Sunday shirt and mak- 
ing him look smart, and worked hard when 
he was idle. She was determined he should 
be a swell, though she were always meanly 
dressed. And Sarah, too, must be well 
dressed, for she had great hopes that Sarah 
would do well and help her in time. The 
gu:l had inherited her father's fine ideas, 
and wanted to be a lady. She had picked 
up education at the schools established by 
Price Boden, where plenty was taught, much 
more quickly than the other children, and* 
she had remained at the school much longer 
than usual, because she made herself useful 



THE LTFTLE OLD LADT OF WESTBURY. 35 

to the mistress, who begged Mrs. Daw to 
let her become a pupil-teacher. But Mrs. 
Daw fancied that Sarah would make more 
money as a lady's-maid, so she took great 
pains in teaching her to make her clothes 
and dresses : and, to judge by the pretty 
little coquettish cotton dresses that Sarah 
wore, she made good use of her mother's 
instructions. Mrs. Daw had been wishmg 
for some time to get a place for Sarah 
where she could be maid to little girls, and 
she thought perhaps that the Lady of the 
Manor, who was kind to everybody, would 
help her. 

She made a deep curtsey when she came 
into the room, and told her wants. 

"I think I can help you immediately, 
Mrs. Daw," said Miss Litton, "for I have 

d2 



36 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

heard to-day that a little relative of mine 
is on the way from India, and no doubt she 
will be here in a few days. I should like 
to have a young girl to be maid to her, and, 
from what you tell me, I should think Sarah 
would suit. I have seen very little of her. 
I know she is a pretty-looking girl, but I 
hope she is steady ?" 

^^ Oh I yes, ma'am, steady enough at 
present; but it's time she was kept more 
strict now, and if she is to live in your 
house, I shall feel quit>e contented about 
her, for I am sure, ma'am, that you looks 
after your servants, and cares for them as if 
they was your fellow-creatures, which is 
more than some great folks does." 

** Well, you had better send her here as 
soon as possible, so that she may be ready 
for Miss Luttrel on her arrival." 



THE LITTLB OLD LADY OF WBSTBURY. 37 

And SO it was arranged that Sarah Daw 
was to go to Westbury Place, to be Miss 
Luttrel's maid. 



38 



CHAPTER III. 



THE GARBS. 



Ureris ipse miBcr. 



TOHN and Robert Carr, who worked at 
^ the great iron factory of Roden & Son, 

were two as honest young fellows as ever 

stepped. They lived with their parents in 

one of Mr. Roden's most comfortable 

cottages, and made the garden a perfect 

picture. Their father, known in the 

vicinage as Fiddler Carr, was a real musical 

genius, always in request when there was a 

dance about. Indeed he had played many 



THK CABB8. 39 

a time at Roden Hall when thronged with 
Christmas gaests, and had amazed London 
mnsidans by making the strings of his 
instrument speak as if they had been under 
Sirori's magic fingers. Mr. Roden, being in 
a London auction-room one day, picked up 
a real Stradivarius, and made the rustic 
violinist a present of it. It would be im- 
posnble to describe his delight hereat. 

Carr, who had been for years an over- 
seer in the Irontown works, did not marry 
till he was about forty. His wife had been 
Mrs. Boden's waiting-maid ; was fifteen years 
younger than himself; rather shrewish ; a 
capital manager. They had two hojs only ; 
at the lime our tale begins, the eldest was 
just of age, the second a year younger. 
John was rather short, but very strong and 
stalwart ; Robert was just six feet in his 



40 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

stockings, and as agile as a stag. Both had 
been well educated, thanks to the Irontown 
schools ; and John Carr showed a natural 
aptitude for mathematics and mechanics, and 
had already made one or two useful 
suggestions to his employer. Price Roden 
always encouraged ideas among the people 
he employed. Robert Carr, though he had 
learnt the three R's thoroughly, had no 
scientific tendencies except a mania for 
geography. When he had holidays, he used 
to ramble round the neighbourhood for 
miles, exploring the hills and streams, and 
making rough maps of them. But his great 
fame was for athletic sport# He was a 
splendid football player, a three-figure man 
at cricket, a dangerous round-hand bowler, 
and the best back-sword player in the county. 
Also, he was a good rough-rider ; for he had 



THE CABRS. 41 

been attracted by the stables at Roden Hall, 
and the grooms had mounted him in his boy- 
hood on some of the young colts that were 
being broken for the saddle, and his fearless 
spirit made him their master. As he grew 
older Paul Roden made him useful in this 
way, and he earned many a sovereign by 

» 

bringing colts and fillies to their senses. 

It was pleasant to see the Carr family on 
a summer evening. The cottage stood alone 
in a garden with common land around ; on 
the common were many other cottages 
which Mr. Roden had built in the same way, 
and in whose gardens other family groups 
might be seen. But the Garrs were a pic- 
ture. The old man would be welcoming 
the sunset with some caprices on his violin 
. . . now and then drawing from its strings 
some pathetic minor melody . . . suddenly 



42 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

dashing into dance music that made the lads 
and lasses in the neighbouring gardens caper 
involuntarily. Mrs. Carr, of course, had 
supper on her mind; was in and out the 
cottage incessantly; was specially anxious 
that the potatoes should be done to a turn, 
for her son John grew the finest potatoes in 
Irontown. Sometimes it was Bob's aspara- 
gus required her care ; her younger son had 
made the asparagus beds from roots Paul 
Roden told the gardener to give him . . . 
and very proud he was of it. The boys 
would be hard at work in some way or 
other, till their mother's shrill summons to 
supper stopped spade and spud, and off they 
went to a frugal yet abundant meal. The 
remains of a loin of pork, potatoes white and 
flour-like, home-brewed ale . Robert Carr 
was the brewer, and knew his craft ; these 



THS GARBS. 4& 

were the viands one summer evening at 
eight o'clock. This was the time, sharp; 
the brothers liked a good tramp for 
an hour after supper, over the thyme-fra- 
grant turf, under a sky where stars were 
stealing through the dead sunset's 8affi*on. 
They were uncommon good friends for 
brothers, who too often are anything but 
friendly ; the diversity of disposition between 
John and Robert Carr made them like each 
other all the better. The boy who could 
back a horse admired the boy who could 
solve an equation, and versa vice. There 
was but one thing that was likely to cause 
any unbrotherly feeling between them : both 
were in love with Sarah Daw. 

This evening the matter was on their 
minds more heavily than usual. Gossip had 
told of the meeting between Paul Roden 



44 SWEET AND TWENTY, 

and Sarah. Mrs. Carr had heard of it. At 
supper, she said, 

" Well, so they say that little hussy, Sarah 
Daw, is going to be maid at Westbury Place. 
I'm sure I wonder Miss Litton will have her. 
I wouldn't, if I was a lady." 

Though both the boys were in love with 
the "little hussy," they were too much in 
awe of their mother to stand up in her de- 
fence. Anyone who ventured to contradict 
Mrs. Carr was quickly routed, horse, foot, 
and artillery. Her old man knew that, and 
confided only to his fiddle his opinions as 
to what his wife had to say. John and 
Robert said nothing, but the flavour seemed 
to depart suddenly from the crisp, crackling 
and flowery potatoes ; and Bob took a tre- 
mendous draught of his own home-brewed 
ale. 



THE GARBS. 45 

Mothers are by instinct jealous of 
their son's sweethearts. Mrs. Carr went 
on: 

" A girl like Sarah Daw to be walking 
with Mr. Paul Roden in the green lanes I I 
call it abominable I And they were seen 
kissing one another. I hope it was nothing 
worse. I don't blame Mr. Paul ; the little 
slut drew him into it, of course. 0, 1 know 
what men are !" 

The good woman had the talk all to her- 
self, for her sons uttered no word. As to 
old Carr, he had finished his supper, and 
walked out into the porch with a glass of 
amber ale that mocked the yellow-tinged 
sky, and was making brief remarks to his 
violin. 

Mrs. Carr got up to clear the table. Her 



46 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

sons, according to their habit, started for a 
walk over the common, Robert lighting a 
short pipe. They tramped away in silence 
for ever so long, till at last impetuous Robert 
broke out with . 

" I say, Jack . . . this won't do/' 

"What won't?" 

"Why, we're both in love with Sarah; 
we'd better have it out, or else we may 
quarrel." 

"I'll not quarrel with you, old fellow," 
«aid John Carr. 

"No, nor I with you. Jack. But how 
about Sarah and Mr. Paul ?" 

" Nothing in it," said John, gravely. " Mr. 
Paul is a gentleman, I'll swear. He gave 
her a kiss, perhaps, not thinking much about 
it ; unfortunately little girls like Sarah think 



THE GARBS. 47 

a deal of being kissed by a gentleman. It 
puts wild notions into their heads. She's a 
mere child, you know." 

" I don't know/' said Bob, puffing away 
at his pipe with tremendous energy, and 
striding over the turf as if walking for a 
wager. " I don't know, and that's a fact. 
She seems to me to know a devilish deal 
more than I do. I tell you what, Jack, I 
should like to know which of us two she 
likes best. If I knew that, I could be quiet. 
Let's both ask her." 

" My dear Bob, she's much too young to 
ask her such a thing." 

'^ Is she? She's older than you and I in 
thinking of such things. I'm sure I'm right. 
I can judge a filly better than you, old Jack. 
Look here, let's sky a copper, and whoever 



48 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

wins shall ask her first. Come . look alive 
. man or woman ?" 

He jerked a penny into the air. 

"Woman!" says Jack, almost without 
thinking. 

Woman it was. 

"You must ask her to-morrow," said 
Robert Carr. " And you must not tell me 
a word she says, and I will ask her the next 
day.'' 

" Agreed," said John Carr ; but he walked 
homeward in silent thought, doubting 
whether it was right to trouble so young a 
girl's mind with such ideas. Still he was 
forced to admit that there was some truth 
in his brother's statement as to Sarah Daw's 
precocity. No one would fancy she was 
only sixteen. Well, he would try the ex- 
periment. 



THE CABRS. 49 

As, beneath the starlight, the brothers 
neared the cottage in which they were born, 
they heard the violin uttering the plaintive 
wail of "The Flowers of the Forest." 



VOL. I. E 



50 



CHAPTER IV. 



TH£ STKIEi:. 



" Fermm in igne." 



TN the great dining-room at Roden Hall 
-*- Price Roden and his son were sitting 

over their dessert. The table was a white 

island covered with flowers and glass and 

china. On the wall hung superb pictures 

. . . portraits of Mr. Roden and his wife, 

and of Paul in his boyhood, playing with a 

dog. The light diffused through the room 

was soft and lambent. On the sideboard 

were superb cups and salvers of gold and 



THB STRIKE. .51 

silver, doubled by the reflective mirror be- 
hind them. An arched door opened into a 
great conservatory, from which came the fra- 
grance of exotic flowers, and the occasional 
notes of foreign birds, and the silvery splash- 
ing murmurs of a fountain. Windows were 
thrown wide open to the southern terrace, 
where a full moon was regnant over breadths 
of lawn and cycles of flowers and mystic 
avenues of trees. 

Very stern looked Mr. Roden as he lean- 
ed back in hw chair and professed to enjoy 
the beeswing that lighted up his antique port. 
He did not like to own himself baffled and 
annoyed, but he was so now; his men were 
on strike. The insurrection of labour had 
been moving gradually through the country, 
carefully fostered by some adroit and fluent 
organisers who got their living by such 

E 2 



52 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

agitations: but Price Roden, conscious of 
all that he had done for the class from 
which he rose, fancied that the invaders 
would leave his kingdom of Irontown alone. 
Full well he knew that he gave a fair day's 
wage for a fair day's work, and that he add- 
ed many facilities for instruction and enjoy- 
ment, out of sheer love for his people. 
There were no such cottages and gardens 
and schools anywhere in the iron district. 
It vexed him. He leaned back gloomily in 
his chair, and sipped his port. Paul was 
watching him the while, but said nothing. 
He could see intense wrath in the com- 
pressed lips and swelling veins and clenched 
hands ; but he waited till his father chose 
to speak. It was not long. 

" The dogs I" he said, in a low whisper 
of scorn. " After all I have done for them 



THE STRIKE. 53 

. I don't say it's a bit more than I ought 
to have done, . to be misled by the very 
first chattering idiot that is paid to come 
this way 1 I won't be bullied, Paul* I've 
been looking into our affairs this afternoon, 
and there's a good forty thousand a year 
from investments of one sort and another, 
apart from the business. You and I can 
live on that, my boy. I'll blow out all the 
furnaces. I'll pull down the buildings. I'll go 
abroad, and turn Rod en Hall into a lunatic 
asylum for the county. They were talking of 
building a new one." 

Price Roden, as he spoke, was white with 
anger« He thought he had strong reason 
for his wrath. The people whom he had 
treated with generous friendliness, having 
been one of themselves, had turned against 
him at the instigation of a noisy babbler* 



54 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

Mr. Roden was thoroughly in earnest. 
'*That fellow HoUiwell ought to be 
flogged out of the place," replied Paul : 
"but don't be too hasty, sir, in taking 
action. There are some of our people who 
wouldn't join in the strike on any account ; 
and, although they are the minority, we 
must remember they are our best hands. 
Would it be fair to the men whom you have 

« 

employed for years, and to their sons, who 
have just come into your employ, to stop 
the works altogether ? Take the Carrs for 
example ... a thoroughly good lot. You 
wouldn't have poor dear Fiddler Carr sell 
his Stradivarius to escape a workhouse, I'm- 
sure. And the two young fellows are as 
good as gold." 

"Paul," said Mr. Rod^fi, who was evi- 
dently softening, " your argument is a strong 



THE STRIKE. 55 

one. John Carr reminds me of my old 
self : he will be as rich as I am some day. 
But what do you propose to do ?' 

" Well, sir," answered Paul, ** I have no 
definite plan at this moment, and I suppose 
we had better wait till these people come 
forward with their demands. But I per- 
ceive there is a meeting this evening at the 
Blue Lion, when a Mr. Strete HoUiwell, 
from London, is to address the audience on 
their wrongs ; and, if you have no objection, 
I should like to go, and see if he can tell 
me any of* my wrongs.^ 

. . * 

Mr. Roden could not help laughing. 

" Go, by all means," he said. "You will 
be late, won't you ?" 

"No; the meeting is at nine, and it is 
not quite that now." 

Paul took leave of his father, and strode 



56 SWEBT AND TWENTY. 

off. The night was full of odour and silence 
in the grounds of Roden Hall : the night 
was full of tobacco-fume and noise in the 
streets of Irontown, especially as you ap- 
proached the Blue Lion. 

Mr. Strete Holliwell had in his lifetime 
been almost everything, from a begging- 
letter writer to a Methodist preacher. He 
was a small stout man with lank black hair, 
an oily visage, a fat stumpy hand devoid of 
finger-nails, and legs remarkably short 
which ended in feet remarkably flat. Mr. 
Strete Holliwell might be described as a 
large voice inside an ugly person. There 
was no subject on which he could not be 
eloquent for hours. When, as professional 
agitator, he came to Irontown, he went 
straight to the Roden Arms : but the cour- 
teous head-waiter, after a moment's examin- 



THE STRIKE. 57 

ation, assured him . . . with deep regret . . . 
that the hotel was full. So he went to the 
Blue Lion, a house famous for coccuhs m- 
dicus and a debating society. There let us 
seek him, in company with Paul Roden. 

Paul made a short cut towards the town, 
passed into a lane through a wicket-gate of 
which he habitually carried the key, and at 
the corner of the lane came suddenly upon 
the brothers Carr. 

" Why, John," he said, ** not at the meet- 
ing I I'm going." 

" You, sir 1" said John Carr. 

"Yes, I. I want to hear what these 
clever fellows have to say against us. If 
the masters are domg wrong, I for one 
should like to learn to do right. So would 
my father." 

" He always has, Mr. Paul," said John. 



58 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

" He has tried/' said Paul Roden. " Well, 
he can't go and hear this prophet, but I 
can go anywhere, and so I mean to go 
there. I may be taught something worth 
knowing." 

** We'll go with you, sir," said Robert 
Carr. " We weren't going, but if you think 
it worth while I dare say it is." 

So they entered the large room at the 
Blue Lion in company, these three. A 
good many people were rather amazed to 
see young Mr. Roden, unmistakeably aristo- 
cratic, though his father had been a working 
man, lounge in among the crowd. So many 
eyes were turned upon him that the lecturer 
was quite angry : but, not knowing who he 
was, and thinking he might perchance be an 
influential supporter of strikes, he did not 
come out with any personal allusion. Had 



THE STRIKE. 59 

he known I 0, had he known ! How he 
regretted his ignorance afterwards I 

He was most eloquent on the tyranny of 
capital over labour. He drew strong pic- 
tures of the ironmaster's unlimited cham- 
pagne and the ironman's limited beer. He 
contrasted the hall with the cottage. He 
maintained that, all men being naturally 
equal, it was criminal that one man should 
have more to spend in a week than another 
could spend in his whole lifetime. He told 
them that the time was now come to change 
these things ; that the sons of toil through- 
out the empire had resolved no longer to 
be ruled by prostituted gold; that he, 
"annumble individooal," had been chosen 
to preach the gospel of. equality to the citi- 
zens of Irontown. He proceeded to predict 
the millennium, and to advise everybody to 



.60 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

give up work at once. The masters would 
soon be starved into submission, and the 
Union would give them as much to live 
upon as if they were at work. 

"Then what's the good of working at 
all ?" cried some fellow from the centre of 
the crowd. 

Paul Boden, who had listened to this 
HoUiwelPs unctuous platitudes with some 
impatience, said, with a voice that rang 
through the room like a bell . * . 

" You all know me here. This man is a 
paid liar. Anyone who has a grievance, 
let him come and see my father, who will 
be as fair to you as he would be to me. 
When did any of you know him to do a 
mean thing? Come and say what you 
want: don't listen to the lying blarney of 
strangers. You ought to know Price Boden 



THE STRIKE. 61 

better by this time. He'll do all he can- 
for you, but he won*t let you bully him." 

There was a tremendous cry of ** Hurrah 
for Mr. Paul I" amid which uproar Robert 
Carr slipped away. He found half-a-dozen 
of his athletic friends ; leader among them^ 
they were ready to do his bidding. 

^^ Let's toss that fellow in a blanket^ 
George," he said to one of his cronies. 

The idea took like lightning : the biggest 
blanket the Blue Lion could produce was 
laid under requisition ; and the placid 
moon beheld (or might have beheld if sight- 
gifted) Robert Carr and three stalwart 
assodates tossing in a blanket the orator of 
the evening in front of the Blue Lion. Mr. 
Strete Holliwell was a light weight, and the 
four comers of the blanket were held by 
the four strongest young fellows in Irontown, 



.2 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

It may hence be imagiaed that he made 
isome fine gyrations in the air. Would that 
all agitators could be served in the same 
wayl 



63 



CHAPTER V. 

TWO WOOERS. 

*^ Two are better than one/' 

Ecclesiastes, 

npHAT a girl of sixteen only should have 
.*- lovers may seem absurd, but all who 

know village life in England are aware that 

it is not unusual. The human race, of both 

sexes, may be divided in two classes . ^those 

who grow fast, and those who grow slow. 

The second are, as a rule, the more valuable* 

The oak of England, tardy in its growth, is 

of greater worth than the gourd of the prophet 



1 



64 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

who amazed Nineveh, or than the shrub khar- 
dal, erroneously recorded as mustard in the 
gospel. You will often meet a weedy boy of 
sixteen or seventeen, who has already " seen 
life," by which he means experimenting on its 
vices, and who is in a chronic state of beer 
and tobacco. He lounges about the stables, 
is familiar with the grooms, is even more 
familiar with the female servants. He 
knows more than a healthy well-trained 
young fellow of twenty ; he will probably 
die early, or live a scamp. These are the 
fellows who pass their brief lives between 
the betting-ring and the fornix. These are 
the dregs of the race, the fo/ex civitatisj as 
Cicero put it. If they were taken in hand 
with authority, and sternly repressed, some 
good might be done with them. They 
were created for some purpose. Even the 



TWO WOOERS. 65 

Marquis of Hastings might have been made 
of some use to the world with a scientific 
system. 

The precocious girl is of the same type. 
She is a knowing woman at sixteen, whereas 
a healthy girl of that age is as simple as a 
baby. Such fast-growing young people are 
only too common ; it is usually found that 
they can resist an3rthing except temptation. 
If they are so far kept under control that 
temptation does not reach them, they may 
be developed into tolerable wives and 
mothers, and have, of course, large families. 
Maiden aunts were designed by Providence 
for the management of these forward 
hussies. Mothers are too kind to them. 

Sarah Daw was not of the worst class of 
precocious girls, but she certainly was pre- 
cocious, and wanted to conjugate Amo at an 

VOL. I. r 



66 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

age when she ought to have been declining 
Dominus. Any good judge of character 
would have at once seen that her future 
fortune or misfortune would depend on her 
falling into good hands. A wise and strict 
mistress at first, a loving yet resolute 
husband afterwards, would secure to this 
pretty frivolous child a happy life. The 
first she was about to have in Miss Litton, 
who knew how to maintain discipline, and 
would stand no nonsense. But as to the 
second ? 

John Garr carried out his agreement with 
his brother. He was very grave while at 
his work all through that day. John's work 
was important, for his mechanical ingenuity 
(which perhaps verged on genius) had al- 
ready given him a position in the scientific 
department of Roden & Son. Hence he 



TWO WOOEKS. 67 

always went through his day's work soberly 
enough; indeed, his hare-brained brother 
had chaffingly nick-named him ^* the centre 
of gravity." This day he assuredly was 
graver than ever. He had before him per- 
petually the picture of Sarah Daw, blushing 
and beautiful. What should he say to her ? 
What would she say to him P 

When evening came, he did not go home, 
but walked to where Margery's cottage 
stood, in a lane that came out upon the 
common. A few yards from the end of the 
lane was a well, where the cottagers just 
around got their water ; and as John Garr 
came along under the rose-flushed sky in 
the evenglome, he saw his pretty little 
sweetheart and another girl gossiping beside 
this well. Wells have been famous places 
for gossip and love-making from the days of 

f2 



68 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

the patriarchs . . . and earlier. As John 
Can* approached, Sarah's companion tripped 
away laughing, and he found himself with 
just the right opportunity. 

And how pretty Sarah looked ! She had 
only one of the common old red pitchers 
fuU of the cool well-water. What has be- 
come of those red pitchers from whose lips 
I used to drink icy water in my youth's hot 
summers? One never sees them now. 
Sarah was just going to balance this pitcher 
on her pretty head, when up came John 
Can*. She looked at him, and blushed. 
There was something in his eyes that made 
her tremble. The magnetic impulse passed 
from the one to the other the moment their 
eyes met. She knew that he would tell 
her his love. She palpitated from head to 
foot, like a sensitive plant ; but all the while 



TWO WOOBES. 69 

Paul Roden was in her mind. As to John 
Carr, having made up his mind, he was 
prompt enough. He came forward and 
said, 

" Sarah, I was coming to see you. Have 
you a few minutes to spare ? I want to ask 
you a question." 

" Ask anything you like, John," she said. 
" I am not obliged to answer, I hope ?" 

*. dear no," replied John Carr. " Do 
you think I would ask you to answer a 
question if you didn't like? But, Sarah," 
he went on, taking her pretty little soft 
hand . soft, though it had done plenty of 
hard work . "I want to talk to you seri- 
ously." 

"You always are so serious, John. I 
wish you'd be merry sometimes; anyone 
would think you were an old man." 



70 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

John began to fear that Sarah was not 
in a mood to listen to his proposal, but 
presently, seeing John looked pained, she 
looked up in her coquettish way, and said, 

" I was only joking, John ; you are al- 
ways so kind and good. Now what is this 
serious business ?" 

" I hear you are going to service at Miss 
Litton's, which wUl be a very good thing 
for you ; but I want to know whether, when 
you are a few years older, you could think 
of me as a husband. I shall be able to 
make you very comfortable, Sarah dear, and 
I love you so much that to make you happy 
would be my chief delight. What do you 
think about it ?" 

Sarah was crying. When she had got rid 
of her tears, she said, in a petulant tone, 

" You talk to me like a child, John Carr, 



TWO WOOERS. 71 

and yet you talk about marriage. How do 
I know what I shall do when I am a few 
years older ? If you had said, * Marry me 
now, Sarah,' I could have answered, * Yes,' 
or ' No.' But a few years older I Why, 
John, what an old man you'll be I You 
never were young, you know. It can't be 
thought of. I am not going to lose my 
liberty in that way." 

Sarah was thinking of Paul Roden all the 
while. She fancied he was in love with her^ 
and thought what a fine thing it would be 
if he would marry her. All sorts of pic* 
tures were passing fast through her brain. 
She imagined that she might one day be the 
lady of the Hall, and wear beautiful dresses 
and jewels ; and she thought how she would 
then patronise poor John. But then, again, 
she thought more soberly that Mr. Paul 



72 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

might mean nothing, and John would be a 
good husband, and would most likely in 
time have money enough to make her a fine 
lady. So she considered it best to give John 
an answer that would not be entirely a 
refusal. 

" You understand me, Sarah ?" said John. 
" I do not wish you in the least to bind 
yourself to me. You are a mere child, and 
it would be wicked of me to ask such a 
thing. I only want to know whether you 
could learn to like me in time. Be as free 
as you will . only let me see you now and 
then ; if you meet somebody else better 
suited than I, take him, and I'll come to 
your wedding, if you'll let me. I only ask 
you to let me talk to you now and then, and 
try to make you love me." 



TWO WOOERS. 73 

Sarah could hardly help being touched by 
this chivalrous modesty. 

"Well, John," she said, "I couldn't re- 
fuse that to a kind friend like you. I don't 
know how I may feel by-and-by, but just 
now the world seems in a sort of whirl, and 
I can't make out what I ought to do. I am 
glad I am going to Westbury Place, for they 
say Miss Litton is very strict, and I think I 
ought to be kept in order." 

John Carr laughed at this candid self- 
criticism. 

" I am sure you will do very well, Sarah ; 
and I shall call and see Miss Litton, and ask 
her to let me see you once a week. Do you 
object ?" 

"But then won't people think we are 
engaged ?" 

.* We're second cousins, Sarah; we've a 



74 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

right to a walk in the fields together. If 
you get tired of me, you have only to say so. 
I shan't trouble you with love-making while 
you are so young." 

He picked up her pitcher for her, and 
carried it home, and gave her a kiss at the gar- 
den gate. He walked gaily up the lane, think- 
ing his interview had been rather successful. 
Sarah, the prettiest possible girl at this mo- 
ment in his judgment, would in four years be 
a lovely little woman. He, John Carr, knew 
that in four years he should be making some 
hundreds a year. He saw his way very 
clearly. Roden & Son could not do with- 
out him. He felt happy as he strode home- 
ward. Yet, as he neared the cottage, he 
began to grow sorry for his brother. He 
knew that hot hasty impetuous temper. 
He had a loving unselfish character, this 



TWO WOOERS. 75 

John Carr. What would Robert do ? He 
was bound by agreement to say what had 
happened. When he reached the garden 
gate, there was his tall brother looking after 
his asparagus beds; and Jack looked so 
thoroughly miserable at that moment, that 
Bob became jubilant, and thought himself 
sure to win the day. "Poor Jackl" he 
thought ; "he is so serious in everything 
he does, that I am afraid he will feel it.'' 
That these two noble young men should be 
wasting a thought over a pretty little piece 
of flesh and blood like Sarah, seems a pity ; 
but love will make fools of the best of men. 
Little Sarah could not sleep that night. 
When her mother returned from the village 
shop, where she had been buying some odds 
and ends to make Sarah look tidy for her 
new place, she remarked . 



76 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

" So John has been up. I met him at the 
end of the lane. He looked very bright." 

But Sarah, who thought herself a good 
deal cleverer than her mother, did not in- 
tend to confide in her, so said, 

" Did he ? I thought he was just as grave 
as usual." 

"Ah! Sally, my girl, he'll make you a 
good husband 1 They're both good young 
men, your cousins are, but John he's more 
steadier like, and he'd make you a better 
home than ever your poor father's been able 
to make for us." 

" Lord I mother, I'm too young to think 
about marriage. I'd better be thinking how 
I shall get on in my new place first." 

The sly little maid was thinking very little 
of her place, but knew that was the best 
way to stop her mother. 



TWO WOOERS. 77 

" Well, my dear," said her mother, as she 
laid out on the table some stuff she had just 
bought, and proceeded to cut out a garment^ 
.^ I hope the next clothes I have to make 
for you may be for your wedding." 

Sarah was glad to get away to bed, and 
think over everything. She had always 
been fond of her cousins John and Robert^ 
but she had looked upon them almost as 
brothers, and she preferred Robert of the 
two. But she knew John would be a good 
husband for her, and if Mr. Paul should not 
mean anything she would have John. She 
was afraid she should not often have an 
opportunity of speaking to Mr. Paul at 
Westbury Place, though she would often 
see him there. She would make up her 
mind to try to look like a lady, that she 



78 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

might please Mr. Paul, and she would have 
an opportunity of seeing how ladies behaved 
at Miss Litton's, and she would do like them. 
She never doubted doing well in her new 
place, for she imagined she should fascinate 
Miss Litton, and have > her own way com- 
pletely ; and thus she fell asleep, with her 
giddy little brain full of wild fancies, while 
her mother stitched away in the room below, 
that she might have her clothes ready in 
time. 

The next evening Robert Carr walked 
down the lane. Sarah was in the garden 
alone, having just put her little brothers to 
bed, . her mother had gone on some errands 
when it was dusk, and she could no longer 
see to work. She was loitering among the 
flowers. She was to go next day to West*- 
bury Place, and she looked rather sadly at 



TWO WOOERS. 79 

the old-fashioned cottage-garden, where she 
had grown ranunculus and auricula, and 
which now she should see only once a week. 
She was stooping over a flower-bed when 
she heard the latch of the garden-gate, and 
saw tall Bob Carr stride up the narrow path 
of gravel. It struck her that he was a hand- 
somer man than his brother ... ay, than 
even Mr. Paul, 

She put out her hand to shake hands. 
He caught both her hands in his, and looked 
at her with an intensity of longing. The 
light in his eyes frightened her . . . though 
it need not, for there never was a softer 
temper in a strong man than Robert Carr's. 
But when he held in his strong hands the 
soft frail fingers of this girl whom he madly 
loved, what wonder there was a frightening 
fierceness in his dark brown eyes P 



80 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

** Sarah/' he said, *' I love you ! . will you 
love me ?"" 

The girl was paralysed. John Carr had 
been beforehand, and she had a great liking 
for John, and she felt that she had given 
him a kind of promise. She was stunned. 
Robert Carr was still holding her hand, and 
gazing fiercely into her eyes, as if trying to 
search into the soul behind them. 

"0!" she exclaimed, "why didn't you 
come yesterday ?'* 

" Yesterday !" he cried, letting go her 
hand; "good-bye, Sarah. You won't see 
me again in a hurry." 

He gave her a cousinly kiss ; ran down 
the garden path and jumped the gate ; was 
out of sight in an instant. Sarah, looking 
after him, wondered whether she had done 
right to reject that hot impetuous love. Such 



TWO WOOBBS, 81 

love comes not every day. It differed, she 
could feel, both from Paul Roden's patronis- 
ing flirtation, and from John Carr's sober 
kindness. Robert Garr did not make his 
way home by the accustomed path across 
the common. He walked rapidly to Iron- 
town railway station. He just caught a 
train, and took a third class ticket to 
London. 

Sarah remained in a state of bewilder- 
ment all that evening. What ought she to 
have done ? 



VOL I. G 



82 



CHAPTER VI- 

PAT, 

. . . made of white sea-^sheUs, 
Only just a soft pink tinge 

Fxinted where the Sun's foot dwells 
First upon .the foamy fringe. 

The Ladder of Light. 

fTlHE next day Sarah arrived at Westbury 
Place, with all her little worldly pos- 
sesions ; these latter being packed up in a 
neat box covered with a whity-brown 
material bound with red braid. When you 
see a box covered with a chemise of this sort, 
you may depend upon it that it belongs to 



FAY. 83 

a female, though I never can make out why 
women thus cover their boxes when they 
travel. Is it to preserve the box, or is it to 
hide the shabbiness of it ? Sarah was rather 
timid as she took her place among Miss 
Litton's servante, some of whom had grown 
elderly in the service ; but the old cook en- 
couraged her, and the butler patronized her, 
and asked after her mother, and she soon 
felt at home. She thought it would be wise 
for her to try and please the elder servants, 
and thus get the more liberty . ^for elder 
servants know how to tyrannize over younger 
ones, and she had such a pretty winning 
manner that she soon infatuated the old 
cook. Moreover she was so handy with her 
needle in making dresses, or putting together 
bits of finery, that she soon won over the 
other female servants by doing such little 

g2 



84 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

things for them. But the arrival of her little 
mistress made her rather unhappy . as will 
be presently seen. The little lady reached 
Westbury Place one pleasant summer even- 
ing. 

She had only as yet known India. How 
different seemed England I Children are 
not quite so unobservant as their elders often 
think ; and their little troubles are as trying 
to them as those which come at a later age. 
I can remember to this day troubles which 
happened to me at about two years old, 
though I have forgotten most of those which 
came to me in manhood. It appears to me 
that we neglect young children. 

Little Fay Luttrel, passing from India to 
England, underwent a great change. But 
she was rather a cool child. She took the 
world easily. I suppose she had inherited 



FAY. 85 

this tendency from the Colonel, her father, 
of whom it was said that nothing could sur- 
prise Luttrel except the English being beaten 
in a bayonet-charge ... a thing as yet hap- 
pily unknown. Fay, when she saw Eng- 
land, after passing the mighty ocean, be- 
held a strange new world, but showed no 
surprise. Born in the world of Buddha 
and Brahma, she had somehow been infect- 
ed by that love of absolute tranquillity 
which belongs to Asian creeds. Nothing 
astonished her. She had the questioning 
intellect of the English, and wanted to 
know what any new thing meant ; but she 
had also the grand oriental repose blended 
therewith . . . the tendency of mind which 
renders one quite careless whether any an- 
swer is given to any question one asks. 
I am writing of a girl of eleven. It may 



86 SWKET ASD TWKSTX 

be said that of a g^l so yoang it is absurd 
to make analysis of character. An immense 
mistake ! Han is nndiangeable. 

Miss Dtton was prepared to make the 
little girl very happy. The annt looked on 
the niece (for annt and niece they called 
each other) as a child to be petted: the 
niece r^arded herself not without reason^ 
as a woman of the world. Bom in the 
calm air of Asia, yet daughter of a gallant 
intrepid Englishman, this child had some 
power in her. Nor must we forget her 
mother. Englishmen in India generaUy 
make odd matches: Mrs. Luttrel was a 
French girl bom in the east. Addle d'Arpen- 
tigny. She was all fire and force, all poetry 
and art. She was too brilliant to live. Fay 
did not remember her mother. 

Now Miss Luttrel had been christened 



FAT, 87 

Euphasia^ by her mother's desire: but, as 
the Colonel had seldom time for so many 
syllables, he re-christened her Fay, When 
this was explained to the little Lady of 
Westbury Manor, she was deeply gratified, 
and in times of ceremony insisted on calling 
her niece Euphasia. 

"What a lovely place, auntl" said thb 
same Euphasia, when a cup of orange pekoe 
and some brown bread and cream had re- 
newed her vitality. " And so this is Eng- 
land I Aunt, dear, I have dreamt about 
England all my life. I have thought to 
myself, I am an English girl, though I was 
born so many thousand miles away. I have 
tried to think what an English house ia 
like, or an English garden, or an English 
field with cows in it, as I have seen pictures 
of. And what can London be like, aunt ! 



88 SWEET ASD TWEHTT. 

London mnst be like one of the cities in the 
^ Arabian ISights ' that I have read abont. 
Shall I go there, annt?" 

ThoB the diild chattered on* It was a 
pretty picture to see the tall delicate child, 
with her mad fuides, and the dear Lillipn* 
tian old lady, with her infinite courtesy and 
kindness* It took not long for them to be- 
come good friends. 

More than once it has occurred to me, 
talking to men who have spent their lives 
in India, that England owes to India almost 
as much as India to England. Our best 
men go out there: restless fellows, who 
might make revolutions, if such a gross idea 
could enter the mind of an English gentle- 
man* Asia, the seat of repose, teaches them 
the loveliness of lassitude : and when they 



PAT. 89 

return to England, they are disposed to be 
quiet. 

Fay Luttrel showed herself an odd mix- 
ture of English restlessness and Asiatic calm. 
She had a delicate transparent-looking skin^ 
which the slightest blow would seem to 
injure ; and she would sometimes sit in an 
attitude of perfect repose, her long dark 
eyelashes falling on her cheeks: but the 
moment she moved or spoke you could see 
the activity of her limbs, and the fire in her 
eyes. She quite astonished Miss Litton by 
the way she could climb a tree, or get over 
a five-barred gate ; and, for the first week 
or two, the little old lady was in constant 
fear of some accident happening to her. 
She was already as tall as her aunt . ^for 
Indian children grow fast, both mentally 



90 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

and physically, . and, like other Indian 
children, she was tyrannical to servants, but 
docile, and even courteous, to anyone placed 
over her. 

Sarah Daw returned to the servants' hall, 
after attending Fay to bed on the night of 
her arrival, in rather an unhappy state of 
mind. She confided to the cook that her 
young mistress had treated her like a slave, 
and she never should be able to stand it. 

" 0, never mind that," said the cook. 
" I've heard as them Injins always does treat 
servants like that, because they're used to 
black people out in those parts . which they, 
can't be slaves neither, for I've heard as how 
slavery were done away with, but must be 
next door to it. I dare say the young lady 
will soon be like us civilised English, for I 
am sure mistress won't be for having any 



FAY, 91 

slavish ways here. In this country, thank 
God, we does our duty in that state of life^ 
as the Catechism says, and we gets paid for 
it." 

This did not altogether console Sarah. 
She had been for some time picturing her- 
self as a great lady in time to come, and now 
to be ordered about as a slave hurt her dig- 
nity. But at night, in her own little room^ 
she consoled herself by looking in the glass, 
and thinking how pretty she was. Then 
she tried on a gown that her mother had 
made hurriedly for her when she first heard 
of her new place ; and she was satisfied with 
her appearance in the gown, and wondered 
when she should have a chance of showing 
herself to Mr. Paul in that costume. Then 
she thought how well she would look if she 
could wear beautiful lace and diamonds, as 



92 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

Miss Litton did : she would be rich perhaps 
some day, and then she would wear them. 
But she was determined to get some lace di- 
rectly she had her wages, for lace set off the 
complexion ; and she knew she could buy 
lace cheap enough, which she thought would 
look almost as good as Miss Litton's. She 
had not arrived at the point of culture by 
which she could distinguish common lace 
from real lace, although she did in time, and 
much preferred left-off trifles to the new 
stuff of the shops. 

The next day she found her young mis- 
tress as tyrannical as ever, and yet there 
was something so irresistible about her that 
she could not help obejdng her. One mo- 
ment she would order her as if she were a 
slave, and the next moment speak to her in 
so pretty a manner, as if she were an 



FAT. 93 

equal. Sarah looked a little unhappy at 
her position, but the cook cheered her up, 
and gave her good advice. 

"Now cheer up," she said, "and bear 
all ; for us folks as works must bear with 
them as doesn't. And, after all, we gets 
paid for it, and what more can we want, as 
the Bible says, than food and raiment? . 
which I takes to mean vittles and clothes." 

But Sarah's ambition went beyond mere 
victuals and clothes. 



94 



CHAPTER VIL 

IN TOWN, 

I lived, 1 loved, 1 lingered in the conntry till 
The great green woods became an awM agony, 
The bng still roads nnntterable weariness ; 
And then ^ said, *' A little fool my sweetheart is ; 
She loves not me ; she only loves herself . ^I guess 
111 go and see if London beats the villages." 

Tlie Comedy of Dreams, 

'O OBERT CARR knew little of London, 
^ having been once there, or may be 
twice, in his boyhood. But the great 
thought of London weighs on the minds of 
boys when their prim preceptors see it not, 



IN TOWN. 95 

of girls when dry duennas are quite un- 
aware. There are cities that become ideas. 
If you utter the word Rome Ihree ideas pass 
through the mind . conquest, debauchery, 
superstition. A city is not a mere geogra- 
phical expression, or the accident of a river. 
If a competent historian could find suffi- 
cient materials for the history of London 
for about twelve centuries, it would be a 
book of delicious fascination. I fear that 
both historian and materials are wanting. 

What is London? England, with all 
England's imperial dependencies crystallized 
into the smallest space possible. It may 
seem a paradox, but the smallness of Lon- 
don strikes me more than anything else 
about my favourite city. I have known 
that city longer and more intimately than 
any other part of the world. It is too 



96 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

compact ; it wants expansion terribly. The 
ridiculous nearness to each other of the 
Bank of England, the Mansion House, and 
the Royal Exchange ; or of the Tory Carl- 
ton and Radical Reform and other clubs in 
Pall Mall, strikes one as absolutely imbecile. 

m 

There is room in the island . ^why could not 
the Tories have built their dub within the 
shadow of Stonehenge, and the Whigs on 
the summit of Snowdon ? Why, to put the 
matter clearly, should narrow streets lead 
to huge buildings of enormous cost, whose 
incomparable ugliness is the greatest pride 
of the true Briton ? It is strange that Eng- 
land, which has produced the greatest of 
poets, has not yet had a great architect. 
Wren was a fine imitator; but cannot we 
English set up a Michael Angelo of our 
own ? I fancy our finest geniuses in 



IN TOWN. 97 

architecture have never caught their chance. 

Architecture is a supreme art, and no 
man can be an architect without the true 
poetic faculty. Sculpture and painting are 
subordinate to it. Music is meant to move 
in mighty edifices. The great architect has 
great work to do. 

When Bob Carr reached London, he was 
puzzled what to do. Accident took him to 
Westminster, and thirst to a public-house ; 
and in that tavern, where the ale and the 
whiskey were good, he happened to meet 
an Irish recruiting-sergeant, who had more 
blarney than usual on the tip of his tongue. 

" Now there's the handsomest man in the 
world," said Sergeant Macarthy, as Bob 
Carr came in for his glass of ale. " What 
a cavalry officer he'll make if he lists while 
he's young I Why, Stapleton Cotton is 

VOL. I. H 



98 SWBET AND TWENTY. 

nothing to him, and he was the beauty of 
the world ! Now, Colonel, what will you 
take to drink ?" 

Bob Carr knew perfectly well this man 
was a humbug, but in his present disgusted 
humour we must have something to do, and 
he thought he might as well enlist in a 
regiment of horse as do anything else. He 
knew he could ride, and he thought he 
could fight. He grew friendly with the 
Irish sergeant. Sergeant Macarthy saw he 
was not dealing with a fool, and felt con- 
siderable anxiety to enlist this young fellow 
in the Queen's Houyhnhnms. So he treated 
him dexterously ; and Bob Carr took Her 
Majesty's shilling; and next day he went 
into barracks, and gave infinite satisfaction 
to the riding-master. The dep&t of the 
regiment was in Woolwich, but the regiment 



IN TOWN. 99 

was in India, whither Bob Carr was to be 

drafted off pretty quickly. He did not care. 

He felt he should like to do something in 

the world better than mere business. Is it 

not nobler to use a sword than to forge a 

sword ? 

He did not feel disposed to return home 

before he left England, for he hated the 

thought of seeing Sarah again ; and he knew 

his mother would scold him terribly ; and 

he had visions of the pathetic notes of grief 

his father would draw from his Stradivarius ; 

and he. was not at all anxious to have John's 

logical mind exposing what he knew to be 

the extreme folly of his course. So he 

wrote to all of them, in his offhand way, 

with a kind of rough pathos in his hasty 

words ; and the consequence was, his father 

and mother and John all came to London 

h2 



100 SWEET ASD TWENTY. 

to see him oS. fiddler Carr and his wife 
had never visited London before, so for 
them it was a great undertaking. 

The interview between this passionate 
wanderer and his relations can scarcely be 
described. Fiddler Carr had not his 
Stradivarins with him, and by no other 
means conld he express his opinions fully 
on any topic. Mrs. Carr had brought her 
tongae with her, and, by Jove ! she used 
it! 

**You, Bob, that was such a good boy 
long ago, and never cried when I smacked 
you, or when the soap got into your eyes 
as you was washed . ^to think of your 
wanting to go for a sojer among then 
InjinsI And I do verily believe" . (she 
got verily out of the New Testament, and 
thought it emphatic) . " that it's all because 



^^mtmm^m^^m 



IN TOWN. 101 

that flighty little thing, Sarah Daw, would 
have nothing to do with you. 0, Fm 
ashamed of such little wicked wenches as 
come between boys and their fathers and 
mothers.*' 

" Poor Sarah is not to blame/! said Bob 
Carr. *' She's a good girl, mother. But I 
am restless, and want to go somewhere, and 
I may as well fight in India a& do anything 
else*. I'm in Colonel's Luttrel's regiment, 
you know, mother. And don't you think," 
he said, turning gaily towards her, *'that 
your troublesome son can serve the Queen, 
if he can do nothing else ?" 

All this time Fiddler Carr was playing 
imaginary tunes with his right hand on his 
left arm, and wishing he had a Stradivarius. 
Could he only have thrown his ideas on the 
subject into music, he would have been 



102 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

happy ; words were too gross and material ; 
besides, his wife always had far the best of 
him at words. Betty Carr was a finer 
scolder (which, below a certain stratum, is 
the equivalent of orator) than you will easily 
meet with. 

She was equal to this occasion. 

"If Sarah Daw's a good girl. Bob, I 
should like to see a few bad ones. I never 
let myself be kissed by a gentleman I knew 
wouldn't marry me ; and I was a prettier 
girl than that hussy." 

You should have seen Fiddler Carr's 
fingers on the imaginary Stradivarius just 
then ! It was true . every word. She had 
always had a temper of her own . a " spirit 
of her own," she called it ; but Sarah Daw 
would have been a very insipid beauty 
alongside of Bessy Carr in her youth. Why, 



IN TOWN. 103 

the fire was in her eye now, and the glow in 
her complexion ; and as she grew vivid in 
her talk, both boys wondered whether they 
were not fools to be in love with a girl 
whose prettiness was trivial to the beauty 
their mother still possessed. 

John Garr came in as mediator . the 
more readily from the sudden sense that he 
perhaps had made a great mistake. For 
when he saw his mother looking beautiful in 
her anger, he recognised the fact that this 
little pink-and- white Sarah Daw could never 
develop into anything like that. People 
said of Bessy Carr that she had a temper . 
how in the world could she have managed 
her imaginative musical husband, and those 
two strong heterogeneous sons of hers, with- 
out a temper ? A woman who can't scold 
is never of much use. I like a woman with 



104 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

a temper. Its very existence 'shows that 
she loves her husband and children. 

Said John Carr : 

" Well, mother, we must forgive dear old 
Bob, and hope he'll do great things. Look 
at him," he went on, grasping his brother, 
and with tears in his eyes, ^^ isn't he a fine 
fellow ? Isn't he fit to fight for the Queen ? 
Lord, he'll do something noble, that shall 
make us all known through the world 1 
And I'll stay at home and stick to business, 
and take care of you both. Can't you trust 
me, mother?" 

"0, I can trust you, John," she said, 
sinking into a chair, and bursting into tears. 
" But I didn't want to lose Bob. I didn't, I 
didn't !" 

'^ I shall come back safe and sound, dear 
mother," broke in Bob Carr. " I'm sorry 



IN TOWN. 105 

now I did it, for your sake ; but Fm pledged 
to the Queen, you see, and I should be a 
coward to turn back. And as to Sarah 
Daw, mother, don't call her a hussy, please, 
for I think she's a good girl. But since all 
this happened, and I see how you and father 
feel it, I wish Td never seen her." 

" 111 try to think the best I can of her, 
Bob," said Mrs. Carr ; " and Fm glad you 
says what you do ; and as you must fight for 
the Queen, I hope you'll do it well. But I 
can't easily forgive that girl for sendmg my 
boy away. I shall think of you watering 
the asparagus. Bob dear, and leaning over 
the wicket gate to look at the sunset across 
the common, till I called you to supper. 
You won't get cold roast pork and home- 
brewed ale in India, Bob. 0, you might 
have stayed with us !" 



106 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

It would be impossible to give an idea of 
how the imaginary Stradivarius was all this 
time being played. 



107 



CHAPTER VIII. 

OLD AND YOUNG. 

*^ No true poetic story shall be told, 
Of those who, young, are prematurely old ; 
But many a poet has divinely sung 
Of those who, old, are wonderfully young." 

WESTBURY PLACE continued to be 
attractive to Paul Roden . grew 

more attractive, indeed, when he came to 

know its new little inhabitant^ Fay Luttrel, 

the oddest gayest wildest wisest child in 

the world. Miss Litton lost a little bit of 

her delicious tiny dignity, when Fay, who 

was already tall enough to look down on 



108 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

the lady she called Auntie, played tricks at 
^hich Auntie could not help laughing. Miss 
Litton, a student of human character, who 
knew what manner of man her cousin 
Luttrel was, felt no particular astonishment 
at his daughter's vagaries ; but Fay amazed 
Paul Roden, and frightened the servants, 
Sarah Daw amongst the rest. Sarah, who 
was in her seventeenth year, thought, of 
course, that in becoming personal attendant 
on a young lady of about ten, she was some- 
what in the position of a nursemaid; but 
«he found this child as tall as herself almost, 
and with a fine imperious temper, such as 
India is apt to develop, and with a know- 
ledge of the world that made poor Sarah 
feel she was a fool. She was despotic in 
her ways, and soon brought Sarah into a 
4state of complete servitude. 



OLD AND YOUNG. 109* 

But, if despotic in her ways to her servi- 
tress, how winning were her ways to Miss- 
Litton I She was as submissive as the- 
needle to the magnet, for she loved Aunt 
Hannah from the first moment. Fay was a 
girl who could submit and obey with perfect 
pleasure, but only when she believed it 
right. You could lead her with a thread of 
silk, but you could not hold her with a 
collar of iron. 

She delighted Paul Roden, but she treat- 
ed him with unconscious caprice. Even at 
ten a clever girl of good blood, who has 
developed rapidly through warmth of cli- 
mate and much knowledge of society, is an 
intuitive judge of character. Fay Luttrel 
somehow understood the character of Paul 
Roden. She felt, without knowing it . ^for 
how, at her age, could she know it ? . that 



110 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

he was a man of sense by nature, yet very 
nearly a fool by circumstances. Iron had 
entered into his soul, though he assuredly 
had not the least idea of it ; but it was de- 
tected by this little girl Fay, who was all 
flowers and fun, all roses and romp. They 
romped together. Fay was. too active for 
Mr. Paul, who had been training himself 
into moving in a dignified manner. One 
July afternoon, when he looked for her in 
a pleasant summer-house, where she might 
often be found, he received a small douche 
bath, from a basin she had deftly fixed over 
the door. With the dampest of shirt-fironts 
he started in pursuit of her, for there she 
was laughing at him behind the yew-hedge ; 
but in a minute she had flown over a five- 
barred-gate like a bird, and established her- 
self on a branch of a great cedar which she 



OLD AND TOUNG. Ill 

knew he dare not climb. She sang some 
defiant air, in Hindustani, fretting Paul 
Eoden, who could not understand a word 
of it. 

When Miss Litton heard of this adven- 
ture from Paul Roden himself, she laughed 
a pleasant laugh, and said, 

"Yes, she's her father's true daughter. 
She'll be a great woman for somebody ten 
years hence. I mean to live for her sake, 
Paul. I am sorry for your linen, my dear 
boy, but if you ^vill romp with the girls you 
must take the consequence. They always 
get the best of it first : they sometimes get 
the worst of it after." 

At this moment Sarah Daw brought in 
some coffee. She looked very pretty, in the 
trimmest costume, stiitable to Westbury 
Place. Miss Litton caused her maids to 



112 SWEET AXD TWESTY. 

dress after her own notions, and coriously 
quaint this girl looked as she came simper- 
ing in with coffee in caps of e^-shell china 
on a sQver tray. But Paul Roden thought 
of the young romp in the cedar, and was 
suddenly struck by the absolute difference 
between a lady and a handmaiden. What 
would that wild little creature Fay Luttrel 
be ten years hence? Something very far 
above Sarah Daw, clearly. He smiled at 
himself in the thought that he was half in 
love with a mere child, who had made his 
shirt-front look like a dish-doth. 

Just then she entered through the open 
windows of the paUo. She was a pretty 
thing to see. Her low bodice showed nice 
white shoulders; her short frock showed 
deerlike legs in white stockings. She made 
Miss Litton a curtsey ; she always did it : 



OLD AND TOUNG. 113 

then she came over to Paul, and put her 
hand in his, and said, 

''You forgive me, please. It was only 
fun. I know it was naughty. Papa used 
to scold me when I did such things, so T 
wasn't so troublesome as I am now. But I 
can't help being troublesome. I expect I 
shall be troublesome to myself and to 
other people my whole life long." 

The girl spoke with a strange seriousness, 
as if some vision of the future came before 
her eyes. She certainly impressed both 
Miss Litton and Paul Roden. Almost be- 
fore she had finished her sentence, she saw 
a favourite dog in the vatiOj and rushed 
away to have a romp with him. 

*'She is a very remarkable child," said Paul 
Roden, who could find nothing better to say, 
since it would not do to tell Miss Litton he 

VOL. T. I 



114 SWBBT AND TWENTY. 

heartily wished she was ten years older. 
Yet he had that wish : and it is my opinion 
that, if he had ventured to tell Miss Litton 
of it, she would have thought much better 
of him. 

" I suppose I must get her a governess," 
said Miss Litton, reflectively. " It is a great 
nuisance, for I hate strange faces, Mr. Paul, 
and you are the only stranger I have en- 
dured for a long time." 

"I am very grateful, Miss Litton," he 
said. 

** Well, you're a nice boy, and I want to 
educate you, Paul. But that can wait. A 
governess t Horrid idea I I can't send the 
child away to school. Hugh would never 
forgive me if I did. Besides, I hate board- 
ing-schools, where there's a fearful mixture 
of low society, and Vm afraid there's often 



OLD AND TOTING* 115 

a good deal of vice. Besides, she'd run 
away I" 

*' That she would I" said Paul at once, in 
a tone that sounded like approval. 

"But you know, Paul, if I have a 
governess, I expect Fay will make her 
life miserable. I really don't know what 
to do." 

" Get the most commonplace woman you 
possibly can, Miss Litton, and tell Fay 
beforehand to regard her as a necessary 
article of furniture." 

" You are getting epigrammatic, Paul," 
said the old lady. " Your advice is good. 
I think Fay may be induced to see it in 
that light." 

So Miss Litton set to work to get a 
commonplace woman as Fay's governess. 
She was well aware that if she aidvertised 

i2 



116 8WBKT AND TWENTY. 

for a commonplace woman she would not 
get one, so she resolved to go to London for 
a day's shopping, and take Fay to show her 
that dty, and make arrangements with a 
^' tutorial agent '' for seeing a few specimens 
of the class. On second thoughts she 
decided to spend the night in town« and to 
give Fay her first theatrical entertainment. 
The little old lady of Westbury knew 
London and knew the world ; and when a 
note from her reached the Clarendon, rely 
on it a choice suite of rooms was retained 
for her. She wrote at the same time to Mr. 
Carey Delisle, a gentleman of Norman 
extraction, who has devoted his time to in- 
troducing tutors to pupils and the reverse, 
with a tact which has met with deserved 
success. Mr. Delisle is a remarkably useful 
person in this way. If you want a 






^:: 



5 I 



OLD AND YOUNG, 117 

Cambridge man cheap, to teach your sou 
mathematics, he is sure to have on his list 
some uncommonly clever fellow who has 
just been rusticated and wants money. If 
you are blessed with a boy who tmll smoke 
and drink with the grooms, and won't work, 
he can find you a school where, if the birch 
rod does not bring him into order, the cat- 
o'-nine-tails will. If you want your 
daughter to have all the manners and 
accomplishments of the highest aristocracy, 
he will mention a select seminary where a 
baronet's daughter is thought rather low, and 
where nothing is taught under five guineas 
a lesson. If, on the other hand, you have a 
female child with a tendency to smack her 
governess's face, and make love to all the 
boys about, high or low, he can place her 
for you where mild discipline will soon 



118 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

effect a cure. He knows what people want^ 
and where it is to be had, and does not give 
trouble by futile introductions. 

Mr. Carey Delisle, at Miss Litton's 
request, waited upon her at the Clarendon. 
A tall slim gentleman of fifty is Mr. Delisle, 
with a Poole surtout buttoned close to his 
waist, and boots that only Hoby & Humby 
could have made, and trowsers in which he 
must have been born. There is one dia- 
mond on his hand . . . only one, but it 
represents ten pounds a year at least, at the 
present rate of interest. He is a man to 
impose on anybody ; but neither he nor any 
other son of man could impose on Hannah 
Litton, who reads him through and through, 
and smiles an inward smile. 

"Pray sit down, Mr. Delisle," she said. 
" Do you think you can find me the sort of 



OLD AND TOUNG. 119 

person I want ? My letter was brief, for I 
dislike writing; but the requirement is 
easily stated. The child for whom I want 
a governess is eleven years old ; born in 
India, she is precocious ; she is clever, quick, 
physically strong ; she will only learn what 
she likes. I want as her governess a rather 
quiet person, good-tempered, not too clever, 
but with knowledge enough to guide 
the child as to what she wants to know. 
Can you find me such a person?" 

At that moment in rushed Fay (who was 
not expected to be present at this interview), 
and who ran up to Miss Litton with a beau- 
tiful bouquet in her hand, exclaiming, 

" O, Auntie, look I some one has sent me 
these lovely flowers, and here in the middle 
of this camellia is a scrap of paper. See !" 



120 SWEET ASD TWENTY. 

Miss litton examined it throogh her 
spectacles, gravely. On it was written . . . 

^FloweiBforaFaj 
To take to tlie FUj." 

'' Who can have sent it. Auntie ? And 
am I going to a Play, really? O, I am so 
delighted r 

She danced a strange Hindoo dance, 
heretofore unknown to the Clarendon, in 
her childish delight. 

" Fay, dear," said Miss Litton, " we wfll 
talk of all this presently. Run away, for I 
have business with this gentleman, whom 
you do not seem to see." 

Mr. Carey Delisle had risen from his seat 
ceremoniously. Fay, who actually had not 
seen him, at once made the deepest curtsey 
possible, whirled round, and was off in a 
moment. As the door closed, Miss Litton 



OLD AND YOUNG, 121 

gave him a questioning look. He smiled 
softly. 

" I think I know the very person who will 
suit the young lady, whom I am very glad 
to have seen. She is quiet, homely, unpre- 
tentious ; would never take offence or turn 
cross ; knows a great deal of most things, 
because she has worked hard and conscien- 
tiously. But she has not an original idea of 
any kind." 

" Fay has more than enough," said Miss 
Litton. " How old is this paragon of dulness, 
and what does she want a year ?" 

" She calls herself twenty-eight," said the 
polite Mr. Delisle, "and I never cross- 
examine ladies as to age. She asks forty 
pounds a year." 

" Ah. Well, as to her personal appear- 
ance. How does she dress ? Is she ugly ?" 



122 8WEET ASiD TWENTY. 

" Not at all ugly, I assure you ; a pleasant 
comfortable look about her. And she 
dresses quietly, but in good taste. Tu tell 
the truth, I shall feel pleasure in doing 
something for her, as she is just the sort of 
governess most people would despise. I 
was afraid I could not place her. She has 
nothing showy about her, but I believe she 
is thoroughly conscientious." 

" Send her here as soon as you can, Mr. 
Delisle. How soon do you think ? I want 
to do some shopping." 

'* In an hour," he said, rising and taking 
his departure with an air unrivalled by Mr. 
Turveydrop himself. 

Miss Litton rang for lunch, and she and 
Fay sat down to a quiet little refection be- 
fore shopping. Fay was hilarious. The 
mysterious bouquet made her too wild to 



OLD AND YOUNG. 12S 

eat even the lovely lemon-pudding for 
which the Clarendon luncheons are famous. 
She chattered away. What a place London 
was ! Who could know she was there ? 
Who uHndd be so kind as to send her flowera 
and verses ? 

** And, Auntie, are we going to the play ?"" 
** Yes, child, we are. Now run away to 
the other room, for I am expecting a 
visitor/' 

Fay danced off, her gay young brain 
alight with the imagination of what she 
should have to enjoy that day ; and a very 
few minutes later Miss Clumber was shown 
into the room. She entered rather awk* 
wardly and shyly, ushered by a trim waiter, 
in the glossiest black and the whitest linen 
. ^much better dressed than the average 
Curate. She had probably never seen such 



124 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

a courtly servitor before. A glance at Miss 
Litton re-assured her. 

" Sit down, Miss Clumber,*' she said, in 
the silvery voice that all her friends loved 
to hear. " Mr. Delisle has told me all 
about you. I want a governess for a wild 
little girl of eleven . ^my cousin's child . 
though she always calls me Auntie. I want 
her to learn what suits her best, without 
being pushed in any particular direction; 
and it is most important that she should be 
carefully treated, for she would rebel at the 
first unkind word. Are you disposed to 
take charge of such a difficult case ? The 
child comes from India, and knows more of 
the world, in some things, than you or I. 
She rides, leaps, swims, climbs trees, . does 
all sorts of wild things ; but she is affection- 
ate and clever, and would not tell a false* 



OLD AND TOUNG. 125 

hood on any account. What do you think, 
Miss Clumber?" 

"I shall be very happy to try, Miss 
Litton. Perhaps, as mine is a slow and 
quiet disposition, I may exercise a tranquillis- 
ing influence on the young lady." 

"I hope you may," said Miss Litton, 
laughing ; " it would do her good to tran- 
quUlise her. But when can you come? 
Your terms, Mr. Delisle says, are forty 
pounds a year." 

" I can come at once," she said. " Forty 
pounds will be quite sufficient." 

" I don't think so," said Miss Litton ; " I 
shall give you a hundred. Forty pounds 
are a servant's wages." 

The governess did not speak, but there 
was a look of delight and astonishment on 
her countenance which caused Miss Litton 
to say, 



126 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

" Are you surprised ? I like to pay the 
price a thing is worth." 

" Ah r she said, in reply ; " I am sure I 
hope I may be able to earn it. I help my 
poor mother, who has only about twenty 
pounds a year of her own ; and I shall be 
able to make her so much more com- 
fortable." 

Hannah Litton rose from her chair, and 
held out her hand to the governess, saying, 

" You will suit me. Miss Clumber." 



X 



127 



CHAPTER IX. 



AT THE PLAY. 



" The play's the thing !" 

Hamlet. 



T>AUL RODEN came to dinner. When 
he heard of the journey to town, and 
the evening at the theatre, he asked leave 
to join the party, in order to see the child's 
delight at the first dramatic entertainment. 
It was agreed that Fay should know nothing 
about it beforehand, so as to give her a series 
of pleasant surprises. 

" If I am to surprise her with a governess 



128 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

when we come back," said Miss Litton, with 
a quaint grimace, as if she had just sipped a 
glass of cheap sherry, " I may as well sur- 
prise her with something pleasanter in Lon- 
don." 

" Let us hope the governess will not be 
so bad as you think," said Paul Roden. 

Miss Litton herself had a surprise, for 
that hope was realised; she saw in Miss 
Clumber the very person she wanted, who 
evidently would never get out of temper or 
in the way. She felt half inclined, in her 
gratitude, to give Mr. Carey Delisle a finer 
diamond that the one he wore. 

Fay at the dinner-table, dressed all in 
white for the coming enjoyment, with red 
flowers in her hair, and one at her breast, 
and a soft red flush of excitement in her 
eager face, was such a picture that even the 



AT THE PLAY, 129 

imperturbable waiters were struck by it. 
But her delight did not destroy her babyish 
coquetries and caprices. 

'' I am so sorry it was you who sent me 
those lovely flowers, Paul," she said. 

" Why ?" he asked, with a look of sur- 
prise. 

^' 0, because I hoped it was something 
romantic. I thought perhaps the young 
Prince of London, if there is such a being, 
had seen me coming to the city, and fallen 
madly in love with me, and sent me this. 
But there was no language in the flowers, 
nor any talisman in the bouquet." 

'^What nonsense you talk, Fay I" said 
Miss Litton. *^Such things never happen 
anywhere." 

" 0, you have never read the * Arabian 
Nights,' or heard of the wonderful things 

VOL. L K 



130 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

that happen in our Indian cities. I could 
tell you such stories." 

" Tell Paul some day or other," said Miss 
litton. " Now eat your dinner, or you will 
not be well enough to go." 

Fay obeyed : indeed, the excitement had 
not much injured her always healthy appe- 
tite. Moreover, she never thought of re- 
belling against Auntie's authority. 

As they drove through the lighted 
streets of London, she chattered her amaze- 
ment. 

"There must be magidans here," she 
cried, "as there are in India, only they 
must be better ones, to make so much light 
everywhere. And ! now, how all the 
people are running! Do you see that light 
in the sky ?" 

Their driver had just pulled suddenly 



ATTHBPLAY, 131 

to the near side, for he hear^ the hoarse 
shouting of firemen to clear the way, and 
the next moment a fire-engine passed them 
at its fiercest pace. Fay clapped her hands 
and cried : 

"I told you so! That's a chariot of 
djinns. Where are they going ? Are they 
good djinns, or bad ones?" 

" Good, certainly," said Paul, with a laugh, 
seeing it was vain at that time to explain. 
^'I hope you are not frightened, Miss 
Litton r 

" dear no," she replied. " I only hope 
it is not our theatre that is burning." 

The carriage passed across one corner of 
the square in which the fire was burning. A 
lurid red light filled the air, and the heat 
was hardly bearable. High up on the para- 
pets of a vast building Fay could see 

k2 



132 SWEET ASD TWENTT. 



Strangely-clad beings in the veiy midst of 
the flame, spouting water from long flexible 
pipes, while a dozen en^es were throwing 
upward their mighty volleys of water. She 
looked on in silence till they had turned a 
comer, and left the sight behind. Then she 
said, 

^'The djinns of water are fighting the 
djinns of fire.** 

They were at the theatre in good time. 
The orchestra had begun playing music so 
lively that Fay would have danced around 
tiie box, only she could not keep her eyes 
from wandering around the immense house. 
It was very full; the pit crammed; tier above 
tier of boxes crowded. Money was being 
turned away. You could only see an empty 
stall or two, reserved, probaby, for some 
crusty critics or late diners. 



AT THE PLAY. 133 

" How lovely !" said Fay. " And yet you 
«ay you have no magic 1" 

The house on this occasion was filled, not 
by what is styled legitimate drama, a phrase 
very difficult to define, but by a piece com- 
bining the lightest conceivable dance-melo- 
dies with the lightest conceivable costumes 
for the pretty girls who danced. The 
favourite actress of the day, young, finely- 
formed, a charming dancer and singer, play- 
ed Aladdin . for it was the story of the 
Wonderful Lamp she was to see. 

How she started when the curtain rose, 
revealing to her a second world of more 
wonderful beauty, whose existence she had 
not guessed. Was it real or a dream? 
The stream of nymphs in tissue, who were 
fairies or angels surely, throwing themselves 
into wondrous attitudes in the dazzling light; 



134 SWEET AND TWEITTY. 

the quaint Oriental city, and the boy Alad* 
din at play; the old magician, the caves 
where diamond and emerald and amethyst 
fruit grew on the trees ; the slaves of the 
Ring, and the still greater slaves of the Lamp; 
the Sultan's daughter ; the palace that, with 
its one unfinished window, rose like an 
exhalation in a single night; the vile old 
sorcerer crying, " New lamps for old !" Fay 
knew all the story well, and her eyes were 
fixed upon the stage all through with a 
charmed intensity. She followed Aladdin, 
whom she fancied a beautiful boy, all 
through his surprising adventures ; watched 
his miraculous dancing, airy and graceful,, 
yet never unseemly ; listened with delight 
to the gay melodies which he sang in a full 
contralto voice. The actress had that night 
one true triumph ; for to Fay Luttrel's eyes 



AT THE PLAY. 135 

she was no actress at all, but Aladdin, a 
subject of the Caliph Haroun al Raschid, the 
victim of a magician, the lord of genii, the 
winner of a princess. When the curtain 
fell, and all was over, the girl gave a great 
sigh, and turned to Miss Litton, and said, 

''Now will you tell me there is no 
magic ?" 

There was a farce to follow, but Miss 
Litton thought Fay had been sufficiently 
excited, and would not mingle two things 
SO different. Hence they drove home at 
once; and Fay dropped into the land of 
sleep, to dream Aladdin all over again, in far 
more radiant hues than those which the 
theatre could produce. Her vivid imagina- 
tion, trained in Oriental legend, familiar 
with Eastern splendour, adopted the 
Aladdin mjrth, and played dream-variations 



136 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

upon it. She awoke next morning to find 
herself in London . ^in a chamber looking 
upon Bond Street, and astonished the 
chambermaid who came to wait on her by 
saying, 

"I'm sure this dirty street can't be in 
Bagdad or Bassora or Damascus." 

Paul Roden had been invited to breakfast. 

** How did you like the play ?" he asked, 
as Fay came running into the room, and 
kissed Miss Litton, and held out her pretty 
pink long-fingered hand to him. 

" I dreamt of it all night," she said. " I 
have learnt many more of Aladdin's adven- 
tures in my dreams, but I have not time yet 
to make them out. They are all tied up in 
knots. I shall untie them by-and-by, and 
try to write them down. I am sure they did 
happen, they are so strange." 



AT THE PLAY. 137 

" Would you like to see it again ?" asked 
Paul. 

" No," she answered decidedly. " It could 
not happen twice, you know. The same 
thing never happens twice." 

" You seem to take the play for reality, 
Fay," said Miss Litton. " Many people will 
go to see Aladdin a dozen times." 

" Strange people they must be," said the 
child. " Would they eat the same dinner 
over again. I will go to-night if they will 
show me the fresh adventures of Aladdin, 
as I saw them in my dreams. 0, I saw 
that old magician make a genie carry him 
through the air right above a burning 
mountain and drop him straight into the 
flame . and he fell, fell, fell far down 
through air, and then through fire, till he 
came into a cool hall of diamond in thecen- 



138 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

tre of the earth, where there were flowers 
and fountains and beautiful girls . and above 
all, his own princess.'* 

"Drink your milk, child," said Miss 
Litton, laughing. "I think, Paul, a play 
that has a new phase every night would be 
rather a tax on the resources of our 
theatres." 

"Yes, and of our authors," he said. "But 
what do you think, Fay, of the actress who 
played Aladdin ?" 

" Actress ! What do you mean ? Aladdin 
is a boy." 

" Yes, but a lady played the part, and a 
very famous lady she is." 

" Do you really mean to say Aladdin last 
night was a woman ?" cried Fay, indignant- 
ly. " ril never go to a theatre again, never, 
never. What a wicked creature to deceive 



AT THE PLAY. 139 

me so I And all this time I thought I had 
seen Aladdin. It is disgusting.'' 

Fay had never been known to cry, but 
perhaps she was never quite so near it as on 
this occasion. 

" I am afraid," said Miss Litton, gravely, 
'' that you will take the amusements of life 
too seriously, Fay. Consider, child, some- 
body has to look like Aladdin. A pretty 
girl who can sing and dance is much better 
suited to it than a clumsy boy." 

" All boys are not clumsy. Auntie, else 
Aladdin himself would have been clumsy. 
And for a girl to pretend to be a boy is 
abominable. I am glad I didn't know it 
last night ; if I had I wouldn't have stopped 
in the place. You are bad magicians here, if 
you turn girls into boys." 

"Well, darling," said Miss Litton, "I 



140 SWEET AHD TWBNTY. 

mean to stay another day in town, and 
another night at the theatre would be too 
much for that imaginative little head of 
yours. But I should like to show you 
something in the afternoon, and then send 
you to bed early, because we travel early 
to-morrow. What can you suggest, Paul ?" 

" Something like the cool ball of diamonds 
in Fay's dream. Suppose we try the 
Crystal Palace. There is somebody oq the 
organ, and Blondin, and the fountains 
play." 

Fay had been only half.listening, for her 
indignation had not subsided ; but she caught 
the words " fountains," and cud . 

" Fountains must be real water, I think, 
so you may take me there if you like." 

So a carriage was ordered that afternoon, 
and they drove through pleasant quaint 



AT THE PLAY. 141 

Dulwich, with its College founded by a 
player, to the great glass structure built by 
a gardener . the only original architect for 
some centuries. It was a day of sunshine 
and breeze, and the road was crowded with 
carriages drawn by some strange magnetism 
toward Blondin. 



142 



CHAPTER X. 

AT THE CBYSTAL PALACE. 

** Since rose tbe high aerial towen of Xanadu 
When haa the sky been mocked by such an edifice ?** 

*'"fT7HERE are all these people driving, 
Auntie ?'' asked Fay, as their fast 
bays from Newman's carried them past 
a long line of carriages. ^' Are they going 
to the fountains ?'' 

Paul Roden had ordered the carriage, 
and chosen the horses himself, for he knew 
Miss Litton disliked slow movement. Her 



AT THE CRYSTAL PALACE. 143 

mind moved fast, and she wished her body 
to do the same. 

" Look before you," she said, " and you 
will see where we are all going." 

" The sun was striking the long roofs of 
the palace into versicoloured fire. The two 
towers reminded Fay of the East, where 
they have been tower-builders since the days 
of Babel. 

" I hope this is real," she said. ** I hope 
it is not a magic lantern show, like what I 
used to see at evening parties in Calcutta. 
ChUds' parties !" she added, with emphatic 
contempt, as if she never had been a child. 

''I suppose you think it will turn into 
something else before we get there," said 
Paul. 

** Well, Aladdin turned into a girl, so why 
shouldn't it ? But are the people who go 



144 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

there fire-worshippers? There is smoke 
from the top of one of the towers." 

" We are all fire-worshippers in England 
in winter," said Miss Litton; *'we are so 
cold, that we get as close as we can to the 
fire, and enjoy it heartily." 

" What a charming time to tell stories I" 
said Fay. " I have so often heard about it 
out in India. A big fire at Christmas, and a 
lot of ghost stories. Paul, have you plenty 
of ghost stories ? Did you ever see a ghost ?" 

" No," said Paul Roden, " I never had 
that honour ; and to tell you the truth, I 
don't want to. I like ghost stories very 
much, but I never could invent any." 

^^ Invent r said Fay. "Ghost stories 
don't want inventing. Why, you must know, 
Paul, that there are spirits everywhere. 
You don't suppose that people like me and 



AT THE CRYSTAL PALACE. 145 

you, in coats and frocks, are the only people 
in the world." 

The child spoke so earnestly, with a pallor 
of passion on her pretty blushful face, that 
both Miss Litton and Paul Boden saw she 
was very much in earnest. Neither knew 
quite what to say. And Fay went on . . . 

" Do you know what happened to Papa ? 
He was at the head of the regiment once in 
battle. There were ten times as many 
against him. He could hardly make his 
men come forward. All at once there rode 
to his side some one on a white horse, who 
seemed to have the strength of a hundred 
men, and who cut a path through the enemy. 

« 

When the English had won the victory he 
gave Papa a smile and vanished. Now, 
what do you say to that, Auntie ?" 

" I say that if it was a ghost it was a very 

VOL, I. L 



146 SWEET ASD TWESTT. 

nsefol ghosL Gome, Fay, here we are at 
the place where there is musiG^ and where 
fanntaiiis play. Forget your ghosts, child, 
and tell ns what you think of this.* 

Fay wandered with Miss litton and Paul 
throogh that popalar nave which has become 
rather a bore. Then they wandered out to 
the gardens where the fountains were to 
play. This was a delight to Fay: they 
threw np their grand masses of water, 
through which the son made rainbows, and 
cooled the air with delidons downfall. 
When they stopped she was disgusted. 

"Why dont they play always?" she 
said. 

" Because it costs so much," said Paul. 

'* Does water cost money ?" said Fay. 

Neither Miss Litton nor Paul Boden could 
think of anything to say to this troublesome 



AT THE CRYSTAL PALACE. 147 

child, SO they left her remarks unanswered 
on subjects beyond her infantile comprehen- 
sion. There is, however, much to be said 
on her view of the topic. Surely a foun- 
tain should be as perfect in its way as a 
cataract, throwing its showers of perennial 
spherules into the air untiringly. Alas I 
with us how different. The paltry foun- 
tains of the Square of Trafalgar are the tri- 
umph of our engineering. Never mind. 
Trafalgar was a glorious fact ; though the 
Trafalgar fountains are a contemptible 
abomination. If the Duke of Northumber- 
land is going to improve that Square, in re- 
turn for the half-million he gets for North- 
umberland House, I hope hell make those 
fountains throw their water a little higher. 

It certainly amazed and annoyed Fay 
Luttrel that these fountains played for a 

l2 



148 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

« 

certain time and then stopped again. She 
did not, you see, quite comprehend the fact 
that a thing in England can only exist so 
long as it pays. The idea of glorious jets of 
water thrown up into the air to delight the 
people is not altogether English ; the Eng-» 
lish notion is, by what means the largest 
number of persons can be induced to pay a 
shilling each to see something or other, 
America has its Almighty Dollar ; England 
has its Satisfactory Shilling. Given a shilling 
in this country, and you may have music 
and fountains, and all manner of delights. 
The notion of giving people enjoyment for 
nothing at all has not yet reached us. 

As I think has already been stated, this 
was a day on which Blondin was to show off 
his acrobatic capacity. A rope was stretched 
across the Palace terrace. Our party were 



AT THE CRYSTAL PALACE. 149 

in one of the galleries, on about a level with 
the famous performer. Miss Litton, who 
had never seen anything of the kind, was a 
little frightened by his proceedings, though 
the easy way in which he crossed the rope 
soon reassured hgr. But Fay Luttrel was 
disgusted at the whole affair. 

"Any monkey could do it,*' she said. 
**Is England a place where people are 
astonished because a man is as clever as a 
monkey ?" 

" Well," said Miss Litton, as they sat at 
dinner afterwards in the airy rooms that 
look right across the open Surrey country, 
" I think Fay is right, Paul. I don't under- 
stand what pleasure there can be in seeing 
a man risk his neck on a rope. Any mon- 
key could do it." 

" The English public wants excitement," 
said Paul Roden. 



150 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

"The English public would be a great 
deal better without it," said Miss Litton. 

" Auntie, please," said Fay, who, all the 
while, had been much engaged with some 
Neapolitan ice. *' Would you mind telling 
me who the English publiq are,, that you and 
Paul talk about?" 

, Miss Litton was at a loss for a defini- 
tion. Paul, seeing this to be the case, said^ 

" 0, people in general, Fay." 

"Does that mean you and me and 
Auntie," said the child, finishing her Neapo- 
litan ice very deliberately. " We don't want 
to see a man acting like a monkey." 

" I quite agree with you, Fay," said Miss 

Litton. " It is a pity people should come 

together to see such things. The child is 

right, Paul, is she not ?" 

. *' Of course she is," replied Paul Roden. 



AT THE CRYSTAL PALACE. J61 

" I am quite thankful to her for giving me a 
healthy view of the question. I won't come 
to see Blondin again." 

The evening ended with fireworks ; and 
here the critical young lady made no objec- 
tions. Indeed the youthful eye that is un- 
dazzled by the pyrotechnic art is not easily 
discoverable. When Fay Luttrel is a few 
years older . when she is my heroine of 
Sweet and Twenty . ^she will see greater 
beauty in the crescent moon, in the evening 
star, in the glory of sunset. Now she is 
only a child ; now Crystal Palace fireworks 
delight her little palpitating heart. She 

went home to the Clarendon very tired, and 

« 

very well pleased with her day's enjoyment. 



The next day Miss Litton returned to 
Westbury Place, and our little friend Fay, 



152 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

in a very short timey found herself under the 
guidanoe of her oommonplaoe governess, 
Miss Clumber. 



153 



CHAPTER XI. 



ON s'aMUSE. 



Alouette. . He thought that he could play whatever game 

he pleased 
With a mere girl. Ay, that^s your modem cavalier, 
Who thinks himself a wonder, deems it nonsense to 
Care half a farthing about girls in petticoats- 
Mere pretty playthings to be touched and thrown 
away. 

TTie Comedy of Dreams. 

f]lEW things are more difficuft than to find 

yourself at twenty or thereabouts, with 

plenty of money and practically very little 

to do. According to a mild fiction, Paul 

Roden was managing his father's business ; 



154 SWEET AKD TWENTY. 

but, as a fact, the business would have gone 
very straight to the devil if John Carr had 
not been there to look after it Price 
Roden had a curiously illogical belief in his 
son, which might have been justifiable if, at 
this time, Master Paul had not managed to 
become irregular in his habits. It was the 
very time. What are you to expect of these 
youngsters of twenty ? They are just be- 
ginning to perceive the beauty of life at a 
time when their fathers would fain teach 
them the unutterable weariness of life. To 
the boy, every pretty girl is a creature to 
touch delicately and adore; to the boy's 
father, everyone of them is a wretched 
little minx, who ought to be whipped. 

When a young fellow has an independent 
position, an easy way of life, a fine aristo- 
cratic appearance, it is a strange thing if the 



ON s'amtjse. 1 55 

little girls of the vicinage do not flock round 
him. Paul Roden might have thrown his 
scented kerchief to a dozen girls, or more. 
He did not much care for anything of the 
sort. But when pretty Sarah Daw, whom 
he had kissed once upon a time, made a 
dead set at him, and showed that she liked 
him very much, what was Paul Eoden to 
do? 

What was Paul Koden to do ? It is a 
trivial question, you may say, yet it often 
involves the whole future of a man. It is- 
not merely the paltry problem : shall I or 
shall I not give way to my foolish fancy for 
this girl ? . it is, shall I always give way to 
foolish fancies, and be the slave of my 
passions to the end of my life ? FacUi$ 
descensus Avemi. 

I am sorry to say that with Paul Rodea 



156 SWEET AND TWENTT. 

it was only too fadle. I cannot defend him. 
He had Miss Litton to give him intellectual 
pleasure, and little Fay Luttrel to exdte 
his imaginative faculty. But he could not 
help paying some attention to Sarah Daw, 
T^ho put herself as much as possible in his 
way. She was in fact just the sort of 
young woman that the female novelists of 
the present day like for a heroine. She 
was pretty, naughty, self-conscious. In 
any occasional communication with a girl 
of this sort, a young fellow like Paul Roden, 
meaning no harm, but easily tempted, is 
soon led into difficulty. Paul was too free. 
To be " too free " is, perhaps, the worst 
thing that can happen to a man, whether 
-erotically or otherwise. 

"Too free." The self-conscious young 
person whom I have described is easily put 



ON s'amuse. 157 

in her proper place by the calm quiet con^ 
temptuous gentleman, who has few sympa- 
thies with the lower orders of his own 
species . the Tory and Patrician by nature, 
who looks above the level of a merely 
tempting unintellectual face, and to whom a 
Lady to worship is as necessary as a Deity to 
adore. Such a man would regard Sarah Daw 
as a pretty little servant girl, to be appreciat- 
ed for her neatness, and nice ways, and gene-^ 
ral habit of looking pleasant ; but he would 
no more dream of kissing her, or flirting 
with her, than of going through those pro- 
cedures with the handsome Aldemey cow 
that yielded his matutinal milk. This inborn 
ToiTiso, i,, I beUeve, regarded as a vUe 
form of prejudice by the enlightened philo- 
sophers of the day ; but it saves a man from 
a world of trouble. When a young fellow 



1 58 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

begins life with a noble pride that makes 
the Stock Exchange and the Haymarket 
and Tattersairs equally impossible to him, I 
dare to think he has a fine career before 
bim. 

Alas for Paul Roden ! Of this sort he 
was not. Of his class, a better fellow than 
Paul it would be hard to find ; and he was 
wondrous lucky in the friendship of Miss 
Litton, a lady by birth, and a lady of 
genius, who did her best to develop him. 
But he wanted stronger guidance. His 
father, Price Roden, admired his handsome 
clever boy . thought him the handsomest 
and cleverest boy that ever had existed. 
He had never seen Count d'Orsay or heard 
of Alcibiades. So Paul of course was 
spoilt, and it was rather a wonder he got on 
so well. 



ON s'amuse. 159 

Among the peculiarities of modern society, 
few are more remarkable than the rapid 
development of the millionaire. Somebody 
begins with three halfpence and ends with 
£1,500,000, or something of that sort. He 
usually is a jolly old fellow to the end of 
his time, unless they are cruel enough to 
make him a baronet. His daughters, with 
pleasant portions, commonly get picked up 
by penniless younger sons ; and on the whole 
it is a fair exchange. The girl is raised to a 
higher level, and her money makes her hus- 
band comfortable. But the millionaire's 
sons are in greater difficulty. Women 
catch the tone of society a thousand times 
faster than men. The taint of vulgarity sticks 
horribly to the male animal. He cannot 
shake off the hereditary idea of business. If 
he sees a picture he guesses its price ; if he 



160 SW££T ASD TWENTY. 

meets a poet he wonders how much he 
makes a year. He can't be kept from dia- 
mond waistcoat buttons and other absurdities 
of the same class. The unfragrance of 
money adheres to him. 

I will not say that Paul Roden was of 
this vile type ; assuredly he was not, or Miss 
Hannah Litton, a lady of ladies, could not 
have made him so great a favourite. But 
he was somewhat spoilt. His father 
believed in him ; he, with very fair reason, 
believed in himself, for he was handsome 
and clever, and had never met anybody of 
his own age and sex superior to himself, 
mentally or physically. Had he gone to a 
public school and a university, he would 
have found out that there were men of the 
same year vastly his superior in biceps and 
brain. Half an hour with the Oxford 



I 



ON s'amusb. 161 

Stroke or the Senior Wrangler might have 
done Paul Roden good. But he dwelt in a 
kind of fool's paradise, and liked the 
situation. 

Let us therefore put down to the want of 
paternal control and proper education the 
fact that Paul, with the poetic incidents of 
Miss Litton's lovely household before him, 
and with Fay Luttrel, the most original and 
beautiful creature in the world, growing up 
into the perfection of ladyhood, could not 
help flirtation with Sarah Daw. Propin- 
quity is a great thing, and doubtless MLss 
Sarah, deserted by her lowlier lovers, and 
with Mr. Paul Roden straight in the way, 
made the best she could of it. But what a 
fool Paul was ! He saw it not then ; he 
saw it years after, as we shall record. 
With that poetic ideal child before him, who 

VOL. I. M 



162 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

was oertain to become a woman of the 
loveliest type, could he not wait.he, a 
mere boy of twenty-one . until she was out 
of her teens ? 

No. He must talk to Sarah Daw. He 
must meet her in the green lanes by West- 
bury Manor. He must think himself a fine 
fellow because this pretty little pink-faced 
chit is so fond of him. As for Sarah, she 
is wild about him. She has dreams that 
he will marry her. She thinks of herself 
as Mrs. Paul Boden, the queen of Irontown, 
looking down with contempt on her old 
associates. It does not occur to her, poor 
child, that the very element in Paul Roden's 
character which induces him to flirt with 
her would prevent him from marrying her. 
How should so inexperienced a creature 
know the true test of a gentleman ? 



GS s'amusb. 163 

She was a pretty little creature^ certain- 
ly, this Sarah Daw. I don't wonder at Paul's 
admiring her. At home she had been 
a nice little thing, always trim and neat and 
natty; but when she came to Westbury 
Manor, and waited on Miss Fay, she grew 
into quite a quaint picture of the pretty 
handmaiden. Lace and muslin passed to 
her as perquisites ; she had deft little fingers 
for the needle ; she adorned herself charm- 
ingly, and looked a pearl of parlour-maids. 
As such, let us by all means admire her. 
Beauty of all degrees is beautiful in its place ; 
but, if you try to elevate the pretty maid- 
servant into a lady's position, assuredly you 
will fail. 

How far the flirtation went between 
Paul Roden and Sarah Daw will appear 
in time. He did not enjoy it much. He 

m2 



164 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

felt that he had made a terrible mistake. 
He was afraid of Miss Idtton's discovering 
it . . . afraid also of Fay, though Fay was 
only a child. 



165 



CHAPTER XIL 

WBSTBURY CHERRY FAIR. 

** Cherry ripe, ripe, ripe, I cry, 
Full and fair ones ; come and buy. 
If BO be you ask me where 
They do grow, I answer, there, 
Where my Julia's lips do smile, 
There's the land, or cherry-isle, 
Whose plantations fully show 
All the year where cherries grow/' 

Herrigk. 

QARAH DAW, though only in her 
^^ seventeenth year, could remember the 
days before Irontown had grown so vast, 
when Westbury Cherry Fair was a joyous 



166 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

country wake, ending with a dance on the 
village green, under the great bigaroon 
cherry-trees, that had stood there from time 
immemorial. There was always a holiday 
on that spring day, and the country fellows 
bought fairings for their sweethearts, and 
the whole ended with a dance on the green, 
to the gay tunes of Fiddler Carr's violin. 
Such idyllic scenes were not unusual in days 
within our memory ; but the rapid move- 
ment of modern life has almost obliterated 
them. The great cherry trees still bloom 
on Westbury green ; Miss Litton, as lady of 
the manor, sees that they are carefully 
tended, and has planted others to succeed 
them when they die of old age ; but the 
centre of the Cherry Fair is now Irontown 
market-place, which is crowded with show- 
men, and gipsies, and tramps on the fair 



WESTBUB7 CHBBBT FAIB. 167 

days. How suddenly these vagrants spring 
into existence when there is a fair or a race I 
I like gipsies ; they are picturesque fellows, 
honest up to a certain point (which is all 
that can be said of the best of us), and they 
have produced at least one man of genius in 
the person of John Bunyan. The Pilgrim's 
Progress could ouly have been written by a 
man who had been on the tramp. 

Although the market-place of Irontown 
now magnetised the holiday-keepers, still 
the holiday was known as Westbury Cherry 
Fair. Nobody danced under the old 
cherry-trees now, and Fiddler Carr was 
superseded by brass bands with trombones 
and basMons and ophideides of stupendous 
calibre. It need hardly be said that this 
extension of the fair led to much dissipation. 
Price Roden had often thought it would be 



168 SWEET ASD TWEirnr. 

a good thing to put an end to it, but was 
loth to interfere with an ancient holiday. 
So it flourished, growing noisier every year, 
and bringmg more equivocal people to the 
neighbourhood. 

Sarah Daw asked for a holiday for the 
Cherry Fair. Miss Litton was disinclined to 
grant it, but Fay over-persuaded her. 

" Let her go, Auntie. She's a good girl^ 
and deserves a little fun. I suppose it's 
very amusing. I've never seen an English 
fair; in India there are conjurers who swal- 
low fire and swords, and charm serpents, 
and show you people thousands of miles 
away in a drop of ink held in the palm. Is 
there anything as good in England? 
Mayn't Miss Clumber and I take a walk 
through the fair after luncheon, Auntie ?" 



WESTBUBT CHERRY FAIR. 169 

" Should you be afraid, Miss Clumber ?" 
asked Miss Litton. 

" dear, no," was the reply. " I will go 
with pleasure. Fairs are noisy, but there 
are always plenty of policemen to keep 
order." 

^^What important people the police are 
in this country 1" cried Fay. " I believe if 
I wouldn't learn my lessons you'd send for 
a policeman, Miss Clumber. But say. Auntie, 
is Sarah to have her holiday ? Let me go 
and say yes. She's waiting in a dreadful 
state of uncertainty," 

^^ I suppose she must go," said Miss Litton, 
who by no means approved the changed 
aspect of the picturesque old Cherry Fair ; 
whereon Fay ran off to find Sarah. 

"Now, Sarah," she said, "you are to go 
to the fair, but you must be back at six 



170 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

o'clock. And mind you don't talk to anyone 
you don't know. I shall expect you to tell 
me where you have been and whom you 
have seen. Do you quite understand ?" 

" Yes, miss," said Sarah, with a curtsey. 
She was puzzled and frightened by this pre- 
cocious young mistress of hers, who talked to 
her just as if their ages were reversed. But 
Fay, child of a brilliant race, and early ripen- 
ed by orient warmth, had quite as accurate 
ideas of life at eleven as most girls have at 
twenty. 

Little Sarah Daw dressed herself in a 
light print, and decorated herself with bits 
of lace and ribbon, and tripped off into 
Irontown to see the fair. Of course she soon 
encountered friends, and had plenty gossip 
and laughter. Presently, in the market- 
place, just opposite the Roden Arms, John 



WESTBUBY CHERBY FAIB. 171 

Garr met her; she had not seen him for 
some time, as he had been absent on impor- 
tant business for Mr. Roden. He looked 
more firm and strong and vigorous than 
ever; quite a gentleman, with his well- 
fitting coat and boots and gloves. He held 
out his hand to her, and looked delighted 
to meet her. As he stood there on the 
pavement in front of the Roden Arms, you 
would have said he was the most influential 
man in Irontown ; and I am not certain that 
you would have been wrong. 

As Sarah's pretty little hand lay within 
the grasp of his strong square fingers, was 
she thinking of him ? She was ; but of two 
others also. Her fancy wandered to tall 
Bob Garr, the handsomest man she had ever 
seen, now a soldier and an exile all for her. 
Then she thought of Mr. Paul . a gentleman, 



172 SWXET AHD TWXHTT. 

aad John Garr's master . ^who had kissed her 
cherry lips in a patronizing way, and told 
her she was pretty in such lovely language* 
The little fool was torn into three parts, and 
could not make up her mind what she 
wanted. To add to her confusion, at this 
moment Paul Roden, driving his father in 
a mail phaeton, pulled up his horses at the 
Roden Arms, where some meeting was to 
take place. He did not see her, as he walk- 
ed in a haughty fashion up the hotel steps, 
looking every inch the young Prince of 
Irontown. 

" It is so long since I saw you, Sarah," 
said John Carr, taking her out of the 
market-place into a quiet street near. '^ But 
I have thought of you all the time I was 
away. Have you though!^ of me at all, 
Sarah ?" 



I 



WBSTBURY CHERRY FAIR. 175 

** Now do you expect me to tell you that ? 
How tiresome men are ! If you give me a 
fairing I shall be sure to think of you." 

"0, you shall have your fairing," said 

John Carr, pleasantly. He had been very 

successful in the business which had taken 
him from Irontown, and he began to think 

he should succeed in everything else. " But 
I am not going to give you trash from the 
stalls, Sarah." 

He took her into a jeweller's shop, and 
bought her a pretty little watch and chain of 
plain pattern but real value. 

" There," he said, " I daresay Miss Litton 
will let you wear that, especially if I tell 
her I gave it you. And now, dear, I must 
go, for there is business at the Roden Arms, 
and I am behind time. I shall call and 
see you to-morrow. 






174 8WXET ASD Twurrx. 

Sarah separated firom him in a kind of 
nnoonsdons state. She walked through the 
market-plaoe and down the High Street 
like a somnambulist She positively passed 
Fay Luttrel and Hiss Clumber without see- 
ing them. John Caries way with her, and 
his gift of a watch, seemed to show that he 
conoidered she belonged to him . and she 
didn't want to belong to him, not a bit. 
She hated him, and his watch, and every- 
body. 

She left Irontown by a street that led 
away from Westbury, and sauntered along a 
pleasant path by the margin of a little river, 
hardly important enough to have a name. 
Presently she sat on a stile that led into a 
meadow full of young oxen, whose looks 
she did not approve, and languidly gazed at 



WBSTBUBY CHBRBY FAIB. 175 

her new watch, and found it was four 
o'clock. 

^' Miss Fay said I was to be back at six/' 
she said to herself. '' I wish I never had to 
go back any more. dear, dear, what 
a dreary life it is !" 

In this foolish fashion soliloquising, a girl 
more fortunate in her position than one of 
ten thousand, she began to cry a little. 
Tears are the luxury of the weak. While 
she was thus consoling herself, an arm came 
suddenly round [her waist, and she was 
aware of Paul Boden. 

"What are you crying about, child?" he 
said. 

" Mr. Paul, how you frightened me !" 
she exclaimed. '^ Who could have thought 
of meeting you here ? I came here to be 
alone, and think." 



176 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

" And cry," quoth Paul. " You're a 
silly little thing. When you've got any 
troubles, why don't you tell me ?" 

*' I've no right to," she said. " Besides, 
what are you to me that I should tell you 
my troubles ? You're a gentleman, and I'm 
a servant-maid, and there can't be anything 
between us, you know that." 

" Upon my word," said Paul, " you are 
very saucy to-day. Miss Sarah. What has 
happened to you ? Tell me all about it." 

He sat down on the bank under a great 
beech tree, with a white straight stem like a 
column. She stood before him like a school- 
girl before her master. It was a pleasant cool 
solitary corner, with leaves above and moss 
below and a little river rippling softly over 
the arrowy water weeds. Now and then a 
swallow dipt or a fish sprang to the surface. 



WBSTBURY CHERRY FAIR. 177 

A great dragon-fly balanced himself in air 
for awhile, then suddenly darted into inde- 
finite space. An unseen lark sang high 
above. It was the true place, the true 
moment for true lovers. Ay, but these 
were not true lovers on either side. "Now, 
Sarah," said Paul Roden, " listen to me. I 

« 

want to know what you come into this 
corner for, and cry ? What qan you have to 
trouble you ? A pretty little girl, in a com- 
fortable place, with a kind mistress . . . 
why you ought to be as happy as the lark 
you hear singing in^the sky above." 
In his head ran Goethe's lines : 

" O maiden, maiden I 
How love I thee ! 
How shine thy bright eyes ! 
How lovest thou me I 

So the lark loveth 

Song full of mirth, 
And snnrise-^ gladness 

Far above earth." 

VOL. I. N 



178 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

Paul Roden had read some German; he 
thought Goethe the chief of poets ; he quite 
approved of the way in which that eminent 
individual, whom the world begins to recog- 
nise as an impostor, played love's game to 
the mental, if not physical, detriment of 
many women. Paul Roden had no definite 
cruel desire to do harm, but he could not 
quite realize the value of a human soul, 
when it is imprisoned in the blushmg skin, 
veiled by pink calico, of a mere uneducated 
servant-maid. He had never thought on 
such questions. How should he P 

On the other hand, Sarah Daw had quite 
her own views and ideas. If Bob Carr 
were in England again, the girl would have 
knelt and prayed to him to marry her . or 
even to let her be his mistress and slave. 
He was gone, with small chance of early 



WESTBUBY CHERRY FAIR, 179 

return; so the second best thing to love 
seemed revenge ; and she had a picture in 
her foolish brain of Bob coming back after 
some years' service, invalided or wounded, 
and seeing her drive through Irontown in a 
carriage and pair . . . Mrs. Paul Roden, 
quite a leader of fashion. She felt she had 
lost Bob ; she could not make up her mind 
to accept the loyal offer of his brother 
John ; she resolved to fascinate Paul Roden, 
who, to her mind, seemed very ready to be 
fascinated. 

" I suppose I may cry if I like, Mr. Paul," 
she replied, "without your interference. 
Most people have their troubles. When I 
want a good cry, I try to find a place where 
I shan't be interrupted, but this time I have 
failed." 

Her tears were gone now, and she was as 

n2 



180 SWSBT ASD TWESTT. 

pert as a oock-robin in autumn. Paul 
Boden smiled. He was in his finest Goethe- 
mood. He thought he was studying char- 
acter in the inferior sex. That a woman 
might possibly be cleverer than himself could 
no more enter his brain than that of lus 
great exemplar. 

^^ Sarah," he said, " you are a foolish 
pretty little girl, and don't know the world 
a bit ; crying spoils your eyes, child. If you 
had anything to cry about, it would be 
quite another thing. You have a comforta- 
ble place, and plenty to eat and drink. 
What more can you want ?" 

" dear,'' cried Sarah, ** what nonsense 
you talk, Mr. Paul! Do you fancy that 
plenty to eat and drink is 'the chief idea of a 
young girl at the beginning of her life ? 
Plenty to eat and drink means getting stout 



WBSTBURY CHRRRY FAIR. 181 

and stupid. You don't understand me a 
bit, Mr. Paul, and I don't believe you care 
about me. I am very, very unhappy !" 

Paul laughed. He was rather amused at 
having to console an unhappy maiden in her 
teens. As Sarah Daw alternated between 
weeping and laughter under that shapely 
beech, with the light coming through its 
leaves upon her blushing face, she was cer- 
tainly a pretty picture. " Has she a soul ?" 
is the question one feels inclined to ask as to 
these pretty dolls of whom men are often so 
fond. 

*' If you can tell me why you are 
unhappy, Sarah, I will try to help you," he 
said. "What can you have to trouble 

you?" 

"Gentlemen never let anything trouble 
them," she answered. "That's why they 



1 82 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

can't understand other people's troubles- 
It's no use telling you, Mr. Paul, and I 
won't try. You are very kind, but I think 
perhaps you ought not to talk to me like this. 
Miss Litton would not like it, I'm afraid." 

" I shall talk to you exactly as I please^ 
Sarah," said Paul, almost sternly. **What 
harm can I do by giving you a little advice ? 
But all this is nonsense. Tell me what you 
have been crying about, child. Have you 
had a quarrel with your sweetheart ?" 

" I haven't got a sweetheart, Mr. Paul,'' 
she said, with a sob in her voice. "0» 
I wish . I wish . I was dead . that I do." 

Paul couldn't resist kissing her ; it seems 
the natural way to console a little girl in 
tears. As he did so (which of course was 
very wrong,) he caught a glimpse of her 
new watch and chain. 



WESTBUBY CHERRY FAIR. 183 

" Why, Sarah," he said, " if you haven't 
got a sweetheart, who in the^world gave 
you this watch ?" 

He took it in his hand as he spoke, and 
looked at it inquiringly. Sarah blushed, 
but said nothing. She was afraid of Paul 
Roden's impetuosity. 

"Come," he said. "Speak out. Who 
gave you this watch ?" 

"John Carr, Mr. Paul. He is my 
cousin." 

" So he is," said Paul, laughing; " and if 
every one of your cousins gave you a nice 
little watch like this, you could set up a 
watchmaker's shop. Shall I throw it into 
the river . and give you another myself?" 

He made as if he were going to do it, and 
the girl gave a slight scream. 

" don't, please 1" she cried. 



184 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

" WeU, I won't," said Paul Roden, " But 
as you're so particularly dutiful to Miss 
Litton, what do you mean to say when she 
asks you where you got this pretty trifle ?" 

He was holding it in his hand at the time. 
He tossed it in the air and caught it just as if 
it had been some halfpenny toy. Sarah was 
rather impressed by the contemptuous way 
in which he treated what seemed to her the 
most delightful possession she had ever had 
in her life ; but at the same time she had a 
kind of dull half-conscious notion that Mr. 
Paul was treating her watch very much as 
he designed to treat her, and that he cared 
no more for the one than the other. 

" He can get plenty of watches better than 
that," she thought; "and I daresay he 
thinks he can get plenty of girls prettier and 
cleverer than me." 



WESTBURY CHEERY FAIR. 185 

That famous line of Matthew Arnold's, 

(( We mortal millions live alone/' 

is never more applicable than to a flirtation 
at cross-purposes, like this between Paul 
Roden and Sarah Daw. When two people 
are thoroughly in love, they break the inve- 
terate law, and are isolated no longer. But 
here was Paul thinking that it was a pleasant 
afternoon's amusement, under a beech tree 
by a rippling stream, to teach a little girl 
the elements of the erotic art, with no speci- 
fic idea of harming her, but with slight care- 
lessness as to what might come of it ; and 
here was Sarah, flattered by the amorous 
patronage, calculating whether she should 
be able to develop it into earnestness, 
dreading the air of impetuous command that 
seemed irresistible. If either could have 
exactly known the other's thought, they 



186 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

ft 

would probably have parted at once, and 
for ever. It is a pity that, when people 
make love, some power cannot interfere to 
compel them to speak the absolute truth. 
If the formula " I love you " were by some 
frolic Fate converted into "I love your 
money," what a diiFerence it would make 1 

Paul Roden enjoyed the fine calm quiet 
afternoon ; enjoyed teazing this little girl into 
a mood half tears, half laughter. He was 
only a boy, you know ; one does not expect 
much maturity at twenty-one. Almost all 
boys are cruel ; and it gave Paul Roden a 
strange delight to see this little girl fretting 
like a wild creature in a cage. Yet it may 
be questioned whether she did not play her 
game more skilfully than he did. 

^' Give me my watch and let me go home, 
Mr. Paul," she said presently. *'I must 



WBSTBURY CHERRY FAIR. 187 

be home at six, or Miss Fay will scold. '^ 

Fay's name made him think. His nature 
had a poetic side, which had been stirred by 
the fantastic originality of Fay's character. 
He felt for a moment ashamed of his undig- 
nified flirtation with Sarah. 

'^ I will walk with you as far as the Mill 
Meadow," he said, " and help you over the 
stile. Here is your watch. You will spoil 
it in a week. You are too young to have 
such a thing." 

" If I spoil it, John will give me another. 
I can get over the stile very well by myself, 
thank you, Mr. Paul.'' 

But he went with her. The path led 
along the margin of the stream, in which 
trout were swimming with their heads 
against the current. Willows hung over the 
water ; but at the stile which Sarah had to 



188 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

cross on her way home was a fine oak tree 
in the prime of its life. Many sweethearts 
had sat on that stile, beneath the shadow of 
that oak. The Mill Meadow, a fine forty- 
acre piece, was so called because at the end 
of the footpath across stood an ancient dis- 
used water-mill . one of those small mills 
for the manufacture of paper which were 
ruined by the duty on the raw material of 
literature. 

When they reached the stile, Paul Roden 
lifted Sarah over it as if she had been a baby, 
and acted on the counsel given in an old 
Scotch song to anyone who meets a bonny 
lassie. She went briskly along the path ; he 
immediately began Ughting a cigar, and when 
he had accomplished that work of art to his 
complete satisfaction, looked round to watch 
heron her homeward way. To his amazement 



WESTBURY CHERRY FAIR. 1S9 

she had vanished, although it was impossible 
she could in the time have half way crossed 
the field ; and the only object visible was a 
short-homed bull, which stood in the path 
pawing the ground. Paul was puzzled ; for 
where could Sarah be ? He pulled a stick out 
of the hedge and went forward to meet the 
bull, which turned tail at the first stroke over 
his head. Looking about, he saw poor little 
Sarah lying in a kind of ditch, at this 
time quite dry, which crossed the meadow ; 
she was in a dead faint, and Paul at first 
feared the bull had hurt her. But it was 
not so ; when she saw the creature coming in 
a threatening way towards her, she was 
seized with such terror that she stumbled 
and fell . and fortunately fell into the ditch, 
so that she was beneath the level of the 
grass. Hence the bull lost sight of her. 



190 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

Paul raised her very daintily from the 
ditch; and, as he was not fop enough to 
carry smelling-salts, and it was a long way 
to the river, the only method of reviving 
her that he could think of was to kiss her. 
She was evidently not hurt, though her 
<X)quettish pink attire was slightly rumpled 
and sullied by her fall. Paul thought it 
very pretty to see her blue eyes open, re- 
flecting his image as he stooped over her. 

"0, Mr. Paul, that dreadful creature!" 
she said ; " I thought I should be killed ! O, 
how did you manage to save me ?" 

'* You saved yourself, Sarah, by tumbling 
into that ditch. You are not hurt, I hope. 
How you tremble, child I Come, I will see 
you across the meadow, and then you will 
be in Nightingale Lane, and quite safe." 

Sarah was too frightened by her adven- 



WESTBURY CHERRY FAIR. 191 

ture to think very much on her way home. 
She was rather late, but hoped to escape 
notice : so she ran up to her bed-room, and 
changed her dress, which was rather ruflEled, 
and came down stairs to report herself to 
her exacting young mistress. It turned out 
that she need not have hurried; for the 
beauty of the afternoon had made Fay 
persuade Miss Litton to drive out, and they 
had not yet returned. So Sarah made her- 
self a cup of tea to soothe her fluttered 
nerves; and reflected on her three inter- 
views . with John, with Mr. Paul, with the 
bull . ^in a rueful way. Then she looked 
at her pretty little watch, which she 
managed to wear so that it should not be 
seen, and murmured to herself: 

" Poor John ! He's a good fellow after 
all." 



192 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

Paul Roden went home not entirely 
satisfied with himself. He had not quite 
reached the acme of Goethe's splendid 
selfishness. He was only playing with 
Sarah, true ; but he could not help seeing to 
what such play might lead ; and he felt cer- 
tain pangs of conscience as he smoked cigar 
after cigar in his leisurely stroll towards 
home. 



193 



CHAPTER XIIL 

FATHER AND SON. 

T)AUL RODEN and his son dined that 
-^ evening tSte-h-tete ; and, though they 

were a father and son on as good terms as 

any in England, they often felt that it grew 

rather slow, and that they would have been 

" thankful for an enemy." Blood relations 

are usually too much alike to entertain one 

another. 

Dinner at Roden Hall was always on a 

grand scale. The dining-room had an open 

oak roof, and was ornamented with fine 

VOL. I. 



194 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

paintings on panel; groups of dead game 
alternated with well-imagined sketches of 
hunting and fishing and shooting. The 
mantelpiece was a superb piece of wood- 
carving by Grinling Gibbons, for which 
Paul Roden had bid against the whole 
county when a neighbouring mansion was 
dismantled ; a noble work of art, in which 
the wooden pheasants and partridges and 
snipes looked so likely to fly away that it 
seemed dangerous to open the windows of 
the room. On the oaken sideboard were 
noble pieces of plate, some of them the 
veritable gold-work of that grand artist 
and liar, Benvenuto Cellini. In the midst 
of this great room, the small table at which 
the father and son sat looked like an island 
of light. A butler and a footman waited on 
them, serving a dinner contrived and cooked 



FATHER AND SON. 195 

to perfection by a gastronomic artist from 
France ; had they been princes of England 
instead of mere princes of iron, they could 
scarcely have dined in a finer style. 

"How have you enjoyed yourself this 
afternoon, Paul ?" said his father, kindly, as 
they ended with a glass of fine old port. " I 
am afraid you find it dull sometimes. 
. " Not at all," said Paul. " Between the 
very little work you let me do, and the 
numerous views of human life there are in 
this neighbourhood, I get on capitally. My 
friend, Miss Litton, is a great resource." 
. " Yes, she must be a charming old lady, 
when you once learn to tolerate her preju- 
dices; But I know you must often find it 
dull, and I can't help thinking that one gets 
out of sorts without female companionships. 
It's like the oil to the machinery." 

o2 



196 8WKET AJSD TWJfiNTX. 

'^ What are you driving at, £ither ?^ said 
Paul, who was old-fashioned enough to call 
his sire by his proper title. '^ Ton don't 
want me to get married, I hope ; for I really 
would rather not/' 

'^ No, Paul,'' replied Mr. Roden, laughing. 
^^ If thou art wise, thoult not marry for ten 
good years." Price Roden always used the 
second person singular when in real earnest. 
^^ No, Paul ; but to-day I got a letter from a 
cousin of ours . that is to say, she is your 
dear mother's firat cousin once removed . 
Edith Tracy her name is. Tou saw her 
once, I think, when you were a mere child ; 
you wouldn't remember it. The Tracy 
family are the real thing, you know ; and 
this girl has two or three thousand a year ; 
but it is odd that through various deaths we 
are the nearest relations she has. Well, here 



FATHER AND SON. 197 

is her letter, Paul/' he said, taking it from 
his pocket-book. '^ Just look at it. She 
has plenty of money, you see, but no home. 
She's a few years older than you, so that if 
we ask her here for a time, there'd be no 
danger of your falling in love with her." 

This last remark of Price Roden's shows 
that he did not know quite ever}rthing. 
; Paul read Miss Tracy's letter. Perfect 
lady was written in every line of it. She 
reminded Price Roden of her existence ; de- 
scribed the way in which she had lost friend 
after friend, till nothing but money remained 
to her ; asked if, on her return to England 
(she wrote from Venice), he would give her 
a week's hospitality. Paul, not wholly un- 
appreciative, saw through the style of this 
letter a beautiful soul. His father eyed him 
over the red wave in his port glass, wonder- 



198 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

ing what he would say. He, Price Roden, 
the moment he read the letter, was for ask- 
ing her to come and stay as long as ever she 
liked. But he would not do such a thing 
without Paul's fiat. 

" Father," said Paul, when he had finished 
the letter, leaning back in his chair with the 
gossamer paper in his hand, '^I think this 
cousin of ours is delighful. If she talks as 
she writes, and of course she does, she will 
brighten us up amazingly. Ask her to come 
as soon as she likes, and stay as long as she 
likes. Why can't she stay always ? She is 
too old for me, you say, father, but she is 
not too joung for you.'' 

Price Roden only laughed. He liked his 
son's impertinences. The result of this 
after-dinner conversation was that he wrote 



FATHER AKD SON. 



199 



a letter to Miss Tracy, asking her to come 
and stay at Roden Hall according to her 



own convenience. 



200 



CHAPTER XIV. 



EDITH. 



*^ Yet, by my faith in nnmben, I pro{eaE^ 
These all, than Saxon Edith, please me less." 

GhablesLamb. 

T N due course Edith Tracy came to Roden 
-*- Hall. It 80 happened that she arrived 

just in time for her maid to dress her for 
dinner. Her arrival had been uncertain, so 

that neither Price Roden nor Paul was at 

home. When she went down stairs, she 

found herself alone in the princely drawing. 

room, and looked round with a critical eye 

on the ornaments thereof. On the whole, 



EDITH. 201 

they were good enough to satisfy the taste 
of Edith Tracy, who had the unfortunate 
yet useful faculty of discovering blunders. 

Then, as she was alone, and had to wait 
for her cousin and his dinner, she looked at 
herself in one of the magnificent mirrors. 
Not an old maid yet, certainly, . not yet at 
the prime of life, wise men would say ; a 
girl with abundant hair of a colour between 
flax and gold, and a lithe lissom form, and 
the most exquisite eager blue eyes ; a girl 
who could ride across country, cook a dinner, 
caricature an idiot, write a laughable poem, 
with equal ease. Indeed there were few 
things Edith Tracy could not do. 
, She had just settled her silken flounces 
into the depths of an easy chair, when Paul 
Roden entered. He had been detained on 
business, and was not yet dressed for 



202 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

dinner. He came forward gaily, and said, 

" How sorry I am not to have been at 
home when you came I My father will be 
here in a few minutes ; he was detained by 
unexpected business. We are the slaves of 
the mine, you know, Miss Tracy---but I hope 
you will let me call you Edith, as it is such 
a charming name for a charming cousin." 

Edith Tracy smiled quietly. 

"Yes," she said, *' you may call me Edith, 
and I will call you Paul. Indeed, I want 
to make myself at home here, so long as 
you let me stay. You cannot imagine^ 
Paul, what a trial it is to a woman to be 
left entirely alone, even though you may 
have plenty of money. Men can wander ; 
no woman can be happy without a home." 

At this moment Price Roden also entered, 
and greeted Edith in his usual kind fashion. 



EDITH. JOS' 

Afterwards came dinner, and a pleasant 
evening, brightened wondrously by Edith's 
gay talk, and the music and song which she 
gave them. Father and son were both 
fascinated with her: Paul at intervals 
plagued himself to think why he should 
flirt with Sarah while jBUch ladies as this 
abounded in the land. The best antidote 
to the possibly-naughty girl is the true 
lady. 

When Edith Tracy found herself in her 
sumptuous chamber, she was a little puzzled 
as to the events of the evening. A keen 
student of character was Edith ; a fearless 
thoughtful girl, who collected data and made 
up her mind, and never deigned to listen to 
other people's opinions. She opened her 
window wide, and looked out on a brilliant 
full moon, and let in the fragrance of 



204 SWBBT AND TWENTI. 

innumerable shrubs and flowers. She 
leaned over the window-sill and thought. 

"They are both good fellows," was her 
reflexion, " and could only be dishonourable 
through weakness. The father might be 
tempted by a tremendous speculation, or the 
son by a very pretty girl. Is it worth my 
while to live with them for a time ?" 

She pondered. 

" Yes, I think it is. One owes a duty to 
one's relations. They must be frightfully 
<3ull here, and uncomfortably comfortable, 
without a woman to worry them. Ill take 
them in hand for a time ; perhaps I shall 
have them both wanting to marry me. I 
think I should prefer the old gentleman. 
No matter ; I'll go to bed." 

Edith Tracy could always sleep. 



205 



CHAPTER XV. 

PAUL IS PERPLEXED. 

*'How often the erotic youngster thinks, 
Which shall 1 choose, a Lady or a Minx ?^' 

Tj^DITH TRACY'S residence at Roden 
Hall at once made a wide difference 
in the life of Paul Roden. Hitherto he had 
not been brought into close affinity with a 
young English lady of the higher sort ; and, 
though Miss Litton's friendship had done 
much to educate him, it did not supply all 
that he needed. The girls of Irontown were 
almost all of the middle class ; the doctors 



206 SWEET AOT) TWENTY. 

and lawyers and rich tradespeople had 
plenty of handsome daughters who would 
have delighted to assist Mr. Paul's educa- 
tion ; but they were all deficient in style, 
and he fancied none of them. This may 
form a slight excuse for his foolish flirtation 
with Sarah, who at least pretended to be 
nothing more than she was, a waiting-maid, 
and who, thQugh she brightened herself up 
with scraps of Fay's finery, had taste 
enough so to do it that she looked like a 
young waiting-maid still, though perhaps a 
little like one in a comedy. Now the young 
ladies of Irontown for the most part aped 
the dress and manners of the aristocracy, 
whom however they had few opportunities 
of seeing ; for the county people ignored the 
existence of this new wen on the surface of 
the shire, and avoided it carefully, and did all 



PAUL IS PERPLEXED. 207 

their business at the cathedral town of North- 
minster. Northminster was a drowsy town to 
look at, except on high days and holidays ; 
but there was a wonderful social life in the 
old city. With its High Church Bishop, its 
Low Church Dean, its prosperous Grammar 
.School, ruled by the youngest Head Master 
in England, its ladies' club, its county balls 
and assemblies, it was a charming nucleus of 
'county life. The old city looked as if it be- 
longed to the Middle Ages: the ancient houses 
in its Close, and the adjacent City Green had 
been inhabited by the same families from 
the day they were built. But to Paul 
Roden it was unknown ground, though only 
twenty miles from Irontown. He had visited 
it once or twice, but he knew no one there ; 
and the pretty girls whom he passed in its 
streets would have regarded him with utter 



208 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

disdain had they known he was an ironmas* 
ter's son. 

Paul found intercourse with Edith very 
pleasant She had a complete self-posses- 
sion which he had never found in any other 
woman. She did not patronize him at 
ally or take a mean advantage of the three 
or four years difference in their ages ; on the 
contrary, she always seemed to him a great 
deal younger than he knew she was. She 
had all the gaiety of eighteen, but with the 
calmness of experience behind it. Then she 
knew so much that Paul did not know. Her 
travel had filled her with knowledge of 
cities and character. She could not onlv 
speak but write Italian and French and 
German as easily as English. She was a bom 
artist and musician, but used her faculties 
merely as an amateur. These things about 



r 



PAUL IS PERPLEXED. 209 

her, and many others, Paul learnt only by 
degrees; for though very candid, she was 
not at all ostentatious, and rather concealed 
than paraded her unusual accomplishments. 
Still, though what Edith Tracy knew came 
upon Paul as a series of surprises, he found 
out at once, that her character was of a type 
to him hitherto unknown. She was as free 
and fearless with him as if she had been his 
sister; yet he felt that, however much he 
might come to admire .her, he should find 
it an uncommonly difficult thing to tell her 
so. 

Price Roden was as exhilarated as his son 
by the pleasant ways of their guest. He 
soon grew very fond of her, and regarded 
her as a daughter. He had never cared 

1. 

much for music, but Edith's gay and grace- 
ful songs cheered his evenings amazingly, 

VOL. L P 



210 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

and he began to understand that the too 
active brain can be lulled through the ear. 
One evening, when she left the piano, Paul 
aaid, 

" Do you play the organ, Edith ? There 
is a splendid organ in Westbury Church, 
given by Miss Litton. Would you like to 
try it?" 

'' Some day, perhaps. These little fingers 
of mine are not strong enough for a really 
fine organ. I can play the guitar better." 

" 0, can you ?" quoth Paul. *' Have you 
got one with you ?" 

" Yes," she said, " I have, but I am not 
going to play it to-night, at any rate. I 
must see if it is in tune. But when are you 
going to take me to see this charming old 
la^y you have told me so much about ?" 

" In a day or two, I hope. She is much 



PAUL IS P£RPLEXEP. 211 

better. I go over every morning to in- ' 
quire," 

Miss Litton had caught a bad cold, as the 
saying is ; and, when she had anything the 
matter with her, she shut herself up in her 
private rooms, and set to work resolutely to 
cure it. She had studied medicine all her 
life, and knew her own constitution, and 
never consulted with a doctor. This catarrh 
had prevented Paul's taking Miss Tracy to 
see her. 

While this conversation had been going 
on, Price Roden had been meditating. 
Edith had placed herself on a low stool near 
him, as was her habit after the music wais 
over. She quite understood him; better 
perhaps than Paul. She saw that, with all 
his harsh experience, and stern struggles 
with the world, he was a loving and lovable 

p2 



212 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

man, whom success had not spoilt, and to 
whom neither money nor show was the 
chief thing in the world. So she behaved 
to him intuitively as a daughter might; 
and Price Roden never came home from 
business in the evening without finding 
Edith ready to receive him with a cheerful 
smile, and to supply him with anything he 
needed. She discovered that on certain 
busy days he would go through his work, 
beginning often at sunrise, and ending just 
before his dinner hour, with scarcely any 
refreshment. So she insisted, with a pretty 
tyranny, on his havmg something the mo- 
ment he came home ; cutting him the dainti- 
est sandwiches, irresistible with a glass of 
sherry. Later in the year she made him 
take a few oysters and some chablis. 

" I think, Edith," said Price Roden, sud- 



PAUL IS PERPLEXED. 213 

denly, "thou hadst better make up thy 
mind to live with us till thou make up thy 
mind to marry somebody. Art thou happy 
here, or dost thou think it dull ?" 

*' I am very happy here," replied Edith 
quietly, " and I do not think it at all dull, 
and I will promise to stay as long as you like. 
Will that do ? Why, I am in Fairy-land. 
You are feeding me and petting me, and I 
am saving all my money. But there . that's 
a thing I want to talk to you about. Don't 
you think I ought to do some good to the 
poor or somebody with all that money I am 
not spending? I don't know anything 
about the way to help people who want help 
without doing any harm." 

*^ No more do I," said Price Roden. " I 
never let my people starve, that's all. But 
I am truly glad thou'lt stay, my lass," he 



214 SWEET AST) TWENTY. 

added, smoothing with his hand her rather 
rebellions hair of gold. 

" We will consult Miss Litton about your 
charitable projects, Edith/' said Paul Eoden. 
^^ She is very wise about such things. I 
hope she will soon be well enough to 
receive us." 

Paul Roden, during this slight illness of 
Miss Litton's, had gone daily to inquire 
for her, and had almost every day had a 
few minutes' talk with Sarah Daw. At 
first the young minx kept out of his way, 
thinking he would make an effort to seek 
her ; but his anxiety about Miss Litton, and 
his newborn interest in Edith, prevented his 
doing so. Then of course, being piqued, she 
managed to meet him accidentally in the 
garden walks ; for he came in by a postern 
gate which led to the house by a thick 



PAUL IS PERPLEXED. 215 

avenue of close-dipt yew, so haunted by 
birds that their twitter would drown the 
whisper of a pair of lovers. On the morn- 
ing after the conversation just recorded, he 
walked over on his usual errand. He was 
not intercepted by Sarah, as he entered, 
and rather rejoiced thereat. When he 
came into the ordinary reception-room, 
there was Fay in the highest spirits. 

" Auntie's well again, Paul," she cried. ' 
" You can see her. Now you'll be able to 
bring that dear Edith you talk about to see 
her. Bring her to-morrow, mind. Why, 
Paul, I've made a rhyme about it. 

* Atmiie^s well, and I am gay : 
Jan'titajoUyday?'" 

In this wild fashion did Fay Luttrel 
usher Paul into Miss Litton's room. 

"You are a good boy, Paul," said the old 



216 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

lady ; " you have inquired for me very re- 
gularly. Not that there was any need ; I 
only had a slight cold, and shut myself up 
until I had conquered it, so as not to be pes- 
tered. Fay tells me you have found a new 
cousin, and a very charming one. I am glad. 
Always adhere to your relations, Paul; 
blood is thicker than water. Bring your 
cousin here to-morrow, if she will come ; I 
long to see her/' 

^^ She will come with much pleasure, Miss 
Litton. I am sure you will like her. She 
is going to stay with us altogether, I am glad 
to say . at least, until she gets married." 

" Perhaps she'll stay with you even then, 
Paul," said Miss Litton, laughing. " How 
would you like her for a wife . or a step- 
mother ?" 

" I like her every way," he said, " but I 



PAUL IS PERPLEXED. 217 

don't think either of these casualties will 
happen." 

When he left Miss Litton, he went to take 
leave of Fay, who was in the morning- 
room, where she and Miss Clumber had what 
may be called educational duels. Miss 
Clumber was in every way a most excellent 
person, but she religiously believed whatever 
appeared in authoritative school-books, like 
Whittdker^s PinnocKs Goldsmith^ and Miss 
Corner, and Mrs. Markham, and Miss Mang- 
nall. Now Fay had a way of reading all 
sorts of irregular things ; and would occa- 
sionally puzzle Miss Clumber with some 
very awkward questions. 

** My dear Miss Clumber, this about the 
sun's distance is absurd. Astronomers have 
found out that this is wrong by seven or 
eight millions, but they won't be able to cor- 
rect it all till the next transit of Venus." 



218 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

The good governess was stricken with 
astonishment. She accepted the ninety-fi^ 
million miles, just as she accepted the 
Apostles' Creed ; and as to the transit of 
Venus, she had not the least notion what 
it meant. Her learning, the result of an 
industrious memory, was thrown away on 
a young alert precocious intellect, given 
to search for information wherever it could 
be found . alike from the Times newspaper 
and a gipsy fortune-teller. 

Miss Clumber rose to receive Paul, in a 
respectful fashion. The poor lady had been 
too much snubbed by vulgar employers ever 
to regain the freedom which doubtless was 
natural to her. Fay, who had a book in one 
hand, and a pair of compasses in the other, 
jumped up gaily, and said : 

** Auntie's well, you see. Is your cousin 
to come to-morrow ?" 



PAUL IS PERPLEXED. 219* 

" Yes," he said. " I know you will like 
her." 

He had not noticed till that moment that 
there was another person in the room . 
Sarah Daw. She was standing with a small 
book in her hand, looking very uncomforta* 
ble. She looked more uncomfortable when 
Fay said, 

" Only think, Paul, Sarah can't learn the 
pence-table. I want her to keep my accounts, 
and she is always making such silly mistakes. 
So I found she had never been taught her 
tables, and I am trying to make her learn 
them, but she is such a little dunce I 
Now, Sarah, shut your book ; how much is 
seventy pence ?" 

" Seven and sixpence, Miss," said Sarah^ 
who could hardly help crying at her hu- 
miliating position, 



220 SWBET AND TWENTY. 

"Upon my word, Sarah," said the im- 
petuous Fay, "you deserve to be whipt. 
Now learn it over again. 1 am trying to 
get on with Euclid, Paul : Papa is a great 
mathematidan, and I want to show him, 
when he comes back, that I have been 
thinking of him. I have got past the 
Asses' Bridge. You must help me if I am 
in any difficulty." 

"I'll try," he said; "though I am not 
very clever at geometry." 

Fay went down with him through the yew 
walks to the postern door. 

" You will bring Edith to-morrow," she 
said. " I am dying to see her. Come to 
lunch . now do come to lunch, and I'll make 
Miss Clumber give me a half-holiday ; and 
we'll all have such fun together. Lunch at 
one, sharp I I'll order it myself, and give 



PAUL IS PERPLEXED. 221 

you a glass of wine of my own choice/' 
As Paul Roden walked home, he could 
not help pitying poor little Sarah, made to 
learn her tables by this young despot, who 
inherited the Anglo-Indian instinct of com- 
mand. Poor little Sarah, who had expected 
to get a kiss from him in the yew walk I 



222 



CHAPTER XVI. 



A HALF-HOUDAT. 



*' The life of some men always is half-holiday.'* 

The Comedy of Dreams. 

TTOW Sarah Daw felt on this occasion 
-.J- may be imagined easily enough. 
She, in the pride of her coquettish beauty, 
which was manifest to all who saw her, 
had driven Bob Carr abroad, had made 
John Carr her worshipper, had almost, 
as she thought, subjugated Paul Roden, and 

4 

now she was treated like a schoolgirl by a 



J 



A HALF-HOLIDAY. 223 

young thing not much more than half her 
own age, and talked about in Mr. Paul's 
presence as a little dunce, that deserved 
whipping. Alone in her bedroom that night 
she thought over the scene in bitter indigna- 
tion. She went upstairs as early as she 
could, and locked her door fiercely, craving 
for isolation. She was her own only friend. 
There was no one to sympathise with her. 
If Mr. Paul had cared a doit for her, he 
would have interfered, but he seemed rather 
amused, and went off with Miss Fay, and 
never gave her a look. It was too bad . he 
that had kissed her so often, and said such 
pretty things to her. She would not stay to 
be so treated . she would go home to her 
mother. 

That idea, on second thoughts, did not 
suit her. The life at home was one of 



224 SWEET AND TWENTT. 

poverty and pinching and hard work, and 
she knew that her mother would not be 
well pleased to see her back again. Then 
she thought she would go away altogether, 
and try to find some place ever so far off. 
She had some money, for Westbury Place 
was a generous home. But to a little girl 
who has never left her native village the 
world seems very wide : and besides, Sarah 
was a coward, and knew she was a coward. 
She fainted when she saw that bull approach- 
ing her : Fay Luttrel would have sprung on 
the bull's back, a new Europa, and ridden 
him round the meadow till he was tired of 
his situation. 

Sarah that night, in the midst of her 
loneliness, her humiliation, her indignation, 
had no thought of sleep. She looked at 
herself in the glass ; she saw that she was 



A HALF-HOLIDAY. 225 

pretty and tastefully dressed ; she felt that 
she could like somebody very much indeed, 
if he was handsome and rich. She had no 
idea that anything beyond this could be 
required of a woman. As there are coun- 
tries in which certain plants cannot grow, 
so there are minds to which certain ideas 
are incommunicable. Tolerance in a Rod- 
man Catholic or a Calvinist brain is as de- 
void of possibility as the growth of the 
date-palm in England. To implant the 
idea of loyalty in a French brain is as diffi- 
cult as to make our English oak flourish in 
France; while to make the average Eng- 
lishman believe in equality would be harder 
than to grow a grape here that would make 
claret. Sarah's vision and faculty were 
limited. She thought of herself first; se- 
condly, of the young fellows in the neigh- 

VOL. I. Q 



226 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

bourhood who admired her. But she could 
not, though clever and craftily coquettish, 
And full of pretty kittenish tricks, to some 
men irresistible, see beyond the limit of her 
narrow horizon. She had no power to 
understand John Carr's wise steadfastness, 
or Robert Carr's strong spirit of enterprise, 
or Paul Roden's variable nature and wide 
ranges of thought. Beyond her small love- 
circle, the nature of man was to her a 
blank. She was matchless at her own 
game, but the card-player who knows no- 
thing but " Beggar my neighbour " is likely 
to fail at whist. 

Sarah did not undress that night. She 
passed hours of real misery, though it must 
be remembered that there is a vast differ- 
ence between the agony of a high nature 
and the anguish of a low nature. In one 



A HALF-HOLIDAT. 227 

case there is unconquerable resistance . ^in 
the other early submission. Sarah soon 
took to crjdng and fretting and sobbing; 
and so she tired herself out, and then she 
lay down on her bed without undressing. 

Sarah slept, but it was a disturbed sleep ; 
and when she awoke, and found herself 
still dressed, she recalled the whole of her 
troubles. But a wholesome fear came upon 
her. She had to attend on Miss Fay in the 
early morning, and perhaps she had over- 
slept herself. She looked at . her pretty 
little watch . John Carr*s gift . ^but it had 
run down. She crept out quietly into the 
hall, and found by the clock there that it 
was as yet only six. Miss Fay would not 
be likely to want her for two more hours. 
So she returned to her room, and took off 
her pretty crumpled dress, and ribbons and 

q2 



228 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

laces, soiled by crying, and put on a clean 
gown, and freshened her face with cold 
water, and then decided to stroll out into 
the gardens, thinking the cool soft air might 
lessen the fever she felt in her blood. She 
knew an easy way out, and was soon among 
flowers that smelt all the more delicious be- 
cause the dew-pearls of night were just 
touched by the delicious warmth of dawn. 
She went through the yew-avenues, where 
yesterday she longed to have met Mr. Paul 
. ^whom to-day she detested and despised . 
and she leaned over a wicket-gate that look- 
ed out into the lane. Her violet eyes, her 
soft brown hair, her vexed pouting rosy 
lips, her little plump figure, in its fresh 
morning attire, were prettily framed by the 
evergreen that overhung the gate. A pity 
there was no one to see her ; so she thought. 



A HALF-HOLIDAY. 229 

" And yet/* she argued with herself, "who 
was there she would care to see ?" She would 
never care to see Mr. Paul again, and would 
refuse to answer him if he spoke to her ; and 
yet she might perhaps be able to manage 
him if that forward Miss Fay were out of 
the way. She thought she would try once 
more. 

Suddenly she started. She heard the 
tread of a horse in the lane. She laughed at 
herself. Of course, at that early hour, it 
was only some farmer's man, or perhaps a 
groom. At any rate, it could not be Mr. 
Paul. The steps came nearer. She placed 
herself in a picturesque attitude at the 
wicket, framed in evergreen, and placidly 
awaited the new-comer. 

Horse and rider were soon visible. No 
farmer's man or groom, nor Mr. Paul, but 



230 SWEET AND TWBNTT. 

only honest John Carr, on a bright chestnut 
mare, making an early inspection of the 
furnaces. Having time on his hands, he had 
ridden round by the Manor, persuading him- 
self that he had done so for fresh air. 
Doubtless he had a sentimental fancy for 
passing so near to his foolish little sweet- 
heart, though he did not expect to see her. 
When he caught sight of her at the gate he 
thought her a beautiful vision. He pulled up 
at once, jumped down, and came to the 
wicket-gate, with his arm through his horse's 
rein. 

" How nice to find you here I" he said. 
** And how pretty you look ! I must have 
a kiss, Sarah, dear I" 

He had released the mare, who was con- 
tentedly browsing on some wayside grass. 
He took her in his arms, and gave her a 



A HALF-HOLIDAY. 231 

very quiet kiss . a kiss of kindness rather 
than of love. John Carr restrained himself, 
feeling that Sarah was still a child. She 
felt the difference. She somewhat disdained 
John Carr for the honourable self-restraint 
which she could not understand. 

'^ It is quite a pleasure to meet you at so 
unlikely a time, Sarah/' he said. ''And 
you are looking so well. I hope you are 
happy here, Sarah? Always tell me if 
anything makes you unhappy. I consider 
you minej you know, unless you change 
your mind . and I do hope you won't.' 

Sarah said very little during this brief 
interview, but what she did say delighted 
John Carr, who gave her a much warmer 
kiss when they parted than when they met. 
He rode off, joyous at having seen his sweet- 
heart, and sipped the dew of her lips. She, 



.9 J. 1» 



232 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

loitering slowly back through the garden 
alleys, thought to herself, 

"He is the best of them all. He does 
love me. 0, I do want to be loved 1" 

Fay Luttrel made her arrangements with- 
out difficulty for a half-holiday, and cajoled 
Miss Litton into letting her contrive her 
own luncheon for their visitors, and choose 
her own wines. Luncheon was to be served 
in the paiio^ in a space surrounded by a wil- 
derness of ferns, and shaded by some superb 
exotic plant, with white star-flowers, that 
reached the glass in its upward growth. It 
was a very choice little collation, with some 
eccentricities suggested by Fay, and every- 
body seemed to like it. They were a curious 
party: aristocratic Miss Litton, vivacious 
Miss Tracy, quiet Miss Clumber, indescriba- 
ble Fay Luttrel, and our friend Paul Roden, 






A HALF-HOLIDAY. 233 

the sole male creature among so many. In 
waiting were Miss Litton's old butler and 
Sarah Daw, Sarah had rather a defiant 
look; for, after her interview with John 
Carr that morning, she felt that she need 
not remain a servant any longer. He would 
free her from service, she knew ; but then 
the difficult question occurred . Did she want 
to marry John Carr? She was obliged to 
answer this question in her own mind nega- 
tively. 

Edith Tracy was equally well received by 
Miss Litton and by Fay Luttrel. The old 
lady of Westbury recognised in her the true 
type of womanhood, calm at the core amid 
all its vivacity, free from all aflfectation, and 
superior to all sentiment. As to Fay, she 
simply saw in her somebody she could talk 
to and be jolly with. Miss Clumber was a 



234 SWEET ASD TWENTT. 

very good creature, but her brain moved at 
aboat a tenth the pace of Fa/s, and any- 
thing like interchange of ideas was simply im- 
possible ; but the first few sentences inter- 
changed between Edith and Fay showed 
that they were of the same kind ; and Fay, 
who had been a good deal bored by the 
general dulness of everybody at Westbury 
Place, except Miss Litton, was delighted be- 
yond measure to meet some one who could 
think as fast as herself, and who knew a 
wondrous deal more. Fay fell in love with 
Edith at first sight. 

When luncheon was over, they went off 
into the gardens, to see the sights of the 
place. It was only Paul, Edith, and Fay : ; 
for Miss Litton seldom walked much, and 
Miss Clumber had a shy avoidance of socie- 
ty. She was a very conscientious and ex-. 



. A HALF-HOUDAT. 235 

cellent governess, but felt herself out of 
place when young people were talking pleas- 
ant nonsense in the sunshine. Her life had 
hitherto seen little sunshine, and there was 
no nonsense in Mangnalls Questions, or 
Mrs. Markham's Histories. 

So Paul and Edith and Fay rambled 
about the pleasant grounds of Westbury 
Place, pending the time when they were ta 
have four o'clock tea with Miss Litton. All 
the while Sarah Daw watched them from 
her bed-room Mrindow, and was miserable^ 
but consoled herself with the thought that 
there was one person who cared for her . 
John Carr. 

After traversing the gardens, all kept in 
the loveliest order, and full of the choicest 
flowers . for Miss Litton was born a garden- 
er . ^they sat down under a great cedar-tree* 



236 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

" How do you like this place, Edith ?" 
«aid Fay, impetuously. " Isn't it nice ? 
Isn't Aunt Hannah nice? It isn't grand 
like Paul's big house, you know ; but it's 
snug and pleasant. You may laugh, Paul ; 
you may grow pineapples at the Hall . and 
O, ain't they nice ? . but Auntie says you 
<^n't equal her peaches." 

'* That is quite true," said Paul. " Miss 
Litton has very fine trees of the rare 
September peach." 

'^ I am delighted with this house and its 
<;harming gardens," said Edith. "I hope 
you will let me come very often. I shall 
be glad to see you, Fay, but I shall be even 
more glad to see Miss Litton." 

" Of course," replied Fay, quickly, " I'm 
only a child. You can't learn anjrthing 
from me, but Auntie's as wise as the Queen 



A HALF-HOLIDAY. 237 

of Sbeba after she took lessons from 
Solomon. Never mind ; I shall be an old 
lady one of these days, and then won't I be 
tremendously wise ?" 

She jumped from the seat on which they 
were sitting, put her foot on its top rail^ 
caught hold of the great cedar's lowest 
bough, and in a moment swung herself into 
it. Then she went up the dark stairs of the 
tree till she was fifty feet above them, 
climbing as easily as a squirrel. 

" She is a marvellous child, Paul," said 
Miss Tracy ; " I wonder how she will grow 
up. 

" I have often wondered," he said. " She 
is the most original creature I ever saw. 
She understands everything and fears 
nothing." 

"She is only eleven years old," said 



238 SWBBT AND TWENTY, 

Edith. "What will she be at twenty?" 

This confidential conversation was inter- 
rupted by Fay's rapid descent. She came 
gliding from branch to branch as easily as if 
she had been born in a tree, and lived there 
always. 

" It is so pleasant," she cried, springing 
to the ground from the lowest branch, 
** right at the top of that tree; You can see 
for miles all round. I came down in a 
hurry because I saw there was a hawk's 
nest there, and the bird flew out, and I 
wouldn't disturb her more than I could 
help. But I'll tame one of the young 
hawks, I declare." 

" Aren't you afraid of breaking your neck, 
Fay ?" said Paul Roden. 

" Well 1" she replied. " As if anything 
was easier than climbing a tree. You have 



A HALF-HOLIDAY. 239 

only to use your hands and feet. Edith, do 
you climb trees ?" 

" I never tried," said Miss Tracy, laughing. 

" Well, try now," said Fay, jumping and 
clapping her hands. " Try now. Come up 
with me, and see the young hawks. There 
are six of them . such delicious little 
beauties. Now, won't you come? And 
there's such a splendid view." 

Fay was quite in earnest, while Paul and 
Edith were both amused and amazed. 
Edith had in her time got up into an old 
mulberry-tree to pick some fruit, but the 

« 

ascent of that aerial cedar, whose summit 
rose far above the chimneys of Westbury 
Place, was rather too tremendous an enter- 
prise. However, she had not time again to 
decline, for at this moment Sarah Daw 
came tripping down demurely to say Miss 



240 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

Litton would be glad to see them at tea. 

There was something in Sarah's look that 
caught Miss Tracy's observant eye. She 
could not quite understand it. She made 
up her mind to notice her rather more 
closely. 

Fragrant was the odour where Miss Litton 
sat, her quaint old silver teapot before her, 
and the silver kettle on its tripod throwing 
out a flood of steam, and the spirit-lamp 
burning with a delicate fragrance, some 
Indian scent being dissolved in the alcohol, 
and various ladylike luxuries on the table, 
such as you only see in old country houses 
. such as those only eat who don't mind 
spoiling their dinners. The little old lady 
looked more like a good fairy than a real 
substantial lady of the manor. The tea 
and its accompaniments were delicious. 



t? 



A HALF-HOLIDAY. 241 

"We are quiet folk here, Miss Tracy," 
she said, "but we shall always be glad to 
see you, and hope you will come often. This 
young witch Fay is like an English flower 
that has been forced in a hothouse; her 
brain is half a dozen years older than the 
rest of her. She must be gradually brought 
down to the temperate habits of our temper- 
ate climate/' 

Sarah Daw, who was in waiting, did not 
understand Miss Litton's metaphoric lan- 
guage, but she guessed it meant Miss Fay 
-wjas " too fast," and she agreed with every 
word of it. 

" 0, I shall soon flourish in your temper- 
ate climate. Auntie," she said. " It's a good 
thing to be bom in Asia, you know, because 
that's where Adam and Eve were born, my 
old ayah used to say. But it's better to 

VOL. L R 



242 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

live in England, because tbere I've got 
Auntie to take care of me.*" 

"Better than your father, Fay?" said 
Miss Litton. 

" 0, Papa 1 he is the best of papas ; but 
what time had he for an insignificant chit like 
tue ? I used to see him at tiffin, and that's 
about all. Papa's a soldier," she said, proud- 
ly. "If you once saw him on horseback 
at the head of his regiment, you'd know 
that he wasn't made to look after a baby 
like ma" 

"You take it very quietly," said Mifia 
Tracy, much amused. " Shouldn't you like 
to see your Papa ?" 

" dear no, not yet. I want to surprise 
him. When I'm twenty he may come home ; 
and he'll have done something grand, I 
know, and we shall hear his name all over 



A HALF-HOLIDAY. 243 

England. No," she said, very decisively, 
" I don't want him to come home till I'm 
twenty." 

The picture of Fay at twenty formed 
itself distinctly on Paul Roden's imagination. 
What a strangely beautiful creature she 
would be I And he, only just past thirty, 
entering on the prime of life, might per- 
chance win her, if only he would wait. 
Sarah Daw, who, still in waiting, followed 
this conversation as well as she could, felt a 
thrill of jealousy pass through her as she 
sav Paul Roden's eyes fixed upon the child's 
face with a gaze of admiration. She began 
to detest Fay as much as Paul. Hers was a 
shallow nature, or she might have felt dis- 
posed to go to Fay's bedside as she slept, 
and run a sharp knife into her breast. Some 
such vague idea arose in her timorous mind. 

b2 



244 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

But she fell back on the thought of that 
morning's few pleasant words with John 
Carr. That interview had made her a trifle 
braver. She felt resolved her little mistress 
should not tyrannize over her any more, 

"You see what a wild creature she is, 
Miss Tracy,** said the old lady. " I wonder 
what she thinks she will be like at 
twenty?** 

Paul wondered too, but he said nothing. 

"01 couldn*t tell you, Auntie, what I 
hope to be, for you would think me con- 
ceited. But I only want Papa to be proud 
of his daughter when he comes home, you 
know. Mayn't I try ?" 

*' Conceited little thing I'* thought Sarah. 

" By all means, child,'* said Miss Litton ; 
" Miss Clumber will help you* And now 



A HALF-HOLIDAY, 245 

eat your cake and drink your tea, you little 
chatterbox." 

All this time Edith Tracy, keenly obser- 
vant, had noticed the changing expressions 
of Sarah Daw's face, and had inferred from 
them that she took peculiar interest in Paul. 
Certainly it did not at that time seem that 
Paul took much interest in her. Edith, who 
had always been a critic of human nature, 
felt sure that this little servant had a foolish 
fancy for Paul, and wondered in her own 
mind whether he knew of it or encouraged 
it. She devoutly hoped not, knowing well 
what harm such mistakes infallibly do. 

Paul and Edith were due at Roden Hall 
in time for a seven o'clock dinner ; but Miss 
Litton, who had heard of Edith's musical 
accomplishment, asked her to give them a 
song before she went. 



246 SWEET AJSfD TWENTY. 

" I hope you will often sing for me, dear 
Miss Tracy. I am so fond of the music of 
the human voice, but I do not care to visit 

the Opera. I like my music at home.'' 
*^ I will learn to sing," thought Fay . and 

she did. 
Edith sat down to a pretty cabinet piano^ 

and sang this ballad : 

The yonng King standg by his palace-gate, 
O what a joy is the youth of a King I 

Tired a little of splendour and state . 
Hark in the valley the sweet birds sing. 

Like a lion*s mane his yellow hair, 

His eye as keen as a hawk*s on the wing, 

The ladies gaze and tremble there^ 
Ahy is it not sweet,* the love of a King ? 

He sees the towers of his city below, 
O shining river ! O ships that swing I 

Throngh wide white streets his people flow, 
Hark, the bells of the Minster ring I 

The Beggar comes by with a nut-brown akin. 
Ah, deep in the heart lies misery's sting I 

Her eye has a blue to the sky akin, 
Tirra-Urra, he hears her sing. 



A HALF-HOLIDAY. 247 

Forward lie strides as the girl he sees, 

O how wild is the wiU of a King I 
The ladies titter under the trees ; 

Still the bells of the Minster ring. 

What the young King whispers none has heard 
Hey for the heath where the wild birds sing 

But the echo is .caught of the Beggar's word : 
^ I love my bye, and he is not a King." 

''That is charming/' said Miss Litton. 
"The story of King Cophetua read another 
way. Who is the author of ihose words ? 
You sing well, Miss Tracy; you give us 
words and music also." 

" Well," she said, laughingly, " the music 
is mine the poetry is written by some one 
who would object to my mentioning his 
name. He read me the verses one evening 
when I was staying at his house, and I asked 
permission to set music to them." 

^- So you have a mysterious poet among 
your acquaintance, Cousin Edith," said Paul. 



248 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

'* I hope you will give us some more of his 
songs." 

** There is not the least mystery about 
him/' said Edith, laughing ; " but tha,t is a 
song he has never published, and he gave 
it me as my own, because he liked the music 
I made for it. That's all the mystery." 

^^ It is a charming ballad," remarked Miss 
Litton, '^ and conveys the useful lesson that 
people ought not to marry above or below 
their ranks. When that girl said, 

* I love my love, and he ib not a King/ 

she showed the young King that there is at 
least one thing in the world which Kings 
cannot command. Your unknown poet gives 
girls and boys a very good lesson, Miss 
Tracy." 

Even half-holidays must end ; there is no 
land in which it is " always afternoon." Nor, 



« . 



A HALF-HOLIDAY. 249 

indeed, should I desire that monotony, hav- 
ing a preference for midnight. The pleas- 
ant party broke up, and Paul and Edith 
started to walk across the fields to Roden 
Hall, about a mile through open meadow 
and winding lane. 

The cousins walked in silence for some 
time. The sky was sapphire and the grass 
emerald, and a soft south wind brought 
delicious odours over wide stretches of 
sweet-flowered meadow-land. Both Were 
meditative. Paul was thinking that he was 
rather a fool to have entangled himself with 
that silly little Sarah, when he might marry 
a beautiful lady, if he only tried : and Edith 
was occupied also with Sarah, wondering 
whether there was anything between her 

. _ 

and Paul. Suddenly, just as Paul had 
helped her over a stile, she spoke. 



250 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

** What a pretty little servant-maid Miss 
Litton has managed to pick up ! . she looks 
like a pretty bit of pink and white china." 

'^ And quite as fragile/' interposed Paul. 

"But," Edith went on, **shedoe8 not seem 
to be quite happy under Fay's despotic treat- 
ment. Those Indian children are always 
so tyrannical to servants. I thought the 
young woman looked rather rebellious at 
times. Did you notice her, Paul ?" 

" I have scarcely looked at her," he said, 
coolly. " I know her people. John Carr, 
who is my father's factotum and great 
favourite, is her cousin, and sweetheart, too, 
I believe. Old Mrs. Daw is eminently re« 
spectable . what, in these parts, they call a 
chapeUwoman ; she would skin her daugh? 
ter alive if she did anything naughty. Butt 
I suppose all young girls in that class of life 
are a little flighty." 



A HAI4F-HOLIDAY. 251 

Edith was convinced by Paul's cool man- 
ner, and concluded in her own mind that 
the little girl was simply fascinated by Paul's 
personal appearance. A handsome fellow, 
Miss Tracy admitted, and a good fellow too ^ 
yet, she thought to herself, she could not 
marry him. She could not quite tell why ; 
the reasons were in her brain, uncrystallised. 
Later experience taught her all about it. 
Meanwhile, that was her decision ; and she 
had not the remotest notion that he, as he 
walked by her side, was pondering deeply 
the question whether he would not ask her 
to marry him. It occurred to him that she 
was beautiful and brilliant, a lady, not alto- 
gether poor, with a wonderful knowledge of 
the world, and only three or four years 
older than himself. What was three or 
four years? Should he ask her? He 



252 SWEET ASD TWEinr. 

thought of it very seriously on their home- 
ward way, but could not find a convenient 
comer for the enterprise. 

I suppose if, simultaneously, what Paul 
was thinking of could have been revealed to 
Edith, and what Edith was thinking of to 
Paul, they would have abruptly separated, 
and never met again. The limits of know- 
ledge in this world are wisely arranged by 
the '^ sage atoms " that attend to that de- 
partment ; we walk and talk together, yet 
there can be no certainty of truth in our 
intercourse. 

Paul didn't ask the momentous question : 
whether it would have been wise of him to 
.do so, we shall discover in due time. 

Price Roden was rather curious that 
evening as to what had occurred at West- 
bury Place. There was in Price Roden's 



A HALF-HOLIDAY. 25S 

mind rather a remorseful feeling for the 
strange havoc he and his ironworks had 
made in that hitherto quiet shire. Many 
men who come to the front may have good 
blood, which has struggled for generations 
through pauper veins; and Price Roden, 
though he could not conquer all his prejU" 
dices, was marvellously superior to the vulgar 
parvenu. At dinner that night he wanted 
to know all about Miss Litton's establish- 
ment, and both Paul and Edith described it 
as most charming. He listened to their 
vivid sketches with much amusement ; then 
he suddenly said, 

*^ Paul, thou hast found pleasant friends. 
There is nothing like the good old blood. 
The Littons and the Rodens have been in 
this shire for many a long year. I'm a 
working man, thou knowest, and I care not 



254 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

to look up old genealogies, but there are 
books in the library which give Litton and 
Roden as names heneabout three hundred 
years ago. Thou wilt find one on my desk 
that I discovered only to-day, which shows 
the two families were here in the sixteenth 
century." 

" I should very much like to look at that," 
said Edith. 

"It is a book of the county histories," 
said Price Roden. '^ I havef had it for years, 
but looked at it only lately. I confess I am 
glad that we Rodens did our work in the 
shire three hundred years ago. Thou wilt 
find we did our duty, Paul, or else the book 
lies." 

" I shall be glad to see that my ancestors 
did their duty, father," he said. "The book 



A HALF-HOLIDAY. 255 

is on your reading-desk. I will look at it 
presently." 

" You may look at it when you like. I 
am going to bed," said Price Roden, " for I 
have had hard work to-day. But I want 
Edith to sing me something first. Will you, 
my dear ?" 

"Of course I will," she said. "I wish I 
could sing fresher things with a better 
voice." 

She went to the piano, Paul following. 
To turn over music for a pretty songstress is 
a difficult and delicate duty. On this occa* 
sion it was not necessary, for Edith sang 
from memory : 

The days of old were magic days, 
The knights so brave, the maids so fair I 

Strange beauty in the forest ways, 

And o'er the sea a mystic haze : 
^Twas magic everywhere. 



256 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

Why these our days are magic days, 

If only we have eyes to see : 
My darling has her witching ways, 
Her laugh brings out the sun's bright rays, 

And fills the birds with glee. 

That night Edith Tracy, when alone, 
thought a good deal over the occurrences of 
the day. She had noted Sarah Daw's evi- 
dent pre-occupation with Paul ; she fancied 
that once or twice Paul had shown some 
slight reciprocal feeling. However deter- 
mined he might be not to do so, it seems 
probable that Paul could scarcely have 
passed the whole time without a glance at 
Sarah, whom he had lovingly embraced more 
than once; and Edith Tracy felt sure she 
had detected something of the kind, and de- 
termined, being a perfectly fearless lady, to 
have it out with Paul. She regarded him 
as a boy, who might very likely make a fool 



A HALF-HOLIDAY. 257 

of himself. She resolved to stop it, if pos- 
sible. 

*'ril talk to Master Paul to-morrow," 
said Edith to herself, shaking her bright 
curls ; but she changed her mind when the 
morrow came. 

Little Sarah Daw, after that interview 
with John Carr, felt defiant ; and, when she 
waited on Fay Luttrel at night, she gathered 
courage enough to say, 

'* If you please. Miss Fay, I don't think it 
was kind of you yesterday to call me a 
dunce when Mr. Paul was there." 

She was dressing Fay's hair at this time 
. wondrous long brown hair, that would 
clothe the child to her waist. She felt a 
certain advantage, doubtless, in thus de- 
livering her remonstrance. It did not 
occur to her that Fay could see her face in 

VOL. I. s 



258 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

the glass all the time, and thereby judge of 
her sincerity. But Fay was a bom physiogno- 
mist, and had watched Sarah preparing her- 
self for this utterance. 

She turned upon her sharply, an agile 
creature with bright eyes, and hair hanging 
all over her. 

" Sarah," she said, " I shall say what 1 
please to you. What has Mr. Paul to do 
with it ? What is he to you ? He never 
looks at you, I suspect. I told you you 
were an ignorant little dunce, and wanted a 
whipping; and I'll ask Aunt Hannah to 
have you whipt if you ever dare to talk to 
me in this way." 

" please, Miss Fay," said Sarah, instant- 
ly frightened. 

"Finish my hair at once," said Fay. 
"The idea of your mentioning Mr. Paul 



A HALF-HOLIDAY. 259 

Roden's name in that way. What next ?" 
Sarah obeyed. Fay terrified her. She 
could only fall back on the thought of John 
Carr. 



82 



260 



CHAPTER XVIL 



JOHN garb's PBOMOnONr 



The fiddle can sing, the fiddle can talky 
The fiddle can make a lame man walk, 
The fiddle can laugh, the fiddle can woo 
Maiden shyest that ever you knew, 
The fiddle can swear, the fiddle can scream, 
The fiddle can bring you love's sweet dream, 
In palace or cottage or tower or tent, 
Never'knew fiddler discontent* 

Fidicinis Fahula, 

SUMMER died slowly into autumn, and 
the nights drew in, and fires began to 

bum at Westbury Place and Boden HalL 



JOHN care's fbomotion. 261 

Meanwhile Price Roden's business flourished, 
and he found that among all his subordinates 
none rendered assistance so efficient as John 
Carr. After a talk to his son, just to 
ascertain whether that young gentleman, 
whom he spoilt almost as absurdly as 
Lord Holland spoilt Charles Fox, would be 
jealous of Carr's elevation to a prominent 
position, Price Roden resolved to make him 
his confidential manager. Paul of course had 
not the least objection ; he had no special 
delight in hard work, and was quite content 
with a life of busy idleness. To do him 
justice, he was never unemployed ; he walked 
and rode and read; he wrote desultory 
essays, not with an idea of publication, but 
to teach himself English. Paul had sense 
enough to know that a mastery of language 
is a valuable accomplishment, whatever 



262 . SWXXT ASD TWENTT. 

position a man occupies. Besides, he was 
the life and soul of the Trontown Cricket 
Club, and paid the salaiy of their profession- 
al bowler ; and it is perhaps unnecessary to 
say that he was Captain of the Irontown 
Volunteers. He smiled serene approval when 
his father proposed to ^ve John Carr the 
position which would have naturally been 
his own had he cared for it. 

" John," said Price Roden to Carr, in his 

private counting-house next day, " I want 
thee to be my head man, out and out, and 
take charge of all the private business of the 
firm, just as if thou wert I. Thou hast 
worked well, lad. FU give thee a wage 
worthy of the place, for a man who is trust- 
ed should be paid for his trust. What 
sayest thou, John ?" 

*'I will do my best to fill such an import- 



JOHN cabr's promotion. 263 

ant place, sir," he said. " Til be honest, at 
any rate," 

'''That I know, lad," said Price Roden; 
and then, for some hours, he was occupied 
in explaining to John Carr the private 
financial arrangements of the firm, their in- 
vestments, their position with various cus- 
tomers, their dealings with the banks. 

Through this labjrrinth we will not follow 
them. It was time then for refreshment. 
Price Roden, among other intelligent and 
humane arrangements for the benefit of his 
workmen, had a regular restaurant connect- 
ed with the works, where each man could, 
if he chose, get a good dinner for just as 
much beyond its cost as would pay expenses. 
The keeper of this restaurant was licensed, 
and supplied home-brewed ale of the best 
quality ; but spirits were only sold to men 



264 8WBKT AND TWENTY. 

who were A 1 on the list . ^for Price Roden 
had classified his workmen according to 
regular roles. Men were allowed to bring 
their wives and children, if they chose : and 
they did choose, very often. Price Roden, 
when he thought of it, was wont to have 
luncheon sent up from the Refectory, as 
Paul had classically called it : often, indeed, 
he limched in the dining-room, and had a 
pleasant chat with his men and their wives. 
There was nothing exclusive about Price 
Roden ; he was a gregarious cordial club- 
bable man. 

On this day he had ordered luncheon to 
be sent to his private room, and it arrived 
just as he had finished the laborious business 
of imparting to John Carr knowledge of 
affairs which, hitherto, had been locked 
closely in his own brain . affairs of a colos- 



1 



JOHN care's promotion. 265 

sal character, which it was no easy thing to 
make plain and dear. With the luncheon^ 
brought in by a deft waitress (for the Refec- 
tory gave employment to the workmen's 
daughters) arrived also Paul, whom his 
father had asked to be there. 

"We have finished our business, Paul," 
said Price Roden. " Glad you are punctu- 
al. John Carr and I have got on famously 
together ; but it was a tough piece of work, 
and we are both hungry." 

" And thirsty too, father, I should think," 
quoth Paul, heartily grasping John Carr's 
hand. " Carr, old fellow, I'm glad we have 
you here to do work that I ought to do, if I 
were fit for it. I hope you'll be our part- 
ner one of these days ; Roden, Son, & Carr 
would sound excellent well. Meanwhile, 
we'll drink your health and prosperity in 
champagne." 



266 SWEET AKD TWENTY* 

Impetuous Paul had ordered some to be 
sent up (the Refectory kept it for the supply 
of Price Rodents numerous visitors), and 
immediately began to open a bottle. The 
health was drunk, and John Carr said, 
quietly, 

"Thank you, Mr. Paul. I hope to be 
your father's faithful servant, and yours 
also." 

"John/' said Price Roden, in the course 

of luncheon, " you must take a nice house 

« 

now. There's that little place of mine in 

the South Road, Birklands, will be empty at 

Christmas ; old Wakefield, the Postmaster, 

has resigned his situation, and is going 

abroad for his health. It would be just the 

thing for you ; not too large to commence 

with. It has a nice bit of garden, and I 

know you're fond of gardening, John. Of 



JOHN carr's promotion. 267 

course, you'll be wanting something larger 
in time, when you will be giving dinners 
now and then, and when, I hope, you will 
have a good and handsome wife to take the 
head of your table, and arrange your house- 
hold ; and, maybe, some little Carrs added 
to the family . eh, John? But I think 
Birklands would suit you now. What say 
you ?" 

" Don't you think it's too fine and dear 
for me, sir ?" 

" Well, the rent's fifty pounds a year to 
you : and a man's rent is generally reckoned 
at a tenth of his income. Now we've not 
had a word about salary yet, John, but I 
shall give you enough to make that right. 
And you'll have room there for your father 
and mother, if you like them to come, and 
they like to live with you." 



268 SWEET AKD TWE&Ti, 

" TheyTl never leave the cottage, T doubt, 
ar,*" said John Carr. " And it's because I 
fear the/11 miss me so much now that BoVs 
away that I he^tate about doing what I see 
I ought to do. Your grand customers 
wouldn't think much of me/' continued John^ 
with a laugh, ^^ if they found T lived in the 
dear old cottage on the common. But I 
don't believe my father and mother could 
be got to come away." 

" You'll be able to see them every day," 
said Paul Roden. " I should keep my bed- 
room, if I were you, and go and sleep there 
now and then. But how about the hand- 
some wife, John, eh ? Who is she to be ?" 

^^ I don't much think about marriage at 
present, Mr. Paul," said John Carr. " Time 
enough for that." 

** Ah," said Paul, " don't leave it too long. 



JOHN care's promotion. 269 

I fancy you're not much the sort of fellow 
to fall in love with a pretty face, that will 
very soon fade. A lady with brains, and a 
little money if possible, would suit you best," 

John Carr, who had fallen desperately in 
love with a pretty face, began to think Paul 
Roden had found him out and was chaffing 
him. However he took no notice there- 
of, having the fortunate faculty of self- 
control. 

That evening, as he approached the cot- 
tage, he could hear his father holding counsel 
with his violin. The melodies seemed more 
pathetic and tender than ever. There was 
no deviation into dance-music. Was there a 
prophetic wood-nymph buried in the tree 
from which Antonio Stradivari made that 
marvellous violin? Suddenly, as Fiddler 
Carr caught sight of his son's shadow pro* 



270 SWEET AND TWENTT. 

jected across the green tarf to Titanic size 
by the setting sun behind him, he burst into 
" See the conquering hero comes," and en- 
riched the air with variations of the most 
amazing character. 

That evening at supper, John Carr, whom 
neither the events of the day nor Paul's 
champagne had unduly elated, drank a 
mighty draught of ale before he commenced 
his story. Then he said : 

** Father, Tve good news for you. I'm to 
be manager of the Irontown works, and do 
all the business. Mr. Paul doesn't care about 
it, and Mr. Roden thinks I can do it. I've 
been through all the affairs to-day with Mr. 
Roden." 

Fiddler Carr said no word, but his violin 
gave out one soft mellow note. Mrs. Carr 
exclaimed : 



.--^-i 



JOHN care's promotion. 271 

" Thanks to the Lord 1 Now thou'lt be 
a gentleman, my son." 

" Well, mother," said John, ^' I always 
think father's as good a gentleman as any- 
body. But I shall have more money . I 
don't know how much yet, but it won't be 
less than five hundred a year." 

" Five hundred a year, John !" cried his 
mother. " Whv, 'tis a fortune." 

" Not exactly," he said, smiling. " I shall 
be obliged to live in a different way and 
spend more money. Mr. Roden wants me 
to take a nice house of his in the South 
Road : that will be fifty pounds a year . al- 
most sixty, with the rates, I expect. Will 
you and father come and live with me there ?" 

The imprisoned wood-nymph of Stradivari 
uttered an electric No. Mrs. Carr said : 

" Nay, John, we couldn't leave the cot- 



272 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

tage. We'll live and die here. Why, what 
would Bob say, coming across the common 
some evening from India just in time for 
supper, if he saw strange faces when he 
opened the garden gate, and his asparagus 
beds all gone to ruin ?" 

" Your mother's right, John,*' said Fiddler 
Carr. *^ We'll live and die here, please God. 
I must have the common in front of me in 
the pleasant evenings, and make the lads 
and lasses dance when my fiddle's in a merry 
mood. No, John, my lad, here well stay, 
and here you'll come to us whenever you 
can. For Mr. Roden's right; now he's 
given you that place of trust, you must hold 
your own with the best gentleman of the 
town. You'll be dining with Mr. Murray at 
the Bank, and Mr. Codicil the lawyer, and 
have to ask them in return. You must do 



JOHN care's promotiok. 273 

what Mr. Roden advises. Don't be too 
humble, John. You're working your way up, 
just as your master did before you. You'll 
be his partner by-and-by." 

"That's what Mr. Paul said to-day, father. 
And he advised me to keep my bed-room 
here, and come and sleep here whenever I 
could manage it." 

" Mr, Paul's a thoughtful lad," said Mrs. 
Carr, " though he is a trifle flighty. Yes, 
John, you must come and sleep here, and 
look after the potatoes and asparagus in the 
mornings. And now you'll be choosing a 
wife, John; and, mind my words, you'll 
have to take a lady. If you marry some 
pretty little hussy without any book-learn- 
ing or manners, or knowing how to dress 
herself, like that doll-faced Sally Daw, think 
how ashamed you'd be of her when you live 

VOL. I. T 



274 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

in a fine place like Roden Hall, and all the 
best gentry in the Shire come to see you." 

'* I don't much expect to live in any such 
place as that, mother,'* said John Carr ; 
but I am not the man to marry in a hurry. 
You may trust me," 

" May I ?" said Mrs. Carr. " I'd trust no 
man where a woman is concerned. Solo- 
mon was the wisest of men, they say, and 
see what a fool the women made of him. 
You're a clever lad, John, but if you can 
resist the pink and white face of a saucy slut, 
Tm the mother of a wiser man than Solomon. 
You're born, John, to show that the Carrs 
are as good as the Rodens, though your 
mother was Mrs. Roden's maid when she was 
Miss Neville, the prettiest and haughtiest 
young lady^ in Gloucestershire. Why, 'twas 
at an Assembly in Gloucester they met first, 



4 . 



JOHN carr's promotion. 275 

and well I remember the day. My young 
lady looked lovely. I dressed her dark 
hair with white roses. She never could bear 
a hairdresser to touch her, and said I did it 
better than any of them all. And when 
she was going down to her carriage she said 
to me, ' Harriet, I'm engaged the first dance 
to Sir Charles Sedley, and I believe he'll 
ask me to marry him before night's over.' 

* And what shall you say, Miss ?' says I. 

* 0, I don't know,' she answered. * It de- 
pends on the humour I'm in. I daresay I 
shall tease him till he goes off to somebody 
else.' She didn't come home till five, and 
was too tired to talk, and fell fast asleep 
while I was unpinning her ; but when I got 
her into bed there was a sweet smile on her 
face, and I said to myself, ' She's said yes to 
Sir Charles. < She'll be Lady Sedley.' But 

t2 



276 SWKET AND TWENTY. 

not a bit of it. Sir Charles happened to be 
late, and Mr. Roden he came up the rooms 
just as she entered, and got an introduction, 
and they danced together half the night, 
I believe. And . ^would you believe it ? . 
by nine o'clock there came a lovely bouquet 
for Miss Neville, and a card from Mr. Price 
Roden, hoping she wasn't fatigued, or some- 
thing of the sort. It was all over with poor 
Sir Charles then, and the talk in Gloucester 
was that he meant to horsewhip Mr. Roden, 
or shoot him, or . I don't know what. But 
Mr. Roden wasn't the man to be frightened, 
and he followed my young lady everywhere. 
Good Lord I how the years fly ! To think 
that beautiful young creature has been lying 
in her grave so long I Well, Mr. Neville 
liked Mr. Roden very well, but his was a 
high family; and he had two sons in the 



JOHN care's promotion. 277 

Army that ran away with half his income, 
and he didn't want to marry his daughter 
without giving her a comfortable bit of 
money down. But Mr. Roden told him 
that, if he would give him Miss Neville, he 
wouldn't want a farthing with her, for he 
had more money than his needs, and he'd 
settle a thousand a year on her ; and that, 
you know, comes to Mr. Paul," she said, 
proud of her legal knowledge. " And 
though Mr. Neville's high relations, Lords, 
and all sorts, were very wild, Mr. Roden 
had her, and loved her to the end, . that he 
did, with a real deep love. And when 
people have said to me . ^gossiping idiots I . 
* A pity Mr. Roden doesn't marry again/ I 
always said, ^You fools! he's a man that 
can only love once.' Why, 'twould be 
sacrilege and blasphemy and perjury, and 



278 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

all in one, to marry anybody after that 
sweet dear creature I There never was 
anybody like her . ^there never was !" 

Garrulous Mrs. Carr broke down into a 
sob. The Stradivarius spoke . a low soft wail 
of distant grief, that suddenly broke into a 
gay ecstasy of sound, as if it were angels 
welcoming the beautiful spirit of Price 
Roden's wife. Mrs. Carr resumed : 

" So, you see, John, it's easy for a man 
to win a real lady, if he tries : and I can 
tell you, that have seen real ladies, that 
they're the right sort for a young fellow 
like you to marry. What I say is, that 
women can't go up as men can. Dressing 
up women in ever such fine silks and laces 
and jewels, don't make 'em ladies, . least- 
ways, not in my humble opinion. And I 
can tell you true, John, that, if you were to 



JOHN care's pbomotion. 279 
many Sarah Daw now, nothing you could 
do to her would make her look like a lady, 
or speak like one. You might send her to 
school: she'd never learn. She's just got 
her beauty, and nothing else ; and that 
won't last. And then, only think, John, 
how your servants would treat her ! . for, 
of course, you will have plenty of servants 
in time, and your wife must have her own 
maid, . and fancy that little slut with a maid 
of her own I Why, a good waiting -woman, 
as I was, in my time, John, would look with 
contempt on such a creature." 

" Well, well, mother," said John, who 
was feeling a little impatient at hearing 
Sarah spoken of in this manner, " I'm in no 
hurry to marry, and I haven't got my house 
yet, and I sh^l not be so rich after all, per- 
haps. At any rate, it may be many years ; 



i 



280 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

and I could not ask a fine lady to come and 
live at Birklands, neither shall I have enough 
money to keep many servants at present." 

"Ay, ay, John," said Mrs. Carr; *'but 
you will have the fine house and servants 
some day ; and if you marry some silly girl 
now, you can't make her into a fine lady when 
you get your fine house. You might order 
her silks and jewels when you order new 
furniture, but you couldn't order anything 
else for her." 

" But I don't see," said John, " that you 
have much more to say of Mrs. Roden than 
that she was beautiful." 

" 0, the difference, John, the difference I 
Miss Mary never thought of her beauty ; she 
could do anything. She managed Mr. 
Neville's house perfectly, and kept him out 
of debt by her carefulness, and sent money 



JOHN cakr's promotion, 281 

to her brothers, who, poor dears, were 
always wanting it, for they say an officer's 
life is very expensive. She and I made all 
her clothes ; she never paid anything to a 
dressmaker ; and she found time to make a 
good bit for the poor, too. And then to 
hear her and old Mr. Neville talk at dinner 
was wonderful. I couldn't follow it, but 
she seemed to know everything. I remem- 
ber the old Bishop was dining at our house 
one day, and he said, when she had said 
something clever, 'Miss Neville, it's a pity 
you're the wittiest lady in Gloucester, for 
it makes one forget you're the prettiest.' I 
felt so proud of my young lady. And let 
me tell you this, John, she made me what I 
am, and I thank her for it. I was a stupid 
country girl when I came to her. She 
taught me everything herself, and, 0, how 



282 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

kind and patient she was I My fingers were 
all thumbs in those days, and I used to 
think that the only use. of a needle was to 
prick them with. She taught me to sew 
and to cook ; she taught me to spell and to 
reckon ; she was as good to me as if I had 
been her own sister, and yet she made me 
know my place. John, my lad, if you could 
do as Price Roden did, and find such a lady 
as Mary Neville, I should be happy. But 
don't, for your father s sake and mine, don't, 
for your own sake, marry some silly saucy 
chit, that you will always be ashamed of." 

She ceased. The Stradivarius caught 
up the discourse, like the chorus to a Greek 
play. All the brief history of pretty Mary 
Neville, which Fiddler Carr had heard be- 
fore, though never so emphatically told, 
came from the magic strings. From the 



JOHN cakr's promotion. 285 

dance at Gloucester to the grave in Irontown, 
the violin told the simple sad story. Yet 
after the melancholy notes there came an 
aspiring passage, a thrill of upward sound, 
which died into a soil tranquillity. 

Next morning, as he walked to his office, 
John Carr thought seriously over what his 
mother had said. He had great regard and 
reverence for his mother. He acknow- 
ledged the truth of what she had said. It 
seemed not unlikely that he was destined to 
do what Price Boden had done, and to rise 
to the present social level of the upper 
middle-dass. The difference between Price 
Roden and John Carr was the difference be- 
tween ambition and duty. Roden made up 
his mind to marry a lady of good birth, 
from ambition only ; but, by good hap, in his 
case love and ambition coincided. Carr 



284 SWEET AND TWKNTT. 

would willingly have wedded Sarah, and 
lived in a cottage for the remainder of his 
life. Bat his mother's emphatic declaration 
awoke in him a doubtful feeling. Never 
had he before realized the wide distinction 
between a lady and the woman, however 
good and beautiful, who is not a lady. 

As he walked briskly across the common 
towards Irontown, with the beautifiil fret- 
work of an October hoar frost upon the 
grass and the furze bushes, while the larks 
sang invisibly, and the bullfinches fluted from 
the dogrose sprays, he thought very serious- 
ly on his mother's lecture. He was a very 
young man to be in such a position of trust 
in connexion with so great a firm. A few 
years would certainly turn his income from 
hundreds to thousands. John Carr saw this 
clearly, for he had the knack of calmly cal- 



JOHN oarh's promotion. 285 

culating the probablities of his own position 
as if they referred to some other person. 
This happy faculty enabled him as he walked 
at a swinging pace across the common, try- 
ing to retain the warmth which his mother's 
hot coffee and fried rashers had given him^ 
to look on his possible future with a dispas- 
sionate eye. He might fairly expect, if he 
managed the great firm of Roden & Co. 
aright, to make a fortune in due course of 
business. Well, it would then be necessary 
to live according to his position in the worlds 
to buy or buUd a country-house, to take a 
prominent place in society. John Carr had 
no wish for this sort of thing, but he felt it 
would be his duty ; and duty was his guid- 
ing star. Satisfy John Carr as to what he 
auffht to do, and no power on earth could 
prevent his doing so. 



286 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

But the very fact that he thought more of 
duty than of anything else made him the 
victim of a curious sort of casuistry. He had 
hitherto held himself bound to marry Sarah 
Daw ; but his mother's fluent exposition of 
the misery which might arise, if a girl like 
Sarah were lifted above her station, caused 
him to ask himself whether he ought not to 
break that engagement as a matter of duty. 
Would it not make her unhappy to be raised 
into a position where she would be tacitly 
despised? Would it be right to subject her 
to such a trial ? John Carr perplexed him- 
self over this question to a great extent, on 
his way to business this morning. 

His mother's story of the way in which 
Price Eoden had won his wife, and her 
description of Mrs. Roden in her girlhood, 
had greatly impressed him. He always 



JOHN care's promotion. 287 

thought his mother the cleverest woman he 
ever knew, yet she maintained that she owed 
everything to this gay and lovely young 
mistress of hers, long since dead. Much in 
love as he assuredly was with Sarah Daw, 
he clearly perceived that no influence in the 
world could make her half as clever a wo- 
man as his mother. But then she was such 
a wily little witch, with such delightful ways. 
John Carr reached Irontown in a very 
doubtful mood as to what his actual duty 
was on this occasion ; but when he entered 
his room, and found on his desk the mo- 
mentous letters which hitherto had been 
scanned by no eye save Price Roden's, he 
forgot both his mother and Sarah, and 
thought only of his duty to the firm. 



END OF THE FIRST VOLUME 
SWEET AND TWENTY. 



CHAPTER XVIIL 

IIRST LESSON IN SKATING. 

"Why 18 the Rose so very red?" 
A scientific baby said : 
Her Aunt replied : " O why are you, 
My little dear, so rery blue ?*' 

A S the days passed on, and the year 
-^^ moved through the gloom of the 

late autumn into the brighter, keener at- 
mosphere of winter, Reginald Litton's Ara* 
besque patio was found to be the snuggest 
conceivable meeting-place. It was well 
warmed, as was necessary for the existence 
of the noble exotics which it contained : and 

b2 



4 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

this warmth communicated itself to the whole 
house, which seemed to resist the influence 
of frost and damp as completely as Miss 
Ldtton's beautiful spirit defied all cheerless 
influences. Paul Roden and his cousin were 
frequent visitors, and Fay now and then went 
to Roden Hall ; but as Mr. Roden was away 
all day, it was commoner for Edith, after 
she had gone through the business and pleas- 
ure of the morning, to stroll toward West- 
bury Place, whether Paul was with her or 
not. Between Miss Litton and Edith there 
was growmg up a firm friendship, based on 
intelligent appreciation of each other's char- 
acters. They looked on life in much the 
same way, though there were so many years 
between them. Both ladies were utterly 
free from all things morbid, sentimental, 
ostentatious, insincere : both also were keen 



FIRST LESSON IN SKATING. 5 

judges of character, and often in their pri- 
vate colloquies discussed the probable future 
of the small society around them. 

Fay had made up her mind to learn every- 
thing she could, and this was no sudden 
impulse, but a permanent resolve. She kept 
Miss Clumber always on the alert, to supply 
her with useful knowledge. She was not 
contented with this, but read by herself in a 
desultory fashion, and got Edith to intro- 
duce her to regions beyond the customary 
track of the average governess. She had 
a thirst for knowledge of all kinds, and a 
memory both facile and retentive. Miss 
Litton began to think she would certainly 
be a remarkable girl at twenty. 

Among other things, she induced Edith 
to teach her the guitar, and showed a deli- 
cate finger for that picturesque instrument. 



6 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

Fay had a natural aptitude for all pursuits 
which require a nervous sympathy : if the 
spiritualists had got hold of her they would 
have tried to make her a " medium," or, as 
Mr. Serjeant Cox calls it, a " psychic." 
This sensitive temperament came from her 
mother, Ad^le d'Arpentigny : but, as it was 
blended with Colonel Luttrel's strong and 
healthy forces, I think Fay would have 
defied the disciples of Harris and Home. 

All this time Sarah Daw sulked. She 
kept out of Paul Rodents way, and gave him 
no chance of a word with her : and it did 
not seem that Paul regretted it much. Why 
should he ? Where could he find three 
pleasanter and more suggestive companions 
than Miss Litton and his cousin Edith and 
Fay. He seldom recalled his adventures 
with Sarah, being doubtless a little ashamed 



ilBST LESSON IN SEATING. 7 

of them : for although the heartless vice of 
Goethe and Rousseau has had its disciples in 
England, they have generally been men 
without much natural potency or any actual 
originality, like the three most pretentious 
minor minstrels of the present day : and a 
real healthy Englishman, who has been 
misled by such teachers, is pretty sure to 
escape from their feculent Slough of De- 
spond, and to shake himself dear of the vile 
theories which find their natural issue in the 
abominations of Baudelaire and the younger 
Dumas. Paul tried to think as little as 
possible of Sarah yielding to his embraces 
so readily: a kiss or two could not harm 
her, surely, and she would soon forget all 
about it. Thus reasoned Paul Roden, fitting 
his logic to his desires, as most people do. 
Moreover, now that John Carr was in 



8 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

harness as confidential manager at Irontown, 
and Edith Tracy was effectually driving dul- 
ness from Roden Hall, Paul thought he 
might do what his father had often pressed 
him to do, namely, see a little life at various 
country houses. The business of the firm 
lay chiefly among men in a large way of 
business themselves, and Paul Roden had 
numerous invitations to pleasant country 
places, where merchants and manufacturing 
princes kept up princely state. 

*'Thou must go this autumn, Paul," his 
father had said. "Thou'lt find pleasure, 
and do some indirect business as well, and 
perhaps find a sweetheart. Choose care- 
fully, lad. Don't let some sly puss that's 
worth nothing be too many for thee." 

Paul was not loth to make a round of 
visits, and get some shooting and flirtation ; 



FIRST LESSON IN SKATING. 9 

SO he took kindly leave of Westbary Place, 
and started fully equipped for bis mission. 
I suppose nobody could bave bad a finer 
dressing-case, or a breecb-loader of more 
scientific construction. Let us leave bim on 
his travels, premising that be took no leave 
of Sarah, who, indeed, did not for some 
days know he was gone. When this fact 
reached her, she became more disgusted 
than ever with Paul, and she determined to 
forget him altogether, and think only of 
John Carr. But John could only see her 
occasionally ; his new occupation tasked his 
energy to the full, and gave bim little time 
for recreation ; be bad seldom a spare mo- 
ment, save in the evening, when Sarah was 
of course inaccessible, and when he was 
glad to refresh himself with his mother's 
cheery supper, and bis father's irrepressible 



10 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

fiddle. Still they met now and then ; and 
John, though always in a hurry, was always 
kind ; and Sarah felt a secret refreshment 
in the thought that, whatever happened, he 
would be true to her. Paul Roden was 
beyond her reach ; Bob Oarr was a dream in 
that remote unintelligible India, which had 
produced that tyrannical little witch, Miss 
Fay, and must therefore be a dreadful place 
altogether ; but John Carr was a substantial, 
well-to-do man, living close by, and ready to 
have her when she was old enough. Sh^ 
wished he thought her old enough; Miss 
Fay drove her wild sometimes, by treating 
her as if she were a baby, and entirely 
ignoring . or, one might say, reversing . the 
difference of their ages. > 

When Fay awoke one morning her win- 
dow-panes were covered with frost-flowers. 



FIRST LESSON IK SEATING. 11 

She sprang out of bed into the keen chill air, 
touched the glass with her hand, and mar* 
veiled. Then she looked out on the lawn 
beneath, and saw every blade of grass covered 
with dainty white crystals, and the very cob- 
webs across the window crusted with the same 
crisp white jewelry of frost. A vase 
stood below in which pigeons were wont to 
drink; Fay saw the birds walking on the 
surface of the water, and was amazed. Of 
course she had heard of ice, but she had 
never realized it, and now she looked at it 
with delighted astonishment. She rang the 
bell impetuously for Sarah, who came 
harrying widiout having finished dressing, 
and exclaimed, 

" What is this, Sarah ? I never saw any- 
thing like it.'' 

"Only a white frost. Miss. They say 



12 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

that after three there always comes rain." 
'* Yes, but why is it ? What makes those 
beautiftil crystals, that sparkle in the sun 
more than all the diamonds of Delhi? What 
makes the water hard, so that the birds 
walk on it ? It is magic I It is a miracle ! 
Can't you tell me something about it, 
Sarah ?" 

" Law I Miss Fay," said Sarah, shivering, 
for she was lightly attired, " it's only f reez- 
iiig? you know; it always does in cold 
weather. I'm sure I wish it didn't. Please 
get into bed till I light your fire, or you'll 
catch your death of cold." 

"0, you little ignoramus 1" cried Fay. 
"Fancy seeing this beautiful sight every 
year, and not knowing anything about it I 
Here, get me some things . where's my 
dressing-gown? . I can't wait . I must go 



FIBST LESSON m SEATING. 13 

and ask Miss Clumber . ^you can light the 
fire at once.'' 

Off she dashed to her governess's room, 
and awoke that lady from that sommeil du 
matin which indolent people enjoy. Had 
Miss Clumber been wide awake, she could 
not have given Fay much help in plucking 
out the heart of the mystery of frost : there 
was something about it, she thought, in the 
Rev. Dr. Brewer's Why and Because^ but 
she could never make much of it. And, as 
Miss Clumber was really half asleep, Fay's 
chance was a poor one. She rushed back 
to her room, where Sarah had lighted a 
fire, and was getting her some chocolate, 
and said to herslf, 

"Well, Auntie and Edith are sure to 
know. Dress me quick, Sarah ; I want to 
go out in the frost." 



14 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

Oat she ran, as gaily as possible, and 
picked the frosted red monthly roses that 
blushed through their crystalline attire, and 



tried vainly to break the ice in the water of 
the birds' vase, and looked at all the new 
aspects of beauty with endless wonder. 
She ran off to the kitchen to get some hot 
water to see if it would melt the ice, at 
which the thirsty birds had been uselessly 
pecking: and when she found it made a 
round hole in it, she screamed with delight 
at the discovery. She was flushed with 
exercise in the keen air when the breakfast- 
bell tinkled, and Miss Litton gave her a 
morning greeting. 

"Is not this charming, Auntie? But 
what makes all these crjnstals? and why 
does ice bum one's fingers ?" 

"Ice doesn't burn, my child," said Miss 



FIRST LESSON IN SKATING. lH 

Litton ; ^^ it only makes one tingle. And as 
to the frost crystals, you must ask somebody 
who reads books of science, which I never 
do. I fear, unless you met some clever 
man who could say things simply enough 
for you to understaiid, you would not be 
any the wiser. You would hear a great 
number of long words, which may mean 
something : Fm sure I don't know. I am 
content to believe that God has ordained 
water to grow solid, and drops of dew to 
turn into crystals, when there is a certain 
amount of cold." 

" I know God does everything. Auntie," 
said Fay; "but I want to find out Aom; He 
does it. Can one make ice P'' 

" yes, by making cold in some scientific 
1\ray. But that only shows that cold brings 
ke ; it does not show us why. You may as 



1 6 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

well ask why a rose is red, and a violet blue. 
I suppose there is some answer to that in 
your books, Miss Clumber ?" 

** Yes. A red flower absorbs all the rays 
of the spectrum but red, which remains on 
the surface ; and so with other colours." 

"Yes," said the old lady; "I see. It 
comes to this : that a rose is red because a 
rose is red. What there is in the petals of 
any flower to make it absorb certain rays of 
light they cannot tell us. Fay, my child, 
you had better be content to know that God 
made ice just as He made roses, just as He 
made you and me." 

Thereon the old lady applied herself 
briskly to hot rashers and crisp toast and 
fragrant coffee. Fay ate bread and milk 
from a china bowl, with clotted cream spread 
over it, at a great rate : all the while she 



FIRST LESSON IN SKATING. 17 

looked through the window at the lawn, 
where already the crystals were returning to 
their earlier existence as dewdrops, and re- 
solved tacitly that she would squeeze more 
knowledge out of Edith. 

A pile of letters lay by Miss Litton's side. 
The little old lady of Westbury was a fam- 
ous letter-writer, and among her correspond- 
ents were some of the most thoughtful and 
brilliant persons of the time. She had once 
been much in the most refined society : now 
she did not care to leave home, but she had 
constantly pleasant letters from statesmen, 
poets, artists, wits, ladies of fashion, every 
one of whom was delighted to get her reply, 
full of golden thought in a polished style. 
That very morning she received a letter 
from a friend who was much troubled 
about her son and daughter, both young, 

VOL, n. c 



? 



18 SWEET AND TWEKTT. 



headstrong, intelligent^ self-willed, and self- 
conceited. The boy had become a Sodalist, 
and the girl a Pnseyite. She wrote in reply : 

** Boys are all infidels at firsts and girls 
fanatics* The boy thinks: the girl feels. 
It is better to think wrongly than not to 
think ; better to feel too strongly than to be 
without feeling. These are Gates of Dark- 
ness, which lead to the Temple of Light.** 

Going through her letters she came sud- 
denly upon one which had not passed 
through the post, but was sent over from 
Rod en Hall. It was from Edith. 

" Fay," she said, '* here's a note from Edith 
they have put stupidly among the other 
letters. She is going with Mr. Roden to 
Northminster this morning, and won't 
return till to-morrow evening : so we shall 
not have the pleasure of seeing her till the 



FIBST LESSON IN SKATING. 19 

day after to-morrow. Then I hope she 
vrill be able to explain the mystery of ice. 
I cannot.'' 

Price Roden, having some business in 
Northminster, thought it would be a nice 
holiday for Edith to drive her over to the 
old city and show her its lions. She was 
always delighted to do anything that gave 
him pleasure, and so accepted the arrange- 
ment at very short notice. He drove a 
mail-phaeton with a pair of roans; and, 
having telegraphed on to the Clarence 
Hotel for rooms (for his business had come 
upon him suddenly) he started soon after 
breakfast, Edith thought it a lovely drive. 
Ah, but how lovely she thought the old 
city, when they descended into it under an 

ancient archway, filled with statues in its 
every niche, and saw below her a steep 

c2 



20 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

Street of many gabled houses, and then 
another st^ep street abruptly rising again, 
with the great Cathedral in a glory of 
sunshine at the very summit ! Such quaint 
buildings she saw on all hands . ^it seemed a 
city of the past. But, as they drove down 
one hill and up the other. for the 
Clarence Hotel is in the Cathedral Close . . 
they saw obvious signs that it was a city of 
the present. Nowhere could you see girls 
more fashionably dressed than at North- 
minster. Parsons were plentiful, for there 
are about thirty churches in the city ; but 
so were soldiers, for it was then the dep6t 
of a regiment of Lancers, and a troop came 
slowly up the hill, their streamers fluttering 
in the wind, as Price Roden was driving 
down. I daresay some of the gay young 
officers looked at Edith ; and why shouldn't 



FIRST LESSON IN SKATING. 21 

they ? It would have been hard to find a 
prettier girl in Northminster. 

The street that descends from the city's 
arched entrance is called Market Street ; the 
street which ascends toward the cathedral is 
called Church Street. Half way up Church 
Street is the lofty granite portal of the 
Grammar School, from which hundreds of 
capped and gowned youngsters were issuing 
as Price Roden's roans climbed the ascent. 

Edith had wrapt herself up in a suit of 
warm dark fur for her travel that day, and 
cosily pretty she looked in it, as her long 
bright hair fell over her shoulders ; and as 
they passed the Grammar School one young 
rascal shouted, 

" Three cheers for the lady in furs 1" 

The boys took the idea at once, and hur- 
rahed as if with one throat. 



22 SWEET AND TWENTY, 

" Rude young rascals !" said Price Roden. 

" 0, they mean no harm !" said Edith^ 
laughing. " They are full of their fun now, 
and I hope they'll enjoy it. There's plenty 
of work for them to do, by-and-by." 

The Clarence is a comfortable house, and 
Price Roden had taken private rooms ; but 
it has also a ladies' coffee-room, and Edith, 
when she found that Mr. Roden's business 
would take him away from her till dinner- 
time, told him she would go there after they 
had lunched, and study character. So they 
lunched with excellent appetite after that 
long drive in the keen north-west wind; 
and then Mr. Roden said : 

" I have ordered dinner at six. I can't 
get back before that, but you will find me 
punctual. I did not put it later, because I 
find there is a concert at the Assembly 



FIRST LESSON IN SKATING. 23 

Rooms to-night, with some famous singers, 
and I thought you would like to go ; so I 
told the waiter to get tickets." 
Edith was accustomed to be alone in strange 
cities, and rather liked it. She went into 
the ladies' coffee-room, but not a creature 
was there. Awhile she stood at the win- 
dow, watching the people who traversed the 
Close, and wondering what dignitary dwelt 

in each gray granite house of antique build, 
with doors under low archways, and abun- 
dant ivy, and the greenest of grassplots. 
Many young parsons passed and repassed ; 
and, though she knew nothing of the famous 
Northminster feud . of the High Church 
Bishop and the Broad Church Dean, each 
with his own special followers . she could see 
that these youthful clerics differed much. 
Some were dressed in long frock coats, and 



24 . SWEET AND TWENTY. 

wore lavender kid gloves, and carried a sedate 
ascetic expression, and stooped patronizing- 
ly, as if with a silent benediction, over the 
hand of any lady of their acquaintance 
whom they met. The others, parsons clear- 
ly enough, were broad-browed broad- 
shouldered strong-calved fellows, who wore 
shooting-jackets, and carried sticks, and were 
commonly followed by one or more dogs. 
They walked almost too fast, whereas the 
opposite faction moved with a stately 
dignity also almost excessive. Edith was 
amused by the contrast, but had no clue to 
its significance. 

Edith, having some unoccupied hours, 
thought she would venture forth into this 
city of polemic parsons, gay lancers, . and 
rude school-boys, and look for some amuse- 
ment. "Adventures are to the adventur- 



riRpT LESSON IN SKATING. 25 

ous," she thought, quoting Mr. Disraeli's 
favourite saying; and she turned out into 
the Close, where the wind, ruder than the 
Grammar School boys, fluttered her bright 
hair all over her dark-furred shoulders, and 
she stood awhile to admire the grand west 
front of the Cathedral with its double 
towers. The Minster is dedicated to S. 
Peter and S, Paul, and there is a tower 
for each ; but the tower of the Master qf the 
Keys is judged by competent archaeologists 
to be two centuries older than that of the 
Apostle to the Gentiles. 

Edith entered the Cathedral, where many 
groups were wandering in the dim religious 
light, and admired its wondrous beauty. 
Every old Cathedral has its special character, 
suggested doubtless in the first instance to 
the architect by the character of the people 



26 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

and the place. Northminster strikes you by 
a somewhat sullen grandeur ; all its arches 
are heavy ; its ornamentation is on a broad 
scale ; its windows are full of the deepest 
colour; its peal of bells is on a mighty 
scale ; its two towers (especially the elder) 
might be living rocks defying all the passion 
of the sea. As you look at Northminster 
Cathedral, you cannot believe the Church 
that built it will pass away. There is a sign 
of permanence in it. 

Leaving the Cathedral and its Close, 
Edith walked out into Church Street, and 
looked into the shop windows. The bright 
sunshine and joyous air seemed to have 
brought everybody out of doors. The street 
was gay with pedestrians : the steep hills of 
Northminster happily prevent carriages from 
being too numerous. Edith glanced into 



FIBST LESSON IN SKATING, 27 

shop after shop. A large confectioner's 
seemed crowded with ladies, oflBlcers, and 
schoolboys; in a jeweller's next door the 
red-coats predominated ; at a book-shop just 
beyond there was a mob of the clergy of 
the Bishop's party. At intervals a high 
ecclesiastical dignitary came serenely through 
the crowd, in curled and corded hat, and 
well-fitting gaiters. The whole scene was a 
study for Edith ; and, tired though she was 
after the concert, she made a few sketches 
from memory for her little friend Fay's edi- 
fication and amusement. 

Presently in the window of a large iron- 
monger's shop she saw the word Skates 
many times repeated; and then it flashed 
upon her that another such frost would 
make the ice safe. Edith adored skating 
for the excitement of its swift flight and 



28 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

possible peril : she had no skates with her, 
so went in to buy a pair. Then she thought 
of Fay. 

" 0, Fay must learn," she said to herself. 
** Now, I know just the length of her foot, 
for we were measuring against each other 
not long ago." 

So she found a pair of skates that she felt 
sure would suit Fay Luttrel, and carried 
them off to the hotel in high spirits at the 
thought of teaching the child to skate. 

Price Roden was in excellent time for 
dinner, which was served as they know how 
to do it in the chief hotels of cathedral 
cities. At eight the concert was to begin. 
The Assembly Rooms of Northminster are 
in Church Street, just opposite the Grammar 
School : the youngest face to face with the 
oldest secular edifice in the town. A lovely 



riKST LESSON IN SKATING. 29 

full moon bathed the Cathedral towers in 
magic silver, and when Price Roden and 
Edith came out into the Close, they found 
plenty of people on the move toward the 
Concert The air was full of pleasant chatter 
and laughter as the gay groups went rapidly 
past . ^rapidly, for the air was keen, and 
only quick motion would give any warmth. 
Edith, wrapped up in a warm opera-cloak, 
with a heavy wrapper over it, tripped gaily 
along by Price Roden's side, curious to see a 
Northminster concert. 

Mr. Roden had purchased his tickets at a 
bookseller's, choosing of course those at 
the highest price ; but, when he entered the 
room, a noble elliptic hall of fine acoustic 
proportion, with no galleries or angles to 
intercept sound, and lighted wholly from 
the ceiling, he was perplexed to find that 



30 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

his tickets had no numbers. The hall was 
already crowded, but few people had taken 
their places : they stood in gossiping groups, 
as if the whole city had come there for an 
after-dinner chat. Price Roden took Edith 
towards the front seats, and looked round 
with some uncertainty as to where he should 
place himself. At that moment a young 
gentleman addressed him, and said, 

'' I beg your pardon, sir, but you seem 
undecided what seat to take. The fact is, 
the Northminster people are a curious set ; 
they all know one another, and leave 
strangers to find out their habits. Instead 
of numbering seats and taking places, they 
leave all the seats open, so that people who 
like to be together during the evening may 
have their own way. So you have choice 
of all the unoccupied seats j and from my 



FIRST LESSON IN SKATING, 31 

experience of these concerts I think you will 
find the fourth row about the best for hear- 
ing anybody but Carlotta Patti. For the 
piercing Carlotta, I prefer to be out in 
Church Street," 

Edith looked with some curiosity on this 
young fellow, whose complexion marked 
him for no more than twenty, though his 
easy manner and presence of mind seemed 
to indicate that he was thirty at least. A 
well-set figure of middle height; bright 
brown hair ; blue eyes that could talk ; 
small hands and feet ; such was this courte- 
ous young gentleman who, in evening dress 
with a white flower in his buttonhole, prof- 
fered his advice to Price Roden. That 
gentleman thanked him, and took the seats 
which he recommended. 

The concert was late in commencing, 



32 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

simply because the audience could not be 
induced to sit down. It was clear that the 
ladies of Northminster understood the way 
to make things pleasant. Horace's wicked 
saying as to the " teterrima belli causa " is 
true enough, doubtless ; yet are women also 
the greatest of peacemakers, as history 
proves from the earliest time. Here in 
Northminster four distinct factions existed 
among the young men, and each looked 
down on the other. The young clergy of 
the Bishop's party felt themselves on a high 
sacerdotal eminence above those of the 
Dean's, which latter looked down on their 
rivals from a high intellectual pedestal. 
Both looked down upon the red-coated 
oflBlcers of cavalry, who in their turn looked 
down upon them with a very contemptu- 
ous pity. The Grammar School masters 



FIKST LESSON IN SKATING. 33 

looked down on everybody, being very 
proud of their young Head Master, Dr. 
Milner, the best Greek scholar and round- 
hand bowler and whist player in England, 
and much fortified by the fact that his sister, 
Dora Milner, who lived with him, had on her 
very first appearance become the acknow- 
ledged Belle of the City. Even the ladies 
were compelled to admit her preeminence, 
and forgave her for it when they saw how 
nice she was. But with the clerical and 
military factions all kneeling to Dora Milner, 
it must be admitted that the Grammar 
School had rather the best of it. 

When at last the company found their seats, 
and the orchestra tuned up, this gay young 
gentleman who had been so courteous came 
from afar and seated himself by Edith. She 
did not object in the least. She saw at 

VOL. n. D 



34 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

once he was of the right sort, and was glad 
to have somebody with whom to converse in 
the intervals of the music. She discovered 
from his critcisms that he was a musician, 
from his conduct that he was a gentleman, 
from his conversation that he had business 
in the city and didn't like it, from his pro- 
nunciation that he was a Cornishman. 
There is not much talking to be done at a 
concert, but Edith and her unknown 
acquaintance managed to have a little con- 
versation that proved that they had sympa- 
thies in common. However, when the con- 
cert was over, they parted at the door of the 
Assembly Rooms, neither knowing anything 
about the other. 

'* A gentlemanly young fellow that," said 
Price Roden that evening, as they had a 
light supper of oysters . Edith being one of 



FIRST LESSON IX SKATING. 35 

those sensible girls that can always eat 
oysters. 

" I liked him very much," she answered, 
**and wonder who he is. He seemed to 
know everybody in Northminster, so that I 
was surprised at his coming to sit with us." 

** Surprised, were you, Edith?" he said. 
*' Well, I wasn't ; for I thought he showed 
remarkably good taste. I saw plenty of 
pretty girls in Northminster to-day, but 
none so pretty as you." 

The frost continued. On the following 
day Price Roden and Edith saw a few of 
the lions of Northminster, and bought 
photographic views, and climbed to the 
summit of S. Paul's Tower in the cathe- 
dral, S. Peter's having long since been for- 
bidden as dangerous. They had a pleasant 
drive home through the keen bright after- 

d2 



36 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

noon, and were very glad of their dinner. 
After the best hotel in the world, how cosy 
is your own dining-room, your own style of 
cookery, your own arm-chair after dinner, 
your own books and nicknacks around you ! 
That night, when fair Edith had reached 
her own private chamber (whither the 
novelist ventures to follow her), and had 
changed herself from a stately young lady 
to a pretty creature in a blue dressing-gown 
stuffed with eider down and trimmed with 
swan's down, she sat in an easy-chair oppo- 
site her bed-room fire, and pondered, and 
wondered. Who was this young gentleman 
at North minster who had been so courteous ? 
Why was he so courteous? Why did he 
not give his name? How old was he? 
Edith began at last to speculate whether he 
had any money ; and to think that, if he had 



% 



: r- Arx,a5 



FIRST LESSON IN SKATING. 37 

not, perhaps her comfortable little income 
might be of use to him. Such fancies often 
visit female brains. Certainly he was a very 
handsome young fellow, with an original look 
about him that she had not noticed in any- 
one else that night, though the subdivisions 
of Northminst6r society were such as to give 
opportuniti^ for originality. 

" I wonder whether I shall ever see him 
again ?" thought Edith, And then she went 
to bed and fell asleep like a good girl, and 
dreamt no dreams. 

One's last thoughts at night are said to be 
one's first in the morning, Edith Tracy 
woke with a double vision: Fay upon 
skates and her unknown cavalier in the 
concert-room. She sprang out of bed to 
see if it still froze. Didn't it ? The panes 
were covered with frost-flowers, too thick 



38 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

for her warm breath to melt them ; there 
was no looking out of window. 

" Hurrah r cried Edith. " Fll teach 
Fay to skate." 

Ay, it was skating weather. A firm 
black frost had fallen on the land, and the 
lawn was so hard that no worm could reach 
the surface, to be gobbled up by blackbird 
and thrush and robin. A pet redbreast of 
Edith's . an impudent little fellow, who had 
become quite familiar through having flown 
into one of the rooms, and hurt himself by 
trying to escape, and been petted for a 
while, and who, in summer days, would 
come and sing on Edith's knees as she sat 
on the turf . was now twittering on the 
bare branch of wistaria that crossed her 
window, and obviously asking for crumbs. 

Pleasant was the breakfast-room at Roden 



FIRST LESSON IN SKATING. 3d 

Hall on a cold morning. A noble wood 
fire on the open hearth. Edith came down 
looking so joyous, and made tea and coffee 
with so deft and delicate a grace, that Price 
Roden admired her more than ever. Could 
it have occurred to Price Roden to marry 
again, Edith was the girl he would have 
asked ; and I believe she might have said yes. 
But he was loyal to the memory of the 
lovely lady whom he had won in his youth ; 
he revered all true ladies for her sake, but 
his love was entombed with her. Price 
Roden was not a man of clear thought on 
the realities of a future world ; what you do 
not find in a Bishop, you can scarcely ex- 
pect from a manufacturer. Yet he had a 
blind belief that somewhere in the infinite 
depths of the universe he should again meet 
the sweet soul that had been his second self 



40 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

for awhile. He formed no definite theory 
about it. He only waited for what he knew 
must come, if Omnipotence and Justice are 
synonymous. 

Edith was looking after the fragrant coffee 
as Price Roden entered. A footman brought 
in crisp rashers and griUed game. The fire 
burnt frostily. Out of doors our friend Helios, 
lord of health and joy, was doing his utmost 
to melt the ice. Very calm was the day ; not 
a breath of air stirred. The outside chill and 
the inside comfort were in absolute antithesis. 
A defiant kettle sang upon a trivet : 

Who cares for Winter 

While there^s a splinter 
Of oak to be burnt anywhere? 

While the good trees grow 

We can baffle the snow 
And laugh at the frost in the air. 

" You look quite cheerful this morning, 
Edith," said Price Roden, ^' cold as it is." 



^Hmmm^mtm 



FIRST LESSON IN SKATING. 41 

" Cheerful r she replied. *' Of course I 
am. Who oould help it in such a pleasant 
life as mine ? I'm as cosy as a squirrel in a 
hollow tree, with the added pleasure pf 
having somebody to talk to. Now, Mr. 
Roden, when breakfast is over, what do you 
think I am going to do ? I am going to 
teach little Fay Luttrel to skate. I bought 
her a pair of skates in Northminster yester- 
day.'' 

^'So you can skate, can you?" said Price 
Roden, who was busy with his breakfast. 

** Why, of course I can. It's part of a 
lady's education. Ice was made to be skated 
upon." 

" And to be used for cooling Champagne," 
said Mr. Roden. 

Edith Tracy, when left alone, packed up 
her skates and walked across the meadows 



42 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

to Westbury Place. In the grounds of Miss 
Litton's house there was a deep pond, famous 
in the autumn for white water-lilies. This 
pond was inhabited by a few enormous carp 
. one fish had a gold ring through its gills, 
on which was engraved the legend, *^ V. L* 
1630." Valentine Litton was a hero of the 
house, concerning whom a curious history 
existed in the manuscripts of the family ; and 
it appeared probable that he had ringed that 
fish more than two centuries ago. Who can 
say how old it was then ? It is a very tame 
old carp now, and likes to receive bread 
crumbs from a lady's hand. It is a wise fish, 
and hath its likings and dislikings even 
among ladies. If I wanted an opinion as to 
whether a pretty girl was poetically mar- 
riageable I should take her to feed that 
carp. 



FIBST LESSON IN SKATING. 4^ 

Edith, skates in hand, made her way into 
Westbury Place, and without any ceremony 
entered the school-room. Here, to her 
amazement, there was an imbroglio. Miss 
Clumber found Euclid a difficult subject to 
teach, and could not follow her rapid little 
pupil, who, having been taught to bisect a 
straight line, or divide it into two equal 
parts, wanted immediately to know how to 
trisect it or divide it into three equal parts. 
Poor Miss Clumber, who took Cassell's or 
Colenso's Euclid (I forget which) as the 
absolute basis of all geometry, did not know 
how to deal with this keenly investigative 
mind. To describe an equilateral triangle 
and bisect the angles did not occur to her, 
simply because she had learnt Euclid as a 
parrot learns English. This unhappily is 
the way in which most of us pick up our 



44 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

notions of space. Miss Clumber was in a 
difficulty on the one hand : Sarah Daw was 
in a difficulty on the other. Sarah had con- 
quered her pence table, and reached the con- 
clusion that seventy pence made five shillings 
and tenpence: whereon Fay wickedly set 
her to other tables of even a more frightful 
description. It seems questionable whether 
it would ever be of much use to poor Sarah 
Daw to know how many links make an acre : 
but Fay took a wicked delight in troubling 
her shallow memory with trifles which she 
herself could pick up and retain quite 
easily. 

So^ here was this young monkey Fay 
plaguing both her governess and her maid. 
She wanted Miss Clumber to trisect a straight 
line : she insisted on Sarah's understanding 
the reason why 144 square inches make a 



i»' 



FIBST LESSON IN SKATING. 45 

square foot, and 9 square feet a square yard. 
Edith and her skates came as a delightful 
relief to both the governess and the maid. 

" Fay !" said Edith, " ask Miss Clumber 
to give you a holiday, and come and learn 
to skate." 

Miss Clumber needed little asking, Fay, 
always troublesome, had been more trouble- 
some than usual, probably because Edith 
had been away for a day or two. The 
governess was only too glad to get rid of 
her tiresome pupil, and to sit down and 
write a long prosy affectionate letter to her 
mother. 

The pond or lakelet heretofore named 
was down in the lower part of the grounds 
of Westbury Place. It occupied about three 
acres of ground. It was of a curious shape 
. in one part round, in another running 



46 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

into a kind of canal. The wide part was 
deep ; the narrow end, being shallow, froze 
early. Down to this Edith hurried Fay, eager 
to see whether she could teach her to skate. 
She explained to her, as they ran down to 
the lake, what she would have to do. 

The skates were strapped on, under a 
glorious willow whose boughs fell far across 
the pool. 

" Now, Fay," said Edith, "just see how I 
do it. And away she started, at a famous 
pace, and came back swiftly to her starting- 
point. 

"Well," said Fay Luttrel, " I don't see 
why I couldn't do the same. I'll try." 

And she balanced herself safely the very 
first time, a thing unusual, but the child 
was straight from head to foot, and poised 
herself perfectly by natural aptitude. There 



FIRST LESSON IN SKATING. 47 

was a thin skin of ice over one part of the 
lake, and Fay crossed it with scarcely a 
touch. Skating came naturally to this 
joyous creature, a modern Atalanta. 

Edith Tracy could skate well, but Fay 
Luttrel soon left her breathless. She took 
to the ice as a young bird takes to air. 
Away she went, right and left, her hair 
floating behind her, as if she had known ice 
and traversed it on keel of steel from her 
babyhood. Edith was amazed. This child 
had no sooner caught the secret of the 
skate than she was absolutely at home on 
the frozen surface. Ay, and a pretty 
picture I With flying hair and skirts, with 
face that blushed against the wind, little 
Fay looked charming. And of course 
Edith was delighted with her pupil. Edith 
Tracy was rather a remarkable young lady. 



48 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

She had not made any special career for 
herself. Obviously there was some one 
somewhere to fit Edith Tracy, but where 
was he to be found? What manner of 
man must he be? The very man who 
would suit her best would be kept away by 
the knowledge that she possessed two or 
three thousand a year. I have a decisive 
contempt for the demon Mammon myself; 
but i^ in my bachelor days, any lady with 
a few thousands a year had shown that 
possibly she might love me, her wealth 
should not have stood in the way. Yet 
wealth is a definite embarrassment. Our 
Edith felt it so. Indeed she had grown so 
doubtful of the men she met that she made 
up her mind to be an old maid. It was a 
trial to her. Having neither brother nor 
sister, she had hitherto had no young folks 



FIBST LESSON IN SKATING. 49 

to love. It would be absurd to suppose 
that any true woman would not be glad of 
a man to accept as her master and friend. 
Edith found no one ; so she lavished her 
love on Fay Luttrel, and tried to regard her 
as the daughter of her souL 

Fay was too fast for Edith. 

" 0," she said, " skating is delicious ! 
How good of you, darling, to buy me some 
skates in Northminster 1 And was it jolly 
there?" 

« 

"Yes," said Miss Tracy, "it was very 
jolly. We went to a concert. The music 
was excellent. I never went to a pleasanter 
entertainment." 

" And you thought of me all the time, 
you dear Edith, and bought me some skates. 
I call you a real good gu:l. Nobody else is 
so jolly kind," 

VOL, n. E 



50 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

Edith Tracy was always perplexed as to the 
proper way of dealing with this child. Fay 
Luttrel was indeed a rather difficult person- 
age to deal with. She had never learnt 
any hjrpocrisy, and I believe she never will. 
She had made up her mind to have her own 
way. Absolutely obedient to Miss Litton in 
all trivial matters, she made " Aimtie " do 
just what she liked. She learnt all Miss 
Clumber chose to teach, but she managed to 
make Miss Clumber less peremptory about 
her old-fashioned catechisms. With Edith 
she was just like a younger sister; and Edith 
liked her plaintive fascination, her soft 
reliance; but the time came when Edith 
Tracy discovered that this mere child had a 
strange magnetic power which was irresisti- 
ble, and that she loved her so much that she 




FEEtST LBSSON IN SKATINO. 51 

b^an to hate her almost for h&ng so 
loveable. 

'^ I don t care about her a bity"* thought 
Edith, often; and the next moment some 
fascinating freak of the wilful child's would 
make her care for her more than ever. 

Extremes meet, as all observers know; 
and when Fay Luttrel was most trouble- 
some, she often seemed most charming. 
Even Sarah in her sulks, plagued by her 
young mistress's despotic whims, could not 
help liking the little despot: and as to 
Edith Tracy, though she got very cross with 
her now and then, when she was unusually 
eccentric, eventually gave way to her fasd- 
nation. 

The skating lesson was over; the pupil 
had beaten her tutress. The misty sunshine 

e2 



52 SWKET A5D TWZ5TT. 

tamed to an absolute fog, and the air was 
very damp as Edith and Fay ran up the 
lawn to tea. 

^^ I like skating," said Fay, as they came 
panting up to the threshold. 



53 



CHAPTER XIX 

WHITE MAGIC. 

Down it ccxneB sQently, 

Slowly and Boffc, 
Whitening cottage-roof. 

Garden and craft ; 
Whiter than liUeB that 

Brood on a gtream. 
Comes the strange mystery : 

Is it a dream ? 

TTvREAMS vary widely. There are those 

who when healthy never dream, but 

have their visions as the consequence of 

indigestion; there are others to whom 



54 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

dreaming comes as naturally and healthfully 
as thinking. Perhaps psychology will, some 
day or other, give us an explanation, or at 
any rate a theory, on this topic ; but we 
are in a very backward state in this province 
of thought. While a few dull fellows are 
attempting to persuade themselves that they 
may have intercourse with the spiritual 
world through the medium of a dining- 
table fresh from Shoolbred, and never bap- 
tised by a conjurer, we neglect the study of 
pure mental phenomena as yet never 
thoroughly analysed. It is a curious retro- 
gression. Oneiromancy was a science of the 
remote past : Joseph interpreted dreams in 
Aegypt, and Daniel in Babylon. But at this 
time, while some of us are willing to accept 
news from the invisible world by any 
irregular and absurd channels, there is no 



WHITE MAGIC. 55 

attempt to investigate what are natural and 
normal phenomena. What is a dream? 
This question has never yet been answered. 

Fay was a regular little dreamer, and 
hers assuredly must have been always 
dreams of health, for there never was a 
healthier child. She had no megrims. 
Clearly therefore her sleeping must have 
been as pure and lucid as her waking 
thoughts ; at any rate, she liked her dreams ; 
and often she tried to make sense of them^ 
but with no result. 

Now, the night after her delightful first 
lesson in skating, coached by Professor 
Edith, she dreamt she was a bird ; indeed, 
she dreamt she was a series of birds. First 
she dreamt she was the whitest of swans, 
swimming swiftly down a summer stream ; 
and then she suddenly became a wood- 



56 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

pigeon, flitting into shadowy depths of 
the greenest woods in the world ; and then 
she suddenly turned to a lark, and climbed 
the invisible stairs of sky, a winged atom of 
song drowned in the sunlight. What else 
was she? A condor poised above the 
highest pinnacle of Andes. A falcon floating 
in the air, and falling like lightning on a 
heron that was flying lazily home after a 
heavy fish breakfast. A wren, no bigger 
than her little finger, with a nest deep deep 
in the warm hedge-moss, and a lot of little 
spotted eggs that will soon be molecules 
of music wrapped in feathers. And then 
the Roc to whose feathers Sindbad of the 
Sea clung closely, and was carried to the 
Valley of Diamonds. And then the Olym- 
pian eagle of the Father of Gods and Men, 
riding on the vivid streams of lightning. 



WHITE MAGIC. 57 

and carrying the thunderous message of his 
Master. And then Iris, the gay messenger 
of the lady-deities, half bird half girl, her 
fair foot upon the rainbow, which catches 
the colour of her gay apparel. 

Such wild dreams had Fay, even in the 
midst of sound sleep. Sounder than usual 
was her sleep indeed, for something in the 
air weighed upon her, and she felt as if a 
light warm mass of eider-down quilts were 
lying upon her. It was a delightful sensa- 
tion. She could scarcely open her eyes to 
the bright sunshine that was entering her 
room with a pleasant " good morning." She 
wanted to drop again into the unfathomable 
depths of sleep, into the dream*haunted 
palaces that are opened by the star-signals of 
night . those radiant scintillating lights, that 
come slowly out of the blue [of eventide. 



58 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

like diamond specks upon a sheet of 
sapphire. 

However Fay awoke, and sprang out of 
bed ; and then, thinking how delightful it 
would be to skate again, she ran to the 
window to look at the weather. All the 
world was white. Snow two inches deep 
had fallen during the night, and the hollies 
and laurels showed scarce a speck of green. 
The crisp green hollies held up their leaves 
like tiny hands, and caught the snow in pic- 
turesque little dabs of the purest whiteness* 
Fay was wonderstruck. She stood gazing 
out of window at the scene before her, and 
did not notice Sarah's entrance to light her 
fire. The white tumbler-pigeons, whitest 
birds that fly, looked dirty upon the dazzling 
snow. 

As she looked, the snowfall recommenced. 




WHITE MAGIC. 5& 

Huge heavy flakes fell fast through the 
air. 

" Where can it come from ?" thought Fay, 
gazmg intently on the scene. " Now this 
is true magic. I wonder how long it will 
last. I wonder how it will go away. Why^ 
the poor little birds cannot get anything to 
eat.** 

On the stone water-vase stood a crimson- 
breasted robin, looking ruefully at the 
snow, and wishing he had a worm for 
breakfast. A pair of blackbirds had come 
close to the house, and were probing the 
ground where a holly had kept the snow 
from entirely obscuring the turf; the cock 
true sable with a yellow bill, the hen soft 
brown with a dim orange breast. They 
found nothing* Fay pitied them. Turning 
round, she beheld Sarah. 



60 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

"Sarah," she said, "bring some bread. 
I want to feed the birds." 

She threw the window wide open, and 
scattered crumbs to the hungry birds. 

"0, Miss Fay!" cried Sarah, "you'll 
catch your death of cold. Do please have 
your chocolate, and shut the window. It is 
so terribly chilly." 

'' Fancy thinking about the cold with this 
lovely snow falling I" said Fay. " What a 
wonderful thing snow is I 0, Sarah, I do 
like winter in England." 

" Well, miss," said Sarah, " I can't say I 
do. It's all very nice if one can have one's 
fire lighted to dress by, and plenty of hot 
water to wash with ; but winter's a sad time 
for poor folk." 

"Well, Sarah," replied Fay, sharply, 
^\yov!re comfortable enough at any rate. 



WHITE MAGIC. 61 

How often am I to remind you of your duty 
towards your neighbour ?" 

Sarah would sometimes be sulky and 
sometimes pert; and, whenever she was 
either the one or the other, Fay used to 
make her recite from the Church Catechism 
her duty towards her neighbour ; admonish- 
ing her at the end of each clause in a very 
significant way. On this occasion she had 
to go through it at once ; when she had 
finished, Fay said . 

*' You will never do your duty in your 
own state of life, Sarah, if you are always 
wanting to be in some other state of life. 

If you were bom a sparrow, you will never 
grow to be a bullfinch. This is a snug nest 
for a little sparrow like you, and you are 
very foolish to be discontented." 

Fay's quick illustrative mode of speech 



.2 SWEET iVND TWENTY. 

was always too much for Sarah, who subsid- 
ed instantly. Her young mistress dressed 
rapidly, anxious to see what snow felt like 
as well as what it looked like. She rushed 
down to the lawn and scooped up a double 
handful in her pretty pink palms, and made 
a snowball of it instinctively, which she 
threw at a pigeon. 

" dear, dear !" said Miss Clumber, who 
saw this from her bed-room window, *' what 
a dreadful cold the child will get I" 

She didn't. Not a bit of it. She made 
snowballs and tossed them in the air, and 
her eyes sparkled while her feet grew wet. 
Presently Miss Clumber descended, having 
dressed in a tremendous hurry, and stood in 
the doorway, a drab figure, remonstrant. 
Fay immediately threw a snowball at her 
governess which took effect upon her head- 



WHITE MAGIC. 63 

dress, and drove her into immediate retreat. 
The governess's place was aptly supplied by 
a little white Maltese terrier that had been 
christened Snow. Out it came, a mere 
snowball of a dog, and rolled over and over 
again in the cool white clothing of earth. 
Fay snowballed Snow to her heart's con- 
tent : and Snow bit at the snowballs : and 
when girl and dog were called in to break- 
fast, both were as warm as the buttered 
toast that stood in front of the fire. But 
Miss Litton was an experienced old lady. 

"Euphasia," she said, "I am sure your 
feet are damp. This is your first introduc- 
tion to snow, so I let you run about in it : 
but you must not do it every time there is a 
fall. Do your feet feel damp ?" 

*'They do, a little, Auntie," said Fay. 
" I am very sorry." 



64 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

" Nonsense, child ; there's nothing to be 
sorry for. Take off your boots and stock- 
ings at once, and warm your feet by the 
fire. Snow-water gets through leather in 
the most wonderful way; I daresay Miss 
Clumber can tell you why, but I can't.*' 

Miss Clumber did not make any attempt 
to deliver a scientific lecture on the subject. 
Fay rang for Sarah, to take off her boots 
and stockings, and warmed her little rosy 
toes on the porphyry hearth. Miss Litton 
looked on with infinite amusement. Fay 
was always an endless study to the old lady. 
Extremes met in her so curiously : she was 
,a mere baby in some things, and in others 
so mature. She puzzled her governess and 
her maid ; she puzzled Edith Tracy to some 
extent ; she did not puzzle Miss Litton. 

*' They are all like it, the Luttrels," she 



WHITE MAGIC. 65 

thought. "The child is just like Hugh. 
He killed half-a-dozen people in fair fight 
before he was twenty ; and he'll come home 
a grizzled old General, ready to play cricket 
or leapfrog. The child's a true Luttrel. I 
wonder what her father will think of her ?" 

Miss Litton looked forward pleasantly to 
the time when father and daughter should 
meet; it became quite her customary day- 
dream. This Euphasia was growing up such 
a sprightly yet thoughtful little lass, full of 
fun and full of forethought ; a creature half 
of sunlight and half of midnight. 

" I hope she won't fall in love with any- 
body till Hugh comes home," thought Miss 
Litton. 



VOL. II. 



6^ 



CHAPTER XX. 

SIR B06EB DE COYKRLKT. 

** Lips with a fragrant taite, 

Breast where dreams of a lorer lie, 
Exquisite easj waist . . . 

Hurrah for Soger de CoYcriej !" 

Old MS. am Damee JTmsmt. 

CHRISTMAS came. Paul Roden re- 
turned from his shooting and flirting. 

Price Roden, influenced thereto by his son 

and Edith, resolved on a grand party for 

Christmas Eve. All the world and his wife 



SIR ROGER DB COVRRLBY. 67 

were invited. Miss Litton would not go ; 
she would not on any account leave her 
snug corner at such a time . . . snow on the 
ground, and a succession of hard frosts. But 
she let Fay go, with Miss Clumber and 
Sarah Daw to take care of her : and the 
good governess was instructed by no means 
to allow Fay to stay up too late, while Sarah 
was told to be always carefully waiting on her 
young mistress. For Fay was to stay at 
Roden Hall several days : and I think Miss 
Litton had fuller trust in Edith than in either 
governess or serving-maid. She did not 
much like to let Fay be out of her reach, 
but she believed in Edith. 

There was great fun at Roden Hall. Paul 
Roden had brought down his friend Skeggs, 
of Garden Court, Temple. Skeggs is one of 
those men who can do nothing useful, but 

f2 



68 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

ever3rthing utterly useless. Skeggs has been 
known to write so brilliant a letter to the 
Times that the editor asked him to write a 
leading article. He wrote a leading article. 
There was positively nothing in it. Tell 
Steggs to do a thing, and he can't, for the 
life of him : though, if there's a thing that 
strikes him to be done, no man alive can da 
it better. Such is Skeggs : not reliable in a 
quadrille, but a capital fellow for Sir Roger 
de Coverley. 

Skeggs was delighted with Fay : and as 
he was Master of the Ceremonies, and had 
to utilize everybody, he utilized her. He 
utilized Edith, also. He turned Fay into a 
parrot, for the first part of a charade, covering 
her with feathers so that she looked like a 
radiant bird. When I tell you that the 
second scene was nothing but Edith, in male 



SIR ROGER DB COVBKLEY. 69 

attire, with upstretched hands, and a look 
of horror on her face ; and that the comple- 
tion was half a dozen pretty girls arranged 
thus 



you will easily solve Skeggs's charade. 

He had another. Indeed he had several 
others, but I do not wish to tire you of J. J. 
Skeggs by reporting at too great length his 
ingenious devices. Only there was this : 

First, Fay Luttrel, dressed as a little 
soldier of the Middle Ages, walking up and 
down with an iron weapon twice as long as 
herself. How she staggered under its 
weight I 

Second, Edith Tracy, disguised as a dealer 
in marine stores, with the most miscellaneous 



70 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

collection of old iron you ever saw in your 
life. 

Third, a pie, ready to be eaten. Fay has 
to carve it, as mistress of the feast. The 
moment she makes an incision, out fly no 
end of singing birds. 

It is curious how trifles of this sort will 
amuse people who come together with 
intent to be amused. Sagacious friends of 
mine severely ask me, what is the use of 
the follies of Christmas? The answer is easy. 
We are burdened with the enormous work 
of the world. A year now holds ten times 
the work for any energetic brain that it held 
a century ago. It is an absolute delight ta 
have a time when the wisest of us all can 
play the fool at his pleasure. The Romans 
recognized this in their Saturnalia. We 
might with advantage extend our holidays . 



SIR BOQER DE COVEBLEY. 7 1 

and thanks to Sir John Lubbock and his 
associates, something has been recently done 
in this direction ; but it is quite dear that 
more might be done. The world should 
have a week's idleness at Christmas, and the 
rich should make that Yule-tide joyous for 
the poor. If you are a Christian, gentle 
reader, keep this wintry tide in such a way 
as to do good to your fellow-creatures ; if 
you are not a Christian, show a good exam- 
ple to those who are. 

*' This is very charming," said our little 
friend Fay to herself on the morning of 
Christmas Day ; she wasn't a bit tired, 
though she had acted lots of parts in char- 
ades, and had been danced to death in the 
country dances that ended the evening. 
" Great fun, but I don't much care for the 
people here. Paul isn't as clever as he used 



74 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

Although no actual conversation on the 
subject passed between Fay and Edith, there 
was a tacit understanding that they were 
not satisfied with Paul. In his round of 
visits he had encountered a good many girls 
who were of decidedly bad style . ^girls who 
would gladly have married Paul Roden at 
a moment's notice. He was the young 
prince of Irontown, a mighty heritage. This 
kind of intercourse had injured him. He 
came home with a notion that he could throw 
his handkerchief where he pleased, and play 
the Sultan. But in time he was brought to 
his senses by Edith Tracy's pure and per- 
fect loveliness. Edith meanwhile was quite 
sorry for him, being well aware that such 
folly is a sure sign of intellectual weakness. 

" I did not think he had so much self- 
conceit,'' thought Edith. "Poor Paul! 



SIR ROGER DE COVERLEY. 75 

What in the world has he to be proud of, 
except being six feet high and having a 
few thousands a year? He didn't make 
either his height or his income. If he had 
got something to be conceited about, he 
wouldn't be conceited." 

That is the way we are criticised by the 
keen-sighted rosy-lipped daughters of Eve. 
Well, if their keen glance sees through us, 
shall not their rosy lips console us ? And^ 
after all, to be thus criticised is an admirable 
moral medicine. It is well to be taught, in 
any way, the limits and the measure of one s 
powers. Paul Roden very soon recovered 
himself when he saw his mistake; before, 
indeed. Fay had time to send Miss Clumber 
to an etymological dictionary, wherein, to 
her surprise, she learnt that supercilioics has 
something to do with the eyelids. Miss 



76 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

Clumber was completing her education 
through little Fay's persistent question- 
ings. 

All this while Sarah Daw, who had gone 
to Roden Hall in attendance on Fay, and 
who, with the other servants, got her share 
of the fun, was in a half-sulky state. Paul 
Roden never looked at her. John Carr 

was at the Hall on Christmas Eve, but he 
was a guest at the master's table, and got no 
opportunity of talking to Sarah till quite 
late in the evening, when the dancing came 
on. Even then she considered he was too 
much taken up with "that Miss Tracy"; 
the fact being that Edith did her utmost, 
knowing his position, to make him feel at 
home, and that he could not help feeling 
the fascination of her natural courtesy. 
Hence, though he really wanted to snatch a 



SIR ROGER DE COVERLET. 77 

few pleasant moments with Sarah, he could 
not find the opportunity till the hours grew 
late, and she had amused herself with many 
flirtations, and was in the mood to treat him 
as superciliously as Mr, Paul treated every- 
body in general. John was amused. He 
was a good true-hearted fellow, and liked 
his little sweetheart none the worse because 
he was a guest where she was a servant. 
He quite understood that she might not like 
it, and was anxious to make her forget all 
about it. The little stupid wouldn't. 

" I wonder you condescend to dance with 
me, John, when there's that Miss Tracy, I 
believe, would rather dance with you than 
anybody here. Fancy her dressing up like 
a man for that acting stuff! I should be 
ashamed of it 1 And like a dirty old tinker 
too 1 Rich folk can do what they like, and 



78 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

make fools of themselves without being 
laughed at." 

John Carr wisely did not argue with 
Sarah; he tried to dance her into a good 
humour, and succeeded pretty well. Whirl- 
ed through a country dance at a breathless 
headlong pace, with his arm encircling her 
waist, she found it difficult to continue 
sullen ; she forgot her jealousies. After all, 
he was true to her, though he could sit 
down to dinner with her betters. This 
loyalty of John's, contrasted with the indo- 
lent forgetfulness of Paul Roden, to whom 
she had offered herself almost, made a 
strong impression on her. By the time, 
long after midnight, that Fiddler Carr's 
Stradivarius ceased to make standing or sit- 
ting still impossible, Sarah was in the most 
hilarious temper, and had quite forgotten to 



SIR POGER DE COVERLET. 79 

be jealous. Shallow waters are soon stirred, 
and soon still again. Sarah dreamt pleas- 
ant dreams that night, the last sounds in her 
ears being a wild whimsical serenade from 
Fiddler Carr's violin. 



80 



CHAPTER XXL 

IN THE SPRING. 

lam ver egelidos ref ert tepores, 
lam coeli furor aequinoctialis 
locundis Zephyri silescit aureis. 

"\TES, spring comes at last; and Fay, 
-*- though she had enjoyed some of the 

unaccustomed wintry scenes, was glad to 

see the trees bursting into bud, and to hear 

the blackbird fluting his mellow song to his 

patient mate in her snug nest beneath. It 

was a radiant morning, with a sweet south 



% 



IN THE SPRING. 81 

wind bringing odour of violets up to the 
very windows ; and Fay, merry as the sky- 
lark that had just ascended into the aerial 
expanse, looked out upon the bright misty 
lawns with intense delight. It was a day 

on which even a Good Templar could hard- 
ly be dull. Fay was as bright as a grass- 
hopper, whose chirping grows loudest when 
all other creatures are too sultry to utter a 
sound. She came singing into the break- 
fast-room, and her merry melody made 
Miss Litton smile. 

The table was covered with letters and 
papers, for an Indian mail had arrived, and 
Colonel Luttrel, though by no means a 
a prolix letter- writer, always sent Miss Litton 
a budget of journals, and a few brief lines 
telling of his own affairs. 

" 0," cried Fay, " Papa has written, I 

VOL. n. G 



82 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

see. Open it, Auntie, and see if he has won 
any battles. Of course he is well ; nothing 
ever hurts Papa." 

" Go on with your breakfast^ Fay,** said 
Miss Litton. " I will tell you all about it 
presently." 

The old lady never hurried herself about 
anything, and taught Fay patience on prin- 
ciple. However the magic missive from the 
East was opened in time, and was found to 
contain very litttle news. One paragraph 
only need be quoted here. 

"There is a promising young fellow in 
the regiment," wrote the Colonel, "who 
comes from your neighbourhood. He left 
home and enlisted because of some love- 
affair, I fancy ; that's the sort of man that 
often makes a good soldier. He saw a 
little fighting when he came out first, and 



IN THE SPRING. 83 

showed that he liked it ; but we have found 
him very efficient in surveying the country, 
and I have just got him a commission. You 
may not know him, but he knows you very 
well, and I thought you might like to hear 
of his rapid rise. His name is Robert Carr." 

At that moment Sarah Daw, who was 
handing a plate of toast to Miss Clumber, 
dropped the plate on the ground in the 
clumsiest possible way. Of course it broke 
into many fragments. Miss Litton merely 
looked up, and then recommenced reading. 

" I think this young fellow will make a 
good officer. He is well educated, gentle- 
manly, modest, and as brave as a lion. I 
like him very much, and shall try to push 
him forward, both for his own sake and 
because he comes from your neighbourhood. 
He is a born geographer, which you know 

g2 



84 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

is most important in military affairs, and 
lays down a map from personal observation 
with wonderful accuracy. We are very 
much obliged to the little hussy who jilted 
him or refused him, and so made a soldier 
of him; and I daresay she will be sorry 
enough when he comes home a Captain or 
a Major. You see even silly girls may do 
good." 

"Why, that's dear old Fiddler Carr'sson !" 
cried Fay. " I am so glad. Won't the old 
gentleman make his fiddle sing when he 
hears the news?" 

It was fortunate for Sarah Daw that no 
one looked at her all the while : she stood, 
blushing from head to heel, with tears in her 
eyes that she could scarcely restrain. The 
thought of Bob Carr, an officer now and a 
gentleman, ran through her with electric 



m THE SPBING. 85 

force. What did she care for John Carr or 
Paul Roden ? Ah, but then what did Bob 
Carr think of her now ? She felt annoyed 
when she saw John Carr sitting at the 
dinner-table at Roden Hall, while she was 
among the servants : but then she felt that 
Roden Hall, grand as it was, stood on a 
lower level than Westbury Place, and that 
Mr. Paul was not a gentleman in quite the 
same sense in which Miss Fay was a lady. 
And now Bob Carr, whom she had sent 
away by her wilfulness, was somehow risen 
to be a friend of Miss Fay's father, and an 
officer like him. Poor Sarah felt very un- 
happy. How she wished she had never 
flirted with Paul Roden ! How she wished 
she had never let John Carr think she could 
like him I It was all too late now, she felt : 
when Bob Carr returned he would have 



86 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

forgotten all about her, and be looking for 
some fine young lady to marry. the 
misery that came upon poor Sarah as she 
heard Colonel LuttreVs letter read ! 

But Fay was delighted. She rushed into 
a corner where she kept a tambourine, and 
danced round the room, playing it wildly. 

" That will do/' said Miss Litton, deafened 
by the din. " I am glad to hear this news, 
but if you go on like that I shall never be 
able to hear any more news. You had 
better take your tambourine down to Fiddler 
Carr's, and play a duet with him." 

"0 may I go and see him by-and-by. 
Auntie ?'* she said. " Of course he has 
heard the news. I should like to hear him 
and his fiddle talk about it. May I go^ 
Auntie ?" 

" Better wait and see if Edith comes up 




m THE SPRING. 87 

this afternoon," said Miss Litton. " She will 
like to go, I daresay." 

Miss Litton never suggested Miss Clumber's 
taking Fay to visit the cottagers, having 
noticed that the good governess did not 
much like such visits. Sprung from the lower 
middle-class, Miss Clumber did not quite 
understand how to talk to cottagers with- 
out trying to patronize them. The heredi- 
tary lady treats a cottager's wife with quite 
as much courtesy as if she were a member 
of her own class : and those who know the 
inner life of English villages know how much 
good the hereditary lady can do in this way. 
What sayeth Wordsworth of the good Lord 
Clifford ?. 

'^ Love had he found in hnts where poor men lie.'* 

And not love only, but courage, courtesy, 
chastity, reverence, shall you find among the 



88 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

poorest, especially where they have kept 
what the richest too often have lost, the 
secret of " plain living and high thinking." 
Intellectual fruit and imaginative flowers do 
not flourish best in hothouses. 

Edith Tracy did arrive in the afternoon, 
and was told the news, and readily offered 
to go with Fay to the cottage on the com- 
mon. So they strolled down there in the 
afternoon. Ever so long before they reached 
it they could hear Fiddler Carr's violin, 
jubilant, penetrant, exultant, its high notes 
piercing the very sky as if they would shatter 
its cloudy roof. 

" He has heard the good news," said Fay. 

" We came to congratulate you, Mr. Carr," 
said Edith, as she reached the garden gate 
where the old gentleman was expressing his 
gratitude in music. 



IN THE SPEING. 89 

"Colonel Luttrel wrote to Miss Litton 
about your son this morning, and we are all 
so pleased. " 

" What, the Colonel wrote, did he ? And 
what did he say about Bob, Miss ?" 

By this time Mrs. Carr also had reached 
the gate, anxious to hear any news there 
might be. 

" 0," replied Edith, " he only spoke of 
him as a promising young officer, and said 
it was fortunate he had run away and listed 
because of a quarrel with some girl or other." 

" Ah, those girls 1" said Mrs. Carr. 
" Begging your pardon, Miss, which you're 
not a girl, but a young lady, these creatures 
in petticoats does a deal of harm. Now, 
when I was a young woman, I knew I 
should be married to somebody some day ; 
so I determined, if I couldn't get much 



90 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

book-learning, Td learn to cook and to sew, 
and to look after a garden : and then, I 
said to myself, Til wed somebody that's 
steady . and I don't mind waiting for a 
steady one/ And Fve never been sorry 
once. I haven't much book-learning, that's 
true ; but I can bake a potato into a flour- 
ball, and I can make my old man a coat or 
shirt better than anybody else could fit him. 
So I'm satisfied that I went the right way 
to work; but, Lord I Miss, the little chits 
won't do it now-a-days. Now, I dare say, 
Miss, you could cook a chop or a steak, if 
needs was ?'* 

" I hope so," said Edith, laughing. 

"Ah yes. And I daresay you could 
make a button-hole, or darn a sock, as well 
as anybody that ever held a needle ?" 



IN THE SPRING. 91 

" I should be very sorry not to be able to 
do such work," said Edith. 

** Of course you would/' said Mrs. Carr. 
** You're a lady ; you know that such things- 
is woman's work, though perhaps a woman 
may never happen to have to do it. But 
our girls won't learn to sew and to cook. 
They'd learn the pianner if they might, and 
they'll try to make themselves stylish bon- 
nets when their stockings are full of holea 
and their petticoats have to be kept up with 
pins. It's a burning shame, but it's true of 
every one of them ; and I often wonder 
what my boy John will do when he means 
to settle down and take a wife for himself. "^ 

" Ah," said Edith, " your son John was 
dining with us on Christmas Eve. I like 
him very much indeed. Of course he will 
often come to dine with Mr. Roden." 



92 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

Fiddler Can's violin made wondrous joy- 
ous remarks as Edith spoke. 

" He's a good lad," said his mother, sen- 
tentiously. " Ah, and here he comes." 

Wherein she spoke truly. He came can- 
tering across the common at a jolly pace, 
and dismounted easily as he rode up to 
where Edith was standing, her sunny hair 
touched by the sunlight, and her blue eyes 
full of a pleasant welcome. 

John Carr touched the precise point of 
common courtesy in his behaviour to Edith. 
He had tact. He contrived to show that, 
while he was conscious of his own position, 
he recognised her inevitable superiority. 
There was never a humbler man than John 
Carr, nor ever a prouder. He accepted his 
own rank with perfect willingness, but he 
held to the belief that his position in the 



I 



IK THE SPRING. 93 

world was nothing to be ashamed of; hence 
he by no means felt like a fish out of water 
when he dined at Roden Hall, or talked to 
Miss Tracy ; yet, at the same time, he felt 
that the right thmg for him to do was to 
marry Sarah Daw. Here, as I have said, 
was the crucial difference between Price 
Roden and John Carr : one thought chiefly 
of ambition, the other chiefly of duty. 

** We are rejoicing over your brother's 
good fortune, Mr. Carr," said Edith. " You 
know all about it, of course ?" 

" No, indeed I don't," he replied ; " I 
have had no news of him, though I know 
the Indian mail is in." 

"They've made him an officer. Jack," 
quoth Fiddler Carr, to an ohhligato accom- 
paniment. "He's been cutting down the 
niggers at such a rate that they can't do 



"94 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

without him. I thought the boy would 
make his way. Lord, lord, how I should 
like to see Bob cutting those black fellows 
in two with his sabre !" At this point the 
Stradivarius uttered a scream that would 
have put to flight a whole army of Sepoys. 

"He'll be a general some day, Jack," 
said Mrs. Carr. " Come in, and look at 
his letter. Won't you come in and have a 
dish of tay. Miss Tracy? We shall be very 
proud." 

Of course they would. And a charming 
dish of tay they got. Mistress Carr pro- 
nounced the name of the fragrant liquid as 
Alexander Pope used to, and as the French 
do now. She served a carefully chosen 
Souchong, with just a dash of young Hyson 

in it, in a silver teapot that had been given 
to her great-grandmother by a Countess 




IN THE SPRING. 95 

whose lady's-maid she had been. That tea- 
pot, of thin pure metal curiously carved, 
appeared on great occasions only. Now it 
came out, in honour of Edith and Fay, in 
honour too of her dear son's good fortune ; 
and there was delicious cream, for Fiddler 

Carr kept a cotiple of Guernsey cows on the 
common, and altogether it was a delicate 
and dainty meal. 

" Papa writes about your son, Mrs. Carr," 
said Fay presently, " as if he were sure he 
would get on nobly. And Papa always 
knows. He has been fighting all his life, 
and finds out when a man is brave. But 
dear, what nice tea this is I And such 
rich cream ! Why, this is better than 
Auntie's, Edith." 

** It's only the change, dear," said Mrs. 
Carr. " New things seem better than old. 



96 SWEET A3fD TWESTT. 

However, we do try to make our tea good, 
for I always declare that good tea cheers one 
up better than anything. It's a good gift of 
Gody is good tea ; and it s solaced me, many 
a weary day." 

The Stradivarius made a few remarks in a 
minor key. EdithandFaydrank their tea, and 
enjoyed the old lady s chatter, and tripped 
home rapidly as the sunset began to fade. 
They received, as they crossed the common, 
a valedictory melody from the irrepressible 
violin, ilddler Carr, looking over his 
wicket-gate, saw these two girls walking 
over the greenest grass under an arch of 
amber sky, and tried to convey his thoughts 
thereupon by the magic of the strings. Ah, 
but melody cannot grasp the concrete. 
Where Mendelssohn failed. Fiddler Carr 
was unlikely to succeed. 




IN THE SPRING. 97 

When the girls had gone, John Can had 
a serious talk to his parents. He had 
followed Mr. Roden's advice, and taken 
Birklands. He had garnished the house 
pleasantly and in good taste from Shool- 
bred's. He thought he would once more 
try if his father and mother would come and 
live with him. He beforehand knew that 
it would be useless. The cottage on the 
common, with pasturage for the graceful 
Guernsey cows and the geese, and pools for 
the ducks, and neighbourhood of pleasant 
people, was not to be easily deserted. Mr. 
and Mrs. Carr quite saw that their son must 
live in a fine house, but they did not mean 
to go and live with him. 

" This is a great day, John," said Mrs. 
Carr. " I did fear Robert had been rash, but 
I see now he was cut out for a soldier. 

VOL. n. H 



98 SWEET AND TWENTY, 

He'll do well, I've no fear. But I've a fear 
of you, John. I dread you'll want to marry 
that Sarah Daw. It's no good for a mother 
to speak a word ; she's all pink and white, 
and dresses herself up, and looks pretty. 
But you can't make her a lady, John, though 
you're making yourself a gentleman. And 
ten years hAce you^U * be ashamed of her. 
Do think about it, John, and don't be rash." 

That word msh was a favourite epithet 
with Mrs. Carr. John Carr made no reply. 
His father confided his opinions on the sub* 
ject to his Stradivarius. 

''You see, John," proceeded Mrs. Carr, 
who was not easily exhausted, "you're a 
great man in Irontown. What's to prevent 
your marrying a lady ? Price Roden was 
no better than you, and he married a lady, 
and it was the best thing ever he did 



m THE SPRING. 99 

through all his life. Why, just think, Jack, 
when youVe at Birklands, and all the rich 
folk come to dine with you, the diflference 
between having a little hussy like Sarah 
Daw dressed up at the head of your table, 
and a real lady like Miss Tracy there I" 

John Carr laughed. 

*^A real lady like Miss Tracy would 
hardly think of me, mother," he said. " I 
wouldn't ask such a lady to demean herself. 
It's all very well for me to get a little rich- 
er ; but it isn't money that does it. I can 
see the difference only too clear. It would 
be folly of me to think of marrying anybody 
who would be always finding out something 
wrong in me." 

"You're a strange lad, John," said his 
mother, " and I'll say no more. But I hope 

h2 



100 SWEET AND TWENTY, 

you won't marry some pretty little fool, and 
be ashamed of her ever after." 

I wish I had fit musical notation to put in 
this place the choral remarks of Fiddler 
-Carr's Stradivarius. The Pied Piper of 
Hamelin was nothing to it. It seemed to 
tie some musical links between his son and 
a flirting minx, and told, as well as a fiddle 
could tell, that to marry a minx was an 
awful sell ; and showed in its high notes all 
her sly notes, and groaned in the bass at her 
rapid pace, and showed she could flirt with- 
out much hurt, and treated men as if they 
were dirt. It climbed the scale to its absolute 
summit, to show how high she would strive 
to fly; then dropped to the depth like a 
builder's plummet, to prove where, in time, 
she would surely lie. In fact, the fiddler s 
musical power seemed to build from sound 




IN THE SPRING. 101 

a gay girl-flower, with all her nonsense, all 
her naughtiness, all her silly pretence of 
haughtiness, and to sharply say, " See what 
girls are I Would you like to marry that 
girl, John Carr ?" 

John Carr, riding homeward in the twi- 
light, pondered much. His mother was 
right, he knew ; and his father's fiddle was 
light. Yet, he thought, what was the good 
of rising in the world, if it must cause him 
to give up the girl he loves? Then he 
thought of Sarah's pretty face and sweet 
manner, and wondered why she should not 
become a lady. Why should he not teach 
her himself? . ^it would be so pleasant to 
educate her, and have her all for his own I 
What should he teach her? . ^what was 
necessary for making a lady? John an- 
swered these two questions in his own mind 



102 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

by thinking of Edith Tracy, and wondering 
what was the difference between her and 
Sarah. There was a great difference, he 
could see. It was something more than a 
mere knowledge of grammar, or history, or 
geography ; or even what are called accom- 
plishments . such as music, languages, &c. 
Then he thought that, if he should go on 
rising in position, would it not be better to 
choose a wife who could educate him ? He 
was perplexed between duty and feeling, 
and determined to solve the difficulty by 
giving up all thought of marriage for the 
present. But this resolution was soon 
broken, for, on arriving at Birklands, he found 
his dinner waiting for him (a late dinner 
being one of his earliest sacrifices to his new 
position), and he sat down alone, wishing 
there was some one to sit opposite him. 



IN THE SPEING, 1 03 

John Carr was one of those indefatigable, 
persevering men who sacrifice everything to 
duty. He would never allow 'his own 
affairs or feelings to interfere with business ; 
but when once business was over, domestic 
matters were his chief care, and he could be 
as passionately attached to his home as to 
his business. Therefore he felt the loneli- 
ness of his new home : he wanted some one 
to share it with him. He had been a good 
son to his parents, and was sorry to leave 
them ; at the same time he felt that it was 
time that he should be making a home of his 
own, and much as he loved his mother, he 
sometimes found her authority over him 
rather galling (as the best of sons will), and 
longed to have some sweet creature for his 
companion, who, he fancied, would always 
coincide with him in everything, and never 



104 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

lecture him. He had already given a 
pleasant aspect to his house by filling it with 
all sorts of little nicknacks of his own mak- 
ing or contriving . ^for he was an ingenious 
fellow ; and through the long evenings of 
the winter and eariy spring, when he was 
doing these many little things, he longed to 
have a companion to sit at his side, to look 
on and praise him. He was not a man who 
made friends easily amongst his own sex. 
He and his brother had always felt some- 
what removed from men in the class in 
which they had been brought up ; and since 
Robert Carr had gone away, John was 
scarcely ever seen with a companion. 

When he had finished his dinner, he sat 
by the fire thinking. He must marry ; he 
could not remain in that lonely state. And 
why should he not marry Sarah? No 



IN THE SPRING. 105 

doubt it would be better to marry a lady ; 
but then what lady would have him ? Such 
a lady as Miss Tracy would only marry a 
rich and clever man, and it would be mad- 
ness to ask her. If he were to wait some 
years, perhaps he might have sufficient 
money to tempt a lady to have him ; but 
then she might only care for his money, and 
not for him. John got restless as he 
thought over all this. He began to walk 
up and down the room, and wonder whether 
his mother was right in worrying him so 
much about Sarah. He did not often smoke, 
but he thought that a pipe would quiet his 
brain ; so he sat down once more and filled 
his pipe, and tried to think calmly on his 
present and future. 

He might remain in his present position 
for some vears, and he could not live all 



106 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

those years in a lonely state. And if he 
rose gradually, why should not Sarah rise 
with him? And, after all, was he not 
bound to Sarah? Poor Bob had left the 
country for her sake. This reminded John 
that he had been so absorbed in himself that 
he had forgotten his brother's good fortune ; 
so he took up an unfinished glass of wine 
that he had left on the table, and drank 
BoVs health. 

" How I should like to see the dear im* 
petuous fellow !" he thought. " Why, if I 
neglect poor little Sarah, he will be coming 
home some day, and marrying her ; so why 
shouldn't I? I won her fairly from him. 
Bob wouldn't be ashamed of her, I know ; 
so why should I ?" 

After John had been thinking in this way 
for some time, he knocked the ashes out of 




m THE SPRING. 107 

his pipe with a very decided tap, and said, 
"My mind is made up; I will marry 
Sarah, and very shortly too." 



108 



CHAPTER XXIL 

A KISS. 

Alouette.. We all of us are kiBsed beneath the mistletoe ; 
Kissed by our cousins too, and other wicked 
ones. 
AsTROLOGOS.. All well enough, before you come to woman- 
hood. 
But 'tis a very altered matter afterward. 
Contact of lips is prelude of a mystery. 

The Comedy of Dreams, 

01 John Carr, notwithstanding all that 
could be urged to the contrary, resolv- 
ed that he would be true to little Sarah. 
Why not ? he often thought. She was the 



A KISS. 1 09 

loveliest little creature in the world. It is 
certain that when a man begins to enumer- 
ate his sweetheart's claims to be loved, he is 
no longer quite in love. When a man pro- 
fesses to be in love, I have the better 
opinion of him if he cannot tell the colour 
of his lady's eyes or hair, or what feather 
she wears in her bonnet, or what is the 
material of her dress. To the true lover his 
lady is concrete, and not capable of being 
analysed and pulled to pieces. She is the 
woman in whom he delights. The true 
delight ends when you begin to ask yourself 
why. There is an old Christmas game which 
illustrates this. It runs through the alpha- 
bet. 

" I love my love with an A, because she is 
Audacious, or Amiable, or Artful . . . 

and so on down to 



110 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

I love my love with a Z, because she is 
Zealous, or a Zany." 

Now anybody who begins to ask why he 
loves a woman, loves her no longer, if he 
ever loved her. That John Carr did love 
Sarah Daw once, is very certain. As, how- 
ever, the time passed on, and he applied his 
reasoning faculty to his love affair (which no 
man ever should do) he certainly found his 
love grew less passionate. With all that, he 
made up his mind that he would have her. 
She was the rosiest little beauty in all Iron- 
town and Westbury, and he resolved that 
she should be Mrs. John Carr. 

Sarah, meanwhile, was not thinking of 
John Carr in precisely the same way. The 
spring was soft and sweet. " The jasmine 
of Shirwan, called by the Franks the lilac," 
as the Shah of Persia hath it, was in deli- 



AKISS. Ill 

dons bloom and perfume. Sarah bloomed 
and budded too, in the early spring. These 
sensuous young things feel the sap rise in 
them when St. Valentine comes to the front, 
and have their happy dreams when the 
swallows return from Nile to Thames. 
Sarah was dreaming and absent. Fay, who 
had not reached the age of such tantrums, 
and would have crushed them down with 
stern promptitude, had much difficulty in 
keeping her ancilla in order. 

The weather in early May grew wonder- 
fully warm. One pleasant morning Miss 
Clumber was not well j so Fay, who was at 
that time reading Phaedrus, took the book, 
and flew into the garden to find a convenient 
tree to perch in. She was intimate with the 
tops of many of the trees, and looked upon 
them as friends and companions ; but she had 



112 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

her favourites, and on this occasion, antici* 
pating a long morning, she chose a tree which 
had a comfortable seat in the middle of it. 
She was soon in her perch studying the 
acute fabulist, and trying to fancy that the 
wild creatures around her could talk equally 
crisp Latin. She was so familiar with them 
all that they would come and perch on the 
tree quite close to her ; so she was generally 
surrounded by some of her friends when in 
any of her favourite seats. There was one 
little robin who was her most devoted ad- 
mirer. She had made his acquaintance in the 
previous summer before his breast had 
turned red, and she had fed him every day 
through the winter; but when the spring 
came the attractions of a lady-robin took up 
his attention, and Fay did not see so much 
of him. 



A KISS. 113 

Fay was buried in the story of the Vain Jack- 
daw^ when she heard voices beneath her. She 
looked down and beheld Paul Roden and 
Sarah Daw. 

Fay read her Phaedrus/as she read every- 
thing, with an imaginative intelligence. She 
had discovered for herself what Miss Clum- 
ber was incapable of teaching her, the 
periodic character of Latin prose, the scien- 
tific character of Latin verse. Poe, in one 
of his prettiest little poems, tell us of 

^The glory ihat was Greece, 
And the grandeur tliat was Borne/' 

Greece and Rome have both left their 
mark on the world; but which was the 
greater? Greece, sorely. Had not Aris- 
tophanes lived, that empire of the world 
that was won by Borne would have been 
won by AthentL The great Tory poet and 

TQLu n. I 



114 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

wit ruined by his ridicule the schemes of 
Alcibiades, who otherwise would have 
conquered Carthage and Italy, outdone all 
the Sdpios and Cassars, and made Athens the 
omphalos of the world. Aristophanes 
changed the current of events, and gave 
Eome its chance. It was a definite mis- 
fortune for the world. Athens could never 
have fallen to the level of Caligula's Rome ; 
and, when Christianity came upon the 
world with its flood of light, it would have 
been more reasonably understood by the 
appreciative Greeks. Bigotry could not 
have fastened on the City of the Violet 
Crown. A Pope of Rome came naturally 
enough after a series of debauched and 
bestial Emperors ; but the lucent atmosphere 
of Athens would poison a Pope, 

Well, but here is Fay Luttrel construing 



AKI8& 115 

her Phaedrus high in air . a white bird 
amid the dim dark leaves of the wide- 
spreading yew, whose ancestors furnished 
bows to our ancestors in the days when 
English archers conquered France. She 
liked the fabulist She made stories out of 
all his fables. Irreverent chit I when she 
construed the second fable she mentally 
nicknamed Miss Clumber Queen Log. 
" Goodness me," she thought, " if I had to 
be any troublesome little animal's governess, 
wouldn't I torment her ? 0, but I like 
Queen Log. I won't pray to Jupiter for 
another governess." 

And now, as she looked down through 
the dark branches on Sarah, who was won- 
drously beribboned and furbelowed, she 
thought of that vain jackdaw in the third 
fable who dressed himself in peacock's 

i2 



116 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

feathers. The jackdaw is the last bird in 
the world to play such pranks ; but Phaedrus 
did not know that, and little Fay had not 
yet found it out. She could clearly see, 
however, that Sarah was "dressy/' and 
dressiness means vanity, and vanity means a 
weak brain. And she marvelled much to 
see Paul Roden and Sarah Daw together. 

Paul had come into the grounds by the 
gate at the end of the yew path. Sarah 
had come to search for her little mistress, 
as Miss Litton wanted to give her something 
to amuse her. Sarah had already gone 
through the garden, and concluded that 
Miss Fay must be somewhere indoors. So 
she thought she would just have a look out 
at the widcet-gate before going in. As she 
stood there she saw Paul Boden coming. 
She put herself in a pretty attitude, and pre- 



A mss. 117 

tended not to see him till he came up to 
the gate. Then she uttered some exclama- 
tion, and moved as if going away in a great 
hurry. She was a pretty little creature, this 
pink and white thing delicately dressed, 
like a lady's-maid in a play. Paul felt the 
old fascination. If he had had time to 
think, he might have reasoned with himself 
and restrained his passionate feeling for 
Sarah ; but when the little creature looked 
so startled and prepared to run away, he 
said quickly, "Don't go, Sarah." Then 
Sarah looked round at him with the pretti- 
est possible expression, so Paul thought, 
and he could not resist her. He hastened 
up to her side, and walked along with her 
till there was a turn in the yew path, and 
then told her to follow him into a thick 
little bit of shrubbery between the yew 



118 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

hedge and big yew tree in which Fay was 
perched. 

" 0, please, Mr. Paul, do let me go," said 
Sarah. He had taken hold of her hand. 
" I must go and look for Miss Fay. Miss 
Litton will wonder why I am gone so long." 

" Nonsense, Sarah," said Paul, whose earn- 
estness increased with Sarah's unwillingness. 
" Why, we haven't had a chat for a long 
time," he said. " How are you getting on, 
Sarah? You are looking prettier than 
ever." 

" Perhaps that's because I never see you," 
she replied. 

" 0, I have been busy lately," said Paul. 
" And the weather has been so cold. Now 
that the spring is coming on, we shall have 
some pleasant meetings, I hope." 

" Thank you, Mr. Paul, I'd much rather 



A KISS. 119 

not/' said Sarah. " Fm only a silly little 
girl, I know, and a gentleman like you 
thinks such as me of no account ; but I'm of 
some account to myself, and I don't want 
you or anybody else to try and make a fool 
of me." 

" Why, Sarah," said Paul, in a supercili- 
ous way, " what nonsense you talk I Can't 
you and I meet and chat, and have a kiss, 
without any harm done ?" 

" Harm or no harm !" cried Sarah, breath- 
lessly. "I don't know. Perhaps I'm too 
poor a creature to be worth harming. I 
didn't think much of myself till you touched 
my lips, Mr. Paul. Now, if I think too 
much of myself, whose fault is it, I wonder ? 
Now you know . . . but, 0, I won't tell 
you . . . never mind . . ." 

*' Yes, tell me, Sarah," he said. 



120 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

" Why, it's this. No, I can't. I can't, Mr. 
Paul." 

"You nmstj^ he said, kissing her quite 
eagerly. 

Fay was looking down upon them. She 
was amazed. Her interest in Phaedrus was 
gone. Was this a new version of the Wolf 
and the Lamb ? 

" You have made me think of you," said 
Sarah. " How could I help it when you 
kissed me by the river, just as if you loved 
me. 0, 1 call you wicked, uncked, Mr. Paul. 
You know you don't care about me a bit. I'm 
a little servant girl, just a trifle better look- 
ing than the rest of the servants. 0, 1 know 
quite welL Never mind, Mr. Paul ; I'll try 
not to hate you. l^owj>lease let me go, I'm 
looking for Miss Fay." 

" Sarah," he said, keeping his arm round 




A KISS. 121 

her waist, " you talk nonsense. What harm 
could there ever be in my giving you a kiss ? 
Can't you take such a trifle easily ?" 

" No, Mr. Paul, I can't take it easily. I 
don't like such treatment. I'm a girl, and I 
must either love a man or hate him. That's 
all. I don't love you, Mr. Paul." 

" Don't you ?" he said, and caught her in 
his arms and kissed her a dozen times on her 
lips and eyelids. She seemed nothing loth, 
but when he let her go she flew away like 
Atalanta. Then Paul Roden walked slowly 
across the lawn toward the house. 

Fay was paralysed. It was a mercy she 
had not dropt her Phaedrus down on their 
heads in the very middle of their fierce flirta- 
tion. She could not make it out. That 
Paul Roden should care to kiss Sarah Daw 
seemed to her amazing. A little aristocratic 



122 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

beauty like Fay could not understand the 
fascination which characterless prettiness 
exercises upon some men. And Paul Roden 
too, whom she had thought so much of! 
Fay was disgusted altogether. She resolved 
to remain in her yew-perch, and read the 
fabulist, till there was every chance that Paul 
was gone. 

So she stayed and read her Phaedrus, and 
pondered over things in general. She was 
beginning, early though it may seem, to have 
an insight into human character. Instances 
of early development are plentiful enough. 
I have known a schoolboy deservedly flogged 
for neglecting his classics, the neglect having 
arisen from his writing certain newspaper 
articles which the schoolmaster who switched 
him greatly admired. From this fact I 
draw the inference that schoolboys should 



A KISS. 123 

not write articles, nor schoolmasters read 
them. 

When Fay at length descended from her 
quiet haunt in the aerial tree, Paul Roden 
was gone. Miss Clumber was a little better, 
and had come down to lunch with Miss 
Litton, who, never having anything at all 
the matter with her, was always excessively 
kind to those who had. So she was petting 
the governess in her pleasant benevolent 
way, and luncheon was just served as Fay 
came in. 

** Why, where have you been wandering, 
Fay ?" said Miss Litton. " Mr. Roden has 
been here, and was quite disappointed not 
to see you." 

"Dear me, what a pity!" quoth Fay. 
" I had no idea Mr. Roden could care for a 



124 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

little girl like me. He came to see you, I 
suppose, Auntie?" 

As she talked thus, Sarah was handing 
her the potatoes. 

" Well," said Miss Litton, " I am always 
glad to see him ; he seems better than most 
of the young men of the present day. He 
would not do anything mean or dishonour- 
able. I like him very much." 

"0 yes," said Miss Clumber. "1 do 
think there never was such a gentlemanly 
young man." 

Miss Litton didn't care much for the 
governess's style of playing echo, so the 
subject dropped. 

Fay had intended to tell Miss Litton what 
she had witnessed, but she did not care to 
do it in Miss Clumber's presence, and the 
invalid governess had evidently made up her 



A KISS. 125 

mind that she would remain in that cosy par* 
lour. So Fay flew off into the garden again 
when luncheon was over, taking with her this 
time, not Phaedrus, but an English volume 
of fables, charmingly illustrated, which 
strove to condense more closely the wit of 
JSsop and Baubris. Thus : 

" A crow was in a hollow tree, 
That crow was fond of plunder ; 
But the flatterer fox came up, and she 

Made a most terrible blunder. 
She tried to sing, and dropt her slice : 
Fox picked it up, and said, ' How nice !' ** 

Fay tried sometimes to persuade herself 
that there was an intelligible language of 
birds and beasts ; and how she longed 
to understand it I There seemed something 
more in common between her and a robin 
or a skylark, than between her and a girl 
like Sarah Daw, whose strange conduct with 
Paul was to her a complete enigma. 



126 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

When she descended from her sky-par- 
lour, unvisited save by the birds, it was past 
Miss Litton's ordinary time for afternoon 
tea. Fay, by this time, having been delayed 
so long in telling her story, had made up 
her mind how to do it. Miss Litton was 
alone, reading some ancient Russia-bound 
volume ; the tea-kettle still hissed for this 
spoilt child, and Sarah Daw had some crisp 
brown slices of toast fresh made for her. 

"How kind of you. Auntie!" she said. 
" I am so sorry to be late ; but I was read- 
ing up in the great yew-tree, and did not 
know what time it was." 

This remark she made just as Sarah was 
leaving the room. That young person won- 
dered whether Miss Fay had been in the 
great yew at an earlier period of the day. 

" She's a regular tomboy, " thought 



A KISS. 127 

Sarah, '^ climbing trees in that indecent 
way! And I daresay she can be a little 
spy . mean little thing 1" 

" You have had a regular holiday to-day, 
child," said Miss Litton ; " I hope you have 
not quite wasted your time." 

"0 no, Auntie, I don't think so ; but I 
hope Miss Clumber is better, for I miss my 
lessons. I took my Phaedrus up into my 
dear big tree, and wished the birds that 
came there would talk to me, as they do in 
his fables. They do talk, 1 know, especially 
the robins ; but I can't learn their language. 
I would rather know it than Latin, though 
I love my Latin all the same. Don't you 
know anybody who could teach me bird- 
language. Auntie ?" 

"No, Fay, I don't; but I suppose you 
are doing the next best thing when you 



128 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

climb a tree and take a bird's-eye view of 
the world. Do you mean to climb trees all 
your life ?" 

" Till Tm a nice old lady like'you, Auntie 
dear, and then I'll encourage other little 
girls to climb trees. But 0, Auntie, I had ' 
a bird's-eye view to-day from my cedar that 
I didn't like a bit. I saw Mr. Roden kissing 
Sarah Daw, just as if he loved her truly ; 
and that was why I stayed away until I 
thought he had left, for I couldn't have met 
without saying something fierce. I couldn't 
have believed it of him, that I couldn't. 
Miss Clumber was here, or I should have 
told you after lunch. Isn't it wicked of 
him, Auntie ? And you were praising him 
so just afterwards, when Sarah was in the 
room." 

Miss Litton was not a lady to stand any 




A KISS. 129 

nonsense. She was intensely indignant at 
Paul Roden's conduct. She had held him 

to be a gentleman ; that he should dare to 
behave in such a way to one of her maids 
in her own prednct made her very angry. 
She was angrier still that Fay should have 
witnessed the interview. 

" I must send that girl away/' said the old 
lady. " It is disgraceful of her." 

"No, Auntie, please. Don't send her 
away. She will only come to some harm. 
She is a handy girl, and if she is kept strict 
I daresay she will be better. Let Mrs. 
Gruffley'* (this was MissLitton's housekeeper) 
keep her closer at work, and not let her go 
out. It would be a pity to send her away." 

Miss Litton reflected awhile. 

" Well," she said, "I can try her a little 

VOL. n. K 



130 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

longer. But Paul Roden must not come 
here again." 

"I never wish to see him again," said 
Fay. " I could not talk to a man who would 
treat a servant-girl like that. Please tell 
him not to come, Auntie." 

"Drink your tea, child, while I write 
him a note." She walked to her bureau, 
fanning herself with her long ivory fan, 
while the diamonds in her dress trembled 
into sparks of fire. Here is her note : 



" Miss Litton takes leave to request Mr. 
Paul Roden not again to visit Westbury 
Place, having been informed of his miscon- 
duct to one of her young servants. 

"Miss Litton regrets the irrevocable 
decision at which she has arrived, as she has 
had great pleasure in Mr. Roden's society." 



A KISS. 131 

" There, Fay," she said, " you may read 
it and seal it up for hitn. And now I must 
talk to that little hussy, Sarah, I'll have 
the business over once for all/' 

She rang the bell, which was answered by 
Sarah. 

" Ask Mrs. Grujffley to come here," she 
said. " I want you also." 

In five minutes the housekeeper arrived. 
She was a tall Devonshire woman of forty- 
four or thereabout, with a keen eye, a firm 
mouth, a well-set jaw. 

"Gruffley," said Miss Litton, "this girl, 
Sarah, has been behaving most improperly. 
She has allowed Mr. Roden to kiss her 
in my garden. I shall not turn her away, 
as she may come to harm ; but I wish you 
to be very strict and severe with her, and give 
her plenty of work to do when she is not wait- 

k2 



132 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

ing on Miss Luttrel, and never to let her 
out except to see her mother, and not to let 
her send or receive letters without your 
knowing about them. She is only a child, 
and must be kept in order. Mr. Roden 
will not come here again. I know I may 
trust you to attend to this, Grujffley.'* 

^'Yes, Ma'am, you may/' was the very 
firm reply. 

Sarah all the while, to whom Miss Litton 
had not said a word, stood blushing with 
shame, and crying with rage. Both shame 
and rage were caused by the thought that she 
had been found out, that she should not see 
Mr. Paul again, that perha|)s John Carr 
might hear of it. " O no," she thought, 
" that was most unlikely. She would make 
John Carr marry her soon, and get out of 
the clutches of that dreadful old Gruffley." 



A KISS. 133 

She resolved to get an interview with John 
at the earliest possible opportunity. 

Has it been mentioned that Fiddler Carr 
was not only a musician, but also a notable 
fly-fisher? Miss Litton, years ago, gave 
him leave to fish in the swift shallow stream 
that runs through Westbury Manor; and 
when he chanced to catch any very fine fish, 
he was wont to bring it up as an oflfering. 
This day he had invented a most killing fly, 
and had wiled from his haunt a wary old 
trout of unusual weight that had defied him 
for several seasons. So he brought up his 
basket, the monster and a dozen others, for 
Miss Litton's acceptance ; and she sent him 
down a sovereign, and Mistress Gruffley en- 
tertained him with a glass of her special 
cherry-brandy in her own room. The 
Gruffley knew well how to manufacture that 



134 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

supreme cordial of England, to which char- 
treuse and trappisti and kirschenwasser are 
sheer abominations : and on the north wall 
of Westbury Place grew noble morella 
cherry-trees, which she turned to excellent 
use. 

When he entered the room, Sarah Daw 
was there. Mistress Gruffley had taken her 
in hand at once, and given her some hard 
sewing to do, under her own supervision. 
Now she dismissed her, saying sternly, 

" Put away your work now, Sarah, and 
go to bed; your candle must be out in 
twenty minutes." 

" Please, Mrs. Gruffley," said Sarah, who 
had a healthy appetite, *' I haven't had my 
supper." 

"Nor will you," said the housekeeper. 
" Go at once, and don't answer me." 



A KISS* 135 

Sarah went. She longed to defy the 
housekeeper, but had not courage enough. 
Besides, the presence of John Carr's father 
embarrassed her. As for Fiddler Carr, he 
quietly drank in the cherry-brandy, and 
drew his conclusions. 

**'Twas a fine fish I brought in to-day, 
Mrs. Grujffley," he said. ** Tve been trying 
for that fish four years. He knew it. I 
tried new flies every season, and he turned 
up his nose at 'em. But a trout^s just like a 
woman, Mrs. Gruffley, saving your presence ; 
there's always something irresistible for 
both of 'em. A woman will jilt a man she 
sees is handsome because she's told another 
man is clever; she'll refuse diamonds and 
give herself away for lace; she'll throw 
over a lot of jolly red-coated officers, and 
marry a black-coated parson with a cold in 



136 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

his nose that lasts all the year round and 
gets worst when he preaches. That was 
the way with my trout. I'd tried him with 
very near everything. This morning, my 
old woman fancied some pigeons for break- 
fast ; so I killed a pair of squabs . and she 
did enjoy them. When I was plucking 'em, 
I says to myself, * I'll try pigeons' feathers 
on that old trout.' So I made a fly, and 
out I went ; and he couldn't resist. It was 
something new ; he'd never seen the like of 
it before. And I hope you'll make the 
cook dress him to a turn, and put plenty of 
port wine in the sauce.*' 

" I'll look after it, Mr. Carr," said the 
housekeeper, with whom, as with most folk, 
he was a great favourite. 

"Thank you, m'm, " said Fiddler Carr. 



A KISS. 137 

"I am afraid this delicious cherry-brandy 
loosens the hinges of my tongue, and causes 
me to talk too much/' 

"Take a drop more," quoth the house- 
keeper. " It is wholesome. I make it my- 
self from our own fruit." 

" You seemed severe on that little girl, 
Sarah Daw," said Oarr, who had taken Mrs. 
Gruffley's advice. " Is she unsteady ?" 

*' Well, Mr. Carr, I don't mind telling you 
that she has been behaving most improperly 
with Mr. Paul Roden. I don't know how 
far she has gone, but she's a regular little 
slut, that certain. Miss Litton is very kind, 
and means to keep her on all the same, but 
I'm to be very strict to her. And I mean to. 
I don't approve of these young hussies that 
go enticing gentlemen. I'll make her sorry 



138 SWEET AND TWENTT. 

for the day she ever dared to do such a 
tbmg here.'" 

Fiddler Carr soon after took his leave. 
He was very angry, though he kept his 
anger quiet. Here was the miserable little 
hussy, Sarah Daw, after winning the love of 
both his boys, who were infinitely too good 
for her, playing wicked tricks with Paul 
Roden. It was abominable. It made him 
perfectly mad. He longed to tell his indig- 
nation to the spirit who haunted his Stradi- 
varius, and get articulate reply. 

When he got home, he found his wife and 
John just sitting down to supper . . . eggs 
and rashers, both home-grown, with aspara- 
gus and flowery potatoes. 

"Well, John," he said, **here you are 
again. You're a true Carr, and don't desert 



A KISS. 139 

us. I've been taking some trout up to Miss 
Litton ; here's a sovereign for you, lass," he 
said to his wife, throwing it on the table. 
*'And Tm hungry, for I've been drinking 
cherry-brandy, and that's rather strong 
for my old head. And how do you like the 
new house, John ?'' he said. 

"Pretty well, father," said John Carr. 
" It's lonesome." 

"Get thee a wife, lad," he said. "Then 
thou'lt be cosy enough. Now thou'st thought 
of some wench, I wager. It's that little 
Sarah Daw that you and Bob both liked." 

" She's a good girl, father, but very 
young." 

" A good girl /" cried Mrs. Carr, and was 
going on in the highest tone of the human 
voice, but her husband said, 



140 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

*' Just let me finish, and then you'll see. 
Sarah Daw, John, has been making too free 
with Mr. Paul Roden, and it's only Miss 
Litton's kindness she wasn't turned away that 
minute. But Mr. Roden won't be let go 
there again, and shell be kept very strict. 
That's how it is ; I don't like telling you, 
John, for she's a pretty girl, and a gentle, 
and might have been good if she hadn't been 
too fond of people above her. Right sorry 
for her I am, but if she can be made good 
anywhere. Miss Litton's is the place. You 
can find out all about it ; you know what a 
nice lady Miss Litton is . she'd tell you 
everything if you went and asked. You'll 
find, I fear, that Sarah Daw was never 
meant for a wife for an honourable man 
and a true gentleman such as you mean to 
be." 



A KISS. 141 

He said no more, but the Stradivarius 
broke out into a wild wail of melody, that 
seemed to tell of wasted lives and lost souls. 



(. 



142 



CHAPTER XXIII. 

JOHN CABB AND PAUL BODEN. 

Baphael. . How should men bear dieir troubles, O 

Astrologos ? 
AsTROLOGOS. . ^Why, meet tliem bravely. Prince; 

heroic dauntlessness 
Transforms a trouble to a bubble, instantly. 

The Comedy of Dreams, 

T)AUL RODEN got that sharp little note 
from Miss Litton just before he dress- 
ed for dinner. It took him doubly by sur- 
prise ; for he had not thought his kissing 
Sarah likely to be known, and he did not 
imagine she would regard it as so ungentle- 



JOHN CABB AND PAUL BODEN. 143 

manly an action. The employment of 
women and girls in factory labour has done 
much to lower the chivalrous feeling natural 
to Englishmen among the young men of the 
manufacturing districts ; they find it difficult 
to realise the fact that all women would be 
ladies if they could, and ought to be treated 
as if they were ladies. Paul Roden could 
not see much harm in the game he had been 
playing with Sarah; but he was very sorry Miss 
Litton had found it out, and taken it up so 
warmly. He hated the thought of being 
thus ostracised by Miss Litton. When he 
sat down to dinner that evening he was very 
dull indeed ; a pity, as he was alone with 
Edith, for Price Roden was compelled to go 
to some public dinner at which he was the 
sole possible chairman. There was a charm- 
ing dinner in that raftered room heretofore 



144 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

described ; there was good wine as accompa- 
niment ; and Edith sat opposite him, as gay 
as a skylark, with her bright hair, wreathed 
with vernal flowers, flowing over her rosy- 
white shoulders. She chattered, but Paul 
was glum. He drank claret in great gulps, 
eating scarcely anything. So there was very 
little talk while the servants remained in the 
room. Edith gave him up, till they met in 
the drawing-room ; then, she thought, there 
might be some chance of discovering what 
was the matter. 

So she patiently waited, and served him 
with coffee. Then she ventured to say : 

** Why, what is the matter with you, Paul, 
to-day ? You are not half as gay as usual. 
Have you a toothache, or are you crossed in 
love r 

Paul smiled rather weakly. 



JOHN CARR AND PAUL RODBN. 145 

''lam rights enough," he said, "Edith. 
One is not always in equally good form." 

"Of course not,'* replied Miss Tracy; 
" but when one is young and healthy and 
pretty well off there ought to be nothing 
to spoil one's appetite, unless it were one of 
the real substantial troubles of life. You 
can't have any such troubles, Paul ; you 
ought to dine like one of Homer's heroes, 
and be as brilliant after as one of Sheridan's. 
Come, I am sure there is something the 
matter ; if it is not a quarrel with a myste- 
rious sweetheart, you may as well tell me. 
I was always a good hand at consoling 
people." 

The majority of people would have 
thought Edith Tracy a very pretty bit of 
incarnate consolation. Paul, who had taken 
his cup of coffee with a chmse therein, and 

VOL. n. L 




146 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

who began to feel as if he had been ill- 
treated by the lady of Westbury Manor, said 
to Edith : 

" Do you think there is much harm in 
kissing a pretty girl ?" 

'* Well," she replied, " it depends. Pray 
what pretty girl have you been kissing, that 
you ask such an odd question ?" 

" Why," he said, " I kissed that little girl 
that waits on Fay, Sarah Daw, in the gar- 
den to-day ; and just before dinner I got this 
note from Miss Litton. What do you think 
of it ? I suppose one ought not to kiss a 
pretty maid-servant, but I have known the 
child for years, and I can't see such great 
harm in it." 

Edith read the letter. 

" It seems harsh, Paul. It's a pity that 
you should condescend to kiss a servant- 



JOHN CARR AND PAUL RODBN. 147 

maid, but it is not such a very dreadful 
offence. I can understand that you are 
annoyed. I should have thought Miss Litton 
would have been less prudish about such a 
trifle . what shall you do ?" 

" Nothing," he replied. " I am not going 
to defend myself against such a ridiculous 
charge. I kissed the little girl : granted : 
what particular harm have I done ? Better 
not, perhaps : but where's the pretty girl in 
a higher rank of life than hers that does not 
give away a kiss now and then ? I call it 
mere Puritanism. I am annoyed, because I 
like Miss Litton so much, but I shall not 
take any notice of her letter." 

" Shall I say something to her about it, 
Paul ?" asked Edith. " It must be so 
annoying for you that Miss Litton, whom 
you like so much, should quarrel with you 

l2 



148 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

about such a trifle." For all this time Edith 
merely thought of Paul as giving Sarah one 
of those casual kiases that young fellows are 
tempted to give when pretty lips arQ UQar 
them. 

Paul RodeUy sitting in his Qa^y chair^ 
sipping his cup of Mocha lace4 with curagao, 
liked Edith's sympathy. He tried to forget 
that his behaviour to Sarah differed widely 
from the casual kiss that may harmlessly be 
given to a pretty innocent child. He began 
to feel indignant against Miss Litton. 

^* Dou't oay a word about it, Edith," he 
replied, '^ Mi^ Litton will find some time 
or other that she has doue a very foolish 
thing. But, as I don't want people to re- 
mark that I am not on the same friendly 
terms with her as I used to be^ I think I 
will do something to oblige the governor, 



JOHN CARR AND PAUL RODBN. 149 

who wants me to go into France and Italy 
for a timd. What do you think of that idea, 
Edith ? My father thinks it would do me 
good to travel : and now that you are here, 

he can do without me well enough." 

" I think travel would do you good, 
Paul," she said. ** It is almost impossible to 
escape from a provincial way of thinking if 
you always live in England. There is no 
doubt that you ought to know more of the 
world than just your own neighbourhood, 
in order to look at life properly. Go, if yoil 
think it will be pleasant, I say go : I'll look 
after your father carefully. I won't attempt 
to marry him, you know, Paul. You need 
not be afraid of finding a stepmother when 
you return. But do you really object to my 
giving Miss Litton any explanation ?" 
" I object entirely," he said. " She will 



150 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

think better of me by-and-by. You don't 
think me very wicked, I hope, Edith." 

"No," she said, laughing, "I confess I 
don't. I don't understand your taste, you 
know. Kissing goes by favour, as the old 
adage says : and I should be very sorry to 
kiss Sarah Daw myself. Look at the matter 
logically. You kiss that little girl. Suppose 
she had a good-looking brother, what should 
you say if I permitted him to kiss me? * What 
is sauce for the goose is sauce for the gander,' 
Paul. Harm is always done by familiarity 
between people of different classes. Still 
I think Miss Litton is too severe, and I shall 
tell her so some day, when you are on your 
travels." 

Paul was much consoled by the view his 
cousin Edith took of the situation, and they 
sat down to a game of Sixty-six, at which 



JOHN CARR AND PAUL RODEN. 151 

she usually beat him, having the most 
diabolic luck. Do you know Sixty-six, 
gentle reader ? Nine the lowest card, and 
nine the game : pairs of twenty and forty : 
the daring brilliancy of shutting up. Any- 
one who has once played Sixty-six will 
never condescend to ^carU or piquet. 

When Paul Roden parted from his cousin 
that night, after being decidedly beaten at 
cards, the idea simmered in his brain, 
Should he ash her to marry him ? It would 
be a most sensible match on both sides. 
He would be keeping her money in the 
family. But . . . would she have him? 
Paul could not help seeing that Edith was, 
in some matters, cleverer than himself. 
She could beat him at a game of cards. 
That's a trifle, you may say ; but it's an in- 
tellectual test. And in knowledge of the 



152 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

world, and of human character, Paul was a 
mere child to Edith. Edith knew Paul 
thoroughly, but he had no idea of her 
character, or he would have fallen manfully 
in love with her at once. 

John Garr had no one that evening to 
console him . ^less fortunate than Paul. He 
got away from his father's cottage as soon 
as he could, and let himself in at Birklands, 
and took refuge in his own spedal snuggery, 
. a little room which seemed to have been 
built for the grumbling moments of the 
master of the household. Installed there, 
he pondered over the position. He had 
reverence for his father, whom he knew to 
be the most truthful of men, whatsoever his 
eccentricities. He was sure he must be 
telling the truth. Hitherto, he had been 
very much in love with Sarah. She was 



JOHN CABR AND PAUL RODEN. 153 

excessively pretty, nobody could deny ; his 
dear brother Bob had been his rival, which 
was a strong special stimulus ; and he really 
wanted, as he rose in the world, whereof 
there was absolute certainty now, to show 
that he was not forgetful of thpse from 
whom he sprung, John Carr would rather 
have married Sarah Daw than a peeress in 
her own right, or a Duke's daughter. He 
believed in the glory of labour, and held 
closely to his own people. 

What should he do about this foolish 
little Sarah ? He was not going to have a 
wife who had recklessly touched the lips of 
other men? He had loved her . he now 
began to feel how much he had loved her. 
A glance from her merry eyes made him 
happy for a day. She was so joyous and 
happy and bird-like. To think that she 



154 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

would allow Mr. Roden to take liberties 
with her ! John Garr was indignant ; not 
so much with Paul . ^though, doubtless, he 
would have very willingly punched his head, 
. but with this flighty little girl whom he 
had dreamt of often and often as his steadfast 
little wife. If she came to him now, and 
acknowledged her naughtiness, could she 
ever be the same to him again ? No ; the 
crash was absolute. 

John Carr felt a blow of this kind deeply, 
yet took it, some people would say, stolidly. 
He had no gush in his temper. Sarah had 
deceived him ; he made no complaint, but 
he felt it always. On the following day he 
went to see Miss Litton, who received him 
graciously, and would not hear of any 
apology for his calling. 

" I shall be glad to see you whenever you 



JOHN CARR AND PAUL RODBN. 155 

like to call, Mr. Carr," she said. '* I have 
heard of you many a time, and I have heard 
of your brother in India ; and it is a pleasure 
to me to see young men doing their work 
well. Why, you'll be a rich man in a dozen 
years, but I hope you think of something 
better than being a rich man. Do your 
duty in that state of life unto which it 
pleaseth God to call you. These are the 
homely words of the Church Catechism ; I 
trust they will not be entirely forgotten." 

" They are words that suit me, Miss Lit- 
ton," he said, " and it is because I wish to 
do my duty that 1 have taken the liberty of 
calling on you to-day. You have a servant, 
Sarah Daw, whom some months ago I asked 
to think of me as a possible husband . not to 
make any promise, because she is very 
young. The truth is. Miss Litton, that my 



156 SWBBT AND TWENTY. 

brother Robert and I were both very much 
in love with her, and it was that made him 
go into the army. Sarah gave me a kind of 
promise; we have always seemed to be 
sweethearts, Miss Litton, if I may venture to 
talk in that way ; and now I hear she has 
been going on in a way that is not quite 
right with Mr. Paul Roden. As I feel 
pledged to Sarah so long as she's a good 
girl, I should like to know whether she has 
behaved badly. She's a mere child 1 Bob 
and I ought not to have talked to her about 
such things ; if she has done anything foolish 
I think it is hardly her own fault. But, if I 
may ask you what you think about it, I shall 
be really thankful for anjrthing you can tell 
me. It isn't only that I have all along loved 
her very much; I feel that Bob, over in 
India, must often think of her." 



JOHN CARR AND PAUL BODBN. 157 

Miss Litton appreciated John Carr's earn- 
estness. She admired his truthful nature. 
She said : 

" Mr. Carr, my impression is that Sarah 
has no harm in her, but she is flighty and 
easily led astray. With Mr. Paul Roden I 
am greatly annoyed, as he certainly ought to 
know better than to behave as he did to a girl 
in my service. It is a great insult to a mis- 
tress for a gentleman who is either an inmate 
or visitor of the house to be familiar with 
the servants. It must destroy the respect 
due from the servant to the mistress. I 
like Sarah; she is handy and clever and 
waits on Miss Luttrel very nicely; but I 
should think you, with the prospects before 
you, could marry much better. Don't your 
father and mother tell you so ?" 



1 58 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

"They do, very often," said John Carr, 
laughmg. 

" They are right," said Miss Litton. " I 
have heard all about you, and can see you 
will do well in the world. A pretty ignor- 
ant helpless wife would drag you downward. 
I mean to have Sarah kept very strictly, so 
that she may have no more adventures of an 
irregular kind ; but if you care to come here 
and see her, I do not object. At the same 
time, Mr. Carr, there is an anomaly here ; 
for I should be glad to see you here to dine, 
and you would hardly like it with Sarah 
waiting at table. Hadn't you better forget 
her for four or five years ? She's a mere 
baby as yet ; when she is marriageable you 
may be in quite another sphere. I am 
not talking in a mere monetary vein; 



JOHN CABR AND PAUL RODEN. 159 

you will rise, and you know you will 
rise, and the question for you to ask yourself 
is, ' Can you raise Sarah Daw?' Cf course 
there is the previous question, 'Is Sarah 
worth the experiment ?' . and on that I have 
a very decided opinion ; but I leave it 
wholly to you. I am glad you came to me, 
Mr. Carr, for I like to deal with all ques- 
tions frankly. People who write letters on 
such matters are my abomination ; I like to 
settle everything face to face." 

The result of the two conversations here 
chronicled was that Paul Roden resolved to 
take his father's advice, and pay a visit to 
the Continent. perhaps, if he felt in a wan- 
dering humour, to travel beyond European 
limits ; and that John Carr determined to 
go firmly on with his work, and forget 
Sarah Daw, as far as possible. The aspect 



160 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

of affiurs was entirely changed for poor 
little Sarah, who found Mrs. GruflBiey a very 
rigid disciplinarian indeed. 



book: II 



VOL. n. 



M 



CHAPTER I. 

THE LAPSE OF A LUSTRUM. 

Kaphael. . Five years to wait before the darling girl is 

mine : 
Dotard ! you^ll ask me next to wait a century. 

ASTROLOQOS. . ^When you have lived a century, as I have 

lived, 
Lustrums wiU seem the atoms of eternity. 

The Comedy of Dreams, 

TjlIVE years slipped away, and another 
May-time came to Westbury Place. 
It was unaltered, save that the trees had 
grown more umbrageous. Miss Litton 
looked no older as she sat in her favourite 
seat, looking out on the flowers and ferns in 

m2 



164 SWEBT AND TWENTY. 

the patio. She lived so calm and regular a 
life that the years did not tell upon her. 
To'Fay she seemed no older than when she 
saw her first : anyone who had not seen her 
for some years would doubtless judge other- 
wise. Every instant changes us, though the 
change be infinitesimal. 

'^ None twice has crossed the self -same stream, 
None twice has seen the self -same face." 

But to Fay, who saw Miss Litton every day, 
she seemed the very same fairy Auntie, all 
wit and kindness, all diamonds and lace, 
who had welcomed her when she came from 
India. She looked not a day older, in 
Fay's judgment ; younger, if anything. 

Alack ! the same thing could not be said 
of Fay. She had shot up, straight as a 
young poplar, to something above the 
average height of women. You could see 



THE LAPSE OP A LUSTRUM. 165 

in her abundant brown hair the lavish rich- 
ness of her nature, . in her eyes, that were 
always full of light, though their colour 
often changed, the genius that dwelt within 
her. She was just as simple as ever. She 
climbed a tree quite as easily, and had no 

fear of showing her ankles in the ascent; 
she rode and swam and skated wondrous 
well. This was not all. She had resolved 
to cultivate her mind as well as her body, 
to make herself worthy to welcome her 
father oil his return ; and, when she had 
squeezed Miss Clumber as dry as an orange, 
she asked Miss Litton for a tutor who could 
give her strong classical and mathematical 
doses. One happened opportunely to be in 
the neighbourhood. Edward Salisbury 
would have taken a Double First at Oxford, 
and probably been a Bishop, but for his 



166 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

having written a fiightftilly atheistic pamph* 
lety which caused his expulsion fix>m the 
University. It would be better if the Uni- 
versity, instead of expelling a brilliant 
undergraduate who takes to Atheism (the 
measles of the mind), could flog him into 
common sense. Salisbury's expulsion made 
him defiant and desperate. He had a small 
income, and few friends; he lived by his 
wits, though he might have fattened in a 
Fellowship, or passed from the Bar to the 
Woolsack, or worn a mitre 1 "beg par- 
don . an apron. 

What did he do ? He had a couple of 
hundreds a year inalienably. He increased 

it in many ways, when not too lazy. He 
played chess for shillings and billiards for 
sovereigns. He wrote letters for the illite- 
rate. He photographed gentlemen's houses. 



THE LAPSE OF A LUSTRUM. 167 

He lectured at Mechanics' Institutes. He 
invented London correspondence for coun- 
try papers, in which he wrote like a mem- 
ber of Parliament and a man of fashion, in 
the confidence of the Prime Minister, and 
first favourite with the Belle of the Season. 
He came to Irontown to edit the Irontown 
Iconoclast^ which was designed to revolution- 
ise everybody, and especially Price Roden : 
but the capitalist who started the Iconoclast 
had forgotten his capital, so the journal did not 
last more than a fortnight. Poor Salisbury 
could not get an atom of salary ; and, as he 
was unable to leave his lodging without pay- 
ing rent, and had not enough money to 
pay his fare to London, he perforce 
remained where he was. But by dint of 
advertising he got some lessons to give ; and 
very fortunate he deemed himself when he 



168 SWEET AND TWENTY 

had an applicatioii firom Miss Luttrel to 
teach Fay. Fay got on very well with Mr. 
Salisbury. With all his wildness, he was a 
thorough gentleman ; and, when he had a 
pretty girl for a pupil, logically separated 
acddent from essence, and regarded her as 
pupil merely. He had in him a touch of 
the defiant spirit of Shelley, but without 
Shelle/s poetry. There is a point at whicli 
the roads of genius diverge ; a guide-post 
stands beneath an aerial plane-tree, and two 
ways branch up hill. As you stand beneath 
that guide-post you look down on a plain 
full of the cities and villages of common men, 
who get their brain-food from the heights 
above. The two legends on the guide-post 
are Imagination . . . Intellect : you look to 
the right, and at the end of the steep path, 
bordered with fuU-foliaged trees, the sky is 



THE LAPSE OF A LUSTRUl^r. 169 

rich with purple and amber ; you look to 
the left, and at the end of a path through 
the stiffest pines, there soars into the air a 
mountain-peak shrouded with snow. Now 
choose ! Some love to seek the secrets of 
sunset and sunrise ; others have a passionate 
desire to scale the clear pale peak that seems 
inaccessible. Shelley turned to the right ; 
Salisbury to the left. Alas, neither did 
Shelley reach the glorious sunrise which he 
saw before him, nor had Fay Luttrel's tutor 
energy enough to climb the difficult peak 
which always seems so near, yet proves to 
be in the land that is very far off. 

Fay learnt well from this new tutor of 
hers ; but, as what people learn is only of 
service when it comes to be a part of what 
they are, no need exists to say what she 
learnt. Theobjectofacademic training should 



170 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

be to produce a man or a woman, not a 
mathematician or a poetess. It has been 
remarked that people who write plays 
and norels fall into their chief mistakes 
by giving more weight to the unlikeness 
that there is between human beings than 
to their likeness to each other; but the 
likeness is far greater than the unlikeness, 
and must be thus regarded by the true 
artist. The author who takes hold of a 
single dominant quality, and forms it into a 
man or woman, is simply a caricaturist, and 
might just as well label his characters with 
names that would indicate them. The 
greatest character created by Shakespeare, 
Hamlet, Prince of Denmark, puzzles the 
critics, and baflBies the actors, because he is 
so very human. He does just what any 
man would do who was clear-sighted yet 



THE LAPSE OF A LUSTRUM. 171 

superstitious, loyal to his father's memory^ 
yet loving his mother, a Prince every inch 
of him, yet fond of easy intercourse with 
other men, a true lover of a lady, yet 
desirous that no other creature should be 
drawn into the whirlpool of misery which 
he saw before him. Now there is more 
humanity in the greatest poet than there is 
poetry, and in the greatest mathematician 
than there is mathematics, and in the 
noisiest costermonger than there is coster- 
mongering : and my experience leads me to 
think that the same may be said of lawyers, 
stockbrokers, critics, and other abused classes. 
We must draw the line, I suppose, at the 
foeneratores qui in odia hominum incurrunt . 
at the hno communis pemides adolescentium. 
As to the other habitants of Westbury 
Place, it may suffice to say that Miss Clum- 



172 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

ber flourished there very comfortably : Fay 
had squeezed her pretty dry, as I remarked, 
and was, physically and intellectually, a 
head and shoulders taller than she ; and the 
arrival of Mr. Salisbury gave her a perma- 
nent holiday. So she enjoyed life quietly, 
and purred in a cat-like state by the cosy 
schoolroom fire, when fires were seasonable, 
and did little or nothing for her comfortable 
home and ample salary. What cared Miss 
Litton? She was used to her; and it 
would have been a pain to dismiss her. 
She could ring the bell for her, write a note 
for her, take a message for her to a servant. 
She could go out with Fay when necessary. 
It looked as if the quiet governess were 
likely to remain at Westbury Place the rest 
of her life. 

Sarah Daw had been living a very quiet 



THE LAPSE OF A LUSTBUM. 17S 

life all this time under Mrs. Gruffley's 
superintendence. John Carr had taken 
Miss Litton's advice; he was indeed per- 
fectly disgusted with Sarah's flightiness, and 
he made up his mind to stick to his work 
and think no more about marriage. So 
Sarah had what she thought a very dull life, 
though it would have been pleasant enough 
if she could have used her opportunities. 
She could not. She was a born flirt: it 
was useless to feed her and clothe her and 
give her books to read if also you did not 
supply her with somebody to flirt with. 
This she did not get at Westbury Place, 
and so she could not consider herself 
happy. 

Paul Roden made a long tour, and re- 
turned with rather a contempt for his 
former follies. When you have seen the 



174 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

beautiful and distinguished women in the 
courts and cities of Europe, you naturally 
think less of some little servant-girl whose 
lips you kissed in a rustic lane, and who 
rebuked you with, 

" 'A' done, Mr. Smith 1" 

When you discover that there are women 
who can think and talk, as well as look 
lovely, who, like the Princess in the fairy- 
tale, whenever they open their rose-fra- 
grant lips drop diamonds, you think rather 
less of the florid farm-beauty whose Doric 
dialect you once thought ornamental. Paul 
Roden came back with an utter disgust for 
his old fancy about Sarah ; but he felt no 
immediate inclination for attempting to 
renew his acquaintance with Miss Litton. 
He presumed that after a long absence she 



THE LAPSE OF A LUSTRUM. 1 75 

would willingly forget and forgive ; Edith, 
who still reigned at the Hall, as charming 
and as young as ever, was of like opinion ; 
but Mr. Paul was in no hurry. His tour 
had improved him in some respects, but 
injured him in others. He had broadened 
his mode of thought by European experi- 
ence ; on the other hand, he had come to 
think more of himself than ever. With 
good introductions, plenty of money, a per- 
sonable presence artistically dressed, he was 
well received everywhere. He returned 
with a vast amount of polish, which, however, 
veneered a good deal of conceit. Edith saw 
this very clearly. His father did not ; he 
thought him perfect. He had no sooner 
seen Paul in his new form than he wrote a 
confidential letter to the Private Secretary 



% 



176 SWEET ASD TWENTY. 

to the first Lord of the Treasury. It ran 
thns: 



" My deab Sir, 

"You asked me a year ago, 
would I like to be a baronet ? and I answer- 
ed, No, I didn't want a handle to my name. 
Circumstances change cases. My son Paul's 
come back, and he's such a fine young fellow 
that I think I should like it for his sake. So 
you may tell Mr. Impetus, if you like, that 
I won't refuse. 

" Yours truly, 

" Price Roden." 



Mr. Roden knew full well that his request 
would be granted, having done good service 
to his party many a year. When the letter 
was laid before the Right Honourable Mr. 



THE LAPSE OF A LUSTRUM. 177 

Impetus, as he sat ia that three-windowed 
first floor room that looks on the park, he 
smiled quietly and said : 

"0, yes. He can have his baronetcy. 
It hardly requires an astrological horoscope 
to forecast the career of Sir Paul Rod en, 
second baronet. Have him gazetted, Lori- 
mer." 

John Carr had been rising steadily. He 
still lived at Birklands, and was now 
accepted as one of the town's foremost men. 
He had been Mayor, much against his will. 
He pushed the great iron trade of Roden & 
Son with unflagging energy ; and Price 
Roden, who for a long time had allowed him 
a percentage on profits, had just offered him 
a partnership. 

" You have made the business three 
times what it was, John," he said, " and you 

VOL. II. N 



178 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

have a right to a share in it. Energy is as 
good as capital any day. Besides, I shall 
gain by it ; when Roden and Son becomes 
Roden, Son, & Carr, all our customers will 
see that I do my duty to you, and they'll 
believe in us all the more. So thou'lt have a 
fourth share, John Carr, and much good 
may it do thee." 

Fiddler Carr was as young as ever, and still 
caught his trout and got mystic music from 
his Stradivarius. Frequent news came to 
the old people of their son Robert, who was 
Captain Carr now, and Adjutant to his regi- 
ment. He did a few dashing and a great 
many useful things. He hoped to come 
home in a year or so, his last letter said ; but 
he did not want to ask for leave till the re- 
giment was ordered home, because Colonel 
JJuttrel did not like to be without him. 



THE LAPSE OF A LUSTRUM. 179 

Fiddler Carr and his wife thought they 
had reason to rejoice in the good conduct 
and good fortune of their sons. 



n2 



180 



CHAPTER 11. 



CANON TREMAINe's NEPHEW. 



ASTROLOGOS. . Space is a cone whose height and breadth 

are limitless : 
The summit God, the base in deep eternities. 
Therefore the planet's orbit is elliptical ; 
Therefore the comet flies in a parabola. 
Alouette. . (aside) Papa grows conicaL I call it comical. 

The Comedy of Dreams. 

I^OETHMINSTER had not much change 
in this lustrum. It is a good Tory 
city, and holds to its ancient habits. The 
High Church Bishop was not yet translated ; 
the Broad Church Dean still occupied the 



CANON TREMAINE's NEPHEW. 181 

decanal throne, and encouraged mild forms 
of heterodoxy. The young Head Master of 
Northminster Grammar School was maturer 
now ; he played whist better than ever, but 
had given up cricket ; he had edited Aris- 
tophanes, married his sister to an Earl, and 
sent up more men to win Hertford and 
Ireland scholarships than any other peda- 
gogue in England. Still the Lancers had 
their dep6t there, and the commanding 
officer was agay young baronet with plenty of 
money, who liked nothing better than din- 
ners and picnics and balls. It was odd that 
the Bishop and the Dean, the Head Master 
and the Major, were all unmarried. What 
were the ladies of Northminster about, all 
these years ? 

There was one occasional resident in 
Northminster who, in the eyes of a select 



182 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

few, was a man of greater importance than 
either of the four gentlemen who have been 
mentioned as foremost in the life of the City, 
This was Canon Tremaine, Rector of S. 
Gludoc in Cornwall, and writer of some of 
the choicest poetry of the time. The 
fate of poets is curious, but absolutely 
logical. The highest poetry is of necessity 
the least popular at first ; had Shakespeare 
been only the supreme poet he would never 
have bought land at Stratford, but he was 
also a first-rate man of business, an adroit 
courtier, and a clever adapter and beautifier 
of stories at the time popular. There were 
moreover at that period a few great nobles 
who had real literary taste ; even the Queen, 
strange to say, knew something of poetry . 
but in these days they educated ladies, even 
though they were Queens. By education I 



CANON TREMAINE's NEPHEW. 183 

mean theology, Greek, Latin, and geometry ; 
not the Miss Mangnall and Mrs. Markham 
and Miss Corner of our grandmothers ; not 
the omne sdbik of Tyndall and Huxley and 
Sylvester and Proctor and Cole C. B. which 
commends itself to our daughters. 

But I am digressing from the poets. 
Canon Tremaine was one who found audi- 
ence fit though few ; he was not at all the 
fashion, and never would be. Some writ- 
ers are fashionable because they are so very 
simple, others because they are so very pro- 
found. Canon Tremaine was neither; he 
put strong thoughts in strong language, but 
the thoughts were clear, and the language 
carried them well. His words were winged, 
as Homer would say. His ideas were in 
front of the Age, wherefore of course the 
Age could not be expected to understand 



184 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

them. The seeds of thought are never 
sterile; they grow into mighty flowering 
trees, whose every blossom bears their Plant- 
er's name when the fashionable rhymester 
has been wholly forgotten. Compare 
Thomas Moore with William Blake. Ask 
any man, whose knowledge of poetry is not 
confined within the Tennyson and Tupper 
limit, what he thinks of each. A century 
hence, the question may be put with a still 
greater certainty as to the reply. 

Among Miss Litton's acquaintances was a 
Cornish lady of good family, Mrs. Hawker, 
with whom she corresponded at intervals. 
This lady was a sister of Canon Tremaine, 
and had often suggested that Miss Litton 
should go over to see him when he was in 
residence at Northminster ; but the old lady 
of Westbury Place loved her own home 



CANON TREMAINE's NEPHEW. 185 

best, and little cared to leave it. However, 
when Fay had run up into a handsome girl, 
and looked and talked like a woman, Miss 
Litton seemed to feel a fresh energy arise. 
She renewed her youth in Fay. She began 
to think it absolutely necessary that Fay 
should see more of the world. The girl 
mustn't fret herself to death with Mr. Salis- 
bury's lessons, which Miss Litton always 
regarded as rather supererogatory. Still 
she let Fay have her own way; and the 
child roamed through Homer's wide do- 
mains of delight, and viewed with awe the 
tremendous creations of iEschylus, and 
studied Horace well enough to become a 
member of Parliament with appropriate 
quotations, and followed Euclid into his 
most recondite demonstrations. Indeed, 
she astonished Mr. Salisbury by suggesting 



184 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

them. The seeds of thought are never 
sterile; they grow into mighty flowering 
trees, whose every blossom bears their Plant- 
er's name when the fashionable rhymester 
has been wholly forgotten. Compare 
Thomas Moore with William Blake. Ask 
any man, whose knowledge of poetry is not 
confined within the Tennyson and Tupper 
limit, what he thinks of each. A century 
hence, the question may be put with a still 
greater certainty as to the reply. 

Among Miss Litton's acquaintances was a 
Cornish lady of good family, Mrs. Hawker, 
with whom she corresponded at intervals. 
This lady was a sister of Canon Tremaine, 
and had often suggested that Miss Litton 
should go over to see him when he was in 
residence at Northminster ; but the old lady 
of Westbury Place loved her own home 



CANON TREMAINE's NEPHEW. 185 

best, and little cared to leave it. However, 
when Fay had run up into a handsome girl, 
and looked and talked like a woman, Miss 
Litton seemed to feel a fresh energy arise. 
She renewed her youth in Fay. She began 
to think it absolutely necessary that Fay 
should see more of the world. The girl 
mustn't fret herself to death with Mr. Salis- 
bury's lessons, which Miss Litton always 
regarded as rather supererogatory. Still 
she let Fay have her own way ; and the 
child roamed through Homer's wide do- 
mains of delight, and viewed with awe the 
tremendous creations of iEschylus, and 
studied Horace well enough to become a 
member of Parliament with appropriate 
quotations, and followed Euclid into his 
most recondite demonstrations. Indeed, 
she astonished Mr. Salisbury by suggesting 



184 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

them. The seeds of thought are never 
sterile; they grow into mighty flowering 
trees, whose every blossom bears their Plant- 
er's name when the fashionable rhymester 
has been wholly forgotten. Compare 
Thomas Moore with William Blake. Ask 
any man, whose knowledge of poetry is not 
confined within the Tennyson and Tupper 
limit, what he thinks of each. A century 
hence, the question may be put with a still 
greater certainty as to the reply. 

Among Miss Litton's acquaintances was a 
Cornish lady of good family, Mrs. Hawker, 
with whom she corresponded at intervals. 
This lady was a sister of Canon Tremaine, 
and had often suggested that Miss Litton 
should go over to see him when he was in 
residence at Northminster ; but the old lady 
of Westbury Place loved her own home 



CANON TREMAINB's NEPHEW. 185 

best, and little cared to leave it. However, 
when Fay had run up into a handsome girl, 
and looked and talked like a woman, Miss 
Litton seemed to feel a fresh energy arise. 
She renewed her youth in Fay. She began 
to think it absolutely necessary that Fay 
should see more of the world. The girl 
mustn't fret herself to death with Mr. Salis- 
bury's lessons, which Miss Litton always 
regarded as rather supererogatory. Still 
she let Fay have her own way ; and the 
child roamed through Homer's wide do- 
mains of delight, and viewed with awe the 
tremendous creations of iEschylus, and 
studied Horace well enough to become a 
member of Parliament with appropriate 
quotations, and followed Euclid into his 
most recondite demonstrations. Indeed, 
she astonished Mr. Salisbury by suggesting 



184 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

them. The seeds of thought are never 
sterile; they grow into mighty flowering 
trees, whose every blossom bears their Plant- 
er's name when the fashionable rhymester 
has been wholly forgotten. Compare 
Thomas Moore with William Blake. Ask 
any man, whose knowledge of poetry is not 
confined within the Tennyson and Tupper 
limit, what he thinks of each. A century 
hence, the question may be put with a still 
greater certainty as to the reply. 

Among Miss Litton's acquaintances was a 
Cornish lady of good family, Mrs. Hawker, 
with whom she corresponded at intervals. 
This lady was a sister of Canon Tremaine, 
and had often suggested that Miss Litton 
should go over to see him when he was in 
residence at Northminster ; but the old lady 
of Westbury Place loved her own home 



CANON TREMAINB's NEPHEW. 185 

best, and little cared to leave it. However, 
when Fay had run up into a handsome girl, 
and looked and talked like a woman, Miss 
Litton seemed to feel a fresh energy arise. 
She renewed her youth in Fay. She began 
to think it absolutely necessary that Fay 
should see more of the world. The girl 
mustn't fret herself to death with Mr. Salis- 
bury's lessons, which Miss Litton always 
regarded as rather supererogatory. Still 
she let Fay have her own way ; and the 
child roamed through Homer's wide do- 
mains of delight, and viewed with awe the 
tremendous creations of iEschylus, and 
studied Horace well enough to become a 
member of Parliament with appropriate 
quotations, and followed Euclid into his 
most recondite demonstrations. Indeed, 
she astonished Mr. Salisbury by suggesting 



186 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

that the possibility of there being only five 
regular solids might be shown by the gradu- 
al compression of a sphere . the hint being 
taken from the hexagons of a honeycomb, 
the only possible form that an arrangement 
of cells by insects like the bees could take. 
If a sphere were subjected to irresistible 
mechanical pressure on every point of its 
surface, would it become an icosahedron ? 
I do not think Mr. Salisbury has worked 
out that problem yet. 

Miss Litton did not care about all this 
stuff. She saw that Fay was straight as an 
arrow, joyous as a summer breeze, fond of 
hard work, and also fond of fun. She 
wanted her to see some young people of 
both sexes. Paul Roden had as yet made 
no effort to resume his old intimacy ; Edith 
Tracy came often, but Fay never went to 



CANON TREMAINE'S NEPHEW. 187 

Roden Hall. Things were dull for her, 
Miss Litton thought ; so she was pleased to 
get a letter from her friend Mrs. Hawker^ 

* 

telling her that her eldest son, Charlie, 
would be at Northminster with his uncle for 
a few weeks, and asking her to notice him. 

" Charlie's an odd fellow," wrote the old 
lady ; " and so was his father before him. 
I don't know how far you are from North- 
minster, but I suppose you will go over to 
the musical festival ? If so, do find my boy 
out, and see if you like him. His uncle, 
the Canon, is a capital fellow, only he wears 
such astonishing hats. Please don't say I 
said so. He writes lovely poetry. You 
may tell him I said that, if you like." 

This letter gave Miss Litton an impulsive 
idea. She would go to Northminster for 
the Festival. It was glorious August wea- 



188 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

ther, too hot to sit out of doors except in 
the shade . weather that stimulates the 
brain, while it makes the hand indolent ; 
weather for wit that shall never be printed, 
for songs to be sung once and never again. 
No wave of ether stirred. The great trees 
around Westbury Place slept and were 
silent. The birds were too lazy to sing 
after matins. What time could be better to 
listen to classic music in a cathedral city ? 
Miss Litton said no word to anybody, but 
wrote to her agent, a solicitor of the higher 
class, who lived at Northminster, to secure 
her comfortable rooms near the Cathedral. 
Mr. Patchitt, who knew just what the old 
lady liked, got her rooms in a house in- 
habited by some ecclesiastic functionary; 
got her, in fact, the whole house, for he 
went and lodged elsewhere, leaving nobody 



CANON TREMAINE's NEPHEW. 18^ 

but the servants. It was a two-storied 
house in the Close, with just a few shrubs 
in front of it, and behind a lovely quiet 
walled garden, with an emerald lawn, and a 
great plane-tree, and peaches ripening on 
the walls, and a fountain, and a sun-dial. 
This Mr. Patchitt secured at a considerable 
cost, aware that Miss Litton, when she 
wanted to do a thing, did not consider 
money. 

On the morning when a letter from Mr. 
Patchitt informed her that he had done 
what she desired, and described the house 
in the Close, Edith came over early, eager 
to bring the news that Price Roden was 
made a Baronet . ^news only just arrived. 

" Sir Price r said Miss Litton. " Well, 
it's an awkward expression." 

" It's a surprise^ Auntie,'' said Fay. 



190 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

"Don't you make puns, Fay," said the 
old lady, threatening her with her long 
ivory fan. " You are clever enough to do 
better than make puns, if you try to find 
out what true wit means. And what does 
Paul say about it, Edith? You know I 
find it difficult to forgive Paul : but years 
pass, and he is wiser now, doubtless ; and I 
think he might have had the courtesy to 
make some overtures to me. Don't tell 
him so . . . though you may hint it, as if 
from yourself. You know, Edith dear, I 
love you too well to like a relation of yours 
to feel cold to me. And now I have some- 
thing else to say. Are you going to North- 
minster Festival ?" 

"I never thought of it," said Edith. 
"How could I go? There is no one to 
take me." 



CANON TREMAINE's NEPHEW. 191 

"Well," said Miss Litton, laughing, "I 
mean to go, though there is no one to take 
me. I want Fay to see a little fun : she is 
dull here now that she has nothing to do 
but learn lessons." 

" Auntie I" broke in Fay, " I'm as happy 
as the day is long. Fancy being dull with 
you ! I am always sorry to go to sleep, and 
glad to wake up and splash into my bath, 
and dress by the window, with all the birds 
singing, and think, 'Now there's another 
day with Auntie begun.' But I'll go with you 
to Northminster with pleasure. And of 
course you mean Edith to come with us ?" 

" Of course 1 do. Now, Edith, what do 
you say? I have got rooms ready, and 
shall start about eleven o'clock in the morn- 
ing this day week. I know a good many 



192 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

people there, and we shall have a pleasant 
society around us." 

'' I shall be delighted," said Edith Tracy. 
"What a charming idea ! I must tell Sir 
Price . isn't it odd to call him so? . that he 
had better show himself there in his new 
dignity ; and shall I suggest to Master Paul 
it is time he ate umble-pie? " 

" Do as you like, dear," said Miss Litton. 
"Of course I should not reject the advances 
of a future baronet. Still I think he might 
have done it without any prompting. He 
is old enough to know that a lady always 
says, according to the circumstance, either 
more or less than she means. It can hardly 
be pride that keeps him back. He need 
not be afraid of meeting Sarah ; she is very 
demure now, and not half so pretty as she 
used to be." 



CANON TREMAINb's NEPHEW. 193 

" That dear old ill-tempered kind-hearted 
Gruffley has regularly broken her in," said 
Fay. 



VOL. n. 



194 



CHAPTER III. 

BBCONCILIATION. 

" Tis gude to be merry and wise, 
"lis gude to be honest and trae, 
And before ye are off wi' the auld loYe, 
"lis gude to be on wi' the new." 

. ilDITH took the first opportunity to lee- 
".^ ture her cousin on his slowness to try- 
to make it up with Miss Litton. Paul 
was invariably influenced by anything she 
said to him, having an intuitive knowledge 
that hers was the clearer intellect, though 



RECONCILIATION. 195 

of course lie was quite unconscious of the 
fact. Since he had returned from his tra- 
vels abroad, he had amused himself in 
many ways, being seldom at home more 
than a few weeks at a time ; and so, al- 
though the idea of a reconciliation with 
Miss Litton was often in his mind, he took 
no active steps about it. One reason why 
he felt he should like it was that he wanted 
to be intimate with Fay Luttrel again. He 
had seen her in church occasionally since 
his return, and perceived that she had 
grown into a girl of wondrous beauty and 
grace, and, as the question of whom to 
marry frequently occupied his brain, he 
very naturally thought of Fay as a charm- 
ing possibility ; at any rate, he should like 
to flirt with her, that was certain. 

" You ought to make overtures to Miss 

o2 



196 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

Litton, Paul," said Edith. " Why not call 
upon her? She'll think you bear malice. 
Why, by this time you are supposed to have 
forgotten, after all you have seen in your 
travels, that such an insignificant person as 
Sarah Daw existed." 

"0, but it is awkward,'* he replied, 
^' since I have been so long at home without 
going near her." 

" Nonsense !" said Edith. " She'll be all 
the better pleased you were a little in awe 
of her. Come up with me this afternoon, 
and you can easily say a word or two of 
apology for what you hope she has quite 
forgotten. I want you to be intimate with 
Miss Litton again : she is so witty, and so 
wise in her wit. And I want to see what 
you think of Fay Luttrel, who, in my 
opinion, is the most charming girl of seven- 



RECONCILIATION. 197 

teen I ever saw. Yes, seventeen I think 
«he is. But she is wonderfully clever, and 
at the same time very simple. I expect 
you to fall in love with her." 

"I don't expect anything of the kind," 
said Paul. " I never liked perfect people, 
and I believe you were ten times as charm- 
ing when you were her age : and I'll swear 
you're twenty times as charming now. The 
fact is, Edith, you have educated her, and 
you are falling in love with a faint reflexion 
of yourself." 

" Is that the last Parisian style of com- 
pliment ?" she asked. " It will delight Miss 
Litton. Well, you will walk over with me 
this afternoon . . . and mind you don't look 
at Sarah Daw if she should be in waiting." 

" That's bad advice for once, Edith," he 
tsaid. " I shall look at her in the way in 



198 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

which any stranger would look at her. I 
have forgotten her." 

So they went to Westbury Place together, 
and Miss Litton let him off with the mild 
remark that her edicts were not infallible, 
like the Pope's bulls, and graciously re- 
ceived him into favour again. As to Fay, 
she astonished him. He had seen in his 
wanderings many beautiful girls, but none 
whose beauty seemed so completely a 
secondary thing, the clothing of the charac- 
ter. There is a fine line of Byron s . . . 

<' The mind, the music, breathing from her face " . . » 

which admirably shows the highest conceiv- 
able class of beauty . the beauty wherein 
you think not what colour a woman's hair 
is, or whether her eyes be gray or azure or 
hazel, or whether her bosom has a soft 
curve, her hands a graceful form, her body 



EECONCILIATION. 199 

altogether an easy lissom grace. All about 
her is the product of her unseen spirit, 
which shapes her into loveliness, and gives 
music to her voice. 

A man who, having some imagination, 
looked at Fay, would hardly think much 
more of her material beauty than of the 
dress she wore ; the spiritual beauty that 
shone through her, and revealed itself by 
her external colour, and form, and grace, 
was what would hold him fast, and cause 
him to keep her in his memory. You could 
not analyse her, as you may some women, 
and, having catalogued hair and eyes and 
eyebrows and lips and the like, have not 
much real woman or true soul to catalogue. 
Fay was a concrete creature, whom you 
could not build up like a female Frank- 
enstein and improve by millinery. I never 



200 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

care for the sort of beauty concerning whom 
men say, "What beautiful hair she has!" 
..." What lovely eyes, or complexion, or 
anything else you please, she has !'* It is 
like saying of a man that he is a good 
mathematician, or writes pretty poetry, or 
dresses well, or has splendid whiskers. The 
moment you distinguish a man by some 
accident of this sort, you show that in the 
man himself you have discovered no real 
manliness. Call him Algebra, or Versicle, 
or Dress-coat, or Whiskers : don't call him 
Man. Don't tal^e a creature of trivial 
achievement and give him the name which 
belongs to the hero of infinite possibilities. 

Edith, in her desire to bring Miss Litton 
and her cousin Paul together, had forgot to 
tell him about Northminster Festival. So 
the subject came up that afternoon over the 



RECONCILIATION. 201 

customary cup of orange pekoe, which Miss 
Litton always liked to link with pleasant 
gossip. Sarah Daw was in waiting, by the 
way, and Paul Roden glanced at her now and 
then ; he saw enough to be ashamed of his 
boyish folly, as he contrasted her with Edith 
and Fay. Sarah had not improved. You 
would call her a buxom lass, but there was 
a sulky look in her countenance . the result, 
no doubt, of ungratified ambition. 

Yet Sarah had her day-dream, and you 
might sometimes see a defiant light in her 
eye, as she thought of what must surely be. 
Paul Roden she despised; he had never 
meant anything but his own amusement, she 
thought; she did not remember her own 
wily methods of leading him into temptation 
. or, if she did, she blushed not. John 
Carr had, in her judgment, behaved very 



202 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

badly ; he ought not to have condemned her 
without inquiry: ah! she knew what it 
was . . . that meddling old father and 
mother of his. So Sarah fell back on a 
vision of Bob Carr returning as much in 
love as ever, and making a lady of her. 
His name was often mentioned in her hear- 
ing. Colonel Luttrel's letters were full of 
his cleverness and gallantry. On one occa- 
sion they were out tiger-hunting together, 
and Colonel Luttrel was treed by a man- 
eater. The shekarries ran away, as they 
always do ; Captain Carr came up at double- 
quick, and put a rifle-bullet through the 
brute's brain. 

" Wasn't I glad to get out of that tree !" 
wrote the Colonel to Fay. " I shall bring 
you home the tiger-skin for a rug. Lucky 



EECONCILIATION. 20S 

for both Carr and me that he's such a dead 
shot." 

This is one sample of many of the sort 
of things Sarah heard read when the Indian 
mail came in : and, remembering that it waa 
love of her sent Bob Carr away, she felt 
sure he would still love her when he return- 
ed. What a triumph it would be to win 
him, after being so shamefully treated by 
Paul Roden and John Carr! She kept 
patient and demure all this time, in the hope 
of Bob Carr. 

Miss Litton began talkmg about the 
Northminster Festival and her intentions. 

*'I must go," said Paul. "I have not 
been to the Festival for years. In fact, 
before I left England, I did not understand 
the difference between Northminster society 
and our own." 



204 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

^^ Well," said Miss Litton, " Edith and Fay 
and I are going ; and I have taken a house 
in the Close ; and you had better go to an 
hotel, and come and lunch and dine when 
you like. Can't you persuade your father to 
go, Paul ? These Cathedral-city people are 
absurdly exclusive; but, now that he's a 
baronet, they'll bow down and worship 
him." 

"I think," said Paul, "that my father 
consented to be a baronet . ^for I know he 
had refused before . just because he thought 
it would please me. If so, he has made a 
mistake, in the kindness of his heart : but I 
don't mean to let him kftow it. You're not 
to tell him, Edith. I look forward awk- 
wardly to myself, years hence, as Sir Paul 
Eoden ; that Sir Paul will be like a stiff 
shirt-collar that will remind one of its exis- 



BBCONCIUATION. 205 

tence. However, I submit . the more 
willingly that I believe he hates it himself, 
but thinks I shall like it." 

** You just reverse Byron's rhymes about 
Shelley's baronetcy," said Miss Litton : 

" * 'Twas not my wish 
To be Sir Bjsshe, 
But 'twas the whim 
Of my son Tim.' " 

" I think we must get your father to come 
over to the Festival," said Edith. " After 
all, you know, Paul, you may laugh at this 
baronetcy : but it is a mark of distinction 
which is not given for trifles. It marks your 
father as the first man in his line. Sir 
Robert Peel was not ashamed of his baron- 
etcy." 

" 0, I'm not ashamed," said Paul. '' Only 
I am come to think that modern titles are 



206 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

not of much consequence. When a Prime 
Minister goes out of ofl&ce, he makes peers 
of a few of his second-rate men, but he takes 
good care not to give himself a peerage, 
though I suppose he might make himself a 
Duke if he liked." 

*^ Never mind," said Miss Litton. " Fm 
an old-fashioned Tory, you know, and the 
Queen is the fountain of honour, and if she 
likes to honour a man it is the duty of her 
subjects to honour him also. You had 
better come to the Festival, Paul, and bring 
your father if possible." 

Miss Litton, who liked a little fun as well 
as anybody, had not all this while mentioned 
Mrs. Hawker's son. She had not seen that 
young gentleman since he was a baby, but 
she knew that a son of Mrs. Hawker's was 



RECONCILIATION. 207 

likely to be an original. So she said no word 
to Fay or Edith about his existence, and 
looked forward to an amusing surprise. 



208 



CHAPTER IV. 



THE POET RECTOR. 



'* Along that cliff went Launcelot with Guenevere : 
From that high peak saw Galahad his mystery/' 

rpHE Reverend Launcelot Tremaine 
-*. liked his Cornish Rectory of S. 

Gludoc better far than the City of North- 
minster. He was a poet, pure and simple. 
I do not say he was a great poet : that is 
one of the questions which posterity has to 
decide, when the quasi-poetic ore has passed 
through many critical crucibles. I think 



THE POET RECTOR. 209 

however he was a true poet. This is a 
point in which a man may judge himself. 
No man ever had the true lyric faculty with- 
out knowing it absolutely. It is the gift of 
gifts . . . the diamond of mental gems. 

Canon Tremaine was more in his element 
in his lonely Rectory of S. Gludoc than 

in the busy idleness of Northminster. No- 
thing had he in common with the High 
Church Bishop or the Broad Church Dean. 
His principles were High Church of an older 
sort than the prelate's : indeed he had made 
up his mind on matters ecclesiastical before 
that dignitary left school. As to the Broad 
Church tenets of the Dean, Canon Tremaine 
regarded him as a man who would have 
been a nonconformist if being a Dean were 
not more pleasant. " He ignores," Tremaine 
said, *' all the doctrines of the Church of 
VOL. n. p 



210 SWKBT AND TWENTY. 

England: but he is glad to receive her 
money and to take a place in society as her 
servant. He serves not only God and 
Mammon, but Belial also." 

Little thought the Poet-Rector of Bishop 
or Dean, when he was away at S. Gludoc, 
where he loyally served a wide unpopulous 
parish, and where he had scenery around 

him that well suited his poetic moods. Wild 
moorland, where the falcon floated and the 
chough chattered of King Arthur : a wide 
expanse of sea, over which you gazed from 
cliffs three hundred feet high : altogether a 
solitary legendary place, where a poet might 
live with much comfort. The parish, as I 
have said, is a wide one. The houses are 
scattered about singly, and at long distances. 
There is only one house besides the Rectory 
within a mile of the church; therefore it 



THE POET RECTOR. 211 

can be imagined how small a congregation 
is collected, especially when the weather is 
bad, for the Cornish roads are not excep- 
tionally good. A small congregation how- 
ever does not dishearten the Canon. He 
considers that it is the duty of a clergyman 
to pray for those who are unable or un- 
willing to come to church to pray for them- 
selves, and a visitor to S. Gludoc will find 
the Canon daily in his little church, reading 
the prayers, whether there is a congregation 
or not. Let us hope his parishioners are 
worthy of so much pastoral care; but 
whether they are or not, old Canon Tre- 
maine is an example to the clergy of Eng- 
land, very few of whom would care to go 
daily into the church (especially in winter) 
and read prayers without a single listener. 

I have reason for stating that some parsons, 

p2 



212 SWEET AND TWJ^NTY. 

do not know that they are compelled to 
read the Prayers of the Church daily, either 
in their own houses or in church ; and many 
certainly do not do so. I suppose it suits 
the English character to crowd the religion 
of the week into one day, and make the day 
a gloomy one. 

S. Gludoc does not see many visitors. It 
is an inaccessible place. The roads leading 
to it have break-neck hills, which frighten 
any but a Cornish man. Then there are no 
sights to see, no lions, no curiosities, except 
the old Canon himself, and he is indeed a 
curiosity. He indulges in the little vanity 
of a visitor's book, and as you put down 
your name, and turn over the leaves, he is 
pleased that you should remark that many 
distinguished people have visited him during 
the forty years he has been Rector ; for he 



THE POET RECTOR. 213 

is the only attraction at S. Gludoc. The 
house, built by the Canon, has a very ecclesi- 
astical appearance. When you arrive, if 
you are expected, there stands the Canon at 
the door, a perfect picture. He is a tall 
handsome man, looking twenty years 
younger than he actually is, and dressed in 
a very peculiar but becoming costume. It 
is the dress of a priest of some order of 
some century a long way back, but I cannot 
remember which order or what century. 
The furniture of the house is as curious as 
the Canon's dress. It was made chiefly by 
himself, from pieces of old carved oak 
which he found in cottages many years back, 
which were no doubt the spoils of the 
churches at the time that the reign of plain 
square wooden pews and whitewashed walls 
began. Then the Canon will show you 



2 14 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

many curiosities, about some of which he 
will tell you odd mystical istories; indeed, 
all his talk has a mystical and poetical haze 
over it. Then he will take you to see his 
retreat, which he has cut in the side of the 
cliff, and as you are sitting there with him^ 
looking down almost a perpendicular height 
of 300 feet, he will tell you how he comes 
there to think, and to consider the works of 
God; and he points across the sea, where 
no land is visible, and tells you there is 
nothing but this great sea between you and 
Labrador. Then he will point down to a 
little bay under the cliff where you are 
sitting, and tell you he once saw a mermaid 
there ; and you quite believe him, for you 
feel that you are in a world of mermaids, 
and all sorts of odd things. And when you 
have spent a pleasant time with the old 



THE POET RECTOR. 215 

Rector, whether you are friend or stranger, 
rich or poor, you cannot delight him more 
than by subscribing something for the re- 
storation of his beloved little church. The 
poor man's shillings and the rich man's gold 
are alike acceptable, for the restoration of 
his church is his constant care. He has 
never been able to get a large enough sum 
to have the work properly done, so he has 
done a little at a time. He has with his 
own hands taken off a great deal of the 
whitewash, and has put together some of 
the old oak carvings. But there is yet a 
great deal he wants to do, and he well 
deserves the little black mail he likes to 
levy on his visitors. Many poor ship- 
wrecked creatures have been buried in his 
little churchyard ; and in one case, where 
he buried the whole of the crew of a vessel, 



216 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

he has placed a touching inscription on a 
simple stone, with the figure-head of the 
vessel beside it. 

When Canon Tremaine came into resi- 
dence at Northminster, he quietly dropped 
all his poetry and eccentricity. He rather 
patronized the Bishop^ and was cool to the 
Dean ; but he was very popular with the 
Grammar-school masters (and the boys too) ; 
and the redcoats declared he was the best 
parson they ever knew. For on one occa- 
sion, when they mustered in force to hear a 
sermon at the Cathedral, it was he who 
preached, and he took for text Judges, 
vii., 8. . '*So the people took victuals in 
their hand." 

The passage seems not particularly sug- 
gestive, but Canon Tremaine contrived to 



THE POET RECTOR. 217 

make it so. He turned it at once into 
modern English. 

" The backbone of an army," he said, " is 
its commissariat. A starved poet cannot 
sing ; a starved soldier cannot fight. Take 
victttals in your hand. If I had to fight . 
and if I were a Captain instead of a Canon 
I would try to do my duty. I should like 
to breakfast before the battle. 

" Now I can imagine some captious ob- 
jector saying, * What, think of your break- 
fast when you are going out to kill people ! 
Had you not better pray first, for your own 
soul if not for others ?' To which I reply 
that I would not be a soldier save in a just 
cause . in such a cause as would do honour 
to our England ; and that I pray all through 
my life, and at every moment, and do not 



218 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

deem it necessary to fall on my knees at a 
given hour to have intercourse with God. 

"Why should I, in my white surplice, 
talk of war to you who wear blood-red ap- 
parel ? Christ came not to bring peace, but 
a sword. I am a Canon of this Cathedral, 
a Captain of the Church Militant. The 
demoniac host is marshalled against the 
invincible army in which I hold a small 
command. You fight against men of less 
stature than yourselves : I, and those who 
are with me, fight against the immemorial 
sins of mankind. It is a long, long battle . 
a Waterloo of many centuries. But we 
know we shall win. Our Commander-in- 
Chief cannot be defeated. 

" The victory will be won all the sooner 
if we stick to our text, and remember the 



THE POET RECTOR. 21^ 

commissariat. In this great religious war- 
fare we want the food of knowledge, we 
want all science and all literature and all 
art as our helpers. They are ours. Reli- 
gion created science when it taught men to 
regard the stars ; and poetry when it told 
how the world was created, and how Adam 
and Eve dwelt in Paradise ; and art when 
the Temple of Solomon rose to amaze the 
world. The atheistic mob assume that 
they know most things better than we^ 
whereas we know all things as well as they, 
and know one other thing which they can 
not know. But this disorganised enemy of 
ours takes care of its commissariat. It lays 
in grand stocks of science and literature, for 
use in its campaign. Let us do likewise. 
Let us have at hand all the knowledge the 



220 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

world can give ; let us take such food even 
from the foe, assured that we have analysts 
among us who can detect poisons. Faith 
and knowledge are not twain, but one ; and 
when a chymist has found a new element, 
he has only passed a little farther into God*s 
garden of infinity ; and when an astronomer 
discerns a new planet, tremulous in ether, 
I think that the creation of the planet, and 
the creation of the astronomer, are both 
easy things for God. And God, my dearly 
beloved brethren, is our Commander-in- 
Chief." 

Thus, on one occasion, preached Canon 
Tremaine. The High Church Bishop, in 
his throne, with few ideas in his head save 
of candles and genuflexions, with a slight 
notion that the Confessional was, on the 



THE POET RECTOB. 221 

whole, conducive to virtue and the sacer- 
dotal influence, frowned much as Canon 
Tremaine preached. The Bishop was a 
little man, with light eyes under light eye- 
brows, evidently brought into the world 
never to have a definite opinion. The 
Dean also frowned in his throne (do they 
call a decanal stall a throne ?), for this was 
not at all the doctrine he liked. He want- 
ed science first, and some sort of religion 
afterwards. He was a short wide-headed 
and wide-shouldered man ; the sort of 
fellow who gets all at once a few furlongs 
in front of the world, and yells out " Fm 
first P^ and stays at the point where he 
emitted that yell until the whole world has 
passed leagues beyond him. 

Canon Tremaine was regarded with equal 



222 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

distrust by both Bishop and Dean, cordially 
as they detested each other. Small enmi- 
ties give way to great hatreds. The Bishop 
and the Dean disliked each other heartily, 
because High Church and Broad Church 
have but one common measure, sincerity i 
and that did not exist in this special instance. 
That sermon of Tremaine's rang as clear 
through the ranks as the bugle that cries, 
March! The Lancers understood it. He 
preached as Latimer might have preached. 
From that day he was the most popular 
man in the city, with the soldiers and the 
schoolboys. He did not preach often ; 
seldom more than a sermon a year ; very 
homely stuff. 

Yet people thronged to hear him ; for he 
tsaid what he meant, what he learnt by 



THE POET BECTOR. 223 

suffering and toil, what he knew was true. 
He was a man without doubt. Such men 
are rare. 



224 



CHAPTER V. 



A CHANGE FOR FAY. 

AsTROLOGOS. . ^The secret of a great Cathedral City is, 

That some one once therein did something 
mysticaL 
Alouette. . ^Which is a very mystical remark, Papa. 
Raphael. . ^The secret of a great Cathedial City is. 

That it breeds ladies and produces gentlemen. 
You can't be quite a cad beneath a Minster- 
tower. 

The Comedy of Dreams. 

" TTOW charming !" cried Fay, as they 

pulled up, after a long drive, at an 

arched stone gateway, overhung with many 

creepers. "Are you very tired. Auntie? 



A CHANGE FOR FAY. 225 

I am sure they must have a nice cup of tea 
ready for us in such a lovely corner as 
this.'' 

They had. The minor or minimus 
Canon, or precentor, or verger, or whatever 
it was, had retreated to a corner, and left 
comfort and good old-fashioned servants 
behind him. Alas! the old-fashioned ser- 
vant exists no longer ; the cook who took 
pride in her dinner, and the housemaid who 
hated a speck of dust . ^where are they 
gone ? Well, perchance a few of them are 
left, far away from that strong loadstone 
which we call London. So long as London 
magnetizes England, the habits of London 
must infect England, and there seems no 
way out of it. 

Miss Litton with Edith and Fay had 
reached the pleasant rooms taken for them 

VOL. IL Q 



226 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

by Mr. Patchitt. That gentleman was 
there in person to receive them ; for the 
Lady of Westbury Manor added a few hun- 
dreds a year to his income, since he looked 
after her affairs, and so it was no less than his 
duty to be in waiting. However, to do 
Edwin Patchitt justice, he would have been 
equally courteous to any other lady. He 
was a man entirely void of that plausible 
insincerity which is considered the essence 
of legal ability; but somehow his honesty 
flourished, and if anyone asked a question 
about Northminster lawyers, it would be, 

" Who was the second?'^ 

There was a choice little supper ready, 
and they all sat down together. Mr. 
Patchitt was a perfect study all the while. 
To Miss Litton he was deferential ; to 
Edithj easy, as if they were of the same 



A CHANGE FOR FAY. 227 

generation, he being about sixty-five ; to 
Fay paternal, as if he were a hundred at 
least. Edith and Fay were both intensely 
amused, and made eyes at each other ; but 
they daren't show their mirth, because they 
saw Miss Litton liked him* And a very 
likeable man he was, and a successful 
lawyer; but nature had designed him for 
something better* 

He, in due time, went away. Miss Litton 
went to bed. Edith and Fay followed soon* 
It had been agreed that Miss Litton's maid 
only should travel with them, Edith 
saying that she could take care of herself, 
and offering to help Fay as well. The bed-* 
room appointed for Edith was a large room, 
furnished in quite the old-fashioned style, 
with a huge four-post bedstead with heavy 
hangings, and Fay was to sleep in a little 

q2 



228 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

room opening on to this large room. Fay, 
who had gone out very little during the 
six years she had lived with her Aunt, wa3 
quite in high spirits. She danced about 
Edith's big room, and laughed and talked so 
much that Edith told her she had better be- 
gin to think of going to bed. 

" 0, but I couldn't go to sleep yet, 
Edith," Fay said. " And I am sure you'll 
get lost in that big bed, Edith ; you'd better 
let me sleep with you. 0, isn't this jolly ! 
and isn't this the sort of room to see a ghost 
in I Suppose you should see one standing at 
the bottom of the bed in the very middle of 
the night ! 0, Edith, what would you do ? 
You had better let me sleep here." 

" Why, you chatterbox, it is getting near 
the middle of the night now, and I don't 
believe you'll ever leave off chattering. 



A CHANGE FOB FAY. 229 

The ghost will be frightened of so much noise. 
If 5'^ou want to see a ghost you must be 
quiet." 

Over the mantelpiece there was a por- 
trait of a lady, done by some second-rate 
artist. It was a picture of an inoffensive 
and not very good-looking person, in the 
dress of about fifty years ago : . a yellow 
satin low-bodiced dress with leg of mutton 
sleeves, a thick gold chain round the neck 
to which was pendent a large watch, the 
watch being passed behind a broad and 
tight waistband and hanging down in full 
view. The hair was dressed in stiff sausage- 
like curls placed high on the head, and two 
narrow bands of velvet across the head, 
which gave the impression that it is necessary 
to tie the skull to keep it together. The 
lady sat in a stiff position (she could hardly 



230 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

have done otherwise in life if she wore her 
clothes so tightly pulled round her waist), 
and displayed her hands with a ring on near- 
ly every finger. Fay suddenly ran up in 
front of this portrait, and said, 

" Now, Edith, I'll tell you what is the 
correct thing : You must fall asleep ; then 
you must wake up, when all is quiet, and 
see the room filled with mysterious light ; 
then you must look at this portrait, and you 
will see the eyes slowly move; then the 
lady will slowly walk out of her frame, and 
you will hear the rustle of that yellow satin ; 
and she will walk up to the bed ^" 

"Good gracious!" said Edith, "I hope 
not ! I should like to see a prettier ghost 
than that. And I am sure such a placid- 
looking old lady would never trouble her- 



A CHANGE rOB FAY. 231 

self to visit us. You may depend upon it, 
she lived to a good old age, and died with 
all her children standing around her bed, 
and was * decently buried,' as they say, and 
has never been heard of since. And now. 
Fay, if you don't be quiet, the old lady will 
not have a chance of coming out of her 
frame, and you will be too tired for all the 
fun to-morrow." 

Fay at last slept, and woke up the next 
morning as fresh as ever. . After breakfast 
she began dancing about, and wondering 
when the fun was to commence. 

'' I daresay you won't have to wait long,'* 
said Miss Litton. " We cannot go out yet, 
for I am expecting an early call from a 
friend." 

At this moment she left the room, and 



232 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

soon after a visitor arrived, and sent up a 
card, on which was inscribed . 



Mb. HAWKEB. 



Mr. Hawker was shown into the room 
where Edith and Fay were sitting: Miss 
Litton, being informed of his arrival, and 
being for the moment occupied, thought it 
would be good fun to leave the young man 
to introduce himself to two young ladies. 
She did not know that the young man in 
question never found the slightest difficulty 
in making his way with the ladies. 
Edith knew him at once. The same bright 
hair, easy figure, and quaint mixture of care 
and grace which she had noted before in 
the nameless stranger who had helped her 
and Price Roden to places at a concert years 



A CHANGE FOR FAY. 233 

ago. How raany years, she thought I . and 
yet he did not look a day older. He seemed 
even to be dressed exactly the same. The 
same neat compact figure, yet with a touch 
of languor : the appreciative yet nonchalant 
look in his light blue eyes, and even the very 
same kind of flower in his button-hole . for 
there was the same faint smell which she 
remembered so well that night when he sat 
by her at the concert: a creamy white 
flower which Edith had often seen in green- 
houses. 

Having come to see an elderly lady, he 
was slightly surprised to see a beautiful 
woman in the prime and pride of life, and 
a charming girl in the laughter and luxury 
of her teens. But Mr. Hawker was not a 
man easily taken aback. He was by nature 
poetic and romantic, while by necessity he 



234 SWEET AND TWENTY, 

was dvic and financial. The flower in his 
button-hole signalized the one; the well- 
brushed silk hat and rapier-like umbrella 
indicated the other. Born in Tamarland, he 
had to live in the city. Mr. Tennyson talks 
of 

^' King Arthur, like a modem gentleman, 
Of stateliest port." 

But Mr. Hawker was more like 

" The daring Launcelot, 
Entirely fearless of both bulls and bears." 

There were two sides to his character. 
Those who knew him as a friend or a lover 
called him Charlie ; but, dear me ! what a 
grave and business-like person he was in the 
City as Mr. Hawker! He was quite a 
match for Baron Rothschild or Baron Grant. 
His primary character was poetical; his 
secondary, financial ; and he found it profit- 



A CHANGE FOR FAY. 235 

able to keep the poetical part of him in the 
background occasionally. Yet now and 
then he wrote very pretty verses to pretty 
girls. *' You see," he observed one day to 
a friend, " a fellow can say in verse what he 
couldn't very well say in prose without 
being asked his intentions. " And certainly 
Charlie did say a great many pretty things 
in verse, to a great many pretty ladies, and 
I am afraid several ladies so addressed 
thought themselves chief favourites : but I 
doubt whether Charlie had ever had a chief 
favorite . at least for more than a week 
together. He was a general lover. He would 
imitate Matt Prior's pretty *' easy jingle," or 
he could address a mantle, a muff, or a boot 
as well as Mr. Fred Locker himself. 

Edith recognised her polite cavalier at 
that famous concert, long years ago; but 



236 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

Charlie did not recall her, though the light 
lithe figure and bright hair and keen yet 
«oft eyes might well have adhered to his 
memory. Ah, but how many ladies had 
experienced his unvarying courtesey since 
that night I 

" We are glad to see you, Mn Hawker," 
said Edith. " Miss Litton will return soon, 
I have no doubt. Not to put you at a dis- 
advantage, I am Edith Tracy, a neighbour 
and friend of dear Miss Litton*s, and this 
child is Euphasia Luttrel, daughter of 
the Colonel Luttrel whom everybody 
knows." 

" Why it was only this morning I read 
Colonel Luttrel was gazetted Major-General 
and a Knight of the Star of India," said 
Charlie. " I have just seen it in the Times. 
How fortunate I am to be the first to bring 



A CHANGE FOR FAY. 237 

the news I He is General Sir Hugh Luttrel 

now." 

" I would rather hear such news this way 
than see it in print," said Fay. " I am very 
proud of Papa, Mr. Hawker, for he is a 
real soldier, and no nonsense. I read 
history for the sake of the battles ; and I 
only find one man all through that I think 
like Papa." 

"And who is that?" asked Edith. 

" Xenophon," she replied. " Papa is just 
the man to lead such a glorious retreat as 
that of the ten thousand Greeks. I could 
read that story over and over again. Fancy 
. how glorious it must have been for them 
when they saw the sea again after struggling 
over those cold Armenian hills where the 
people live underground, and keep their 
cows in their parlours to help warm them !" 



238 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

'' What a charmingly odd creature !" 
thought Mr. Hawker to himself; but what 
he said was, **Ah, Xenophon was a fine 
fellow, only he was spoilt by the Radicalism 
of Sokrates." 

" 0, then he wasn't a bit like Papa," said 
Fay, with indignant emphasis. "Papa's a 
real Tory, and so am I, and so is Auntie, and 

so is Edith, and everybody else worth know- 

. j» 
mg. 

"How do you know about me?" said 
Edith, laughing. " I belong to a Radical 
family, Fay, so I ought to hold Radical 
opinions . . . though I don't a bit know what 
Radical opinions are." 

" I can tell you," said Charlie. " The 
word Radical is derived from radish^ a root ; 
and it means that the people who live under- 
ground ought to rule those who dwell 



A CHANGE FOR FAY. 239 

above. Radicalism signifies . Let the lowest 
govern! Its creed is that the turnip is 
greater than the oak, the mole than the 
falcon, the tinker than the poet, the cinder- 
wench than the lady. It bases its brazen 
assumption on the utterly untenable theory 
of general equality . absurd you know, for 
one couldn't find in all Northminster two 
such charming ladies as are here present. 
But I mustn't go on talking ; I am a chronic 
sufferer from heart-disease." 

'' How sad I" said Edith. " Well, I like 
your notion of Radicalism. I do think there 
are differences between people. Only I 
find that working-men and women are very 
often more really gentlemen and gentle- 
women than those who take that line of busi- 
ness professionally." 

" You can't be a gentleman if you don't 



240 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

work," said Charlie. *^ The man who doesn't 
work, some way or other, is a lazy lout who 
ought to be thoroughly flogged. Only the 
great misfortune of the world is that men 
who like their natural work and do it well 
are by circumstances compelled to do work 
entirely foreign to them. Think of Pegasus 
in harness ! Think of Venus and the Graces 
keeping a milliner's shop r 

" The last thing Venus would take to for 
a living," said Edith. 

"True," he replied, 

" Beauty unadorned adorned the most,'' 

as Mr. Seasons Thomson observes. I have 
been always a worshipper of the Goddess of 
Beauty : and I keep Friday sacred, which 
the Church of Rome has made a perpetual 
fast because it belonged to her. Vendredi 
is S. Venus's Day. Religion can't do with- 



A CHANGE FOR PAY. 241 

out its goddesses. The Greeks had a whole 
galaxy of them : the man who thought 
Aphrodites too naughty might take to the 
chill Artemis or the wise Athene, Eoman 
Catholics let us have a lot of female saints, 
not to mention the Virgin Mary. There's 
Cecilia for music and Apollonia for tooth- 
ache, and a host of others. But, as we 
Protestants have abolished goddesses and 
saintesses, I think of Venus on Fridays." 

"And on no other day of the week, I 
hope," said Edith. 

" 0, of course not. But, talking of Venus, 
I have just been immensely amused. When 
I have a holiday, which is rare enough, if I 
am not invited anywhere, I ask some fellows 
to join me for a trip on Thames. We get 
a boat, and row as Providence indicates. 
We enjoy ourselves, any way. A couple of 

VOL. II. R 



242 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

years back one of my party was Tom Car- 
teret, a capital fellow, with two defects ; he 
could not make up his mind, and he fell in 
love at once with anything that wore a 
petticoat, even if it was a broomstick." 

" What a charming creature !" said Edith. 

" He was great fun," said Charlie. " He 
had just left Oxford, and bored us abomin- 
ably, only that we revenged ourselves in 
chaff by developing his absurdities. He 
could not make up his mind as to what pro- 
fession he would follow. He thought that 
if he went into the House of Commons he 
should be Prime Minister, and if he went to 
the Bar he should be Lord Chancellor, and 
if he tried the Church he should be Arch- 
bishop of Canterbury. He amused us and 
amazed the swans of Thames by describing 
what he should do in these various high 



A CHANGE FOR FAY. 243 

positions. We used to camp out of nights : 
my brother Jack, generally known as Miss 
Iphis, does the cooking and all that. He's 
first-rate at a steak. Well, we stopped one 
Saturday night at Battlefield, a jolly village 
which was permanently demoralized by a 
mad Irish peer some years ago. We pitched 
our tents under some big walnut trees by 
the Church, and Jack grilled some eatables. 
Next morning our encampment was sur- 
rounded by a mob of clodhoppers. Tom 
Carteret, having happily breakfasted, said 
he should go to Church. 

"I said, ^Go thither; I will smoke till 
thy return.* 

" He went in his flannels ; he came back 
in a state of collapse. The Vicar, the Rev. 
Uriah Urgent, had preached so eloquent a 
sermon on the text, ' Go thou and do like- 

R 2 



244 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

wise,' that Tom Carteret perceived it his 
definite duty to become a parson. More^- 
over, in a pew near the pulpit, Tom had 
perceived a group of eight . a whitish-green 
haired mother, and seven sweet expectant 
daughters. They were Mr. Urgent's 
family. He had learnt at the Ferry Inn, 
which the villain had visited after service, 
that the old Vicar was the wisest of men, 
and his wife the most beneficent of women^ 
and his only son likely to be the cleverest 
man of the present day. 

*^ * He's got eight daughters, poor man T 
said Mrs. Fiat, ^and I find one quite 
enough; leastways, he had eight, till one 
was married to her father's last Curate . a 

young man from the North Country.' 

"We proposed going on our journey 
again in the afternoon, but Tom made ex- 



A CHANGE FOR FAY. 245 

cuses about the sun being hot, and affecting 
his head. We knew he wanted to see 
something more of the seven daughters, and 
as I never throw away the chance of seeing 
a pretty woman, I agreed to go to after- 
noon church with Tom. We put on our 
jackets over our flannels, and went; and 
there, sure enough, were Tom's seven 
beauties . though I cannot say his taste and 
mine in women agree. They were what I 
should call of the pretty-servant-maid type 
. a class of beauty that I do not care for, 
except behind my chair at table. 

" But Tom was infatuated. We went to 
the Inn before starting, and there I happen- 
ed to take up a monthly periodical called 
the ' Battlefield Magazine.' I found there 
a very pious and unctuous address from the 
Rev. Uriah to his parishioners, in which he 



246 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

deplored the fact that some distant part of 
his parish must yet remain without spiritual 
guidance, as he was still unable to find a 
suitable Curate for them. Some wag had 
written at the end of this paragraph, 

"*Homo pecuniosus, qui unam ex octo 
Urgentium ducat.' 

'' I am sure I need not translate to two 
such clever ladies. I read the paragraph 
to Tom. Tom immediately made up his 
mind as to a profession. He would be a 
parson; he would marry one of these 
seven young women. He went to Mr. 
Urgent that very afternoon, flannels and all^ 
and asked if he wanted a Curate. Mn 
Urgent had not yet returned from his 
various Sunday afternoon duties, but Mrs. 
Urgent and two of her daughters were at 
home. Mrs. Urgent is famous for the 



A CHANGE FOR FAY. 247 

Vigorous way in which she can catechise an 
intending Curate, and completely crush him, 
if he has not * means/ For it seems to be 
pretty well understood in the parish that a 
Curate will not be chosen unless he has 
* means.' The lady, with her daughters 
giggling in a corner, soon made out that 
poor Tom had * means ' ; and as Mr. Urgent 
was always ready to give a title to orders 
to a Curate wiih means^ there was no diffi- 
culty. So my old friend Tom is now the 
Rev. Thomas, and has married Ursula 
Urgent, and the Vicar has only six daugh- 
ters to dispose of. Now it's a shame to 
have bored you with this long story, but I 
met Tom Carteret just before I came here, 
and I never saw a man look more miser- 
able." 

"The moral is," said Edith, "that you 



248 SWKET AKD TWENTT. 

had better not turn parson to marry a 
parson^s daughter, or doctor to marry a 
doctor*8 daughter, or anything of that kind. 
I hope Mr. Carteret has got his wife with 
him ; I should so like to see one of the 
eight. But how did he make up his mind 
which he liked?" 

** I really don't know. I should imagine 
that he had to take the one that Mrs. 
Urgent chose for him, for he is completely 
governed by her in everything. The last 
time I rowed past Battlefield I thought I 
would see how Tom was getting on. I 
found the house full of female Urgents. 
The Rev« Uriah had just come in, and 
smiled benignuntly on me, as if he would 
say, * Go thou and do likewise/ He is an 
unctuous man^s^ sort of half breed between 
a Jesuit and DissenteT,*" 



A CHANGE FOR FAY. 249 

"You are severe, Mr. Hawker," said 
Edith. 

" 1 hate all cant, Miss Tracy." 

At this moment Miss Litton appeared. 

" Mr. Hawker," said the little old lady, 
"I am glad to make your acquaintance. 
Your mother is a very dear friend of mine, 
and I often grieve she cannot come to see 
me, or I go to see her. We shall meet 
some day, in this world or another." 

" She lives a quiet life in Cornwall," said 
Charlie, "and takes the troubles of the 
world as easily as she can. Ours is a 
family in which enthusiasm and common 
sense are curiously mingled. I always feel 
like the two papers of seidletz, or whatever 
they call it ; I've got to keep the one apart 
from the other; if they mix, they bubble 
up. 



250 SWEET AND TWENTT. 

" We will always allow you to bubble up 
as much as you 'please," said Miss Litton. 
"I am quiet enough myself, having had 
some experience of the follies of life ; but I 
like enthusiasm and energy, even when 
they are not directed to the exact point we 
desire to touch ; and I am sure your mother 
agrees with me." 

" She stays down in Cornwall, and medi- 
tates," he replied. "Hers is the quietest 
life in the world : her wildest dissipation is 
a game of whist. She likes it well enough. 
When she can't get anybody to play whist 
with her, she plays patience, I should like 
her to come to London and live with me, 
but her Cornish corner is as dear to her as 
a pigeon-house to a pigeon, or a mouse-hole 
to a mouse." 



A CHANGE FOR FAY. 251 

"There is a place in Cornwall called 
Mouse-hole," said Edith. 

"Ay, there is," returned Charlie; "but 
Mouse-hole is a corruption of words that, in 
old British, means the Queen's Garden ; just 
as the Hill with the Deep Valley has been 
turned by you ignorant Saxons into Penny- 
Come-Quick. It was at Mouse-hole that 
Queen Guenevere, looking out of her par- 
lour, her mouth full of bread and honey 
and Cornish cream, saw a ferocious cock 
blackbird pecking the nose of the young 
person who was hanging up her chemises. 
She rushed into the counting-house, to tell 
King Arthur .... but of course you remem- 
ber the rest of the veritable history." 

"Nonsense is an excellent thing, Mr. 
Hawker," said Miss Litton, " and I see you 



252 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

are a good hand at it. I am delighted to 
make your acquaintance, for your mother's 
sake and your own ; and also because I am 
sure you will do all you can to show Miss 
Tracy and Fay the beauties of Northminster. 
They want to go through the whole routine 
of the Festival : I don't : I shall only hear 
the Messiah. I care for nothing after that, 
and am too old to tire myself. So if you 
have any spare time to devote to these 
young people, Mr. Hawker, please give it 
them." 

"It is the pleasantest task I ever had, 
Miss Litton," said Charlie. " I feel that the 
Fates are favourable. But I grow forget- 
ful. My uncle asked me to ask you to 
come and dine with him, any day that you 
like, and at any hour, of course with Miss 
Tracy and Miss Luttrel. I hope you will 



A CfirANGE FOn FAY. 253 

not think it too much trouble : his house is 
only a dozen yards away." 

'* I will come any evening that suits him 
and you," said Miss Litton. "Having 
travelled so far in search of amusement, I 
am ready to do even more. It will do these 
young folks good to hear a poet talk." 

^* And how do poets talk ?" said Edith. 
"Do you know, Miss Litton, I heard a 
capital story on that point. An inquisitive 
fellow had been following Mr. Tennyson 
about at the Academy, hoping to hear him 
drop a poetic diamond. He was just get- 
ting tired when the poet said to his wife : 
* Look here, take care of the children ; I'm 
going out to get a glass of ale.^ 

" That's the large utterance of the early 
gods," said Charlie, laughing. "If the 
story isn*t true, it's typical. A real poet is 



5>» 



254 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

the very man to confess his liking for ale. 
The commercial millionaire daren't do it. 
I should lose a thousand a year if I were 
seen to drink ale in the City. Dry sherry 
is respectable: but the man who would 
succeed should always drink Champagne at 
lunch, and be very particular that there is 
England branded on the cork. I shall 
never succeed myself, because Champagne 
upsets my ^wetched liver,' as Punch calls 
it." 

Charlie Hawker at once became a great 
favourite with the ladies, and throughout 
the Festival he attended to them "with the 
most careful courtesy. Charlie was one of 
those magnetic young fellows whom no 
woman can know without liking : and Miss 
Litton and Edith and Fay all liked him at 
the very first. Charlie was a ladies' man. 



A CHANGE FOR FAY. 255 

This phrase is often used offensively, to 
designate the dull dreary dangler after 
women : I use it here as describing the man 
who has the power and will to brighten 
female society. Women are wondrous in- 
tuitive judges of character: a man whom 
women like is a man whom most men may 
envy. 

Canon Hawker's dinner-party came off. 
It was a party of eight, the true number for 
dining. There were Miss Litton and her 
two young ladies: there was the Bishop, 
the Dean, and Charlie. This, with the 
Canon, maketh seven : the eighth (tell it 
not in Gath, nor mention it in the streets of 
Askalon) was the famous prima donna 
Sefiora Sforzi, who had come down to sing 
the soprano parts in the oratorios. Canon 
Treraaine held that a woman who did that 



256 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

sort of work so divinely must be worth 
knowing more closely than cleric and canta- 
trice usually know each other : so he invited 
her to dinner, and I think thereby he 
slightly astonished both the High Church 
Bishop and the Broad Church Dean. 

However, it was a very pleasant enter- 
tainment. 

I am not going to describe that dinner, 
for dinner-table talk vexeth the souls of 
critics who either cannot or dare not dine. 
It was brilliant and pugnacious. The prima 
donna began it. She was a charming vision ; 
a wreath of pearls in her dark hair, and 
diamonds sprinkled about her. Miss Litton 
regarded her with curiosity. 

'^The Church of England," suddenly said 
the Sefiora Sonora, '* is an heretical Church, 
is it not ?" 



A CHANGE FOR FAY. 257 

A Bishop and a Dean of that Church 
were present. Neither knew exactly what 
to say in reply to the Italian singer. The 
High Church of the one and the Broad 
Church of the other were difficult to explain 
at a moment's notice. 

"We are older than Rome," said the 
Bishop. ** Saint Paul and Joseph of Arima- 
thea were here before the Roman Bishopric 
was founded under Linus, Cletus, and 
Clemens. yes, there can be no doubt we 
are older than Rome." 

" I don't quite think that is the proper 
way to regard the question," said the Dean, 
quietly taking his port wine as he deliberate- 
ly discussed the topic. ** Older or younger, 
what does it matter? If inspiration ever 
existed it exists now : and if I, a mere 
Dean, am inspired (which I by no means 

VOL. II, s 



258 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

assert), I am of more importance than the 
whole bench of Bishops. I am not inspir- 
ed : would that I were I I am merely- 
illuminated by the wondrous flood of scien- 
tific and literary light which is just now 
poured upon us. I wish it were not so. 
One glance, one only, of the divine light, 
would be better for me than all this illumin- 
ated haze of shallow knowledge." 

.^That is what you need," said the 
Bishop, eagerly. "That is what I have. 
You, my dear Mr. Dean, take Darwin and 
Huxley and Tyndall as your teachers : I am 
not prepared to say that they have not a 
few new things to teach you. But the new 
things they have to teach you are very few. 
I will leave Christianity out of the question, 
as it seems to annoy the clergy to be 
thought Christians, but if you can find any- 



A CHANGE FOR FAY. 259 

thing in Huxley and Tyndall which is not 
in Plato and Aristotle I shall be very glad 
to examine it. I am an old-fashioned 
Churchman, with a belief that there is much 
truth in the Bible." 

" I prefer Ecclesiasticus to all the canon- 
ical books of the Old Testament," said Miss 
Litton, " and I cannot understand its being 
placed in the Apocrypha. There is a won- 
drous world of wisdom in it." 

Both the Bishop and the Dean were 
annoyed by Miss Litton's heterodoxy (for 
surely Leviticus is of higher value than 
Ecclesiasticus), and became greater friends 
in consequence. Extremes meet, in cases 
innumerable; therefore it is not strange 
that a High Church Bishop and a Broad 
Church Dean should be driven into each 

s2 



260 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

Other's embrace by the heterodoxy of an 
eccentric old lady. 

It is noticeable that the most advanced 
dignitary does not desert his Church. 
Even Colenso is still a Bishop . pitiable, 
since how can a man be a Bishop without a 
belief? 

Fay was very tired when she left the 
Canon's house that night; tired of the 
Bishop, the Dean, the cantatrice ; tired of 
everything and everybody except Edith and 
Charlie. Edith had been delightful, but 
Charlie had been delightfuUer. While the 
Bishop and the Dean wrangled, while the 
SefioraSonora squalled, Charlie had managed 
to amuse these two girls in his own easy 
way. They both thought him great fun. 
There must be some genius in a young 
fellow who can manage simultaneously to 



A CHANGE FOR FAT. 261 

give pleasure to a lady like Edith and a 
mere baby like Fay. Certes, there is a touch 
of genius in Charlie. 

I am not sure that they were not both 
falling a little bit in love with him. Edith 
had in early life travelled much, and seen 
a great deal of society, and, being a hand- 
some girl with a good fortune, had not been 
without opportunities of marriage. I do not 
say that she had had many offers of mar- 
riage, for she did not, as many girls do, 
encourage men up to the point of asking, 
for the pleasure of refusing them. A lady 
of my acquaintance assures me that it does 
some men good to be refused : it takes the 
conceit out of them, and when she sees a 
conceited and self-conscious man she says 
she would like the opportunity of saying 
''No" to him. But Edith took the world 



262 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

easily, and was not in the habit of falling in 
love. Six years ago she had been a little 
attracted by Charlie Hawker, and she had 
thought of him for some little time as the 
^^ handsome stranger/' and wondered whether 
she would ever see him again. But she for« 
got him in time, or only thought of him 
when she drove over to Northminster two 
or three times a year. Now that she met 
him again she found he had the same mag. 
netic power. She reasoned with herself^ 
and blamed herself for being at thirty years 
old attracted by any man, especially by a 
young man. " What can be his age ? '^ 
she thought; ^^he doesn't look a day 
older." 

On the evening of the dinner at the 
Canon's, she had taken great pains to get a 
gardenia to wear in her hair and bosom, the 



A CHANGE FOR FAY. 263 

same flower that Charlie so often wore. 
After dinner, when the Bishop and Miss 
Litton, the Dean and the Canon, were talk- 
ing learnedly, and Charlie was talking 
delightftil nonsense to Edith and Fay^ 
Charlie said : 

" You scent the room with your flowers, 
Miss Tracy." 

'* Do you know what that scent reminds 
me of, Mr. Hawker?" 

" No," said Charlie, wonderingly. 

"Six years ago," began Edith. 

" Dear me I how old you must be to re- 
member six years ago. I thought ladies 
never had such long memories." 

" Then you see I am getting old, Mr. 
Hawker." 

" I beg your pardon, I don't see it by any 



means." 



264 SWEET AND TWENTl. 

** Let me go on with my story ; it con- 
cerns you," said Edith. 

'* Concerns me !" exclaimed Charlie, " then 
I'm all attention, for I love to hear the 
ladies talk about me." 

*'Well, six years ago I came with my 
cousin, Sir Price Roden, to a concert at 
Northminster. We went into the concert- 
room, and were puzzled about our seats, 
when a handsome cavalier came and helped 
us out of our difficulty ; and he must have 
been glad to make my cousin's acquaintance, 
for he sat by him all the evening, and was 
most agreeable. Now, do you know, the 
cavalier was just like you." 

"Ah, he couldn't have been like me in 
one thing, though, for I should have sat by 
you all the evening. Is that all I have to 
do with the story ?" 



A CHANGE FOR FAY. 265 

" I don't know yet. Suppose I say the 
cavalier did sit by me all the evening, and 
that he had bright brown hair and blue eyes, 
and a voice exactly like yours." 

Charlie had entirely forgotten the incident. 
He had been attentive to so many ladies 
that the face of one was not likely to dwell 
in his memory. But he began to see the 
position now. He knew there was some 
incident of the kind, though he could not 
remember the details, and no man is so quick 
as Charlie with a compliment to a lady, so he 
said, 

"I remember the incident very well, but 
I am sure you are making fun of me, Miss 
Tracy. It must be an elder sister of yours 
that I met. The lady that I saw that night 
was certainly like you, but she looked older 
then than you do now." 



266 SWEET AND TWENTT. 

" That is a capital way of getting out of 
it, Mr. Hawker." 

" 0," said Fay, "why didn't you tell me 
this before, Edith." 

" Why, you little goose, I told you at the 
time, and you and Miss Litton used to chaff 
me about the handsome stranger ; but it's six 
years ago, and you've forgotten all about 
it" 

When Edith and Fay went to bed that 
night, they lay in the moonlight, having 
left their blind up because the full moon was 
so glorious. The serene satellite shed her 
silver light, and a myriad stars surrounded 
her. The devil's in the moon for mischief. 
Edith and Fay could not sleep for the life 
of them ; and by-and-by they took to talk- 
ing, and the subject of their conversation was 
not the Bishop or the Dean, or even Signora 



A CHANGE FOR FAY. 267 

Sonora. It was . Charlie. And I suppose 
that a jolly young fellow with plenty of 
fun in him is likely to make more impression 
on the young female folk than your grave 
dignitaries of the Church. 

" Do you know, Edith, I like Mr, Hawker 
better than any young man I have met. 
Don't you ?" 

*' Why, Fay, you are falling in love with 
him." 

'*No, I am not, Edith ; and besides, I am 
sure he is in love with you." 

" Then why does he say such pretty things 
to you, Fay?" 

" Well, he can't marry both of us, Edith^ 
so which is he to have ?" 

*' I should think we had better toss up,'^ 
said Edith in fun. 

"All right," said Fay, "let us do it at 



268 SWEKT AND TWENTY. 

once, or we may forget it to-morrow. 
There is some money on the dressing-table ; 
there is a sovereign, I know." 

They jumped out of bed simultaneously. 
Agile Fay was first. She took the coin, and 
tossed it in the air, and said, 

" Man or woman ?" 

" Man of course," cried Edith. 

The sovereign fell. It rolled under the 
draperies of the dressing-table. Both went 
on their knees at once to find it, eager to 
know what the Fates had to say about Charlie, 
Alas, they could not find that disc of gold. 
It was gone, utterly. Whither had it rolled, 
after Fay s whirl in the air ? They searched 
vainly till they were quite tired, and then 
stood up regarding each other with looks of 
comical dismay. 

" Where can it be ?" said Fay. " If any- 



A CHANGE FOR FAY. 269 

body picks it up, they'll be sure not to re- 
member whether it's man or woman." 

" Let's put the question to Mr. Hawker,'^ 
quoth Edith. 

" Well," exclaimed Fay, after another 
search for the lost coin, ^'I do wonder what 
has become of that sovereign. The Fates 
are resolved not to let us know which of 
us Mr. Hawker would like to marry." 

" I think," said Edith, trying to speak 
and look gravely, "that the Fates have 
decided he is to marry neither of us, so they 
have spirited away the sovereign, and taken 
it off to Hades or Jericho, or wherever they 
live." 

'* I call it decidedly dishonest of them," 
said Fay. 

So they went to bed again, these two 
pleasantly assorted girls, one a wise beauti- 



270 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

ful little woman of the world, and the other 
a healthfully precocious baby . . . and this 
time they slept. 

Slept ! Ay, but did they dream ? Did 
they, passing through the immortal ivory 
gate, whose legend was ancient even in 
Homer's time, see Charlie Hawker trans- 
figured there, robbed of his mere civic 
gravity, all his troubadour tendency left ? I 
know not. Who dare interfere with the 
dreams of girls? 

It is of course within the limits of possi- 
bility that Charlie Hawker dreamt. Per- 
chance he had a vision of a kind of Judg- 
ment of Paris, with two delightful goddesses 
instead of three. But Paris's judgment 
was comparatively easy. The Prince of 
Troy and Shepherd of Ida was choosing 
between Power and Wisdom and Beauty. 



A CHANGE FOR PAY. 271 

That is all very well with your goddesses ; 
but what are you to do when you get these 
abstract ideas mixed in the concrete ? The 
trinity of womanhood which Paris had to 
disentangle is immensely ancient and intense- 
ly modern. You cannot worship a woman 
who has not a touch of Hera, nor live with 
her intelligently unless she has a touch of 
Athene, nor love her to the very heart 
unless she has a touch of Aphrodite. 

Paris had a difficult problem to solve. 
So had Mr. Hawker. 



END OF THE SECOND VOLUME. 
SWEET AND TWENTY. 



CHAPTER VI. 

UP A TREE. 

To fly afar we oft are yearning ; 
We long to see great sunsets burning. 
Ah, but how pleasant is returning ! 

QIR PRICE RODEN was too busy to go 
to Northminster Festival. Paul Roden 
went over on the day of the oratorio, and 
heard the Sforzi sing wondrously ; but so 
great was the crush that he could not get 
near Miss Litton's party, and all through 



4 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

the performance he saw Charlie Hawker 
making himself only too agreeable to both 
Edith and Fay. So disgusted at this 
stranger's conduct was Mr. Paul, that he 

. ___^^ 

rode home to Roden Hall that night, al- 
though he had ordered a bed at the Clarence. 
Some intuition told Paul Roden that this 
easy alert bright-haired stranger was a dan- 
gerous rival with the ladies. He had been 
a little too apt to think he could play the 
Sultan. When he saw the two girls in 
pleasant confabulation with somebody he 
didn't know, his anger was extreme. 

" An impudent little fellow !" he thought 
to himself, as he rode homewards that 
pleasant night of summer. '* Who is he, I 
wonder ? How could Edith encourage him 
as she did ? You never know whom you 
meet in places like Northminster." 



k 



UP A TREE. 5 

Thus soliloquized Paul, aware all the 
ivhile from his first glance that his rival was 
a gentleman. 

Paul meditated much while he rode home 
under the beech woods that night For the 
life of him he could not make up his mind ; 
and he wanted to, very badly indeed. 
Whom should he marry ? What a charming 
wife Edith would be . a perfect lady, with 
knowledge of the world and abundant 
money. What a delicious bride would be 
the ripening Fay, so original, capricious, 
romantic ! Paul was a little afraid of them 
both. He had an uneasy suspicion that Edith 
would manage him, and that he would not 
be able to manage Fay. When he dis- 
mounted at Roden Hall that night, he had 
not the remotest idea as to what he ought to 
do. Poor Tliul Roden ! All through his 



b SWEET AND TWENTY. 

life he had traversed easy ways, and chosen 
his own turnings. All his difficulties were 
of his own making ; and those are the very 
worst difficulties one ever meets. 

Meanwhile Charlie Hawker, who had 
not yet exhausted his holiday, accepted with 
glee Miss Litton's invitation to spend a few 
days at Westbury Place. The Canon had 
received a sudden summons to his Cornish 
parish ; the Charity Commissioners, three in 
number, with a Secretary and a Secretary's 
clerk, had come down to inquire into the 
distribution of seven shillings and eleven 
pence three farthings a year, left by an old 
maid who died at Saint Gludoc, in the reigu 
of Edward the Elder, for the benefit of the 
old maids of the parish in perpetuity^ There 
was nothing Canon Tremaine liked better 
than fighting Commissioners; so he went 




UP A TBBK. 7 

south-west by the first possible train. 
Hence it was lucky for Charlie that he had 
made such charming acquaintances all at 
once. 

He accompanied Miss Litton to Westbury 
Place, Edith being dropt on the way at 
Roden Hall, but promising to come over to 
luncheon next day^ and bring Paul Roden 
with her. Early next morning Charlie was 
out in the grounds to see what might be 
seen ; an inquisitive investigative youth was 
Charles, who never threw away his time som- 
nolently. It was the loveliest quiet summer- 
tide. No breath of air shook forth the drowsy 
fragrance of the roses. Mavis and merle 
were too indolent to sing. Charlie felt full 
of life and ready for enjoyment ; he wander- 
ed through the old yew walks and admired 
the long bright walls of Portugal laurel ; he 



8 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

rambled hither and thither, feeling assured 
that he was quite alone in the place, for it 
was only five o'clock as yet. He enjoyed 
his happy solitary hour. Under the great 
cedar he sat down in a comfortable garden 
seat, and lighted a eigar, and began to 
meditate. 

"This is curiously pleasant," thought 
Charlie to himself, " and I must cultivate 
Miss Litton. She is a delightful old lady. 
As to the girls ; well, they beat any I ever 
saw, and I've had some experience. I 
never met such an absolute lady as Edith 
Tracy, or such a gay little fairy as Fay 
Luttrel. I'm in love with both of them. 
Lord, lord ! hadn't I better go back to the 
City and forget them both ?" 

Just then a blackbird broke out above 
him with a mellow note or two, and flew 



UP A TREE. 9 

off across the lawn into the laurels. And 
just after he became aware of a rich contral- 
to voice singing above him : 

'* The clouds like a fleet are sailing : 
See how swift they pass I 
1 am up with the clouds here, 
Between the sky and the grass. 

** Here I am kissed by the sunrise, 
Here I am drenched by the dew. 
Here the high-travelling skylark 
Thinks me a wild bird too. 

^' Am I not half a bird now. 

Up where the wild lark sings ? 
Tes, for I mimic his music : 
Yes, for my heart has wings T' 

These words dropton Charlie with delici- 
ous suddenness. He looked upward won- 
deringly. The great cedar was pavement 
above pavement of heavy green leafage, so 
that no creature was perceptible in its midst. 
But he was of an adventurous temper, and 



10 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

had climbed precipitous Cornish cliffs for 
sea-mews' eggs, and had taken a chough's 
nest in S. Gludoc's tower, and had climbed 
Tintagel in search of that tomb of Arthur 
which eludes the gaze of any man who has 
wrought a deed of sin. On it is engraven 
the famous leonine hexameter : 



4( 



Hie jacet Arihurus : Rex quondam : Hexque futurusJ' 



Whether Charlie Hawker ever saw it I can- 
not say. 

** There's a wilder bird in that tree 
than ever I caught," said Charlie. So he 
swung himself up, branch after branch ; and 
all the while he could hear the song ; and 
by-and-by, as he got pretty high, he could 
see the singer. It was Fay Luttrel of course. 
She had gone to almost the summit of the 
cedar, and was looking at the saffron-stained 



UP A TBEE. 11 

East, and singing thoughtlessly. She did 
not hear Charlie ascending, so intense wa^ 
her gaze on the radiant sky, so undreamt-of 
any interruption ; and he felt somewhat 
afraid that if he surprised her she might falL 
It was quite a needless fear. Fay was at 
home in that cedar. It was her sky-par* 
lour. 

She did not see the invader till he was 
just beneath her, his hand holding a bough 
within a few inches of her foot. She laugh- 
ed gaily. 

"What brought you up here, Mr.Hawker?'^ 
she said. " I thought I was pretty far above 
the reach of visitors, especially at such an 
early hour." 

*' Birds should not sing if they want to 
hide their nests," said Charlie. "Your 
musical voice told me where you were^ 



12 SWEET AND TWENTY, 

You'll sing that pretty little song again, 
won't you, Miss Luttrel ?" 

"0 yes, and any other nonsense you 
like. I'm glad you can climb trees, Mr. 
Hawker. I never should care much for a 
fellow who thought it undignified. Isn't 
there a divine view from here, right across 
where the river winds, in and out, miles 
away, like a huge silver serpent? I am 
quite fond of coming up here, Mr. Hawker. 
The birds and the squirrels talk to me, and 
I like their talk ; and the people whose talk 
I don't like can't climb up here, which is 
delightful. You are the very very first 
visitor I have had in my cedar-parlour ; and 
I wish I had some refreshment to offer you 
... a sip of nectar in an acorn saucer." 

Charlie, looking at Fay's rosy lips, thought 
he knew where nectar was to be found ; but, 



UP A TREE. la 

wise* in his generation, he did not say so, 

. 

He'd have liked to touch those budding little 
lips with his own. He did not dare. He 
and Fay descended the cedar-stairs together 
in the most decorous fashion. 



14 



CHAPTER VIL 

DID THEY LIKE EACH OTHER? 

*^I do not like thee, Doctor Fell ; 
The reason why I cannot tell ; 
But only this I know full well, 
I do not like thee. Doctor Fell." 

fTlHAT matutinal flirtation in the cedar 
made Charlie Hawker and Fay Luttrel 
good friends at once; they came in to break- 
fast together, and were as gay as a brother 
and sister . or shall I say a brace of first 
cousins ? Miss Litton was quite pleased to 



DID THBY LIKE BACH OTHER? 15 

see how well they suited each other. The 
old lady had not the remotest notion of Fay's 
falling in love with Charlie or anybody else ; 
she regarded her as far too young, and would 
have made Miss Clumber drench her with 
senna tea and French verbs if she had sus« 
pected such an enormity. But she thought it 
well the childshouldseesomelife; and Charlie 
Hawker, she decided, was just the sort of 
fellow to give her an introductory lesson. 
He was a gentleman clearly, and might be 
trusted. Miss Litton trusted him fully, and 
was quite justified in doing so. Charlie 
was wondrously fascinated by this child Fay's 
capricious eccentric charm ; but he was not 
absolutely conquered. Charlie was an eclectic 
flirt, and wanted all the best points, of a 
thousand delightful girls united in the one 
whom he could adore. Whether he had to 



16 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

offer masculine perfection in return did by 
no means occur to him. 

To be with Fay, wandering in those 
quaint grounds, and climbing a tree now 
and then for a change, was a great enjoy- 
ment to Charlie. He studied the child with 
care, and was delighted by her frank simpli- 
city. By-and-by there was a complication. 
Paul Eoden and Edith came in just before 
luncheon; and of course they stayed. 
Charlie Hawker did not like Paul Roden, 
neither did Paul Roden like Charlie 
Hawker. They took tacit offence at each 
other from the very first. The well-dressed 
easy Londoner thought he detected some- 
thing clownish and provincial in PaulRoden's 
style. The Iron town magnate thought 
Charlie much too free and familiar. Edith, 
who had brought Paul over in the hope 




DID THEY IJKB BACH OTHER? 17 

that he and Mr. Hawker would make a 
pleasant acquaintance, was much annoyed at 
the ill success of her experiment ; but Miss 
Litton was intensely amused. This was just 
what she liked. It would, she thought, be 
good for both Edith and Fay to see this 
contrast. Miss Litton's preference was for 
Charlie Hawker. She had never quite 
reconciled herself to Paul since his ridiculous 
conduct to Sarah Daw ; she saw, none better, 
that he was a weak brother. She hated 
the thought of his wanting to marry either 
Edith or Fay, both of whom she knew to 
be a world too good for him. So she 
welcomed Charlie's casual intervention, and 
was delighted to see the two young gentle- 
men glare at each other as if contemplating 
the old-fashioned " pistols for two and coffee 
for one." 

VOL. in. G 



18 SWEET AND TWENTY, 

It took Miss Litton, shrewd as she was, 
wise by long experience, some time to make 
out Chariie Hawker. No wonder. Few 
people comprehend him. His mother gave 
him up as an insoluble problem at a very 
early age. The simple truth is that nature 
designed him for a poetic gentleman, and 
that necessity made him " something in the 
City." However *'naturam expellas furca 
tamen usque recurret," and his fine frank 
breezy Cornish nature, the breath of the tors 
and of the wild wide sea, never deserted 
him. 

The girls were much amused to see him 
and Paul Roden together. What critics 
girls are ! How they watch the weaknesses 
of men ! How lucky for them that men 
never dream of similarly watching their 
weaknesses! You will find, in a small society, 



DID THET LIES EACH OTHER? 19 

a fine young fellow half in love with all the 
ghrlsthere congregated, andthegirls all trying 
which can pick out his faults and show him 
to disadvantage. At twenty or thereabout, 
the human male animal, unless exceptionally 
clever, is most unfortunate. The boy of 
that age ought not to go unguarded, lest he 
should be picked up by the wily widow or 
spidery spinster. 

But if girls are critics, what uncom- 
monly good friends young men always 
are ! How they like each other, exoterical- 
ly, if one may use a long word ! It was 
great fun to see Charlie Hawker and Paul 
Roden fraternizing. Paul was in the great- 
est difficulty. He saw that there was in this 
young fellow something that he had not got, 
nor ever could get . . . the poetic touch, 
the divine utterance which will bring beauty 

c2 



20 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

to kiss your lips when you are old and 
poor and weary of the world. Now here 
was Fay. Fay would go and play tricks 
with Charlie Hawker; pull his hair, or 
pinch him, or what not ; she never did that 
sort of thing to Paul. There was Edith 
again, his own cousin. Charlie kissed her 
as coolly as if he had known her all his 
life ; Paul had not pluck enough to do any- 
thing so resolute. 

From what has been said it may be 
imagined that Charlie and Paul were not on 
the friendliest possible terms. They were 
not. Yet they liked each other well enough 
when the womenkind did not stand between 
them. They were, it must be observed, at 
opposite poles. Paul Roden, born to busi- 
ness, was freed from it by good fortune ; 
Charles Hawker, of an old family, famous 



DID THEY LIKE BACH OTHER? 21 

for brain as well as birth, was forced into 
business by circumstances. The contrast was 
curious. They could not understand each 
other. They had no common measure. 

However, the less they understood each 
other, the civiller they grew ; you might 
have fancied they were brothers. Charlie 
despised Paul as a mere millionaire, and Paul 
despised Charlie as a comparative pauper, 
and tbey were outwardly the best possible 
friends. So goes the world. The man who 
can say he has a friend is rarely happy. I 
have . * . some ; ay, but they will not 
exhaust in counting the fingers of one hand. 
Fashion and ostentation and selfishness are 
destroying friendship. 

The heading of this chapter is a question. 
The answer, I regret to say, must be deci- 
sively negative. Paul Roden did not like 



22 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

Charles Hawker, nor did Charles Hawker 
like Paul Roden. As to Paul, I fear he 
considered our friend Charlie an absolute 
nuisance. He was such a magnetic fascinat- 
ing fellow, Paul was disgusted to see that 
his cousin Edith went earlier to Westbury 
Place when Charlie was there; that Fay- 
followed him about like a pet spaniel ; that 
he had his own way with all the women- 
kind, Miss Litton not excepted. What was 
his secret ? 

However he had to return to town, and 
Paul Roden was left in possession of the 
dtadel. Charlie did not at all want to 
go. He was a sensitive creature ; he fell in 
love with Miss Litton and with Edith and 
with Fay. And they all reciprocated. It 
was amazing how friendly they all got. 
Was it Charlie^s audacity, I wonder ? These 



DID THBY LIKE EACH OTHER? 23 

daring youngsters seem to get their own 
way. Everybody was very sad when he 
had to return to the classic vicinage 
of Bishopsgate Within, Westbury Place 
mourned for Charlie ; but he made fair pro- 
mises of early return, which he meant for 
his own sake to fulfil. The only person who 
had not the least desire to see him again was 
Paul Roden. 

Edith and Fay confessed to each other 
that they found it rather dull after Charlie's 
departure. How much exactly they con- 
fessed to each other I must leave to conjec- 
ture. Fay was more frank than her friend. 
She admitted that she had never met anyone 
she liked so much ; Edith could have said the 
same, but she did not. Miss Tracy was a 
young lady of reflexion and experience; 
there was something in Charlie's easy agree- 



24 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

able manner which caused her to decide that 
he was not a marrying man. Indeed he talked 
of his numerous flirtations with a cool candour 
that showed her what sort of a fellow he 
was. He would not marry for money ; he 
would not marry until he had made money 
enough to live in ease and luxury ; and he 
was not quite certain that he would marry 
at all. This was Edith's judgment of his 
character. 

Fay could not be expected to understand 
him. He seemed delightful; only she 
was afraid he liked Edith better than he 
liked her. So, when he was gone, and they 
came to talk him over, as girls will, she did 
not at first say all she thought. Edith saw 
through her at once, and played with her as 
a cat plays with a mouse. Was Edith a 
little bit spiteful, perhaps^ because this was 



DID THEY LIKE BACH OTHER? 25 

just the sort of young fellow she could have 
liked, if only he had been in earnest ? 

They were under the great cedar in the 
warm afternoon, and Edith was doing some 
fantastic work with swift skilful fingers, for 
she liked something to employ her deft 
white hands, while Fay was indolently turn- 
ing over the leaves of a volume of Blake's 
poems. She had just set her finger on the 
pretty lines : 

** Why was Cupid a boy? 
And why a boy was he ? 
He should have been a giil 
For aught that I can see." 

Fay dreamt over the meaning of this, and 
thought in her heart that the Greeks were 
right after all, and that Cupid ought to be a 
boy. Faith and so he ought, for the girls. 
The rosy little rascal comes nestling in their 
bright young bosoms, and leaves a curious 



26 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

sharp sting behind that is half pleasure and 
half pain. 

Edith looked over Fay's shoulder, and 
read the simple rhyme, and laughed, shak- 
ing her bright hair the while. 

"Studying the character of Cupid, eh. 
Fay ? Do you think he ought to have been 
a girl, as the mad poet says? Don't you 
fancy him very much like Mr. Hawker in 
his baby days ?" 

" How nonsensical you are to-day, 
Edith I Mr. Hawker doesn't look to me as if 
he ever had been a baby. I believe he was 
born grown up, with a shiny hat and a silk 
umbrella, and that he flirted with his nurse- 
maid, if she was a good-looking girl, before 
he had got beyond bread and milk." 

"Likely enough," said Edith. "He's a 
dreadful flirt, isn't he? And 'twas a shame 



DID THEY LIKE EACH OTHER? 27 

of him to try his wicked arts on a child like 

you/' 

'' Now, Edith ! I'll pinch you. Or Fll get 
a cord and tie you to the tree and leave you 
there. You know I'm stronger than you." 

Which was true enough ; Fay was a regu- 
lar little athlete. 

" Well, what have I said that's wrong ?'^ 
asked Edith. " Aren't you a child, or didn't 
he flirt with you ?" 

" Why of course I'm a child," answered 
Fay. " But what do you mean by flirting ? 
I'm too young to understand such thmgs. I 
dare say you and Mr. Hawker have been 
making fun of me all this time. I don't care 
one bit ; I like him very well, but I don't 
believe in him ; and I am quite ready to be 
your bridesmaid when he leads you to the 
hymeneal altar, as they say in the papers. So 



28 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

there now, Miss Edith ; you may be Mrs. 
Hawker as soon as ever you like." 

" What a mischievous monkey you are !" 
oried Edith. " But I forgive you, Fay, and 
I am going to lecture you. Don't you 
fancy that Mr. Hawker means all the pretty 
poetical things he says to you. He is just 
the same with everybody, I can see ; that is, 
he suits himself to the lady he happens to be 
flirting with." 

" O you dear Edith 1" laughed Fay, " how 
wise you are 1 Now you know I'm only 
seventeen. I'm just out of the nursery. I 
smell of bread and butter, as the polite 
Lord Byron remarks ; if he had been a great 
poet, he would have imagined a young girl 
smelling of roses and lilies all covered with 
dew. And you think Mr. Hawker would 
condescend to flurt with me I What a mis- 



DID THEY LIKE EACH OTHER? 2^ 

take ! He puts me on about the same level as 
little Myra at the lodge, who is twelve years 
old. He gave her a kiss and a shilling. He 
would do the same for me, if he thought I 
wanted either. But you are an antagonist 
worthy of his prowess, and I hope that you 
have made holes in each other's hearts." 

Thus saying, Fay Luttrel swung herself 
up into the cedar-tree, and was soon lost 
amid its dark boughs ; but Edith could hear 
her voice, as of some invisible dweller in the 
air, singing . . . 

^* Two fishers went where the river is bright, 
And one was a girl and one was a boy ; 
And one canght just a day's delight. 
And the other caught grief for murk midnight ; 
O 'tis a world of sorrow and joy ! 

^^ Two trayellers soared in an air-balloon, 
And one was a boy and one was a girl, 
And one fell down from the car too soon, 
And the other was scorched in the sun's hot noon ! 
O tis a world of wonder and whirl I" 



50 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

" Where does the child get all that non- 
sense?" thought Edith, quietly continuing 
her artistic occupation. "Did she think 
much of Charlie, I wonder? He is a man 
I could marry, if he were capable of being 
in earnest for half-an-hour. He is not. I 
don't think he would seriously ask any wo- 
man to marry him. Yet, if he could make 
up his mind he would be happier himself, 
and would make the right sort of woman 
happy. I don't believe he ever will." 

While thus meditated Edith on the seat 
below. Fay was meditating near the summit 
of that mighty cedar, whence she could see all 
the country round. She had taken refuge in 
her favourite tree to escape Edith's catechism ; 
for she was conscious that she had been a little 
misled by Charlie's plausible fascinations. 
She was a child, you know ; he was an old 



DID THEY LIKE EACH OTHER? 31 

hand, who had been luring pretty birds all 
his life. Fay was a little annoyed with her- 
self for having been magnetized for a mo- 
ment : she was also a little annoyed with 
Edith for lecturing her on the subject. So 
she climbed the cedar summit and commun- 
ed with herself. 

And she came to the decision that Charlie 
was a capital fellow to flirt with, but no 
more. She needed somebody more in earn- 
est. The gardenia in his buttonhole symbo- 
lised him; always elegant and fragrant, 
always in season. Thus thought Fay 
Luttrel. 

" My lover shall wear the rich red rose," 
she said. 



32 



CHAPTER VIII. 



TWO PB0P08ALS. 



«« Where the heron eoara in its bright array, 
The falcon will fly some fatal day." 

Emo Alfbed^s Adaoia. 

T)AUL RODEN had been rendered a 
little angry by Charlie Hawker's 
appearance on the scene. His imagined 
supremacy was gone. This fellow, with his 
Celtic poetry and London nonchalance, was 
altogether too much for Paul. Though he 
had travelled abroad, and seen the society 



TWO PBOPOSALS. 33 

of Courts and Cities, he had not mastered 
that social style that makes intercourse easy 
without vulgarity. You can hardly get 
this without birth and breeding. Paul felt 
that he had not caught it, and could not 
help confessing that Charlie had. And it 
was so. Charlie could not be awkward 
anywhere, and would feel quite at home if 
suddenly introduced to an Imperial Court. 
He would flirt with a pretty Princess on his 
very first introduction. 

Paul Roden, angry at being effaced by 
Charlie, made up his mind to do something 
definite, if not desperate. He resolved to 
ask Fay Luttrel to marry him. She was the 
loveliest creature in the world ; she was just 
the age for him ; surely she would not 
refuse. Of course she would not marry Mr. 
Hawker, a mere "city man." Miss Litton 

VOL. ni D 



34 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

would never allow that. Besides, what 
* was there in Hawker for anyone to care 
about ? He was a mere tame cat about the 
house, petted by all the ladies. 

Thus he consoled himself; yet by the 
expression of his face, and the angry strides 
he took, it did not look as if he found con- 
solation in mentally abusing Mr. Hawker. 
"Why should he come in my way?" he 
thought. '*I have never much cared for 
any woman but Fay and Edith, and I believe 
they are both in love with him. But they 
know well enough it won't do to marry him : 
and I am determined he shall not have the 
chance if I can help it. 

As he walked on the lawn. Fay was 
sitting under the great cedar. He looked, 
she thought, as if he had some definite pur- 
pose in his mind. She, having cleared her 



TWO PROPOSALS. 35 

brain from reminiscence of Charlie by a 
soliloquy high in the glorious dark boughs, 
was ready for anything that might happen. 
Yet she was surprised when Paul Roden 
broke suddenly into the language of senti- 
ment, and asked her if she thought she 
could marry him. There was a queer mixture 
of business and sentiment in Paul's method 
of making a proposal. Fay would have 
liked to laugh; but she thought of days 
long gone by when Paul was to her a hero, 
and so she would not hurt him. And she 
thought of the scene under the big yew 
tree when he had kissed Sarah so passion- 
ately, and she thought with a shudder that 
the same man should never be allowed to 
embrace her. 
Up in her beloved cedar Fay had got her 

d2 



36 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

brain clear. She answered Paul Roden in 
her happiest vein. 

" I am only a girl yet," she said, " and I 
have resolved not to think of marriage till I 
am twenty. And I would never marry 
unless Papa knew and liked the man I was 
going to marry. I am waiting for Papa to 
come back, and that is my chief thought. 
So, dear Mr. Roden, though I am proud to 
receive your offer, I cannot say a word 
about it, one way or the other. I daresay 
when the time comes for me to find a hus- 
band, you will be married to somebody a 
hundred times better than I." 

Thus Fay; but Paul Roden had sense 
enough to judge from her tone that she 
could never care for him, even though her 
father told her she was to. Paul did not 



TWO PROPOSALS. 37 

wholly believe in her filial obedience ; yet 
Fay meant it. Of course, had she seen 
somebody whom she could not help loving 
passionately, her theory of life would have 
changed ; but in all her time she had met 
nobody whom she thought half so noble as 
her father, and his gallant stately memory 
dwelt with her, causing her to think com- 
paratively little of the young gentlemen 
who made love, or pretended to make love, 
to her. 

Paul Roden made a courteous retreat, 
murmuring something (he did not know 
what) about asking the question again by- 
and-by. Yet he knew well that to ask it 
again would be useless ; he saw that for 
some reason or other he and Fay were 
divided by an impassable gulf. He gave it 



38 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

up for ever, this project of his . though 
thinking all the while what a marvellous 
beauty he had lost. 

Then he sauntered slowly home ; feeling 
too much annoyed and excited to go and 
talk to Miss Litton. Just outside the gates 
he met Miss Clumber, who began talking to 
him in her usual slow way about the weather, 
or something of that sort. He made an 
impatient reply, and quite astonished that 
poor meek lady, who went into the house 
feeling very uncomfortable. When she saw 
Miss Litton she said, 

"I am afraid Mr. Roden has got into 
trouble with you again, he looked so very 
angry just now as he left the gates ; he 
would hardly speak to me." 

" Mr. Roden !" said Miss Litton, '' why, I 
haven't seen him for some days.'' 



TWO PROPOSALS. 39 

" Well, he certainly was walking out of 
the gate a few minutes ago, and looked so 
annoyed," 

" Please to ring the bell, Miss Clumber." 

A servant appeared, who said Mr. Roden 
had not been in the house, but she did not 
know whether he had been in the garden. 
Miss Fay was on the lawn. Miss Fay was 
sent for. 

" Fay," said Miss Litton, " has Paul been 
here ?" 

" Yes, Auntie." 

" Did you see him ?" 

'' Yes, Auntie. He came up to me and 
sat down under the cedar, and chatted for a 
few minutes, and then went away." 

"Did you say anything to make him 
angry. Fay ?" 

" Not that I know of. Aunt." 



40 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

But Fay was looking confused and un- 
comfortable, and her Aunt saw that there 
was something the matter, so she asked Miss 
Clumber to be so good as to fetch her hand- 
kerchief, which she had left upstairs. Miss 
Clumber had learnt to take Miss Litton's 
hints, and knew when she was not wanted ; 
indeed she had in this manner made herself 
so useful to Miss Litton. She understood 
that the handkerchief was not to be found 
for half an hour. 

" Now, Fay," said her Aunt, "tell me 
what is the matter, and what you have said 
to Paul that he should have gone away 
angrily. Poor Miss Clumber came in al- 
most in tears because he had snubbed 
her." 

" Mr. Roden asked me to marry him, 
Aunt." 



TWO PROPOSALS. 41 

" And you refused him, I suppose ?" 

" I told him the truth, Aunt. I said I 
would not marry a man that my father did 
not approve of." 

''But that need not have made him 
angry," said Miss Litton; "he can wait to 
see your papa, who will I hope be home 
soon? Surely you must have said some- 
thing more than that. Would you marry 
him if your papa liked him ?" 

Fay hesitated a moment. Then she said 
out boldly, " No, Auntie, I couldn't. And 
please don't talk about it any more, there's a 
dear Auntie, for. oh, I can't forget that day 
when he kissed Sarah a hundred times, and 
seemed to love her so much. I am sure he 
did love her, fof he held her so close to him ; 
so he cannot love anyone else." 

'* You ought to try and forget that. Fay. 



42 SWEET iVND TWENTY. 

Young men will sometimes make mistakes in 
their youth." 

" Perhaps if I had only heard that Paul 
kissed Sarah I should forget it as easily as 
you and Edith seem to," said Fay ; " but I 
saw it, Auntie, I saw it all, and Tm sure he 
must have loved her very much ; and I have 
always been so sorry for Sarah, for she 
must have believed in him. I know I should 
believe in anyone that kissed me so pas- 
sionately.'' 

" Well, Fay, dear, we'll say nothing more 
about it at present. I should not like you 
to marry Paul, and there is plenty of time 
yet before you need think of marriage ; but 
I'm sorry for Paul, for if he loves you very 
much he must be disappointed. I will 
write a note to console him as well as I 
can." 



TWO PROPOSALS. 43 

When Paul Eoden left Miss Clumber in 
an agitated state outside the gates of West- 
bury Place, he walked on some little way 
mechanically, not knowing where he should 
go or what he should do next. His belief 
in himself was a little shaken, but not for 
long. He turned his steps homeward with a 
fixed determination. He would marry 
Edith. Edith was a delightful girl ; a true 
lady, with perfect knowledge of the world. 
She liked him, he felt certain. Fay's refusal 
had just a little shaken his opinion of him- 
self ; but he had a very strong belief that 
with Edith it was only a case of ^' ask and 
have." He thought over the matter as he 
walked slowly home ; he smiled contemptu- 
ously at Fay Luttrel, as a silly child who 
would only be too sorry for what she had 



44 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

done ; he conjured up a vision of Edith 
Tracy as his wife. 

He was fortunate; There was Edith, as 
he entered, feeding the pigeons. He strode 
across the grass to where, with sunlight on 
her bright hair, she was throwing peas and 
hemp to the birds. A prettier picture no 
man could anywhere see. He thought to 
himself, well, after all, this little Fay was 
only a girl you know, and Edith was charm- 
ing and a woman of the world, and all that 
sort of thing. He was ready for anjrthing. 
He would go and ask Edith at once, 

Paul Roden had had his own way all his 
life-time. His father had indulged him in 
every way, he was surrounded by obsequi- 
ous servants, and when he had been placed 
as a young man in the business, the people 
around him were only too ready to worship 



I 



TWO PROPOSALS. 45 

him. The ladies had petted him, and he 
knew that there were plenty of them ready 
to have him if he asked. '^ That ridiculous 
little Fay," he thought, *' would have had 
me if it hadn't been for Hawker coming in 
my way. It is all nonsense about her being 
dutiful to her father. That is mere prig- 
gishness. She would not stop to think about 
her father if she were in love. Of course 
Edith won't be such a fool as to refuse me 
for the sake of that beggarly young fellow 
with his airs and graces. I can't think how 
the women are so infatuated with him." 

When he came up to Edith, and sent the 
frightened pigeons flying far away, she was 
startled by his manner, and was also puzzled. 
He tried to look very much in earnest, but 
there was something not quite real in his 
manner. 



46 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

" Edith," he said, taking her hand between 
his own, " I should like to have you near 
me all my lifetime. You are just the sort 
of companion I like." 

^' Well, Paul, Fm not going to run away 
yet, unless you tell me to." 

" No ; but I should like you to be my 

wife, that I could always have you near me. 

T feel as if I could never be happy without 

you," he said, in almost a pathetic way. 

^'Am I good enough for you? Can you 

love me? I love you very much, but I 

don't quite know the proper way to say it. 

I am a dull fellow in such matters, but I 

* 
mean what I say." 

Did he mean what he said ? Edith was 

uncertain. Edith liked Paul very well, but 

loving was quite another matter. Was he a 

man, this cousin of hers, to whom she could 



TWO PROPOSALS. 47 

give herself? Edith had dreamt, in years 
gone by, of a grand passion, of a love that 
should absorb and entrance her, of a lover 
whom she could worship. Yes, in that secret 
heart of hers there had been such a vision. 
Now, what should she do ? Paul Roden 
was a very good fellow, but not her hero. 
And now Paul was pressing her for a reply. 

"Paul," she said, "you are too hasty. 
Come, we will be cousins all the same. Let 
us wait a year. Your offer comes suddenly, 
you know ; and I, for my part, Paul, had 
made up my mind to die an old maid.*' 

" It would be a great pity," he said, 
laughing. "Well, I shall consider you 
mine. If you alter your mind, it will be to 
make the time less by many months." 

Very pretty and sweet looked bright- 
haired Edith at this moment : yet she had a 



48 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

fear in her heart that to marry Paul would 
be a mistake. She liked him, that was cer- 
tain ; but she did not love him. She knew 
the marriage would delight his father. She 
knew she would live a comfortable luxurious 
life. Yet . . . there was something wanting. 
That evening, when Edith had flitted 
away to the drawing-room, Paul Roden 
told his father what he had done. I don't 
mean that he told him all he had done : be 
sure he said no word of Fay Luttrel. Sir 
Price was well satisfied with his son. He 
wondered why Edith should want to wait a 
year, but set it down to the natural modesty 
of ladies. He resolved that there should be 
the grandest wedding ever known in Iron- 
town, with certainly not less than two 
bishops to tie the nuptial knot for the heir 
to the Roden baronetcy. 



TWO PROPOSALS. 49 

So pleasant was Sir Price in the drawing- 
room that night, wearing such a benignant 
air of delight, that Edith almost felt she 
ought to marry Paul not to disappoint his 
father. Paul, too, was remarkably courteous 
and lively ; he felt that for once he had done 
a decisive thing, and that now it was his duty 
to act as if he were almost a married man . 
for he had not a doubt that Edith meant to 
have him. His future responsibility filled 
him with pride. As he looked at Edith, he 
thought how far superior she was to any 
lady he had ever met. If a vision of Fay 
Luttrel came upon him, he merely dismissed 
it with the thought that she was only a child. 
Paul had the fortunate capacity for consider- 
ing his own property better than any other 
man's : he wore a diamond ring which he 
maintained was of purer water than any 

VOL. nic E 



50 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

Other stone in the world : he dedared Rick- 
man, his confidential valet (a most plausible 
and audaciously indolent villain) the clever- 
est and honestest servant ever known. He 
bought as many screws as the ingenious 
author of " Happy Thoughts," but the horse 
he rode was always the best in the 
county, in his own belief. And so, now 
that Edith was to be his wife, she had risen 
immensely in his opinion, and he could not 
make too much of her. 

In the course of the evening a letter from 
Miss Litton was banded to Paul. It ran 
thus: 



" My dear Paul, 

"Fay has told me of your kind 
proposal to her, which took me a little by 
surprise. She is very young, you know ; 



TWO PROPOSALS. 51 

besides, she ought not to come to any deci- 
sion on a matter of the utmost importance to 
her in the absence of her father, whom we 
are daily expecting. The fact that you have 
spoken to her need make no difference in 
your intercourse with us. I shall hope to 
to see you as often as ever ; and you and 
Fay should try to forget the incident till 
the proper time to remember it arrives. 

" Yours as ever, 

*' Hannah Litton." 



'^ What a nuisance 1" thought Paul ; " that 
stupid child has told her aunt, and now 
Edith will hear of it." 

But he shut up the letter quickly, and put 
it in his pocket. 

"Is that from Miss Litton, Paul?'' said 
Edith. " What has she got to say ?" 



E 2 



52 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

" Oh, it's only a little commission she 
wants me to undertake for her," said Pauly 
in an oflf-hand way. 

When Edith retired at night, she thought 
over the whole affair in a dissatisfied way. 
Paul had surprised her in asking the ques- 
tion, and she, thinking that he looked in 
earnest, and that he seemed to be in an un- 
happy state of min(J, had out of pity not 
given an actual refusal, but had asked him to 
wait a year, in the hope that he might change 
his mind. But Paul had taken it as a 
settled thing, and Sir Price was happy 
beyond measure. She felt that the disap-r 
pointment to Sir Price would be much 
greater than to Paul, for she knew by ex- 
perience that Paul was capricious and did 
not feel a disappointment long. Then she 
wondered whether after all it would not be 



TWO PROPOSALS. 53 

a wise thing to marry Paul. Thus she 
reasoned : " I am thirty years old. I ought 
not to be thinking of falling in love. Paul 
is a good fellow ; and as mistress of Boden 
Hall I might be of much use in the world. 
I have never done as much as I ought for the 
good of others." But when a girVs only 
idea of marriage is that in due time it will 
enable her to play the part of Lady Bounti- 
ful, it does not generate much enthusiasm in 
the female breast. Edith, I grieve to say, 
candidly confessed to herself that her bosom 
would have palpitated more rapidly if 
Charlie Hawker had asked her that fatal 
question, instead of Paul Roden. 

However, she tumbled into bed, and tried 
to forget her cares. Vain the attempt! 
Under the open window by her bed-side 
the fragrance of a jessamine in full bloom 



54 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

made her think of Charlie's inevitable 

gardenia. She slept, but she dreamt the 

dreams devoid of meaning which pass 

through Homer's gate of ivory. She was 

the defendant in a breach of promise of 

marriage case, the plaintiff being somebody 

who was neither Paul nor Charlie, but a 

monstrous mixture of the two. The judge 

wore petticoats, and looked like Miss 

Litton's cross old housekeeper. Edith, in 

her vision of the night, was to pay a hun- 

« 
dred thousand pounds damages, and to be 

imprisoned in a third-class railway carriage, 

and kept always travelling up and down 

the road until she paid it. 



55 



CHAPTER IX. 



NEWS FROM THE EAST. 

^* The fiddler plays in the summer eve, 

While the lads dance, and the lasses too : 
Who would care to mope or grieve 
When the lark sings in the summer blue ? 

'' The music flies to the sapphire skies, 
To the lads' heels, to the lasses* breast. 
Dance, dance, while the sunset dies 
Purple and amber, deep in the West." 

rilDDLER CARR was playing one of his 
wildest tarantula dances on the com- 
mon for a group of young folk who had 
made holiday because it was his wedding- 



56 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

day. A happier summer afternoon were 
unimaginable : the sunset began to look 
like a shower of giant roses in a vase of 
emerald, and the curious light slanting 
across the common gave the grass a won- 
drous lovely tinge. The wind was south- 
ern, but only a breath, no stronger than 
that of a child in its sleep. The turf was 
as dry as a Turkey carpet, and ten times as 
pleasant to dance upon. Fiddler Oarr, 
leaning over his wicket, and drawing quaint 
music from the Stradivarius, was a pleas- 
ant sight to behold. On the grass rested 
two gallon jars of ale* and cider, which 
came in very aptly when the swift dance 
ceased for a while, and Fiddler Carr broke 
out into a slow choric movement. 

In the midst of the dance John Carr was 
seen striding across the common as if rather 



NEWS FROM THE EAST. 57 

in a hurry. The fact was, the mail had 
been late, through a railway accident : and 
there was a letter from Bob to his father, 
which, to save time, had been put into 
John's box at the office. So he was coming 
down earlier than he had intended, that the 
old folk might have their wandering son's 
letter before the sunset on their wedding- 
day. , 

" A letter from Bob, father," said John 
Carr, holding it up as he approached the 
garden gate : and the Stradivarius instantly 
burst into a wildly jubilant welcome. 

At that very moment Mrs. Carr was seen 
at her cottage door with gestures that 
suggested supper : and in two minutes more 
they were seated before a comfortable 
homely meal, and Fiddler Carr, laying the 
unopened letter from his son upon the 



58 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

coarse white cloth, said reverently: *'For 
what we are going to receive, the Lord 
make us thankful." 

But he didn't begin to eat. He drank a 
great gulp of home-brewed ale, and opened 
the letter, and read it out. 

*' Dear Father and Mother, and 
Brother, . I have lots of good news for 
you. I shall be gazetted Major in a few 
days : I have been very fortunate, through 
a lot of men leaving the regiment for one 
reason and another. I always wanted to 
show that my father and mother's son was 
a gentleman : just because I always knew 
that my father was a gentleman born and 
my mother a lady born. Now I'm satisfied. 
I shall come home Major Carr: one of 
these days I shall get a regiment. There's 
no knowing what mayn't happen. 



NEWS FROM THE EAST. 59 

" We are ordered home. We are com- 
ing in the troop-ship Calypso. Fm told 
she's a tub: but we shall get home some 
time or other. Shan't I be delighted ? I 
mean to bring you lots of things from India. 
You'll have my little old room ready for 
me in the cottage, won't you, mother dear ?" 

Thus wrote Bob Carr, as true and brave 
a soldier as the Lord of Armies ever creat- 
ed. I wish I could put on my page the 
exultant tones of the Stradivarius on this 
occasion. It rang across the common every 
way : and the neighbours were aware that 
good news had come to Fiddler Carr. 

On the same day a letter from Sir Hugh 
Luttrel had arrived at Westbury Place. He 
wrote very briefly, having had a heap of 
despatches to send off. Thus ran his note 
to his daughter : . 



.0 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

" Home at last, little Fay. Ship Calypso. 
Have you been growing into a nice child 
all these years, my daughter ? Yes, you are 
in good hands, I know. You haven't been 
falling in love without my leave, of course. 
It is too early. I am looking forward to 
taking you to all sorts of places. 

'^ Carr has done well : he is to be a Major. 
I never knew a finer fellow. If we get any 
real fighting, he is sure to come to the 
front." 

Fay was delighted at the thought of her 
father's return : with that delight came the 
added pleasure of having refused Paul 
Roden. She did not like to'think of Paul as 
a husband herself: but she felt certain her 
father would laugh at him altogether. She 
kept in her heart the vision of that father 
of hers, strong and stern and prompt and 



NEWS FBOM THE EAST. 61 

kind, whose natural seat was the saddle, 
whose natural implement the sword. Hero- 
worship (teste Carlyle) is a very fine thing : 
all our gods (save one) were heroes ere they 
graduated. Happy thing for boy and girl 
who find instinctive hero-worship suggested 
by their father and mother. 

Edith came up in the afternoon, looking 
very anxious. She had worried herself 
into the belief that she ought to marry Paul, 
if only for his father's sake. Sir Price had 
loved Edith as a daughter from the first. 
His love was even greater than a father's, 
for Edith seemed to take the place of both 
wife and daughter : she had filled up the 
blank in his life, and had made him a better 
and a wiser man. He could not bear the 
idea of her ever leaving Roden Hall, so he 



62 SWEET AND TWiSNTY. 

had always been dreading her marrying a 
stranger. 

" If Paul would only settle down with her 
here !" he thought. 

In his blind love for his son it did not 
occur to him that Edith, or anyone else, 
would refuse Paul. And now he took 
Edith's answer as the caprice of a woman, 
and thought she would soon change her 
mind about waiting a year, and that the 
wedding would shortly take place. 

At breakfast that morning he had been 
so lively, planning all sorts of things that 
must be done for the wedding : little altera- 
tions in the arrangement of the house . and 
he even chaffed Edith pleasantly about a 
nursery. Poor Edith was wretched. Every 
word he said was giving her pain. She got 
away from the breakfast-table as soon as she 



NEWS FROM THS EAST. 63 

could, pleaded some little morning duties, 
and went into her boudoir (a room which 
Sir Price had fitted up most charmingly for 
her), and tried to think calmly. If she did 
not accept Paul, she saw there would be 
some difficulty about her remaining at Roden 
Hall ; and what would Sir Price do without 
her? Either she or Paul would have to 
leave, for Paul would be too proud to re- 
main in the same house with her after 
having been refused. If he were to go, she 
would feel that she had been the cause of it, 
and thus bring sorrow to Sir Price. 
" What shall I do ?" she thought. " If Sir 
Price had asked me to marry him, I should 
not mind so much, for I could respect him, 
and I could be happy, and could still love 
him in the same way that I do now. But 
oh ! I don't think I can ever marry Paul. I 



64 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

should be always miserable, and always 
striving to hide my misery. Then I should 
not have the same power of making Sir 
Price happy. I don't see what I am to do. 
I will go and talk to Miss Litton about it. 
If anyone can advise me, she can." 

So directly after lunch Edith went over 
to Westbury Place. She found everybody 
in a great state of excitement about Sir 
Hugh Luttrel's return, so she wisely thought 
she would keep her trouble to herself till 
she saw a good opportunity of talking to 
Miss Litton. 

*^ Edith darling, I'm so glad you have 
come," said Fay ; " we've just heard from 
Papa, and he's coming home. He must be 
half-way home by now. Isn't it jolly ?" and 
she began dancing about the room, one of 
her queer fantastic Hindoo dances. 



NEWS FROM THE EAST. 65 

" Do Stand still, Fay, and tell me some- 
thing more about it." 

" 0, I can't be still," said Fay. "There's 
the letter," and she threw it down on the 
table without stopping in her dance. 

" Ah, Miss Fay, you see what your Papa 
says," said Edith ; " he hopes you haven't 
been falling in love. Now, Miss Flyaway, 
I've a good mind to tell tales. What about 
Charlie, eh ?" 

" Edith," said Fay suddenly standing 
still, " that reminds me I have a most de- 
lightful secret to tell you. I've been longing 
to tell you for ever so long. I have hardly 
been able to wait to see you." 

" Why, I only saw you the day before 
yesterday, you little goose ; why didn't you 
tell me then ?" 

VOL. in. F 



.6 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

*' Because it only happened yesterday," 
said Fay. 

" What happened ?" 

" You come out here," said Fay, taking 
Edith's arm and drawing her through the 
open window. " Let us come down to the 
lime walk, and I'll tell you all about it." 

They went down to a pretty lime walk at 
one side of the lawn. There was a single 
row of limes, which threw their branches 
right over the path and on to the lawn, so 
that they formed a pretty avenue. There 
was the buzz of innumerable bees in the 
trees: and a charming picture it made . 
these two tall women walking arm in arm 
under the arch of green, the sun peeping in 
here and there, and occasionally slanting on 
Edith's hair, showing its wonderful bright 
colour. 



NEWS FROM THE EAST. 67 

Fay was flushed with delight. 

"0 Edith," she said, "what do you 
think Fm going to tell you ? I know you'll 
laugh." And she burst into a little laugh 
herself. 

" Why should you be so merry about a 
great secret. Fay ?" 

" You'll laugh too when I tell you," she 
fiaid. "Paul Roden asked me to marry 
him," and she burst out into another merry 
laugh. 

" Asked you to marry him ?" said Edith, 
looking thunderstruck. " When ? Where ? 
Tell me, Fay." She spoke very quickly. 

"Yesterday, here," said Fay, suddenly 
losing her merry tone. " But, Edith dear, 
what is the matter ?" 

" 0, nothing," said Edith, trying to regain 
her natural manner. " Only I was so very 

f2 



68 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

much surprised at what you told me. What 
an odd boy Paul is ! Now tell me, Fay/' 
she said, trying to seem unconcerned, " what 
time yesterday did he ask you . and what 
did you say ?" 

Fay told her everything that happened. 

" And only fancy, Edith," she said, " he 
was so annoyed . for I quite made him under- 
stand I never could like him . that he was 
quite rude to poor Miss Clumber as he 
passed her outside the gate. And do you 
know, Edith, if it hadn't been for Miss 
Clumber, I don't think I should have told 
Auntie anything about it ; for what is the 
good ? I knew it would only trouble her, 
and I felt sure that Paul would not ask me 
again ; but Miss Clumber looked so misera* 
able that Aunt wanted to know what was the 
matter, and then it all came out." 



NEWS FROM THE EAST. 69 

" Why wouldn't you marry Paul, Fay ?" 

"I couldn't, Edith, I couldn't! I am 
sure he loved Sarah Daw once, and I'm 
not going to marry a man who has been in 
love with my servant." 

" What nonsense you talk, Fay ! He only 
gave Sarah Daw a kiss because she had a 
pretty face. It was a stupid thing to do, 
but I daresay he has repented of it long 
ago. 

" If you had seen it as I did, Edith," Fay 
said in the most earnest way, " you would 
not think so lightly of it. He gave her a 
hundred kisses, and held her so close to 
him, and looked into her eyes, and kissed 
her eyes and mouth, and seemed as if he 
could never let her go. 0, I am sure he 
loved her. I never, never can forget that 
day." 



70 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

Edith now knew why Paul did not wish 

her to make explanations to Miss Litton 

at the time that he was forbidden to go 

to Westbury Place again. Poor Edith 

went away sadder than ever. She thought 

it useless to ask Miss Litton's advice^ for she 

had quite made up her mind for herself. 

She would not marry Paul Roden. She 

had always felt that Paul was not the noble 

fellow she wished him to be, but he had 
now gone very low in her estimation. 

"What a pity/' she thought, "that his 

father did not send him to a public school 

and a University ; then he would have had 

some of his nonsense crushed out of him by 

boys in a better position and cleverer than 
himself." 

Edith was right in her judgment. Paul's 

troubles through life came from his weak- 



KEWS FROM THE EAST. 71 

nesses more than from actual vice. It would 
have been better for him if his father, instead 
of bringing him up to the business, had 
brought him up to spend properly the money 
he had amassed. 

By the time Edith reached Roden Hall 
she was no longer angry with Paul, but had 
begun to pity him ; but she had made up 
her mind as to what must be done in the 
future, and she resolved to say nothing for 
the present. 



72 



CHAPTER X 



THE CALYPSO. 

The 'wonders of the deep are mnliitadmons, 
The dangers of the ocean are inuneasurable. 

TUST when everyone was in high expecta- 
tion of the return of Sir Hugh and 
Bob Carr, the following telegram appeared 
in all the papers : " The Calypso burnt at 
sea ; nearly all hands lost," and brought 
anguish wherever there was thought of a 
soldier coming home by that ship. It was 
read at Westbury Place, and in Fiddler 



THE CALYPSO. 73 

Carr's cottage. The news brought dismay 
everywhere. Often enough do we read 
these short keen messages of disaster, but 
only those who are definitely connected 
with them, who have lost in the event some 
friend or relation, know their real meaning. 
Sometimes the disaster is exaggerated, and 
hundreds of unfortunate people are subject- 
ed to terrible anguish by reason thereof. It 
is the way of the world. We must have 
the latest news, whether that news be true 
or false. If a gentleman of inquiring mind 
from the planet Jupiter were to come here 
and take notes, nothing probably would more 
astonish him than that we are ready to pay 
a penny a day (and some of us threepence) 
for the sake of knowing what is done by a 
number of persons who are for the most 
part quite beyond the limits of our possible 



74 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

acquaintance. Open the damp sheet, and 
what do you find ? Railway accidents,, 
murders, long speeches of political people 
to their constituents, bankruptcies, police 
court news, railway and City articles that 
you could easily write yourself if you care- 
fully suppressed your originality. Better 
far to read Homer or Shakespeare, Rabe- 
lais or Swift. To whom is a newspaper of 
the slightest use, except its proprietors ? 

The loss of the Calypso was the talk 
everywhere: but strange enough. Fiddler 
Carr, who, it was supposed, had lost his 
son, and Fay Luttrell her father, would not; 
believe that the terrible loss had occurred. 
When the news first came to Fay, carefully 
broken to her by Miss Litton and Edith, 
she broke into a passion of grief ; then all at 
once she calmed herself and said. 



THE CALYPSO. 75 

** No, Papa is not dead, Auntie. God is 
too good. I have prayed every night to 
God to bring him safe to me, and I know 
He will. I shall see him again ; I know I 
shall." 

Just as the child spoke, there came across 
the^^ a jubilant cry from the only instru- 
ment that could speak significantly in that 
vicinage . Fiddler Parr's Stradivarius. The 
old boy and his fiddle were licensed visitors 
to Westbury Place, but it was not usual for 
them to arrive till evening. To-day how- 
ever he came up the avenue as if he were 
an invited guest, and was by Miss Litton's 
orders ushered into the paiiOj where they 
were standing amid ferns and flowers. 
There he stood gaunt and gray, but full of 
life, with a strange fire in the blue eyes 
whose lustre age could not dim. 



76 SWEET AND TWENTY- 

" I am very sorry to intrude, Madam," 
he said to Miss Litton, standing with his 
fiddle under his arm as if he thought he 
ought to conceal it, " but I have heard sad 
news to-day. The Calypso's burnt, they 
say. If that's true, many and many will 
have to grieve : maybe I have lost a son, 
as good and brave a boy as ever served 
the Queen : maybe Missie has lost a father, 
a glorious gentleman, as we all know. But 
I don't believe it. Miss Litton, Madam, 
perhaps you'll think me off my head : but, 
when I heard the sad story I fell into tears, 
thinking of my dear Bob, and I took down 
the fiddle, as I always do, for consolation, 
and I tried to play a melancholy tune. I 
couldn't. The old fiddle wouldn't have it. 
It made me play all sorts of wild tunes : I 
came up here straight to tell you about it. 



THE CALYPSO. 77 

for my fiddle never was wrong yet, and 111 
swear it wouldn't have played a merry tune 
if the Colonel or my Bob was lost. They'll 
come home safe, Miss Fay. I trust that old 
fiddle as I would the prophet Isaiah." 

Fay, poor child, though she had before- 
hand made up her mind that God was too 
good to let her father be lost to her, was 
wondrously cheered by Fiddler Carr's cer- 
tainty. There was no doubting the voice of 
that Stradivarius. He heartily believed 
this musical assurance that his son was 
alive : Fay was only too glad to have the 
same faith, and accepted it with delight. 
Fiddler Carr had a convincing way with 
him : he believed, and made others believe. 
Of this class are your popular preachers 
and revivalists, and makers of quack medi- 
cines and the like. But Fiddler Carr was 



78 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

above the level of Spurgeon and Holloway, 
4since music is far above cant and pills. 

Fay believed, and regained her joy. 
Hoping, as she had hoped, for the return of 
her father, to see her developed into a noble 
woman (for Fay's were high aspirations), 
she felt that to lose him at such a moment 
would be a misery for life. Fay was singular 
in her liking for her father. Fathers and 
daughters must settle it between them whose 
fault it is ; but in my experience a girl who 
thinks more of her father than of the last 
young man she happened to meet, is quite 
a black swan among young women. Such 
rara avis was Fay. She had formed herself 
on her father, partly in reminiscence, partly 
in ideal: When in the company of Paul 
Roden and of Charlie Hawker, she compar- 
ed them with her father. Paul was a fine 



THE CALTPSO. 79 

fellow in his dass . ^rich, personable, gentle- 
manly. Charlie belonged to no class . was 
poetic and brilliant, and might be rich in time. 
She thought of her father, at the head of 
his column, sword in hand, fearless of death. 
She could not imagine either Paul Roden or 
Charlie Hawker developing into a man of 
. Sir Hugh Luttrel's mould. Fiddler Carr's 
thorough faith in the sayings of his violin 
made Fay wonderfully happy. The child 
had previously had a feeling that her father 
would be saved to take her in his arms and 
tell her how he loved her: but Fiddler 
Carr's musical superstition fortified her be- 
lief, and she felt certain that all would be 
well. So I suppose nobody was less worried 
about the loss of the Calypso than the 
daughter of Hugh Luttrel and the father of 
Robert Carr. 



80 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

Both fairly believed that, whatever might 
happen, the one would see again her soldier 
father, the other welcome his soldier son. 
Pity that faith does not always remove 
mountains, or save people from shipwreck. 



81 



CHAPTER XL 

SOLDIERS AT SEA. 

" We were the first who ever burst 
Into that silent sea.*' 

" pjARR," said Sir Hugh Luttrel, lying 
in a weak and weary state on the 
greenest grass, under a huge tree that spread 
vast shadow in a sunny land, **you have 
saved my life. Some day I may be able to 
make it up to you. How easy it is to be 
lazy in this climate I I suppose we shall get 

VOL. m» G 



82 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

picked up one of these days. Do you feel 
as lazy as I do ?" 

" I should think I did. One might live 
on nothing a day in a place like this ; but 
a little variety would be pleasant. Turtle 
is nutritious, and there's plenty of it ; but I 
would give up all the turtle on this island, 
though there's enough to serve Lord 
Mayors for many generations, to see an 
English ship." 

The Calypso had been burned to the 
waters edge. Sir Hugh and Bob Carr 
and the Captain had remained to the very 
last, seeing everybody into the boats. Then 
they took to a fragment of mast that had 
fallen overboard, and with them came the 
Captain; but he, tired with his.eflEbrt to help 
others, slipped into the ocean and was lost ; 
and Sir Hugh was so weakened that he 



SOLDIERS AT SEA. 83 

certainly would have done likewise, if Bob 
.arr had not resolutely clung to him. Bob 
was in fine form, but that floating through 
the sea with Sir Hugh nearly insensible 
tried him terribly. When they got ashore 
Bob was scarcely conscious, but he was 
conscious enough to kneel on the sand and 

«ay, 

" Thank God IVe saved the Colonel !" 
The Colonel, when he got better, soon 
grew jolly, and tried to keep his companion 
in good spirits. 

"So weVe lost the poor Captain, Bob. 
He was a good brave man, and kept ex- 
cellent order all through that horrible time, 
or we should never have got all the men off 
so well. Poor fellow, he deserved a better 
fate, but let us hope he has a greater re- 
ward than he could have had here on earth." 

g2 



84 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

" I wish I could have saved him, Colonel^ 
but it was as much as I could do to keep 
hold of you, and preserve ray own balance." 

"Yes, lad, Vn\ grateful to you for my 
little daughter's sake. I hope shell be able 
to thank you some day. Poor little girl^ 
she would have missed her father, for I 
know she loves me. Bob : and I hope some 
day she will have a good husband to love : 
I expect she'll marry none but a soldier. 
Bob." 

As Sir Hugh got better he proposed ex- 
ploring the island. 

On no pleasanter island could two gentle- 
men have been shipwrecked. The climate 
was perfect. There was abundant turtle on 
the sands, apparently anxious to be eaten. 

The place was full of wild antelopes, swift 
of foot yet easy to catch, for they evidently 



. SOLDIEBS AT SEA. 85 

had not been chased by human creatures. 
The trees bore delightful fruit, wholly new 
to these voyagers. And there were deep 
quiet caverns in the rock, which seemed to 
have been made for sleeping-places. There 
was no alcoholic liquor ; no crusty old port of 
Sandeman or dry champagne of Roederer : 
but who wants that kind of thing in an 
island of perennial sunshine P 

" This is amusing, you know, Carr,'' said Sir 
Hugh. " We may meet giants or dwarfs, 
and be as lucky as Gulliver ; or we may en- 
counter some lovely Amazons . who knows? 
After all there is some fun in being on a 
desert island. It is quite a new sensation. 
We must get up the topography of the place 
before we are picked up. It would be no 
good going in search of a flirtation, Carr, for 



86 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

if you did you'd have to be content to flirt 
with a female baboon." 

But notwithstanding Sir Hugh's good 
spirits they began to feel a longing to get 
away. They were always watching for any 
speck in the horizon, and for several days 
they saw nothing. 

They dined one delightful afternoon. 
This was the menu : 

Turtle. 
Turned on the yellow sands that morning. 

Haunch of Antelope. 
Rather scorched, for it fell into the fire when roasting, 

Feutt. 
Name unknown ; as superior to pine apple as mangosteen* 

to mangold- wurzel. 

They could not smoke after dinner, for the 
island furnished no substitute for the magic 
weed. They could not drink, for Noah or 
Janus had not brought to the island his un« 



SOLDIERS AT SEA. 87 

paralleled discovery. They lay on the turf, 
untrodden perchance by any human foot, 
and speculated as to the future. Before 
them slept the sea, a silent sheet of sapphire. 

"Suppose nobody ever finds us, Carr," 
said Sir Hugh. " Suppose we are doomed 
to die in this lonely island. How should 
you like it ? Shouldn't we get consumedly 
tired of each other ?" 

" I don't know," replied Carr. " I could 
play Friday to your Crusoe, Colonel. It 
would be an odd thing to pass all the rest 
of one's life without seeing a woman." 

" Yes," said Sir Hugh, " it would. Now 
I want to go home for the sake of a 
child who is just growing into a woman : 
my daughter Fay. But for my longing to 
see her, who I know longs to see me, I 
could stay here lazily the rest of my exist- 



88 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

ence on this planet, if the turtle and ante- 
lope lasted. You, my dear Carr, are 
younger. Of course you left a sweetheart 
in England. We should never have had 
such a fine fellow but for that. You'd have 
been a successful tradesman except for that 
minx, I swear . the principal grocer in Iron- 
town. We all know the teterrima belli 
causal 

"God forbid!" cried Bob Carr. '^No, 
my dear friend, nothing could have made a 
grocer of me. You have made me what I 
am, and I won't forget it : I would die to 
save you from a trouble, dear Sir Hugh. 
But you are right about why I came out. 
My brother John and I were both mad 
about the same girl . a nice little girl 
enough, just a kind of servant-girl, you 
know. John and I were great friends, 



SOLDIERS AT SEA. 89 

always : we tossed up who should ask her 
first : he won, and got a kind of a promise 
from her. So I enlisted, and glad I am I 
did, for I would rather have one year of a 
soldier's life than twenty of any other 
man's." 

"It's a great career, Carr," said Sir 
Hugh Luttrel. "A day's battle is worth 
a year's life. Shouldn't you like to be 
going into action at five to-morrow 
morning ?" 

"Shouldn't I?" said Carr. "Especially 
if there was a ball in the evening, and you 
could jump into the saddle from the last 
waltz. Goodnight^ Lady Blanche^ to your 
pretty partner as she sinks sleepily into her 
carriage. Now then^ Orderly^ bring up my 
horse^ and you give your charger a caress as 
you settle in the pigskin, and say to your- 



90 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

self, Shall we ever come out of this little 
affair r 

*' By Jove, Carr, you are dramatic," said 
the General. "And about this little girl. 
How has she got on ?" 

*' I don't know, quite. I have not had 
much news about her. John hasn't 
married her yet, that's certain : and I 
believe she is still in service at Westbury 
Place. In fact, she is your daughter's 
maid. I mean, if she is unma,rried, to ask 
her to marry me." 

" Quixote ! " cried Sir Hugh, intensely 
amused by the young fellow's loyalty. 
" Do you really mean it, Carr ? Will you, 
an officer in Her Majesty's service, offer 
yourself to a girl who is probably at this 
moment bringing my daughter a cup of 
tea ? You mean it ?" 



SOLDIEBS AT SEA. 91 

** I mean it, most undoubtedly." 
" Then all I can say is, my dear Carr, 1 
hope the girl is married, or will refuse you. 
I admire your Quixotic temper. But you 
can't realize what it would be for a fellow 
like you, brought to the front by a soldier's 
education^ to wed a girl who has all her 
life been a waiting-maid. We all have to 
obey, Carr : but there's a difference be- 
tween obeying the bugle and the parlour 
bell. If you find that girl marriageable, 
my dear boy, you will make a terrific 
mistake in marrying her. No matter : let'a 
hope she'll be Mrs. John Carr, if you and I 
get beyond the region of turtle and ante- 
lope." 

"If the girl is not good enough for me,. 

Colonel, she won't do for John, for he's a 

« 

downright good fellow. But it will be time 



92 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

enough to speculate about marriage when 
we get off this island. I would be content 
to live and die unmarried if I could hear the 
sound of my old father's fiddle again. How 
anxious everyone will be, if they have heard 
anything of the burning of the ship." 

" Good God, Carr, I hear footsteps," said 
Sir Hugh. 

They both started up from a small dingle 
where they had been dining, and there, 
sure enough, was a fine tall fellow striding 
along . an Englishman by his appearance. 

While Sir Hugh and Major Carr had 
been making their strange meal and chat- 
ting, an American yacht had come into the 
bay. Its owner was one Julian Orchard, 
author and diplomatist, who, being out of 
harness for a time, was taking a look at a 
few of the world's neglected islands. He 



SOLDIERS AT SEA. 93 

held that a neglected island, like a neglected 
woman, is often the victim of human stupidi- 
ty. He loved to run into untraversed bays^ 
and break the dreams of a myriad Nereids 
that never had known mankind. > Yachting 
in this fashion was one of his three hobbies ; 
the two others being to drive four-in-hand, 
and to write essays that Elia the essayist 
would have thought almost equal to his 
own. 

The yacht, Daphne^ ran into the bay, and 
Julian Orchard came ashore. He looked 
too big for so small a yacht. He prowled 
over the place, looking east, west, north,, 
south, and enjoying every breath he took 
of the divine delicious summer air. But his 
walk had been all up hill, and he sat down 
to rest where he could see for miles over 
ocean every way, and he said to himself: 



54 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

" I like uninhabited islands." 

It was just as he began to descend a hill 
that Sir Hugh and Carr came in sight. 

It is hard to say who was most 
astonished. 

"I was just thinking," said Julian 
Orchard, " that I like uninhabited islands, 
but I think I might add an Irish corollary, 
and say I like them best when they have got 
inhabitants. Gentlemen, you don't look 
like aborigines, you slightly resemble 
Englishmen. You are shipwrecked mari- 
ners doubtless. You didn't come here for a 
picnic, I'll swear. I am an American, 
Julian Orchard by name, and at your service, 
gentlemen." 

" I am Hugh Luttrel, and this, my friend, 
is Robert Carr. We are Englishmen, and 



SOLDEEBS AT SEA. 95 

officers in Her Majesty's army, and are on 
our way from India." 

" And I daresay you would be very glad 
to find yourselves somewhere else. Here I 
am, a Dem ex machma. My yacht is in the 
bay. Where shall I land you ?" 

"London Bridge," said Sir Hugh, 
promptly. 

" Good," said Orchard ; " 111 do it, Deo 
volente. But what has been your fate, 
mutiny or shipwreck ?" 

"Wreck by fire," said Carr. "The 
Calypso^ a troop-ship. I think most of the 
people will be saved, for discipline waq 
good all through, and we got them well 
into the life-boats. We floated here on a 
spar, so that we were worse off than any- 
body. The skipper is lost; his strength 
failed him in the water." 



96 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

" ril order my yacht to cruise about the 
islands and look for stray boats," said Or- 
chard. '* Meanwhile, may I ask what your 
terra incognita furnishes in the way of prov- 
ender ? I have been living on drier food 
than I care about for the last week, for our 
commissariat ran low. So if you'll get up a 
dinner a la Crusoe, FU make my fellows 
bring up some champagne to digest it." 

"Our meals are monotonous but nutri- 
tious . turtle, antelope, and fruit," said Sir 
Hugh. "Carr cooks; he's a real artist. 
What do you think of the bill of fare T 

** Glorious I" said Orchard. "Not the 
Lord Mayor of London could equal it. Let 
us go forth and capture our dinner at once." 

They went down to the beach, where the 
Daphne^s gig lay on the sand, and Orchard 
gave orders that the yacht should cruise 



SOLDIERS AT SEA. 97 

among the islands in search of the Calypso's 
boats while daylight lasted. Wine and 
other necessaries had been landed, under 
the care of the yacht's steward, a ready 
little fellow, who could turn his hand to 
anything. He stayed to help in preparing 
the repast, and the Daphne's white sails 
were quickly hoisted, and away she fled 
into the blue distance at racing pace. 

"Now, Wisker," said Orchard to the 
steward, " we have to find our dinner. I'm 
tired of potted meats." 

"There ought to be turtle here, sir," 
quoth Wisker. 

"There are," said Carr. "Come, Stew- 
ard, you and I will get a turtle, while thq 
others look for an antelope." 

The great reptiles basked by scores in 
the sun, a sight to make Painter and Birch 

VOL. in. H 



98 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

desperate. I remember, in my boyhood, 
being much amused with Byron's absurd 
lines about "the rage of the vulture, the 
love of the turtle" . . . terrible trash, 
which people used to laud as wonderful 
poetry. Alack, the Bride of Abydos is as 
much out of date now as the Idylls of the 
King and Proverbial Philosophy will be in 
1985. But that turtle used to puzzle me. 
It took me some time to find out that he 
meant a pigeon, and called it by an obsolete 
name that he might rhyme it with myrtle. 
The rage of the vulture might perhaps indi- 
cate an alderman on the bench : the love of 
the turtle the same functionary at the 
dinner-table. 

I am digressing. Our friends did not 
digress. Carr and the steward turned their 
turtle, and dealt with him in scientific 



80LDIEBS AT SEA. 99 

fashion : Orchard meanwhile had got among 
the haunts of the antelope, and shot a fine 
buck with his revolver . very likely the first 
shot ever fired on the island. 

" What a shame it seems, ** he said, " to 
kill beautiful creatures like these for food I 
And yet we cannot do without them : and 
the most beautiful are invariably the best 
eating. A pheasant is nicer than a fowl : 
a Southdown sheep than a Wiltshire hog. 
I feel like Pius Aeneas when he killed 
those seven stags with his swift arrows, with 
that dull fellow, /cfe/5 Achates^ the prototype 
of our modern private secretary, to hand 
him his weapons. How the deuce those 
two fellows took the seven stags down to 
their ships, I never could guess. Either the 

deer were of Lilliput or the heroes of Brob- 

h2 



100 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

dingnag. I shall find this antelope quite 
enough to cany." 

They dined that day, in Homeric fashion^ 
upon the silver sands. Turtle and antelope^ 
admirably cooked by Carr and the steward, 
were washed down by very fine dry cham- 
pagne, and gave complete satisfaction. Then 
came some of the divine fruit which abounds 
in the island : a chestnut coloured fruit the 
size of a St. Michael's orange, white and 
cool as snow beneath the thick bitter rind, 
and with a flavour uniting the highest 

quality of the pine apple and the peach. 

"This is a species of Gardnia," said 
Orchard . " a finer sort than they have in 
Malaya. Laurent Garcin gave it its name. It 
is a cure infallible for every species of fever* 
These with the snow-white pulp are best : 
there are some with a rose-red pulp that are 



SOLDIERS AT SEA. 101 

not half so fine. I shall have a young tree 
or two dug up, with plenty of earth about 
it, and see if I can acclimatize it" 

The yacht Daphne returned with no news 
of the Cdlypso^s boats. They took another 
cruise next day with no greater success, and 
inferred that passing ships had picked them 
up. 

Next day the gay little schooner, only a 
couple of hundred tons, crowded all sail for 
England. 

*' Now for London Bridge," said Orchard. 



102 



CHAPTER XII. 

LONDON BBIDOE. 

^^ London Bridge is broken down : 
Dance over, Lady Lee I" 

Nursery Bhyme* 

WHAT means that old distich, I wonder ? 
Who was the mystic Lady Lee ? 

How came the bridge that divides the dio- 
ceses of London and Winchester to be broken 
down in ancient nursery rhyme, a literature 
of origin untraceable. 

How nursery rhymes came to be invented 



LONDON BRIDGE. lOS 

is a marvel. It seems clear that Oliver 
Goldsmith invented Goody Twoshoes : nor 
am I thereat surprised, for he was a child* 

genius. But who invented Little Red Riding 

« 

Hood or The House that Jack built ? What 
lyrist hit upon " Who killed Cock Robin ?" 
Nobody nowaday can do these things. 
Try it. Go into your own nursery with a 
new nursery rhyme, and the plump young- 
sters will treat you contemptuously. You 
can no more write that gay silly stuff than 
you can catch the humour of Suckling or 
Lovelace, or find an echo of Dorset's ballad : 

t^Withafa-la-la-la-la." 

When Shakespeare wrote : 

*^ In delay there lies no plenty, 
Then come Mas me, Sweet and Twenty,'' 

he was perpetrating nonsense. Agreed. 
The School Boards certify thereto. Mrs. 



104 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

Fawcett endorses the judgment. Yet, 
poetic friend, if you in the soft summer air 
could hit upon anything half so nonsensi- 
cally delicious, would you not be thankful to 
Apollo and the Muses ? 

The Cape was the first point at which the 
Daphne could touch, to telegraph home the 
safety of the shipwrecked voyagers. The 
suspense in England did not last long : all 
the Calypsds boats were safely landed in 
various places, after adventures that I need 
not record. I follow the fate of Sir 
Hugh Luttrell and Bob Carr, who had a 
rapid voyage home, made pleasant by their 
American friend's humour and kindliness. 
He kept his promise literally, and landed 
them at London Bridge. And, when they 
had drunken each other's health and vowed 
eternal friendship, they parted : the Ameri- 



LONDON BRIDGE. 105 

can to an hotel which his countryfolk 
patronized, the Englishmen to catch the 
Irontown express. 

They were barely in civilized garb. 
They had managed to refit roughly at Cape 
Town, and were in suits of tweed, comfort- 
able enough, but not exactly the style that 
sets off Cavalry officers. 

"We look a couple of guys," said Sir 
Hugh, " but I want to get home and so 
do you, and so we'd better have a man 
down from Buckmaster s to put us in order. 
I hope we are safely booked this time. Do 
you know, Carr," he said, as they took their 
place in the carriage, " I feel quite nervous. 
I'd rather be in a cavalry charge than in a 
railway train, any day. When I am in a 
train I feel as if I were being conveyed like 
a parcel of goods, and that I am about as 



106 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

much cared for as if I were inanimate stuff. 
If I were at the head of my regiment in 
battle and were cut down, I should know 
that I was dying for my country ; but if I 
am smashed in a railway train, it is that the 
directors may put more money in their 
pockets/' 

''Ah, we are safe enough now, I trust," 
quoth Bob Carr. " My old father used to 
tell me that what's gpod for nothing comes 
to no harm, and I think that's about my 
case. I suppose I shall hear him scraping 
away at his fiddle as I cross the common to 
our old cottage." 

" You mean to go there first ? You are 
not in a hurry to see your sweetheart, eh ?" 

Bob Carr looked as if he were not at all 
in a hurry. 

"Well," he replied, "I should go 



LONDON BRIDGE. 107 

straight to the old folks in any case: 
and . . . *' 

He hesitated a little, and struck a match 
for his cigar. 

" I know, " said Sir Hugh, laughing. 
"To-morrow will do for the young lady. 
Carr, my boy, now you are coming close to 
the grand event, you are getting doubtful. 
Isn't it so ? Don't let your Quixotic ideas 
tie you for life to a woman unfit for you. 
Think before you leap. I cannot see, from 
your own account, that she has the least 
daim on you. There is nothing more 
terrible than to be linked to some one who 
cannot understand you : and if you make a 
mistake now, from an exaggerated sense of 
honour, you will regret it always. I 
laughed at your notion when you told me 
at first, but now I tell you in real earnest 



108 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

you ought not to act rashly, as much for the 
girl's sake as your own. Come, you know 
I speak as a friend." 

Major Carr pondered awhile. Then he 
said: 

"You don't understand my feeling. I 
loved that girl madly, and felt she ought to 
be mine. I feel so still. I do not know 
that I love her in the same way, but I ought 
not to draw back." 

"Carr," interrupted the General, "you 
are talking nonsense, and you know it. I 
see the mood you are in. All the logic I 
<;ould use would make you more obstinate. 
If I tell you that you were a young fool, 
and she a little flirt ; that you are in the 
prime of life, and she is faded ; that you 
have risen to be a distinguished officer, and 
she is merely a servant-maid ; you will find 



LONDON BRIDGE. 10& 

in every assertion an argument for marrying 
her. Go your way. I shall trust to the 
chapter of accidents. Only don't make an 
offer till you have spoken to your father and 
mother about it." 

" All right, Sir Hugh," said Carr. " I 
know my impetuosity is likely to lead me 
wrong . and your arguments don't convince 
me a bit. If she is faded and a servant-girl, 
it isn't her fault, poor child. Cannot I 
brighten her up and make a lady of her ?" 

" We shall see, " said Sir Hugh. " I 
admire your chivalry, but I like you too well 
to think of your spoiling your life for a . 
crotchet. Talk to your father and mother, 
that's all." 

It was evening when the; train reached 
Irontown Station. Bob Carr, with only a 
black bag for luggage, strode away through 



110 SWEET AND TWENTY. . 

the well-known gas-lighted streets, having 
promised to come to Westbury Place early 
next day. There was more plate-glass in 
the Irontown shop windows than when he 
left England : the streets had more traffic : 
the place had grown. He walked quickly, 
recognizing no one, and unrecognized ; yet 
doubtless he elbowed many old cronies. It 
was a fine moonlight night, and he was glad 
to get beyond the gleam of gas, meditating 
all the while on the words of wisdom ad- 
dressed to him by Sir Hugh. He saw 
their wisdom : but his inborn impetuosity 
made him disposed to do exactly the wrong 
thing in such a case. He had a vision before 
him of that pretty Sarah, all rosy blushes, 
on the day when he saw her last ; he could 
imagine that she would be altogether 
different, wiser perhaps, but not half so 



LONDON BBIDGE. Ill 

winning, a commonplace young woman in- 
stead of a bonnie lassie. 

Bright fell the white moonlight on the 
well-known road that led to the common 
with its colony of cottages, each in its own 
quaint fragrant plot of garden ground. Bob 

Carr opened the gate at the end of the lane, 
and made his way towards the dear old 
house. The windows were alight. As he 
approached he could see the tall bent figure 
of Fiddler Garr leaning over the wicket 
gate. He broke into " double quick ;" and 
as his steps were unheard upon the turf, he 
aroused his father from a fit of meditation. 

" What !" said the old man, surprised. 
"Is it Bob? Thou hast grown a fine 
fellow, lad." 

Bob Carr was not naturally vain, and it 
had not occurred to him that he was an 



112 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

altered man. But he was. His chest had 
widened, his shoulders and thighs grown 
larger, his stride was that of a man to whom 
power gives ease. His grasped his father's 
outstretched hand almost too strongly for the 
Fiddler's delicate fingers. When he entered 
the little parlour he seemed to dwarf the 
cottage, and Mrs. Carr, after a hearty 
motherly hug, exclaimed, 

"Eh, lad, but ye're grown to a giant. 
Pray the Lord ye're as good as ye're big." 

" Fve got a good appetite, mother, I can 
tell you. Ah, it is a pleasure to be home 
again. And how well you both look! 
How's John? I came straight here, you 
know." 

"0, John's set up a nice house, and 
everybody thinks much of him, but he 
comes here whenever he can, and he's sure 



LONDON BRIDGE. 113 

to come to-night because he's hoping you'd 
be here. He's a good lad is John : and he's 
Mr. Carr now you know, and as good as 
Sir Price Roden himself ; but, my faith, Bob, 
you'd make two of him." 

John's hand was on the door at that 
moment. The two brothers met with the 
usual quiet friendly meeting of Englishmen, 
who are none the less friends because they 
do not rush into each other's arms. Two 
brothers were never more delighted to meet 
again under happy conditions than John 
and Robert Carr. 

What a jolly homely supper they had I 
How they recalled the dear old time, when 
one brother grew the flouriest of potatoes 
and the other the delicatest asparagus! 
Everything served up velocius quam coquuntur 
asparagiy as Augustus Csssar used to say. 

VOL. nr* I 



114 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

No *'neat handed Phillis" ever equalled 
Mrs. Carr at the preparation of a supper. 

After supper the boys smoked, and 
Fiddler Carr made low remarks to his 
Stradivarius as he sat in his old arm-chair, 
and the mother fed her eyes on her two 
sons, happy to have them together again, 
both healthy and successful. 

" You're not going away again, Bob, are 
you?" she said. "I hope youli stay in 
England now." 

" I shall take a few months' leave, mother, 
now that the regiment's in dep6t, and 
they've got another adjutant. And that 
time I mean to spend here as much as I can, 
if you and father don't get tired of me." 

Fiddler Carres Stradivarius became quite 
brilliant in its manifestations. 

"Ah, that's right," said Mrs. Carr. 



LONDON BRIDOE, 115 

^^ And BOW you know I should like you and 
John to think about marrying. A man's 
only half a man till he's married. It's quite 
lime you both thought of it. I don't want 
boys of mine to be old bachelors." 

John and Robert looked at each other 
curiously. 

" You see, lads," went on the old lady, 
" you've made me ambitious. You've done 
too well not to do better. I can see there 
isn't a lady in the land, except princesses, 
who must marry fusty foreigners, poor 
things I who need be ashamed to marry 
either of you. And I say it's time you look- 
ed about, and decided what to do." 

Fiddler Carr's accompaniment to this little 
lecture was charming to hear. 

John and Robert Carr sat together for 
some time after the old folk had gone 

i2 



116 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

upstairs. Bob Carr declared he was too 
excited to sleep, and would let his brother 
out by and by. So they sat and smoked, 
for some time, in silence. Presently Bob 
said : 

"Well, what do you think of Mother's 
advice ? I expected you would have been 
married to Sarah Daw long ago." 

" Bob, old fellow, we had best forget 
Sarah Daw, both of us. She isn't true to 
anybody. She has been going on with Mr. 
Paul Roden, till I couldn't stand it any 
longer. I thought first it was only the 
folly of youth ; but she is always ready to 
flirt with anybody. " 

"Are you fair to her, John? Aren't 
you thinking a little that now she is below 
you ? It does not seem to me that because 
you and I have got on in the world we 



LONDON BRIDGE. 117 

ought to look down on Sarah, or any other 
of our old friends." 

" God forbid 1" said John Carr. ** That's 
no more my character than it is yours. Bob. 
I was fully resolved to marry Sarah, though 
Mother told me it would be unwise : but I 
couldn't do it when I found she was as free 
with young Roden as if they were lovers. 
No, Bob : I'd gladly have married the lass, 
or I'd gladly have seen you marry her if 
she liked you better : but she's too flighty 
for an honest man's wife." 

'* I'm sorry for it," said Bob Carr, sadly. 

No more was said. John went off to 
Birklands. His brother sat smoking for 
hours before he went to bed. 



118 



CHAPTER XIIL 

FAY AND HER FATHER. 

Ay, he returns, a dweller in the Orient, 
A governor and master of the mnltitade, 
To kiss that gay delicions little girl of his 
Who has been growing into beauty silently.- 
Growing for him to give away to somebody. 

The Comedy of Dreams. 

QIR HUGH LUTTREL was not in 
quite such haste as Major Carr. 
He was a curious mixture of reflexion 
and impulse. After his railway journey 
he felt a sense of discomfort: so he 



FAY AND HEB FATHER. 119 

told his cabman to drive him to the 
principal hotel, and wait for him. Iron- 
town has itsr hansom : its chief inn is of 
course the Roden Arms. It was about six 
o'clock when the General reached the inn, 
and inquired for a room where he could 
wash away the dust of his railway travel. 
Sir Hugh hated dirt: the men of his 
regiment were notably the cleanest to be 
found anywhere. One day, when the 
Governor-General was complimenting him 
on their smart looks, he said : 

"Cleanliness next to godliness is all 
right for a woman: for a soldier I say, 
cleanliness' next to courage." 

**^Yes," replied the Governor-General. 
" Wellington always said that nobody 
fought like a fop. He was a bit of a fop 
himself in his youth, and Cotton, who 



120 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

would have led cavalry anywhere, was a 
regular dandy, even to the last, and he 
lived to nearly a century. I must say I 
like to see soldiers well brushed and officers 
well dressed." 

Sir Hugh walked down through the 
hall of the great hotel, and looked out into 
the moonlight. Another gentleman was 
also lounging there: it was Sir Price 
Roden, who had been at some meeting, and 
was expecting his carriage to take him 
home to dinner. In the bright moonlight, 
they could see each other well. The 
General took small note of Roden, who 
however was struck by the erect figure and 
easy carriage of Sir Hugh. The latter 
was thoughtfully surveying the bustle of the 
crowded street, and comparing the agoniz- 
ing strife of an English town with the 



FAY AND HER FATHER. 121 

deliberate quietude of one in India. 
Presently he walked to his cab, and said to 
the driver, in a clear tone easily heard, 

" Westbury Place. Miss Litton's." 

It flashed upon Price Roden whom he 
had seen, and at dinner he told Edith and 
Paul. He was more courteous than ever to 
Edith now, having quite made up his mind 
that she would be his daughter-in-law. 

When the hansom reached Westbury 
Place, Fay was sitting with Miss Litton and 
the governess. They had been in electric 
expectation of the General for days: and 
Miss Litton had regularly put dinner an 
hour late, in order to allow for the caprices 
of the down trains. When the door-bell 
rang, up jumped Fay, crying, 

" This must be Papa." 

Yes, little Fay. Papa at last. As he 



122 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

entered the room she thought him hand- 
somer than ever. He kissed Miss Litton's 
diamonded hand, saying, 

" Hannah, you look younger than ever. 
Here I am, you see, safe enough after 
plenty of adventures. All over now: I 
shan't go out again unless there is war, 
which isn't likely. And so this is Fay. 
You used to be a tiny thing. Fay, and now 
you're quite a young woman. I hope 
you're as wild as ever." 

Fay was happy indeed, sitting on her 
father's knee, and playing with his long gray 
moustache. 

" Are you ready for dinner, Hugh ? " 
asked Miss Litton. 

"As to appetite, yes," he said. "I can't 
put myself into a dress coat, you know. I 
bought some rough toggery at the Cape, 



FAY JLND HER FATHER. 123 

and had no time to do better in London. I 
hope youll forgive me for a day or two." 

"Goodness, Hugh, you don't think we 
care about your dothes now we've got you. 
No* doubt there's a very good tailor in 
Lrontown.'' 

" No doubt there is," laughed the General, 
" almost as good as this Gape Town fellow, 
who has put me into a tweed sack, so that 
I don't know my arms from my legs. No : 
I telegraphed to my man before I left town 
to set to work on some civilised clothing at 
once, and I daresay I shall get something 
fit to wear by this time to-morrow." 
-"That seems very soon. Papa," said Fay. 

" They've only to set a lot of men at 
work," replied Sir Hugh. 

They had a pleasant dinner, and Sir 
Hugh told lots of adventures. After- 



124 SWEET AHD TWENTY. 

wards, in the drawing-room. Fay gave him a 
few songs to the gaitar, with which most 
poetic instrument she had grown familiar 
under Edith's teaching. As the General 
sipped his Mocha, with a soup9on of cura9ao, 
and looked at dear old Miss Litton, the per- 
fection of a beneficent fairy, and heard 
Fay sing gaily to her guitar, he felt that he 
had a pleasant reception. Miss Clumber, 
always discreet, had discreetly slipped away. 
Fay sang : 

O golden days that I have known 

Amid the roses, happy child ! 
With fragrance throngh the foliage blown^ 
And dreams that came to me alone, 
And merry music always new 
From gay birds singing, as they flew, 

Wayward notes and wild I 

O golden days 'tis mine to know 

When Love's sweet lesson I shall learn. 
No fragrance of the rarest flowers. 
No visions of the laziest honrs, 



FAY AND HER FATHER. 125 

No music of a myriad birds, 
No melody of poet*s words, 
Tells all for which I yearn. 

" Who taught you the guitar, Fay ?" said 
her father. "I am very fond of it, and 
really you play well." 

"Miss Tracy, Papa, a great friend of 
Auntie's and mine. I know you'll like her, 
she is so very nice. I don't know how to 
explain who she is ; but I can tell you what 
she is . a dear friend, who has done me a 
world of good. I can't help chattering in 
praise of Edith, Papa." 

" And you are right," said Miss Litton. 
" Edith is an exception to modern young 
ladies. She is frank as a boy and as soft as 
the south wind. Edith is my great pet, after 
you, you know, Fay." 

As they were talking, the door bell was 
heard to ring. 



126 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

"Another arrival," said Miss Litton. 
*' Who is it this time I wonder ?^ 

It was no less a person than Charlie 
Hawker, who found himself suddenly on 
business at Irontown, and thought the hos- 
pitable Miss Litton would take him in. Of 
course he never imagined that Fay's father 
would be on the premises. It was a little 
awkward, but the General and Charlie soon 
understood each other. 



127 



CHAPTER XIV. 

CONFIDENCES. 

" Are girlfl any use in the world, I wonder ?" 

Once a petulant maiden said. 
'^ If there weren't any girls it would be a blunder,'' 
Quoth a boy who kissed her the great tree under. 
" For how in the world should we be wed ?" 

** "ORING me up some coffee in the morn- 
ing, Fay, and we'll talk about things 
in general before I turn out. I like to be 
lazy in the morning, now that I haven't to 
listen to the bugle.'' 



128 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

" So Fay, who liked nothing better than 
to serve those she loved, brought her father 
some strong coffee and dry toast at about 
eight o'clock, . and, having heard of the 
matutinal weaknesses of heroes, she also 
armed herself with a flask of cognac and 
some soda water. The General was amused. 

'' You are thoughtful. Fay," he said. " I 
will take the coffee first, with a spoonful of 
brandy in it; the rest may wait. Now sit down 
by my bed-side and chatter ; I don't want 
to catechise you : I want you just to tell me 
all about the people here who at all interest 
you. I'm your father and your friend, you 
know, my darling ; if you're in love, or any- 
body's in love with you, tell me ; I'll promise 
you that I'll make you happy, if it can be 
done." 

" Dear Papa !" she said, taking his hand 



CONFIDENCES, 129 

in both hers, " I quite knew you would be 
kind to me. Tm not a bit in love with 
anybody, that's the fact. I have been try- 
ing my best to make myself ready for you. 
I want to be worthy of you. One man 
has asked me to marry him, Paul Roden ; 
but I couldn't, I saw him once making love 
to a servant girl . my own maid." 

" And who is this gay young cavalier who 
arrived last night ?" 

"0, he is a relation of Auntie's . a 
capital fellow, but with no intentions. I am 
not at all afraid of his asking me to marry 
him ; it would take a widow to marry him. 
But he really is very nice, Papa, and I am 
sure you will like him.*' 

"And you don't?" 

*'0 yes, Ilikehimwell enough. Butwhat's 
the good ? When I marry, I must marry 

VOL. ni. K 



130 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

a man, not merely something in the City. I 
could marry a poet, or a soldier, or a mem- 
ber of Parliament, if he were honest, or a 
parson, if he really believed in Christ : but 
to marry a man who buys and sells, whether 
it's wholesale or retail, seems to me dreadful. 
Auntie laughs at me, and Miss Clumber 
says my opinions are wicked. What do you 
say. Papa?" 

"I say that your ideas are decidedly 
heterodox. Fay, but unluckily I agree with 
them. You are only your father in petti- 
coats. Pity we couldn't mount you on a 
charger, and make you a comet of horse." 

" Ah," she exclaimed, '' shouldn't I like 
that ? It is a shame that boys have so many 
more chances than girls.** 

"Don't look at the thing in that way, 
Fay : girls are wanted to cheer the boys. I 



CONFTOBNCES. 131 

fought twice as well in India when I 
thought of my little daughter." 
** Dear Papa," she said. 



k2 



132 



CHAPTER X\^ 

BUSINESS AND PLEASURE. 

" Gold and iron are good 

To buy iron and gold : 
All earth's fleece and food 
For their like are sold." 

ElfEBSON. 

i^HARLIE HAWKER had business in 
iron, which brought him into contact 
with the house of Roden, Son, & Carr, and 
he was just the fellow to feel gratified that 
it would also bring him into contact with 
Fay and Edith. He flirted with both these 



BUSINESS AND PLEASURE. 1 33 

young ladies in his own daring way, and 
wrote to both verses which they duly show- 
ed to each other. His keen observation of 
such matters proved to him that Paul Roden 
had also an admiration for both ; and the 
idea of making Paul jealous added greatly 
to his amusement. 

Breakfast at Westbury Place was pleasant 
this morning. The windows of the patio 
were open, and there entered a divine 
fragrance of tropical flowers. Charlie, a 
chartered libertine, had caught Fay when 
she had come down from her father's room, 
and induced her to pluck him a white 
flower for his buttonhole, and to let him 
put a red one in her bosom. The silver 
kettle simmered, and the spirit-lamp filled 
the air with its quaint Oriental aroma ; the 
little old lady of Westbury Place took her 



134 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

seat, looking a year younger since Sir 
Hugh had arrived: and the General him- 
self, still in his homelysuit of tweed from the 
Cape, came down prepared to enjoy an 
old-fashioned English breakfast of crisp 
rashers, brown toast, eggs fresh from the 
hen-house, brawn that was a picture, Mocha 
coffee, and orange pekoe tea. 

" This is like home after exile,** he said, 
*' cousin. I never drank tea for breakfast 
in India ; always either claret or Bass. And 
those crisp rashers of bacon I Wouldn't 
they have been a treat ? However, one can 
always breakfast on buffalo hump, and Lord 
Mayo used invariably to take a few with 
him on his travels." 

^^ Hippopotamus is said to be finer eating 
than buffalo," remarked Charlie Hawker. 

*^ Very likely ; I never tasted it. Buffalo 



BUSINESS AND PLK ASUEE. 1 35 

hump is superior to turtle, in my judgment ; 
but just now I would rather eat good home- 
ly bacon and eggs than any such outlandish 
food/' 

" I mean to feed you well, Hugh," 
said Miss Litton, " to keep you here as long 
^ I can. That's the proper way to get hold 
of a man, I am told." 

"I don't know about that," quoth the 
.General, twisting his long gray moustache. 
*' I have known young fellows . of course 
they were very young . prefer a pretty ^1 
to a Perigord pie. As for my going away, 
well, they want me at the Horse Guards ; 
but I'm not going to town till Buckmaster 
makes me presentable. Just fancy me in 
St. James's Street in this dress. The men 
at White's would be betting whether I was 



136 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

an American swindler or an Australian 
digger/' 

Just at this moment, while Sarah Daw 
was handing a cup of tea to Fay, another 
servant entered the room and announced 

" Major Carr," 

Sarah set down the cup awkwardly. 
Her eyes fell on the man she had rejected. 
She was struck with dismay. What a differ- 
ence ! What an air of knowing the world 
well, of being equal with anybody I Poor 
Sarah shrunk into herself like a snail 
into its shell, feeling somehow that Bob 
Carr had passed beyond her reach. She 
thought it would be easier to marry Paul 
Roden. The soldierly look of the young 
officer, his air of independence and command, 
took her by surprise. She never dreamt that 
he had come home with a full resolve to 



BUSINESS AND FLEASUBE. 137 

renew his offer of marriage ; and that even 
now, notwithstanding all he had heard, his 
judgment was in a state of suspense. 

Sarah managed to slip out of the room 
while greetings were exchanged, and got 
another servant to take her place. She was 
a favourite in the servants' hall, especially 
now that she was not so provokingly pretty ; 
her comrades formed the conclusion, from 
slightly imperfect knowledge, that "she 
hadn't been behaved well to." So she got 
more consideration than Jaques's stag, and 
indeed was regarded as rather a heroine of 
tragedy. 

" Of course you have breakfasted, Carr," 
said Sir Hugh. " Still I daresay a 
second meal won't hurt you. Come, sit 
down by my daughter. Fay, and try to pro- 
duce another appetite. Carr is an old 



138 SWEET AND TWENTY, 

campaigner, Cousin Hannah, and never fails 
at his knife and fork.*' 

" I am delighted to welcome Major Carr," 
said Miss Litton, '^ and so I am sure will be 
everyone in the neighbourhood. We don't 
often get a lion of our own, Major Carr : I 
expect the Mayor and Corporation are 
already plotting a dinner against you." 

Bob's face was a study. While he listen- 
ed to Miss Litton he had been furtively 
glancing at Fay, and wondering in his own 
heart whether any other creature so abso- 
lutely beautiful had ever been created. At 
the mention of the Mayor's probable dinner, 
he exclaimed, 

" Good gracious ! I hope not. Why, I 
should have to make a speech. Fancy iny 
making a speech, Sir Hugh 1" 

" I have heard you make one or two 



BUSINESS AND PLEASURE. 139 

very good ones. That day at Raj pore, 
when you cried out, ' Now, boys, right wheel, 
and be quick with your sabres !' you pro- 
duced a finer effect than most orators I have 
known." 

" That's not the style for a Mayor and 
Corporation," said Charlie. "They want 
platitudes . . . loyalty to the Queen, devotion 
to the Service, Britons never shall be slaves, 
and so on. That last sentiment is horrid 
nonsense, as the British . which means the 
Welsh and the Cornish-r-have beien slaves 
to the English ever since they came over 
here. But I'll write you a municipal speech, 
Major Carr, if you want one. It's quite 
easy." 

" I don't think I could face it," said Carr ; 
" but they won't be such fools, I hope. My 



140 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

brother John's one of the lot: he won't 
stand it." 

" Won't he ?" said Miss Litton maliciously. 
" Why, he would very likely be knighted, 
especially if the Prince could be induced to 
come. If you want to escape, Major, plead 
urgent private affairs, and get away at once." 

*' I don't think I'll let them drive me 
away just yet," said Bob Carr, whose second 
breakfast was much interrupted by the fact 
that he couldn't help looking at Fay LuttreL 
Her magical beauty, her easy pliant move- 
ment, the language of her lovely eyes, set 
inflammable Bob on fire. 

Sarah, whom he positively had not 
noticed. when he came into the room, seem- 
ed a dowdy as he recollected her years 
before, now that Fay Luttrel, tall and 
graceful, witty and musical, with a rose on 



BUSINESS AND PLEASURE. 141 

her cheek and a laugh in her eye, came 
upon him like a'vision of wonder. 

Only one person observed this . it was 
Charlie Hawker. 

" Not a bit of it, soldier," he said to him- 
self. *' You're not good enough for that 
beauty. She's real Dresden china, painted by 
the supreme artist. You'll have to be content 
with rougher crockery," 

Charlie, who had not yet met the widow 
whom Fay predicted for him, began to 
think whether . after all . this beautiful 
girl, if he could win her, would not make 
him a perfect wife. 

" I'll be hanged if Roden or Carr shall 
have her," he murmured. 

Meanwhile Bob Carr was meditating, in 
quite a different way. 

" I could love her better than my life," he 



142 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

thought, *'but the Chief wouldn't like it, 
and it would be a shame to try to make 
her love me. I'll get away as soon as I 
can, and not come back till she's married to 
somebody." 

A hard resolve to keep. Fay was magnet- 
ised. She liked him better than either of 
the others. He was a soldier, just the same 
sort as her father. What was it to her 
that he happened to be the son of old 
Fiddler Carr, the master of the Stradivarius ? 
Had he not been with the father whom she 
worshipped in fights and tiger-hunts and 
perils by land and sea ? 

When Fay reflected on the three young 
men whose circles of life had osculated hers, 
if we may use a mathematical simile, she 
came to the rapid conclusion that Paul 
couldn't make up his mind if he would, that 



BUSINESS AND PLEASURE. 143 

Charlie wouldn't if he could, and that Bob 
Carr both could and would make up his 
mind with promptitude and decision. She 
took to him quite naturally. After break- 
fast that morning, when Charlie had to go 
and attend to business in Irontown, she led 
her father and Carr out intp the charming 
secluded gardens of Westbury Place, and 
chattered about her dreams and her fancies, 
and all the legends wherewith her agile 
imagination peopled the great trees. 

*' The cedar is my great friend. He has 
told me all his secrets. See, Papa, how 
fond he is of me." 

She was away in the heights of the blue 
green boughs, more like a bird than a girl. 
They heard her singing far above, some gay 
nonsense of her own. 

Sir Hugh and Carr looked at each other. 



144 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

" What a lovely lady your daughter is !" 
said Carr, ^'A wild flower sweeter and 
fairer than anything that grows under glass. 
I must take flight from her fascinations, Sir 
Hugh. She would drive me mad in a 
week." 

Sir Hugh, who was quietly smoking a 
vast meerschaum, was much amused. He 
knew impetuous Bob Carr well by this time. 
He had found him the very brother of 
Shakespeare's Hotspur, of fiery Rupert. He 
had seen him drive his horsemen straight 
through the enemy, spring from his elephant 
to shoot a tiger with his revolver, jump 
over-board in a stormy sea to save a man 
from drowning. Carr never thought twice. 
The General saw what was in his mind, and 
said, deliberately, 

" Why should you run away from her? 




BUSINESS AND PLEASURE. 145 

If you and she should like each other, there 
is no man in the world whom I would 
rather see her husband. Td rather she 
married a soldier than anybody else, be 
sure : and you and I are old friends now, 
my dear fellow, and have had some tough 
tussles together." 

"All very fine, Sir Hugh," said Carr; 
" and that you are willing to accept me as 
your equal is a glorious thought to me. But 
then. General, Tve nothing but my pay, 
remember." 

"Well, Fay's got plenty. Her mother 
had a heap of money ; Fve never had time 
to spend it. If I'd been invalided, I meant 
to buy an estate in England, and teach 
people how to live as owners of land. I 
shall do it, if I live long enough. Then 
Miss Litton's property all comes to me first, 

VOL. in. L 



146 SWEET AND TWBNTT. 

and then to Fay . so you wouldn't starve, 
Bob." 

"Don't you see. General, all you say 
makes it all the harder ? Supposing your 
daughter could fancy me, she would bring 
me all that property, I daren't think of 
it." 

" Well, Carr," said the General, puflBing 
his smoke slowly between his words, as by 
way of emphasis, " the child will have to give 
it to somebody, unless, like some women with 
money, she doesn't marry at all, out of 
sheer suspicion. I don't much like the idea of 
her marrying an imbecile diseased peer for the 
title of Countess, or a man who has plenty 
of money himself, just that the two may 
have together more money than they can 
possibly, spend wisely. What is mere money 
after all ? Would you like to be a coward 



BUSINESS AND PLEASURE. 147 

with a million a year ? If you had a daugh- 
ter, wouldn't you think more of the man 
she thought of marrying than of his money ? 
Now I don't know a bit whether you and 
Fay would suit each other: that's your 
affair, entirely ; but I know you to be a man 
of honour and courage, and so I say, try 
if you like, only I don't mean to let Fay 
marry till she's twenty . and even that I 
should think too early, but that her Indian 
birth has ripened her early." 

Bob Carr was on the point of making a 
reply when Fay descended upon them 
suddenly, saying, 

" Papa, there's my dear friend Edith 

Tracy coming, and with her Paul Roden, Sir 

Price Roden's son, you know. I can see them 

a mile off from the top of my dear old cedar. 

You'll like Edith, Major Carr ; you ought to 

l2 



148 SWEET AND TWENTY 

fall in love with her ; I should, if I were a 
man. Now, Papa, come with me down 
this yew walk, and leave Major Carr to his 
cigar. " I want to tell you something." 
When they had diverged, Fay said : 
" I want you to tell me what you think 
of Paul Roden, Papa. You know I told 
you he asked me to marry him. Even if 
he had not done what I saw him doing, I 
don't think I could like him. He doesn't 
seem able to make up his mind about any- 
thing. You'll tell me what you think of 
him, won't you. Papa ? And 0, do tell me 
how you like Edith. Talk to her, please. 
She is so charming." 

Paul Roden and Edith had come just in 
time for lunch, from which, alas ! Charlie 
Hawker was absent. Perhaps it was as 
as well for some people. Charlie had a 



BUSINESS AND PLEASURE. 149 

clever capacity for reading what people 
meant, and it was possible that he might 
have divined something of the position 
between Paul and Fay and Edith. He was 
just the sort of fellow to do it. 

Paul still lived in his fool's paradise, 
imagining Edith would marry him. He 
was quite brilliant at lunch, but somehow 
did not get on very well with either Sir 
Hugh or Carr. He felt that after all he, 
a man who lived on his father's earnings, 
was inferior to men who faced death for 
England. Since the days of Homer, and 
probably before, the soldier has been held 

greater than the shopkeeper. 

But Sir Hugh was delighted with 
Edith. Her perfect ladyhood, her real 
loveableness, enchanted him. He saw how 
much good so fine a creature must have 



150 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

done his little Fay. When he and his 
daughter were left alone again, he said to 
her: 

" Well, I would not advise you to marry 
Roden, Fay. He is not resolute enough for 
my taste. He is of two minds in two 
minutes." 

"And what do you think of Edith^ 
Papa?*' 

"Why, if I weren't such an old fellow I 
should be inclined to ask her to marry me* 
She's as bright as a diamond and as good as 
gold." 

" Do you consider yourself a very old 
fellow ?" asked Miss Fay, archly. 

During the morning there had been a 
scene in the servants' hall at Westbury. 
Sarah was in what cook called "high 
strikes." When she had seen Bob Carr, 



BUSINESS AND PLEASURE. 151 

she ran down into the kitchen and begged 
another servant to take her place. She 
then burst out into a violent fit of crying. 

She had been for years treasuring up the 
belief that Bob Carr would come home 
some day and marry her. She had suffered 
terribly when she heard of the burning of 
the ship, and had fretted so much about it 
that she had become weak and out of 
health ; but when she heard of Bob's proba- 
ble arrival, she was in high spirits, and 
looked forward to what she considered to 
be an end of her troubles. She thought 
how she would tell Bob, at the very first 
opportunity, how badly John and Paul had 
behaved to her, and how unkind everybody 
had been. But she was not prepared to 
see such an alteration in Bob's appearance. 

The old cook, who had always taken her 



152 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

part, and thought Mrs. Gniffley rather hard 
on her, said, 

"Now, Sarah, don't take on so. What 
can be the matter with you ? You haven't 
been yourself at all lately. Don't you 
think you want a little medicine, my dear ?" 

"Her old sweetheart's just come in," 
whispered another servant to the cook; 
" that's what it is." 

" Poor dear !" says the cook ; " she have 
been badly treated, she have. As I says, 
it's a shame, it is, that these 'ere young men 
go a-running after the girls, a-making believe 
they're in love with them, and then, when 
they gets a rise in the world, snaps their 
fingers at them. There never was no harm 
in her, there wasn't, I'll warrant; but all 
these young men went a-looking after her 
pretty face, and a- wanting to kiss her, and 



BUSINESS AND PLEASURE. 153 

then let her bear the blame, which Mrs. 
Gruffley she were hard on hen And my 
opinion is as Mr. Roden he ought to have 
come down handsome when he got her into 
that there trouble : not that I consider the 
poor dear was wicked to take a kiss, and no 
mischief need have come either, but for 
young miss ; but children will be children, 
and tell all they sees. And these here Mr. 
Carrs, they say, was both mad on her, but 
is now too high and mighty to speak to 
her. Thank God as I was led into no 
temptation of kissing ; but if I was, 1 knows 
as how they should have paid for it. But I 
always stuck to my catechism, which was all 
I got learnt at school, and I never had 
nothing to do with no kissing nor pomps 
and vanities, as they calls 'em . I leaves my 
betters alone. But there . cheer up, poor 



154 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

dear ; perhaps youll many a good honest 
hard-working fellow, with none of these 
mighty grand ways about him." 

As this was exactly what Sarah did not 
want to do, it did not console her much, 
and she was bursting out afresh when Mrs. 
Gruffley's step was heard. As it was well 
understood that Mrs. Gruffley's cure for 
hysterics was rather decisive and unpleas- 
ant, Sarah was hurried into another room 
out of her way. 



155 



CHAPTER XVL 



BOB CABR*S ADVENTURES. 



'^ O cedar by the south wind stirred, 
Noblest of every tree ! 
I manrel much what wondrous bird 
Climbers might find in thee/' 

A DAY or two later on Major Carr came 
to Westbury Place. What had been 
foreseen had occurred; General Sir Hugh 
Luttrel, K.S.I., and Major Carr, could not 
be allowed to escape the attentions of the 
municipality of Irontown. Bob Carr was 



156 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

in dismay : he hated the notion ; so he 
came down to talk to his commanding 
officer. And on his way he had a curious 
meeting. The autumn winds were moan- 
ing ; the autumn leaves turning innumera- 
ble colours. He had taken a short cut from 
his father's cottage to Westbury Place, and 
he met a girl in the lane. Her air was 
dejected. It was not until he had looked 
at her twice that he became aware it was 
Sarah Daw . his old sweetheart, the girl 
who had sent him to India, and whom he 
had dreamt of there, the girl whom he had 
resolved to marry when he came back. 
His heart smote him. Was he responsible 
for this poor child's depressed despondent 
look ? Here was he, rising in the world, 
with a chance of marrying the General's 
daughter; how Sarah must feel the 



BOB carr's adventures. 157 

difference ! He stopped to speak to her. 

She made him a kind of mock curtsey. 
Poor Sarah, she was very miserable, and all 
through one venial fault, the result of 
neglected education. She could not bear 
her troubles. Indeed, at this very instant, 
feeling her position intolerable, she was 
rushing away to Irontown Station, meaning 
to hide herself somewhere from all who 
knew her. 

" What is the matter, Sarah ?" he asked, 
and took her hand in friendly fashion. 
" We have not had a word yet since I came 
home. Come ; we are old friends ; why do 
you look so unhappy?" 

"I am unhappy," said Sarah. "Once 
there was somebody to love me . more than 
I liked ; there was you, and John, and Mr* 
Paul. Now there's none of you cares for me. 



158 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

I know all about it. I'm not a lady. Fm 
a mere servant maid : and I used to be 
pretty once ; and it's a pity I ever was. 
Now I'm going away for ever ; and. if you 
hear of me drowned in the Thames or the 
sea, don't be astonished." 

Bob Carr saw her mood at once. 

" Come with me," he said, in a tone of 
command that would have moved a regi- 
ment. He turned on his road, and walked 
Sarah, half unconscious, down to his father's 
cottage. Fiddler Carr was not at home; 
his wife was. 

" Mother," said Bob Carr, '' will you take 
charge of Sarah Daw ? I found her in the 
lane, and she said she was going away by 
rail somewhere, being unhappy. I'll go 
across to her mother's cottage and tell her 
she's here." 



BOB cabb's adventubes. 159 

This he did accordingly ; and in due time 
Sarah, between the joint influence of Mrs. 
Daw and Mrs. Carr, was reduced to a state 
not far differing from that of a jellyfish. 

Bob Carr did not want to meet his old 
sweetheart that morning. It brought back 
unpleasant reminiscences. He was striding 
away towards Westbury Place with the 
thought of Fay Luttrel radiant within him, 
and he met this poor dejected girl, like a 
ghost of his youth, going she knew not 
whither. It was hard upon Bob, especially 
as he had never done Sarah any harm. He 
had only been too loyal to her, if too much 
loyalty is possible. 

So, when he turned back toward West- 
bury Place, he was rather heavy-hearted. 
He felt as if he had no right to a pleasant 
prospect of happiness while this little girl 



160 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

was in such distress. Yet, if anybody be- 
sides herself was really answerable for her 
misery, it was Paul Roden before him, it 
was even John Carr before him. Paul 
Roden's lax conduct had spoilt her life: 
Major Carr did not yet see that it was also 
likely to spoil his own. 

He loitered on toward Westbury Place. 
There was a delicious odour of flowers in 
the air, born of multitudinous honeysuckle 
and clematis and wild rose, and the larks 
were alive in the sky. He pondered as he 
went. He had come back with intent to ask 
Sarah to marry him. Ought he not to do it ? 
He sat down on the stump of a tree and tried 
to think out the question : but somehow he 
could not. Just because Sarah Daw had 
grown dowdy and half imbecile, this chival- 
rous young fellow thought he ought to marry 



BOB CARRES ADVENTURES. 161 

her: just because Fay Luttrel was pretty 
and clever and good and wealthy, he thought 
he ought to refuse her. He tortured him- 
self with this problem for about half an 
hour, and then he started toward Westbury 
Place. The magnet there was too strong 
for him to resist. And after all, when he 
came to reflect, he was in no wise bound to 
rescue Sarah from her self-imposed trouble, 
even if marrying her would do it, which was 
very doubtful. 

As he walked faster he thought more 
clearly, a point worth noting as to our human 
mechanism. Sit by the fire and brood over 
your cares, and youll soon be as melancholy 
as a gib-cat and contemplate suicide. Take 
your stick and whistle your dogs and start 
out, in defiance of east wind or hail, at five 

VOL. m. M 



162 . SWEET AND TWJCNTX. 

miles an hour, and youll soon forget that 
there is a care in the universe. 

Bob Carr, having arrived at Westbury 
Place, and finding Miss Litton alone, told 
her at once of his interview with Sarah, and 
of the course he had taken. He also told 
her, what she had well known before, 
that Sarah might have married either his 
brother or himself, and that she was the 
cause of his enlisting. 

"She has done some good then, this 
foolish girl," said Miss Litton. "To all 
appearance, Major Carr, you would never 
have been a distinguished soldier if this silly 
child had not refused to marry you. I am 
an old woman, Robert Carr, and I have 
noted the way in which events go with some 
attention ; and it is my opinion that there is 
no occurrence which gives us trouble at the 



BOB cabr's adventures. 163 

moment that is not designed to do good to 
lis after. You have never read Voltaire, of 
course : the witty Frenchman takes exactly 
the opposite view. Let him. I am an 
Optimist, and my long experience of life 
teaches me that the best thing is that which 
happens. You have done quite rightly 
about Sarah Daw : I shall at once send a 
messenger with a note to her mother to tell 
her she is to remain at home for the pre- 
sent. After what you have told me and 
what I have heard elsewhere I am not sur- 
prised that the girl is in a miserably ex- 
cited state : but I will see that she comes to 
no harm, so far as it lies in my power. I 
suppose, as long as the world lasts, there 
will be foolish boys and foolish girls doing 
foolish things : and, worse than that, there 
are foolish writers of novels who make girls 

m2 



wsxr. 



gn .''^ 






kimL 
l#ui ^Ji. -vrao: mLiiiirmam ±g 



i4V? 



Hs^ jbinui ssE ousBBEc sr BSd&fs 



.# ;. 

> 



ii^/r^m^ly apMe of imdnrtamTiii g the 
uUfW$ whkh dwell in the ndnds of men of 
/.liltfir^. Edith indeed had a frank tern- 
pm and A lovo of general knowledge like 




BOB CARRES ADVENTURES. 165 

that which you find in a boy from a 
public school : her mind had a masculine 
youthfulness that quite charmed Sir Hugh 
Luttrel. It was what I may venture to call 
this gentle manliness of Edith's which made 
her feel it impossible to love Cousin Paul, 
who had none of the directness and solid 
strength which a woman of that kind re- 
quires. 

Bob Carr saw Sir Hugh and Edith 
sauntering under the limes, and thought it 
would be a shame to interrupt them. So, 
as their backs were turned toward him, he 
went across the lawn to Fay's favourite 
cedar ; and, as he stood below it, he heard 
her gaily singing high in the air : 

** The Dawn's red fingers 
Slant o'er the sky : 
The Maiden lingers . 
I wonder why. 



166 SWEET AND TWENTY, 

" Short grow the shadows 
On wood and stream, 
They leave the meadows 
An emerald dream. 

*^ The bright brooks glitter 
Beneath the sky ; 
The gay birds twitter 
And heavenwards fly. 

" Ah, perfect beauty I 
If I may woo, 
m do my duty . 
Fly heavenwards toa" 



That quaint soDg was but half sung when 
Bob Carr, who had in his time climbed 
many a Westbury tree, put himself on a 
level with the lovely singer. A cedar is an 
easy tree to climb, for its branches make 
platforms : but Bob could have swarmed up 
the slipperiest branchless beech that ever 
grew into the semblance of a. Corinthian 
column. With those muscular arms of his he 
could run up a rope like a monkey. He was 



BOB cabb's advent obes. 167 

not at all out of breath when he presented 
himself to Fay Luttrel in this sky-parlour of 
hers, where only Charlie had ventured to 
follow her. 

*' I heard you singing, Miss Luttrel," he 
said, " so I ventured to dimb your cedar. 
It is a lovely tree." ^ 

"Isn't it!" said Fay. "Look at the 
view. Look at the river, winding like a 
snake, and Westbury spire, and the old 
ruined Castle on the hill. Even those 
smoky Irontown chimneys look picturesque 
from this distance. I have never had any* 
body bold enough to come up here and 
look at the view with me except Mr. 
Hawker." 

"I am bold enough for anything," said 
Bob Carr. " I am bold enough to ask you 
a very daring question. Miss Luttrel, though 



168 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

I dare not do it if my dear friend your father 
had not said I might if I would. I loved 
you the moment I saw you : do you think 
you could love me ? I am not your equal, 
beautiful Fay: but I am a soldier, you 
know, and your father deigns to call me his 
friend.'* 

" How very sudden you soldiers are !" 
said Fay, swinging on her bough. " Now, 
what shall I say ? I like you, Major Carr ; 
I liked you the instant I saw you. I don t 
think I could marry anybody but a soldier. 
But Fm a mere child, you know, or I should 
not be up a tree with you. And really, 
really, really, though I like you very 
much, I don't know about being able to 
love you. I don't feel that I love anybody 
except Papa and Auntie." 

" Then I had better grow as much like 



BOB carr's adventures. 169 

Papa or Auntie as I possibly can," said Bob 
Can. " Which shall it be ?" 

'' 0, Papa, please," she said. " You are 
like him, very much. I shouldn't care a bit 
for you else.*' 

*' Well, Papa says you're not to marry till 
you are twenty. Miss Luttrel ; and in that 
time I shall be trying to grow more like the 
noblest gentleman I ever knew. And now, 
will you let me kiss your lips up here in the 
cedar, and will you let me call you by your 
pretty name, Fay ? I don't ask you to call 
me Bob ; it's such a horrid name." 

" I don't think so," she said. " I've heard 
of fighting Bob Carr. Yes, you may kiss me, 
if you take care not to tumble down while 
you do it ; and I will promise not to fall in 
love with anybody else unless I tell you. 
Will that do?" 



170 SWEET AND TWENTY 

Bob Carr thought it would, and they 
accomplished their kiss without breaking 
their necks. 



171 



CHAPTER XVII. 

THE COTTAGE ON THE COMMON. 

With sonnd hilarious 
The Stradivarins 
Cries '^ Bob the Major 
Will win, for a wager." 

npHERE were at this time very pleasant 
evenings at Fiddler Carr's cottage. To 
the old folk it was a proud and happy time; 
Such good fortune as they had seen their 
two boys realise was beyond their wildest 
dreams. Here was John Carr, Sir Price 



172 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

Rodents partner and the most influential 
man in Irontown. Here was Bob Carr a 
Major in a crack cavalry regiment, and the 
intimate friend of General Sir Hugh 
Luttrel. And both were unspoilt. Both 
indeed were rather improved by their 
remarkable rise in life. They had no 
affectations or absurdities. They loved 
their old father and mother with thorough 
heartiness, and were at no time happier 
than when they quarrelled over whose gar- 
dening had been the best in the olden days, 
days that had been full of tranquil enjoy- 
ment. They were at home in the garden, 
and on the common beyond it, and the 
simple cottagers, their neighbours, were 
surprised to see these two important indi- 
viduals playing quoits as had been their 
wont in their youth, with their father act- 



THE COTTAGE ON THE COMMON. 17S 

ing as umpire, the Stradivarius always ia 
his company. Quoits is a fine game, pro- 
perly played ; but the modern makers pro- 
duce a discus too light for a strong thrower, 
and liable to be blown aside like that 
quoit wherewith Apollo unhappily killed 
poor young Hyadnthus. But John and 
Robert had disinterred the quoits of their 
youth, and went out in their shirt sleeves, 
playing their game like boys, and quenching 
their thirst with honest home-brewed ale. 

It was a grand time for Fiddler Carr . 
a grand time for his old dame. They 
were happy beyond measure. Their boys 
had grown into something they neither 
quite comprehended, yet they could see that 
in doing this they had developed an here- 
ditary tendency. The pedigree of the Carrs 
has not yet been investigated, and the Major, 



174 SWEET ASD TWXHTT. 

Strange to say, has not set up a crest or a 
motto ; bat no man who saw Slddler Carr 
playing his beloved violin, his thin gray hair 
floating down over his shoulders, oould 
doubt that there was gentle blood in the 
old man's veins. His sons proved it. They 
might perchance have been as successful in 
life if they had been of a grosser strain; 
but they could not so delightedly have 
come back to their dear old cottage, and 
resumed the simple sports of their boyhood. 
When they were there, no further word 
was said of Sarah Daw. Everybody pitied 
the poor foolish creature, but everybody 
felt that she was beyond help. Doubtless 
Mrs. Carr was harder in her judgment of her 
than anyone, thinking it a shame that such a 
little minx should so nearly have entangled 
both her boys, of whom she was justly 




THE COTTAGE ON THE COMMON. 175 

proud. Biit she was not named. These 
evenings at the Cottage were devoted to 
enjoyment : there was the occasional game 
at quoits, and the dear old-fashioned homely 
supper, and the tones of the Stradivarius, 
which sometimes seemed like a prayer. 

One night they had a talk about the 
future. 

" Fm an oldish man, boys," said Fiddler 
Carr, '* and I've done nothing particular in 
the world except play a few tunes and catch 
a few fish and love my old woman and 
bring up you two youngsters to do better 
far than your father. And I'm thankful for 
you, lads: and so is the mother. WeVe 
prayed for you, many's the time : and no 
man shall persuade me prayer isn't answer- 
ed. You're both doing well : but you both 
ought to marry. No man has done his duty 



176 SWEET AND TWENTT, 

till he marries. What should I be without 
your mother ? They joke about it, lads, and 
call a wife a man's better half . ^but it's true, 
and no joke. Women are better than men, 
and when a man marries he gets better* 
Now it's quite time you thought about it, 
boys, so listen to what I say." 

Not often did Fiddler Carr make so long 
a speech. He spoke in music, mostly. 

"Your father is quite right," said Mrs. 
Carr, who took a practical view of all 
questions. " Both of you ought to marry 
soon : if you have children later on they are 
a trouble. I've noticed the world, though 
Tve lived outside it, and I think the man 
who can live without a wife is hardly fit to 
live at all." 

"Suppose he can't find the woman he 
needs, mother ?" said John Carr. "What is 



THE COTTAGE ON THE COMMON. 177 

he to do then? Now, can you tell me 
anybody I could marry that you would 
like ?*' 

" Why, there's that lovely Miss Tracy at 
Roden Hall," she said : ** she'd suit you to a 
T. She*« a real lady, without any pride or 
nonsense, and so like my poor dear mistress 
in everything. Why not try her ?" 

" I haven't the courage, mother, that's a 
fact She's a glorious creature, but she's 
too good for me. I must be content to 
admire her at a distance." 

" It's no good admiring her and marrjdng 
somebody else, John. You'd better try. 
Why, you're good enough for any lady in the 
land." 

** Ah, that's your pride, mother* But I 
fancy Miss Tracy is engaged elsewhere." 

" What, to Mr. Paul ?" said his mother. 

VOL. m. N 



178 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

" I don't believe it. He's not the sort for 
faer^ she's as tme as gold, but he isn't. I 
don't wish for to speak against Mr. Paul, 
who is a liberal gentleman, and as fine a 
looking fellow as you oould see anywhere ; 
and Fm sure Sir Price worships the ground 
he treads on . and no wonder, when he's so 
like his poor dear mother; but he don't 
seem to me to settle down steady . he don't 
know his own mind, and is shifty. But 
there, he ought to be pitied, with no mother 
to bring him up ; for it's a great thing, boys, 
to have a careM mother to look after you 
in your early days " (here the Stradivarius 
joined in). " But mark my words, he's not 
the one for Miss Edith. So, John, you 
might just as well try there, if you think 
you can love her as a wife ought to be 
loved. I am sure it would be the proudest 




THE COTTAGE ON THE COMMON. 179 

day of my life to have a cousin of my dear 
mistress's for my daughter. And so like her 
in her ways. It does my heart good to see 
her." 

The Stradivarius was making a low ac- 
companiment all this while. John Carr 
thought over his mother's suggestion. He 
had long ago thought Edith the most perfect 
of women, but to marry her was a dream 
which he never expected to realize. He 
had not the transcendent aiudacity of his 
brother Bob, who thought nothing and 
nobody in the world too good. 

"Well,, mother," says Bob, merrily, 
" while John is reflecting, perhaps you'll tell 
me who's the lass for me. I don't take so 
long to make up my mind, you know. I 
went away from England . glad I am I did 

n2 



180 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

. because Sarah Daw wouldn*t have me : 
and I came back determined to ask her 
again, if she wasn't married yet. But I soon 
heard enough to show that, though she 
hadn't done any real harm, she's not the 
woman I'd marry. So now, mother, advise 
me, please. I'll try to like the wife you 
choose for me." 

*' You're as mad as ever, Bob," said his 
father. " Choose for yourself. Whether 
you'll choose right or wrong I'll ask my 
fiddle to tell me." 

" Well, how, it will tell you truth, father. 
I've chosen already, and chosen right . that 
I know . and there isn't a man in England 
dare come between me and mv own love." 

Fiddler Carr's Stradivarius went mad for 
a moment. Mrs. Carr looked at her son in 
a pitying way, knowing his impetuosity was 



THE COTTAGE ON THE COMMON. 181 

always getting him into difficulties. John 
spoke : 

" Bob, my dear brother, I am very glad. 
I wish I could say the same. I agree with 
mother that a man's only half a man till he*s 
married. I wish I could hope Miss Tracy 
would have me." 

'*Lord, John, what a muff you are!" 
cried Bob, with emphasis. " You'll never 
marry a woman if you think of her as Miss 
Tracy. You're a Christian, I hope, and she's 
got a Christian name. It's all very well to 
be courteous to women, but you need not 
be too respectful. They like a chivalrous 
familiarity." 

*'We live and learn," said John Carr, 
laughing, " and you have had wider exper- 
ience than I. Never mind, old fellow. I 
don't want to die a bachelor, so perhaps 



182 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

you'll give me a few lessons in the art of 
courtship you evidently know so well. But 
you have not yet told us whom you have 
chosen, and who has chosen you." 

" 0, I am ready," said Bob Carr. " I 
don't want the world to know, for my 
darling is too young to marry just yet: but 
to my father and mother and brother I 
may say that 1 am going to marry Fay 
Luttrel." 

" WeU," said Fiddler Carr, " that's the 
best news I ever heard. That lovely girl is 
doomed to make folk happy. I always 
knew it of her : my old fiddle would play a 
merry tune when she came by. Is it cer- 
tam, Bob ?" 

** As certain as love, father, which is the 
only certain thing in the world. My darling 




THK COTTAGE ON THE COMMON. 183 

is not to marry till she's twenty, and that's 
quite young enough, and I don't want a 
word said about it till towards the time. 
But you, dear father and mother, have a 
right to know, and I like you to know all 
about me. Now, you see that I'm set- 
tled for life, and you'd better make John 
settle too." 

This evening the brothers were staying at 
the Cottage, in the old homely fashion ; John, 
to say truth, was rather glad to be away 
from Birklands, for he had unwisely set up a 
housekeeper, a " young person " with signi- 
ficant eyes and insignificant brain, who 
didn't make actual love to him, but was at 
the same time rather dangerous. To all 
bachelors and widowers I say : Avoid " lady 
housekeepers." I have known a man who 



184 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

was positively driven to live at an hotel by 
a creature of that kind. John Can's 
menial was not quite so pretentious, but she 
had a cunning designing way with her ; and 
he had given her notice to leave, resolved 
to be his own housekeeper rather than 
try that experiment over again. 

So they stayed at the Cottage in their 
old friendly way, and enjoyed it thoroughly : 
nor did anyone for an instant suppose that 
John Carr had any particular reason for 
taking flight from his homestead. For that 
housekeeper whom I have mentioned was a 
young woman highly respectable, whom 
perchance he had less reason to dread than 
he thought. There is no knowing. He at 
any rate had taken flight, and was glad for 
the time of a reason to be absent from Bh-k- 



THE COTTAGE ON THE COMMON. 185 

lands. And so at the Cottage, in these 
autumn evenings, it seemed like old times. 
John and Bob Carr were boys again, in 
thought at any rate, and went back to that 
pleasant old life which it is the fortune of 
few men to renew even for an instant. 
What would not any man give for the happy 
feeling of boyishness that is caught by stand- 
ing in the fields where we played, in the 
rooms where we worked, in the golden days 
of youth and folly? John and Bob Carr 
at this moment were enjoying the memories 
of the past amid the satisfactions of the 
present in a way entirely unusual : they re- 
newed their old homely life at the Cottage 
on the common, and at the same time they 
had the grand consciousness of having made 
their place in the world. Such a con- 



186 SWEET AND TWEKTT. 

carrence is anusual. Seldom has any man 
the happy fortune to return to the joyous 
haunts of his youth, to find them unchanged, 
to enjoy them as he enjoyed them of yore, 
but with the added appredation of simple 
pleasure which is given by experience of 
the world. For the most part, if we 
return to the chosen haunt of our youth, all 
is changed around it. The old common is 
built upon ; the old rookery is cut down ; 
the lake is a reservoir; the house with 
sacred memories is a Seminary for Young 
Ladies. A very few years work vast revolu- 
tions . ^vast to the individual mind of man, 
though trivial in the order of the world. 
To return and find an empire where you 
left a republic is startling, but to most men 
unimportant. To return and find your 



THE COTTAGE ON THE COMMON. 187 

father's house remodelled by a strange 
owner is a far heavier shock. Happy the 
man to whom time leaves some relics of his 
youth. 



188 



CHAPTER XVIIL 

A CONFESSION. 
*^ 'Tis good to be honest and trae." 

QIR PRICE RODEN had quite made up 
his mind that Paul and Edith would 
marry, and built on that theory a whole 
terrace of castles in the air. Edith was to 
him a necessity now ; he had taken her to 
his heart of hearts; her sweet unselfish 
ladyhood delighted him ; he thought of her 
as Paul's wife and the mother of Paul's 



A CONFESSION. 189 

children. Yet, being not altogether undis- 
ceming, he perceived that she and Paul 
were not precisely on such good terms as he 
fancied was righ^t. He consoled and satisfied 
himself for a long time in numerous ways. 
Young people were not so demonstrative 
now-a-days ; it was not thought good style 
to show any particular liking for each other. 
So reasoned Sir Price Roden, well aware 
that his son Paul would certainly try to be 
in the fashion, whether that fashion was to 
make love fiercely or to make love languidly. 
But as time passed on, and neither 
erotic fierceness nor amorous languor became 
apparent, Sir Price wondered how it was 
that Paul and Edith were so very indiffer- 
ent, if indeed they were to marry within 
the year. Once or twice, after dinner, he 
had made attempts to draw Paul into con- 



190 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

versation on the subject, but Paul had said 
nothing. In truth, Paul was unwilling to 
say anything, for Edith's manner perplexed 
him, and he did not feel at all certain of his 
position. She had made up her mind not 
to marry him, and yet was loth to tell him 
«o. She felt so strong an affection for his 
father that she dreaded a step which must 
render their separation necessary. 

Sir Price Roden took the bull by the 
horns at last. 

"Edith," he said, one day when Paul 
was awaj^ on a visit and they had dined 
quietly together, "how are you and Paul 
getting on? and when are you going to 
marry ?" 

Edith was not at all a tearful young lady ; 
she had not been so in her earliest youth, 
and had borne childish discipline with dry 



A CONFESSION, 191 

eyes; but she felt almost inclined to cry 
on this occasion, since she loved Sir Price 
Roden so much, and felt she must grieve 
him to the soul. 

" I shall never marry Paul," she said. 

It had to be said : so she said it right 
out. 

" Why ?" said Sir Price, in a tone of anger 
and amazement. 

'' Must I tell you ?" said Edith. " I don't 
want to hurt you. Cousin Price. I would do 
anything I could for you, but . oh, I cannot 
marry Paul." She crept close to him, and 
knelt down and took his hand. " Please 
listen kindly, cousin," she said. ** Do you 
remember when Paul offended Miss Litton, 
because he kissed one of her maid-servants ?" 

"Yes, child, I remember; but there's 
nothing in that. Young men will do stupid 



192 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

things. I thought Miss Litton too severe 
about it . and I fancied you thought so too, 
Edith. Surely a girl of your sense can 
forgive a man a stupid mistake of that 
sort ! " 

"Yes/' she said, **I could even forgive 
him . though it was too bad, it really was . 
for making little Sarah Daw believe he 
loved her ; for it was something more than 
the mere kiss which he would have had us 
believe ; he seems to have showered kisses 
upon her in the most passionate manner, and 
the poor girl actually reproached him at the 
time with his having made her love him ; 
and from what she said, he must have been 
in the habit of meeting her. I daresay 
many young men have done such things, 
though they are not always found out, but 
it is unpleasant to hear that the man you are 



A CONFESSION. 193 

to marry has been in love with a servant 
maid." 

"But how did you hear this, Edith? 
This is all new to me. I certainly did not 
understand Miss Litton's severity at the 
time." 

"Fay told me a short time ago," said 
Edith, " and " 

" But surely, Edith," Sir Price said, "you 
don't take the word of a mere child, an 
imaginative child like that, when my son's 
character is m question ?" 

.* I don't think Fay would tell an untruth, 
but unfortunately I have good reason for 
believing it. Miss Litton would not have 
been so angry, if what Paul had told us of 
the affair were true. I was very anxious, I 
remember, at the time to make it up 
between Paul and Miss Litton, but Paul 

VOL. in. 



194 8WEET AHD TWENTT. 

begged me not to do so. Bat after all I 
could forgive him that, but I camiot forgive 
him for asking Fay Luttrel to marry him, 
and then when she refused him, asking me 
the very same day. Now, dear oonsin, 
could you ask me to have him after that ? 
You know he could not really love me as 
he ought to love a wife, if he only asks me 
to marry him because some one else has 
refused him. I am ready to make excuse 
for him : I think he is so used to coming to 
me to tell his troubles, that he was going to 
tell me how Fay had refused him, and that 
the impulse seized him to ask me to marry 
him. But it would be foolish for me to 
marry a man who can regard me only as 
a comforter in his troubles. I don't want 
to make him unhappy, for I like him very 
much for his own sake, and very much 



A CONTESSION. 195 

more for yours; so please let me settle 
everything with him in my own way. If I 
told him now what I have told you, I could 
not stay here, you know; and I want to 
stay because I think you like me here. 
I will talk to him quietly, by-and-by, and I 
daresay he will find a wife to suit him far 
better than I." 

Price Roden had been silent all this time. 
He was bitterly disappointed. He saw 
where the weakness of his son's character 
would have been supplemented by the 
strength of Edith's. He thought also of 
Paul's possibly marrying somebody else, for 
whom he should not care twopence. Sel- 
dom did any of his schemes collapse ; it was 
miserably annoying that a scheme of so 
great importance to his son's future welfare 
should break down utterly. Yet there was 

o2 



196 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

clearly no help for it. Edith was manifestly 
in earnest ; the very softness and sweetness 
of her remonstrance showed her serious 
resolve. 

Price Roden felt his son's loss more than 
Paul himself would feel it . Paul, who 
estimated everything and everybody accord- 
ing to their usefulness to himself. Paul 
would simply regard Edith as a foolish girl 
for not accepting him : while Paul's father 
could see clearly that if she could be in- 
duced to take him, she would make a man 
of him." 

" Edith/' said Sir Price Roden, " I have 
no doubt you are right : at any rate it is 
your right to decide. I am very sorry, for 
Paul's sake. You would have made him a 
finer fellow than I can ever expect to see 
him now. Upon my word, child, if I were 



A CONTESSION. 197 

not getting aged, I would ask you to marry 
me instead of Paul. Never mind, dear 
Edith, you will stay with us all the same, 
and Paul must take his chance." 

He stroked her bright hair in fatherly 
fashion. Edith felt very very sorry, but she 
could not marry Paul. Nor did she at all 
like the idea of remaining at Roden Hall, 
feeling assured that Paul would determine 
to live elsewhere. Besides, Paul would 
soon recover from his disappointment, and 
decide to marry some one else : there were 
plenty of ladies who would be glad to accept 
him, with the colossal fortune that he must 
inherit throwing a golden halo around his 
unquestionable good qualities. She knew 
one or two, in their not very wide circle of 
acquaintances, who would be well content 
to marry him, and would make him happy : 



198 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

and she felt that it was her duty to recede 

from a position that must embarrass him. 

Something of this kind she said to Sir 

Price Roden as clearly as she could. She 

had some difficulty in making her meaning 

plain, for the subject was a delicate one : 

but Sir Price saw that her feelings on the 

subject must be respected. 

''Let us at any rate leave the question 

till after Christmas, my dear Edith. This 

will be a gay time, with Sir Hugh Luttrel 

and Carr as our visitors : I don't want poor 

Paul to lose the pleasure of the festive 

season. So, without asking you to alter 

your mind, I entreat you to leave Paul 

without enlightenment till the New Year 
has passed. You have told him he must 

wait a year, so that there is no hurry. 

When the spring comes, if you must leave 



A CONFESSION. 19^ 

me, you can triavel awhile : in fact I could 
take you abroad myself, and leave Paul to 
find his own amusements. But I cannot 
lose you this winter, when I want the house 
to be pleasant. We should all go into 
mourning without you." 

" I feel as if I were entering into a con- 
spiracy against poor dear Paul," said Edith, 
with a sad sort of smile. " I am so sorry for 
him and for you. I ought never to have 
come here, that is the truth." 

At this point she broke down, and could 
not help crying. It was not often this gay 
courageous creature gave way to tears, but 
on this occasion she could not help it. She 
had been so happy at Roden Hall, and had 
felt that she was making Price Boden 
happy : and the idea of going away, leaving 
him solitary, setting up some sort of estab* 



200 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

lishment as a lonely old maid, was melan- 
choly enough for Edith, who was full of 
brightness and spirit, loving and loveable. 
Naturally she took m the first instance the 
dreariest view of her position. She had 
nestled down quietly at Roden Hall, and 
made it her home after long wandering: 
and now she felt as if she must begin life 
again. As to Sir Price, he really could 
have cried with her, if it had not been so 
terribly undignified. But he comforted her 
in a kind fatheriy way, and so the matter 
ended between them. 

Next morning life did not look quite so 
gloomy. Sunlight made her cheerful, and 
caused her to laugh away her misgivings. 
What hardships had she, after all ? She was 
her own mistress, with an ample income ; 
she could live somewhere near Roden Hall, 



A CONFESSION. 201 

in some natty cottage all over roses and 
clematis and wistaria that should look like a 
DoU's-house ; her feelings told her that she 
was all youth and health, and her mirror 
told her that she was too pretty to die an 
old maid. So she sang gaily as she came 
down stairs, fresh as a flower and light as a 
fairy : and Sir Price Roden brightened 
under her influence, and was quite gay when, 
after a loitering breakfast, he entered his 
carriage to drive to Irontown. Though 
John Carr was the soul of business now, Sir 
Price liked to see what was going on : be- 
sides, he was a magistrate for both county 
and borough, and worked hard at the 
honorary administration of justice, and the 
various other affairs which occupy country 
gentlemen. Sir Price had become a greater 
favourite than ever in town and country 



202 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

since Edith had lived at Roden Hall : she 
had insensibly softened and broadened his 
mind, by the influence of her own charming 
temperament. Not too often can we be 
reminded of Steele's aphorism, that to love 
a true lady is a liberal education. For 
that which he said of one may be extended 
to all. 

When Paul returned from his brief visit, 
he found Edith in a humour that delighted 
him. She would not hear a word about 
love, but she was in the most gracious of 
moods. Paul, if he had had more experi- 
ence, would have guessed that this was not 
the best imaginable symptom ; would have 
known that a woman is not usually amiable 
to the man whom she expects to marry. 
For, as Mrs. Browning has shown in a 



A CONFESSION. 20^ 

pretty string [of versicles that shine like 
pearls, a girl in suspense between the Yes 
and No demanded of her is fluttered and 
fearful through the great gift she is asked to 
make. She is required to give herself 
away, body and soul, happiness on earth 
and hope of heaven. No wonder that she, 
who would weep if she hurt a bird's fea- 
ther, or brushed the bloom from a butterfly, 
is cruel to the man who wants her to be 
wholly his. The deeper her nature, the 
more petulant and provoking the gu:l is 
likely to be. Paul, a mere novice, was 
quite unaware of this : he basked in the 
sunshine of Edith's smiles, and felt that 
he was safe in harbour. The worst of it 
was, for Edith, that he insisted on over- 
whelming her with presents : and, if she 



204 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

did not wear his rings and bracelets, she 
knew he would wonder why. She hated 
them all the time : but what was she to 
do? 



205 



CHAPTER XIX. 

CHRISTMAS AT WKSTBURY PLACE. 

'Twaa ChrifltmaB broached the mightiest ale : 
'Twaa Christmas told the merriest tale ; 
A Christmas gambol oft could choer 
The poor man's heart through half the year. 

Scott. 

/CHRISTMAS at Irontown was, as Sir 
^^^ Price Roden had predicted, a very 
gay affair indeed. November had seen John 
Carr elected a second time Mayor of Iron- 
town, and it fell to his duty to preside at a 



206 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

public banquet, whereat the freedom of 
the borough was presented to General Sir 
Hugh Luttrel, E.SJ., and to Major Carr. 
Oceans of champagne and eloquence were 
shed on that festive occasion ; and it was 
credibly reported that the two guests of the 
evening were the only people who had no 
headaches next morning. The town was 
illuminated, of course; there were flags fly- 
ing everywhere ; an ox was roasted in the 
market-place, and sky-rockets innumerable 
were sent up, to be drowned in one of the 
heaviest snow-storms that had been known in 
that part of the country for years. When 
the banqueters left the Guildhall they found 
getting home no easy matter ; and the next 
morning the snow was still coming down 
in those huge heavy direct masses which 
mean the real thing. Railway trains were 



CHRISTMAS AT WBSTBUBY PLACE. 207 

hours late ; carriage travel was impossible ; 
and Sir Hugh Luttrel, lyith characteristic 
impetuosity, telegraphed to Long Acre for a 
sleighy and to Tattersall's for three horses fit 
to draw it. And faith they all came, just 
as the snow, which had set in reso- 
lutely, was in fine crisp condition. The 
sleigh was perfect ; the horses . two chest- 
nuts and a roan . well matched in size. 
This little extravagance cost the General 
nearly a thousand pounds; but he was in 
the humour to throw away money, for a 
reason which hereafter may appear. 

If Irontown was abundantly gay, so was 
Westbury Place. Canon Tremaine had 
consented to pass Christmas with Miss Litton. 
He had not left home except to reside at 
Northminster for nearly forty years. He 
was a delightful Christmas guest. Full of 



A 



208 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

solemn reverence for the season, he yet ac- 
cepted and enjoyed the harmless gaiety with 
which it is associated. He reconciled the 
two phases of our happy annoal festivity in 
the most perfect fashion. And by way of 
extra brightness there was Charlie Hawker, 
gay as a troubadour, full of his fun, and 
rather apt to consider whether he would be in 
earnest for once, and try to win the love of 
Edith Tracy. 

Charlie in earnest! Imagine such a 
picture ! He certainly never had been so, 
except when he was doing City business. 
Then his grave air was admirable ; he was 
as solid and stern and steady as a Sphinx. 
The City thought Mr. Hawker the most 
serious inhabitant of Mincing Lane. The 
pretty girls thought Charlie a man without 
a serious idea. Now, however, he did feel 



^ 



CHRISTMAS AT WESTBURY PLACE. 209 

rather in earnest. Edith Tracy was a lovely 
lady, a woman of the world, with a com- 
fortable income ; it seemed that she had 
been thrown in his way by Providence. He 
had been sipping honey from so many 
flowers, been taking delectation with so 
many nymphs : was it not time for him to 
settle at last ? Was not Edith the very girl 
for him ? 

There had been a very gay day. The 
General, who had learnt in Canada to sleigh 
with three horses abreast, had taken out a 
merry party . Fay and Edith of course, and 
Bob Carr and Paul Roden. The Canon and 
Miss Litton had stayed at home to have a 
pleasant talk, of archaeology and character, 
in both of which they were well versed. It 
was a delightful drive over the snowy roads, 
the horses tossing their heads and ringing 

VOL, m. p 



210 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

their silver bells, the General driving at a 
rapid pace, Fay muffled in her furs by his 
side, Edith doing her utmost to play off 
Charlie and Paul against each other. Bob 
Carr could amuse himself. They went right 
away through Irontown, where they were 
cheered by the multitude, who had never 
seen a sleigh before. When they came 
home, there was an early dinner, for a dance 
was to come after, to which all the world 
was coming through the snow. An inde- 
scribably merry dance it was; Charlie 
Hawker was the hero of the night, for he 
was the most charming dancer in the world ; 
but Bob Carr was not much behind him, for 
India had taught him dancing as well as 
fighting. They and Paul were rivals all 
through for the hands of Edith and Fay. 
When Charlie whirled Edith through the 



CHRISTMAS AT WBSTBURY PLACE. 211 

waltz, he felt as if he really meant it at last. 
Should he ask her that night ? Should he 
entice her amid the flowers and ferns of the 
patio, and settle the matter at once ? I don't 
know whether Edith saw that he was grow- 
ing serious, but she suggested supper, and 
after supper Paul was the fortunate cavalier. 
Paul was rather cross, for he thought 
Charlie and Bob Carr had been both too 
attentive to Edith, whom he deemed his own 
property. However, she soon laughed him 
into good temper, and the evening became 
gayer and brighter as it culminated towards 
Sir Roger de Coverley. 

There was supper of course. There was 
a series of suppers which Mrs. Gruffley 
managed to send up each time more attract- 
ive till the last. She was a woman of fer- 
tile resources. The suppers grew brighter 

p2 



212 SWEET AND T WEN T Y. 

towards the last, and came to grilled oysters 
and anchovy toast, with whiskey punch and 
soda negus. Miss Litton and the venerable 
Canon had taken themselves away before 
that time : but the General was as lively as 
the boys, and it was four in the morning 
when he ordered out the sleigh to drive 
home the party from Roden Hall. It is my 
belief that Charlie and Fay had a final waltz 
all alone when the others had gone. What 
would Bob Carr have said? He was tramping 
home in the snow all alone, valiant and 
happy, having the warmth of Fay's rosy lips 
upon his own to warm and cheer him. 

The snow fell fast as the sleigh went gaily 
toward Roden Hall. Sir Hugh had got 
Edith by his side, wise in his generation ; 
the Rodens, father and son, had to take care 
of each other. They fell asleep in the snow 



CHRISTMAS AT WESTBURY PLACE. 213 

Storm, as people often do when they sudden- 
ly change their temperature ; but Sir Hugh 
had to keep awake to guide his steeds, and 
Edith was alive with pleasure and excite- 
ment. As they pulled up at the portico of 
Roden Hall, amid the hurry of servants, the 
General helped Edith Tracy from the 
front seat of the sleigh, and . . . yes, it 
is a fact . . . touched her lips lightly. 
Nobody saw it. Edith felt it, though, 
and knew full well what it meant. Sh-e 
ran off to her room rapidly, to think over it 
. leaving Sir Price and Paul to thaw them- 
selves gradually in the hall. Sir Hugh 
had said nothing definite to her, but they 
had right pleasantly talked together during 
this joyous week ; and by some indefinable 
means he had made her understand that he 
was eager to marry her^ if she thought him 



214 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

not too old. How the magnetism of eye 
and hand had given meanings for which 
words are mostly necessary, it is hard to 
say: but it was so, and Sir Hugh and 
Edith were quite of one mind on the most 
important matter in the world to both of 
them. She, running away upstairs on the 
plea of sleepiness, thought over her posi- 
tion. Not a bit sleepy was she: wide 
awake, indeed, after a long sleigh-drive, 
and a dinner suited to Christmastide, and 
many hours of dancing with indefatigable 
partners. The feeling had come upon her 
that Fay's father, though twice her age, was 
better suited to her than any of the younger 
men. She resolved that the offer which he 
tacitly made in that parting kiss should 
loyally be accepted. Thus determined, 
she slept soundly, and did not awake 



CHKISTMAS AT WESTBURY PLACE. 215 

till late on the morning of Christmas Day. 
Not so the General. When the horses 
were put up, he sat by the side of a noble 
fire in his bed-room, and smoked dreamily. 
Sir Hugh, an old soldier, did not easily 
tire. He had not danced, like the boyjs ; 
but he had done a good day's work, indoors 
and out, and yet was probably less fatigued 
than anybody. Bob Carr not excepted. 
And now, gazing through the smoke upon 
the ruddy flames, he thought of his future 
not unpleasant. Sound all through, a man 
who had never made a fool of himself by 
any sort of dissipation, he felt that he was 
not at all too old to offer himself to a lady 

m 

of ripe age. He had divined that Edith 
Tracy was not the gu:l to love Paul Roden, 
as people seemed to think she might : and 
though he considered Charlie Hawker a far 



216 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

more dangerous young gentleman, yet was 
he not particularly afraid of him. He could 
not know, what was the truth, that Fay's 
high estimate of him had prepared Edith to 
think him a man with few equals : still less 
could he know that Edith, who had imagined 
him far more venerable, was surprised at his 
first coming by his comparative youth. 
Sir Hugh, straight and square, with grey 
hair and moustache setting off a com- 
plexion bronzed by exposure, looked 
quite ten years younger than he really was : 
and Edith Tracy, who found weak points in 
most of the young men she knew, thought 
him absolutely perfect. She was ready to 
love him, worship him, marry him; but 
they had exchanged no word on the topic . 
and only one kiss. 
Edith slept. Sir Hugh smoked. Charlie 



CHRISTMAS AT WESTBURY PLACE. 217 

was awake, in a slightly excited state. 
He had no idea of that tacit under- 

# 

standing. Edith had danced with him 
more than with anyone else that night: 
and they were the two best dancers in the 
room: and they both enjoyed their tri- 
umph. But while Charlie, who had 
clasped her waist in the waltz, had not read 
aright the beatings of her heart, Sir Hugh 
had learnt them only from her eyes. 

Charlie could not sleep. He took pen 
and paper at last, and sat down to write 
some of those gay rhymes in which he says 
what can never be said so well in prose. 
Thus they ran : 

" Toward the dawn of Christmas Day 
Tune's tread now swiftly speedeth : 
I watch the moments ebb away 
And think of lovely Edith. 



218 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

'^ She, cradled in the linen's snow, 
Deliciouslj reposes : 
I see her sweet breath come and go 
Between her rich lip-roses. 

^^ Outside there's elemental strife. 
White snow, the fields to smother : 
Within, I think, * I want a wife- 
Fair Edith and no other.' 

^^ Dear lady, on these rhymes of mine 
Look not with aspect sternest : 
So sore as Edith is divine, 
Her Charlie is in earnest. 

^' So, when we join the pious flocks, 
You in your gayest bonnet. 
Give me your hand for Christmas box : 
111 place a ring upon it. 

" Sweet lady, for whose lips I yearn, 
Let love, the latest comer, 
Yield me the joy I ask, and turn 
My Christmas into summer." 

Charlie, having written these verses, look- 
ed at them with considerable satisfaction. 
Then an idea occurred to him. It was 



CHRISTMAS AT WESTBURY PLACE. 219' 

already six in the morning. To go to bed 
was absurd. He would turn out and get 
across to Roden Hall somehow, and place 
his verses where Edith should cast her eyes 
on them early. Charlie was an adventur- 
ous fellow ; he got a rough pony from Miss 
Litton's stables, a useful little Exmoor, 
chiefly ridden by the errand boy, and was 
off to Roden Hall. Of course only servants 
were up. He got hold of a pretty little 
housemaid, who even at that early hour 
looked neat and nice, and bribed her with a 
sovereign (and, 'tis whispered, with a kiss) 
to steal quietly into Miss Tracy's room, and 
put the letter on her pillow. 

So, when Edith woke, after a long night's 
sleep, happy she scarce knew why, she 
stretched out her hand, and lo, it touched 
Charlie's magic missive. She opened it with 



220 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

wonder. She read the verses with amuse- 
ment. 

" Too late, Master Charles," she thought 
to hersel£ " I like you very much, but you 
would have to be more in earnest than 
those verses are to make me love you." 

Canon Tremaine preached on the morn- 
ing of Christmas Day at Irontown Church. 
It was a pretty church which had been 
built some twenty years before, when the 
old church at Westbury was found to be too 
small for the increasing population of 
Irontown. 

It is in these towns of rapid and recent 
growth that the seeds of dissent are so 
easily grown. The population becomes too 
large for the Vicar to care for personally. 
Little colonies of cottages arise at a distance 
from the Church, and some Little Bethelite 



CHRISTMAS AT WESTBURY PLACE. 221 

from a neighbouring town comes on a Sun- 
day afternoon, and chooses a spot of ground 
where he can easily gather a crowd, and 
preaches what he chooses to call *Hhe 
Gospel." His idea of the Gospel generally 
consists in bawling out at the top of his 
voice a few sentences about eternal damna- 
tion and everlasting fire. By putting a great 
deal of emphasis on these impleasant words, 
he makes a great deal of effect, and a lot 
of hysterical women are " converted " or 
" called/' or whatever the phrase is, and in 
time a chapel is built. 

But Sir Price had given no chance of 
an3i;hing of this sort in Irontown. He had 
built the church entirely at his own expense, 
and had enlarged it, as it became necessary. 
In time as the town grew and its tradesmen 
became prosperous, a chapel of ease had 



222 SWEET AND TWENTT. 

been built, and then a seoond. But no 
Dissenting Chapel had as yet risen in Iron- 
town. Price Roden, though he rose from 
the people (had I not better say because he 
rose from the people?) was a Churchman 
and a Tory. He liked material progress 
as well as most of us like it : but what is 
called political progress was not much to 
his taste. Now I take it that the man who 
does not like material progress would not 
like a rump-steak and oysters, and that the 
man who does like political progress would 
also like Holloway's Pills and Old Dr. Jacob 
Townsend's Sarsaparilla. 

The church was ftiU. It was a great day. 
Irontown was enthusiastic about Fighting 
Bob Carr, concerning whose prowess in 
battle tremendous stories were told by the 
youth of the town. It seemed more than 



CHBISTMAS AT WESTBURY PLACE. 223 

likely that Irontown would soon furnish to 
the British Army a great number of recruits, 
eager to emulate our friend Bob in his 
upward career. As to Sir Hugh Lut- 
trel, the youth of Irontown and Westbury 
regarded him as something miraculous, espe- 
cially when he drove to church over the 
snow in a sleigh with three horses abreast, 
with the Reverend Canon Tremaine and the 
Lady of the Manor of Westbury among his 
passengers. Pretty Fay Luttrel sat beside 
her papa, and had now and then on secular 
occasions been allowed to drive: but her 
frail fingers were not permitted to hold the 
reins when the sleigh contained so valuable 
a freight as Miss Litton and the Canon. 

Perhaps few orthodox dignitaries of the 
Church, High Churchmen of the highest 
class, would care to come to do their duty 



224 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

in so unusual a way : but Canon Tremaine 
cared little for accidentals, while he would 
not give way the millionth of a hair's breadth 
in what he deemed essentials, so that he 
would, like his Master, have gone to his 
work on the back of an ass, had it been 
necessary. And so nobly did he demean 
himself amid all his poetic eccentricities that 
he never lost the serene dignity of his cha- 
racter, or gave opportunity for ridicule to 
the basest of the spawn of Tbersites. His 
tall strong form, his stern commanding way, 
his absolute resolve to do the right what- 
ever it cost, carried him well through the 
world. Such a man could never be a 
bishop, for reasons like those which pre- 
vented Swift and Sidney Smith from being 
bishops : but he probably had more theology 
and common sense than the whole episcopal 



i 



CHRISTMAS AT WESTBURY PLACE. 225 

bench. Only, to become a bishop, you must 
have been a schoolmaster, or written poli- 
tical pamphlets, or attended assiduously at 
court, or edited a Greek play. Canon Tre- 
maine preferred his Cornish eyry to S. 
James's, and his own nervous verse to all 
Euripides. 

There was a crowded church and a fine 
musical service. There was an Irish curate 
with a tenor voice who intoned the litany 
in the most wonderful manner. That tenor 
voice has since won him a bishopric and the 
hand of a lady of title and fortune. When 
the service was over. Canon Treraaine, who 
had read the Gospel only, but had read it 
in a way which slightly annoyed the ad- 
mirers of the Irish curate, went into the 
hexagonal granite pulpit and announced his 

text: 

VOL. in. Q 



226 

'* Unto us jt rhfld m bom.'' 

No more. Six words of the prophet- 
poet's were enoo^ for Caooa Tremaine. 
Would I could «sk noTel-resdeis to listen 
to hia sermon ? 

-A Child," he said. **Thjit is the key to 
Christianity. What m^i call sciaioe mocks 
at an eternal truth. God was once a child, 
here on earth; a child among other chil- 
dren, feeding at EBs mother's breast^ and 
going through all that we in our childhood 
have to endure. He knew all the joys of 
earthly childhood, and all its sorrows. 
There are old, old traditions of how Christy 
playing with His schoolfellows, shaped a bird 
with mud, which grew feathered and flew 
into the air ; of how He could not say His 
alphabet^ and was punished for His igno- 
rance. What does this mean ? Is it truth 



CHRISTMAS AT WMSTBURY PLACE. 227 

or poetry ? Whatever it is, this is the root 
of the matter : God himself was born as a 
baby some eighteen centuries ago : and as 
He was a child, as He grew to be a man, so 
He gave you the right to be Godlike as He 
was childlike." 

But it will not do to quote even Canon 
Tremaine's Christmas sermon, which slightly 
astonished by its perfect straightforwardness 
many of its hearers. For the worthy old 
poetic Canon took the Bible literally, and 
by so doing brought out original views of 
meaning which are lost to the disputatious 
theological pedants of the present day. When 
the Canon preached at Northminster Cathe- 
dral, both the High Church Bishop and the 
Broad Church Dean sat shivering in their 
thrones ; for Canon Tremaine was no High 
Churchman in the modern sense, and no 

q2 



228 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

Broad Churchman in any sense, though a 
very broad and simple thinker. But he 
desired to have the limits of the true Church 
strictly defined, as against Papal infallibility 
on the one hand and universal fallibility on 
the other. 

There were a good many people at Church 
that day who I fear did not profit as they 
ought by the Canon's sermon. Among 
them certainly was his kinsman Charlie 
Hawker, who had his head full of Edith, 
and could think of nobody else. He want- 
ed to know what answer she would give to 
those verses she had found on her pillow 
that morning. All through church time he 
had watched, but did not get a glance in 
return. She was absorbed in the Canon's 
sermon, evidently . Charlie wished his uncle 
somewhere else. Why the deuce could not 




CHBISTMAS AT WESTBURY PLACE. 229 

the little witch look at him? His verses 
deserved a better return. Charlie grew 



savage. 



The whole party were to go to Roden 
Hall, some walking, others in the General's 
sleigh, for seats in which there was such 
eager competition that the ladies were 
squeezed into nothing but a pair of bright 
eyes and a mass of fur . as if they were 
some marvellous Arctic animals. Charlie 
did not succeed in getting a word with 
Edith until they had assembled in the dining- 
hall for luncheon. Then he thought she 
was wonderfully occupied with two "old 
buffers/' as he irreverently called them, Sir 
Hugh and Sir Price. But of course the 
time came, as it comes to all the adventur- 
ous, when he could whisper in her ear : and 
he whispered, 



230 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

" Did you find my verses ? Tell me the 
answer/' 

"Fancy my thinking about verses of 
yours, Charlie, when you told me long ago 
that you wrote in verse because you could 
say things you daren't say in prose. 0, I 
know what your verses are worth ! And 
pray how did they get where I found 
them ? I hope you had not the audacity to 
put them there yourself, though I believe 
you capable of anything. " 

"Of course I put them there myself,'* 
said Charlie: "and of course I saw the 
prettiest picture in the world, a bright- 
haired head resting on a cream-white arm. 
But now, Edith, give me your answer : I 
am in earnest this time, I really am." 

" Dear Charlie," she said, taking his hand 
in sisterly fashion, "it is no use. We 



CHRISTMAS AT WBSTBURY PLACE. 231 

should never suit each other. Some one 
else has taken me and made me his own.'' 

" Some one else I" said Charlie, appalled. 
" Who, in the name of wonder? Not Paul 
Roden?" 

" No, my friend, not Paul Eoden by any 
means. Now. if you wont to know, I will 
tell you ; but you are not to be angry, and 
we are to be good friends always. For, 
you know, Charlie, I shall always like you 
as I always did from the day we met : but 
I always felt as if I were your cousin, and it 
was your duty to make love to me, and it 
meant nothing. Don't you see ?" 

" I see I'm a fool," said Charlie, almost 
fiercely. " Tell me who it is, Edith." 

"Do you want to fight him, you fiery 
young gentleman ? I'll tell you with 



232 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

pleasure. I am going to be Fay Luttrel's 
step-mother." 

Charlie felt as if struck by lightning. 
Not the least notion of this had occurred to 
him. Boys never seem to fancy that 
women may prefer men. He turned by a 
kind of instinct to look at the Greneral, who 
was standing near the fire, with his arm 
round Fay's waist, talking in an easy way 
to Canon Tremaine. It came suddenly on 
Charlie like a revelation that youth and age 
are not precisely matters of years. Why, 
that tall vigorous man, gray as to hair and 
moustache, but without a weak line in his 
face, or a weak point in his figure, could 
not be called old. What were years to 
him ? He would die in time, doubtless, as 
we all must : but he would die young, and 
die in harness. 



CHRISTMAS AT WESTBURY PLACE. 233 

Charlie was disgusted, of course, but he 
determined to console himself. He took to 
the Christmas festivities joyously. He was 
not the man to sing 

^' Omne circa petasum salicem gero viridem, 
Per annos circa petasum, et unam diem plus.'* 

No : Charlie would wear no green willow 
for any woman, but would go to her wed- 
ding in the bravest attire, and return thanks 
to the bridesmaids at breakfast in the witti- 
est speech ever yet recorded. 

However, Edith was very kind to 
Charlie after this revelation had been made. 
With all her wisdom, she was a loving little 
woman, and she felt rather guilty at the 
thought of disappointing both Charlie and 
Paul. But what were those boys to Sir 
Hugh? As she also turned towards 
him, standing there with his arm round 



234 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

Fay, she thought to herself: "Was there 
ever such a man?" 

There have been many such men, but 
they are in what the City calls a low per- 
centage. The men to whom cowardice and 
dishonour are impossible are not born so 
often as I could wish. Two men so dissimi- 
lar as the General and the Canon were 
linked together at once by finding that they 
held the same moral faith : firm friends 
have they been ever since. 

At dinner that day it happened that 
Charlie came side by side with Sir Hugh ; 
and it is of course within the limits of pos- 
sibility that a certain young lady of our ac- 
quaintance had suggested to Sir Hugh to 
be agreeable . for reasons. At any rate, 
they got into pleasant converse. 



CHBISTMAS AT WESTBURY PLACE. 235 

" Our host is a pleasant fellow," said Sir 
Hugh, "but where in the world does he 
pick up the Latin motto that disfigures a 
hideous crest upon his plate ? I can't eat 
a spoonful of soup without seeing a horrid 
bit of dog-Latin, VigilantibuSynondormientibus. 
A nice moral lesson, no doubt ; but could 
not his adviser in such matters have made 
him say VigilOj non Domiio f " 

" I think they like their words long," said 
Charlie, " and syllables are cheap in Latin, 
I remember one parvenu whose newly- 
found motto was Equabiliter et diligenter. 

" Nonsense !" said Sir Hugh. *' You must 
be inventing ihat'^ 

" Not a bit of it. I think somebody with 
a slight knowledge of Latin ought to be em- 
ployed to give such people their mottos. 
This man, if I remember aright, built rail- 



236 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

way carriages; but he was a languishing 
selfish individual, with a flower in his button- 
hole, and a valet always in attendance. His 
secretary wrote his letters, which was a 
prudent arrangement." 

There was much enjoyment around Sir 
Price Roden's table at this time ; there was 
enjoyment afterwards, when all the fun of 
Christmas was let loose in its pleasantest 
way. And, although on that day there was 
some amount of disappointment, few Christ- 
masses ever passed with such gaiety, Charlie 
was of course rather downcast, or I should 
say fierce, at not being able to have the 
only lady to whom he had ever condescended 
to make an offer of his heart. But what is 
disappointment to Charlie, when the sounds 
of dance music strike up ? He is off with 
the fairest and nimblest lady he can find, 



CHRISTMAS AT WBSTBURY PLACE. 237 

and his small feet never stop till the music 
dies away. 

By-the-way, I have never mentioned 
Charlie's small feet. He is a very good 
figure, of the middle size, a real Adonis, 
in fact . but his feet and hands are mar- 
vellously small and well made. I don't 
think Charlie wants a wife, except when he 
is in a melancholy mood. He is sometimes 
melancholy, and assures you, with' a serious 
shake of the head, that he has disease of the 
heart, and cannot live long ; but no doubt 
he leaves his diseased heart locked up in a 
cupboard on such evenings as this of which 
I am writing ; for he danced away in the 
wildest way, and was foremost in all the fun. 
He could sing a Cornish song in the dialect 
of his bounty, amid shouts of laughter, and 
he could sing a pretty pathetic ballad, and 



> 



238 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

melt the hearts of the ladies of his audience. 
One of his songs this evening was . 

WhaVs the use of loving in 

Such a world as this is, 
Where they sing that lovers a sin, 

Deep in sin's abysses ? 

Toil and strive, and thereby thrive. 

Shun whatever is sonny : 
If you have a mind to thrive, 

Mind you marry money. 

May the God who made the sun, 

Trees, birds, woman's beauty. 
Scourge the fools who have begun 

Thus to teach men duty. 

While my lady's heart's astir, 

'Neath its milk-white cover, 
AU the birds shall sing of her. 

All who see shall love her. 

As Charlie's silvery voice died away, the 
women were all positively in love with him 
for a moment. Miss Litton and Edith and 
Fay, and everyone else there . and the men 
all felt jealous of him. 



CHRISTMAS AT WESTBURY PLACE. 239 

Fay next gave a song . 

*^ May, like a girl at a garden gate 

With slender fingers lily bells grasp, 
With eyes of hazel that wonder and wait. 

And a hand that longs to lift the hasp. 
Is sighing ; ah when will summer begin ? 
When shall I open and let love in ? 

^* Mistress mine are you like May, 

The maiden month in her tender green, 
Looking wistfully up the way 

Whence music is heard, whence summer is seen? 
Will you lift the latch as my foot draws nigh ^ 
To your gate of love ? for I mean to try." 



Impetuous Bob Carr wanted to make a 
rush at Fay, and clasp her in his arms. 

" Don't be in such a hurry, Bob," said Sir 
Hugh, who was standing by him, '* you'll 
have her in time." 

Edith sang . 

^^ Dawn, with flusht foot upon the mountain-tops, 
Stands beckoning to the Sun-god^s golden car. 
While on her high clear brow the morning star 



240 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

Grows fainter, as the silyer-misty copse 
And rosy river-bend and village white 
Feel the strong shafts of light. 

*' The tide of dreams has reached its utter ebb ; 
The joy of Dawn is in my Lady's eyes, 
Where at her window with a half -surprise 
She sees the meadows meshed with fairy web. 
And hears the happy skylark far above, 
Singing, / live 1 1 love /" 

John Carr had been watching her in 
patient melancholy fashion ; he was, perhaps, 
the saddest of the party. He had for three 
or four years been longing to ask Edith to 
marry him ; but he had never dared to do 
so. But just as he had made up his mind 
to risk the question he found he was too 
late. He would have loved and served 
Edith most loyally, but he thought of her 
with true delight as Lady Luttrel, and wor- 
shipped her at a distance as an inaccessible 
star. John Carr, one of the strongest of 



CHRISTMAS AT WBSTBURY PLACE. 241 

men, was also one of the humblest. Fiddler 
Carr with his Stradivarius was there, for 
there was never a Christmas entertainment 
at Roden Hall without him. But the 
crowning event of the evening was the coun- 
try dance ; when Sir Price led out the little 
old lady of Westbury, who was looking 
radiant in her diamonds and lace. This was 
the first time that Miss Litton had ever visit- 
ed Roden Hall, and Sir Price made a pretty 
allusion to it, and said something about the 
two families being joined in marriage in a 
speech at supper, a meal served at midnight 
to guests and servants. 

But after that midnight supper the fun grew 
" fast and furious,'' as Burns hath it, and the 
dancing wilder, and there was snapdragon of 
course, and a party of mummers (got up by 
the servants, under Edith's advice) came into 

VOL. m. B 



w 



242 SWEET AND TWENTY, 

the hall, with Robin Hood and Maid Marian 
and all the fabled foresters of our dear old 
ballad legend. And among those who en- 
tered the hall amid this quaint crowd was 
a *' pretty page with a dimpled chin," who 
sang in a charming contralto voice this 
ballad : 

" O 'tis merry, 'tis merry, in good greenwood. 
When mavis and merle are singing I 
But 'tis merrier still, by stream or hill, 
When the dinner-bell is ringing. 

" The forester free, ah! what cares he 
For the law a single button f 
Yet he must desire a dining-room fire 
And a saddle of Southdown mutton. 

" He may wind his horn when a buck he's slain. 
And his comrades greet with laughter. 
But he'd rather sit down to a haunch in town. 
And plenty of port thereafter." 

Who was this piquant page, I wonder ? 
That w^s a late night. Two or three 



CHRISTMAS AT WESTBUEY PIACB. 243 

successive suppers were organized, in inter- 
vals of dancing, impromptu charades, and 
other pretty follies. Paul Roden, not alto- 
gether void of original ideas, had laid in an 
enormous stock of live lobsters ; and he 
and Charlie Hawker, both of whom at pres- 
ent were rather "out in the cold," went 
into the kitchen every now and then to see 
they were properly boiled. It was great 
fiin. Champagne was prevalent (good 
champagne, mind you), and it is a fine 
fluid to dance upon. Everybody grew 
ecstatic at about five in the morning, when 
the final supper was organized . and then 
there was more dancing, and then there was 
breakfast at eight. It is not necessary to say 
that Miss Litton had been long in bed : but 
Fay had kept it up, and her eyes were very 
bright, and she was as gay as a wood- 

r2 



244 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

nymph. By-and-by Charlie Hawker, when 
they were all out of breath with trying to 
dance hornpipes and Highland reels, volou- 
teered a song. 

^' O what is tlie use of going to bed 
In the merry Christmas time f 
Let's dance all night in the Yule-log's light. 
And look upon sleep as a crime. 

^' Summer is sweet with its birds and flowers, 
And its streams that softly flow, 
But I like old winter with Yule-log's splinter, 
And mirth of the misteltoe. 

" And then Sir Boger de Coverley comes, 
And all the crowd is wild, 
And away I race at a galloping pace 
With some swift-ankled child." 

Charlie's song was received with loud ap- 
plause, as songs, good, bad, or indifferent, 
are likely to be received at an early hour in 
the morning, after much fun and flirtation 
and champagne, many dances, many suppers. 



CHBISTMAS AT WESTBURY PLACE. 245 

Dear reader, have you arrived at the age 
when you think such things wrong ? I hope 
not. I love to see boys playing cricket. 
On the same principle I, who never waltzed 
in my life, like to see waltzing. Byron's 
attack on the waltz, at the date of its intro- 
duction, showed a morbid and sensual feel- 
ing on his part, which lasted till he wrote of 
it in Don Jtum the famous line : 

" The only dance which teax^hes girls to think." 

What time the party broke up I will not 
say. It might have gone on for ever, if 
everyone had been as untireable as Charlie 
Hawker. 



246 



CHAPTER XX. 

pat's stepmother. 

" FiniB." 

Earliest author unknown. 

QIR HUGH LUTTREL took a pretty 
little place a couple of miles from 
Westbury, and made it habitable in his 
easy Indian way, and married our Edith 
very soon after these Christmas festivities. 

A charming place, be sure, made Edith of 
Eden Wood, which lay in a valley cosily 
sheltered from all the winds, for it looked 
southward to the river, and had pleasant 



fay's stepmother. 247 

shelter on all other sides. The house was 
small: a parlour (Sir Hugh liked the old 
word for a talking-room), a dining-room, a 
book-room, and five or six bed-rooms ; but 
the grounds were of many acres, and there 
was right of shooting over many hundreds 
more. It was just the sort of place that 
suited Hugh Luttrel and his wife, especially 
as there was a village which required a 
good deal of reform. The first thing the 
General did, when he saw the state of the 
village, was to go straight to the parson, a 
young Lancashire man, with all the priggish- 
ness of Rugby fresh upon him. But he 
soon discovered that there was nothing to 
be done with him. He tried to make him 
understand that, to improve the people 
spiritually, it was necessary to improve them 
temporally ; but the priggish parson seemed 



248 SWEST AND TWXNTT. 

to think that, if the people could be made 
to go to chorch on Sondays, everything else 
would be right. So said Sir Hugh Luttrel, 

" ril do the work for you."* 

He went to the labourers^ cottage by 
cottage, and found out their troubles. He 
gave them some small immediate help, but 
felt that they ought to be helped by those 
who employed them. However, he made 
the pot boil more comfortably in many cot- 
tages, for he always helped the cottagers if 
they needed it. 

His idea was to work upwards. 

So next he tried the farmers, and was 
amused yet disgusted with them. They 
and their wives and sons and daughters 
were ready to bow down and worship Sir 
Hugh Luttrel, Knight of the Star of India, 
and a great gentleman, who condescended 



fay's stepmother. 249 

to call at their houses and drink their ale ; 
but they could not for the life of them see 
that it was their duty to allow their labour- 
ers to live like human beings. Sir Hugh 
discovered that the ordinary farmer is a 
kind of intuitive Darwinist, and considered 
that, as men were developed from monkeys, 
they deserved no better treatment than 
monkeys. Failing the farmers, he tried the 
Lord of the Manor. 

An Earl. A Master of Hounds. A 
member of the lower House in days before 
his accession to the Peerage, who thought 
that the right way to enjoy life was to pro- 
mote popular enjoyment. A very good 
fellow in his way was Lord Deloraine, but 
he regarded the luxuries of life as more im- 
portant than its necessities. He was of the 
modern indifferent type, and thought the 



250 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

people could very well take care of them- 
selves. His stables were full of hunters, on 
which he freely mounted his numerous 
guests ; he gave splendid dinners, with wine 
of the choicest quality ; he hung his walls with 
pictures which he bought freely at the Royal 
Academy ; he had a fine library, and gave 
his librarian carte blanche as to buying 
books. 

But he could not see, even in the light of 
the General's strong eloquence, that he had 
any duty to his poor dependents. He 
thought they got on well enough. They 
were used to living on twelve shillings a 
week; to foul air and bad food; to ill- 
drained tumble-down cottages. The Earl 
was an optimist . of a sort. He was 
satisfied with his own lot in life, and 
blandly concluded that everyone else was 



fay's stepmother. 251 

also satisfied. Sir Hugh could not make 

any. ioipression on this stolid jp^rci^ de grege 

. < 

I^picuriy who said, when the General rose to 
leave, 

"Won't you stay to luncheon? I've a 
Chfi.teau Yquem that I don't think can be 
rivalled." 

"Thank you, Earl Deloraine," said the 
swordsman, his words as keen as his sabre. 
" I will not drink your Ch&teau Yquem, or 
eat salt with you. I will try to do some 
part of the duty which you ' neglect." 

He left the Earl in a state of dull amaze- 
ment, and never spoke to him again, or 
even acknowledged his existence. 

Then the General and enthusiastic Edith 
went to work with a will. From an out- 
lying part of their Eden Wood demesne 
they cut off a fragment, on which they built 



252 SWEET AND TWENTT. 

twenty detached cottages, each with a pretty 

» 

garden, and sank a well, and made quite a 
pleasant little colony. The bit of land, 
being in the very basin of the valley, was 
picturesque, and had some fine old trees 
upon it ; so the cottages had their protecting 
oaks and elms ready for them. 

Sir Hugh and Edith are still carrying on 
their good work, and we will wish them 
long life to complete all that they desire to 
do. 

Paul Roden in due time married a 
widowed Baroness, four or five years hie 
senior. She was a pretty clever kittenish 
little woman, with dark hair and eyes, and 
lived at Ravenscourt, a grand place a dozen 
miles from Irontown, with a vast deer park 
and other pleasaunces. But the late Lord 
Ravenscourt had (thanks to the Turf), con- 




fay's stepmother. 25^ 

trived to encumber it: and Lilith, Lady 
Ravenscourt, found the interest on his 
mortgages greatly reduced her income. At 
her death all the property would go to her 
son Algernon, at this time a boy of twelve. 
Lady Ravenscourt, looking around for an 
eligible husband, selected Paul, fascinated 
him as such a woman easily can, and made 
him marry her. He was not unhappy. 
Lady Ravenscourt always had her own way, 
yet managed to make him think he had his ; 
and he was proud of the grand entertain- 
ments he could give at Ravenscourt, of the 
high company he received, of the exclusive 
set to which his wife introduced him when 
they went to London. But in later years 
Paul Roden was less satisfied. When young 
Lord Ravenscourt came home from Harrow 
in the vacations^ he had learnt from his 



254 SWEET AND TWENTY, 

schoolfellows to consider his stepfather a 
" cad," and he began to treat him with a 
boyish air of contempt which Paul found 
it hard to endure. 

"Look here, mother," said young Lord 
Ravenscourt one day, "I wish you'd ask 
Mr. Roden, when he writes to me, not to 
use that writing-paper with that odious 
crest on it; the boys are always chaffing 
me, and asking me who's my friend, and 
where he dug up that Latin motto." 

John Carr is not yet married. His 
mother often talks to him on the subject, 
but he says he will marry directly he can 
find a lady who is like Edith. Edith pro- 
mises to find such a one . if she can. 

Poor little Sarah Daw had a provision made 
for her by generous Sir Price, when he heard 
that her reputation had suffered from his son's 



fay's stepmother. 255 

indiscretion. He settled an annuity on her, 
and strongly advised her mother to arrange 
for her to live away from the neighbourhood, 
to send her out of the country if possible. 
Mrs. Daw had a brother in Australia and 
sent her out to him, and she is now com- 
fortably married to a tradesman in Mel- 
bourne. 

Mrs. Gruffley still shakes her head over 
Sarah, and says she'll not do any good as an 
honest man's wife ; but the cook at West- 
bury Place thinks poor Sarah "never did 
no harm to nobody, and it's only right as 
Sir Price should come down handsome." 

And as to Charlie Hawker! Even as 
the butterfly roams from flower to flower, 
and the bird from tree to tree, so does 
Charlie wander amid the realms of beauty, 

'< Ut albulus columbusy aut Adoneus.'' 



256 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

He is as young and as pleasant as ever; 
still wears the best gloves and writes the 
wickedest rhymes possible; still loves his 
country holiday, and often stays with Sir 
Hugh and Edith, at Eden Wood. Edith 
declares that, if he is so long in choosing a 
wife, he will some day fall a victim to a 
designing widow. Gardenia blooms in his 
buttonhole, and witty sayings rise to his 
lips. Yet might he wisely take the advice 
of Quintus H. Flaccus to Leuconoe : 

^« Dnm loqmnnir, fugerit inyida 
Aetas ; carpe diem, qnam Tninimnm crediila poetoro." 

Does he ever dream that he is in the 
bar of the Marquis of Granby at Dorking, 
listening to the philosophic discourse of the 
elder Mr. Weller on the results of marrying 
a widow ? 

Sir Price found it very hard to live 



fat's stepmother. 257 

-without Edith, but he spent a great deal 
of his time with her, and she and Sir Hugh 
were often at Roden Hall. Fay thought 
it great fun to have a stepmother, and 
she used to chaff Edith tremendously. She 
would always call her Mamma Edith. But 
her delight was intense when a baby brother 
arrived . she never could nurse him and pet 
him enough. Of course Sir Price was his 
godfather, and he was christened Hugh 
Price. 

And now the time comes that brave and 
loving Bob Carr claims his pretty Fay. He 
has been away a great deal by reason of his 
regimental duties, but his absence makes 
his love only the more fiery. He cannot 
wait a day longer than Fay's twentieth 
birthday. So on a day in May, when the 
air was full of the scent of lilac and syringa 

VOL. m. 8 



258 SWEET AND TWENTY. 

blossom, Major Carr came down the plea- 
sant road that led to Sir Hugh's resi- 
dence. She knew he was coming. He had 
sent her a necklace of pearls by post, and a 
loving message which she kissed twenty 
times over. She was in the gayest humour, 
and her father and Edith watched her with 
happy amusement. 

"There,** she said, when she opened her 
package, "Bob has sent me some pearls. 
He says Fm a pearl myself. He writes 
dreadful nonsense, dear papa. Now, Mamma 
Edith, don't you be cross this morning, and 
want me to stay at home, for it's my 
twentieth birthday, and Bob's coming, and 
I must go and meet him alone . quite alone 
you know." 

"Suppose he comes in a fly," said Sir 
Hugh, mischievously. 



pay's stepmother. 259 

"Now is that likely, papa? But he's 
told me in his letter. He'll send on his 
things by the road, and meet me on the 
field path where there are such thousands 
of blue bells. Good-bye, Mamma Edith," 
she said gaily. "I shall have somebody 
else to scold me soon." 

The lovers met at the point where blue 
bells grew. Impetuous Bob clasped his 
beauty in his arms with delight, and said : 

"My darling Fayl Twenty this day, 
and mine for ever . Sweet and Twenty." 



THE END. 
