THE PRETTY WIDOW. 



CHAPTER I. 

A MYSTERIOUS STRANGER. 

If thou my secret guess, 

Speak of it never ; 
Nor let thy lips express 
Scorn of the deep distress 
Which on my heart must press 

Ever and ever. . G-abrielle Caek. 

One dusty July afternoon a threadbare- coated gen- 
tleman and a very shabby brown leather portmanteau 
arrived together at the hotel of the " Three Crowns/' 
in the Little Place of a certain dull old town in 
Picardy. Under the name of Poly blank this same 
portmanteau and its proprietor had been booked 
at the diligence office at Calais, from whence they 
had started that morning at daybreak. The former 
wagging loosely on the roof, and the latter packed 
tightly in the rotonde, they had bumped and jolted many 
weary leagues ; and, in the end, much travel-stained and 
A'ery dusty, they thus reached Madame Gobinard's hotel 
door. 

Time out of mind the heroes of romance have made 
their entrance into the realms of fiction as interesting 
travellers. When Mr. James was master of the cere- 
monies they generally came on horseback. Under Mr. 
Cooper's guidance they usually arrived on foot, and in 

1 



2 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

mocassins. Other popular novelists have sent them to us 
by coach and rail, and now and then a lucky one has 
come in his own carriage. 

It certainly is rather mortifying, when one has got a 
hero to do what one likes with, to be obliged to bring 
him under the reader's notice as a traveller in that " re- 
ceptacle for dust and bad company" the rotonde ; to be 
compelled, by troublesome considerations of probability or 
veracity, even to dispense with that wild and stormy night 
which romancists ever have at their command ; and to be 
fain to introduce him to you in a natural common-place 
manner, without as much as a single flash of lightning or 
a distant peal of thunder to give eclat to his entrance on 
the scene. More mortifying still is it to have to record 
that Mr. Polyblank, from slipping his foot in alighting 
from the diligence, signalized his arrival in Saint Babylas 
by sprawling on his hands and knees before the assembled 
landlady, guests, and waiters, after the manner of the 
Norman Conqueror's first descent on British soil j only 
that, alas ! as the sequel will show, our Polyblank's sub- 
sequent career was anything but triumphant. 

He was a spare man, of middle height, of a mild aspect, 
with an intellectual dreamy expression, which seldom 
failed to interest those who observed him closely. His 
nature was evidently timid and retiring, and that little 
accident of the fall was not calculated to set him at his 
ease. His knowledge of the language, too, appeared to 
be rather limited ; and failing to understand the at- 
tendants, or to make them readily understand him, a kind 
of contest ensued respecting the porterage of the brown 
leather portmanteau, from which he emerged temporarily 
triumphant, but much flustered and out of breath, 
and staggered with his prize up the passage of the 
Jiotel. 



A MYSTERIOUS STRANGER. 6 

The mean appearance of this Polyblank and his lug- 
gage, had there been any other travellers to honour 
Madame Gobinard with their company, would not, pro- 
bably, have attracted much attention ; but being the only 
arrival, everybody stared at him very hard, and indeed stared 
him quite out of countenance. It was therefore an un- 
pleasant promenade he had to make all the length of the 
hall before half-a-score of grinning idlers, bumping his 
legs with the edge of his portmanteau when he tried to 
drag it, and tripping himself up with one of its loose 
hanging straps when he endeavoured to carry it with 
both hands in front of him. 

The " Three Crowns" is, as everybody knows Avho is 
acquainted with the ancient town of Picardy, which is 
the scene of this history, the most expensive of its hotels ; 
and as the English traveller's appearance seemed to indi- 
cate that he was not as wealthy as continental landlords 
usually give his countrymen credit for being, it is not to 
be wondered at that he tried to get his board and lodg- 
ing for the night at the most reasonable rates obtainable ; 
or that he was desirious of conducting the necessary 
negotiations for that object in the lowest possible tone 
of voice. In this endeavour, however, he was signally 
frustrated by the landlady, who, on receiving his inquiries 
in a whisper, repeated them with variations at the top of 
her voice ; at the same time replying thereto with such 
ready loquacity that even if Mr. Polyblank had not been . 
as he was . overwhelmed with shame and confusion by 
this undesired publicity, he would never have been able 
to follow her meaning. 

Had he been alone he would, probably, have ventured 
on a bargain. As it was, if he could have managed it, 
he would at once have turned tail and fled ; but what 
could our poor hero do with half a hundredweight of 

1.3 



4 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

portmanteau knocking about his keels ? There could be 
no doubt that he was very poor ; but it is more than 
probable that he would have allowed himself to be robbed 
of his last farthing rather than have revealed the dreadful 
secret of his impecuniosity before the genteel company 
there assembled. 

Surrendering his luggage, therefore, to a nimble 
person answering to the name of Alexander, he followed 
that blithe domestic up a remarkably slippery staircase 
to a room on the third floor, where he seated himself on 
his luggage to take breath. 

Not that there was much breath to be got in this 
apartment, for the window was closed, and the nature of 
its fastening remained, after he had investigated it, an 
unfathomable mystery The sun's rays, throughout the 
day, had poured into the chamber uninterruptedly, and 
there was a choking smell of dry cedar-wood, with a faint 
suspicion of stale cigar smoke, a puff of charcoal, and a 
whiff of garlic, making up, altogether, that peculiar and 
indescribable perfume which every English traveller with, 
as they say at the theatre, a " practical" nose, must have 
experienced in most continental bedrooms on the third 
floor, and in many on lower storeys. As Mr. Polyblank 
sat there, in moody meditation, he could not help think- 
ing that the aspect of affairs in general was anything but 
comforting. 

This was the first time he had crossed that Channel 
which, looked at from a Briton's point of view, is entirely 
British property ; and he did not as yet agree with Sterne,, 
that they manage these things better in France. He 
could not, for instance, understand how it was better to 
have a hearthrug by the side of the bed instead of a carpet 
all over the room. He could hardly reconcile with his 
insular notions of cleanliness a pint-and-a-half water-jug, 



A MYSTERIOUS STRANGER. 5 

for washing. And as the bear of famous memory ob- 
served, " What, no soap ?" 

The strangeness of his surroundings was not, however, 
that which caused him the most uneasiness. He was, 
perhaps, one of the most bashful men alive, and, at the 
same time, and perhaps for that reason, very awkward. 
He had hurt himself more than a little when he fell on 
his hands and knees at the hotel door ; but the concus- 
sion had not bruised his body as the laughter did his 
spirit. His imperfect French and his abortive attempts 
at economy, had also, he well knew, afforded considerable 
amusement to the lookers-on, and, to crown all, he had 
slipped his foot again upon those horrible polished stairs 
when following Alexander, and the titter of the spectators 
still tingled in his burning eai's. 

He was miserably poor and very lonely. He knew 
not a living soul in the country to which he had come to 
work for his bread. In his thirty-sixth year he was about 
to begin life afresh. He had begun it ever so many times 
before, and had made as many woful failures. The prospect 
now before him was not very brilliant. He had come here 
in answer to an advertisement, to take a situation as 
teacher of English in the Imperial College, and his salary 
was to be fifty pounds per annum. Nor had he any 
hope of a rise. He had, indeed, no particular hope of 
the affair generally, further than that he trusted to be 
able to keep the place he had obtained. Twenty years 
ago he was very sanguine. There was a time when he 
supposed, as the saying is, " he had all the world in a 
string." Since then he had grown wiser, growing mean- 
while older and greyer, creeping nearer and nearer to 
that common abode in which we all at last, be we simple- 
tons or sages, must mingle dust with dust. 

His was to the general eye an emotionless face, but to 



6 THE PRETTY WIDOW- 

the observant it seemed as though beneath the placid 
surface, fierce tempests of passion might have raged, all 
unsuspected. A poor commonplace, harmless sort of 
creature he seemed to be, -with a worn and wearied look 
at times about his blue eyes, and a hungry one about his 
pinched and fleshless cheeks, which would have frightened 
a boarding-house keeper. 

" At what hour is the ordinary ?" he had inquired of 
Alexander, when the waiter, having deposited the port- 
manteau on the floor was about to retire, continuing the 
air which he had been humming to himself throughout 
the upstairs journey. 

" At five, sir," he replied. 

" Thank you," said Mr. Polyblank ; " thank you. At 
five ? Thank you." Then, with a desperate effort, and 
in as careless a tone as he could manage, " How much is 
it?" 

" Three francs, sir," answered Alexander ; and, having 
waited a moment for another question, he resumed his 
tune at the point he had dropped it, and retired 
leisurely. 

" I wonder/' murmured Mr. Polyblank, uneasily, 
" whether he'll mention downstairs what I have been 
asking. I wish I had not spoken. There's a disagree- 
able smirk about the fellow. I certainly don't like these 
foreign waiters. I wonder whether they all hum in that 
way !" 

He got off his portmanteau, presently, and opened it 
to take out the necessary articles from the poor little stock 
it contained ; for its great weight was occasioned almost 
entirely by shabby old volumes very much thumbed and 
very weak in their backs. From among these he drew 
out a small paper parcel of clean linen, and having se- 
lected a collar he fastened it on with a little manoeuvring, 



A MYSTERIOUS STRANGER. 7 

chose the best part of his blue satin scarf for the 
outside fold, and fixed it with a neck-pin of bygone 
fashion, the head of which contained a speck of some- 
thing about the size of a pin's point which its owner 
gratified himself by supposing to be a diamond. 

Before his toilet was completed the loud ringing of a 
bell below stairs informed him that dinner was ready, 
and so, with a final wrench at the collar, a throttling 
tussle with the scarf, and an unexpected stab in his thumb, 
from the jewelled neck-pin, he pulled himself together,, 
and made up his mind to face the company. What,, 
however, with the delay caused by these arrangements, 
and the time occupied in the perilous descent of the 
shining oak stairs, he did not reach the dining saloon 
until the soup had been disposed of. 

Through a hot mist he saw a long table crowded by 
hungry gentlemen, who evidently regarded the meal as 
a matter of business, from the earnestness with which 
they devoted themselves to it. He could see no vacant 
place, and meandered vaguely behind the guests' chairs 
until the blithe Alexander taking him into custody led 
him to a seat and fixed him between two very fat farmers,, 
who squared their elbows while eating, like winning 
jockeys passing Tattenham Corner. 

" You're all behind," said Alexander, nudging him 
with a soup plate ; " you must be quick ! Here, take 
some of this. It is good." 

" I can choose for myself," replied Polyblank, -with 
English dignity, and in the best French he was capable 
of. 

But Alexander was not so easily routed, for he seemed 
to have resolved on taking the poor foreigner under his 
protecting wing, and, in the innocence of his heart, never 
for a moment dreamt that his kindly-meant suggestions 



8 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

could be deemed offensive. He therefore pressed -upon 
Polyblank all those dishes which he thought he would 
like, but which Polyblank persistently refused. At other 
times Alexander energetically warned him off certain 
other dishes of which the misguided gentleman obsti- 
nately insisted on partaking, very much to his own dis- 
advantage. 

Owing to this petty warfare, and also to the circum- 
stance of his having, while running his eye helplessly 
over the wine list, ordered a higher priced vintage than 
he wished, or had any occasion to do, this dinner was not 
a very pleasant affair. He was glad when the appearance 
of the roast fowl and salad indicated the end of the 
meats ; and Alexander having borne down upon him, 
unsuccessfully, with grapes, green figs, plums, peaches, 
Gruyere cheese, and " lady's fingers," left him to regale 
himself upon almonds and raisins, which, perversely, he 
pretended to prefer to the rest of the dessert. 

While he sat munching and sipping he listened to the 
company conversing, though without being able to make 
much out of it. There were two persons whom he took 
to be commercial travellers, and there was an officer in 
uniform with one epaulet whom, afterwards, he knew to 
be a sous-lieutenant in a foot regiment then quartered 
in the town. There were one or two small farmers with 
dull, heavy faces, and loud, harsh voices. There were 
half a dozen fat and affable little men, natives of Saint 
Baby las, who probably enjoyed small independencies, and 
came to dinner at the table d'hote for the sake of the 
society. Other persons there, were, besides, of whom, 
from the place in which he sat he could not obtain a 
clear view ; and directly opposite to him was a mysterious 
stranger. 

This person probably did not strike those around him 



A MYSTERIOUS STRANGER. 9 

as being particularly mysterious ; but to him, from the 
first moment, Mr. Polyblank's eyes had been attracted 
by a curiosit}' for which he could not account to himself. 
A well-made, handsome young man he was, though with 
a sort of affected weariness about his expression and 
manner, more often to be met with in England than in 
France. Evidently a young man whose existence was a 
burden to him, although he seemed to enjoy robust 
health, and to have an appetite which some of your 
delicate, fmnikin eaters would have thought enormous. 
It was not, apparently, worth this young man's while to 
enter into conversation with those around him, or to 
listen with any attention to what was said to him, or even 
to be commonly polite. 

One of the affable little men, before alluded to, having 
caught this gentleman's eye, in the course of a long 
story he was telling, weakly supposed that he had 
awakened his interest, and continued to address him, but, 
presently, the young man yawning in his face and turn- 
ing wearily away, the affable little man was overwhelmed 
with confusion, and found the climax of his tale so 
embarrassingly remote that he was obliged to wind it up 
prematurely. 

The young man sat sipping his wine, frowning now 
and then as though in deep thought, and biting the ends 
of his moustache. Evidently he was a hero of the 
romantic school, and, hero like, had weighty matters on 
his mind ; . a dark intrigue, perhaps . the honour of a 
noble house . a half- arranged murder . the unburied 
body of a victim weighing heavily on his conscience ! 
Which was it ? 

To poor Polyblank he seemed a prodigiously fine gen- 
tleman. He was handsomely dressed. He had good 
jewellery.. That supercilious withering manner became 



10 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

hiin mightily, though perhaps not fully appreciated by 
the withered. As for the Englishman, the mysterious 
stranger seemed to be unaware of his existence, although 
he sat directly opposite to him. "When first of all Poly- 
blank had blundered into his seat, the other had not 
raised his eyes. jNTow and then, during the course of the 
dinner, he seemed not so much to stare at Polyblank as 
at a highly-gilt clock upon the mantelpiece behind him, 
in the manufacture of which the time of day had been, 
as it were, swamped by elaborate allegory. There cer- 
tainly was a mystery about the stranger, in the eyes of 
Polyblank at least, who, munching his almonds and 
raisins, fell into a reverie respecting his probable name 
and position in life, wondering as he did so whether it 
was likely they would ever see one another again. 

It was not probable. During the last twenty years, 
passed as usher and tutor in many English schools, Poly- 
blank had more than once felt an interest in and formed 
an attachment for some pupil who going away had easily 
forgotten his tutor, or if remembering him at all, remem- 
bered him only with a laugh half pitying and half con- 
temptuous, as that poor devil who led such a life of it at 
old So-and-so's. In time he had come to think it quite 
in the nature of things that some persons should leave 
school, live happy ever afterwards, forgetting all about 
other persons ; and that the other persons should go 
grinding on with an ever lessening interest in life, taking 
their kicks and halfpence with becoming humility, and 
praising the Lord the while that the halfpence were no 
fewer and the kicks no harder. 

Well ! well ! it had been a weary life which he passed 
in those hateful English school-rooms, and doubtless as 
wearisome a prospect lay before him ; but he could bear 
it better now, because he had buried his old hopes and 



A MYSTERIOUS STRANGER. 11 

ambitions. Yes, buried them very deep., and well trampled 
down the earth. All that was gone and done with. He 
scarcely retained anything to remind him of the unhappy, 
wasted time that was gone, unless it were those dog-eared 
volumes upstairs in the battered portmanteau ; in some 
of which Monsieur Polyblank, traveller to St. Babylas, 
figured as P and Peter Polyblank, accompanied by a 
date that was nearly thirty years old ; for the books had 
been his when he himself was a schoolboy, struggling 
over that asses'-bridge across which he had since coaxed, 
and dragged, and driven so many reluctant learners. 

Only these humble records of the past remained,, 
together with one or two ragged bills, which it had 
pinched him sorely to pay ; one or two testimonials to 
his moral character and his learning ; the certificate of 
his mother's marriage pasted upon calico ; one of her 
wedding cards, stained blue and brown with damp ; and 
her portrait, in faded water-colours, which some heartless 
young rogue years ago had decorated with a pipe and 
moustaches, that no effort upon Polyblank's part had been 
able wholly to efface. 

But while he sat pondering upon these and other 
matters which somehow unaccountably at the sight of 
the mysterious stranger came crowding on his memory, 
the other guests began to rise one by one from the table 
and take their departure. The sous-lieutenant rising 
first went buckling himself up down the passage and 
across the courtyard, until his face assumed a crimson 
hue. The heavy farmers stumped out, and fell to scream- 
ing over the harnessing of their lean beasts of burden, 
and presently went jolting in their carts over the Little 
Place as only those were ever jolted who have travelled 
without springs across Saint Babylas's boulders. After 
them the affable little fat men began to drop off one by 



12 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

one, as so many over-ripe plums may drop from the 
parent bough, as some one else has somewhere said. 

It was then that Polyblank in his turn began to think 
he ought to be going, though he did not exactly know 
where to go to. He had no business on hand for that 
evening. He thought it would be time enough to call 
on the following morning upon the Head of the College, 
since it was not until the day after, as had been arranged, 
that he was to begin his duties. To-morrow, too, he 
would be able to find some lodgings. He did not think 
it would be wise to go to a cafe, because it might be 
contrary to the college rules for a teacher to enter one 
of these establishments. Neither did he want to walk, 
about the streets until it should become dusk, when he 
thought he might venture out and reconnoitre without 
fear of being noticed; -for perhaps the less that was seen 
of him before he was regularly installed as a " professor" 
the better. While he was hesitating what to do Alexander 
came once more to the rescue, and this time Polyblank 
was fain to take the waiter's advice. 

" You can go anywhere you like, and do what you 
please," said Alexander, waving his hand grandly, as 
though he were making a present of many acres. " The 
courtyard is at your disposal. You are at liberty to 
enter the garden beyond, or you can go for a little walk 
and take your half cup at a cafe, or you can take it 
here." 

Mr. Polyblank would take it there if Alexander 
pleased, and Alexander pleasing, it was brought to him 
and set upon a little marble-topped table by the side of 
a window looking out into the courtyard with its white 
walls and its green shutters, its row of plants in wooden 
boxes, and its distant view of madame in her bureau, and 
of the flower-garden beyond . beginning on the house- 



A MYSTERIOUS STRANGER. 13> 

top and going up steps into the sky. Alexander by this- 
time had cleared the table ; for all the guests, -with one 
exception, bad now left the salon. The mysterious 
stranger still lingered. He had risen the last from 
dessert, and had stood a long time at the window on the 
opposite side of the room, looking gloomily out upon the 
grass-grown street. 

Disturbed by a hurricane of tablecloth, which arose 
beneath Alexander's nimble fingers, he sauntered away 
with a scowl into the courtyard, and meditatively picked 
his way across and across the flagstones, taking especial 
care to avoid the cracks. But growing, in due course, 
weary of this exercise, he wandered back again to the 
salon, called for writing materials, and began laboriously 
to fill a large sheet of paper with very small crabbed 
writing. Meanwhile Polyblank had reached the dregs 
of his coffee, and was wondering whether or not it was 
the custom of the country to leave any of the brandy in 
the little two-go decanter in which it had been served to 
him ; finally he decided that it was, though at the same 
time he wished it was not. 

And now he endeavoured to amuse himself with the 
reports of the Tribunal of Correctional Police in the 
Saint Babylas local journal ; but he was unable to keep 
his eyes off the mysterious stranger, or to avoid listening 
to the scratching of his pen, which was distinctly audible 
in the heavy silence that had fallen upon the hotel. 
Afar off Alexander was faintly melodious, warbling one of 
the immortal Soap Bubbles of the great Charles Paul. 
Occasionally was to be heard the clic-clac of a sabot in 
the street, or a sing-song voice, raised suddenly and as 
suddenly subsiding again. The twilight was gathering 
in the corners of the room. Surely it was too dark for 
the penman to see what he was about where he sat, for 



14 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

even at the window the faint brown printing-ink began 
to dance before the reader's eyes. The stranger, how- 
ever, went on a little while longer, then made a dash and 
a flourish, indicative of an imposing signature, and walked 
away to the window looking on to the street, to read 
what he had written. But soon Mr. Polyblank heard 
an exclamation of impatience, and the crumpling of 
paper, and then the stranger was tearing up the result of 
his labour into a thousand atoms, which he threw upon 
the floor and trampled under foot with a muttered oath. 
Then throwing himself upon a couch, he lit a cigar and 
puffed at it despondingly. 

" A very strange gentleman," said Mr. Polyblank to 
himself, as he rose and put on his hat . " a very strange 
gentleman, who has evidently something on his mind." 
And thus reflecting he made his way towards the street. 
It happened, however, that when half across the court- 
yard he came to a standstill, to feel in his pockets for the 
key of his portmanteau, which he fancied he might have 
left upstairs ; and, while feeling for it, he stood near 
enough to Madame Gobinard's counting-house window 
to overhear a portion of a conversation between that lady 
and the wife of Mr. Pomponney, the chemist round the 
corner, of which the mysterious stranger was the subject. 

" Oh yes, he's here," Mr. Polyblank heard the land- 
lady say ; " he's been here close upon a month. He may 
go away, too, as soon as he chooses, for me. I shan't 
ask him to remain, I promise you. He's writing a letter 
in the dining-room, and I hope it's to tell his friends 
he'll soon be back with them." 

" There's not much chance of that, though, is there, 
Madame Gobinard ?" 

" No, indeed ! not much while somebody remains in 
the neighbourhood." 



A MYSTERIOUS STRANGER. 15 

" Unless somebody dismisses him." 

" I am afraid that somebody is too tender-hearted to 
do that. Poor little angel ! Good little heart ! Oh, 
the good-for-nothing ; and oh, what fools we women 
are \" 

While thus Madame Gobinard was exclaiming, and 
while Mr. Polyblank was still fumbling for his key, the 
mysterious stranger, himself, came lounging out, and 
slowly approached the speakers. 

" Will you prepare me my bill, madame ?" he said. " I 
shall leave Saint Babylas the first thing in the morning." 

Not altogether without a guilty blush, good Madame 
Gobinard answered that she would do as he desired, and 
seemed upon the point of adding something in the shape 
of an apology when a carriage came rattling across the 
Palace and drew up at the door. The window of this 
carriage being lowered, Mr. Polyblank caught a mo- 
mentary glimpse of a dainty little black bonnet and a dear 
little round pink-and- white face with big, brown, wonder- 
ing baby's eyes, with a low forehead, which a cluster of 
light brown cur]s made even lower still, with a dimpled 
chin, with decidedly a wide mouth, with very red lips 
and two rows of teeth, white though not very regular. 
In point of fact, he caught a glimpse of a very pretty 
woman . one of that sort whom men turn round to look 
after, and all other women pull to pieces. 

That mysterious young man who had something on 
his mind, who had written the long letter and torn it to 
pieces, and given himself up to despair, came eagerly forward 
at sight of this pretty woman's head, to clasp the plump 
little tightly-gloved hand which came out of the carriage 
window to meet his. Then, as he stood talking to its 
owner, and Madame Gobinard and her friend whispered 
furtively together, Mr. Polyblank having found his key, 



16 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

took his way slowly across the Little Place. He had 

not gone very far when the rattling of wheels behind him 

warned him of the carriage's approach, and, as it passed 

him rapidly, he caught one more glimpse of the pretty 

head with the brown curls and the wondering baby's eyes 

which, as long as possible, were fixed upon the figure of 

the mysterious stranger standing in front of the hotel door. 

" I wonder," said Mr. Polyblank, as he walked away, 

" I wonder whether that is the Somebody they were 

talking about." 

While he was yet in the Place, and lingering in front 
of a shop window, he heard a brisk footfall behind him, 
and a merry voice humming a tune. Turning, in ex- 
pectation of seeing Alexander, he found instead, to his 
astonishment, that it was the young man of mystery ; no 
longer gloomy and despairing though, but instead having 
such a radiant countenance as must surely have belonged 
to one of the happiest men alive. 

" I wonder, now," said Mr. Polyblank, as he walked 
onwards, " whether that is Somebody's work." 

And actually it then for the first time struck him as 
being odd that there had never been a Somebody in his 
case. Certainly there never had been ; and was it likely 
there ever would be ? At any rate, he had got through his 
first thirty-six years in safety. He was now in the prime 
of life . such a prime as it was. He had not over much 
flesh on his bones, or hair on his head, and he was of but 
little use at diamond type without his spectacles. The 
clothes that covered him were threadbare and frayed at 
the edges ; but his brain was stored with classic lore. 
He did not know much about life, but you could not 
easily have puzzled him with a Greek verb. Yes, he 
had got through six-and-thirty years of toil and trouble . 
and only to think that all his troubles were yet to come ! 



17 



CHAPTER II. 

THE MARTYRDOM OF THE NEW PROFESSOR. 

Non diable au front cormi, mais un diable d'enfant 
Comme en donne le ciel sans qu'on les lui demande. 

Eaynal. 

A person of consequence, who was staying at the hotel, 
opening his chamber window very early one morning, and 
looking out upon the still sleeping town of Saint Babylas, 
.smiled a pitying smile as he said : . " How in the name 
of wonder do the inhabitants of this humdrum place pass 
their lives ?" 

And truly such an inquiry might naturally suggest 
itself to the mind of a person of consequence who lived 
somewhere else ; for Saint Babylas was indeed but a poor 
little town stuck in the middle of a bare, bleak country 
of uninviting aspect. A very quiet, orderly town it was, 
which went to bed soon . shutting up the most dis- 
solute cafes by half-past ten ; got up very early, caught 
its little worm, and took it to the best market, where, 
howeyer, it frequently happened that a very few pence 
rewarded a great deal of labour. 

The richer portion of the population of Saint Babylas 
was for the most part made up of worthy citizens with an 
income of from eighty to a hundred pounds a year . good 
souls who grubbed on somehow not less happily or unhap- 
pily than the rest of the world which never heard of them. 

A very poor place indeed: yet it had once been strongly 
fortified, and cannon was still mounted on its grey old 
crumbling walls ; and on these ramparts any fine day the 
Saint Babylas children and their nurses might be found 
sauntering beneath the somewhat niggardly shade fur- 

2 



18 THE PRETTY WIDOW- 

nished by the double row of lime trees there growing. 
Rather a bare, naked look had Saint Babylas, the streets 
of which ofttimes lay so silent in the midday sunlight 
that had it not been for the inevitable idle dog panting 
in the white heat, it might have suggested the idea of a 
city of sleepers. 

Now, if you had entered Saint Babylas by Saint 
Abraham's Gate and, traversing the street of the Soul- 
which-mounts-to-Heaven,* turned sharply to the left, 
where, at the corner of Sucking-pig-street, is the tobacco 
shop, standing outside which that little wooden military 
man Avith the weather beaten nose has smoked the same 
pipe these fifty years and more, you would have found 
yourself, once upon a time, in Louis Philippe-street. 
But a few years afterwards, pursuing the same course, 
you would have found no such place in existence, although 
the same houses still were there, and apparently kept by 
the same people ; but the name had been changed, and 
it was then the street of the Republic. There came a 
time, however, when that name was also discarded ; and 
now-a-days, the street of the Emperor will conduct you, 
by Boiled Potato-street, to the street of the Martyred 
Saint, where stands a building that was once the Royal 
School and the Lyceum, but is now the Imperial College 
of Saint Babylas. 

This Imperial College is at the present writing an an- 
cient building, which would be gray with age if it had 
not been recently whitewashed; which would be venerable 
had it not lately been subjected, at great cost, to hideous 
modern improvements. It would be difficult now to say 
what style of architecture it belongs to ; it has been so 
knocked about and tindergone so many changes since the 



* It may perhaps not be unnecessary to state that these names are real. 



THE MARTYRDOM OF THE NEW PROFESSOR. 10 

days when Titus Oates was one of its parlour boarders. 
A noble old building, doubtless, it had been, before brick- 
layers, plasterers, and painters made wild work with its 
mullions, billet mouldings, trefoils, lancets, pinnacles, and 
flying buttresses, and sacrilegious whitewashers fell foul 
of its architecture, generally. 

" We have here, Monsieur Paulyblon," said M. 
Roustoubique, the proviseur or chief of the Imperial 
College, indicating with a graceful turn of his hand a 
large assemblage of dusty urchins screaming and scram- 
bling in the great courtyard ; " we have here that which, 
rightly moulded, may some day be their country's orna- 
ment and pride. Who knows, Monsieur Paulyblon, but 
we see in these our future senators, our future field- 
marshals, our great authors, our famous artists. Here, 
Monsieur Paulyblon, we have them in the rough (there 
was no mistake about the rough). Let us do our best to 
mould their plastic minds. This is the raw (raw enough) 
material. Let the finished work bear the impress of the 
master's hand." 

But here a small portion of the raw material coming 
unexpectedly full butt into the proviseur's stomach, 
knocked all his breath and the remainder of the allegory 
out of him, and though the urchin certainly bore the 
impression of the master's hand . and foot, too, for that 
matter . for some hours afterwards, there is no reason to 
believe that he felt particularly grateful for it. Professor 
Polyblank found out, before the first day was over, that 
a teacher of the young who tried to do his duty in the 
College of Saint Babylas, would earn every halfpenny of 
his twelve hundred francs. It was a tough job, and not 
without its dangers ; indeed it was a wonder how he 
lived through all his sufferings. 

Besides a settled determination from the outset to 

2.2 



20 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

badger him out of his wits, there were not wanting among 
his pupils some who plotted together to do him grievous 
bodily harm. How otherwise shall we account for the 
pin in the seat of his chair, the pepper mixed with his 
snuff, the train of gunpowder in connexion with the 
cracker artfully concealed under the leg of his table ? 
He had to deal with some rough customers in his time, 
had Mr. Polyblank, and it had been his lot to lick or half 
lick some very awkward cubs into shape. He knew, too, 
to his cost, that boys would be boys ; but until he came 
to the Imperial College of Saint Babylas he had no notion 
what a mischievous French boy was. 

For fifty pounds a year the professor was expected 
to teach eight hours per diem, and on some of those hot, 
thirsty, restless July afternoons young France became a 
trouble to Lira. He began at nine in the morning, and 
stopped till twelve. Went home to dinner, and returned 
at one ; then worked till six. The scene of his labours 
was always one or the other of two rooms overlooking a 
dreary courtyard, the gravel of which was, here and 
there, partly worn, and partly scooped, into holes, as if 
rabbits had been burrowing in it. The two apartments 
where the new professor taught closely resembled each 
other. They were both spacious and dingy, and had 
been whitewashed long ago. Their ceilings were decorated 
with coloured wafers ingeniously stuck thereon by boys 
who threw them up on two-sous pieces, the upper surface 
of the wafers having been wet in order that they might 
adhere when they came in contact with the ceiling. 
High up on one of the walls was a small leaden crucifix. 
There were two windows to each room, strongly guarded 
by iron bars. Round the room were several cupboards 
or lockers, each bearing a number. Along three sides 
of the room ran a long desk, with three forms which 
were fixtures in front. On the fourth side was a small 



THE BIARTYRDOM OF THE NEW PROFESSOR. 21 

raised platform, with a chair and table for the professor. 
In the middle of the room a stove. They were not 
pleasant places, these two school-rooms, to pass long 
summer days in ; and it must be confessed that while 
waiting till his pupils had perfected themselves in their 
lessons, Mr. Polyblank occasionally covered his eyes, and 
snatched portions of a never to be completed period of 
forty winks. Prom that raised platform a professor 
gifted with ordinary powers of vision might have raked 
the entire class with eagle glance ; but Mr. Polyblank's 
range of sight being limited, the young Prancais were not 
slow to avail themselves of this optical defect. The young 
gentlemen delighted in playing off various schoolboy 
pranks. 

A paper warfare, taking the form of pellets, was 
waged almost continuously during the hours of Mr. 
Polyblank's class, and wagers were sometimes laid as 
to who would first succeed in hitting the professor . an 
unprecedented outrage in Polyblank's scholastic expe- 
rience. Por this and other offences of graver or lighter 
turpitude, he allotted to the culprits certain hours of 
Petenue or Arret, the former punishment signifying stop- 
ping in during play time to write from dictation, the 
latter that the culprit should stand with his face to the 
wall in the playground whilst the other boys played ; 
a position which certain of the blackest sheep frequently 
maintained, during play-hours, for a month or six weeks 
at a stretch. 

During the winter months the stove in the middle 
of the room offered, under the supervision of a short- 
sighted professor, peculiar facilities for the cultivation of 
some of the lighter branches of the culinary art. The 
manufacture of toffee was a flourishing business, and a 
brisk trade was done in roasted chestnuts and potatoes. 
Deprived of these pleasures during summer, the young 



99 



THE PRETTY WIDOW 



gentlemen found eompensation in the pursuit of horti- 
culture and entomology- Sickly crops of mustard-and- 
cress were grown in desks upon strips of flannel. 
Silkworms were reared in large numbers, and small 
happy families of lizards, May-bugs, and black-beetles 
were kept in cardboard boxes. As the nurture of 
these pets demanded constant attention upon the part 
of their owners, and as it was not unusual for a pupil's 
head to disappear for some ten or fifteen minutes at a 
stretch, within his desk, the professor was frequently 
obliged to demand an explanation of these prolonged 
burro wings. 

One day, after he had been about a week at the 
co lege, Mr. Polyblank, seeing that six heads in a row 
had disappeared, and hearing from behind the upraised 
desk lids the sounds of angry contention, bore down upon 
the young gentlemen, and instituted a rigid search ; and 
then, oh, what a discovery was made ! In the desk of 
one Bardajos was found a frog. One Bourdichon kept 
crickets. Coquillard was evidently a dealer in May-bugs, 
Pepinet had a lizard, and the brothers Moineau silk- 
worms. Stores of paper pellets also came to light, as 
well as offensive weapons in the shape of pop-guns and 
toy cannon. To seize the latter articles seemed to Mr. 
Polyblank the proper course of action ; but how to deal 
with the live stock ? Unhappily, making a snatch at a 
cardboard box, the lizard it contained ran up his sleeve. 
The professor, in some alarm, pulled off his coat, reckless 
of the condition of his flannel- shirt, the elbows of which 
were repaired by patches of a brighter coloured stuff. 
A roar of laughter saluted his appearance in shirt sleeves, 
and was a signal for a general riot. All the May-bugs 
were immediately launched in the air. A shower of 
pellets rattled about Polyblank's ears. 



THE POBIPONNEY'S FIRST FLOOR. 23 

Fixing upon the one whom he supposed to be the 
leader, the new professor seized Bardajos by the collar, 
but that young gentleman being extremely strong and 
nimble, slipped between his legs and tripped him up. 
And at that moment, in the midst of a demoniacal shout., 
M. Roustoubique strode into the room and gazed about 
him in astonishment. 

" Is this the way, sir, you conduct your class ?" he in- 
quired, in icy tones ; and, before Mr. Polyblank could 
explain, he added hastily, " Put on your coat, sir, put 
on your coat. It is not to teach le boxe that your ser- 
vices are required." 

When they talked the matter over afterwards in 
private, M. Roustoubique made a passing allusion to the 
patched elbows which was not wanting in severity. 



CHAPTER III. 

THE POMPONNEY's FIRST FLOOR. 

Shrinking from each rude gaze or jesting word, 

A hidden fire within his lustrous eyes, 

Telling of musings deep ; and pale thin cheeks, 

Bearing their witness of the midnight watch.. . Plumptee. 

" Pelicite," said Mr. Hippolite Pomponney, pharma- 
ceutical chemist, of Saint Babylas, " you will see." 

When thus he spoke, Mr. Pomponney was standing 
outside his shop upon a chair, which Madame Pom- 
ponney was holding steady for him, and he was knock- 
ing a nail into the wall by the side of his private door. 
In case of accident, Mr. Pomponney's forethought had 
provided Madame Pomponney with another nail, which 
she held at the same time that she held the chair, and 



24 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

she furthermore had charge of a loop string, attached to- 
which was a small parallelogram of pasteboard, bearing 
an announcement respecting a furnished room to let in 
Mr. Pomponney's establishment. 

The first nail, however, having done all that was re- 
quired of it, Mr. Pomponney, passing down the hammer, 
called upon Felicite to give him the card, which took 
both hands to hang up. The card thus disposed of to 
his satisfaction, Mr. Pomponney called upon Felicite to 
concentrate her energies upon the steadying of the chair,, 
and having made the descent with safety, he stepped 
back into the road, with his head on one side, to contem- 
plate the residt of his labours. 

" Felicite," Mr. Pomponney repeated, " you will see." 
Mr. Pomponney was a large man, and Madame Pom- 
ponney was small and spare. He was bland and clean- 
shaven. He wore trim mutton-chop whiskers. Mous- 
taches never were popular in provincial France. He 
was what women call a very fine man, and indeed his 
figure and mien were not wanting in a certain grandiose 
air which he mistook for dignity. Perhaps his shirt- 
sleeves and slippers somewhat marred the effect ; but 
then that was an accident, for it was to be presumed 
that some time or other he put his coat and boots on. 
A fine figure of a man he seemed in the eyes of poor 
little Madame Pomponney, who was herself a mere 
whisp of a woman, with a fluttering, half-scared way 
about her. Not onlv a fine man, though, but a sage, 
whose word Mas law and whose prophecies were infallible. 
Thus was it that when the question of how the first-floor 
front was to be disposed of first came upon the back 
parlour carpet, Mr. Pomponney had said, right off, 
" We'll let it furnished." Although Madame Ponipon- 
ney had a passing doubt with respect to where the furni- 



THE POMPONNEY's FIRST FLOOR. 25' 

ture was to come from, and when it had come where the 
tenant was to be found, yet as Mr. Pomponney said it 
was to be let, and knowing that when Mr. Pomponney 
said a thing he, in point of fact, said it, she, as in duty 
bound, came presently to look upon the matter as as 
good as settled. 

How to furnish the room fit for the purpose was the 
first point to be considered ; but with this detail it could 
not be reasonably expected that Mr. Pomponney should 
trouble himself. One thing was certain, no money could 
be expended upon upholstery ; and so the poor little 
woman took a mental inventory of the furniture of the 
other rooms, and set about selecting from them the 
articles which could best be spared, in order to furnish 
the first-floor front. There was, to be sure, a kind of a 
bed in the room, with a sort of a mattress. There was, 
also, something in the shape of a table, and one or two 
other things in the form of chairs ; but all were old and 
ricketty. These things, however, could be replaced by 
others. Mr. Pomponney would never know if he were 
robbed of his under mattress and one of the worst from 
the first-floor furtively substituted for it. The invalid 
table would do as well in the back parlour as the sound 
one : the latter being used only as a sideboard on which 
to display the gala-day service of coffee-cups of white 
and gold. As for the crippled chairs, one could be 
mended, and the other might take the place of a sound 
one, and stand in a quiet corner of the parlour, venture- 
some visitox*s being warned off it as skaters are warned 
off from a weak place in the ice. 

And now came the decorative department. There 
was a fine engraving, in a handsome frame, of the great 
Napoleon, galloping over the Alps on a high-spirited 
steed, which could easily be spared from the hall, toge- 



26 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

ther with two smaller pictures of sanguinary engagements 
terminating in French victories. Next the lavatory 
arrangements had to be seen to, and the swivel of the 
looking-glass attached to the washhand-stand tightened, 
to guard against the mirror unexpectedly intervening 
betwixt the washhand-basiu and the head of the lodger, 
who might otherwise butt at it unthinkingly when his 
eyes were closed. With a bright strip of carpet for the 
side of the bed, with its clean polished floor, its clean 
painted walls, and its clean white window- curtains, the 
little room looked, surely, worth every sou of the modest 
twenty francs a month which it was Mr. Pomponney's 
decision should be asked for it. And now that the 
apartment was ready, all that was wanted was the lodger. 

" I wonder," Madame Pomponney said, timidly, 
" when wc shall have an application." 

" To-day/' replied Mr. Pomponney, decisively. 

1 ' To-day \" echoed the little woman, almost (if such 
a thing had been possible) incredulously. 

" Felicite," observed Mr. Pomponney . a fact, indeed, 
already twice recorded . " you will see." 

It certainly has a handsome card, beautifully written, 
with an astounding delicacy of upstroke; and when it 
was not fluttering in the wind, was distinctly legible 
nearly a dozen yards off. Having sufficiently admired 
his handiwork, Mr. Pomponney followed Madame Pom- 
ponney . who, after the manner of good wives, carried 
the chair, the hammer, and the other nail . and taking 
a seat in the back parlour, folded his hands across his 
stomach, as though he meant to sit there and wait until 
the first-floor front was satisfactorily disposed of. 

Now, looking at probabilities, it would have seemed 
that, like John Leech's Yankee young lady, there was a 
danger of his sitting on till he " took root" before meet- 



THE POMPONNEY's FIRST FLOOR. 27 

ing witli a chance customer in Saint Babylas ; for there 
were no chance customers there. 

Strangers cither settled irrevocably or ran away at 
once. Murray warned off the marauding Briton. There 
was no show church. There was no foot pavement. 
Except at fair time, nobody ever thought of making holi- 
day in the dull little town, and then the holiday-makers, 
for the most part, were the heavy-heeled rustics from the 
neighbouring villages . clumsy louts in blue blouses and 
wooden shoes, long-limbed matrons, shrill of voice and 
scraggy of shape, and thickset maidens with swollen fists 
and shiny elbows, bashful and coy, and as awkward as so 
many calves in petticoats. 

The chance of letting the first-floor front, therefore, 
seemed rather remote, unless the one solitary stranger 
who had come to Saint Babylas by diligence the previous 
evening, and who it was said intended to reside in the 
town, should take it into his head . but really that was 
too improbable. As, however, it often does happen . to 
the great confusion of your wiseacres, who, if they had 
only time and tape enough allowed them, would set the 
world straight without the aid of a two-foot rule . the 
most improbable thing that could occur did occur, and 
the new professor, walking down the shady side of the 
Street of the Priests, crossed over into the sun on catch- 
ing sight of Mr. Pomponney's caligraphy, and rang the 
private door bell. 

" Felicite," Mr. Pomponney observed with a triumphant 
smile ; " you see \" 

True enough, looking in at the corner of the next shop- 
window, belonging to a book and music seller, and pre- 
tending to admire the cover of a new waltz by Leduc, or 
a new romance by Elie Berthel, Felicite saw a shabby- 
genteel and slender man who, thinking himself unob- 



28 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

served, was making one of the panes of the window do 
service as a looking-glass, while he adjusted a diamond 
pin in a very much be-pinned, black satin stock. 

Mrs. Pomponney knew him at a glance. 

" It is the new professor, who put up last night at the 
< Three Crowns/ " 

" To be sure it is," said Mr. Pomponney . as though 
Mr. Polyblank had come according to order. " Go, my 
dear, and make the necessary arrangements. We will 
take the professor." 

Felicite only waited a moment to arrange her little 
corkscrew curls and to pull off her apron, and then 
tripped lightly to the door. She was not used to 
strangers, and was all in a flutter and a tremble ; but her 
confusion by no means equalled that of the professor, who, 
however, was very much pleased with the room, and more 
so with the rent, which was lower than he had expected. 
But besides being bashful and tongue-tied, owing both 
to his modesty and his limited knowledge of colloquial 
French, this poor Polyblank had a great notion of stra- 
tegy, and thought it wisdom not to appear as well satis- 
fied as he really was. Therefore when Madame Pom- 
ponney told Mr. Pomponney that the professor had gone 
away without deciding, saying that if he wanted the room 
he would come back in an hour's time, it must be con- 
fessed Monsieur was a trifle disconcerted ; nor was the 
hour passed by the head of the Pomponneyian household 
without some small amount of uneasiness. 

" Perhaps," said Felicite, " if the gentleman should 
take the apartment it would be as well, as he is English, 
to change the big picture for another, since he might 
feel uncomfortable with Napoleon in the room." 

All the world over they are not under the impression 
that the English had it all their own way at Waterloo. 
At the end of the hour, however, the professor returned, 



tee pomponney's eirst eloor. 29 

bringing with him that rusty brown leather portmanteau 
with which he had grazed his shins in the hotel passage, 
and, paying a month's rent in advance, took up his resi- 
at once under the chemist's roof. It was very pleasant 
to sit there at the open window those calm July evenings, 
book in hand, with the choice of reading the book or 
looking out into the street. Though it was the dullest 
street of a dull town, there was nevertheless a great deal 
for a foreigner to look at. Over the way was a washer- 
Avoman's shop, outside which hung a little board bearing 
an inscription that was in itself a never- failing cause of 
wonderment, for it said . 



Ici on maingle 

Le Linge. 
MANGLED. 



This evidently was intended to catch English residents. 
There was also a milliner's a little distance off, where 
there was a dark-eyed apprentice who seemed to look 
twice out of window for every three stitches she made. 
And there was a barber's apprentice at another shop who 
came out into the street under various shallow pretences 
many times a day, but who never by any chance did so 
without looking up at the dark-eyed young milliner, who 
for her part never by any chance when looked up at 
failed to toss her head disdainfully. There was a long- 
haired cat which slept for hours together in the barber's 
window ; and a shaved poodle at the milliner's, which 
puss treated with as much contempt as the milliner's girl 
did the barber's clerk. 

At a certain hour every fine afternoon a certain old 
lady from one of the houses opposite went out for a walk 
with her bonne. At another hour, with equal regularity, 



30 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

a young man went out of another house in a great hurry 
and walked rapidly out of sight. Two days a-week, and 
always at the same time, a rosy-faced priest, carrying an 
umbrella and a prayer-book, paid a visit to another house, 
and if kept waiting at the door read his book upon the 
door-step. There was an unseen female on the profes- 
sor's side of the way who sang snatches of songs pretty 
regularly every evening ; and an unseen invalid next 
door who as regularly groaned. And there were many 
other matters calculated to arrest the attention and excite 
the curiosity of a new-comer in Saint Babylas who had 
nothing better to amuse him. But there was an almost 
grave-like silence at nightfall, and an impenetrable ob- 
scurity in the Street of the Priests. 

To improve himself in the language, the professor, 
though by no means an admirer of works of fiction, hired 
a few volumes from the library next door and perused, 
in French, Charles Dickens's " Nephew of My Aunt ." 
and Thackeray's " Livre des Snobs," and " Memoirs of a 
Footman." Mr. Polyblank was a perfect model of a 
lodger. The Pomponneys could. never make sure whether 
or not he was at home, unless they went out into the 
street and looked for the light in his window. It was a 
lesson to the careless to see how, when he came home of 
an evening, he scraped those ricketty old boots of his 
upon the scraper, and polished them upon the mat. In 
the morning Madame Pomponney served him up a frugal 
repast of coffee, and milk, and bread and butter ; and at 
night, in lieu of supper, he had tea in the English fashion, 
with more bread and butter. When first he came Felicite 
had asked him whether he would dine at home, thinking 
that perhaps he might not like to dine in the college. 
He answered in the negative, with some slight confusion in 
his manner, of which she took but little notice at the time. 



THE POMPONNEY's FIRST FLOOR. 31 

One day, when he had been with them about a fort- 
night, Mr. Pomponney met him strolling under the lime 
trees upon the ramparts, about half an hour after noon. 
As this Mr. Pomponney knew to be the hour at which 
the Imperial collegians took their meal, he was somewhat 
surprised. 

" You don't dine there then to-day," said the chemist, 
waving his hand in a northerly direction. 

" Dine where ?" asked the other, innocently - 

" Where ? In the college." 

" In the college ! No. Why ?" 

" Why ? Why I thought " 

" I never dine there. I dine . that is . I never dine 
there." 

The conversation ended thus, and probably, the pro- 
fessor having much more important matters to think of 
than mere vulgar victuals and drink, soon forgot all about 
it. However, one day, Felicite, arriving again at the 
subject, either by accident or intention, asked the pro- 
fessor point blank where he did dine. Mr. Polyblank 
seemed to gasp a moment . then replied, " At the 
ordinary." 

" At the ordinary ?" repeated Madame Pomponney. 

" Yes." 

" At the hotel ?" 

" Yes, yes." 

" At the hotel of the ' Three Crowns V " 

" Yes, yes, yes." 

" Really now, but don't you find that very expensive ?" 

" No, I don't," cried the professor, in an excited, 
almost angry tone. " Not more expensive than I can 
afford. And if it pleases me to spend my money so, I 
don't exactly see, ma'am, what you or anybody else has 
to do with it !" 



32 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

Upon this Felicite fled in terror, and it was the very 
next morning after this dialogue that Mr. Pomponney 
made the discovery that the professor must be a most 
extraordinary glutton ! 

Madame Gobinard's table d'hote enjoyed a sort of 
small celebrity in Saint Babylas and its environs, and 
for many years past its praises had been- sung by those 
fat, little, independent gentlemen who dined at it regu- 
larly, as well as by the chance travellers who arrived by 
the diligence, and partook of a single meal. Decidedly 
Polyblank must be a lover of good cheer when he every 
day regailed himself with such an extravagant repast ; 
for three or four shillings a day is a good deal to spend 
on dinner out of fifty pounds a year . which statement 
please to verify by the aid of your slate and pencil, and 
you will not find a large balance remaining for breakfast, 
supper, and bed. But of course, as Madame Pomponney 
argued, Mr. Polyblank knew his own business best ; and, 
after all, might he not have private means of his own 
beyond his scholastic earnings? 

It was only a question of extravagance, until next 
morning when Felicite, with the pardonable curiosity of 
her sex, opening a neatly folded paper packet which, 
when Polyblank went out, he had accidentally left behind 
him on the breakfast-table, made a remarkable discovery. 
This packet contained a quantity of Lyons-sausage skins, 
and the bones of what the English humbler classes term 
a " trotter." The facts of the case, together with the 
skin and bones, having been laid before the chemist Mr. 
Pomponney was compelled to search for a solution of 
the mystery among the hairs of his mutton-chop whiskers 
and to seek a satisfactory explanation in the depths of his 
bandanna. 

" Felicite/' said Mr. Pomponney, when he came at last 



THE POMPONNEY'S FIRST FLOOR. 33 

to the surface, holding tight on to an idea, " the man 
with twelve hundred francs a year, who not only in 
public regales himself like a prince, but subsequently in 
secret gorges himself like a pig, is unworthy of the 
name . in fact of any name but pig. How can he get 
through it all ?" 

" There certainly seems skin enough for a foot of 
sausage," said Madame Pomponney - 

" I cannot determine with anatomical accuracy/'' said 
Mr. Pomponney, " how many bones go to a trotter ; but 
I should say that there are the remains of at least all 
one pig ever walked upon." 

" It does not make him very fat," said Felicite, after 
some moments' reflection. " II est sec comme un 
clou." 

" It isn't likely to make him fat," observed the 
chemist. " Food eaten by stealth is not likely to do 
anybody any good. One thing is very certain, though. 
He is ashamed of what he does, and hasn't the manliness 
to let us see the fragments." 

When, however, the Pomponneys came to think the 
matter over, a doubt arose in Mr. Pomponney's mind. 
They never before had come across any remains. Perhaps 
this was quite an exceptional feast on the part of Mr. 
Polyblank. There might by chance have been a bad 
dinner at the " Three Crowns." Thus matters stood, 
until one day Mr. Benoit, the pork-butcher from Onion 
Soup-street, dropping in, on the part of Mrs. Benoit, for 
some pills and a mixture, asked Mr. Pomponney 
whether the new English professor did not lodge at his 
house. 

" To be sure he does," replied Mr. Pomponney, " and 
he is a customer of yours, too, if I don't make a 
mistake." 

3 



34 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

" You make no mistake, sir. He is as good a customer 
as any I have got." 

" You don't say so ?" 

" At least he is not one of the worst. He looks in 
every day for something or other. A Lyons sausage, 
perhaps a pig's foot . a morsel of spiced beef . in fact, 
all sorts of things, according to his fancy-" 

" And he comes every day r" 

. f Every day he spends his ten or twelve sous/' 

Decidedly the professor gorged in secret. However, 
let him go on gorging. Mr. Pomponney had something 
else to think about, and therefore abandoned the subject 
with appropriate contempt. About a month after the 
thrilling events above recorded, Mr. Roustoubique one 
afternoon sent by a messenger a letter for Mr. Poly- 
blank, marked "immediate" upon the cover. The letter 
arrived at the chemist's shop at half-past five, and had 
been sent under these circumstances : Mr. Roustoubique 
had gone into the country for the day. Polyblank 
feeling ill had asked for two hours'' leave of absence of 
the next in command. Mr. Roustoubique, returning 
earlier than was expected, was indignant at the proceed- 
ing, and invented an excuse for sending to the new pro- 
fessor to return at once. Mr. Pomponney, thinking that 
the letter was of importance, took charge of it, and 
carried it himself to the " Three Crowns," at which he 
knew the ordinary was then in progress, and where he 
expected to find the professor ; not being aware that 
Polyblank left off work of an evening not earlier than 
six o'clock. 

" Mr. Polyblank ?" he demanded of Madame Gobinard. 

" Mr. who ?" 

" Mr. Polyblank, the English professor of the Imperial 
College." 



THE POMPONNEY'S FIRST FLOOR. 35 

" I don't know such a person." 

Mr. Pomponney was taken aback. 

" Do you mean to tell me he does not dine here 
regularly every day ?" 

" Certainly he does not. Now I think of it, he did 
dine here one day . the day he arrived by the diligence. 
A meagre man, is he not ? With a tout-ensemble quite 
rococo . altogether English ?" 

Thus in some barbarous foreign parts they actually 
liken guys and Goths, and human scarecrows generally, 
to the natives of that island which, as all the world 
knows, or ought to know, is first on the Blazoned Scroll 
of Fame, et cetera, with a chorus. 

" That is the man," said Mr. Pomponney, recognising 
the truth of the description. " And so you know no- 
thing about him? He must be dining somewhere, 
though." 

It did not exactly follow. There was indeed no other 
ordinary in Saint Babylas than that at the " Three 
Crowns," unless you counted as one a small establish- 
ment close to Saint Abraham's Gate, which was fre- 
quented by the pipe-makers from a neighbouring- 
manufactory, and where for eight sous the regular 
customers certainly got all that was good for them . if 
not more. It was not likely that the professor- would go 
there in search of his meal; besides, the fourpenny 
dinner took place at noon precisely, and it was not until 
close upon half-past twelve that he could sometimes get 
away from the college. Where then did he go ? It 
certainly was no business of Mr. Pomponney's where he 
dined, and yet both he and his wife felt rather curious 
upon the subject. 

" Here is a letter that came for you, sir," said 
Mr. Pomponney, when the professor came home in the 

3. % 



36 THE PRETTY WIDOW- 

evening. " As you said that you dined at the ' Three 
Crowns/ I went there in search of you." 

The professor blushed. " I am much obliged . I am 
very sorry that you should have had the trouble . I 
ought to have told you that I don't go there now" 

" It was not the least trouble ; but perhaps if I did 
know where to find you at some future time " 

" Yes . yes," stammered the professor ; " yes to be 
sure. We must arrange about it . I did not think that 
such a thing was likely to occur." 

But in spite of all this Mr. Polyblank beat a retreat 
without giving any particulars. 

" Felicite," said Mr. Pomponney, " mark my words ; if 
that man has not some reason we have no notion of for 
deceiving us, I am very much mistaken." 

The mystery grew gradually darker as the shades of 
night gathered over the Pomponneyan domicile. A 
council was held in the back parlour, and it was decided 
that Benoit, the pork-butcher, should be lured into the 
house upon some pretext, and suddenly confronted with 
the man of secrecy The only difficulty was the pretext. 
During the evening the worthy couple kept a close watch 
upon the object of their suspicion. Without their shoes 
Mr. and Mrs. Pomponney relieved each other in their 
vigil at his keyhole; but they only inflamed their eyes 
without making any discovery. About ten o'clock Mr. 
Pomponney, feeling much fatigued and business being 
slack, thought he would poison the summer air outside 
his shopdoor by way of relaxation. With his slippers on 
his feet, his pipe in his mouth, his hat on the back of his 
head, and his hands under the tails of his coat, he strolled 
out into the middle of the street, and gazed upwards at 
the window of his lodger's room. 

As thus he gazed, however, the sash was noiselessly 
opened and the professor's head cautiously protruded. In 



the pomponney's pirst ploor. 37 

a very cat-like fashion then did its owner peer to the 
right and to the left, while Mr. Pomponney, creeping back 
into the shadow of a doorway opposite, watched his move- 
ments with trembling eagerness. Apparently satisfied 
that he was unobserved the professor retired for a 
moment, and then returning to the window, raised his arm 
and flung something violently out into the street. With 
an exclamation of terror Mr. Pomponney staggered 
back against the door ; for the object ejected had actually 
struck him on the chest. The sound of his voice and 
the bumping of the back of his head against the door had 
evidently been heard by the professor, for he instantly 
closed the window. As for Mr. Pomponney, he groped 
about upon the pavement for the unknown object, and 
having found it, hurried into the house in a state of 
strong excitement. 

" Felicite," said he, " in the name of the three hun- 
dred and sixty-five saints in the calendar, here are the 
skins of more sausages and the bones of more trotters." 

" Where on earth did you get these from ?" asked 
Madame Pomponney. 

" They were hurled at me, Felicite ; whether by 
accident or intention I am not in a position to say. 
At any rate they reached me in the form of a pro- 
jectile. There seems to me to be but one course to 
pursue. You, Felicite, shall take them upstairs at 
once, and lay them before the perpetrator of the 
outrage. Yes, it will be best for you to be 
the messenger, Felicite ; and we had better lose no 
time. 

A few moments afterwards Madame Pomponney tapped 
at the professor's door and entered the room with the 
packet in her hand. 

" Beg pardon, sir, but, Mr. Pomponney says that this 
parcel fell out of your window . " 



38 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

But here she stopped in wonderment at the face before 
her. There seemed to be a mixture of half a dozen ex- 
pressions struggling together for the mastery upon the 
professor's countenance. There were rage and wounded 
pride. There were mortification, confusion, and unspeak- 
able shame, and there was withal a desperate and despair- 
ing effort to appear at his ease. He made no answer 
to her speech, but stood as though he were transfixed, his 
fingers clutching nervously at the table edge. Gradually 
she approached him, still holding out the disgraceful little 
parcel of bones and scraps. When it was within reach 
he suddenly made a snatch at it. Then with a jarring 
laugh . 

" I am much obliged/' said he. " It must have blown 
down with the wind. I am very glad . that is . I'm very 
sorry. I am very much obliged, though it was not of 
any consequence, as I intended to throw it away ; and 
.and " 

But he broke down here and smiled painfully, and 
fidgeting with the parcel thrust it into his pocket. There 
was something like a tremble in his voice that rather 
frightened little Madame Pomponney, and something, too, 
she fancied she saw glistening in his grey eyes. And 
then all the mystery was at an end, and the miserable truth 
struck a sudden pang into her woman's heart. 

" Oh, sir," she cried, as the tears welled up into her 
own eyes, . " oh, sir," she sobbed out, catching at one 
of his long, thin hands, " we never dreamt. If we had 
known . but we had no idea. Oh, I am so very, very 
sorry !" 

" Thank you, my dear madam," he answered in a 
hoarse voice. " I know you had no idea how poor 
I was. How could you know ? I ought to be able to 
live well on what I get from the college, but . but I 



an actress's husband. 39 

have calls on me which I must attend to before every- 
thing, and . and . But don't distress yourself, my 

dear madam. I can get on very well indeed if . if you 
will please not to notice me." 

" It's my opinion, in spite of all that," said Mr- 
Pomponney, " that what he tells you is only a fable, and 
that he is a miser who hides his money up the chimney 
and under the floor. I shall certainly keep my eye upon 
him." 



CHAPTER IV 



AN ACTRESS'S HUSBAND. 



Ami, vieillard, enfant, fille ou femme adore"e, 

Quel est le corps glace qu'un marbre va couvrir ? 

Sous quel toit la douleur est-elle encore entree ? 

Qui va porter le deuil, et quels cceurs vont souffrir ? . Manuel.. 

The Baroness de Grandvilain was a widow, was nineteen 
years old, and had been a widow two years and six 
months, and enjoyed an income of a hundred thousand 
francs per annum, which . to save the reader unnecessary 
trouble . may be roughly reckoned four thousand pounds 
a year. Five years before the date of this story her 
yearly gains were forty-eight pounds, which she earned 
in the corps de ballet at the Chatelet Theatre, where the 
baron fell in love with her, from the first gallery. Now 
she had for a residence the rambling old chateau of 
Longanna, situated half a league from Saint Abraham's 
Gate, Saint Babylas ; and she had another chateau, more 
or less dilapidated, in the neighbourhood of Prely le 
Chetif, in the Department of Cher ; but in the days of the 
Chatelet she lived on a fourth-floor in the Rue Chariot,. 



40 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

which, as any Parisian can tell you, is anything but 
aristocratic. 

He -was a miser and enormously rich . this baron who 
fell in love with her . and had she inherited all his 
property she would herself have been as rich as an 
Eastern princess. But this was not to be. By reason of 
sundry legal quips and quirks . with which it were per- 
haps as well not to overload this narrative, firstly, 
because the reader might be bored by them, and secondly, 
because the writer, in his ignorance of the terrain, might 
by chance fall into one of those quagmires into which 
some of his literary betters have ere now taken fearless 
headers and come to signal grief . the young baroness 
lost more than three-fourths of the property. 

It is just within the limits of possibility that pretty 
Manon de Grandvilain was a good deal cheated. You 
can easily imagine when the gay young bachelor (he 
was seventy- two) married the poor little actress from the 
Chatelet that some virtuous indignation manifested itself 
among the gay young bachelor's relations. Had he 
made over his millions of francs to any one of a numer- 
ous family, all of whom, severally and collectively, he 
had all his life vowed that he hated, no one for a 
moment would have questioned his sanity. Had he 
given all his property to a public institution to the ex- 
clusion of his relatives, however loud the outcry which 
the act might have occasioned, it is doubtful whether the 
officers of the institution would not have triumphant] v 
vindicated his sagacity. But when he married that 
young person from the Chatelet, straightway the faculty 
was consulted, every word and deed of the venerable 
simpleton closely scrutinized and disparagingly com- 
mented upon, and the whole seventy-two years of his life 
were passed under review in search of early indications 
of lunacy. 



an actress's husband. 41 

Insane they would have proved him to be, there is 
little doubt, had not that actor woman, with what her 
enemies very happily called the artfulness of her class, 
adopted a course of proceeding that in the end saved her 
some of the property and kept the baron out of an 
asylum. This was what she, or rather her mother for 
her, did. She induced her husband to subscribe towards 
the repairs then in course of progress in Saint Babylas 
Cathedral. Hitherto the clerical party had not been 
backward in their condemnation of the baron's conduct. 
Father Mathias had unhesitatingly pronounced the bride- 
groom to be a lunatic. Father Tristepatte was of the 
same opinion, while Fathers Gimbecque and Gregoire in 
a general way agreed with them, and all four, in speak- 
ing of the bride, referred to her as " that person." But 
just about the time . perhaps a little later . that the 
baron, who had been a sabbath-breaker and scoffer at 
things holy from his earliest youth, repented him sud- 
denly of his evil ways and paid over to Mother Church 
sixteen hundred thousand francs, it oddly enough hap- 
pened that doubts arose in the ecclesiastical mind res- 
pecting the rights of the case. And so on until in due 
course what little doubt remained gave place to a positive 
conviction that no saner person existed in all Picardy 
than the Baron de Grandvilain, and no truer and better 
woman breathing than the baroness his wife : at which 
conclusion who shall cavil ? 

You, reader, of terrible experiences, have no doubt 
formed your own opinion upon the latter head, so that 
it would be waste of time to try and persuade you that 
the conclusion arrived at by the fathers was the correct 
one. With you, ladies, it is just possible that those 
insular prejudices, which all right-minded persons honour 
you for, may to some extent, and very properly, obscure 
your judgment respecting the sprightly Floreska. It has 



42 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

long ago been settled on this side of the water that Paris, 
is a sinful city (though some recent disclosures about what 
is going on among ourselves should teach us to be 
charitable), and you remember what Gozlan says on an 
English lady's opinion of a Parisienne. " Impossible de 
la reproduire. Les lois de la decence et celles de Sep- 
tembre s'y opposent" . the joke in which you doubtless 
perceive and appreciate. The Floreska besides was an 
actress, and therefore all but actresses will at once 
acknowledge was no suitable match for a baron. When 
she was the Floreska . she by the way was born simply 
Manon Dubois . she became at one time the talk of all 
Paris . that Paris which is always talking and so quickly 
exhausts its topics. It was in a highly successful cocas- 
serie that she first attracted public attention, and her 
carte by Pierre Petit had an enormous sale. 

It was in this amusing piece that the baron first fell 
a victim to her bewitchments. He was the last of a long 
line ; but his ancestors had been poor and proud. There 
was, however, very little pride about our baron. He had 
gone into commerce heart and soul, and made more 
money than all his ancestors together had ever possessed. 
One other merit had he over his predecessors . what he 
made he kept a tight hold of. Some of his speculations 
were gigantic, but he was not above a little quiet money- 
grubbing on a small scale. One day he would be buying 
up the shares of a copper mine, and the next driving a 
hard bargain for a waggon-load of secondhand shoes to 
be adroitly renovated and foisted upon an unsuspecting 
public as bran-new misfits by the best makers. While 
too he was making money he wasted none. When he 
could not dine at another person's expense he chose the 
cheapest cookshops. He did not often trouble the omni- 
buses, and was never known to hire a remise in his life. 



an actress's husband. 43 

He wore clothes which no weather could injure, and 
by way of change in summer time would leave off his 
waistcoat. When it rained he turned up the collar of 
his coat and the bottoms of his trousers, the latter of 
which he often enough omitted to turn down again for a 
day or two. But in due course there came a night when 
he went with a free admission to the first gallery (which 
by the way is not the same as the lower gallery of one of 
our theatres . over there called amphitheatre or paradis), 
and from it he fell in love with the Floreska. Was this 
to be wondered at, when all Paris was raving about her 
talent and beauty ? Mind you, she was not beautiful ; 
but oh how becomingly she was dressed ! As for her 
talents, the part in which she displayed them was not a 
very long one. But in spite of her rather large mouth, 
and her nonsensical little bit of a nose, there was what 
they call a chic about her which was too much for the 
over-susceptible. 

Yet, the fact of the baron's falling in love with her 
was rather extraordinary. He was not an admirer of the 
drama; perhaps because he had had no opportunity of 
becoming one, not being in the way of going to see it 
for nothing. This order for the first gallery had been 
given to him for the purpose of appeasing his wrath, by 
a defaulting debtor ; and he had used it because he did 
not like to throw anything away, and did not know how 
to turn it into money. Having an admission for two he 
had prevailed upon a friend to defray the expense of a 
dinner in return for a seat, and they had gone together, 
taking their places in the queue at the door long before 
the time of opening, and staying until the lights were 
turned out before they thought they had quite had their 
order's worth. Very much astonished next day was the 
defaulter upon receiving a visit from the baron. He had 



44 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

half promised to give a -week's grace; but here he "was 
again in less than twenty-four hours. At sight of him 
the debtor began to stammer out some excuses. 

" I haven't come about that/' said the baron. Then 
correcting himself as a bright idea occurred to him . 
." You can keep it a little longer, and I shan't charge you 
anything. Let's see . what shall we say ? (here the 
defaulter quaked inwardly). Suppose you get me a few 
more of those ticket-papers for the theatre ? " 

The debtor was astonished ; but as he had a large 
.circle of friends in the theatrical line he answered readily 
enough, " I'll get you some with pleasure. What house 
would you like them for ? " 

" The same, of course/' replied the baron. 

" The same, eh ! You want to see the piece again, 
then ? Well, I can get that without any trouble." 

" That's all right then," said the baron, snapping him 
up greedily. " How many can you get me ? " 

" How many do you want ? " 

" As many as you can manage." 

The debtor reflected. " Will an admission for four 
do ? " he asked. 

" Four all at once ?" 

" To be sure." 

"I'd rather," replied the baron, "have four admissions 
for one, on separate nights." 

About this time the baron's commercial associates 
Ijegan to think that there was something wrong with the 
millionaire. Some capital specs he neglected to take 
advantage of. Several of his debtors were astonished at 
not finding themselves sold up after they had neglected 
to meet their engagements. He made some alterations 
in his toilet tooj purchasing clothes which, though 
second-hand, were much smarter than anything he had 



an actress's husband. 45 

before been known to wear. One never-to-be-forgotten 
day he was actually seen strolling down the Boulevart de 
Sebastopol with a pair of real kid gloves on. 

Who could pretend to describe the extraordinary revo- 
lution which the tender passion effected in the heart of 
this sordid old curmudgeon? An old man's love has 
formed the theme for the exercise of much satirical talent, 
and perhaps it will be best to settle the matter at once 
by setting down the baron for a silly old fool, and saying 
no more about it. Youth, we know, is the season for 
love, and the loves of youth are never ridiculous. He 
went . this foolish De Grandvilain . every night of his 
life to see the bewitching Floreska; getting gradually 
nearer and nearer to the object of his admiration, and 
arriving at length at that pitch of infatuation that he 
absolutely paid five francs hard money for a fauteuil 
d'orchestre for a week running. 

He began to be remarked before long, and the persons 
connected with the theatre wondered what on earth could 
bring him nightly to see the same piece. All sorts of 
wild conjectures were hazarded upon the subject, and he 
even formed the topic of a facetious article in Figaro, 
where he was called, in consequence of an unusual display 
of starched linen round his face, the Man with the Col- 
lars. At length he accidentally heard that it was some- 
times the custom to throw an actress a bouquet. That 
night he came with an enormous " posey/' and to the 
wonder of all beholders flung it upon the stage at the 
feet of the beauteous Floreska. It was not after she 
had done anything to call forth applause, but upon her 
first entrance on the scene, and this unusual proceeding 
caused much amusement and some surprise both upon 
the stage and among the audience, and considerable con- 
fusion also to the object of the ill-timed honour. But it 



46 THE PBETTY WIDOW 

solved the mystery; and next day Fiyaro informed its 
subscribers that . 

Paris had spent a sleepless night. 

Trade was at a stand-still. 

The discussion of politics was suspended. 

One topic alone occupied the public mind. 

The great fact then riveting the attention of high and 
low was that the Man with the Collars was in love with 
the Floreska. 

The worthy baron knew nothing of this harmless 
pleasantry Neither did he dream that his floral offering 
had not been over acceptable ; but next night, armed with 
another prodigious nosegay, presented himself at the 
theatre door, and once more hurled his posey. You can 
easily suppose that the astonishment of the audience was 
equal to that of the previous evening ; but who shall pic- 
ture the sensation which the repetition of the daring act 
caused upon the stage, or what was said when it hap- 
pened for the third time ? But on the fourth evening a 
startling event occurred which put an end to the little 
comedy. 

When the baron got to the theatre at the customary 
hour he was surprised to find it unusually crowded. 
Perhaps the fact of its being Sunday might account for 
it, but decidedly it was more crowded than usual. He 
was further astonished when the curtain drew up, to miss 
the familiar costumes and landscape. He sat and stared 
and listened in blank amazement. Then he fidgeted 
and wiped his head with his pocket-handkerchief. He 
never bought a programme, so he presently appealed to a 
neighbour. " What were they doing ?" he asked ; for 
his own part he could make neither head nor tail of it. 
The person addressed gave him the name of the piece, 
and handed him the paper. The baron ran his eves 



an actress's husband. 47 

down it with an expression of dismay. In a voice 
tremulous with agitation he said, as he handed back the 
programme : " The Floreska ! When does she come on ?" 

" She does not play at all," replied the other ; " she 
used to play here in a piece that was acted for the last 
time last night/- 1 

The Baron rose without another word and left the 
stalls. In the passage he addressed himself to the box- 
opener, and learned that, if successful, the new farce 
would probably be played for some months, and that, to 
the best of her belief, the engagement of the Floreska was 
at an end. Upon this he went away in despair, with so 
blank an expression, that a stranger seeing him would 
have thought he had met with some calamity. And so 
he had. The loss of a few thousand francs would have 
been a trifle to this. With the termination of the Flo- 
reska' s performance his romance had come abruptly to a 
close. The only real happiness he had ever known was 
lost to him. The heavens had closed again, and hidden 
for ever that radiant vision of the goddess in the satin 
boots. Entering the cafe next door to the theatre he 
called for the Entr'acte and searched vainly for the 
deity's name. Then he wandered about reading the bills 
posted upon the pillars in the Palais Royal ; and at last 
worn out with fatigue, crawled back to his shabby 
lodging and went to bed. 

He did not sleep a wink that night ; but an idea 
occurred to him. He could see the Floreska no longer 
upon the stage. Could he make her acquaintance off it ? 
How was it to be done ? Would any amount of money 
purchase the privilege ? You see he was an innocent 
old gentleman in these matters, though very knowing in 
such cases as that of the renovated boots. For seventy 
odd years he had been grovelling and grubbing, and 



48 THE PRETTY WIDOW" - 

really had not had time to amuse himself. He had kept aloof 
from his fellow men, except in the way of business, and now 
there was no one in the world with whom he was acquainted 
who could give him the necessary information, except . 
except that person . the St. Peter who had given him 
his first glimpse of heaven. The debt had not yet been 
paid. Pierre Raynal, the debtor, had been in the country 
for some time, and thus had avoided his creditor, whose 
importunities for tickets had become almost as trouble- 
some as his demands for the repayment of the loan. 

Strange to say, the baron ran against his young friend 
the very next morning in the street. " I don't want the 
money/'' were the old man's first words, shrewdly gues- 
sing from the other's long face what was passing in his 
mind. " I don't want it yet awhile . not for a long 
time . not at all, perhaps ; but I want you to do me a 
service." 

" Some more tickets ?" said Raynal involuntarily. 

" No." 

" Tired of the drama, eh ?" 

" Yes." 

" I always wondered what on earth you could want 
the tickets for. Share in the profits, I suppose, eh ? 
And went there on the cheap to count up the heads." 

" Ye-es . ye-es. Exactly. That was it. But I want 
you to do me a favour." 

" Name it." 

" Well, I want you then . I have a particular reason 
for wishing . in point of fact, I want to be introduced 
to an actress called the Floreska." 

At the mention of this name Pierre Raynal started 
slightly, and stared very hard. Then smiling to himself, 
as he traced figures on the pavement with the end of his 
walking-stick, " I think I can do Avhat you wish," he 



an actress's husband. 49 

«aid ; " but I must ask her permission first. She lives 
in rather a quiet way, for her salary is not large and she 
has a sick mother to take care of." It is surprising what 
.a many sick mothers there are attached to the theatrical 
profession. 

Walking away, Raynal several times stopped to think 
the matter over. " Why does he wish to know her '(" 
the young man thought. " Can it possibly be . but no. 
That's too ridiculous." 

The baron on his side stopped to rub his hands and 
.chuckle, " A sick mother and poor I" 

Three months after these events Manon Dubois, other- 
wise the Floreska, became the wife of the Baron de Grand- 
vilain, and the rest of the world cried with one voice, 
" the man must be mad !" Long before this he had 
been grievously neglecting his commercial pursuits, and 
now he gave them up altogether. " I've money enough," 
he said, when reasoned with upon the subject. " I've 
worked hard all my life, and now I'm going to enjoy 
myself." 

He was seventy-two, as has been already stated, and 
surely it was not too soon for enjoyment, if he could 
afford it. But it was not to be. Six months after his 
marriage, death laid his hand on the happy bridegroom. 
He died with his affairs in some confusion. The legal 
vultures alighted, screeching, upon the carcase of his 
estate, scuffled and fought over it furiously, and flew 
away at last gorged with the prey. The baroness found 
herself at the age of nineteen an orphan and a widow, 
possessed of a yearly income of one hundred thousand 
francs. 

So far so good. 

4 



50 THE PRETTY WIDOW 



CHAPTER V. 

RICH, YOUNG, PRETTY, AND VERY MISERABLE. 

I see the angry blood flush in your cheek : 

Ah, child! I thought you strong, and you are weak. 

Donaldson. 

The chateau of Longanna was one of those queer, old- 
fashioned, ugly, dear delightful places such as you may 
find a few of even now-a-days round about our town of 
London, in spite of the fell machinations of railway 
projectors and building societies. The exterior of the 
chateau, as seen from the high road, was not commanding. 
It had something of the appearance of a brewery in a 
poor way of business. Its green Venetian blinds were 
almost always closed. Its porte-cochere was almost 
always open, and through it could be obtained a view of 
one of the dreariest courtyards imaginable. 

In summer time, several hours a day, might be seen 
seated at the door of the porter's lodge an old woman, 
gently dozing her life away in the broadest patch of sun- 
shine obtainable ; and in winter she might still be seen, 
seated and slumbering; but this time by the side of the 
lodge fire. Always at her feet, whether indoors or out, 
summer or winter, reposed a plethoric tom-cat, who thus 
got through the autumn of his existence ; going to bed 
of a night with his old mistress, where they slumbered 
together with their heads on the same pillow. 

The interior arrangement of the chateau was awkward, 
and in some parts unsightly. Beams crossed the ceiling 
of the drawing-room. The floors of some of the bed- 
rooms were composed of a kind of cement, brown and 
speckled, like oatmeal porridge congealed ; while others 



RICH, YOUNG, PRETTY, AND VERY MISERABLE. 51 

were formed of red tiles, and others again of oaken 
planks, all highly polished and slippery as glass, though 
so irregularly placed that when the feet of the heedless 
stranger were not slipping from under him his toes were 
for ever tripping over the projecting ends of the boards. 
At the entrances to the various rooms were unexpected 
steps, about the position of which much uncertainty 
prevailed ; so that when acting upon past experience a 
visitor made preparations for stepping up he found, too 
late, that he ought to step down, and vice versa. 

All the apartments were panelled, and abounded in 
cupboards, the doors of which, looking exactly like the 
doors of the room, a timid visitor was occasionally over- 
whelmed with confusion by opening one of them in a 
mistake, and coming unexpectedly upon such of the 
family skeletons as might have been hastily stowed away 
there upon his arrival. There was a dark staircase leading- 
from the hall to the landing, out of which the bedrooms 
opened, and from that landing another dark staircase led 
to the kitchen ; so that the bewildered stranger, mistaking 
his way, was apt to find himself in the company of the 
cook when he believed himself to be approaching the lady 
in the drawing-room, and had to be escorted across a back 
yard, and through a scullery to reach the desired spot. 

The furniture of the quaint old house was mostly in 
keeping with the singularities of the building. There 
were bedroom chairs you had to use both hands to lift, 
and arm-chairs in the sitting-rooms which a good many 
people could not have lifted at all. In one gloomy cham- 
ber there was an awful bed, a gaunt erection of tall posts 
and heavy faded curtains, surmounted by nodding feathers 
black with dust; and in this the old baron had died. 
" As well he might !" Montandon, wine merchant of 
Blanquefort, remarked when first he saw the lugubrious 

4 . 2 



52 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

piece of furniture. This Montandon of Blanquefort was 
a remote relation of the baron, and, for reasons best 
known to himself, supposed he was heir to the baron's 
estates . an erroneous idea dispelled in the course of liti- 
gation. Strolling through the house, with his hat on the 
back of his head, and his hands thrust deep into his 
trousers pockets, Montandon took his measurements with 
a mental foot-rale, and decided, to a nicety, where he 
would make a new door, where he would pull down one 
wall, and where he would build up another; but as the 
property never came to him these improvements were not 
practically effected. 

Sarazin, of Pont FEvech, was not so particular about 
the house, but made up his mind for sweeping reforms in 
the garden and grounds. According to him, there were to 
be paths where there were now beds, and beds where 
there were now paths. There were to be several foun- 
tains ; the shubbery was to be cleared away at once ; a 
new carriage-drive must be laid down, and the back of 
the house turned into the front. 

" We shall soon set all this straight, sir," said Sarazin, 
of Pont 1'Evech, striking with his cane as he spoke the 
pedestal of the chaste though weather-beaten Diana, who 
for the last thirty years had been flying from Actseon 
through a little forest of brambles and briars. " You 
shall see, sir, what you shall see." Unluckily, however, 
Sarazin did not come into the property; but retired crest- 
fallen and purse-lightened to his native town, and subsided 
as quietly as might be. A dear old garden was this which 
would have been sacrificed to Sarazin's taste . a hundred 
years old at the very least ; with a high red brick- wall, 
convent like, surrounding it; with old fruit trees with 
moss-grown trunks and gnarled branches, which in the 
fruit season drooped beneath their load of peaches, apri- 



RICH., YOUNG, PRETTY, AND VERY MISERABLE. 53 

cots, figs, apples, pears, and plums ; . a garden abounding 
in sheltered nooks, where there was deep shade upon the 
dark green grass at hottest noon ; a garden in which to 
dream away a lifetime, secure from intrusion, hidden from 
sight : a sleepy, lotus-eating spot . a little paradise on 
earth some would have called it, and among their number 
its reigning deity, Manon Baroness de Grandvilain. She 
dearly loved this old house, with its straggling garden 
and grounds; and the life she passed there, though rather 
too monotonous maybe for some ladies, was not, for a 
time at any rate, without a certain charm for the ex- 
actress of the CMtelet. 

Quite early in the morning she would awake of her 
own accord . at that preposterous period, in the days of 
infancy, when the bloom was on the rye, when the early 
bird was coming down to his worm ; so early in the 
morning . so very early, that among town-bred folks 
none but sweeps, market gardeners, policemen, coffee- 
stall keepers, wicked people, and . strange association ! . 
the elite of society going home to their beds, can be ex- 
pected to know anything about it except by accident and 
under abnormal circumstances . well, at something like 
five o'clock in the summer, and as soon as it was light 
in winter, our pretty Manon would arise, and in any 
kind of weather plunge boldly into her cold bath. 
Rachel protect us ! . what rubbings and scrubbings were 
then self-inflicted with coarse sackcloth towels, to be fol- 
lowed presently by a more careful desiccative process 
with a variety of soft linen cloths, which, with their 
elaborate fringes and fantastic red and blue borders, 
looked more like pocket-handkerchiefs or d'oyleys than 
the things we make use of over here. 

That business over, what a work of time awaited the 
pretty baroness and her tiring woman in the selection 



54 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

and arrangement of snowy white raiment, the number 
and nature of which it is but for the learned in such 
matters to specify ! And then . following a long and 
elaborate process of braiding and plaiting, quite thrown 
away upon a rebellious head of hair which an hour after- 
wards was all rough again . came the great question of 
whether it was to be the brown holland, with black- 
velvet band, cuffs and trimmings, or the blue or brown- 
spotted Swiss cambric or the white pique, et cetera and 
so on ; which being decided satisfactorily, the fair dame 
came downstairs singing as blithely as the lark. As for 
singing, though she had been singing ever since she got 
out of bed, with only such brief pauses as her occupa- 
tions necessitated. That good soul Madame Dubosq, 
the baroness's lady companion, was not an early riser, 
and probably had not yet made her appearance in the 
breakfast- room. But there was plenty of time for that ; 
and other breakfasts had first to be looked after. 

Three cats, by name Mimi, Bibi, and Dodo, were 
always a-hungered at early dawn, and at sight of their 
mistress cried aloud for their ratioKS and their rights. 
These having being disposed of, or sometimes before their, 
repast had been prepared, plaintive winnings from the 
kennel announced the fact of Ponto the house-dog's 
emptiness, and his anxiety respecting the coming of his 
turn. Hollow pretenders were these Mimi, Bibi, Dodo, 
and Ponto, whose selfishness any one in the world but 
their young mistress might surely have seen through from 
the first; but they were successful in their imposture. 
Bound her came the three cats, mewing, with their tails 
erect, rubbing their deceitful old heads against her frock, 
and making the most palpable cupboard love ; and when 
they had got all the wanted retired to spread themselves 
before the fire, or went out to sleep in the sun, and 
dream of future feasts or past repletion. 



RICH, YOUNG, PRETTY, AND VERY MISERABLE. 55 

A loud boisterous humbug was that Ponto the house- 
dog, roaring and rattling his chain at the first faint 
sound of his mistress's footfall in the court-yard, bound- 
ing and bellowing as she approached, and thrusting his 
great wet nose into one of her little hands . keeping his eye 
the while upon the plate of food she carried in the other ; 
but which he would have her believe was a matter of 
great indifference to him as long as he could enjoy the 
superior delight of the baroness's society. When Ponto's 
little farce was acted out, and he himself replete and 
sinking into a torpid state of felicitous indigestion, an 
aged raven would come hopping out of the stable with a 
peculiarly knavish expression of eye and a general double 
dealing, backsliding demeanour, indicative of any amount 
of moral turpitude. This hoary-headed hypocrite having 
run through his two or three hacknied phrases and re- 
ceived his reward, would give place to the poultry cluck- 
ing at their mistress's heels, the rabbits thrusting their 
twitching noses through the bars of their hutch, the sleek 
chestnut horses whinnying at her approach ; and so on 
down to the ancient tortoise, supposed to be a century 
old, hobbling towards its benefactress with clumsy alacrity 
as she entered the garden. And now this part of the 
live stock disposed of, the old portress, invariably accom- 
panied by her cat, would present herself to wish her 
mistress good day, bob her curtsies, and pay her may 
be some artless compliment. 

But by this time Madame Dubosq was certain to have 
come down and to be waiting breakfast with perhaps a 
little pardonable peevishness, caused by five minutes 
delay. Not quite at her best did madame look thus 
early in the morning. At the best, however, Madame 
Dubosq was not very attractive. A general scragginess 
of figure was not redeemed by the harshness of her facial 



56 THE PKETTY WIDOW 

outline ; added to which a peculiarity of complexion,, 
bearing some resemblance to the skin of a freshly-plucked 
fowl, rendered it necessary . when she wished to create a 
favourable impression upon those unthinking ones in 
whose estimation the beauties of the mind hold an in- 
ferior place to mere evanescent outward charms . that 
she should cull roses from that branch of science which 
has ere now lent its aid to so many other fair ones within 
and without the pale of society. As these roses did not 
show to advantage the first thing in the morning, they 
were not assumed until later in the day, and it was pro- 
bably an injudicious peep at herself in her nightcap 
immediately upon getting out of bed that had produced 
a depressing effect upon the good lady's spirits, and sent 
her downstairs very grim and grumpy. 

It was her wont to greet the baroness in tones of 
gentle melancholy, and, at intervals during breakfast . 
to which she uniformly did justice . to heave sundry 
doleful sighs ; although when questioned respecting their 
cause she was either unable or unwilling to give any 
satisfactory explanation. 

" Fm so glad to see you so light-hearted/'' the good 
lady would say sometimes, with the aspect of an under- 
taker condoling with the departed's nearest relative. " I 
wish I had your spirits," was another favourite remark 
of hers. Or, " Bless you, my dear, if I could only laugh 
as you do \" 

" Why not try ?" Manon retorted one day. " It does 
not hurt half as much as you would think/-' 

" Ah, I shall never be merry again/-" said the Dubosq, 
with a mournful shake of her head ; " the memories of 
past sorrows press too heavily for that. Yet I was light- 
hearted once. Oh yes, I was a giddy thing \" 

It was rather difficult to realize the notion of the Dubosq 



RICH, YOUNG, PRETTY, AND VERY MISERABLE. 57 

at that volatile period of her existence. She must in her 
giddiest maidenhood have been rather long of limb and 
large of joint; and as the ideal picture of her coy gam- 
bolling in search of buttercups and daisies presented 
itself to the baroness's mind it required almost a super- 
human effort to keep serious. Once when the lady 
housekeeper was expatiating lengthily upon the sorrows 
of her wedded life at the period when the dead and gone 
Dubosq was at his worst, and going on, as the cant say- 
ing is, anyhow, Manon mildly intimated that she, too, had 
had her troubles, but that the recollection of them made 
her more thankful for her present happiness; which remark 
madamc taking as a reproof, burst into tears and sobbed 
long and persistently, refusing consolation upon the ground 
that she was of no use to any one in the world, and 
wishing herself out of it as soon as might be, and econo- 
mically but comfortably interred. 

This course of conduct may seem somewhat unreason- 
able, and it may create suprisc in the reader's mind that 
the baroness should willingly have suffered under such 
companionship. Eut are there not many others amongst 
us who suffer silently ? If all the couples who have at 
some time or other wished themselves divorced were at 
this present moment separated, what a revolution there 
would be in our London households ! If all our wicked 
wishes had been fulfilled, what would ere this have be- 
fallen our near relations and distant kinsmen ? Why the 
entire globe would some fine morning be swept clean of 
human beings at one fell swoop if some evilly-disposed 
persons had their way, which luckily for him who writes 
and him who reads, they haven't. 

Our pretty Manon, then, bore patiently with the 
Dubosq because her life through she had ever been the 
victim of a peevish old woman. The sick mother pre- 



58 THE PEETTi" WIDOW. 

viously alluded to had been a wearing old soul in spite 
of many excellent qualities more or less imperfectly de- 
veloped. Propped up by pillows, she lay a-bed and 
prosed long hours together upon the subject of her divers 
aches and pains. When others were wakeful she slum- 
bered, and when others would have slumbered also she 
was wide awake and loudly complaining. A regular old 
woman of the sea had been this mother of Manon, who 
not only kept her child down in the depths of poverty, 
but did her little best to make the burthen of her support 
as painful as possible. In this, however, she was un- 
successful, for the burthen was never felt, and her death 
sincerely lamented by the young girl left behind. There was 
no doubt that had it not been for the old lady's persua- 
sions somebody else instead of the Baron de Grand vilain 
would have been Manon's husband. But that was all 
past and gone now. There is more than one young lady 
in the world who has fancied herself in love and thought 
better of it. 

When these two ladies had eaten their breakfast, the 
meal concluded, there were various household duties to 
perform, directions to be given about the dinner, a tour 
of inspection to be made round the garden, the news- 
paper to be read (not a long job in the case of the Saint 
Babylas local journal), then lunch to be ordered, and the 
baroness and the Dubosq to make their toilets for a pro- 
menade en voiture. A very bright and pretty little 
lady did the Baroness de Grandvilain appear when she 
was fully attired, with her wondering baby's eyes, dimpled 
chin, and bright red lips, so often arched in a joyous 
laugh. 

And her toilet . but how can that be described, when 
every day it varied? Well, one day out of the three 
hundred and sixty-five she was thus attired . and will 



RTCH, YOUNG, PRETTY, AND VERY MISERABLE. 59 

not the description seem to be absurdly old-fashioned, 
though it was the fashion of a short time ago ? Her 
rebellious curls that morning had been tied back and 
bound down and forced pell-mell into a delightful little 
bonnet of violet aerophane, with a bavolet of white blonde 
covered with black lace, a small plume composed of two 
black feathers, fixed in front by a coquille of black lace, 
with quillings of black blonde on the forehead, and 
white at the sides, and strings of broad velvet ribbon 
with black velvet edgings. Her dress, a rich violet 
moire silk, falling about her in ample folds ; the corsage 
high, slightly pointed at the waist, and fastened up the 
front by small black velvet buttons. A little turn-down 
collar of black velvet, with a black velvet neck-tie, fas- 
tened by a plain gold brooch. Her sleeves loose at the 
ends, with broad mousquetaire cuffs, trimmed with three 
rows of black velvet, beneath which a plain white linen 
cuff, fastened by gold studs to match the brooch. A 
handsome shawl of white China crape with a deep fringe, 
The closest-fitting violet kid gloves, to match the dress, 
and the tightest-fitting stockings of dead-white silk. 
Little bronze leather boots, laced up the front, peeping 
from beneath layers of white petticoats, knee-deep in 
embroidery, and seemingly numerous as the leaves of a 
full-blown white rose. " On a remarque que de tous les 
animaux, les chats, les mouches, et les femmes sont ceux 
qui perdaient le plus de temps a leur toilette," says 
Nodier. 

As for the Dubosq, her style was more staid. She 
had left off colours for ever when she put on weeds for 
the dear departed. She had not the heart, she said, for 
reds and yellows. She wore, in spite of all remonstrance 
and many offers of other dresses, a tumbled black silk 
which smelt of lavender, a scanty shawl, and a bonnet of 



60 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

evidently home-manufacture. In this raiment she seemed 
to take a mournful pleasure, by reason of its general 
dinginess contrasting strongly in the sunlight with the 
baroness's gay attire, and reminding her that she was 
only a poor dependent, and ought to be shabby and 
humble. The object of the drive which these ladies 
took together was to visit certain pensioners of the 
baroness, who, in their way, were perhaps upon much 
the same tack as Mimi, Bibi, Dodo, Ponto, and Co. 

First of all, at a cottage up a lane, leading out of the 
straggling main street of Longanna, was to be seen, any 
day you might have taken it into your head to go and look 
for her, a suffering female, who was in a very small way 
a purveyor of cakes, who also had purveyed for herself a 
ne'er-do-well husband and a large small family which did 
not thrive. Piteous were the tales which this afflicted 
soul always had ready for the baroness's ear, and loud 
were the promises of future amendment upon the part of 
the worthless male parent, and of improvement on that 
of the unlikely olive branches. Unbounded was the 
gratitude of the whole household when the of course 
wholly unexpected pecuniary assistance was forthcoming, 
and boisterous and prolonged the orgies thereupon conse- 
quent. In the same lane lived a lone widow, even more 
grievously afflicted with an endless history of lumbagoes, 
sciaticas, catarrhs, influenzas, and tic doloureux, whose 
piteous case necessitated a constant supply of something 
cheering. Bound the corner, down another lane, was a 
blind man, providentially in possession of the full powers 
of locomotion, and capable of telling his pitiful tale with 
a lavish profusion of language, which perhaps to some 
extent consoled him for his misfortune. 

" Did you make yourself some tea as I told you, mere 
Corbeau ?" the baroness asked a pensioner. 



RICH, YOUNG, PRETTY, AND VERY MISERABLE. 61 

" Did I cook the black leaves you left me ?" asked 
mere Corbeau, rather shily. " Oh yes, we cooked them, 
Madame the Baroness, but we couldn't drink any of the 
liquor. Indeed I and my old man were well-nigh 
poisoned with it, though we supped only a little spoonful." 

" But it was beautiful tea, such as the Miladies drink 
in England." 

" Droll tastes those ladies must have," snorted mere 
Corbeau. 

" Not at all. I drink it myself, and very nice it is. 
But I suppose you made some silly mistake." 

" Oh no, ma'am, there was no mistake. I boiled it 
ever so long." 

" You should not have boiled it at all. However, 
where's the remainder ?" 

" There's none left." 

" But you don't mean to say that, after all my direc- 
tions, you used half a pound all at once ? Did you eat 
it like sorrel soup ?" 

" Well, ma'am, we tried it every way, but we couldn't 
get it down." 

Upon receiving which reply the baroness retired in 
much vexation, having, as she said, done for good and 
all with the Corbeaus and their perverse folly ; which 
meant that in a week's time the worthy woman would 
again be the object of the baroness's charity Not unfre- 
quently would the pretty lady lose patience with the 
wooden-headed rustics, and stamp those little bronze 
leather boots with anger and mortification upon the floors 
of the cottages in which her gifts were wasted. 

" There are some old women," the baroness said one 
day, " who are really and truly unbearable." 

At such outbursts the Dubosq only smiled in the 
gentle, long-suffering way which was natural to her. 



C2 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

She seemed to think it strange that Manon should show 
such airs. They were not ladylike. 

Some days the haroness was more angry than others, 
and she complained of everybody. " How is it, pere 
Gros, you have not had your window mended, when I 
gave you the money to do it ? As I live, there are 
Margot's children still without shoes and stockings ! 
Why does not your son, mere Dory, wear that velveteen 
waistcoat I gave him ? What in the name of wonder, 
maitre Grognard, have you got on your neck ? Oh, it's 
the cravat I gave you, is it; and it doesn't fit . and so 
you are making a martyr of yourself, are you ? It's 
extraordinary, but nothing ever does seem to fit that 
man ; besides, now I come to look at him, he's got the 
stock on upside down. And listen to me, mere Balday- 
roux, if jou persist in drinking that camphor lotion, 
instead of rubbing it in outwardly, you never will get rid 
of your lumbago, and never- ought. And as for you . 
but I can't be troubled with any more of you this morn- 
ing. Please drive home, coachman ; I quite lose all 
patience." 

You, like Madame Dubosq, would rather have had 
your heroine less hasty. Is it not so ? She ought to 
have borne with the vagaries of these poor creatures, 
and not have petted them one moment and scolded 
them the next. Did they love her the less for those 
angry heel stampings and clenchings of a plaything fist 
in a violet kid glove ? Perhaps, to tell the truth, when 
she had gone away in a pet they would scowl after her 
and comment, among themselves, upon her shortcomings ; 
saying with many defiant chuckles that they could get on 
well enough, they would be bound, without any of her 
high and mighty assistance and her condescending airs 
and graces ; which the most satirical of the cloddesses 



RICH, YOUNG, PRETTY, AND VERY MISERABLE. 63 

would sometimes mimic in a boorish fashion, stamping 
an uncouth sabot and doubling up a fist like a leg of 
mutton, suggestive of a baboon posing in burlesque of 
the Venus de Medici. But when our little baroness 
overcame her anger or forgot its cause, and returned to 
her pensioners laden Avith cake and wine and small silver 
money, these worthy people would crawl out and fawn 
upon her, kissing her hand as Mimi, Bibi, Dodo, and 
Ponto were in the habit of doing when, as sometimes 
happened, this pretty impulsive little lady thumped them 
all round. 

After all, perhaps it is a mistake to have imperfect 
characters in one's books j because, you know, the good 
ones are as easily manufactured as the bad. It's only a 
question of so much ink, and so many up and down 
strokes : and why should not all one's dramatis persona 
be brave, wise, beautiful, and noble-hearted, as we all 
are in real life, present company not excepted ? 

Returned home from their drive the ladies soon after- 
wards would take their places at the dinner-table, and 
the meal ended, one would read while the other worked 
at faldidals in embroidery ; or they played cards together, 
say at Boston, ecarte, piquet, double dummy, except 
sometimes when visited by Fathers Mathias and Triste- 
patte. 

The life which these two women led may strike you 
about this time as being rather dull and monotonous. 
The lives of most women are dull enough, and a change 
of condition is not very often easily effected, particularly 
that sort of change upon which one of these sometimes 
meditated rather seriously. Staying at Madame Gobi- 
nard's hotel of the " Three Crowns" was, as we have seen, 
a certain handsome and mysterious stranger, whose name 
was Ravnal. Now it is not divulging any secret . for 



<34 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

all the chattering womankind in Saint Babylas said as 
much . to state that had this Mr. Raynal pressed Manon 
de Grandvilain to be his wife she would very probably 
have consented. Public opinion said also that Mr. 
Haynal was in love with her. But he did not ask. 
Why, the chattering womankind aforesaid could not ex- 
plain. Tired of asking herself the question, our pretty 
baroness . after sore provocation from Mimi and Co., and 
the grievous ones in the village . would lock her bedroom 
door upon the Dubosq and cry herself to sleep. 

At such times that good gentlewoman, thus debarred 
from offering sympathetic aid, would, after knocking 
vainly for admittance, whimper at the door in a fashion 
that might have made some angry people angrier. One 
night Manon said, after a long interval of silence, during 
which she had sat gazing into the smouldering embers on 
the hearth, " I think I shall shut this place up and go 
away somewhere for a year or two." 

"Where will you go?" asked Madame Dubosq, with 
some astonishment and uneasiness. 

" I don't care where it is," replied the other, " as 
long as it is hundreds of miles away. But I'm tired of 
this dreadful village and that wearisome old town, and I 
should like never to see anybody in the place any more." 

After which remark she went to bed and cried herself 
to sleep. But next morning she was up with the lark, 
and as blithe and gay as ever. 

"Did I say Fd leave you, my poor darlings?" she 
said, kneeling down to embrace that shaggy impostor 
Ponto : " and you, too, poor dear," she added, as that 
ancient villain, the tortoise, waddled towards her wagging 
his wicked old head. 



65 



CHAPTER VI. 

" YOU CAN GO." 

Wide's the world, and men will give 

Ample room to let him live, 

If his sharpened wits can find 

Fortune blowing in the wind : 

In the curtain of the sky 

Solid roof to keep him dry ; 

And for clothing warm and gay 

Fleecy clouds and sunny ray ; 

For his bed the flint stones bare, 

And for food the plenteous air. . Underwood. 

The world wagged thus within the walls of the Imperial 
College of Saint Babylas. At half-past five o'clock in sum- 
mer (six o'clock in winter) a bell rang, and five minutes 
afterwards, the collegian who was not out of bed found 
in all probability his bed during the next five minutes 
several degrees too warm to hold him. At forty minutes 
past five the usher, having scrambled into his own clothes, 
called upon his young friends to fall into rank, and towel 
in hand they marched to a long tank, at the end of the 
room, provided with a number of small taps, one for each 
collegian, where, with soap, if they had any, or without, 
if they had none . the use of soap being optional . such 
ablutions were performed as were practicable during the 
space of two minutes by the clock. Then falling into 
rank again, wet or dry, they marched back up the room. 
At ten minutes to six they were marched downstairs, 
and prayers were read to the French Catholics in Latin 
and to the English Protestants in French. One of the 
eldest boys read aloud, the others kneeling on the floor 
in a circle, with their caps or pocket-handkerchiefs be- 
tween their knees and the red tiles, their faces turned 
towards the reader and their arms folded. 

5 



GQ THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

Prayers over, followed two hours of study, and at eight 
o'clock the young gentlemen fell in again and marched 
off to the refectory for breakfast. In winter breakfast 
meant a basin of warm milk and water and a hunch of 
bread, for which it was optional to buy butter, had those 
inclined to do so the halfpenny requisite for that pur- 
pose. In summer breakfast took place in the play- 
ground, and consisted of the lump of bread and^no milk ; 
but water was procurable at a small cistern in the yard, 
to obtain a drink from which the boys formed a queue, 
and each in turn putting his mouth under the tap took 
as many gulps as the pushing of those behind would allow 
of. Sometimes, however, it would happen that there 
was no water, and at other times one of the young gentle- 
men having satisfied his own wants would fling a handful 
of earth into the cistern, with the view of preventing 
those who came after him, if they were at all fastidious, 
from drinking. 

After an hour's recreation, the study-master's voice 
was heard calling out . "In rank! in rank!" Then, 
again . " Make ready ! March \" And then . " Slower ! 
Faster ! Is at so fast ! Keep step ! Halt ! Find your 
books ! To your places ! Sit down ! Silence \" An 
order, in fact, preceded every movement throughout the 
day. From nine to ten the collegians were in class. 
Then from ten to eleven, and eleven to twelve, with occa- 
sional falling in and marching between while, and then 
followed dinner. Dinner consisted of soup, rather thin, a 
course of vegetables . potatoes and butter, perhaps, or 
haricot beans . and, except on fast days . that is to say, 
every Friday and Saturday . a course of meat three inches 
by four and one thick. After dinner recreation until one; 
then class until four, and tea in the play-ground. This 
meal, called tea for want of a better name, consisted of a 



" YOU CAN GO. ' 67 

lump of dry bread, with an opportunity of buying butter 
or pennyworths of very dry figs, and apples which tasted 
extremely like potatoes. After an hotir's recreation, study 
followed until half-past seven. Then prayers. Then 
supper . the dinner without soup . and then bed. Five 
minutes allowed from the time of entering the dormitory 
to the time that every boy was to be between his sheets, 
and woe betide the slow coaches ! These were the 
arrangements observed in the college. 

The terms, including all expenses for board, washing, 
repair of clothes, loan of books, paper, pens, pencils, &c, 
and medical attendance and medicine, were twenty-six 
pounds per annum. No additional charge was made for 
boarders left at the college during the holidays, which 
consist of ten days at Easter, and two months in the 
autumn, besides a day once a month. A collegian might 
bring with him and wear in the college any clothes he 
had in use, but it was necessary that they should be pro- 
vided with one full college uniform, without which he 
was not allowed to go out walking with the others on 
Sunday afternoon. The price of the uniform was three 
pounds ten shillings. Or, if the parents thought fit, by 
paying twenty pounds down and thirty shillings a year 
extra, the collegian was provided with all clothes, linen, 
sheets, and towels (which otherwise must be bought by 
the collegian and left behind on his departure) as long as 
he might remain in the college. 

There were nearly four hundred pupils, about ninety 
of whom were day scholars. The boarders were arranged 
in classes according to age and acquirements ; and of 
these classes there were eight, each containing about forty 
pupils. Two classes slept in one dormitory, which con- 
tained nearly a hundred beds. The }'oungest pupil was 
ten years old, and the eldest nineteen. All which par- 

5.2 



68 THE PRETTTf WIDOW 

ticulars, though found in a work of fiction, may be relied 
upon as correct, and have been here written for the bene- 
fit of English parents with sons to educate. The writer 
would premise that in the descriptions of school- 
life which follow there is very little exaggeration, though- 
the reader is, of course, at liberty to believe as much or 
as little as he may think fit. 

" It seems to me, Mr. Polyblank," said the Proviseur, 
one Saturday morning, after reading through the profes- 
sor's report of the conduct of his young friends during 
the week . a document in which the disorderly behaviour 
of Messieurs Bardajos, Bourdichon, and Coquillard, 
though but faintly reflected, yet failed not to suggest the 
idea of anarchy and disorder . "it seems to me that your 
class is growing more and more insubordinate." 

" They are rather unruly," stammered the professor ; 
. " some of them." 

" All of them, I should say," retorted Mr. Roustou- 
bique. " Anyhow, twenty out of twenty-five. Let me 
see, now, why you have punished them. ' Bardajos, five 
hours' dictation for cutting his desk.' Do you mean to say 
that he cut his initials ?" 

" Well, sir," said the professor, with some hesitation, 
"it was rather more than that. In fact it was the table 
leg." 

" The table leg !" repeated Mr. Roustoubique. What 
did he do to it ?" 

"He cut it off." 

" C-u-t it o-f-f !" cried the Proviseur ; " and you gave 
him only five hours ? Why it's monstrous. He should 
have had twenty. He should have been sent to the dun- 
geon. I don't know that he ought not to have been ex- 
pelled. At all events I'll take a note of his case and think 



" YOU CAN GO." 09 

it over. And now what's this ahout Bourdichon. ' In- 
subordination : one hour's dictation. Impertinence : two 
hours' drill. For bringing animals into the class : two 
hours' dictation. For flying an insect : two hours dicta- 
tion. For drawing a portrait. For leaving class without 
leave. For making faces through the window and refus- 
ing to come in again. For resisting authority and kicking.' 
This is a fine picture of scholastic life, Mr. Polyblank." 

" He is rather troublesome, sir, sometimes," said the 
professor, " but he is very clever with his translations." 

" Bah !" said Mr. Roustoubique, " I'll take a note of 
him too. And Coquillard. What's this ? ' For cooking 
during the class.' Cooking what ? Do you mean to say 
that there are culinary operations in progress during the 
time that your pupils are supposed to be receiving your 
instruction ? Haven't you got a nose, Mr. Polyblank ?" 

" Yes, sir," replied Mr. Polyblank, simply, laying as he 
spoke, his hand upon the organ alluded to, which, to tell 
the truth, was not the least prominent of his features ; 
" I smelt something peculiar, and found out what was 
going on." 

" And what was that ?" asked Mr. Roustoubique, with 
suppressed indignation. 

" In my country," said Mr. Polyblank, unconscious of 
the brewing storm, " we call it hardbake. It is a prepa- 
ration of sugar and butter." 

" A thousand thunders !" roared the Proviseur, 
springing from his chair. " Has it come to this, that 
confectionery is to be carried on during the hours of 
study . that menageries are kept . that half the class is 
out at play and their professor out after them, giving 
chase . that windows are broken and table-legs cut oft, 
and the professor and pupils practice le boxe ? Mr. Poly- 
Wank, you're a fool!" 



70 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

" Sir !" cried Mr. Polyblank, turning "white and 
trembling, " I cannot submit to sucli language." 

" Do as you choose,-" retorted the other in a towering 
passion ; " you're utterly useless in this establishment. 
Go back to England if you like. I don't require your 
services another hour.'" 

Like as it were one in a dreani, but trembling with 
agitation so that he could scarcely hold his hat, Mr. 
Polyblank walked to the door. With the handle in his 
hand, he turned and said . "I'll take you at your word, 
sir; I'll leave your college to-day." 

" This minute, if you wish," replied the other, with a 
brutal laugh. "The sooner I see the last of you the 
better I shall be pleased." 

But when Mr. Polyblank had left the room Mr. 
Roustoubique began to reflect and to repent of his hasty 
words, and his reason for regret was this. The object of 
Mr. Roustoubique's life was to distinguish himself among 
Proviseurs. How was that to be done ? There was only 
one way, and that was to increase the revenue of his 
college. He thought of a plan, and hoped to work it 
with success. He asked permission of the Board to 
advertise in some of the English journals for English 
scholars. Permission was granted, but the funds refused. 
He didn't like the idea of spending his own money. 
What was he to do ? The Board had no faith in the 
idea. It had been tried at other colleges without success. 
The Proviseur's scheme seemed likely to go to the wall, 
when chance helped him. One of the boy's parents wrote 
to request that his son might learn English. Seizing, 
upon this idea, the Proviseur canvassed the collegians to 
learn who was desirous of acquiring a knowledge of this 
language. 

A great many young gentlemen were only too eager 



" YOU CAN GO." 71 

to do anything for the sake of novelty ; and these lie told 
to write to their parents to tell them that there would be 
no extra charge on that account, and to induce them to 
send him a formal letter to the desired effect. The 
letters thus obtained he submitted to the Board, and 
suggested that an English professor should be obtained. 
The Board consented to the appointment being made, but 
only on condition that his instruction should be considered 
extra, and paid for at such a rate as would defray the 
expense of his hire. This arrangement did not dauut the 
Proviseur. By dint of perseverance he obtained the 
consent of a large number of parents to the extra charge, 
and making a calculation found that their payments 
would amount to the ordinary salary of a professor, with 
a very decent balance to spare. In that case, why not 
spend the balance in advertising for English pupils ? 
Indeed, why hire a professor at so large a salary ? There 
must be plenty of men of talent to be picked up cheap. 

The Proviseur advertised, and picked up Mr. Polyblank 
at a slight reduction. He also advertised for English 
pupils with considerable success ; and things had gone on 
tolerably smooth until this day on which Mr. Roustou- 
bique and Mr. Polyblank quarrelled. Mr. Roustoubique 
had been a good deal put out that morning. He had 
come to the conclusion that the English professor had 
not sufficient strength of character to manage young 
France, and he did not know how to better himself at 
the price. That morning, too, Mr. Roustoubique had 
received an unpleasant visit from the resident English 
clergyman respecting the conduct of the English boys at 
church the previous Sunday. A fortnight before, in con- 
..sequence of a letter received from an English parent, Mr. 
Roustoubique had determined upon sending the Protestant 
boys, thirteen in number, to the English church. 



72 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

Hitherto it had been the practice for the eldest 
English student to read through the Morning Prayers on 
a Sunday, while the French boys went to the chapel 
attached to the college ; but this primitive arrangement 
had been objected to, and led to the sending of the before- 
mentioned letter. The parent in question had threatened 
to remove his son, and Mr. Roustoubique had decided 
upon sending the English boys to church. This, how- 
ever, would be attended with some difficulty. Who was 
to take them ? One of the ushers was ill. Another had 
left in a huff. The professors could not be asked to 
undertake such duty. There was nothing for it the first 
Sunday, if the boys were to go at all, but to let them go 
by themselves. That, however, was contrary to all pre- 
cedent. It was one of the oldest rules of the college that 
every pupil's parents who did not reside in or near to 
Saint Babylas should appoint some person to act as their 
agent, or, as it was called, correspondant , with whom the 
principal of the college might at once communicate in 
case of emergency. 

Unaccompanied by this agent, or some person 
authorized to act in his stead, no pupil was allowed to 
leave the college on the monthly holiday, when all those 
whose friends approved of the arrangement were at liberty 
from eleven a.m. until seven r.u. ; and thus it was not an 
unusual sight to see a fine young man of eighteen years, 
or thereabout, walking home in charge of a little bonne 
who had seen at most seventeen summers. If found 
walking alone in the town during the day, a collegian 
was liable to be immediately sent back into the college, 
though this rule was rarely enforced, unless the pupil 
happened to be found with a cigar in his mouth, when 
the choice was given him of getting within the walls in 
five minutes or of stopping out for ever. 

With such rigid rules as these in force, how could Mr. 



" YOU CAN GO." 73 

Roustoubique contemplate such an innovation as that 
above alluded to ? But then the English parent said . 
" If my son is not sent to an English Protestant Place of 
Worship (all with capitals) on the coming Sabbath, I will 
remove him immediately from your college." Upon 
receiving this letter, Mr. Roustoubique seized a pen 
with the intention of sending back a stinging reply ; but 
upon consideration did not carry it out. He then deter- 
mined to send this pupil by himself ; but two days after 
the receipt of the first epistle came two others from other 
parents, containing a similar threat. Mr. Roustoubique 
had an engagement which he did not want to break. 
No one could conveniently be sent, and so he determined 
to let the young gentlemen go by themselves, with what 
result will be presently seen. 

During the next week arrangements were made, and 
Captain Ponson, professor of calisthenics and sword ex- 
ercise, accepted the duty of marshalling the English boys 
to church. " They behaved will enough of themselves/' 
thought Mr. Roustoubique, quite erroneously as it hap- 
pened, " or I should have heard something about it 
before this. However, I had better let the captain take 
charge of them, and screw the expense somehow out of 
the quarterly accounts." The captain was a worthy man, 
but pompous. He wore the ribbon of the Legion of 
Honour upon his broad chest. He had a perfectly bald head, 
and a fierce white moustache and beard a rEmpereur. 

That Sunday he had evidently got himself up for the 
occasion. He was in his Sunday best . blue shaven and 
buttoned up to bursting in his military surtout. He 
wore a new pair of white cotton gloves, and carried a cane 
with a massive silver knob. On leaving the college gates 
he cried in stentorian tones, " En route !" and marched 
by the side of his young friends, flourishing his cane after 
the manner of a tambour-major. For about half an 



74 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

hour his young friends marched very steadily, and being 
occupied with his own thoughts, the gallant captain paid 
no particular attention to the road they were taking. All 
at once, though, he drew up short and looked about him. 
It struck him forcibly that they were describing a circle, 
and were at that moment within but a short distance of 
the spot from which they had started. The captain's 
visage assumed an expression of anger. The ear of the 
foremost young gentleman was within easy distance, the 
captain took hold of it and inquired . " Where are you 
going to ?" 

" I don't know," replied the young gentleman, in a 
tone of suffering. 

" Don't know ?" repeated the captain in indignant 
surprise. " What do you mean ?" 

Then taking possession of more available ears . 
" Don't you know either ? And you ? And you ?" 

It turned out that nobody knew. One of the smallest 
boys professed to have a glimmering of knowledge on 
the subject, and was put at the head of the column, but 
he proved to be impracticable. The captain began to 
storm. How had they found the way the previous Sunday, 
and how was it that they had forgotten it ? ^Vhat 
did it all mean ? But they could give no explanation, 
and the captain raged impotently. Time was getting on, 
though, now. They had been marching for nearly an 
hour. The captain made inquiry at a shop, and found 
that they were at the end of the town which was furthest 
from the church. " Right about face !" he cried, and 
away they went again at a quick march. The fact was, 
as it subsequently transpired, the young rascals had 
never been to church at all. upon the previous Sunday, 
but had repaired in a body to an estaminet outside the 
town, where they had smoked cigars, drunk sour small 
beer, and played at bosquet with much enjoyment. 



YOU CAN GO. 7 a 

The English church was up a bye-street, on the first- 
floor over a wine merchant's store . a long, narrow room, 
furnished with a pulpit, half-a-dozen pews, sixty benches, 
and an organ. Attached to this establishment was a 
red-nosed reverend gentleman, who, contrary to the 
practice of Protestant clergymen in England, wore a 
black satin stock, which, unaccompanied by shirt collar, 
had not a very clerical appearance. Ther3 was no clerk. 
About fifty persons composed the congregation, and they 
were rather astonished when the collegians made a 
boisterous entry in the middle of the communion, and 
marched with measured tread up the room. More 
astonished still when the captain . the worthy creature 
never before having been inside a Protestant place of 
worship, and was wholly ignorant of its forms and 
ceremonies . gave orders in a ringing voice for his young 
friends to prepare themselves for sitting down, to sit 
down, to prepare themselves for rising, to rise, to observe 
silence, to pay attention, to prepare for sitting down 
again, to sit down again, and to take care what they were 
about. Most astonished when, misled by one of the young 
gentlemen, the captain rose in the middle of the sermon, 
before the Reverend Mr. Backshiver was half way through 
his thirdly, and shouted . 

" Prepare yourselves. In rank. March!" and marched 
away triumphantly at the head of his chuckling young 
friends, who drowned the remainder of the clergyman's 
discourse in the thunder of their blucher soles. 

Mr. Roustoubique, however, was in his turn not a 
little surprised on receiving a letter from the Reverend 
Mr. Backshiver, complaining of the unhappy Ponson's 
unseemly conduct, and threatening harsh measures should 
he come again to disturb the service. What was to be 
done now ? he asked himself, and paused for a reply. If 
such goings on were repeated, the fact might reach the 



70 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

ears of the Board, and then good-bye to all the Roustou- 
biquian dreams of greatness. The boys must go to 
church, could not be trusted by themselves, and yet there 
was nobody to take them. Nobody unless Mr. Poly- 
blank were pressed into the service. But after what had 
occurred how could that be managed ? Mr. Roustou- 
bique was not the man to be easily overcome by diffi- 
culties. When he had made up his mind that it would 
be to his advantage to keep the professor a little longer, 
he determined that he should not go, and springing up 
rang the bell at once. 

" Send Mr. Poly blank to me." 

" He has just left the college, sir." 

" Run after him/'' 

While the servant was gone Mr. Roustoubique 
rehearsed a conciliatory speech or two. Presently the 
door opened and the man re-entered, somewhat out of 
breath. 

" Well ?" 

" I told Mr. Polyblank you wanted him, sir." 

" Well, where is he ?" 

" He thanked me, sir, and . he walked on." 

" You mean to say that he is not coming, then ?" 

" I should think not, sir. Anyhow I left him walking 
liard in the opposite direction." 

When the door was closed upon the servant the Pro- 
viseur had an opportunity of swearing at his ease. 
Presently he put on his hat and set out for the Street of 
the Priests. 

" I don't see how I can do without him," said M 
Roustoubique, pausing on Mr. Pomponney's door step- 
L " At least not yet awhile. When I can, though, Fll 
make him smart for this." 

He found the professor seated in front of a cup of 



77 

cold tea in his modest apartment. He held a book in 
his hand, but he held it all on one side, and was evidently 
lost in thought. The Proviseur's eyes travelled rapidly 
round the room, taking in its various details . the jumble 
of odd furniture, the battered old portmanteau standing 
open and revealing the poverty of its owner . the frugal 
meal, and the professor himself sitting in his shirt-sleeves 
to save his coat . a coat which Mr. Roustoubique had 
disapproved of upon account of its shabbiness. 

" He's as poor as a rat," thought the Proviseur, with 
an inward chuckle. " He'll be glad enough to stop if 
I'll keep him." Then he coughed loudty to attract Mr. 
Polyblank's attention. 

" Ah, Mr. Roustoubique," exclaimed the other, in- 
voluntarily, and in some confusion because of his shirt- 
sleeves. But having shuffled on his coat he recovered 
himself, and bowing stiffly continued . " I did not expect 
this honour, sir. Pray be seated." 

" Pardon the intrusion," said the Proviseur, taking a 
chair, assuming a careless air, and crossing his legs. 
" The fact is, I wanted to speak to you with reference to 
our conversation a short time ago. I am afraid I was 
too hasty and said what . what I really did not mean. 
Pray do not attribute my visit to any motive but the 
proper one. Understand, I have no wish for a recon- 
ciliation ; but I make it a point through life to act fairly 
if I can. I know I was wrong in speaking to you as I 
did. I had no intention of discharging you, but . but 
you have no idea what things occur to harass a man in 
my position. I beg to withdraw all I said that may 
have been offensive to you. I beg your pardon. Here 
is my hand." 

He spoke in such a frank and manly way that the 
guileless professor was caught at once. 



78 THE PRETTY WIDOW - 

" Pray make no excuses, sir," he said, nastily ; " I . I 
was annoyed, I confess ; but after this explanation . I 
certainly thought that you treated me uncourteously, but 
after you say . that is, when you say " 

*' Let us say no more about it, Mr. Polyblank." 

Mr. Polyblank was very glad that it should be so. 
He was one of those persons . and there are many of 
them . who are shamefaced when they are doing right, 
who bungle when they should triumph, and only long 
after the crisis is over perceive what they should have 
said, and when they should have said it. 

" I'd be the last man in the world to do you an injury, 
Poly blank," said the Proviseur, " because I am sine that 
you do your best, although you are not at all times very 
successful. I said just now that I hated to be unjust, 
and I hate to be misunderstood. Hardly had you left 
me when a letter arrived, bringing me an intimation that 
the number of my professors must be reduced. I was 
afraid that when you came to hear of this you would 
think that I knew it before, and had picked a quarrel 
with you to make your dismissal easier.'''' 

Mr. Polyblank bowed and murmured something, and 
felt rather uncomfortable. 

" Yes," continued Mr. Roustoubique, " it lias been 
determined that the professor of English shall be removed, 
and in his place a gentleman engaged who, besides his 
duties during the week, shall also give a portion of his 
Sundays to the superintendence of the English boys dur- 
ing their religious exercises." 

Mr. Poly blank's jaw fell at this news. 

" But . but," he stammered. 

" I beg your pardon ?" said Mr. Roustoubique, smiling 
blandly. 

" I . I thought you meant me to stop," stammered 
Mr. Polyblank. 



" you can go." 79 

" I should like you to stop ; I should like nothing 
better, but I don't ask you to do so. If I did, it would 
seem as though I wished you to do more work for less 
money. By the way, did I mention that the gentleman 
who is to be engaged is to be paid a hundred francs less 
per annum than you receive ? It is really a great 
shame. A hundred francs less ; but I am told that at 
Douay and Boulogne the colleges do not give even as 
much." 

Mr. Polyblank sat silent for a minute or two. His 
first idea was to say that he would go. But this idea 
very soon gave place to another. Where was he to go 
to ? He had turned the matter over awhile ago, sitting 
in front of his cup of cold tea. If he went away, what was 
to become of him ? He could hardly hope to get employ- 
ment in any other French college with the character he 
would take away from this one. And if he went back 
to England ? . but he had given up England in despair 
when he came out here to make a fresh start. No, he could 
not go back. He must earn a certain amount of money, 
somehow, for a time, and if he left his present situation 
he would be penniless. Mr. Roustoubique, twirling his 
thumbs, waited for a reply. He was pretty certain that 
the professor would come to terms, and he was not dis- 
appointed. 

Next Sunday, Mr. Polyblank accompanied the young 
gentlemen to church, and he found the task thus im- 
posed upon him anything but agreeable. The professor's 
character as a person to be got over had spread through 
the college ; and though this was the first time the Eng- 
lish pupils had been brought in contact with him, they 
had been well coached, and were prepared. This Sunday, 
although they knew the way, they repeated the joke of 
the previous week, and arrived at church by a circuitous 
route after the service had begun. As they came stamp- 



80 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

ing upstairs an old woman, who acted as door-keeper and 
pew-opener, pointed out some benches which had been 
kept vacant for them near the door. It was a very hot 
day. The window stood open, and upon the window-sill 
all the young gentlemen piled their uniform caps in the 
form of a pyramid. The professor having produced his 
prayer-book, and found the place, half-a-dozen young 
gentlemen eagerly inquired what Sunday it was, in order 
that they might find the collect, and, being informed, 
half-a-dozen other young gentlemen wanted the same in- 
formation. To avoid unnecessary noise, Mr. Poly blank 
passed his book, which going down the bench and turning 
the corner, disappeared mysteriously, and was chased, to 
the great scandal of the remainder of the congregation, 
in the style of hunt-the-slipper. 

The book having at length being restored to its right- 
ful owner, nothing particular occurred until one of the 
most audacious of the young gentlemen, producing his 
cap, which he had retained, asked permission to go out 
into the air upon account of a sudden faintness. In- 
dignantly refusing the request, for which he felt sure 
there was no just ground, Mr. Polyblank ordered the boy 
to put his cap upon the window-sill ; upon which the 
young rogue violently launched the cap in question at 
the pyramid, and, striking it at its base, sent most of the 
caps out of window. The excitement of their owners 
occasioned a general movement and murmur, to quell 
which, Mr. Polyblank sent out the cause of the mischief 
to pick up the caps. Some time elapsing without his 
reappearance, it became necessary to send out another 
young gentleman to look for him, who in his turn had 
to be sought for by another. Mr. Polyblank waited help- 
lessly for their return, afraid to leave the church to go and 
look for them himself lest those left behind should mis- 



" YOU CAN GO." 81 

^conduct themselves. The sound of suppressed laughter, 
-and the shuffling of feet on the stones in the street below, 
tdrove him at length in desperation to the door, where he 
[hoped to find the old woman, but she was nowhere to be 
seen. Going downstairs he saw her in the street giving 
. chase to the young gentlemen, who were playfully pelting 
her with cap?. 

With as dignified a tone as he could assume, he bade 
the culprits go in. They obeyed, but on ascending the 
stairs the professor found the door bolted, and as the 
young gentlemen inside were resolved not to hear the 
professor's gentle tapping, and he was unwilling to knock 
louder for fear of attracting the attention of the congre- 
gation, he was obliged to remain outside until Mr. Back- 
shiver's discourse reached a conclusion. 

Then some of the congregation having unbolted the 
.door, the professor rejoined his lambs, vowing vengeance. 
Vengeance, indeed ! . when to tell Roustoubique what 
had occurred was to own himself incapable of performing 
his duty. As he was leaving the church with his pro- 
mising young flock, Mr. Backshiver stopped him. 

" Excuse me, sir," said he in French, " but when I 
last drew attention to the misconduct of your pupils I 
thought I should have no further occasion for complaint. 
I trusted to gentlemanly feeling and a sense of what was 
right ; but I see I was in error. I shall now seek pro- 
tection in another quarter." 

With that speech, accompanied with a freezingly polite 
bow, the clergyman left the unhappy professor, who 
walked homewards by the side of the lambs, frolicsomely 
disporting themselves by the way, treading on each other's 
heels, and playing other pranks which were productive of 
much amusement to a select audience of rag-tagish St. 
Babylasians following in the rear. 

6 



82 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 



CHAPTER VII. 

A CLANDESTINE PrC-NIC. 

It is a day to rest from toil, 

To lie upon the grass ;md dream ; 
To bid life's healing pulses stay, 
Through a'l the hours of one bright day, 

Beside the murmur of the fahing stream. 

ANDE1W3. 

All through the week Professor Polyblank had now but 
little time left for recreation except it was upon a Sunday 
afternoon. There was then little rest to be got in the 
Street of the Priests, for business being slacker than 
usual on Sundays at the chemist's, Mr. Pomponney was 
apt to walk upstairs for a gossip, and had been known to 
take his pipe in the lodger's room under the pretence of 
the lodger finding his time hang heavily on his hands. 
It came to be the main object in the poor badgered 
schoolmaster to get away . to escape from society at any 
price . to burrow his head and hide himself. For some 
time past he had been rather shy of the ramparts, for 
there the Tagabond boys of the town mostly congregated : 
a lawless race, prone to derision, and even capable upon 
occasions of resortihg to overt acts of violence, such as 
pelting with pebbles and bits of clay. 

The streets of the town and the public promenades 
were affected by the other professors, whom he hardly 
liked to meet while wearing the same suit he wore on 
week-days. His only hope lay in long distances 1 . so 
getting out of the town with all the speed of which he 
was capable, he had. placed half a league between him 
and it before he began to feel at all comfortable. A long, 
hot, dusty road was that which he had to traverse, 



A CLANDESTINE PIC-NIC. 8$ 

stretching across the flat marshes ; but there was rest and 
happiness to be found at last in the shady garden of the 
little cabaret on the" outskirts of the village of Longanna, 
where refreshment in the shape of sugar-and-water . a 
tipple not inebriating, if cheering, . cost but one sou the 
jorum. Some cool places, too, were to be found by the 
side of the river, where, squatting between the pollards, 
indefatigable line fishers sat sedately bobbing the live-long 
day, happily content to wait for that which came not. 
And with lengthened contemplation of these anglers 
Polyblank would sometimes catch something of their 
feeling of drowsy contentment ; while at other times he 
persuaded himself that he shared their desire to secure 
the fat trout that wagged their tails and would not be 
caught. 

Of all spots, however, that he had visited, there was 
one particular little wood, or rather copse, by the water- 
side, of which he was fondest. It was a kind of neglected 
plantation at the bottom of a garden belonging to an 
old-fashioned house standing at the entrance of the 
village of Longanna, by the side of which the canal ran. 
The front of this hoiise was white and mournful of aspect, 
as it is the nature of most French country houses to be ; 
and there were large green wooden gates in the centre of 
the wall in front which when open afforded a glimpse of 
a stony-hearted courtyard . such as you might expect to 
find in connexion with a jail . always sad and cheerless 
by reason of the high walls surrounding it, and into this 
courtyard a number of windows looked. But on the 
other side of the house was a large irregular old-fashioned 
garden, beginning with a grass plot surrounded by a box- 
hedge clipped into a semblance of birds and beasts, with 
. in the centre of the greensward . a statue of chaste 
Diana, very much the worse for wear and tear. Beyond 

6-3 



84 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

this a wild growth of flowers . the common choking the 
choice. Beyond, again, an eruption of cabbages running 
fast into walking-sticks. After this a little forest of apple 
and pear trees with wondrous twisted and knotted trunks, 
which of a moonlight night took the shape of crouching 
giants . spindle-legged and distorted. After this, the 
copse running down to the water's edge. 

Of course Mr. Polyblank was perfectly well aware that 
he had no right to force his way through a weak place 
in the hedge which divided one side of this plantation 
from the high road, or to recline by the water-side 
beneath the grateful shade of the overhanging trees. To 
begin with, he knew that he must be doing wrong in 
trespassing on another person's property. Besides, there 
was a board with an inscription, very old and weather- 
worn, but yet for the most part legible, by which tres- 
passing was forbidden under penalties none the less 
terrible because they were not easily to be deciphered. 
The fact was, however, that the first time the pro- 
fessor ventured upon this highly improper proceeding the 
sunbeams had been pouring down on his head all the 
length of the long, white, shadeless road from Saint 
Babylas. He was panting under the heat. The gap in 
the hedge was temptingly large. The river trickled past 
through the trees. There was half an acre of cool green 
grass to spread himself out upon. And lastly, there was 
nobody looking. Climbing through the hedge, then, he 
luxuriated by the water-side for a good hour and more 
before he set off home again. The second time he passed 
that way there was the same gap . the same delicious 
shade, and nobody to see him. And then came the third 
aud last visit, upon which, as will be seen, something 
very dreadful occurred to him. 

He came away from home upon this ocasion this 



A CLANDESTINE PIC-NIC. 85 

desperado . with the settled determination of trespassing. 
Long impunity had given him courage, as is the case 
even with the most timorous of spirits . though, to tell 
the truth, he had come to the conclusion that the old 
house was unoccupied, because upon his previous visits 
he had never seen or heard any sign of life about it. 
While panting up the dusty road he had, when a mile at 
least distant from the place, in his mind's eye, climbed 
through the gap and stretched himself out at full length 
upon the mossy bank. He had started earlier than 
usual, so as to have a much longer rest ; and he took 
with him one of those famous sausages, a hunch of bread, 
and a cracked tumbler. The last he intended to fill 
from the canal, for he meditated a small thing in pic- 
nics, and he had also got a little red wine in a physic 
bottle, with which he purposed taking the rough edge off 
the canal. 

This was to be a gala day, you see. It happened to 
be his birth-day, not that that ought to have been any 
occasion for rejoicing, for surely he had been about as 
poor a spec as mother nature ever ventured on. How- 
ever, he was going to rejoice for reasons best known to 
himself . if known at all . and had come provided with 
the requisites on a limited scale. If ever there was a 
day all the year round when the sun poured down its 
fullest heat upon the long road from Saint Babylas to 
Longanna it was that particular Sunday ; and more than 
once by the way was the perspiring Polyblank fain to 
shelter himself in streaks of shade, a foot wide at the 
utmost, which the lanky lime trees with their lopped 
branches cast spectre-like across the highway. He was 
well nigh fainting with heat and fatigue when at length 
he reached the long-coveted journey's end. But he 
found that something had occurred during the week 



$6 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

which he was very far from anticipating. The gap had 
been made up. 

Poor professor ! It was with a very woful counte- 
nance that he noted this new arrangement, and stood 
scraping his chin with his hand, while he considered 
what steps he ought to take under the circumstances. 
A good many steps would be required if he made up his 
mind to go back again. Half-a-dozen and a good long 
stride if he decided upon surmounting the little difficulty 
of some wooden palings by the side of the hedge which 
had just been repaired. It was not at all the sort of 
thing for a teacher of the young to do ; but only think 
of the temptation. It was one hundred and twenty in 
the sun ! The palings were so easily to be climbed, and 
there was no one to see him. It was anything but 
right ; but then, you others, . if there never was any 
one to see you? Mr. Polyblank thought the matter 
over. He peeped through the palings and listened. He 
could hear nobody about, and he yielded at length to 
the promptings of the tempter . without a very hard 
struggle. Indeed, if there were a struggle at all, it was 
on the top of the palings. 

The difficulty surmounted, oh ! how delightful it was 
to be here in the cool shade, and watch the wanton sun- 
light playing bopeep among the floating branches, beneath 
which the barbel slept securely in the deep shadow. On 
the other side of the water a grey-headed angler, crouch- 
ing among the feathering grass and bobbing bulrushes, 
was dozing under an umbrella whilst the frolicsome 
gudgeons sported round his trembling float, and the less 
venturesome roach looked on at a safer distance, warily 
watching the bait. A soft, refreshing breeze coming 
from the surface of the water fanned the schoolmaster's 
face, and the turf on which he lay was as soft as velvet. 



A CLANDESTINE PIC-NIC. 87 

There was not a sound to break the stillness of the 
peaceful scene save the occasional splash of a fish, or the 
chirping of a bird, or the faint murmur of summer air 
rustling amongst the topmost branches of the trees. 
This was rather different from the playground at the 
Imperial College, with its ceaseless clamour of shrill 
voices, and its clatter of heavy boots upon the rugged 
gravel. Suppose it possible to get one's living by lolling 
all day on the sea beach, or under the shadow of the 
trees by a river side ! But there's not much money to 
be made that way, unless the brain be hard at work 
while 1;he body lies idle ; and that does not sound much 
like making holiday. 

There was nothing wanting to render his happiness 
complete, the professor thought, as he lay there in a state 
of dreamy contentment. Presently, however, an im- 
provement suggested itself. His feet were dreadfully 
hot, and he thought it would be heavenly bliss to lave 
them in the cool water. Why should he not ? He peered 
round coyly, as Dorothea might have done. The angler 
over the way could not catch sight of him from the place 
where he sat even if he woke up. There was no one else 
about. Poly blank hesitated no longer, but forthwith re- 
lieved himself of his socks. The water was deliciously cool, 
and there was surely nothing now left to wish for, unless 
it was lunch. He produced the paper parcel containing 
his sausage and bread, and the physic bottle full of wine, 
and began his repast. He had forgotten to bring a knife 
with him ; but he did not allow the want of it to mar 
his pleasure. He had brought his favourite author in his 
pocket, and read a line or two between the nibbles. 

It was quite a picture to see him sitting there, ankle 
.deep in the water, his book in one hand and a hunch 
of bread in the other, with nothing* in the world to 



83 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

trouble him but the gnats. All at once, though, some- 
thing of a very terrible nature happened. In the- 
middle of a mouthful he heard a rustling behind him. 
among the bushes, and pricked up his ears like a timid 
hare to listen. There was a rustling of leaves and a 
cracking of twigs, accompanied by a sort of half-hissing and 
half-scraping sound, which those who are used to pay for* 
such things might have recognised as that which a silk 
dress might make in sweeping past brushwood. This 
idea, however, did not immediately occur to the professor,, 
for his mind was running rather upon gamekeepers ; but 
presently he heard the sound of a woman's voice, singing 
softly, and then a thrill of terror ran through his frame- 
He dropped his favourite author, flung away his hunch 
of bread, and began to struggle with his half-Wellingtons- 
This was not a moment to think of such trifles as wet feet 
and want of stockings. He got one boot on somehow, be- 
ing within an inch of falling head over heels into the water 
in the process, and began to tear away at the other one. But 
in his agitation he tore off a tab ; the boot was refrac- 
tory, and shame and humiliation stared him in the face- 
In another instant he was confronted by the proprietor of 
the rustling silk . a black moire trimmed with violet, 
velvet and bugles. 

" I beg your pardon, madame," gasped Polyblank r 
dancing an involuntary hornpipe among the fragments of 
the small thing in picnics, to the utter annihilation of the 
physic bottle full of Saint Etienne. The lady regarded 
him with silent wonder for full a minute. Then the 
state of the case, with the evidence of the half-ofF boot, 
the stockings and broken victuals, became apparent . the- 
truth dawned upon her, and a twinkle in her eyes began 
to show through the would-be sternness of her pretty 
face. 



A CLANDESTINE PIC-NIC. 8$ 

" May I inquire, sir, what you are doing upon my 
grounds ?" she asked. He looked at her hopelessly. Had 
he been a boy thief caught in an orchard with his cheek 
stuffed with pippin, he could not well have worn a more 
sheepish look under the farmer's threatening horsewhip. 

" I . I . I," he stammered. He was trying to stand 
upon his stockings so as to conceal them from view. He 
had just kicked one of the sausages riverward, but it had 
cannoned off a pollard and was gambolling shamelessly in 
endless evolutions out in the open. If he could have 
taken a sudden spring, dived to the bottom of the water, 
and remained there for an hour or two without drowning- 
himself ! 

" Well, sir ?" 

This to him, with an impatient stamp of a beautiful 
little bronze leather boot. No further delays were prac- 
ticable. He must make an excuse. But oh, ye gods, 
what sort of one ? It was a goddess helped him at last 
. the goddess in the black moire. 

" Perhaps, sir, you did not know that this was private 
ground when you landed from your boat ?" 

At last our poor booby plucked up courage, and, as no- 
truthful-looking lie occurred to him, ventured on the 
truth itself: . " I do not know how to apologize, madam,, 
for the intrusion. I thought the house was uninhabited. 
I did not intend to do any harm, but I . I climbed over 
the palings." 

" I accept the explanation, sir," said the lady with the 
calmest and most self-possessed manner in the world. 
" And now nothing remains but for you to climb back." 

" Before going, madam, if you will allow me to ask 
your forgiveness, I will retire with " 

" As much haste as possible." 

" Yes, ma'am." 



90 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

Decidedly, thus far, the professor's position was any- 
thing but dignified; hut the -worst part had yet to come. 
Presently he would have to stoop lower still . to pick up 
his stockings for instance. And how about the scraps of 
newspaper littering the grass, and the broken victuals? 
And after this there were the palings ! Is there any 
little episode in the past life of any one of you which sets 
your ears a tiugling when you look back at it? Such 
passages occur in the lives of even the highest-placed. 
There is an undress rehearsal to every grand performance 
. there is weakness in strength . some trumpery details 
under the most splendid effects. Humans are human, in 
short . more's the pity ! . and it is no use our pretend- 
ing to have souls above sausages : at least it was with 
this reflection that the professor having disposed of his 
stockings fell to scrambling after a polony which would 
not be caught. The owner of the moire, after watching 
him a minute, was troubled with a cough, and Polyblauk 
resumed the perpendicular with a scarlet countenance. 

" I am afraid/' suid the lady, "you must have found 
it very difficult to climb over those palings. If you will 
follow me you can pass out through the garden.-" 

" You are too kind, madam," said the unhappy tres- 
passer, catching eagerly at the chance of her leaving him 
for a moment. " 1 will follow you immediately." Then, 
as she passed out of his sight behind the bushes, he fell 
with fury upon his obstinate half- Wellington, dragged it 
on, and kicked the remainder of those miserable frag- 
ments far away among the rushes. After this he stood 
for a moment panting for breath. If he could only 
escape now, he thought. A bound or two and, if all went 
well, he would be over the palings in the road, a free 
man. He took a step forward, but the lady's voice ar- 
rested his progress . 



A CLANDESTINE PIC-NIC. 91 

" Sir, are you coming ?" 

" I beg your pardon, madam ; ye-s, madam/' 

He gave himself up for lost and followed passively. 
Surely there never -was a more comical object than that 
poor professor, blushing like a girl and looking very much 
as though he would have liked to cry. He carried his 
hat in his hand and shambled by her side, as the boy in 
the orchard before mentioned might have accompanied 
the farmer to the place of execution. Yet she was not a 
very terrible-looking lady, this, who had taken him 
prisoner. She was, indeed, rather small and slim, and 
was one of those pretty-faced women, with small noses 
and big eyes, who have some trouble in looking fierce, 
though they may have tempers of their own for all that. 
Until now, however, the professor had not summoned up 
sufficient courage to look at her fairly. She might have 
been old or young, plain or pretty, for what he knew. 
She wore an extensive robe of silk or satin which rustled 
portentously . this much he knew, but after that nothing. 
When, at last, he ventured upon a peep, it was the 
dearest little round face, rather sun-burnt though, and 
with the brightest eyes the professor had ever encountered. 

" I think I have seen you before," she said, " though 
you are a stranger in the town. To be sure . I have 
seen you walking with the collegians/'' 

" I am a professor at the college, madam/'' 

" A professor ! Ah, then,, you are English. I thought 
so from . I thought so." 

But she did not say why, which made the succeeding 
pause rather awkward. 

" I wish I hadn't disturbed you," she said presently, 
with quite a childish, innocent sort of manner. " You 
did seem to be so enjoying yourself. But (with determi- 
nation) you'd no right to trespass." 



92 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

" I . I should never have dreamt of doing so if I had 
known " 

" I am afraid I broke in upon you in the middle of 
your lunch. Let me offer you some before you go." 

" Oh no, madam, I could not think of intruding, and 
I had quite finished, thank you. I am quite certain . 
thank you." 

" You know best, of course. It was at the hotel of 
the ' Three Crowns' I first saw you, now I remember. 
And so you teach at the college . what ?" 

"English, madam." 

"English? Keally. And so there are people want 
to learn English. I have some property in England, 
but it never occurred to me to learn English. This is 
the way out . if you will not let me offer you some 
refreshment." 

" No, thank you, madam. I am very much obliged to 
you, and I beg a thousand pardons." 

" There is no occasion. Good day, sir." 

He sidled out and bowed and shuffled round the 
corner, thanking Heaven for his escape. She, still hold- 
ing the door, looked thoughtfully after him. He cut a 
comical figure in his seedy old clothes, but, strange to 
say, the humour of his threadbare knees and glazed 
elbows was lost upon her. 

" Poor man !" said Manon de Grandvilain, with a 
sigh. " He looks half starved, and I have robbed him 
of a dinner. Teaches English, too ! I wonder how 
anybody can take the trouble to learn barbarous 
English !" 



93 



CHAPTER VIII. 

PLAYING AT LESSONS. 

Si vous l'aviez vu, c'te jeunnesse, 

All' e'tait gentille a croquer, 

AH' etait belle a rend' malade 

Jusqu'au greffier du jug' de paix. . CARRis. 

" Felicite," said Mr. Pomponney, " you will see." 

She was always on the point of seeing, according to 
Mr. Pomponney, whose habit it was to make predictions 
which were not often verified. Not that that mattered 
much. Very few persons in the world were blessed with 
as short a memory as Felicite, and when Mr. Pompon- 
ney's predictions were unfulfilled he said nothing, and she 
recollected nothing about it ; but when, by some extra- 
ordinary chance his words came true, loud was his self- 
glorification, and sincere the admiration his sagacity 
excited in the wife of his bosom. Now it can hardly be 
supposed that Mr. Pomponney would meanly take 
advantage of this shortness of memory on the part of 
Mrs. P even if he was aware that it existed ; and it is 
therefore to be presumed that his own recollection some- 
times failed him, for it is very certain that he was not 
unfrequently in the habit of congratulating himself upon 
the success of predictions which he had never made. 
Indeed, according to his own account, nothing ever hap- 
pened in his small circle that he had not anticipated, 
though it must be owned that upon some occasions . 
such, for instance, as when putting up the shop-shutters, 
one of them fell down on and bruised his head . he found 
it somewhat difficult to explain why, if he was aware of 
coming events of an unpleasant nature, he did not avoid 
them. 



94 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

" Felicite," said Mr. Pomponney one day, whilst 
spreading a blister, "I'm very sorry for your friend 
Polyblank, and I should like him to get on, but I feel 
an inward conviction that he wont. Please to recollect 
my words, Felicite. I say so, and you will see." 

An oblong piece of white cardboard in the window 
had led to these remarks. Mr. Polyblank had written 
in French . in his best large hand, and with his most 
imposing capitals . " English Lessons," and had timidly 
begged Mrs. Pomponney to allow the announcement to 
lie in the window, where accordingly she had placed it, 
and where it had caught Mr. Pomponney's eye as he 
returned from his cafe in the forenoon. A question had 
then arisen respecting the advisability of allowing it to 
overlie and cover up two boxes of capsules which had 
been lying there unnoticed for the last two years. The 
point to be decided was whether it would not be pre- 
judicial to the sale of the capsules which, though they 
had been a long time on hand, might yet be asked for 
at any moment if seen. If moved from the capsules 
would it be best to cover up the pulmonary wafers, swamp 
the leech label, or partially eclipse the show blister ? It 
was not . Mr. Pomponney was anxious to explain . that 
he grudged Polyblank the favour he had requested, if any 
good could come of it, bat who on earth in Saint Babylas 
could possibly want to learn English ? 

" What is England r" said Mr. Pomponney, abandon- 
ing the blister for a moment to wave his hand. " A place 
without a climate, and peopled by savages. A nation 
without music or with any knowledge of cookery ; who 
sell their wives, steal our plays, and caricature our 
fashions. Why should we care to know any more than 
we know already of that abode of prudery, pomposity, 
fog and doleful Sundays ? When our William hundreds 



PLAYING AT LESSONS. 95 

of years ago went over and eonquered them he took his 
language with him, and when presently we go over and 
conquer them again we'll do likewise. Why then trouble 
our heads about their barbarous gabble?" 

To which remarks Felicite having nothing to say, 
Mr. Pomponney went on with his plaster, and just at that 
moment the Baroness de Grandvilain's carriage drove up 
and stopped in front of the shop. The chemist immedi- 
ately ran out, cap in hand, to open the carriage-door, and 
followed the two ladies bare-headed into the shop. They 
had come to purchase some scent and soap, and to have 
a prescription made up for one of the pensioners ; which 
articles it seemed as though Mr. Pomponney would never 
have done folding up, so many wrappers did he employ 
for the purpose, fastening each with sealing-wax, and 
descanting the while most genteelly upon local topics, the 
weather, and the wares in his shop. 

All this while the announcement about the English 
lessons had been lying upon the coimter, and once when 
the Baroness stretched out her hand intending to take it 
up, Mr. Pomponney, misinterpreting her motive, and 
supposing she was desirous of looking at some pomatum 
pots and tooth-brushes underneath, hastily snatched it 
away. When at last the articles purchased had been 
wrapped up to Mr. Pomponney's satisfaction, the younger 
lady rising and walking towards the door had again 
approached the piece of pasteboard, and this time suc- 
ceeded in getting possession of it. 

" What is this ?" she asked. 

"That, madam? oh, nothing! I am sure I don't know 
why it is lying about here. A new perfume, this, madam. 
All the rage in Paris. The ' Theresa/ " 

" Thank you, thank you. Do you teach English, then, 
Mr. Pomponney?" 



9ti THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

" No, madam ! On the contrary." 

" You are learning ?" 

" No, madam, I assure you. Heaven forbid \" And 
he was going further to express his sentiments on the 
point when good little Felicite stepped forward with an 
explanation. 

"He lodges with us, madam . the new professor at the 
college. A gentleman of much learning. On the first 
floor, and gives no trouble." 

" Certainly, to be sure," said Mr. Pomponney, very 
grandly ; " he is our lodger, and . behold him \" 

Even as he spoke the professor came up to the private 
.door heavily laden with books, and was in no small degree 
.confused by finding himself confronting the baroness with 
his hands full, so that he was unable to raise his hat. 
But who shall picture his misery when trying to shift the 
books from one hand to the other he let some fall, and 
in endeavouring to pick them up dropped others ; so that 
had not Felicite gone at last to the rescue there is no 
saying how the painful scene would have ended. At 
length, however, he made his escape, but not before he 
had heard Mr. Pomponney's explosion of mirth. That 
worthy tradesman's risibility was indeed so intensely 
excited that he would not very soon have been restored 
to his usual sobriety of demeanour had he not happened 
to roll up against and break some of his own physic 
bottles during one of his convulsions of laughter; upon 
which he suddenly became as solemn as a mute, and with 
a long face picked up the pieces. 

It may seem strange, perhaps, that the baroness did 
not even smile at the misadventures of the clumsy pro- 
fessor. She might have done so, perhaps, had she not 
chanced to notice the expression of almost agony upon 
poor Polyblank's face, and then her eyes filled with tears. 



PLAYING AT LESSONS. 97 

"' Poor man ! poor man !" she muttered, half aloud. 
Pomponney, holding his sides, rolled at that moment 
among the phials, dealing out destruction right and left, 
at which she broke into quite a savage laugh, and to 
judge from the way in which she clutched the handle of 
her parasol, one might have fancied that she had been 
seized by a sudden and almost irresistible desire to smash 
the rest of the bottles that had escaped the chemist's 
ravages. 

That evening there came a note from Manon to the 
professor, inviting him to call at the chateau next day 
to make arrangements about some lessons, which she 
was desirous of receiving in the barbarous tongue. No 
time was named for the visit, and so he went in the 
evening after he had finished his duties at the college. 
Manon was in the garden when he arrived, and he was 
received by the Dubosq, with respect to whom the poor 
man committed the fatal error of mistaking her for the 
baroness's mother. Bungling again, this Polyblank 
rushed to the conclusion that it was the Dubosq who 
wanted to learn English, and actually began to explain 
the rudiments in the usual scholastic style, which only 
.caused the good lady to bristle up in silent indignation. 
From the first hour that they met the Dubosq conceived 
an antipathy to the simple schoolmaster, which he never 
succeeded in entirely removing, and she treated him 
with a chilling haughtiness. 

The fact was, she wanted to keep the baroness as 
much as possible to herself, and resolutely set her face 
against intruders. Not that her motive perhaps was, as 
the world goes, so very mercenary. She did not expect 
or wish to get any of the baroness's money in case of 
the baroness's death. She was very comfortable in the 
situation that she held, and as happy as she could expect 

7 



98 THE PUETTY WIDOW. 

to be in this world (earthly bliss and the lamented 
Dubosq having perished together) , and she wished things 
to remain as they were, if possible. That notion of 
travelling, which had entered Manon's head the other 
evening had made the good lady feel very uncomfortable. 

She did not wish to travel. Long ago, without being 
so foolish as to take the trouble to go and look at other 
countries, she had come to the conclusion that there was 
no plaoe like home. There was much wear and tear, 
and much worry and fatigue, she had been given to 
understand, in travelling, which might suit a parcel of 
Englishwomen, but which no French lady in her senses, 
who had been properly brought up, would willingly 
undergo. All this she represented to Manon, who 
thereupon, with a prodigiously serious face, proposed 
that they should immediately begin to learn to climb, 
practising upon the garden wall and the apple trees, in 
order to get their heads steady for the Grands Mulets. 
But these annoyances, upon which she lengthily dilated, 
did not form the chief objection to travelling in Madame 
Dubosq's eyes. How was it possible that she could 
take her pretty lamb about in the world, without some 
prowling wolf crossing their path and snapping her up ? 
Even here, hidden away in this tunable-down old chateau 
of Longanna, she was not safe. 

Certainly the rakes of Saint Babylas were not a very 
dangerous race, and were easily enough sent to the right- 
about. The marrying men were not on the whole attrac- 
tive, and though they might do well enough for the 
marriageable maidens of those parts, were scarcely formed 
to inspire a passion in the heart of the ex-actress of the 
Chatelet, even had she not been a baron's widow with 
four thousand a year. But there was danger from one 
quarter, the Dubosq could not help fancying. Although 



PLAYING AT LESSONS. 99 

he made no sign, that young man Raynal meant mis- 
chief, she felt convinced. What puzzled her was his 
going on shilly-shallying ; and she would dearly have 
liked to question him respecting his intentions, had she 
not feared either that he might question her right in so 
doing, or that such a course of conduct would offend the 
baroness. 

Gradually, however, as time rolled on, although Ray- 
nal still visited the chateau, yet no talk of love having, 
as far as the Dubosq knew . and she watched them 
closely . passed between him and Manon, the house- 
keeper began to feel more comfortable, and at length 
persuaded herself that things would go on thus until the 
end of their lives. Yes, they would thus pass away their 
existence. The pretty young widow of nineteen would 
be content to carry her weeds to the grave. The Dubosq 
would ever remain her valuable friend and companion, 
and keep the keys of the wine-cellar and grocery cup- 
board under the stairs. Raynal would call two or three 
times a week, and lounge about, and talk in his vague, 
dissatisfied way of things in general ; his remarks acquir- 
ing piquancy from an under-current of irony which per- 
vaded his conversation without being pointed enough to 
offend the persons addressed. Yes, he would come and 
go as heretofore, and would humour and banter the 
Dubosq, as was his wont, until, she showing some signs 
of restiveness, he would grow of a sudden preternaturally 
deferential. And thus the good lady had settled it ; the 
world was to go on until her further orders. But are 
we not for ever reckoning without our host ? 

Suddenly Manon expresses a desire to travel. She is 
reasoned with, and apparently convinced of her error. A 
few days afterwards she mentions England, and wonders 
whether it would be a nice place to go to. Ravnal, con- 

7.2 



100 THE PRETTY WIDOW- 

sulted upon the subject, says decisively " no," particularly 
if the intending visitor does not know English. The 
Dubosq, listening to this opinion, is joyful, and Manon 
is silent ; but in less than a week she engages our pro- 
fessor to instruct her in the unknown tongue. One per- 
son, at least, gained by this arrangement, and that was 
Polyblank. Manon had proposed her own terms, which 
amounted to rather more than double what the professor 
had thought of asking. Then she paid a quarter in ad- 
vance, allowed him to fix the time for instruction most 
convenient to him, and the lessons began. 

The lessons ! Surely since the art of teaching was 
first invented no living professor of it ever entered with 
such zeal upon the task allotted to him. At the book- 
seller's next door to Mr. Pomponney's he purchased 
Chambaud's dictionary, published near a hundred years 
ago, chez A. Millar, dans le Strand, also the " Traveller's 
Companion, or Dialogues in Six Languages," by Madame 
de Genlis, wherein, as their author observes, " shall be 
found all the expressions of politeness wich (sic) are made 
use of in society/' Also " Paul and Virginia" in Eng- 
lish, to be re-translated, a grammar and a book of exer- 
cises. To these he added half-a-dozen plain paper books, 
which with great care he himself ruled and labelled ; and 
with the lot in a great brown-paper parcel, he one even- 
ing took an inside place in the diligence, and nursed the 
packet on his knees from the door of Mrs. Gobinard's 
hotel to the White Stag in Longanna. 

Who could pretend to picture the almost infantile 
delight with which the pretty baroness turned over the 
contents of that brown -paper parcel ? How she straight- 
way ordered to be dusted a certain corner-cupboard, 
thenceforth to be devoted solely to these works of instruc- 
tion. How she wrote her name in every book, with the 



PLAYING AT LESSONS. 101 

date and a flourish ; having, however, first got out her 
desk, filled afresh her inkstand, and selected a new pen 
and a spotless piece of blotting-paper. How she secretly- 
looked for " love" in the dictionary the very first even- 
ing, committing it to memory, pronouncing it to herself 
as though it rhymed with grove, and feeling highly gra- 
tified by this acquisition of knowledge. Lastly, how, 
having spread out and smoothed down her skirts and 
folded her little hands, she compressed her red lips, fixed 
her large innocent eyes with an expression of concen- 
trated attention which was quite comical upon the pro- 
fessor's face, and waited for him to begin. Perhaps 
never in his life before had Polyblank found himself 
placed at greater disadvantage than he did then ; with 
the baroness thus regarding him, and the Dubosq's cold 
spectacle-glasses glittering in the background. But he 
was equal to the occasion, and acquitted himself, all 
things considered, with distinction. 

When, however, she had had her mind improved for 
half an hour or so, it occurred to Manon that it was 
supper-time, and that the professor had better have supper 
with them, an arrangement against which the professor 
protested mildly, to yield, however, in the end, and took 
his departure in due course, having set certain exercises 
to be prepared for his next visit. But of all sights in 
the world the best and most delightful was that afforded 
by the pretty baroness when she sat down after the pro- 
fessor had gone . oh so seriously! . to her work, and 
made such a lot of blots and blunders. 



102 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 



CHAPTER IX. 



OUTSIDE THE DOOR. 



Grands aboyeurs tant qu'ils sont a la porte, 
Et muets des qu'ila sont entries. . Lavalettb. 

Oh how the sun used to shine when we were all youthful 
and happy ! Oh the days when we were young ! Those 
happy days before Strephon grew bald and Chloe began 
to lose her symmetry. But all the world is terribly 
changed for the worse since then, and time must e'en 
have used ourselves rather roughly, for you must can- 
didly own that you hardly make the impression now 
that you did in those days . do you remember, when we 
went gipsying a very, very long while ago. Polyblank, 
poor soul, had never gone gipsying . never having had a 
holiday and the money to spend, conjointly. His highest 
jinks had been such very small jinks withal. His youth 
had never been more than lukewarm at its hottest. He 
had never "gone in" for anything, and had never "broken 
out " like other young men. 

It had never occurred to him that he was a genius, and 
it must be owned he was not one. Yet he was no fool, 
for a fool could not have earned his living, as he had 
done these twenty years past, as a teacher . he began to 
teach at sixteen, while he himself was learning. There 
was a time when he could command a tolerable salary, 
and was looked up to in the public school in England 
where he was employed as one of its brightest intellectual 
lights. Through a certain misunderstanding, in which 
he was not to blame, he lost his place, and since then 
.had gradually sunk . not because he was less capable, 
but because other rising men appeared in the scholastic 



OUTSIDE THE DOOR. 103 

Avorld and pushed him towards the wall; and there was 
not wanting, either, a certain dead weight to pull him 
down and keep him under, with which incubus this story, 
also, will very shortly be encumbered. 

At thirty- six years of age, then, the sun . which had 
never shone for him as it did for us when we were hay- 
making in the happy era aforesaid . burst suddenly over 
his head in all its glory, and Polyblank was a boy again, 
if a person can be again a boy who skipped that period 
of his early life under the pressure of more important 
business, and went from childhood, at a jump, into 
stick-up collars and a tail coat . the emblems of full- 
blown usherhood. He had a hard life of it at the Im- 
perial College, it is true ; but the hours of his martyrdom 
over, there was now much happiness in store for him. 

What a delightful walk was that over the marshes 
through which ran the stream that skirted the baroness's 
garden, spangled with broad-leaved water-lilies, and edged 
by round-headed pollards, leaning over the water. At 
eventide no sound was heard to break the stillness reign- 
ing over the broad expanse of pasture land save the un- 
certain tinkling of distant sheep-bells, the far-off lowing 
of cattle, the soft drone of the ever restless insect tribe, 
and the lulling murmur of the water, flowing gently 
onwards. Arrived at the copse of firs and hornbeams 
where the baroness had, upon that never-to-be-forgotten 
day, surprised him, and through which the sun at noon- 
day could scarcely penetrate, he would often pause to 
peer wistfully through the tangled branches of the hedge 
into the wilderness of garden beyond. Very beautiful, 
too, that garden seemed to him, in spite of its rank turf, 
its choked-up fountain, its wild and rugged flower-beds, 
its neglected vines flinging their long sprangs across the 
moss-grown path, its old trees strangled by unruly 



]0i THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

climbers, and its stagnant pool, dark and motionless 
beneath the boughs of a weeping willow, through the 
leaves of which the faint summer breeze whispered softly, 
as though evil-doers were plotting mischief in its deep 
shadow- 

But a light gleaming through a hanging wood of 
hazels, which almost hid the house from his view, would 
warn him that the lamp had been lit in the oak-panelled 
parlour, and that the ladies were ready to receive him. 
What happy evenings were those when the ladies listened 
to the worthy professor's accounts of the manners and 
customs of "ces barbares \" During these lengthy 
narratives, the Dubosq, who was perhaps just a little bit 
bored by them, would stitch vigorously, while the pretty 
baroness . as idle a young lady as ever lived . lolling 
back in her soft, luxurious chair, listened with a sympa- 
thizing smile, and sometimes broke into a low musical 
laugh, which was evoked either by the professor's native 
wit or some failure in his French. He was so eminently 
successful as a story-teller, and met with such a warm 
reception as a humorist, that it can hardly be wondered 
at if he occasionally talked a little too much, and to the 
extent of half an hour or so sometimes outstayed his 
welcome. 

"When thus transgressing it was not unusual for the 
Dubosq to yawn at him in an alarming fashion, and then 
apologize in a stately style for so doing. Oftentime she 
would light the bedroom candles very slowly and delibe- 
rately. Then, placing them side by side upon the table 
at which he sat, stand on guard over them, fixing the 
prolix Polyblank with an unflinching eye. Once indeed, 
the professor failing to take the hint, the Dubosq went 
even as far as to bring him his hat and put it into his 
hand, upon which Mr. Polyblank, covered with confusion, 



OUTSIDE THE DOOR. I05> 

and language failing him, turned and fled without even 
saying good night. But his welcome next evening from 
the young hostess was none the less gracious in conse- 
quence of this little incident, and he was even more 
successful than usual in amusing her. 

Encouraged by his success, he even ventured one even- 
ing to briDg with him certain Latin verses of his compo- 
sition, which with very little persuasion he was induced 
to read to the ladies. Sort of epigrams he said they 
were, and upon the same authority there was reason to 
suppose they were witty. He had an idea, he told the 
ladies, of adding a few more to them, and trying some 
day whether he could not find a publisher. From what 
has been stated the reader will already have arrived at 
the conclusion that as far as the English lessons went the 
lady's progress was small. She generally forgot to do 
the exercises her teacher set her, or she cribbed in a 
shameless and transparent way after promising faithfully 
not to look in the book. She would listen to his remarks 
with the demurest and most attentive face, and forget 
every word he had said five minutes afterwards. Her 
pronunciation was the most hopeless thing you ever 
heard ; and she argued seriously in support of a supposed 
difference in the formation of English and French jaw- 
bones. But then she was the prettiest little dunce that 
ever the sun shone upon, and gibberish from her seemed 
to her tutor the sweetest discourse he had ever hearkened 
to. The Dubosq looked somewhat coldly on these visits, 
and more than once ventured upon an opinion respecting 
their frequency and their small value, regarded from a. 
commercial point of view ; but the baroness would reply,. 
" I don't care what it costs. The poor creature wants 
the money badly I know, and I don't want to learn any- 
thing. Fm sure it's not his fault if I can't learn. After 



106 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

all too he amuses me, and I'm dreadfully bored some- 
times, my dear, I am really." 

The Dubosq it must be owned was not the liveliest 
company in Christendom. She was one of that class who 
make themselves disagreeable upon principle ; who per- 
sistently set wrong right, when by so doing they annoy 
all the rest of the community ; who, having their cross 
to bear, take particular care to bear it, so that it barks 
the shins of other pilgrims on the road. Upon the sub- 
ject of the dead and buried Dubosq, she was apt to be 
discursive, and it was a peculiarity of the departed one 
that he was all that was bad until you called him bad, 
when he as it were turned into a different person in his 
grave, and was all that Mas good, with a few odd virtues 
to spare. Upon other subjects, however, she was not so 
fluent, and the conversation flagged a little for lack of 
interest during the long days and nights which the two 
women passed together at the chateau of Longanna. 

He was quite a god-send then, our poor professor, and 
came out for the first time in his life as an agreeable 
rattle. There never was wanting a hot supper and a 
bottle of good old wine upon the baroness's table some 
time during the evening, which meal often very consider- 
ably curtailed the famous lessons. Sometimes, in the 
excitement of talk, Polyblank would take a glass more 
than usual, (worthy soul, water was his drink when he 
drank at his own expense !) and then a flow of language 
would come to him which secretly excited his surprise 
and admiration, and on his way home across the marshes 
he was wont to repeat with a chuckle some of the re- 
markably good things he had said over the supper-table. 
He was very happy, and though he had the most limited 
notion of harmony ever portioned out to human being, 
yet going home beneath the shining stars he would often 



OUTSIDE THE DOOR. 107 

enough sing snatches of bygone melodies as near the tunes 
as he could manage them. 

After all he thought life was not as hard as he had 
hitherto supposed it to be. He was beginning to get on 
famously. What with his salary at the college, and his 
lessons at the chateau, he was now in receipt of really a 
tolerable income, and was actually able to buy new boots 
without pinching their price out of his saucissons. Per- 
haps presently, if he looked about him, he might get some 
other private pupils in the town, and be able to give up 
the imperial establishment. Who could say, the baroness 
was so kind and good she might start him in a school of 
his own ! There was no knowing what would be the 
limit of his good fortune. When luck does come, it 
comes sometimes in bucketfuls. Above all, though, that 
dead weight over there in England, which has been before 
alluded to, had fallen off his back at last, and seemed to 
be removed for ever. For the first time in his life he 
had got a fair start, and he felt ten years younger now 
the load was gone. 

Coming home, however, to Mr. Pompouney's one 
evening he received a severe shock. He was lighter 
hearted and more joyous than usual, for he had made 
several great conversational hits at Longanna, and almost 
surpassed himself. He, therefore, came along singing as 
blithely as a bird, and skipped, quite fawn-like, up the 
door-steps. But while in the act of closing the door a 
sudden panic seized him, and he staggered back against 
the wall; his jaws dropping open as he did so. Some- 
body else in the house was blithe and gay. A familiar 
voice smote upon his ear . apparently a jovial voice . 
which he knew very well. The owner was evidently 
making himself extremely agreeable in Mr. Pomponney's 
parlour, and Mr. Pomponney and his good lady were 



108 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

laughing heartily at some droll story he was relating. 
Pressing his hand upon his heart the professor crept 
noiselessly forward, and, with a ghastly face, peeped 
through the crevice of the door. Sure enough there was 
the dead weight come back to settle on him . the dissi- 
pated prodigal, the curse of his life, rosy cheeked, and 
robust as ever. 

" God forgive me !" groaned Polyblank ; " but I had 
hoped never to set eyes on him again in this world.'" 



CHAPTER X. 

THE CURSE OF HIS LIFE. 

But hast thou wholly, 

In sin and strife, 
Forgot for ever 

Thy childhood's life ? . Hoedt. 

Catching sight of the professor's countenance the jolly 
man within sprang eagerly to bis feet, and gave him a 
boisterous welcome. 

" Peter, old son," he cried, in Whitechapel English, 
" how are you by this time ? Tip us your fin, old fire- 
works. Let's have a claw at you. Why, you look bluer 
than ever, Peter. Blessed if you don't ." and then, 
turning to the others, he added, in Brummagem French, 
" he looks as if it didn't agree with him. Don't he ? 
"What have you been feeding him on? Is it frogs?" 

" We cannot talk here," said the professor, in a faint 
voice. " Let us go to my room." 

" If the lady here will excuse me, with great pleasure," 
and, promising to return soon, the jolly man followed 
Mr. Polyblank upstairs. Not until he had lit a candle, 
and they were seated by the little table, did the professor 



THE CURSE OF HIS LIFE. 109 

break silence, and then he exclaimed, in a despairing 
tone, " What, in Heaven's name, has brought you here, 
Joseph? What do you want with me now?" 

The jolly man had not quite as jolly a manner about 
him when alone in Polyblank's company as he had down- 
stairs, and, indeed, seemed rather to avoid meeting the 
professor's eye. Therefore, in replying, he kept his gaze 
fixed upon a red finger of a large red hand with which, 
as he spoke, he practised ba-ba black sheep on the table. 
" That ain't a very overland way of putting it, Peter," 
said he. " Excuse my mentioning it ; but it ain't, 
strictly speaking, hardly up to what one could call 
brotherly . now is it?" 

The other answered with an impatient gesture : 
" You're not the person, Joseph, to talk about brotherly 
behaviour, are you ? You've not been a very good 
brother so far. But let that pass . what do you want 
now ?" 

" You take a chap up so uncommon short, Peter, and 
after such a long journey, too, when one hasn't even had 
time to have a good sit down." 

"What do you want?" repeated the professor. 
" Well, Peter, I want such a precious lot of things," 
said Mr. Joseph, smiling good-humouredly ; " I don't 

know how to give a name to 'em, but " 

" You want money ?" 

" You've hit it," cried Mr. Joseph, finishing ba-ba 
with a flourish : " I am awfully hard up, and must have 
some tin somehow." 

" When last I heard from you, you said that you 
wanted only a few pounds to buy clothes, so that you 
might make a respectable appearance at the hospital of 
some county town where you had been appointed house- 
surgeon, and I sent you the money." 



110 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

" You did/' responded Joseph, heartily ; "and it was 
devilish good of you ; only I didn't get the berth for all 
that." 

" Didn't get it ?" 

" Filled up when I got there, Peter, although I had 
been promised it for a dead certainty. It was deuced 
disappointing to a fellow, you know, but I'm used to that. 
I'm used to roughing it, I am." 

Mr. Polyblank, however, did not appear to think that 
he was the only person in the world who had had a hard 
time of it ; and it was with a struggle he stifled his rising- 
anger and continued, though not without emotion : 

" If you wanted money and expected me to give you 
any, you have not acted wisely in coming here. I have 
had rather a disagreeable time of it in the college, but 
t . I am happy to say I have found . found friends, and 
am getting on pretty well." 

Here Mr. Joseph broke in warmly . " I'm deuced glad 
to hear it, Peter." 

" My only hope," pursued Polyblank, " lies in my 
good name. If I can establish a reputation as a decent 
scholar " 

" You've a head like an almanac," put in Mr. Joseph. 

" And a respectable man, I may make a good living 
as the master of a scholastic establishment of my own, 
but » 

He could get no further before Mr. Joseph had 
clutched him by the hand and was working him like 
a pump. 

" Don't be down-hearted, Peter," he cried, enthusias- 
tically. " We'll pull it off yet, old man, or I'm very 
much out in my reckoning. We'll square 'em, sir . make 
no mistake. We'll ketch 'em a-live . alive O, or my 
name ain't Joe Polyblank." 



THE CURSE OF HIS LIFE. Ill 

The professor, however, did not respond very cordially 
. " Fm afraid, Joseph/'' said he, " that you may spoil 
my chance if you go on in the way you always have gone 
on as yet. You ruined me once, you know, and . and . 
I think it would be best for all parties if you were to go 
to some other place. The world is very large, you know. 
This is only one out-of-the-way corner, but it is big 
enough for me." 

"Why not big enough for both, Peter? You asked 
me why I came, and I'll tell you. I got a chance of 
going in charge of an invalid to Paris. Being at Paris, 
I tried my luck at getting something to do, and found 
my luck as unreasonable as usual. Coming back, I 
thought Pd give you a look up. Don't think Pve come 
to beg of you, though, Peter ; nor to rob you, for if I 
took any more of your money, old fellow, it would be 
nothing short of robbery ; curse me if it would. I've 
got enough to get back to London, and then I can do the 
same as Pve done before, I daresay. Good-bye, Pm off." 

Mr. Joseph rose as he spoke, wiped something from 
his eye, and moved towards the door. As he reached it 
his brother, with an effort, called upon him to stop. 

" You are not going away like that," said he. " I 
have managed to save a pound or two lately which I 
thought I might want presently, but you can have them. 
You can repay me if you get on. You must go back to 
London, though, and try once more, and Pll manage 
somehow to let you have something to keep you going. 
Here . here's the money." 

" Upon my soul I don't like taking it," said Mr. 
Joseph, with manly emotion, at the same time pocketing 
the gold. " But you shall have it back . every penny . 
with interest. At any rate I wont stop here to be in 
your way. I'll leave the town this very night. I sup- 



1 I 2 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

pose there's a coach. No, Peter, you need not fear that 
your brother will come between you and your good for- 
tune. I'm a poor unlucky devil, but that can't be helped. 
It's my own fault, perhaps. Some people say so, any- 
how. Well, good-bye. I'll be out of the town in an hour's 
time." 

" Stop," said the professor, " I will show you an hotel 
where you can sleep for the night. The diligence goes 
to-morrow afternoon. I will see you between this and 
then, and we will have some conversation about your 
future prospects." 

" As you like, Peter," replied Joseph. " It ain't a 
cheerful subject. Don't let me drag you out, though, 
to-night." 

Mr. Polyblank had some misgivings, however, respect- 
ing the prudence of allowing Mr. Joseph to see any 
more of the people downstairs, and therefore saw him 
off the premises, and only left him when safely lodged in 
the " Three Crowns." Next day the professor was un- 
expectedly detained at the college, and did not reach the 
hotel until just after the diligence had started. He went 
into the booking-office, and as the list of passengers was 
lying upon the desk, referred to it without asking any 
questions. Indeed there was no reason why he should 
make useless inquiries. There, sure enough, was the 
name of Polyblank ; and with a sigh of relief, with which 
was blended no small amount of grief and remorse at 
having sent his brother away so abruptly, and, as it might 
seem, unkindly, he slowly retraced his steps. He had 
suffered severely from Mr. Joseph's little games, and 
there could be no doubt that he would have suffered 
again had he remained in the town. 

Unlike his brother Peter, this gentleman had been 
born a genius, and could not be expected to work and 



THE CURSE OF HIS LIFE. 113 

plod after the style of ordinary, every-day sort of people. 
From his birth upwards great things had been expected 
of him, and were in certain circles expected still; al- 
though, thus far, he had never exactly arrived at any 
result calculated to justify the expectation. Not that 
Joseph was destitute of ability, but irregular habits and 
want of application generally prevented him from turning 
his talents to any account. Nor was he without a cer- 
tain amount of scientific knowledge, but it was unme- 
thodized and undigested, so that he could rarely turn it 
to any practical purpose : in this resembling a man who, 
possessing a collection of useful articles, keeps them 
jumbled together confusedly in a room, and is never able 
to find any particular one when he happens to want it. 
Joseph Polyblank was never more happy than when he 
had an opportunity of performing some daring feat in his 
profession of a surgeon, and would gladly volunteer his 
assistance, which sometimes proved useful, in cases that 
presented features of a novel character; but as to regular 
and constant application to business, that was what Joe 
never condescended to. 

He was a great projector, and had been connected 
with several public companies, which, somehow or other, 
had come to grief. While Peter had been labouring 
hard, Joe had been launching into grand schemes from 
which a colossal fortune was always just about to be 
realised, when unforeseen circumstances occurred which 
nobody could possibly have guarded against. There 
were times when Joseph had been almost too fine a 
gentleman to associate with Peter. Indeed, Society de- 
manded, as it were, that as a rising man he should main- 
tain a certain position, which connexions like Peter would 
to some extent have jeopardized. At other times, how- 
ever, he was most affable, and even condescended to 

8 



114 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

accept small loans from his humble relative, which were 
not repaid with remarkable regularity. There were 
actually persons who did not scruple to call the jovial 
Joseph a heartless scoundrel ; and other hard words had 
been broken over him by those who had fallen victims to 
his joviality. 

To Peter, of all others in the world, he had probably 
behaved the worst, and yet for all his faults there was 
still something very much akin to love for him in his 
brother's heart. Therefore was it that sitting that night 
in his lonely bedroom, the schoolmaster felt very sad, 
drank his tea with anything but a relish, and was wholly 
unable to settle down to his English classic. The 
English classic was, under ordinary circumstances, rather 
a dry old person, though with a style of diction allowed 
to be faultless, and this evening the Professor hardly felt 
equal to grappling with him. Somehow, as he sat there 
book in hand, a young face rose up between him and the 
page. It was the face of little Joey . long years ago . 
when ho was only just beginning to develope into a 
genius, and singed off his own and Peter's eyebrows by 
daring experiments with gunpowder in the back yard of 
their home in Church-walk, Lambeth. Throwing down 
his book, he walked about the room, and, opening the 
window, leant upon the sill and watched the stray foot- 
passengers as they went clattering past in the dim lamp- 
light on the pavement of the street below. But here the 
sound of a child sobbing again recalled to his mind the 
young brother he used to play with in that dear old time 
so long ago, and he closed the window with a sigh. 

" Poor Joe \" he said ; " poor Joe, I am very, very 
sorry we parted as we did. I am sorry I did not give 
him some more money, too. I might very well have 
spared a little more by just pinching a bit." 



THE CURSE OF HIS LIFE. 115 

Under the circumstances he thought he would go to 
bed ; he felt so low-spirited and unsettled. 

" Joe would take a pipe if he felt dull/' the Professor 
reflected : " but I was always, as Joe used to say, too 
much of a milksop to learn to smoke, and it would only 
make me ill if I were to attempt it now ; so instead I'll 
try and go to sleep." 

He undressed himself thus pondering, and paused 
before the looking-glass to contemplate the reflection of 
his thin face, garnished with a long-tasselled night- 
cap. 

" I've . not acted like a brother," he said half aloud ; 
" Joe's had his troubles, poor fellow, as well as I have. 
Perhaps, after all, he might have done well here if he 
had been steady. If I could have been sure he would 
not break out again and drag us both down, as he had 
done before . God grant he may get on well where he 
has gone." 

The Professor blew out the candle and got into bed" 
after this, and laid his head upon the pillow. But as he 
did so the sounds of harmony from the streets below 
smote upon his ear. It was harmony born of strong- 
drink, and a loud but not unmusical voice Avas chanting 
words familiar to his English ear. " We wont go home 
till morning " was the burthen of the minstrel's song., 
and his voice was not unknown to Mr. Polyblank, who 
sat up in astonishment to listen. 

" Bong swore," he heard his brother Joe bawling out 
in his celebrated Brummagem French. " Bong swore, 
mussoo. Vows bong ongfong. Moy aussy bong oug- 
fong. Faites pas erreur. Bong swore, et donnez mes 
complimong a madame voter bong dam." 

He was bidding good-night to no less a person than 
Mr. Pomponney, whom he had brought home somewhat 

S. 3 



116 THE PRETTY WIDOW- 

the worse for spirituous refreshment. After all, then, 
he had not gone by the diligence, and the brothers need 
not be parted. 



CHAPTER XI. 



MIRACLES, ETC. 



Cependant je ne saurais croire 

Que tous les homines sont ainsi ; 

II en est d'autres, Dieu merci ! . Houssot. 

The rise and progress of the jovial Joseph were as surpris- 
ingly rapid as his unlucky brother Peter's were slow and 
painful. To begin with : he, right off, had become the 
bosom friend of Mr. Pomponney. " A man, of talent, 
madam," was Mr. Pomponney's expressed opinion, when 
talking to the wife of his bosom . " a man of undoubted 
talent combined with social qualifications of a surpris- 
ingly high order . a thing utterly incomprehensible to 
me in a native of his country." Under the influence of 
these qualifications, before the two gentlemen had known 
each other forty-eight hours, the worthy chemist was led 
into unwonted excesses at the " Cafe Leduc," upon the 
Little Place, where Joseph, almost from the first hour he 
crossed its threshold, became a notability. " Ohe, garcon, 
du punch \" he was wont to cry in those days of magni- 
ficence which shall presently arrive, and when he shall 
have made rapid strides in the French language. " Un 
punch flamboyant et soigne . un punch au lurch." 

Yet further off, however, in the misty future, the now 
radiant waiter shall observe, with a disparaging shru°- of 
his shoulders, and he talks in confidence to the " patron " 
" Quelle fichue pratique," meaning none other than the 
erst jovial . and shall add with a contemptuous smile 



MIRACLES, ETC. 117 

* s II a trouve uu jobard qui lui paie un Bock." By which. 
it would almost appear as though Joseph would be seen 
through, in those bad times coming. Be that as it may, 
be was at starting a great success, and his name and 
fame soon spread far and wide ; for before he had passed 
a night in Saint Babylas he had effected a miracle. 
After all was it to be wondered at ? He had ever been 
on the point of doing the desirable something, had not 
some untoward event occurred to prevent it. The worl d 
would have been upside down before this, and the Thames 
long ago burnt out, if he had had half anybody else's luck. 
However, it now seemed as though his luck had come at 
last. 

The very first night he passed under Madame Gobi- 
nard's roof one of that lady's most esteemed guests had an 
apoplectic attack. The nearest doctor, Tominet by name, 
who was sent for in a violent hurry, came running to 
the scene of action half dressed, and three-parts asleep, 
forgetting in his hurry to bring his case of instruments 
with him. "While he was giving directions to Alexander 
to run to his house with all speed for a lancet, Joe Poly- 
blank abruptly broke in with a suggestion. 

" Why not throw some cold water over him ?" he 
said. 

" Because it would do no good," replied Tominet, im- 
patiently. 

" I'll show you whether it wont," said Joe, and rushed 
for a bucket. 

" You'll kill him," said Tominet. 

" I'll cure him," said Joe ; and sure enough to Tomi- 
net's disgust, and the wonder of the lookers on, he was as 
good as his word. 

Next day another miracle. One Lardois, a master 
builder, having mounted to the highest point of the 



118 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

scaffolding outside a house in course of erection, while 
swearing himself black in the face at the want of skill 
in his workmen, tripped himself up, and came down 
from the first floor into the street, where he lay among 
the soft mortar very white and bloody. Picked up in- 
sensible, he was carried into the " Three Crowns," which 
was close at hand, and medical aid immediately called in. 
This time Tominet, who came under protest, brought his 
lancet with him and let blood in profusion, but without 
restoring the builder to consciousness. Doctor Cancoin 
also, assisting, felt the patient all over, and pinched and 
poked him back and front, as connoisseurs at a cattle 
show do the prize beasts, finally pronouncing his bones 
unbroken. But yet Lardois remained insensible. Under 
these circumstances, blood-letting doing no good, other 
more or less violent measures were resorted to without 
any satisfactory result. 

At this stage of the proceedings Madame Gobinard 
suggested sending for the English doctor, upon which 
Cancoin, rising with a shriek, and Tominet rising speech- 
less, they moved towards the door. Having been pacified, 
however, they kindly stayed to make further experiments, 
retiring at length with a promise to return shortly, and 
leaving behind them strict orders that the patient should 
not be disturbed ; though if by that they meant he must 
not be brought back to consciousness, there seemed but 
little chance of such an occurrence. But when they 
were gone, the jovial Joseph chancing to stroll into the 
hotel court-yard, cigar in mouth, Madame Gobinard could 
not refrain from asking him his opinion. Joseph listened 
attentively to what had been done, then flung away his 
cigar, and went and stared hard at the patient. After 
which, says he, " Send for the barber." 

" The barber \" echoed Madame Gobinard, who thought 



MIRACLES, ETC. 119 

perhaps these words signified that Lardois' case was 
hopeless, and nothing remained but to prepare the toilet 
of death. 

" To be sure/'' continued Joe, without noticing her sur- 
prise. " I want to have his head shaved, so that I can 
have a good look at it." 

This proposition rather startled the good lady. With 
his head shaved there would be no concealing from the 
other doctors the fact that the patient had been meddled, 
with by an interloper. However, she determined that 
it should be done, having some vague notion of after- 
wards concealing the deed in a nightcap. But there was 
no occasion for this, as things turned out. The great 
Joe, when the barber had done his work, applied himself 
to making a very minute examination of Lardois' bare 
cranium, and with the aid of a pair of nippers effected 
the second miracle ; for scarcely had he withdrawn his 
hand than the master builder, with a deep sigh, opened 
his eyes, and presently, to the relief of all beholders, be- 
gan to swear again as naturally as ever. It was a splinter 
which had penetrated the skull, and just reached the 
brain, and, being removed, Richard was himself again, and 
Joseph partook of liquor at his expense. 

The third miracle, though, was yet to come ; and this 
time no less a person than the Mayor of Saint Babylas 
benefited by Joe Polyblank's science. A worthy man 
was Monsieur Tete, a bachelor and bon vivant, whose 
only fault, perhaps, was a want of self-restraint in the 
matter of eating and drinking. Chancing upon the se- 
cond night of Joe's stay in the town, to give a little 
dinner to two other bons-vivants, he ate, among other 
trifles, three parts of a goose, and went to bed about 
eleven, saying his head felt heavy. Just before one, he 
began to cry out in his sleep, and to struggle, and pant, 



1:20 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

and claw at the bedclothes. At last, with a hoarse cry, 
he fought his way back to consciousness, crawled out of 
bed, and staggered across the floor. 

" Vm choking/'' he gasped, tearing at his neck-band as 
he spoke. 

With difficulty then he helped himself to a glass of 
water, but having raised it to his lips was unable to drink. 
He seized the bell-rope, and, dragging at it furiously, 
brought it down in his hand. Yet nobody seemed to hear 
him. "With an overwhelming fear upon him that he 
would die there alone in the dark, he made for the win- 
dow, and in his dressing- glass on the table, reflected by 
the faint moonlight, caught a glimpse of a purple and 
swollen face, bearing a horrible and distorted resemblance 
to his own, from which he started back in terror. His 
legs seemed to bend and give way beneath him, but he 
managed to reach the window somehow, and with what 
strength yet remained to him, got it open. One o'clock 
was a very late hour for Saint Babylas, and the most ir- 
regular were accustomed to seek their couches shortly 
after midnight, whilst the really good folks were abed and 
snoring at ten. Rolling up the street, however, upon that 
particular occasion, was a bacchanalian, musically inclined, 
to whom Mr. Tete cried out, in a choking voice, for me- 
dical aid. 

This bacchanalian was, of course, the jovial Joseph, 
returning to the " Three Crowns" after seeing safe home 
his esteemed friend Pomponney. Responsive to the call 
of Monsieur Tete, he made a violent assault upon the 
door- bell ; explained to the sleepy porter that there was 
an old gentleman upstairs, in his nightshirt, bawling for 
a doctor ; and, after a desperate struggle, reached the 
Mayor's bedchamber just in time to save his life. It 
was a great stroke of luck this, and jovial Joe, consider- 



MIRACLES, ETC. 121 

ably to his own surprise this time, found he was on the 
high road to fortune. No longer after, .indeed, than the 
following day, the master builder, shaking hands with 
him, left a bank note in Joseph's palm, which was so 
extremely liberal in amount that the doctor thought the 
builder must have made a mistake, and passed the next 
hour or two in an uneasy apprehension of his wanting it 
back again. 

Two days afterwards, the Mayor sending for Joseph 
asked him whether he was open to an engagement, and 
upon that gentleman's professing a general openness for 
anything, offered him the appointment, then vacant, of 
medical superintendent of the Imperial College. The 
result of this interview was that our professor, walking 
meekly next day along one of the vaulted passages of 
the abode of learning, met his brother Joseph swaggering 
as though the place belonged to him ; and then, for the 
first time, he heard the astonishing news . hearing which 
he groaned inwardly, for he knew a good deal more than 
Monsieur le Maire about his medical relation, and knew 
also that he could kill as well as cure. To begin with, 
however, surely nothing could have been more gratifying 
to Joseph's brother than Joseph's progress in popularity. 
Mr. Roustoubique, it is true, regarded with some distrust 
the advent of the new doctor, fancying that there was a 
conspiracy on the part of the Polyblanks to obtain entire 
predominant power in the college. But, in spite of Mr. 
Roustoubique, Joe, in his loud-voiced, blustering style, 
carried all before him. He was the jolliest doctor there 
had ever been within the school gates. He ordered wine 
for boys in the infirmary, and prescribed roast chicken 
and rich soup, as though he had been dealing with no 
more expensive food than hasty pudding and skillygolee. 
Coming, for the first time in his life, upon the famous 



122 THE PRETTY WIDOW- 

tisane* . the panacea of the ailing of all classes among 
our lively neighbours . he smelt at it, sipped at it, pulled 
a wry face over it, and flung the contents of the basin 
out of window into the yard. 

" Cochonerie \" he called it, which was as near " pigs' 
wash" as his knowledge of the language enabled hirn 
to get. 

His views upon things in general rather startled the 
infirmary nurse, as indeed did the frequenters of the 
" Cafe Leduc," his wholesale denunciation of what he 
called the antiquated bungling of Martinet, Andral, 
Meckel, Morgagni, Rouchoux, and indeed most other 
well-known authorities. Out of doors he worked several 
cures more or less surprising, and, fortunately for him, 
all his patients lived through the somewhat desperate 
experiments which he remorselessly carried out at their 
expense. As he worked for poor people gratuitously, 
there was a mania for doctor's stuff in some of the back 
streets, and consequently Joe, who had no idea of ruining 
himself, went in heavily for bread pills and bottles of a 
mixture of which aq. pur. formed the staple. As this 
course of medicine killed nobody . nature lending a 
helping hand at the same time . quite as satisfactory a 
result was arrived at as though the mostly costly drugs 
had been employed. Every now and then, by sheer good 
luck, our jovial friend effected a fresh miracle, which Mr. 
Pomponney . now the friend of his bosom . duly recorded 
in the " Faits Divers" of the Saint Babijlas Gazette, to 
which he was an able and esteemed contributor. 

Notable among these cures was the case of the wife of 
a eabaretier, without the walls of the town, who had un- 
fortunately swallowed some aquatic monster in a draught 
from the pump, which monster in due course attaining 

* Tisane ; a decoction of which the chief ingredients are Spanish liquorice 
barley, and dog's grass. 



MIRACLES, ETC. 12& 

alarming proportions, became the torment of an other- 
wise tranquil existence. Mr. Joseph having fortunately- 
succeeded in delivering her from this unpleasant compa- 
nionship, his fame spread, through the medium of the 
Gazette, far and wide ; and Tominet, Cancoin, and Co., 
gnashed their teeth with envious rage at Joe's success. 
Besides physicking them gratuitously, he won the hearts 
of the poor of Saint Babylas by one or two highly dra- 
matic episodes, in which he showed himself a true artiste. 
One market-day an old beggar-woman was knocked 
down by a countryman's cart and killed on the spot. 
Joe was fetched from his cafe hard by, and came running 
up in his usual impetuous manner, dropping down tipon 
his knees on the ground reckless of the mud, and calling 
to the people about to stand back and give the woman 
air. But when he had glanced at her face and felt her 
pulse he dropped her head, looking very serious, and 
rose slowly to his feet. A little girl also, regardless of 
the mud, knelt by the dead woman's side, looking fright- 
ened and crying noiselessly. 

" Is she your mother ?" Joe asked. 

Being answered in the affirmative, and furthermore 
informed that she had no other relatives in the world, 
the doctor exclaimed, " We'll see what can be done for 
you, then." With that he thrust his hand into his 
trousers' pocket, and dragging out a handful of silver 
and copper flung it into his hat, and straightway went 
round amongst the crowd begging for contributions, a 
proceeding which though to some extent distasteful to the 
uncharitable in the front row, to whom escape was out of 
the question, gained the doctor enormous popularity after 
it was over, particularly among those who were not there 
at the time, and had not been called upon to give any- 
thing. 

All this was very delightful, but yet the professor was 



124 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

uneasy in his mind. As has been previously observed, 
he knew Joseph. He had seen him set sail before to- 
day with the fairest winds and brightest of skies, but 
before long a squall had invariably sprung up. Upon 
this occasion, as we shall see, a regular hurricane was 
preparing, but in the meanwhile the jovial Joseph was in 
the best of spirits. 



CHAPTER XII. 

WHAT MIGHT HAVE BEEN. 

Ere yet she spak I could espy 

A flutterin' at her breast ; 
But whether 'twas wi' grief or joy 

I gat nae time to guess't. . Young. 

The sufferings of Professor Polyblank were not over, but 
just beginning. In the college affairs began to assume 
a gloomy aspect. Roustoubique's hatred for the jovial 
Joseph daily increased, and his wrath falling harmlessly 
upon the doctor, rebounded again with redoubled force 
upon the head of the unhappy Peter. Surely never 
" since Adam was a lad '' were boys to be found so imp- 
ishly inclined as those young gentlemen in the imperial 
establishment, and the amount of ingenuity expended in 
preparations for the professor's torments rivalled, on a 
small scale, the diabolical contrivances of the Inquisi- 
tion. Even those famous evenings at Longanna were not 
quite as happy as they used to be, for reasons hereunder 
given. 

During the course of the first half dozen or so of les- 
sons there never was a more diligent scholar than the 
pretty baroness, and the quantity of cream-laid notepaper 
consumed in the copying and re-copying of exercises 



WHAT MIGHT HAVE BEEN. 125 

quite astonished the Saint Babylas stationer at whose shop 
it was purchased. But after a time Manon very natu- 
rally grew tired of her new employment, and when the 
professor asked for an exercise, he got instead some 
shallow excuse, so prettily spoken though, that no living 
male creature could have hesitated to receive it. And 
when these excuses coming at last to be a matter of every- 
day occurrence, the professor looked grave and shook his 
head in gentle reproof of such blackslidings, the prettiest 
little penitential expression in the world compelled him 
to forgive the fair young culprit, who promised amend- 
ment with a readiness which was only equalled by her 
systematic neglect when Poly blank's back was turned. 
But though he might pretend to look severe, and in 
reality felt somewhat hurt at this wholesale neglect of his 
instructions, yet when the make-belief lesson was over he 
never failed to regain his good humour at the supper- 
table, and many a time, as we have seen, went carolling 
homewards across the marshes as merrily as might be. 

Meanwhile, however, the thunderbolt was forging and 
fell thus : . Coming in one evening more quietly than 
usual, the professor unintentionally overheard a small 
portion of a conversation between Mr. Pomponney and 
his Felicite. 

" It certainly is a strange fancy of the baroness," said 
Felicite, " to want to learn English." 

" It's absurd," said Mr. Pomponney ; " but as far as 
Polyblank's concerned, he probably has no objection." 

" Of course it is his business to teach those who wish 
to take lessons," said Felicite. 

" To be sure it is," said Mr. Pomponney; "and whether 
they learn or not I suppose it doesn't much matter." 

" But don't you think " 

"I don't think anything; but one thing I am certain of." 



126 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

"And that is " 



" Polyblank is not nearly as thin as he used to be." 
The professor noiselessly mounted the stair, carefully 
.closed his door, and sat down with his head in his hands 
at the table. Was it possible that people could thus mis- 
interpret his motives? Was the cruel slander prompted 
by malice, or was this the view of the case which would 
most naturally occur to anybody's mind ? "Was it the 
general opinion that he went to Longanna only for the 
sake of what he could get to eat, pocketing at the same 
time the ill-gotten gold which Manon gave him out of 
charity ? Was that what people thought . and was it far 
from the truth ? He went at once to look at himself in 
the glass. He certainly did not seem to be quite as thin 
as he had been once ; but his figure even now would not 
have struck a casual observer as by any means robust. 
No, in all conscience he was yet sufficiently lean to fur- 
nish a refutation to the slander. 

But though he knew that Pomponney's statement was 
a libel, a blush of shame suffused the honest schoolmas- 
ter's face when his mind reverted to those gay little 
suppers at which he had, it must be confessed, never 
failed to partake freely of the good cheer provided. There 
was one thing, however, about which he soon made up his 
mind. That very night he would tell the baroness the 

lessons must cease unless But no, there was no 

chance of that. She never would learn anything. It 
had all along been a game of play, and it would be dis- 
graceful on his part to pocket another napoleon or eat 
another supper. He had no appetite for his tea, and was 
in a fever until the time arrived for him to set out. All the 
way to Longanna he rehearsed the speeches he intended 
to make, and half a score of times at least buttoned and 
unbuttoned his threadbare body-coat in his agitation. 



WHAT MIGHT HAVE BEEN. 127 

" I must have been as blind as a bat. I must have 
been a dolt and a fool not to have seen it all before 
this/' he said to himself. " She has asked me there 
out of charity, and fed me because she thought I was 
starving/ - ' 

His face flushed with rage and shame when he thus 
reflected. The crime of poverty is such a disgraceful 
one ; it cannot be defended. Excuses may perhaps be 
found for manslaughter or robbery, but how are you to 
explain that you can't afford to have your boots mended, 
or buy new ones ? 

" I am a poor fool/' he went on thinking ; " I know 
nothing of the world . nothing of human nature. I am 
as helpless as a child. I'm all thumbs. I know nothing 
. nothing but what is useless. I can't get a living out 
of teaching. Now, Joe would not have been so blind ; 
Joe would have seen through the whole affair at once, 

and " However he did not care to pursue this train 

of thought, for past experience told him that if the jovial 
Joseph had once got his nose into such snug quarters, 
and therein taken root, it would have been as difficult to 
get rid of him as a ten years' growth of horse-radish 
from a kitchen garden. When the professor arrived at 
the door of the chateau he was all in a heat, but his 
mind was made up, and his sentences prepared. Only 
the worst of it was that Manon, on that very identical 
day, was a great deal prettier and more bewitching than 
usual. When he arrived he found her sitting under the 
shadow of a far-spreading yew-tree in the garden, and 
wearing a lovely little straw hat trimmed with blue ribbon, 
which made her look like one of those pretty shep- 
herdesses Watteati painted. She rose up to meet him 
with a bright smile, and a flutter of dainty white 
petticoats, suggestive of a gale among the sails of a fleet. 



128 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

"Ah ! you cannot think how glad I am to see you, 
Mr. Polyblank," she said, in that frank child-like way 
she had . after all she was hardly anything but a child, 
in spite of her being a widow. " I had no idea it was so 
late, and I do so want something to amuse me." 

Perhaps she might have used other words which, as a 
schoolmaster, he would have preferred to hear; but of 
what value are words ? A pretty woman talks, and who 
among male listeners cares for the sense, or notices that 
she trips in her logic ? The music of a sweet voice is 
pleasant to hear, whether the song be in high Italian or 
low Dutch. The professor, indeed, scarce heard aright 
the words she uttered. The sunshine of her bright eyes 
bewildered him. He knew just this much, that she was 
glad to see him, and he was very happy in her presence. 
She had that morning purchased a glass case of ugly 
aquine monsters, with very hard names, to add to her 
already large stock of domestic pets, and she now took 
the professor to look at them, and to beg him to tell her 
what they were called. Much information upon the 
subject he very eagerly furnished, and she repeated each 
name after him with that profoundly serious expression 
which she was in the habit of assuming upon such occa- 
sions, declaring herself highly gratified by her recently 
acquired knowledge, which flew out of her head five 
minutes afterwards. 

The water creatures disposed of, some newly-purchased 
bulbs demanded the professor's polite attention, and then 
something else ; and after that other things ; and then a 
sudden twinge of conscience seized him, and he said . 

"About the lesson V 

At this, Manon laughed merrily. 

" To be sure," she said, " about the lesson. But I've 
been learning Latin to-day, haven't I ? Let me see now, 



WHAT MIGHT HAVE BEEN. 129" 

what was it? Anemo-thingembobs, zoophy-whats-their- 
names ! Why, I feel already quite half as learned as 
M. Louis Eiguier." 

" But," said Polyblank, weakly struggling, " we are 
to have a lesson in English to -nighty are we not ? A 
short one ?" 

" It must be very short if it is to take place before 
supper," snapped the Dubosq. There was nothing in life 
that vexed this worthy woman more than the postpone- 
ment of meals ; for she possessed, in common with every 
well-regulated female mind, a rooted antipathy to the 
derangement of the great business of life for other less' 
important matters, such as reading the last page of an 
interesting chapter, or employing the last available five 
minutes in writing to catch the post . as it is the habit 
of the superior animal to do when he has his own way- 
At the mention of supper, however, the professor felt his 
face grow red. 

" I . I am afraid you must excuse me this evening," he 
stammered, in reply to the baroness's invitation. 

" Excuse you \" she repeated, in surprise. 

" I . I promised to return early." 

" It is very early yet. Besides, you just now were 
going to stop to give me a lesson." 

This, of course, was the opportunity which you would 
have seized on, had you been in the professor's place, to 
give this absurd little ex-actress a piece of your mind. 
But the worst of Polyblank was his being so slow. He 
felt that the time had come when he ought to speak, and 
the only difficulty was what to say. He felt afraid of 
rashly saying anything that might offend or be misunder- 
stood. The sentences which he had rehearsed upon the 
road would not fit in well under existing circumstances. 
Hesitating, he was lost, and . oh ! that it should be 

9 



130 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

-written, and this pen have to write it . he stopped to 
supper ! But going home he made his mind up. 

He rehearsed no more sentences, because that would 
have been waste of time. Now he had formed a much 
more sensible plan. There were such things in the world 
as pen and ink and paper. In his own room, when her 
eyes were not upon him, he could be "bloody, bold, and 
resolute,'''' and he would write the baroness a letter and 
resign his appointment as instructor. You must allow 
that this was a very proper determination to arrive at, 
and we will not, if you please, insinuate a doubt that he 
would not have carried it out, had not an unforeseen and 
extraordinary event occurred to prevent him. 

On the doorstep of Mr. Pomponney's house he met his 
brother Joe. His brother Joe was a constant visitor at 
the chemist's. Yery often, for hours together, he and 
Mr. Pomponney would be closeted in a little upstairs 
room, which the chemist grandly called " the laboratory." 
They were supposed to be on the point of arriving at some 
highly-important chemical results, and their operations 
had occasioned more than one explosion, which filled with 
terror the unscientific Felicite, who devoutly hoped Joe 
would not get her Hippolite into trouble. 

" Well, Peter," was the jovial Joseph's remark, " you're 
earlier than usual, aren't you?" 

" Than usual !" repeated the professor, rather uneasily. 
*' I didn't know that I was earlier." 

The jovial Joseph looked at him very hard and 
laughed, tapping the professor lightly on the chest as he 
did so. 

"You're all there, Peter," said he; "and not bad 
'either, for such a quiet old card as you are." 

"I don't understand," said the professor, more un- 
easily still. " What do you mean ?" 



WHAT MIGHT HAVE BEEN. 131 

'" Come, I like that, Peter/' retorted Joe ; " but you 
can't deceive me, you know. Besides, everybody says so. 
Ask Pomponney there.'" 

" I don't understand/' repeated the Professor. 

" Ob, you lamb and mint sauce !" continued Joseph, 
with playful raillery ; " as if we didn't know all about it. 
Lessons in English, eh ! Not such a bad game either. 
She has ever so many thousands a year, though, mind 
you, and it would be rather a better spec, than school- 
mastering. I only wish she had taken a fancy to me." 

<e You talk like a fool," cried Polybank, in violent agi- 
tation, and left him without another word. 

Presently he found himself in his own room, though 
whether he performed the upstairs journey on his head 
or his heels he would have had some trouble in determi- 
ning for the next half-hour or so. For half-an-hour 
good he sat bolt upright in the dark, his eyes fixed upon 
a swaying lamp in the street below. Who shall say what 
was the nature of his thoughts ! Peter, the wild boy, 
was doubtless much surprised when first he met a lady. 
A gentleman who had spent the first thirty- six years of 
his life filling his head with stores of Greek and Latin, 
and neglecting sentiment and the ladies, was necessarily 
unprepared for such an emergency as the present. 

" Nonsense !" he exclaimed aloud, when he had sat 
there silently staring at the oil lamp, as before stated, for 
a period extending over thirty minutes. Then he arose, 
lit a match, and went to look at himself in the mirror. 
" Nonsense !" 

There he was sure enough, much as he expected to find 
himself . that is to say, rather grim and worn ; not ex- 
actly the sort of person you would have supposed a rich 
and pretty young lady likely to fall in love with. And 
yet young ladies, often enough, have conceived a tender 

9.3 



132 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

passion for their elders, and Mr. Polybank had read of 
such cases in ancient and modern history. Why she 
should have selected him, -when the wide world was over- 
running with others who would have been only too 
eager to secure her favour, Mas a problem difficult of so- 
lution ; but, after ail, what mattered the why and where- 
fore ? He, Peter Polyblank, was beloved by a baroness . 
had probably been beloved ever so long ; and, like a bat 
and a dolt and a fool, had never perceived it. 

" If it had been Joe, now," he reflected. But again he 
did not choose to follow out this train of thought, for he 
did not like to think of Manon as Joe's wife, which, with- 
out a doubt, she would have been long ago, had she given 
that energetic person a hundredth part of the encourage- 
ment it was now evident she had vouchsafed to his brother. 
Was it true, though ? He felt very uncomfortable when 
he put the question to himself point blank, and . pinning 
himself, as it were, in a corner . argued the matter out 
with a determination to stand no nonsense. Certainly, 
it was much more reasonable to suppose that this was the 
motive which prompted the baroness to invite him so fre- 
quently to the chateau than that she did it out of charity. 
It was certainly more gratifying to think that his society 
was agreeable than that he was an object of commise- 
ration. But how to be assured on this delicate point ? 
To what quarter could he turn for counsel and instruc- 
tion? 

His favourite Horace had remarked on the desire that 
every pia mater feels for the enlightenment of her offspring, 
and perhaps Peter's mother might have given him some 
good advice if she had lived long enough. Now, had he 
gone in for some of those exciting French novelettes 
which he saw so many of in the window next door, 
" format in 18-Jesus," he might have acquired some know- 



WHAT MIGHT HAVE BEEN. 133 

ledge on the subject. But then did not Seneca, or some 
one in his name say : . 

" . Quis sapiens boDO 
Confidat fragile ?" 

He had his subsistence to earn, and never expected to 
have a young, pretty, and rich French baroness, fall in 
love with him ; and so, as the saying is, " had not come 
provided." Now, could he have managed it, he would 
willingly have foregone a little of his classical learning to 
acquire some knowledge of the rudiments of the language 
fo love. But these remarks need not be pixuonged, for has 
not this same story been already told, over and over again ? 
The poor professor, however, was not aware that he was 
only acting a part in a silly old drama with which the 
world had long ago grown weary. Of course silly boys 
and girls may be excused for indulging in some absurdi- 
ties when first they find out that they have got such 
things as hearts ; but better things surely might have 
been expected of a man of intellect, thirty-six years old, 
who earned his bread by the instruction of youth. 

He went to bed that night and rolled and tumbled, but 
never slept a wink. " Fiends in shape of boys " strove 
vainly next day to arouse him from his dreams. He 
walked about, all unconscious, with a long paper tail 
dangling behind him, and a toy cannon, let off in the 
middle of his class, scarcely awakened him from his 
reverie. Somehow, though, things went smoother that 
day than they usually did. It was hot, idle weather, and 
the insects hummed in the air at the open window, sug- 
gestive of lassitude and repose. Young France was 
drowsy, and lay with his head upon his desk. The pro- 
fessor's thoughts were elsewhere, and with his chin in his 
hand he sat and pondered, all unconscious of the progress 



134 THE PRETTY AVIDOW. 

of time. There was no Roustoubique that day, and so 
life, on the whole, was endurable. Yet when school hours 
were run through the professor was very glad. 

He hurried home and made a most elaborate toilet, 
pressing into the service a long-ago forsaken Kerseymere 
waistcoat adorned with monstrous sprigs. For the first 
time in his life, it occurred to him that perhaps he was 
a little out of date in the cut of his coats. Then, having 
brushed himself scrupulously, he set off for the chateau of 
Longanna. He did not exactly know what he was going 
to do when he got there ; for it was not one of his regu- 
lar nights. Half way there he pulled up short to ask 
himself whether it were wise to go uninvited ; but you 
may be sure he found a sufficient excuse for doing so. 
If things were as they were represented to be, she would 
be glad to see him. If not, he could make some 
excuse for having intruded, and retire. Oh, it was all 
admirably planned ; and he was . don't you think ? . a 
very ingenious gentleman. When he reached the house 
he was shown into the drawing-room. 

Left alone, he gazed around upon the articles the 
apartment contained like one who had recently come into 
possession of the property, and he regarded with quite a 
new sort of interest the pictures hanging on the walls . 
the terrestrial " Paradise of Prud'hom/' Meissonier's 
" Dancing Lesson," and a forest piece by Theodore 
Rousseau. He sat down upon a soft velvet couch and 
contemplated at his ease the costly elegance surrounding 
him, and while so occupied let fall his hand, which rested 
accidentally upon an object lying by his side. He took 
it up and examined it. It was a cigar case very beauti- 
fully worked in beads, which, now he came to think 
about it, he had seen Manon engaged upon some days 
ago. On the side of it was embroidered the name of 



WHAT MIGHT HAVE BEEN. 135 

Pierre. Now you who know that Pierre is the French of 
Peter can imagine what must have been the feelings of 
our Peter upon making this discovery- 
It is true that he did not smoke. He had never had 
time to waste in that way, or no doubt he would have 
acquired the habit ; but it made his heart bump violently 
to think that those dear little fingers had been so busy 
on his account. Had she made instead a pair of skates 
or a pair of stilts he would have tried to make use of 
them, and what could be more easy than to learn to 
smoke ? It certainly was an odd gift when he came to 
think of it, because he distinctly remembered telling, her 
he did not indulge in the fragrant weed ; but then it was 
evident she admired smoking in men, and had determined 
that he should share her taste ; which he resolved he 
would do, cost him what agony it might. 

Presently, as he sat there, smiling contentedly, he 
heard Manon's voice in the garden, and walked towards 
the window to meet her. She was coming across the 
lawn towards him; but was not, as he at first supposed, 
talking to Madame Dubosq. A tall, handsome young 
man occupied that lady's place, up into whose eyes she 
was looking with an expression which somehow seemed 
quite different from any he had seen upon her face before 
when she had looked at him. This young man did not 
seem altogether unknown to him, although at the 
moment he could not call to mind where they had met 
before. As the couple drew near, however, the truth 
flashed upon him. It was that mysterious stranger he 
had met at the "Three Crowns'-' upon the night of his 
arrival in Saint Babylas. At the same instant he recol- 
lected that he had several times heard the ladies speak- 
ing of a Mr. Raynal, who must certainly be the person 
now before him. 



136 THE PKETTY WIDOW. 

While the professor stood spell-bound, hidden from 
their sight behind the Venetian blind, the young couple 
came to a standstill within a couple of yards of him, and 
once more was the unhappy Polyblank doomed to hear 
a portion of a conversation not intended for his ears. 

" And what have you been doing all day ?" asked the 
young man, Raynal. 

" I have been working very hard, sir/* replied the 
lady. 

"At what?" he asked. 

" At something for you . you recollect . but, no, you 
recollect nothing. However, whether you remember or 
not, I promised you, long ago, a cigar-case of my own 
manufacture. I have been toiling, sir, like a slave, to 
finish it, and it is done ; and presently, sir, if you are 
good, you shall see it ; and, perhaps . but that's not 
likely, for you are sure to do something to offend me 
before the evening is over . you may take it away in 
your pocket." 

" It is very kind of you to think of me when I am 
away," said Raynal, sinking his voice. " I don't deserve 
it." 

Her eyes were fixed upon the ground, and she did not 
raise them when she spoke again, which was not, this 
time, in the playful tone she had used a moment ago. 

" I hope I shall never forget my old friends," she said. 

" Sometimes / wish to Heaven I could," he rejoined, 
with a slight tremor in his voice. " It makes me hate 
myself, and all the world, when I think what is and what 
might have been." 

" Oh, Pierre !" she said, looking up to him with tears 
in her eyes, " if you would only tell me what makes you 
unhappy. If you would only let me help you. I don't 
suppose I could help you much, because, you know, I am 



WHAT MIGHT HAVE BEEN. 137 

not very clever ; but, if you are in trouble, I might share 
your grief, and that always lightens sorrow, they say.'" 

Oh, so earnestly she looked up into his face, as she 
spoke . his eyes the while averted ! For just a moment 
he seemed hesitating, and as though about to reveal his 
secret ; but quickly changing his mind, said, with a short 
laugh . 

" My dear Manon, I have nothing to tell you. Don't 
fret about me, because I don't deserve it. I always was 
a miserable dog, and always shall be, I suppose. Never 
mind, let us go and look at the cigar-case.'" 

The last words aroused the professor from a sort of 
trance into which he had fallen. Seizing his hat he 
made for the door, and, passing through, closed it behind 
him as they entered the room from the garden. As he 
crossed the court-yard he heard the Dubosq calling to 
him in the distance ; but he made no reply. The old 
portress bobbed a curtsey to him ; but he took no notice 
of her. Like one in a dream, he walked down the 
straggling street, and paused irresolutely when he reached 
a place where two roads met, one going to Saint Babylas, 
and the other due east . the way to England. While he 
stood thus the diligence approached, and the driver, sup- 
posing he wanted to get in, stopped his horses ; but the 
professor, thus appealed to, stared at him unconsciously, 
and the driver, after taking in vain the names of a pipe 
and a dog and a little good man, whipped up his horses 
again, and laughed as he drove away. Polyblank ob- 
serving his mirth, but being at a loss to account for it, 
cast his eyes down, and seeing the famous sprigged ker- 
seymere, hastily buttoned his coat over it, and tramped 
away with his nose pointed westward. 



138 THE PRETTY WIDOW 



CHAPTER XIII. 

HAPPY AT LAST. 

C'est l'amour, l'amour, l'amour, 
Qui fait le monde a la roiide, 
Et chaque jour a son tour 
Le nionde fait l'amour. 

Les Orgues de Barbaric 

It is often very difficult to trace a rumour to the fountain- 
head, and this appears to have been the case "with one 
particular rumour, now to be treated of, which circulated 
in the town of Saint Babylas. At the chemist's shop 
the Dubosq had first heard it. 

" So, madame, the baroness is going to marry Mr. 
Raynal." 

Mr. Pomponney was sealing up a small packet of 
medicine which the Dubosq had purchased, and, as he 
dropped the boiling wax, he looked up with a beaming 
smile, and addressed the lady in the words just quoted. 
But the smile faded fast enough as his eyes encountered 
the look of indignant wonder upon that good lady's 
countenance. 

" "Who dares to say such a thing V she demanded, in 
so awful a voice that Mr. Pomponney was seized with a 
trembling, and sealed his fingers instead of the packet. 
But it was necessary for him to reply to her question. 

" Everybody," he answered. 

" Who is everybody?" she persisted, with her spectacle 
glasses fixed unflinchingly upon him. 

" Well, then, I heard it at the cafe." 

" Who dares to make the Baroness de Grandvilain the 
subject of cafe talk ?" the Dubosq inquired, growing more 
and more terrible. 



HAPPY AT LAST. 139 

" Nobody would venture to do such a thing, I'm sure/' 
said the chemist soothingly, " in my presence. I should 
not dream of allowing it ; but my friend Polyblank " 

" So, the professor told you, did he ?" 

" On the contrary . no," cried Mr. Pomponney. " It 
was the doctor I referred to . the brother of the professor, 
you know, and " 

"Enough!" exclaimed the Dubosq, and, rising, she 
swept out of the shop, leaving Pomponney dumbfoundered 
behind his counter. As for the Dubosq's private thoughts, 
had the cathedral of Saint Babylas suddenly turned a 
summersault and regained its position without displacing 
a single brick, she could not have been more startled 
than she was by the news she had just heard. Every- 
body said so, did they ? while here was she, the lady's 
bosom friend . living under the same roof with her . who 
had never heard of it. Of course, it was wholly untrue . 
at least she hoped so, for it must be confessed that when 
she came to think the matter over, she did not feel quite 
comfortable. Therefore, determining to know the worst, 
she said, as soon as she got home, " My dear, do you 
know what everybody is saying ?" 

" No/' replied Manon. 

" I hardly like to tell you." 

" Do tell me." 

"Well, then . that you are going to marry Mr. 
Raynal." 

Manon blushed and dropped her eyes ; then looked 
up and smiled ; then ran and clinging round the Dubosq's 
neck, kissed her again and again . then said, half crying 
and half laughing . 

" How dare everybody say so, when it ought to have 
been kept a secret? Oh, my dear Mogador, I always 
meant that you should be the first that I would tell it 



140 THE PRETTY WIDOW- 

to, and here actually everybody- seems to know it as soon 
as I do myself." 

The tears of joy which sparkled in pretty Manon's 
eyes somewhat obscured her sight, else must she cer- 
tainly have noticed a surprising elongation of the good 
Dubosq's expressive countenance, while this communica- 
tion was being made. Feeling that some such course of 
conduct was called for, under the circumstances, she bent 
her head forward and bestowed a short, sharp kiss on the 
baroness's forehead, which sounded not unlike the un- 
corking of a pickle bottle, and then jerked herself up 
straight again. But she did not say a word. She dared not 
venture upon a single sentence until several moments 
had elapsed, lest the tone of her voice should betray the 
rage and disappointment which possessed her. Luckily 
for her Manon required her to say nothing, but went on, 
eagerly telling the story of RaynaFs proposal, and the 
probable date of the wedding, with the arrangements in 
futuro. In all she said she used the word " we ." but 
that might mean her husband and herself, and the 
Dubosq listened in some anxiety, and at last managed to 
gasp out . 

" When you are married, my dear, you wont want me." 

" I shan't want you V Manon cried in astonishment. 
" You are very much mistaken, my dear. I shall want you 
then a great deal more than I do now." 

"No, no, my dear," replied the other in a tone of 
gentle resignation. " You think so now ; but you wont. 
No, Fm only in the way. Don't mind me, my dear; I 
should be the last person in the world to stand between 
you and your happiness. 

That was scarcely a wise speech, and, for the first time 
during the course of their friendship, a suspicion entered 
Manon's mind that her companion was not quite as 



HAPPY AT LAST. 141 

unselfish as she might have been. At that moment, 
however, there came a loud, imperious ring at the bell, 
betokening Raynal's arrival, and so the conversation 
ended. What everybody had said was, upon this occa- 
sion, true enough. Raynal and Manon were to be 
married. Whatever reason he might have had for his 
former reserve existed no longer, and so Manon, at last, 
was to be wedded to the only man she had ever loved. 
But how describe this happy period, when all doubts 
were removed and the love she had so long coveted 
was hers ! It is the general opinion that lovers are 
more interesting to one another than to a third 
person, and in the present case we labour under the extra 
disadvantage of having a widow for a heroine, which is, 
one would suppose, rather an unpopular character among 
unmarried lady readers. 

Both the lady and gentlemen readers would, perhaps, 
hardly thank the writer were he to repeat verbatim all the 
sentimental speeches of the happy couple ; and although 
some of their utterances must, of necessity, be introduced 
into this veracious history, it will be sufficient now to 
state, in a general way, that they loved one another and 
were happy. Somehow, though, the world is so consti- 
tuted that everybody cannot be simultaneously in the en- 
joyment of unlimited bliss. Just at this identical time, 
when Manon was happy, mere Corbeau's rheumatism set 
in worse than ever. 

While Manon dreamed away the joyous hours, mere 
Baldayroux lay groaning in her bed, sciatica having fast 
hold of her in its grip. Though the folks were usually in 
a bad way up the back lanes of Longanna, they never 
before were in such a very bad way as they were at this 
time, when Manon's sun shone brightly, and now she 
actually began to neglect them and stop at home, love- 



142 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

making, instead of going her usual rounds with wine and 
soup and such like . offering timely assistance, and listen- 
ing to the long and harrowing tales of woe which were 
always in readiness for her ear. Just about this time, 
too, a circumstance occurred which much damaged the 
baroness's popularity. As the chief actors concerned do 
not figure in this story, the facts of the case may be thus 
briefly stated. A certain native of Saint Babylas had 
obtained permission from the baroness to erect a small 
manufactory at Longanna, it having been represented to 
her that its establishment would greatly benefit the poor 
population of the neighbourhood. She heartily gave her 
consent, and for some time, sure enough, the inhabitants 
of Longanna thought that they were all on the high road to 
make their fortunes ; and, indeed, many families came 
from Saint Babylas and settled amongst them under a 
similar belief. But presently the factory was accidentally 
burnt down, and the proprietor, having neglected insu- 
rance, was ruined, and the speculation failed. Some 
unknown person set afloat a shameful rumour that the baro- 
ness had profited by this transaction. In reality she had 
been a great loser ; but beyond the limits of the domestic 
drama virtue is not always triumphant. Half-famished 
men scowled at her from the doors of their hovels as she 
drove past in her carriage. There are times when it is a 
sufficient crime in poverty's eyes for a person to wear good 
clothes and go by smiling. And so this pretty lady came 
to be what is called " unpopular, " 



143 



CHAPTER XIV. 

CASTLES IN THE AIK. 

But even as babes in dreams do smile, 

And sometimes fall a-weeping, 
So I awaked as wise this while 
As when I fell a- sleeping. 

Hey nonny, nonnoy, O. 

The Shepherd Tonie. 

You may be sure this was not a very happy time for the 
professor. For more than a week after that dreadful 
day of involuntary eavesdropping he kept away from the 
chateau; nor, indeed, was it very improbable that he 
would thenceforth have kept away for ever, had he not 
been specially invited. A great change had come over 
the spirit of the dream, he fancied, when again he entered 
the handsome drawing-room. He found a pair of men's 
gloves lying on the table, and to the owner he was pre- 
sently introduced. Raynal was not, perhaps, as polite as 
he might have been. He knew English well, Manon 
said, but he did not attempt to converse in that language. 
Polyblank watched him uneasily. Maybe it is some- 
what difficult to see the merits of one who has cast us 
into the shade. The loved one's other lover it is as hard a 
matter to judge fairly of as it is to strike the happy 
medium respecting one's friend's wife . between absolutely 
hating and liking too well. What could she see in him ? 
Polyblank asked himself, as he walked slowly home, 
reaching his door at last with the question yet unanswered. 
He did not sing on his way home that evening, and he 
did not return to Manon's until another invitation was 
sent to him. In the meanwhile rumours reached him, 
through Pomponneyian channels, of gay doings at Lon- 



144 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

ganna . of the inauguration of the snipe season, by the 
arrival of some of the baroness's Parisian friends. and 
at last the professor was asked to meet some literary 
celebrities, -whose acquaintance, Manon said, she was 
anxious the professor should make. 

Of course, there are many tens of thousands of persons 
in the world for whom the eyes of society have no terrors 
. who are quite at their ease in the presence of their 
betters, or who perhaps acknowledge the existence of none 
better than themselves, and are, in their own true, honest, 
unbiassed opinion, as good as anybody . if not better; 
who keep the best of company, and yet keep their coun- 
tenance. But there are other persons . poor-spirited 
creatures these, though, and hardly worthy of the notice 
of the superior class aforesaid . who are differently con- 
stituted j whose hearts palpitate in the company of 
strangers : who tread with timid and uncertain step when 
they go out into the world, and who are by nature so 
shame-faced and self-depreciatory, that they endow with 
a factitious superiority all who are unknown to them, and 
thus sometimes mistake shallow simpletons and impudent 
pretenders for wise men and high-bred people. 

It is unnecessary to acquaint the reader, who by this 
time must be familiar with the character of a certain 
professor in the Imperial College of Saint Babylas, that 
sensations such as those last described agitated Mr. Poly- 
blank's breast, when one evening, returning to his lodg- 
ings in the Street of the Priests, he found there awaiting 
him a little note in the handwriting of the baroness, 
which requested the pleasure of his company to dinner 
on the following Sunday, to meet certain brilliant stars 
from the literary and theatrical spheres of Paris. Never- 
theless, he must go, and then came the question of ward- 
robe. If painful to you . well-born and wealthy reader 



CASTLES IN THE AIR. 145 

a description of the pitiful makeshifts which poverty 
compelled our professor to resort to before he could re- 
sume the appearance which he felt to be necessary for 
the occasion, how humiliating to the writer of this his- 
tory to record the petty contrivances to which his hero 
had recourse . the glazed edges secretly inked, and frayed 
edges skilfully pared, and so on. 

Let us then be satisfied with the information that Mr. 
Polyblank sought the privacy of his own apartment, drew 
down his blind, did his little bits of tailoring, tinkering, 
and cobbling, and what not ; and in due course emerged 
into broad daylight, the wonder of all beholders . those 
beholders being Madame Pomponney, rolling pill-paste in 
the shop, and a blue-bloused urchin playing in the gutter. 
When Polyblank reached the chateau he found the stars 
already shining there. 

First and foremost was the great Oscar Max, the world- 
famed theatrical critic of Duchesne ftls . a prodigiously 
stout gentleman, with silvery locks and flowing white 
beard, who said but little save in the way of flattering 
comments upon his pretty hostess's wines and viands ; but 
laughed heartily at others' jokes. He had made his way, 
had Oscar, and was well to do . rarely using his pen now- 
a-days except in the deletion of excessive exuberance on 
the part of younger members of his staff". He was con- 
tent with the crop of laurels which he had gathered, and 
over his excellent dinner every day listened, not unkindly, 
to the sanguine talk of the aspiring unfledged, who had 
yet their worlds to take by storm, and their societies to 
regenerate. 

Very different from this well-fed philosopher was Alexis 
d'Abligny . tall, thin, sallow, back-bearded, and long-haired 
. the celebrated author of " Les Premiers Amours de M. 
Satan," a drama, which over there in the gay capital, 

10 



146 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

made its author's fortune ; although, over here., considera- 
tions of propriety precluded all idea of translation. 
Wonderful was it to see the d'Abligny rolling his eyes and 
his cigarette. He lived almost entirely upon smoke. It 
was, he affirmed, meat and drink to him ; but it must be 
confessed that it was not fattening. It was interesting to 
observe his proceedings. A cigarette was manufactured, 
with a snatch and a twist of his long fingers, and, while 
smoking one, he was busy with the preparation of another 
to follow, puffing away the while like a factory chimney. 
An incredibly small number of hours would exhaust the 
little Book of Job he carried with him in his waistcoat 
pocket. At his bachelor dinners he smoked between his 
soup and fish, and so on between the other courses. Oc- 
casionally he ate and smoked together. He usually fell 
asleep at night with a cigar in his mouth, and it was 
popularly supposed that he went on smoking long after 
slumber had overtaken him. Besides smoking, however, 
he did other things. for instance the "Premiers Amours ." 
also a long string of novels and novelettes, and some 
brilliant articles in the newspapers. Indeed, his con- 
sumption of ink almost equalled his consumption of 
tobacco, and there were few subjects too vast or too 
insignificant to escape the withering sarcasm for which 
Alexis was so justly famous. 

The third star was, more properly speaking, a little full 
moon of a man, Paul Cherami, the farce writer, a jovial 
spirit, who ate and drank and made merry, and knocked 
off his couplets and calembours when he had nothing 
better to do . who had always two or three things on at 
two or three theatres, and two or three more in prepara- 
tion; but who, to all appearance, had nothing in the 
world to employ his time, and to whom you could do no 
greater service than bid him come and play, morn, noon. 



CASTLES IN THE AIR. ]47 

and night, for all lie seemed to want was some other idle 
rogue to kill time with him. Yet he too mnst have had 
his working hours . this Cherami; for jokers generally 
find joking by the yard laborious. 

The fourth celebrity was an Englishman, and it was 
chiefly to meet him that the professor had been invited, 
for though a very great man indeed in his own country, 
his knowledge of the French language was limited. He 
was a London theatrical manager, who had made his 
fortune by some lucky hits and long runs, and had come 
over to Paris to look out for fresh pieces. He was a very 
important person this, though, owing to lingual diffi- 
culties, not quite as great over here as at home. The 
Parisian authors, knowing that he had made his fortune 
in a theatre, not unnaturally perhaps imagined he must 
be a man of histrionic talent j and hearing that his line 
was comedy, supposed that he might be humorous off 
the stage as well as on it. But in this they were quite 
mistaken. The manager was, indeed, a very common- 
place person. By some fatality, whenever he did try a 
piece in which he himself performed he did it to empty 
benches. Upon some grounds, best known to himself, 
he believed he was one of the most able because he was 
one of the luckiest of London managers ; but yet it can- 
not be denied that after his first hit, and before achieving 
his second, he tried very hard indeed to do something 
else, about the success of which he himself felt quite 
certain ; but being at the last moment prevented from 
carrying out his intentions, the piece in question shut up 
another person's theatre at which it was produced, and 
forced the lessee to Basinghall-street. Yet, in spite of 
this, our manager had every confidence in himself, and, 
to hear him talk, anybody would have been led to sup- 
pose that he really knew what he was talking about, and 

10-2 



148 THE PRETTI WIDOW 

that it was not by the veriest " fluke/' he had become a 
man of fortune, instead of remaining the third-rate actor 
he had been for twenty years or so. 

Mr. Polyblank found the gentlemen assembled in the 
.drawing-room, and almost immediately after his arrival 
the servant announced the dinner, which was served in 
an apartment with windows opening on to the lawn. 

" I know we ought not to dine by daylight, Mr. Max," 
said the fair hostess; " but it is such a pity in the 
country to send the sun to bed so many hours before his 
time/'' 

" That is more to favour the dinner than the diners/' 
Max replied. "Some rural roses put the sun to the 
blush." 

He bowed to the baroness as he said this and smiled 
his sweetest. His manner, though, struck the professor 
as rather too familiar. That of the other two French- 
men also seemed open to the same objection. Who were 
these old friends he had never heard tell of, and how 
long did they mean to stop ? These reflections some- 
what marred the pleasures of the table, as far as Mr. 
Polyblank was concerned. It was, however, a dinner to 
be remembered. The profusion and novelty of the dishes 
were an unfailing source of wonder to the humble school- 
master, who cast furtive glances towards his next-door 
neighbours in order that he might, by their example, 
regulate his own course of action with respect to unknown 
" plats." 

The wonders began with half-a-dozen native oysters, 
which he found lying on his plate, and the elaborately- 
folded napkin, which latter was of itself an incident that 
nothing short of the wonders to come could have driven 
from his thoughts. It was a thorough French dinner 
this ; not in the latest Anglo-Parisian style, but accord- 



CASTLES IN THE AIR. 149 

ing to high provincial etiquette, quite en regie, and had 
been carefully planned by the Dubosq. First there was 
potage au Compte de Paris, which gave place to the 
inevitable boiled shreds of beef served with slices of 
melon ; after which came ragouts k la Cardinal e, tendrons 
de veau aux petits pois, epigramme d'agneau aux con- 
combres, filets de poussins a la Marechale, supreme de 
volaille aux truffes ; while at intervals were handed round 
radishes, anchovies, red herring, salad and gherkins. 
Then came haricots verts a- la poulctte, flageolets a la 
Provencale ; then a leg of mutton and endive salad ; then 
miroton de homard and jambon glace a Fananas ; then 
macedoine de fruits, corbeillc de ratifia a la Chantillie, 
meringues a la creme, peaches, grapes, green figs, and 
Roquefort cheese. To this wondrous repast the wines 
served were, to the first course, Macon, followed by Clos 
Vougeot ; then Pic-Pouillie and Chateau Grille ; then 
Barsac, Segur, and FErmitage ; at dessert, champagne 
and Arbois ; and with the sweets, Grenache, Malvoisie, 
and Alicante. Each of these wines was in turn gravely 
handed to Mr. Polyblank by the servants in attendance, 
and of many the professor partook with becoming gravity, 
wondering, as he did so, what amount of practice would 
be required before an inexperienced person could distin- 
guish one from another. 

But if the things upon the table surprised him, how 
much more did the ladies and gentlemen seated round it 
. who talked a language which, though he was now no 
mean French scholar, was almost incomprehensible to him, 
it being the chit-chat of the Paris green-rooms and the 
latest dialect . if one may apply that phrase to written 
language . of the Parisian journals. 

It was more than probable that Madame Dubosq was 
as much in the dark as the professor, although she smiled 



150 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

very affably, and looked very knowing. Mr. Polyblank 
strongly suspected that she was muck out of her element, 
and once glancing at her when the rest were all laughing 
and talking, and she thought herself unobserved, he saw 
her yawning fearfully, and looking very worn and weary. 
No, she was not happy, and he sympathized with her. 

As he sat in silence, timidly sipping his wine, he was 
wishing himself back in his humble lodging in the Street 
of the Priests. Never before had the baroness seemed 
to him so beautiful as she did then, in her pretty 
evening dress, which scarcely concealed her plump white 
shoulders. The sparkling A'i had perhaps imparted just 
a suspicion of extra roses to her cheeks, without detract- 
ing from the lustre of her eyes ; and she laughed and 
chatted more gaily than he had ever heard her do before. 
The English manager was not altogether happy. He 
ate and drank vigorously, though ; missing nothing. He 
made hay while the sun shone, as far as the feast was 
concerned ; but he did not make merry. He was obliged 
to play second fiddle . an instrument to which, when at 
home, he was not accustomed; He would have liked to 
engross the conversation ; but it was as much as he could 
do to slip in a few words edgeways, for little Paul and the 
great Alexis monopolized the talk, while Mr. Max en- 
couraged them from time to time by his good-natured 
laughter. They were evidently very witty fellows these 
gentlemen from Paris, and Baynal and the baroness 
seemed readily enough to appreciate their jokes j but 
while the poor professor sat vainly striving to catch their 
meaning, he could not help asking himself how he could 
ever have been so mad as to suppose that beautiful and 
clever woman had fallen in love with him. Thank 
Heaven he had discovered the truth before it was too 
late . before he had spoken the never-to-be-recalled words, 



CASTLES IN THE AIR. 151 

at the bare thought of which he now flushed crimson. 
In love with him, indeed ! A pretty sort of host he 
would make in such company. 

" The French nation is not properly understood/'' the 
great Alexis was at that moment observing. " My dear 
friends, we ought to go abroad and sow the seeds of 
truth. Let us gather up our beds and assume our staves, 
or at any rate our walking-sticks, and go to all quarters 
of the world to enlighten the minds of the ignorant/'' 

" I object to enlightening minds upon principle," said 
Max, " but I don't mind you, dear boys, doing it." 

" I object to being absent from Paris for more than a 
very limited period," said little Paul. 

" My friends/' continued Alexis, in a tone of remon- 
strance, " shall we allow paltry personal considerations to 
stand in our way? Shall we sit down contentedly and 
allow the world to underrate us ? Is it possible, Paul, 
that in such a case you would refuse to die for your 
country ?" 

" And I'm killing myself with its good things as fast 
as I can. You don't want any more of me, surely ?" 

" Ah, he is like me ! " put in Manon. " He has given 
up ambition, and instead of a laurel wreath is quite 
content . 

" Couronne par Jeanneton 
D'un simple bonnet de coton." 

" Only I haven't got a Jeanneton," sighed little Paul. 

" Look at us," continued Alexis, " whom they affect 
to regard with contempt ! Look at our men of science, 
quoted by all other nations ! Look even at our mobs ! 
Have you any mobs over there, Monsieur Brownjones, 
where Policeman A 1 single-handed routs ten thousand 
Chartists ?" 



152 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

" Voila un chose que vous n'avez pas, Mossoo \" 
exclaimed the manager ; " et cela est un Shakespeare." 

" Your only original dramatist,, retorted Alexis. " We 
know all about him. Our great Alexander has written 
us his history ; but after your Williams what have you ? 
Come, Mr. Raynal, you have lived in England, and ought 
to be an authority/'' 

" To be sure/' said Manon. " What is there now, 
Pierre, worth going to see ? The horses, eh, and the 
Meese Anglaises ? " 

Somehow, Raynal seemed by no means pleased at the 
turn the conversation had taken, and no way inclined to 
communicate any of his personal experiences. 

" I brought nothing away with me/' he said. 

" Ah ! but what did you leave behind ?" asked Mr. 
Paul, waggishly . at which RaynaFs face for a moment 
flushed and darkened. 

As the professor sat silently whilst this and similar 
talk was going on, his eye rarely wandered from the faces 
of his hostess and her lover. He certainly did not like 
this Mr. Raynal. Endeavouring, to the best of his 
ability, to regard him without prejudice, there yet was 
something about Manon's lover . although he could not 
determine what it was . which inspired the professor with 
a feeling of distrust. One thing, however, was very 
certain, and that was that Manon loved him. Little as 
Polyblank knew of the language of love, he was sure of 
that much : and having heard that they had known each 
other for several years, he wisely concluded that they 
were themselves better judges than he could be of their 
chances of future happiness. It was once when Poly- 
blank's eyes were fixed upon Manon's face, that she 
suddenly said to him . 

" I hope you did not forget to bring those very clever 



CASTLES IN THE AIR. 153 

Latin verses, Mr. Polyblank ?" (There had been a P.S. 
to the Baroness's invitation asking him to bring them.) 
" I have been speaking to Mr. Max about them, and he 
is anxious to see your work/'' 

It must be confessed that Mr. Max took some pains to 
make his face express the amount of anxiety attributed to 
him, though he succeeded but indifferently nevertheless. 
Probably anybody else but the author of the verses would 
not have failed to notice the circumstance. He, however, 
saw nothing, and produced the MS., twitching it nervously 
in his fingers. 

" They are epigrams after the manner of Martial," 
said Manon. " Is it not so, Mr. Polyblank ? Women 
don't know anything about those sort of things; but you, 
Mr. Max, who know everything, ought to be a judge." 

" Are they Latin, sir ?" asked Mr. Max. 

" Yes," replied the deluded professor. " They do not 
possess any great merit, but I thought the notion a novel 
one." 

" Very novel," said Mr. Max, sipping his wine. 

Poor unhappy Polyblank. The pretty baroness was 
eager in her championship, and would insist upon our 
author reading one or two pieces aloud. He felt a little 
bashful about doing so, but of course he did it, after the 
gentlemen smiled approvingly . all but the manager, who 
having no particular object to gain by conciliating a 
schoolmaster, contented himself by observing when the 
reading was over . 

" Je ne sais pas parler Latin." 

" Only French," observed the professor, at which Mr. 
Max laughed prodigiously, attributing his mirth to a joke 
in the epigrams which he had hardly comprehended at 
the moment he heard it. 

" I am very glad you think they are so clever," and 



154 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

the baroness, though the beautiful young lady knew 
well enough why he had laughed. As she spoke, she 
passed over the manuscript to Mr. Max, adding, as she 
did so, " You understand now, Mr. Max, you must do all 
you possibly can with them, and a word from you to the 
Paris publishers will effect anything." 

Under any other circumstances Mr. Max would pro- 
bably have repudiated the possession of such powerful 
influence ; but he did not want to offend his pretty 
hostess, and he thought, perhaps, that it would be more 
gracious to say he had tried to serve the professor and 
failed than to refuse to try at all ; so he promised to do 
his best, and pocketed the verses. The poor professor's 
epigrammatic achievements are yet unprinted. They 
were not very brilliant affairs. He was indeed, as we 
shall see, of that opinion himself when he came to read 
some of the MS. over in cold blood, some time after- 
wards, and he did not break his heart at the disappoint- 
ment. Not having got into print, he brought himself to 
believe that he had acted wisely in keeping out of it. 
We are all of us much more witty till we show up in 
type, and then somehow we never do half what is ex- 
pected of us. Now if we would only leave the world 
expectant of what we might do if we tried, no one would 
find us out, and we might pass through life with our 
little shallownesses never plumbed. 

The professor, however, was not of this way of think- 
ing at the time of which we are speaking ; and fancying 
himself, worthy man, already well started on the road to 
fame and fortune, his conversation became animated and 
amusing, and would perhaps have been even brilliant, had 
he been able entirely to overcome his natural timidity. 
Altogether, his efforts were very successful, and, when he 
took his departure, he walked with quite a rollicking air 



PLOTS AND PLANS. 155 

across the marshes, with his hat, actually, a good deal on 
one side, and, more than once, he stopped to langh at 
some good thing that somebody had said. If . it once 
occurred to him . he had only gone in for epigrams, ever 
so long ago, instead of wasting his time at the scholastic 
business, he might now have been a jolly devil-me-care 
sort of fellow, such as those he had been dining with. 

" Merry dogs," he said to himself. " It is fortunate 
that I have made their acquaintance. " 

The other guests were to return to Saint Babylas in a 
carriage which had brought them, and there being room 
for only five besides the driver, they were unable to ac- 
commodate the professor with a seat. Polyblank had 
started first, and, indeed, had reached home long before 
the others set out from Longanna. He was humming a 
tune as he walked up the Street of the Priests, and he 
skipped nimbly up the steps of Mr. Pomponney's house. 
But the shop door opened suddenly, and Eelicite appeared 
upon the threshold. 

" Oh, Mr. Polybank \" she said. " If it would not be 
asking too much . oh, it would be so kind of you ! Oh, 
it is so dreadful. 

"What has happened?" asked the professor, suspend- 
ing his music in the middle of a bar, for his thoughts 
immediately reverted to his jovial relative ; of whom, as 
a matter of course, he expected to hear some bad tidings. 



CHAPTER XV 

PLOTS AND PLANS. 
Dead faces in my visions floated. . Aaeesteup. 



" A poor Englishwoman," said Felicite, in great excite- 
ment . " a poor Englishwoman is at the point of death, 



156 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

over there, opposite, at the laundress's/' and looking in 
the direction she pointed, the professor saw a faint light 
glimmering in the third floor window of the house from 
which hung the announcement of " Le linge mangled." 

"Your Protestant priest has heen sent for/' put in 
Mr. Pomponney, " hut he is not at home. We thought 
she was dying, and went for him. She cannot speak a 
word of French. Will you go over and see her ?" 

Mr. Polyblank would have much preferred stopping 
where he was, hut he could not refuse to go. It was, to 
be sure, a rather startling request to make to a man who 
was neither a doctor nor a clergyman. He was, however, 
soon persuaded. The idea which Felicite's description 
conjured up of the lonely woman dying up there, on the 
third floor, among strangers, jabbering in an unknown 
tongue, filled him with pity, and very soon he was as- 
cending the stairs of the laundress's abode. A very hot, 
close-smelling room was this into which he was conducted. 
A tallow candle on the mantelpiece cast a dim light upon 
a small table littered with plates, basins, and bottles ; the 
rest of the furniture consisting of a couple of chairs, over 
the backs of which hung some dingy old garments, and 
a squalid bed, in which lay the dying woman . undoubt- 
edly a dying woman, but very unlike what the professor 
had pictured to himself. Felicite had not said whether 
she was old or young ; but Mr. Polyblank had somehow 
come to the conclusion that it was to be an old woman. 
She was twenty, at most. Her face was of ashy white- 
ness, and her hair jet black. Her bare arm lying outside 
the bedclothes was wasted, and quite bird-like was the 
appearance of her thin fingers, clutching the coverlet. 
Her features appeared to be contracted by pain. She 
roiled her head slowly from side to side upon her pillow, 
and her eyes were turned upwards, so that the pupils 



PLOTS AND PLANS. 157 

were scarcely visible ; yet might be observed, in the poor 
suffering face, traces of a faded loveliness which years of 
trouble had failed to obliterate. Who and what was she ? 
It was impossible to form any conjecture from the contents 
of the squalid room and the few ragged garments hanging 
limply over the chairs. The landlady could give but 
little information, except that the lady called herself 
" Smit." 

" What's the matter with her?" asked the professor, 
in a low voice. 

" My dear sir/' replied the laundress, thumping her 
own chest with her closed hands, " very bad here." 

" How long has she been with you ?" 

" About ten days." 

" And ill all the time ?' 

" Came ill." 

" What does the doctor say ?" 

" She would not have one. We wanted to send for 
Dr. Tominet ; but she would not see him. Then she's 
too poor to pay doctors' bills. We know what they are." 

" I think I can get some advice gratis," said the pro- 
fessor, and promising to return immediately, went in 
quest of his brother Joe. As a general rule that hila- 
rious practitioner was not very difficult to find when off 
college duty, for he spent all his leisure time in the Cafe 
Leduc, of the most quiet of the regular frequenters of 
which he had now become a sort of bete noir. Upon 
this particular evening, however, he was not to be found 
at the usual haunt, but as he was expected there soon the 
professor sat down in a quiet corner to await his arrival. 
He had sat there more than ten minutes, and was just think- 
ing of leaving a message and taking his departure, when 
the cafe door opened and three gentlemen entered the 
room, talking and laughing loudly. Polyblank looked 



158 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

up and beheld some of his late companions of the dinner 
table . Alexis., little Paul, and Pierre Raynal. They had 
been drinking freely, it appeared, since he saw them last, 
and their high-pitched tones drew the attention of the 
other occupants of the cafe upon them. Now it was not 
that he was ashamed of being claimed as their acquaint- 
ance . for, tipsy or not, they had the airs of very fine 
gentlemen . indeed it would be difficult to explain his 
motive, if one existed; but some inscrutable impulse 
caused the professor, while in the very act of rising, to 
sit down again, and shade his face with the Saint Babylas 
Gazette. For some five minutes or so he sat thus, wish- 
ing himself well out of the place, though, stupidly, 
ashamed to rise and depart openly. Meanwhile, the 
three gentlemen continued to laugh and talk as loudly 
as before ; not forgetting to grumble at the quality of 
the liquor supplied to them. Presently, however, they 
arose, upon RaynaFs proposing an adjournment to 
Madame Gobinard's. With much jingling of glasses and 
knocking about of chairs, they paid the score. Before 
going, though, a cigar had to be lighted. The waiter 
supplied a match which wovdd not burn, and Raynal 
diving into his pocket searched for a piece of paper. 

" Here is some/' said little Paul, producing a small 
packet, and tearing off a sheet amidst the laughter of his 
companions. 

" Poor professor \" said Raynal, as he screwed up the 
paper and thrust it into the flame of the gas jet nearest 
to him. Then, the cigar being lighted, the three took 
their departure. Before they had passed through the 
doorway, however, our professor was groping underneath 
a* billiard table for the fragment of burnt paper which had 
fallen to the ground. A glance at it was enough, and 
then, white and trembling, he followed in pursuit. 



PLOTS AND PLANS. 159 

" M'sieu has forgotten to pay/' the gallon cried, ex- 
citedly catching his flying coat tail, but the professor 
shook him off. With a bound he had reached little 
Paul's side, and laid his hand upon his shoulder. 

" Give them back to me/' he said ; " give them back . 
the verses. " 

Paul Cherami produced the same little packet, some- 
what sheepishly, and murmured something about Mr. Max 
having asked him to show them to a publisher. 

" Don't trouble yourself, sir/' said the professor, 
stowing his literary valuables away in his breast-pocket, 
and buttoning his coat over them, "I've changed mymind." 

With this he turned upon his heel, and the three gen- 
tlemen walked on less joyous than before ; for there was 
something in the poor schoolmaster's white face and 
gleaming eyes which was not altogether provocative of 
mirth. 

" I will tell her how her friends keep their fine pro- 
mises," Polyblank said to himself, as he retraced his 
steps. But hardly had the words passed his lips before 
his mind was altered. " No, no," he thought, " it would 
vex her if I did so. It was very kind of her to speak to 
them about my verses. She shall know nothing about 
it, unless they tell her themselves ; and I do not suppose 
they will do that." 

As he was paying the waiter at the cafe door on his 
return, the jovial Joseph came up, and they walked back 
together to the Street of the Priests. Then the professor 
found the sick woman, in much the same condition as 
that in which he had left her an hour ago. Yet had 
she the same look of pain . yet did she roll her head to 
and fro, with the same weary motion he had observed 
before. Joseph approached the bed, and took her hand 
in his. 



160 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

" What is the matter ?" he asked, in English. 

She lay still and silent for a minute, with her large 
eyes fixed inquiringly upon his face. Apparently she 
had not caught the meaning of his words ; but when, 
after looking at her earnestly for a while and feeling her 
pulse, the doctor was turning away she caught at his 
sleeve, and cried in a weak voice : ' c Where is he . where 
is he ?" 

" Where is who ?" asked Joseph. 

But she closed her eyes again and made no answer. 

" Is she dangerously ill ?" asked the professor in a 
half whisper. 

" It's a case with her," replied Joe, in the same tone. 
" Wont more than last the week out." 

Gently as they spoke, it seemed that the purport of 
their remarks reached the woman's ears, for she called 
upon the doctor in a low, plaintive voice to stop. 

" Don't let me die," she pleaded. " Not yet, not yet. 
Don't let me die before I've seen him !" 

" Whom do you wish to see ?" asked Joe. 

" Who ?" the sick woman repeated, with a wondering 
stare. " Who but my husband, that I have travelled so 
many miles to find . hundreds of miles . hundreds ol 
miles. Nearly all on foot and half starving. Don't let 
me die before I see him." 

" Tell me his name, and where he is, and I'll telegraph 
for him," said Joe. 

For a moment the woman lay still as before; then 
broke out again, in the same low, pleading tone. " No; 
no, you must not write. He would not like it known. 
I want to see him myself. I must live to see him, now 
I'm so near. I must live " 

But her voice died away with these words, and again 
the heavy rolling motion of the head was resumed ; while 



PLOTS AND PLANS. 161 

a pang of extreme pain contracted the features of the 
thin, white face. 

" If s a chance if she does see him/' said Joe, " unless 
he conies precious soon. It's a pity we can't find out 
who he is." And he began to make inquiries of the 
laundress respecting the sick woman. But the laundress 
knew no more than she had already told the pro- 
fessor. She had come there ten days ago, had paid her 
rent for a month in advance, and had written her name 
" Mary Smith" in the official return called for, in the 
usual manner, by the police. Only one thing the laun- 
dress knew, which was that in a little shabby leather 
portfolio desk the sick woman had locked up certain 
papers which might perhaps throw light upon the 
business. Had not the gentlemen better open it and see 
whether they could not find out something about the 
poor creature's friends ? the worthy woman suggested . 
she herself being devoured by an anxiety to know what 
secrets the leather case might contain. Joseph was 
inclined to take the same view of the case ; but the pro- 
fessor objected. 

" Not yet," he said ; " we must not do so without her 
consent." 

"Very well," said Joe; "we shall know all after it's over.'* 

" Can you do nothing for her ?" 

" Not yet. I'll get some physic made up if you like. 
It wont be of much use." 

Just as they reached the door the sick woman, restored 
to consciousness, again cried to them to stop, and they 
once more approached the bed. 

"You must not send for him," she said, closing her 
thin fingers upon Joseph's hand. " Not yet . not yet, I say. 
But remember the name if anything happens . remember 
Mr. Baynal, at the hotel of the ' Three Crowns.' " 

11 



162 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

When the woman ceased speaking there was for a 
moment deep, unbroken silence. The landlady stood at 
the door, too far away to catch the name, which was 
uttered in a tone scarcely above a whisper. Both the 
brothers, however, heard it distinctly, and stood there 
motionless . a wondering, half- frightened look upon their 
faces. Not until they reached the street did they speak, 
when the doctor said : 

" If it is true, the marriage may never come off, 
after all." 

" He is a villain !" the professor muttered to himself, 
scarcely heeding the other's words. 

They had crossed the street now, and stood outside the 
door of Mr. Pomponney's shop. 

" Good night," said the doctor. 

" Good night. . Joe !" 

iC Well !" 

" How long did you say it was possible for her to live ?" 

" I'll give her a week at the utmost." 

" You must mention this matter to no one, Joe, till 
we've talked it over together. Do you hear ? . to no one." 

" I hear," said Joe. " Good night." 



" Fll sleep upon it," said the professor, as he ex- 
tinguished his bedroom candle ; and, having come to 
that determination, he rolled and tossed from side to side 
of his restless couch until the morning. Then he arose 
and shaved himself with an unsteady hand. He was 
obliged to be at the college at half-past eight o'clock, in 
accordance with Mr. Roustoubique's latest regulation ; 
but, before going there, he hurried round to Joe's 
lodgings, to impart to him the result of the night's re- 
flections. Early as the hour was, however, the bird had 
flown. Mr. Polyblank turned away from the door, feel- 



PLOTS AND PLANS. 163 

ing anything but comfortable. Somehow, he had always 
a secret misgiving as to what mischief Joe might be about 
when he was out of his sight. 

A long, hard day's work awaited Peter in the imperial 
establishment . one of the longest and hardest he ever 
remembered to have passed within its walls ; during the 
course of which the vagaries of Bourdichon and Co. well- 
nigh drove him to distraction. As soon as he could get 
away, without going home to tea, as was his custom, he 
went straight to Joe's lodgings, and, not finding him, 
proceeded thence to the cafe, where, wonderful to relate, 
the doctor had not been seen all day. With a fast in- 
creasing feeling of uneasiness, the professor set off for 
the house of the sick woman. He found her in a seem- 
ingly unconscious state, and incapable of holding any 
conversation; but it appeared, from the statement of 
the laundress, that Joe had been there the first thing in 
the morning, and had had some talk with the invalid. 
Could it be possible that he would use the secret as the 
means of making money r Polyblank shuddered at the 
thought, and, when it first occurred to him, rejected it 
with indignation. But, do what he would, the idea re- 
turned, again and again. Joe's nearest and dearest rela- 
tive could not disguise from himself the fact that that dis- 
tinguished disciple of Esculapius was rather unprincipled. 

Without taking any refreshment, Mr. Polyblank once 
more set out, but this time upon the road to Longanna. 
Since B-aynal had been publicly declared Manon's future 
husband, the professor had not been a very frequent 
visitor at the chateau. Those famous lessons were woe- 
fully neglected during the progress of Love's young dream, 
and the professor having once or twice come and gone, 
without the pretty baroness as much as opening a book, 
he began to feel ashamed of making his appearance. It 

11.2 



164 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

was not to be wondered at, if she neglected her educa- 
tion under the influence of the all-mastering passion. 
Young ladies without number, since the world began, have 
put aside their crochet, and abandoned their Berlin wools 
at such a time ; and instances are on record, even of grave 
philosophers abandoning severer studies for the cultivation 
of the graces, in the hope of rendering themselves more 
acceptable to the objects of their passion. Can we, then, 
.blame Manon for not seeking to perfect herself in the 
barbarous language at such a moment ? 

The professor of course had, in the dinner party, an 
excuse for calling at the chateau ; and he was most 
.anxious to ascertain whether Manon had heard anything 
of the sick woman in the Street of the Priests. He 
walked so quickly across the marshes that he was almost 
out of breath and somewhat excited when he reached the 
chateau. The old portress and her cat were there as 
usual, and the sight of them seemed to reassure him. 
The old woman's first words, though, brought his heart 
to his mouth. 

" Madame la baronne is not at home. Madame and 
Madame Dubosq have been out since eleven this morning." 

Such a thing had never occurred before during his 
.experience, and this unlooked-for disappointment fell 
upon him like the presage of some heavy misfortune. 
But worse was yet to come. 

" I thought they had gone to see you, sir/'' continued 
the portress. " Monsieur le docteur came to fetch them." 

The professor made no anwer. He leant against the 
wall, and put his hand to his head. The old woman 
thought he was ill, and toddling into her little sitting- 
room, brought him out a chair to sit upon, and a glass of 
water to drink. Polyblank took the proffered glass and 
carried it to his lips, but he was unable to swallow. 



PLOTS AND PLANS. 1G5- 

" Good heavens ! he could not be such a villain/' mut- 
tered the professor. " I cannot . no, no . I will not 
believe it of him." 

Presently a faint hope dawned upon his mind ; and he 
inquired, " What doctor ?" 

" I think he is your brother, sir ; so the ladies said. 
Monsieur le docteur Peau-le-blanc," she answered, smiling, 
for the name seemed to her such a very droll one she 
seldom pronounced it without a smile. The professor 
scarcely noticed her reply. He had foreseen what it was 
to be, and had only hoped against hope when he asked 
the question. He rose to his feet with an idea of returning 
to town and waiting for Joe at his lodgings, so that he 
might know the worst as soon as possible ; but while 
passing the threshold, a sudden weakness came over him. 
He staggered, and would have fallen had he not hastily 
clutched the door-post. 

" Monsieur is ill," said the portress, with feeling. 
" You must not think of going away yet awhile. Will you 
go into the drawing-room, and wait for Madame's return ?" 

The professor said that he would. He was all bewil- 
dered and 'in a maze, and scarcely knew what he said or 
did. He had worked very hard during that day ; he had 
gone without food and sleep, and overtaxed his strength, and 
was shaken by agitated feelings. The windows of the 
drawing-room were shut, and he moved painfully towards 
them, with the intention of unfastening one of the sashes. 
But, before he could do so, the same giddiness under 
which he had just now suffered seized him again, and he 
sank down upon one of the sofas, with a deadly sickness 
at his heart. How long he remained thus he could hardly 
form a notion. It might have been one hour or two hours. 
He did not heed the lapse of time. Twilight was gather- 
ing when he entered the room, and it was quite dark 



166 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

before any one came to disturb him, but at last there was 
a loud ringing at the outer bell. Presently, footsteps and 
the rustle of silk skirts. Polyblank rose to his feet in 
dread anticipation of the interview to come. Next mo- 
ment the door opened in a blaze of light, and Manon 
entered the room radiant with smiles, and prettier than 
ever. As yet, then, she knew nothing of the terrible 
truth. As yet, she was happily unconscious of Raynal's 
villany, and Joe, after all, was not as bad as he had 
supposed. 

" Hallo, Peter \" 

Why, as sure as there was a sky above, there was 
Joseph in the flesh. Yes, actually, Joseph ; and, as sure 
as in the sky there is a moon, a broad-faced simpering 
moon, which smiles benignly down upon all true lovers here 
below, Madame Dubosq was hanging fondly upon that 
Joseph's arm, in such a way, mayhap, as she had once 
hung on the arm of another, long since dead and gone. 

" Hallo, Peter \" 



CHAPTER XVI. 

joe's little mistake. 

Mais le monde est tin vrai tyran. . De Varennes. 

Why do we not all die when we have done it ? When 
after long struggling, hard fighting, frequent repulses, we 
gain the topmost round of fame's precipitous ladder, and 
the mob below (the same who used to hoot us once ; but 
that is no matter) are vociferously cheering, why don't 
we, then and there, finish our career gloriously, with a 
bang, as it were ? But we don't. We stay there, swinging 
our legs and chuckling ; we stop on the top round as long 



JOE S LITTLE MISTAKE. 167 

as we can hold on, then we slip to the second. We are 
mighty proud even of that lower round, and our self- 
esteem does not entirely desert us when we have sunk 
down further still . to the third, and fourth, and fifth . 
although the cheering of the mob has grown very feeble 
by this time. Is it not always thus ? After the Queen 
of Song has bidden us a last farewell, does she not return, 
when her voice is merely a memory ? Has the once 
agile Jack Pudding never lingered on the stage long after 
his limbs have lost their elasticity ? Are there not faded 
beauties in our drawing-rooms, clinging, with drowning 
desperation, to the wreck of good looks ; and a hundred 
and one heroes who, having outlived the fame of their 
exploits, still revert to the old battle-fields, long since 
ploughed up and sowed with turnips ? 

There was a time when, if that Joseph Polyblank had 
only had the good luck to die, he would have left a repu- 
tation behind him which might, perhaps, have endured 
for a generation or two among the poor people of Saint 
Babylas. Unhappily, however, for his fame, he lived long- 
enough to scatter to the winds all the fruits of his first 
successes. 

Upon the road to Longanna was to be seen, fair 
weather or foul, a certain whining beggarman, horribly 
knock-kneed, and otherwise deformed, who was a source 
of everlasting terror to the little vagabond boys of the 
village, between whom and him was carried on a sort of 
guerilla warfare. A most unclean and unsightly creature 
was this man ; with matted red-hair, bleared eyes, blotched 
face, and other bodily ailments which need not be parti- 
cularized; who shambled after the diligence, and endea- 
voured by the display of his baboon-like antics to wring a 
few odd sous pieces out of passengers. Why this 
hideous creature had not been drowned like a blind puppy 



168 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

at his birth, was a question which the least tender-hearted 
among the passengers asked themselves ; but all wondered 
why he was allowed to thrust his physical horrors upon 
the public eye, and to carry on his illegal trade of begging 
with impunity. 

Somehow, the municipal authorities of Saint Babylas, 
all-seeing in other respects, overlooked him. It would 
have been lucky for Jean Gin had Joseph been equally 
short-sighted ; but it was not to be. One fatal day, as 
the English doctor passed, summd diligentid, Jean Gin's 
knock-knees caught his eye, and from that moment Joe 
longed to have a knife in him. 

" I should like to have a go in at those legs of yours/' 
Joe mentally remarked as he rode by. 

When he came the same road again, he once more re- 
garded Jean Gin's deformity with a wistful eye. 

" Now if I could only persuade that crooked wretch 
to let me have a cut at him," thought Joseph, " suppos- 
ing it were successful, the news of the thing would be in 
everybody's mouth in Picardy." 

He never paused to think what everybody in Picardy 
would say if he did not succeed. From that instant he 
marked the unhappy Jean Gin for his own, and straight- 
way set about the misshapen creature's allurement. He 
began by flinging a handful of sous at him, some of which, 
striking tender points, caused him to bellow like a bull. 
Subsequently, when passing by on foot, he soothed the 
savage with more sous, and some tobacco. 

" Were you born so ?" he asked, pointing to Jean's legs 
with his walking-stick. 

" Ugh !" grunted the beggar, munching at a mouthful 
of caporal which Joseph had just given to him. 

" Wouldn't you wish to look a little more like a 
human being ?" Joe inquired, persuasively. 



joe's little mistake. 16$ 



" Ugh \" grunted Jean Gin, to -whom the notion 
seemed never previously to have occurred. 

Joseph presently put the matter to him more plainly . 
He would give him twenty francs if Jean would let him 
operate on his legs. Jean stared very hard, chewed his 
tobacco, and scratched his head ; but would give no 
definite answer. A few days afterwards, Joe, coming by 
again, or more accurately speaking, having gone there ex- 
pressly, invited Jean to drink at the cabaret, and regaled 
him with a couple of quarts of the sour beer of the 
country ; then laid a bran new ten-franc piece upon the 
table. To see the hideous monster's eye sparkle, and his 
great gash of a mouth water at the sight of the bright 
gold, was a thing to shudder at. Joe thought the busi- 
ness as good as settled ; but Jean, stroking his ugly 
limbs with his great hands, shook his head, chuckled, and 
said he would rather be as he was. 

" Be as you are ?" cried Joseph, wrathfully ; " an 
object like that, only fit to scare away crows, when you 
might walk as straight as I do ? Why, man, if you'd 
only anything like legs the women would all run after 
you." 

At this the scaramouch grinned like an ape. They 
say that the most hideous male creature upon earth can 
find one of the other sex who will look upon him not un- 
kindly. Even this Quasimodo might hope to achieve a 
conquest among the fair maids of Longanna. The 
doctor seeing that he hesitated, ordered another quart of 
sour beer, and while he talked, played with the golden 
piece in his fingers. But the crooked beggar only got 
stupidly drunk and savage, and, at last, inflamed by some 
imaginary insult, was for challenging the doctor to 
mortal combat. " Eh ! Bogr-r-r'i \" he cried, working 
his arms like the sails of a mill, '' je veux te montra que 



170 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

Jean Gin n'a pas froid aux yenx. Nom d'un nom ! 
Aligne toi que je te cogne !"* Joe,, warding off the 
blows with his walking-stick, besought Gin to be calm. 

" You ought to be grateful to me, you fool," he said ; 
but Jean responded indignantly, " J't'en baillerons re- 
compense d'la main gauche."f 

Joe saw that it was useless to argue further, and 
turned upon his heel, when Jean's intoxication taking a 
maudlin turn, he whined out, " Bonne gent ! baillez-moi 
cinq francs et je serons quittes.^J Upon this Joe came 
back, and producing a written paper from his pocket- 
book, induced Jean to affix his mark to a promise, there- 
in made, to forfeit fifty francs if he refused to have the 
operation performed after the receipt of twenty francs. 
Then, having had Mr. Gin's blot properly witnessed, the 
doctor paid ten francs on account, and took his depar- 
ture; leaving the scaramouch and his friends to the en- 
joyment of a select orgie which they prolonged far into 
the night. 

" But you'll have to be cut/' the landlord said, as 
they sat swilling beer together. 

" He'll never have his knife in me," Crookedshanks 
replied. " We'll drink his good health, though." 

" That we will, brave heart," responded mine host, 
slapping the entertainer, blithely, upon the back. " On 
voit ben que t'a ete z'a a Paris, gars!"§ He was an 
awkward customer to deal with . this Jean Gin . and it 
is more than probable that, had not others assisted him, 
Joe would never have succeeded in prevailing on the 
cripple to allow him to operate upon his knock-knees. 
Perhaps, when he made Jean sign the agreement he had 



: Je vais te montrer que Jean Gin n'est pas lache. Mets-toi en garde, etc. 

+ Je ne te recom pen serai pas. + Donnez-moi cinq francs, etc. 

§ On voit bien que tu as e'te' a Paris. 



joe's little mistake. 171 

a, vague notion of proceeding against him before the civil 
tribunal for breach of contract, in the event of his refusing 
to submit to the knife ; but whether he was likely to 
have succeeded in getting the forfeit or not, it did not 
seem very probable that he would get hold of Jean's legs. 
When, however, the news spread about that the doctor 
had given Jean Gin twenty francs to be allowed to 
straighten his limbs, everybody naturally observed, " Hoav 
kind of the doctor, and what a good thing for Jean Gin." 
Indeed, so it was ; and Jean Gin ought, properly, to 
have felt grateful and eager for the doctor to begin to 
operate; only the poor wretch could not help thinking 
how it would hurt when the doctor's knife was hacking 
its way through muscles and tendons. As the rest of 
the world was not disturbed by these apprehensions, not 
a day passed but somebody urged Jean Gin to be a man 
and have his legs altered. Passers-by would stop and put 
it to him, forcibly. The driver of the diligence daily 
inquired when the affair was coming off. The postman 
took the liveliest interest in the operation . having made 
a bet upon the subject. The frequenters of the cabaret 
at Longanna every evening addressed him, at length, upon 
the advantages which would accrue from this cure; and 
when, as it sometimes happened, he ventured as far as 
Saint Babylas, the whole town attacked him, and drove 
him well nigh out of his wits by their friendly suggestions. 
But the poor creature could not screw his courage up 
to the sticking point. He lay awake of a night and 
quaked with fear. After a more than usually indigestible 
supper, he would be troubled with nightmare, in the 
shape of the doctor sharpening a knife upon his breast, 
and, at other times, Joe had him by one leg, and, struggle 
as he would, he could not shake himself free of his perse- 
cutor. To finish all, the Baroness de Grandvilain, also, 



172 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

attacked him ; and at last Jean Gin's obstinacy was 
overcome, and the poor wretch gave himself up to the 
tormentor. And now is the time for a few words of ex- 
planation. It was upon the subject of Jean Gin's legs that 
Joe had called upon the baroness. For once his brother 
had cruelly wronged him. Instead of trying to trade 
upon Raynal's secret, Joe had been working in the cause 
of science . in other words it had occurred to him that, 
as Manon was so kindly disposed towards the professor, 
she might be inclined to help him also. In that case, 
the way to help him was to exert her influence upon the 
knock-kneed Jean, and induce him to submit to the 
operation. Our good friend Joe had, as has been shown, 
what in the vernacular is termed the gift of the gab, 
that is to say, he spoke fluently. To him pretty Manon 
listened with interest, and having, like many kind-hearted 
women (God bless them !) small reasoning powers, she 
was easily convinced that the luckiest thing in the world 
that could happen to Jean Gin was to be experimentalized 
upon by Joe Polyblank. Straightway she paid Jean a 
visit on the highway, and laid the case before him, and 
among the advantages which she enumerated as likely to 
result from his compliance, were forty francs, which she 
promised to pay immediately the operation was performed. 
The previous day Joe had used a little quiet influence 
with the police authorities, and just before the baroness 
spoke to Jean, he had been given to understand that he 
must forthwith abandon his mendicant habits, or look out 
for himself. Dreading the withdrawal of the baroness's 
protection, and the wrath of the gendarmerie, Jean Gin at 
length cried peccavi, and Joe sharpened his knife. The 
feat, which it was confidently supposed would immortalize 
everybody directly or indirectly concerned in it, was to 
be performed at the hotel of the " Three Crowns," that 



joe's little mistake. 173 

being chosen as a locality easily accessible to the doctor 
and Mr. Pomponney, one of the principal agents in the 
business. From the first day of his arrival in Saint 
Babylas, Joe had found a staunch adherent in the worthy 
chemist, who had, far and wide, prophesied for him a 
glorious future. 

This is not intended to be a medical work, or the his- 
tory of the famous knock-kneed ca.se might easily be 
drawn out into ten times the length I purpose allotting 
to it, if I were to insert only one-half of the articles which 
appeared upon the subject in the columns of the Pas-de- 
Calais press. A new era in science had arrived, one 
writer remarked, and the old-fashioned doctors . the 
Tominets, Cancoins, and such-like . reading these words, 
tore their hair and gnashed their teeth. It was ru- 
moured that there were legs in the most elevated circles 
which were not as straight as they might be, and, con- 
sequently, the operation created a decided sensation 
among the highest as well as the lowest of Saint Babylas 
society. Jean Gin was accommodated with a light and 
airy apartment in the front of the hotel, where the very 
pattern of the wall-paper was at first a source of un- 
bounded wonder to him. He was told that he should 
eat of the best, sleep softly, and drink and smoke in mo- 
deration ; but that he must be upon his back for ten 
days. When first these conditions were named to him 
he laughed to scorn the absurd notion of anybody^ 
growing tired of such luxurious indulgence. He would 
lie on his back for three months, the unhappy object 
declared, with a hoarse laugh. 

A little crowd gathered round the hotel door when it 
got about that the doctor had been seen to enter with a 
small mahogany case under his arm. Those who saw 
him shuddered as he passed, and listened, with pale faces, 



174 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

for any noise that might come from the chamber of mys- 
tery, the door of which Alexander jealously guarded. 
Anon, the silent echoes of the Little Place were awakened 
by a dismal howl, then succeeded a death-like silence, 
and then a howl and a series of groans. Then silence 
again, and then the doctor came forth arm-in-arm with 
the chemist, but smiling blandly. 

That evening Joe and Mr. Pomponney sent a flaming- 
article of their own composition to the Saint Babylas 
Gazette. One short week afterwards, and the whole 
business was publicly denounced as the work of a dan- 
gerous madman. Yes, dreadful to relate, the grand 
theory had failed. In a fortnight's time this was the 
state of affairs : Joe Polyblank stigmatized as a quack 
and an impostor, whom no man in his senses would 
allow to cross the threshold of his door ; Mr. Pomponney 
declared to be an imbecile, and unworthy of further con- 
sideration ; the Baroness de Grandvilain set down as the 
chief cause of a fellow-creature's barbarous mutilation, 
the promoter of all sorts of preposterous schemes and 
frauds, and the harbourer of lunatics who cut and carved 
other persons' bodies with as much indifference as they 
would exhibit in slicing a melon. Finally, Jean Gin 
minus his legs. 

The doctor's theory with respect to knock-knees, which 
had so lamentably broken down, was somewhat similar 
to one in vogue a few years back with regard to squint- 
ing eyes. Some scientific surgeon then discovered that 
the extra turn of the eyes towards the nose which amounts 
to a squint, was occasioned by the too powerful action 
of some muscle or tendon, which drew the eyes out of 
their natural position. " Sever the attracting power," 
said he, " and the patient will see straight before him." 
So Joe Polyblank maintained, that all that was required 
to set a knock-kneed man straight on his legs was to cut 



joe's little mistake. 175 

some tendons, which he described, on the inside of each 
leg and thigh. Joe had long ardently desired to have 
an opportunity of proving the soundness of this theory, 
and lo ! one unluckily presented itself in the case of Jean 
Gin, and ended in the way just described. 

Dreadful as all this may appear, there were not want- 
ing persons . Doctor Tominet among others, who said 
that it might have been worse. 

" It is a wonder they did not kill you among them," 
said he to Jean. 

" I wish they had, instead of leaving me this figure," 
said the monstrosity, as he woefully contemplated his 
wooden props ; " but, curse them, Fll be even with them 
before I die \" 

He lay a-bed and cursed all concerned in the business 
with a vigour and persistency that astonished his audi- 
tors, and when, at last, he was able to resume a perpen- 
dicular position in the world, he stumped about, cursing 
still, and imparting his woes to all who would listen to 
him. Against the doctor who had curtailed him of what 
certainly could not be termed his " fair proportions/'' it 
was only natural that the creature should bear some 
enmity, and the same might be said of the chemist who, 
when he had him down, had dosed him with the nastiest 
of nasty physic ; but for some reason or other, his resent- 
ment was directed chiefly against Manon. " She egged 
me on," he said ; " I'd never have stood it if she hadn't 
made me. I'm a cripple for life, I am, and all on her 
account. Curse her for it ! . may she too know what it 
is to be afflicted !" 

Thus would the wretched man exclaim as he hobbled 
over Saint Babylas's uneven roadways : surely the awk- 
wardest town in Christendom for the owner of wooden 
legs to take a walk in. 



176 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

CHAPTER XVII. 

THE AFFAIR OF THE YELLOW BASIN. 



When bloody mouthed 

The dogs had tussled o'er the reeking game 
Forgetting ties of friendship and of kin. 

Arthur Browning. 

A happy time was it for our pretty Manon when. Raynal, 
having told his love, and the day having been fixed, the 
coming marriage was almost as much a fact as if it had 
really occurred. Surely never since she was born had 
the young baroness ever tasted such happiness as she did 
in those long peaceful days when the birds sang love, and 
the flowers bloomed love, and it was bright, glorious 
summer weather every day, to be loved in. Bah ! how 
such nonsense grates upon the ears of those among us 
whose poor old bones are aching . who are trying to ward 
off searching draughts with insufficient wrappers . who 
have none to love them, and who are half disposed in 
return to hate everybody. But every one is not as wise 
or cold as we elders have become. That dear, old, sadly 
used-up comedy of love will still be drawing crowded 
houses hundreds of years after the worms have done their 
worst for us. 

Our dear Manon . little dullard . saw nothing ridiculous 
in being in love. She had for some years been secretly 
.loving the same handsome gentleman ; but had heretofore 
never ventured to show it. Even if she had not been 
afraid of her affection not being returned by its object, 
she would have dreaded the fact coming to the knowledge 
of the terrible Dubosq. Therefore she kept her . as she 
supposed it . hopeless passion a profound secret. Alas, 
we have seen how everybody knew, all about it. We have 



THE AFFAIR OF THE YELLOW BASIN. 177 

seen, too, how the Dubosq received the tidings of the 
betrothal. It will be remembered there was no excess of 
rapture upon the worthy creature's part, nor, indeed, for 
some time to come did she manifest any great amount of 
sympathy with her friend's happiness. Strange to say, 
however, from the day when the jovial Joseph first set 
foot in the chateau a great change took place in her de- 
meanour. Hitherto the Dubosq was always a woman 
with a grievance ; but just now she appeared to be not 
nearly such an afflicted soul as she used to be. A sort 
of subdued sprightliness was, at times, observable in 
her manner. She was heard to hum. It was also 
noticed that when the doctor was expected she put on 
a smarter cap. 

There was something rather diverting in all this, to 
those who remember how, in days gone by, she had dis- 
paraged the tender passion. She had aimed at being a 
woman of sense . a strong-minded woman. A praise- 
worthy enough ambition for those who are large of joint 
and harsh of feature ; but as to you pretty ones, you know 
perfectly well that your mission upon earth is to love and 
get married. 

Yes, it was very clear that the Dubosq had also fallen a 
victim to a passion of which the jovial Joseph was the object, 
and it must be confessed that the baroness was not sorry 
for it. Not, however, because there was a chance of the 
good lady's being thus comfortably disposed of, for in 
spite of a thousand and one provocations, Manon loved 
the grievous relic of the departed Dubosq, and would 
much have preferred that Mogador should remain to 
keep house. But she was, in this time of her own great 
happiness, unspeakably glad to see all the world happy 
around her, and would have spared no pains or money tc* 
obtain that result. 

12 



178 THE PRETTY WIDOW- 

Alas, though;, there are some who will not be comforted; 
and at this time, which should have been a period of un- 
interrupted felicity, there was a more than ordinary 
amount of bewailing and bemoaning among Manon's 
pensioners in the back lanes ; and, worse than all, there 
was the creature with the wooden legs, who stumped 
about all day howling out his wrongs in the public high- 
ways. Yet, though everybody else knew all about the 
way he had been treated, and how he laid his misfortune 
at the door of the Baroness dc Grandvilain, she herself 
for a long time remained in ignorance of it. The fact 
was, the great Joseph for some time brought glowing 
accounts of the patient's convalescence, until the symp- 
toms grew so alarming that he dare no longer falsify his 
reports. Then he became suddenly silent upon the 
subject, and the Dubosq learning something of the real 
state of the case, did all that lay in her power to screen 
Joe's misdeeds from her friend. 

At last, however, the truth suddenly plumped out. 
The baroness met Jean Gin with his wooden legs on. 
She was utterly dumbfounded at the sight ; but he, after 
the first moment of surprise, shook his clenched fist at 
the carriage window, and called down such a fearful 
curse upon its occupant, that the poor girl went home 
white and frightened, and burst into a passionate fit of 
tears upon the Dubosq's deceitful bosom. But, when 
she had somewhat subdued her agitation she asked for 
a true account of Joe's proceedings, and not feeling 
well satisfied with what she learnt, determined to ascer- 
tain the facts of the case for herself. But how ? Whom 
should she apply to ? She thought the matter over 
during the day, and after dinner ordered the carriage. 

" Going out again, dear ?" inquired the Dubosq. 

" Yes/' 



THE AFFAIR OF THE YELLOW BASIN. 179 

" Shall I come with you ?" 

" No, never mind ; I shan't be long gone." 

And thus bidding her friend rather coldly good-by, 
Manon set forth for Mr. Pomponney's shop. 

Manon found the chemist's establishment in con- 
fusion. Mrs. Pomponney was making a liqueur in the 
parlour. On one table stood an earthenware jar. On 
another six bottles, into which she was filtering her 
cassis, through blotting paper. Three young lady nieces 
in brown holland pinafores and black coburg trousers, 
who had come on a visit, were assisting. In the middle 
of the room was Pomponney, holding in one hand a 
large yellow basin, and in the other the ear (with head 
attached) of one Coquillard, recently a pupil of the 
professor's at the college, now apprenticed to the 
chemical trade. 

" What is the matter ?" asked Manon. 

" The matter, madam . the matter !" cried Pomponney, 
in great excitement. " Oh, nothing . positively nothing ! 
. a trifle not worth mentioning. The possible death of a 
family of six. Absolutely no more than that. This 
young gentleman here, when sent for a basin applicable to 
culinary purposes, goes and brings it before our very faces 
out of the laboratory. out. of. the LABORATORY !" 

The apartment thus designated was that in which the 
important experiments were conducted under the super- 
vision of the great Joseph. The laboratory, therefore, 
was a sacred place, from entering which the youthful 
Coquillard had hitherto been deterred by Pomponney's 
Avarnings and denunciations ; but he had now as we have 
seen, intruded upon the hallowed ground, and brought 
down a basin until now used only for profound scientific 
experiments, to be defiled by its application to mere 
household purposes. 

12.2 



180 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

" A boy capable of such an act/' said the chemist, mag- 
nificent in his wrath, though labouring under some dis- 
advantage as regarded stage effect on account of his 
apron, short sleeves, and slippers . " a young man who 
could do such an act, would do . yes, by heavens, would 
do . " but as no simile occurred to him at the moment, 
he added, after an impressive silence . " anything." 

" Pray calm yourself, Hyppolite," entreated poor little 
Mrs. Pomponney. 

" Oh, my uncle," cried the youngest of the young 
ladies in coburg trousers, clinging to his coat-tails. 

" Release me," cried the chemist, growing momentarily 
more terrific. " Take a basin from the laboratory ! . 
what next ? Take the mortar for a pie-dish ; roll the 
paste with the pestle ; break the bottles, burn the blisters;, 
let loose the leeches ! The world's at an end !" 

And he flung Coquillard from him against the Avail, 
and waved the basin aloft. 

" Will you be good enough to tell me, sir," began 
Manon, who was growing impatient. 

" Unhappy youth," continued Mr. Pomponney, with- 
out heeding her, " do you know what might have been 
the result of your conduct ? Did you happen to observe 
what stood on the shelf by the side of that very identical 
earthenware basin? Speak, if you still retain the use 
of any of your faculties ; say something, or I'll pull 
your ear off." 

" I . I . don't know," bellowed the miserable Coquil- 
lard. 

" Oh, you don't, don't you ?" said the chemist ; " well, 
then, I will inform you. You saw a blue bottle filled 
with white powder, on which was written the word 
' Poison ;' and do you know what was the name of that 
poison ? You don't ? Well, then, I will inform you. 



THE AFFAIR OF THE YELLOW BASIN. 181 

Arsenic is its name, and this identical vessel of earthen- 
ware was beside it, and you fetched it down-stairs for 
culinary purposes !" 

" Arsenic !" cried Mrs. Pomponney, who having to 
keep a sharp eye on the filter, had not been able to 
follow the chemist's discourse very closely. " We shall 
all be poisoned in our beds/' 

At which dreadful prophecy the three young ladies in 
the coburgs set up a roar as though they already felt the 
first pangs in their little insides. 

" Poison us ! what does he care ?" cried the chemist : 
" he will poison the customers next. I may be tried and 
guillotined upon the Great Place for some of his doings ; 
what cares he ? He'll come early to get into the front 
row to see me." 

"Will you have the kindness," began the baroness 
once more. . 

" Dear me, Hyppolite," said Mrs. Pomponney, " you 
don't observe that you are keeping madame." 

But he had not quite run himself out yet, and went 
on talking. 

" Take this basin back, sir ; away with it . cleanse 
it . replace it . let such an act never occur again 
beneath this roof. Never ! never !" Taking Coquillard 
by the ear, as though with the intention of swinging him 
thereby from the apartment, he shook out from under 
the young gentleman's waistcoat an illustrated romance, 
in a coloured paper cover, upon which the chemist 
pounced. 

" The Two Corpses !" he cried aghast. " What is 
this ? And then with a sepulchral laugh, " But this is 
only two, and we should have been five. Enough, sir ; 
it is thus that you poison your mind previous to poison- 
ing my family and my customers. But we will destroy 



182 THE PRETTY AVIDOW- 

this work, sir, at once ; and without loss of time I will 
visit your boxes and cupboards, to see bow many more 
corpses you may bave secreted upon tbe premises." 

" But, Mr. Pomponney," broke in Manon at tbis 
juncture, out of all patience witb tbe tiresome scene, 
" can you spare me a moment ? I came to ask you 
whether you knew anything of Jean Gin?" 

" Jean Gin ? Yes, madame, certainly. He's dead." 

For a moment, the baroness stood in consternation 
before him, unable to utter a word. Presently, she said, 
impatiently, " Do you know what you are saying, sir '? 
I saw him myself this morning." 

To tell the truth, the chemist had not quite got tbe 
yellow basin and the " Two Corpses" out of his head. Ke- 
calling himself, however, with an effort, he begged Manon 
to accompany him to another apartment, and leading the 
way up a lofty flight of stairs, opened the door of a dusty, 
close-smelling little room, which was none other than 
the laboratory about which so much had been said. 

"That is the shelf where tbe poisons are kept, 
madame," he said, not yet quite able to drop the subject. 
"And that is where he took tbe basin from." 

" Yes, yes !" cried Manon, stamping her little foot 
impatiently. " Will you please to tell me about Jean 
Gin?" 

" Ah, madame !" said Pomponney, with a long face, 
"that's a sad affair." 

" What is ? What has happened ? Will you explain ?" 

" I always was opposed to Dr. Polyblank trying tbe 
experiment," continued Pomponney, " I really did not 
see my way clearly ; but he would do it. I always said 
what would be the result." 

" What has been tbe end of it ?" 

" Wooden legs have been the end of it, as you have 



GONE ! 183 

seen," said the chemist, sadly. " At least that has been 
the end as far as Doctor Polyblank's new theory is con- 
cerned. I always said there was nothing in those Poly- 
blanks, from the first beginning. But poor Jean Gin 
has suffered heavily for others' faults." 

" For Heaven's sake, explain yourself !" said the 
baroness, trembling with impatience. 

" Certainly, certainly ; I was coming to the point. 
Mr. Raynal's dogcart, you see, this afternoon . the horse 
having got the bit between his teeth " 

"What?" 

" It was no fault of Mr. Raynal's, of course, and Jean 
Gin, being drunk, got in the way . and being flushed 
and not having the use of his legs, could not get out of 
the way again, and so . and . so " 

" Well, well ?" 

" And so . in fact . Jean Gin was knocked down and 
killed." 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

GONE ! 

But you are wandering . who knows where ? 
A wan, wild face under drenched black hair, 
With terror I search 'neath midnight skies 
For altered eyes. 

Is it your ghost that I dread to meet, 
Gladys, my sweet ? . Mortimer Collins. 

The jovial Joseph, as you may recollect, prophesied that 
the sick woman at the laundress's would not live more than 
a week ; but a whole month passed away, and she was yet 
alive. At his brother's request, Joe visited her, more or 
less irregularly ; for the Jean Gin business had so dis- 
turbed him he was unable to give his serious attention to 



184 THE PEETTY WIDOW. 

anything, and the consequence was, that such few patients 
as he had left were put through a course of treatment 
which, to say the least of it, was very eccentric. A 
dreary life it was which this lonely woman was painfully 
wearing away in the little third-floor room. For many 
hours together she lay so silent and motionless, that the 
laundress's little girl, her usual nurse, would sometimes 
come, all in a tremble, to the bedside, to listen for the 
faint sound of her breath . fancying that, in her sleep, 
her sold might have passed away. 

This was the quietest and most patient of little girls ; 
mostly occupying herself with the manufacture of her 
male parent's shirts. She wore a white cap and large 
gold ear-rings, blue worsted stockings, a black stuff frock, 
and a great apron up to her chin; and she usually sat 
perched upon a high straw-bottomed chair, with plain 
deal legs, round and straight, like broom-handles ; her 
own little blue legs dangling in mid-air by reason of 
their wanting another five years' growth to reach the 
floor below. But she had the staidness of a person 
of mature age, and a wonderful knowledge of sick-room 
requirements, which it would be impossible to account 
for, unless one could suppose it came by instinct. 

At rare intervals, the sick woman recovered sufficiently 
to hold a few minutes' conversation with her little guar- 
dian ; but as her knowledge of French was limited to a 
few words, and the little girl's ignorance of English was 
absolute, they were able to exchange but few ideas. Not 
that the woman seemed to feel acutely the deprivation. 
She appeared to have but little interest remaining for 
earthly affairs. She lay there still and motionless, as 
though she were waiting^ for death, and indifferent whether 
it came now or a month hence. Her complaint was one 
under which the sufferer may linger a long while . may 



gone! 185 

even seem to be getting well again . but which will, 
sooner or later, surely kill. 

We must not, therefore, blame the doctor because he 
was somewhat out of his calculation. Of course the 
general public, after that sad knock-kneed failure, de- 
nounced him as wholly incompetent ; but his brother, 
whose knowledge of him dated from an earlier period, 
did not judge him so harshly. He knew that, speaking 
generally, Joe was a clever fellow in his profession : but 
he was not to be relied on from one day to another. If 
he treated a patient according to his knowledge and 
experience, all would probably go well ; but it was always 
the toss up of a halfpenny whether he would not try 
some madcap experiment, more likely than not to prove 
injurious, and, it might be, fatal to the object of his 
tentative science. 

From time to time the professor also visited the sick 
Englishwoman, and upon several occasions attempted, 
though without success, to gain her confidence. It would, 
however, be almost impossible to convey any distinct idea 
of the various and conflicting emotions of his mind at this 
period. What, he asked himself over and over again, was 
the course of conduct an honourable man, under the cir- 
cumstances, should pursue ? Was he acting properly in 
allowing a woman, to whom he owed a heavy debt of grati- 
tude for her great kindness to him, to blindly marry a man 
who had a wife living ? The marriage was fixed to take 
place in a few weeks from the date when Poly blank dis- 
covered the wife's existence. Joe had then predicted 
that she would not live more than a week. Had she 
died within the time specified, Eaynal would have been 
free to contract another marriage. In that case, why 
should he disclose a secret which would only occasion 
unnecessary unhappiness ? 



186 THE P HETTY WIDOW. 

With respect to Raynal's conduct, was he aware of this 
woman being alive ? Had he known it, would he have 
proposed to marry Manon ? Some time ago, Polyblank felt 
certain that Raynal was disturbed by some secret sorrow. 
At that period, Raynal never, by word or deed, betrayed 
his sentiments with regard to Manon. But all at once his 
whole manner underwent a change. He declared his love, 
and asked her hand in marriage. It would seem from this, 
Polyblank argued, that Raynal, at the time of his change 
of conduct, had received false news of his wife's death. 

Supposing all this to be the case, how was it that 
Raynal had been living separate from his wife ? What 
had led to the separation ? How was it that his marriage 
was a secret ? Supposing the sick woman lingered on, 
and the wedding-day arrived, should he, Polyblank, stand 
quietly by and allow Manon to go through a marriage 
ceremony which would be but a mockery ? No ; he felt 
that when that time should arrive, it would be his duty 
to come forward and speak openly. Yet suppose, after 
he had done this, and caused an exposure and a scandal, 
and inflicted much misery on Manon, that, on the very 
next day, the first wife should die ? . suppose she were 
not really his wife after all ? Although she called her- 
self so, she might have no legal claim to the title. 
Polyblank was only a poor schoolmaster, whose good 
name was three-quarters of his stock-in-trade. Might 
he not get himself into trouble if he stirred in the 
matter ? Excepting a few words spoken by a woman in 
a fever, what evidence had he to go upon ? The laundress 
had referred to a leather case containing papers. The 
case was there, sure enough, and the question was, what 
papers did it contain ? Suppose he should find, too late, 
that the result of his meddling was only the discovery ol 
a mare's-nest, and that he had exposed himself to an action 



GONE ! 187 

for slander, which would probably compel him to leave 
the town, and at any rate would cost him his post in the 
college ? 

Thus he argued the case, coolly and disinterestedly, he 
tried to make himself believe ; but never since the world 
began was there a more shallow pretence than this same 
cool and disinterested argument . and, struggle as he 
would, the truth at length forced itself upon him. He 
was himself hopelessly in love with the pretty baroness, 
and if she married Raynal his future existence would be 
one long scene of misery. But though he was madly in 
love, he was not mad enough to suppose that there was 
any chance for him. He felt positively certain of two 
things: one was that Manon loved Raynal; the other, that 
she never would love him. If he kept the secret, she 
would surely marry Raynal ; and if he divulged it, time 
alone would show the result. 

In a fever of excitement he struggled with his daily 
occupations. When these thoughts took possession of 
him in his lonely room at night, he often would catch up 
his hat and rush hastily out of the house ; then wander 
about the dark streets, or upon the unfrequented high- 
way across the marshes : and coming back at last ex- 
hausted by fatigue, he was able to rest and forget his 
troubles in sleep. But during school hours there was no 
escape, and sometimes his sufferings were almost more 
than he could bear. Thus things went on from day to 
day, until one Sunday evening, as he approached the 
sick woman's bedside, she slowly turned her head upon 
the pillow, and said in a low earnest tone : 

" Fetch me the English clergyman. I want to see 
him." 

Polyblank stood silent*; his heart beating fast, his 
tongue refusing to move. 



188 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

" Yes/' he stammered at last, and left the room. 

More than once he had expected this would come. 
She would want to see the clergyman. She would tell 
him all, and he would at once communicate with the 
baroness. Polyhlank hurried along, never pausing to 
ask himself a question. He would have thought himself 
a criminal had he failed to execute the dying woman's 
orders ; and he did not venture to inquire what his own 
feelings were, and whether he was pleased that any other 
should be the instrument of doing what he felt would 
have been wrong had he done it himself. He delivered 
his message, returned home, and locked himself in his 
room, afraid that any one should speak to him or see his 
face. He ventured out no more that night ; but, sitting 
by the window, watched the door of the opposite house. 

It was so dark that he could with difficulty discern the 
faint outline of the passers-by ; but a fitful gleam of light 
from the swinging street lamp fell upon the laundress's 
door, and presently it showed him the clergyman's face 
as he stood there waiting to be admitted. A few instants 
-afterwards a man's shadow crossed the blinds of the sici 
woman's room. Then there was a long pause, and presently 
the shadow crossed again, and a minute afterwards the 
clergyman passed out into the street. A moment, and Hi 
figure was lost in the gloom. Had he the secret ? How 
would he use it ? 

The professor caught at his hat with an idea of run- 
ning after and questioning him; but his constitutiona 
timidity intervened, and, standing irresolute for a few 
minutes, he sat down again at the window, and aftei 
watching an hour or two longer, went weary to bed. 

It wanted now only a week of the day fixed for the 
marriage. What would happen between now and then? 
He proceeded nest morning as usual to the college, and 



GONE ! 18& 

went through his ordinary duties like one in a dream, 
scarce knowing what was going on around him. Hurry- 
ing away the moment the hour of release arrived, be 
sought for Joe, to obtain tidings of the sick woman, but 
unfortunately that distinguished practitioner could not 
be found. He left a message, and went home. He 
waited impatiently until one in the morning, and at last 
went to bed and obtained some feverish sleep. Next 
morning he hastened to Joe's lodgings before going to 
the school, and learnt that Joe had gone to endeavour to 
obtain an important medical post then vacant in a town 
about six leagues distant, and would probably not return 
until next day. He did not return that night. The 
professor, though tormented by anxiety, yet refrained 
from making inquiries, deeming it prudent to leave the 
business in the clergyman's hands. 

Watching at the window that night, he saw the clergy- 
man's wife enter the laundress's house. 

" If she tells her, it will not long remain a secret," 
thought Poly blank. 

Wednesday was the day when Joe ought to pay a visit 
to the college to inspect the pupils, and the professor 
gave up his hour's recreation at twelve o'clock to wait 
for him. 

" Have you been to see the Englishwoman ?" were 
the first words he uttered when his brother appeared. 

" The Englishwoman ?" said Joe ; " no ! I have had ; 
something else to think of. Bless the Englishwoman ! 
What a wonderful interest you take in her !" 

" I do take a great interest in her. You will see her 
to-day, Joe, wont you, and tell me how she is ?" 

" Yes . all right ; if I've got time. By-the-bye, the 
wedding day is drawing near", isn't it ?" 

" Ye. es." 



190 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

That evening Joe called upon his brother to report 
progress. 

" It's an extraordinary thing, but she is much better 
than on the first day I saw her. For what I know, she 
may now live another three months." 

" Was she alone ?" 

f No ; there was a middle-aged woman there . very 
stiff in the back . English : who said, with a toss of the 
head this way, ' A friend of the Baroness de Grandvilain, 
I believe V " 

" And you said ?" 

" I have that honour, at which point the conversation 
.concluded." 

The next day passed without any incident worthy oi 
record. The professor, watching at his window, saw the 
clergyman's wife leave the laundress's house during the 
evening. On the Friday, Joseph, after paying the sick 
woman a visit, reported that she was much worse again. 
Saturday came, the day before the wedding. The hours 
crept slowly along within the college walls until noon. 
and then Polyblank felt that he could endure his impri- 
sonment no longer, and, seeking out Eoustoubique, begged 
for a half-holiday. The Proviseur laid down the news- 
paper he was reading, and regarded the professor with 
astonishment. " A half-holiday ! What do you mean?'' 

" I hope you can arrange it somehow, sir. I am very 
unwell, and . and . I cannot attend this afternoon." 

" Cannot ! You must, my dear sir," replied Roustou- 
bique, smiling pleasantly. " A half-holiday ! Impossible.''' 
Then he went on reading the paper. 

There was a heavy volume on the table, with a mas- 
sive wooden binding, with which it might have been pos- 
sible to split any cranium ol ordinary thickness. Polyblauk 
looked towards it with an angry glitter in his eye . 



gone! 191 

something of the ugly look a sheep assumes when goaded 
into a rage of terror . but without a word he turned and 
left the room. Outside in the passage his heart beat 
tumultuously, and the hot tears sprang up in his eyes ; but 
overcoming his emotion, he left the college, and proceeded 
towards his home through the back streets, not without 
engaging in his hundredth skirmish with his old enemies, 
the street boys. Arrived at his lodgings, he threw him- 
self into a chair, covering his face with his hands, scarce 
knowing where he was or what he did. During the last 
week he had suffered indescribable torments, although it 
would have been impossible for any listener to his abrupt 
exclamations to have guessed at half the mad thoughts 
that were passing through his brain. Sometimes he 
gnashed his teeth and heaped curses upon Raynal's 
head ; sometimes Manon was the object of his rage ; and 
then, in a moment, he would sob out fervent prayers for her 
future happiness. What was the true wish of his heart, 
poor wretch, he hardly dared avow to himself. He never 
could have told it to another. He sat thus in his bed- 
room, this noon time, for a long while, utterly beaten 
down and prostrate. 

The window stood open, and the church clock aroused 
him. It was time to return to the college. He arose, 
bathed his aching head, and prepared to start. As he 
passed out of the street door he saw the clergyman's wife 
coming out of the opposite house carrying a letter in her 
hand, but scarcely noted the circumstance. The weary 
afternoon passed away as many had done before. Bour- 
dichon and Co. flew May-bugs ; a new and exciting game 
was this day invented ; a train of gunpowder was laid 
round the desk (which, in the shape of a horseshoe, occu- 
pied one side and two ends of the room), and communi- 
cated with a little magazine of the same material placed 



192 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

beneath an inkstand, and at a safe distance from the 
nearest pupil. The train was fired, the magazine explo- 
ded, and the inkstand blown up in a manner which caused 
some real alarm to the professor, and a great deal of 
simulated terror among the class. 

At night in his lodging he sat musing, heedless of the 
progress of time. This was the eve of the wedding. 
Was Raynal with her now? No, he had heard Felicite 
tell her husband that the bridegroom had ordered a grand 
dinner at the " Three Crowns/'' He was going to give 
his last bachelor's entertainment to a few choice spirits, 
including one or two of the gentlemen whom Polyblank 
had met at the memorable dinner at the chateau. The 
day had been very hot and sultry. That evening scarcely 
a breath of air was stirring, and as twilight set in Poly- 
blank rose and went out, and listlessly strolled through 
the dark streets in his old way. 

Coming in the course of his purposeless wanderings 
in front of the hotel in the Little Place, a stream of light 
poured out upon him through the open windows of a room 
of the first floor, from which came also the sound of loud 
voices and merry laughter. A small crowd of idlers had 
assembled in the street below, and among these for a few 
moments the professor took his place, until he happened 
to observe a woman, attracted by his dismal countenance, 
looking at him very hard, and by a motion directing the 
attention of her companion to him. Then he turned his 
face homewards, and slowly retraced his steps. Just upon 
his threshold, however, Joe caught him, excitedly, by the 
arm. 

" Do you know what has happened ?" 

" No ; what do vou mean ?" 

« She's gone." 

" Who ?" 



GONE ! 193 

" The Englishwoman. Raynal's wife." 

" Dead \" gasped Polyblank. 

" Dead ! No," replied the other impatiently. " Gone 
. gone away. Got out of bed ; crept out of the house 
while no one was about, and has gone away." 

Without speaking a word Polyblank dragged his 
brother across the street, and breathlessly they ascended 
the laundress's stairs. There they found the laundress 
very red and angry, and the little nurse very white and 
frightened. But they could furnish no very useful in- 
formation. The little nurse knew only that the clergy- 
man's wife had written some letter in French, which the 
sick woman had dictated in English, and that after the 
Englishwoman had signed it the clergyman's wife had 
taken it away. 

" Whom was that letter for, do you think ?" asked 
Joe. " The baroness, I suppose ?" 

The professor made no answer. Did Joe think she 
was strong enough to walk ? he asked presently . 

" She's as weak as water," replied the other ; " but 
she might find strength enough for a great effort under 
some powerful excitement. It will kill her, though ; 
that's a dead certainty." 

" Joe," said his brother, after a pause, " she must not 
go to the chateau. Will you come and help me to look 
for her?" 

" Very well," said Joe, reluctantly. " We shall get a 
soaking, though. There's a storm coming on." 

And even as he spoke the thunder rolled and crashed 
overhead. 

But if they could be in time to prevent the meeting 
between the two women, they were too late to prevent 
the news reaching Manon, for it had come already- 

13 



194 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

Whilst she was gathering flowers in the garden the por- 
tress appeared at the window with a letter. Manon 
came forward to meet her, radiant with smiles and flushes 
of pleasure, thinking, no doubt, it was from Raynal. A 
little disappointed when she glanced at the superscription, 
she took it in her hand and sat down in the drawing- 
room to read it. The sun was shining brightly without. 
The birds were singing. The flowers in her lap exhaled 
a delicious perfume. Oh, it was a happy world, and she 
the happiest woman in it ! She smiled again as she 
broke the seal. Then she read her death-warrant. 



CHAPTER XIX. 

A WHITE FACE AT THE WINDOW. 

Ma rivale est triomphante, 

Elle ordonne de mon sort, 

Et je me vois dans l'attente 

De l'exile ou de la mort. . Cazotte. 

It was all over. The game was played out. The world 
was at an end. How could she live any longer ? Why 
should she ? Without his love, what was there left 
worth living for ? Alone as she was, he filled so large 
a space in her eyes that there was no room left in the 
universe for anything else. His love was all in all to 
her. It was her whole world, and beyond its boundaries 
lay only darkness and despair. 

While yet she held the dreadful letter in her hand, 
she heard Madame Dubosq's footsteps coming along the 
passage, and, as though she were flying from before some 
menacing danger, she made her escape through the win- 
dow to the garden. Then entering the house again by 
the door, she hurried up to her own room. Before she 



A WHITE FACE AT THE WINDOW. 195 

had gained it, however, she heard Madame Dubosq's voice 
calling to her, and Madame Dubosq's footsteps following 
her like Fate. What possessed the woman, that she 
should want to trouble her . to persecute her thus, at 
such a moment ? Probably she wanted to consult Manon 
upon some point of vital importance respecting next day's 
marriage feast. With something of the look of a hunted 
fawn, the baroness turned again and fled upwards to- 
wards the attics, and entering one which was used as a 
lumber room, closed the door and flung herself against 
it, panting, giddy, and bewildered. The midday sun lay 
hot upon the roof, and the close atmosphere of the room 
stifled her. She made her way through the scattered 
rubbish littering the floor, and, after a struggle, dragged 
open the heavy shutters and let in some air. Before 
her was a straight row of white, silent houses, their 
shutters all closed, as though their inmates were asleep or 
dead. Over the weather-stained slates of the roofs she 
could see a narrow strip of ragged, moorland, bounded by 
the blue-grey hills. Not a sound . not a sign of life. 
The village street was hot, dusty, and empty. Along 
the whole length of the arid, white road, stretching away 
to the right, there was not a living creature to be seen. 
Manon leant against the window-sill, and with trembling 
fingers spread out the crumpled letter. She read it 
once, and twice and thrice, scarcely comprehending it. 
Her brain seemed in a whirl. Memory failed her, and 
every moment she was obliged to turn back again and 
re-read what she had just read to help her to understand 
what followed. Still she could not understand. It was 
all so unexpected, so astounding, so horrible ! Presently, 
it became a question with her as to who had written the 
letter. Had he himself ? Had he done it to try her ? 
Could it be a hoax ? Was he, after all, going to marry 

13. a 



196 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

her to-morrow, or was it all over ? All over ! Merciful 
heavens ! could it be possible that her happiness was to 
end thus ? "Was it possible that this piece of crumpled 
paper could contain so much misery ? And if it were 
really true, what was to become of her ? What, indeed ! 
She sought a solution in the white, hot, dusty silence 
before her, and her thoughts travelled over the housetops 
beyond the moorland, over the grey hills and far away. 
Once more she began to read the letter, and then with 
her chin resting on her hand she gazed intently down 
upon the courtyard stones below. The house and the 
street were very still, but there was a strange, faint buz- 
zing noise in her ears, like the drowsy hum of mosquitoes' 
wings, or the sea-murmur of a shell. As she stood thus, 
all at once a horrible feeling took possession of her which 
seemed to drag her down. Why not ? What had she 
to live for? One spring, and there was an end to all 
her misery, this side of Judgment. She raised herself 
up to and knelt upon the v.indow-sill, still gazing down- 
wards. Her brain grew giddy. The humming in her 
ears swelled to a confused roar, midst which she seemed 
to distinguish half audible words . an imperious com- 
mand, perhaps a threat or passionate entreaty. A hand 
was laid upon her arm, and she sprang back from the 
window. With the thought that she had just been 
rescued from a fearful death, a deadly sickness over- 
came her, and she leant against the wall and closed her 
eyes 

" I beg your pardon, ma'am ; Madame Dubosq sent me 
to look for you. Dinner is ready. Are you ill ? 

" I am not ill/' replied Manon with a ghastly face. 
" Only . only . come away . come away." 

And holding the girl's arm, she dragged her from the 
room and locked the door with terrified haste ; as though 
she shut up there a horrible danger. 



A WHITE FACE AT THE WINDOW 197 

And now she must go down to dinner and Dubosq. 
Yes, there was the inevitable Dubosq with her customary 
pppetite. She was even hungrier, it would seem, than 
usual, and was impatiently crumbling and eating her 
bread. 

" My dear, I couldn't think what had become of you." 

" I was busy." 

" I have been calling for you and looking for you 
everywhere. You were not in your room?" 

" No." 

" You were upstairs, though ?" 

" Yes, in the attic." 

" In the attic ?" 

"Yes, I went to look for something." 

" In that dreadfully dusty place, too. If you had only 
asked me to help you. And you found what you wanted ?" 

"No." 

" I will look for it for you after dinner. 

" It is not worth the trouble. I don't want it now. 
Talk no more about it." 

Would the woman never drop the subject, and leave 
her alone ? Would she never cease chattering and 
pressing upon her the contents of the dreadful dishes ? 
She tried to eat. The food choked her. She played 
with her knife and fork, making believe to dine, lest she 
should be questioned and worried. While the Dubosq 
was jabbering, Manon folded and refolded her napkin, 
examining with scrupulous care the pattern in the cloth. 
Anything rather than raise her eyes, for she felt that she 
could not bear to look upon the face before her, so in- 
tolerable in its replete contentment. Without looking up, 
though, Manon noted with nervous irritability the sound 
produced by the working of Dubosq' s indefatigable man- 
dibles, and the gluck-glucking of the wine she swallowed. 

Worthy soul ! she harboured no secret sorrow in her 



198 THE PKETTY WIDOW. 

gentle bosom. She had no anxieties for the morrow, 
beyond those incidental to the successful issue of the 
grand wedding banquet in preparation. Why should she 
not eat, drink, and be merry ? She saAv that Manon was 
inclined to be thoughtful and silent, and so pursued her in- 
nocent babble without pressing too persistently for replies. 
It was not unnatural, she thought, that the young widow 
should be reflective ; and she improved the occasion with 
an axiom or two appropriate to the circumstances. Since 
the world began has it not often happened thus ? . that 
there has been a deep unfathomable gulf severing the 
nearest and dearest, sitting side by side upon the same 
hearth, or laying their heads upon the same pillow? 
What do we all really think of one another, we who shake 
hands and kiss? Heaven forbid that all the secrets of 
our hearts should ever be revealed ! 

All at once the thought of the letter occurred to 
Manon. She had not got it. Had she left it in the 
attic? Had she dropped it on the stairs? For her life 
she would not have her secret known . yet, alas ! it must 
be known soon. If she had dropped the letter on the 
stairs, it was perhaps even at this moment in the hands 
of the servants, affording food for wonder and mirth, may 
be, over the stew-pans in the kitchen. The blood rushed 
in a torrent to her face at the thought, and she cast her 
eyes nervously around. Yet, strange to say, mingled 
with her fear was so much of prostration and mental tor- 
por, that she could not at the moment frame a reasonable 
pretext for leaving the table to go in search of the missing 
note. Would the dinner never come to a close ? Me- 
chanically she accepted the plates handed to her, and 
allowed the servant to remove them with the food un- 
tasted; now and then looking up wistfully at the girl, 
seeking from her expression to discover whether or not she 



A WHITE FACE AT THE WINDOW 199 

was in possession of the secret. At length, however, the 
coffee came. 

The meal was ended. Manon rose and waited for a 
favourable moment to make her escape. Not yet, how- 
ever, was her ordeal over. The Dubosq was desirous of 
her opinion upon the subject of the preparations, and she 
must submit to the torture. Would such and such things 
be better so and so, or the other way ? Manon listened 
with an aching heart. A score of times the dreadful truth 
was on her tongue's tip ; yet her heart failed her when 
she would have revealed it; and the unspoken words 
seemed to choke her. It was only when the Dubosq had 
left the room on some errand that she seized the oppor- 
tunity and escaped. She went quietly upstairs, unlocked 
the attic door, and glanced anxiously around. There, on 
the floor, by the open window, lay the crumpled letter. 
She approached it trembling, but without raising her eyes 
to the aperture ; then snatching the paper from the ground 
and wrestling with the shuddering horror once more creep- 
ing over her, fled precipitately. 

Gaining her chamber she locked the door, flung her- 
self upon the bed, and for the first time her grief found 
vent in a flood of passionate tears. She lay with her fair 
hair tumbled and tangled in a confused mass upon the 
pillow in which her face was buried. After a while her 
sobs subsided, and no other sound broke the stillness of 
the chamber except a low half-smothered moan wrung 
from her at intervals by her bitter agony. -Not a very 
lengthened period, however, elapsed before the Dubosq 
came tapping at the door. 

" My dear, I want to speak to you a moment." 

" Please go away," the other cried, piteously ; " I'm 
not well ; I want to be quiet." 

" Oh, it was only to ask you about the sleeves 



200 THE PRETTY AVTDOW. 

to your figured silk. I would not detain you a 
moment." 

" Do what you like with them, only leave me alone." 
" Well, don't say afterwards that you were not con- 
sulted," said the Dubosq, bridling. " I'm sure you'd 
better decide !" 

"No, I leave it all to you/' 
" Are you very ill ? Can I do anything ?" 
"No, no, dear Mogador; only let me be quiet." 
At last the tormentor was gone, and she was once 
more alone with her grief. Her eyes were dry now. Her 
sorrow had given place to a sullen rage, and she paced to 
and fro the length of the room, as a tigress wears life 
away within its barred cage. She came presently to a 
standstill before her looking-glass, and gazed upon the 
face which he had so often said was beautiful. It was 
dark and swollen now . the features contorted . the lips 
thin and bloodless, tightly drawn and tense. An impo- 
tent fury possessed her. She twisted her hair in her 
hands, and dragged at it savagely. She clutched her 
throat with a strong grip; and as her fingers slowly re- 
leased their pressure the purple marks they left showed 
vividly upon her fair skin. But once again there came 
a tapping at the door, and crossing the room, Manon, 
with an angry jerk, pulled it open, and stood with lower- 
ing brow and flashing eyes confronting the astonished 
Dubosq. 

" It was only to know whether you were any better, 
my dear !" 

" Good heavens, woman," cried the other, wildly, 
" cannot you let me alone ?" 

She slammed the door to in the good lady's face, and 
flung herself down upon the bed gnashing her teeth with 
rage. After a short interval this paroxysm passed away, 



A WHITE FACE AT THE WINDOW. 201 

&nd she became calmer. Then she rose slowly and began 
to dress herself to go out. She took little pains with 
her toilet. Fastening her dress, which awhile ago her 
wilful hands had dragged and torn, she smoothed her hair, 
put on her bonnet and shawl, and, opening her bed-room 
door, stood for a moment listening on the landing. Very 
carefully then she descended the stairs, her heart beating 
violently at every creak, traversed the passage and passed 
out into the garden. 

As she proceeded along the path Mimi and Bibi came 
running towards her with soft little cries. She stooped 
down and raised them in turns in her arms to kiss them. 
A little further on Ponto forced his way through the 
bushes with a joyous bark. One of her horses catching 
sight of her over the hedge dividing the garden from the 
paddock, as she passed beside it to open the side gate, 
whinnied and trotted up to rub his warm nose against 
her cheek. She spoke more tenderly if possible than was 
her wont to these dumb friends, and then went out into 
the lane. Twilight was giving place to night, and in the 
far distance the twinkling of the lamps upon the fortifi- 
cation of Saint Babylas was dimly visible. She turned 
her face towards the town, and walked rapidly along . so 
rapidly that she was tired and out of breath on reaching 
the turn of the long, dusty road at which the crucifix 
stood out sharply against the darkening sky. While 
pausing here a moment she heard behind her the sound 
of horses' hoofs and wheels, and a jingling and rumbling 
that told her the diligence was approaching. She signalled 
to the driver to stop, and inquired whether there was room. 

There was one vacant place inside, and she took her 
seat opposite to a fat peasant woman in a cap and apron, 
nursing a basket and bundle, and from the former sup- 
plying herself with mouthfuls of cake and bites of apple. 



202 THE PRETTY WIDOVf 

Two blue-bloused clod-hoppers discussed the merits of 
some new mode of beet-root culture. 

Manon sat silently in her corner. The other occu- 
pants of the diligence were strangers to her. She seemed 
to listen to their conversation without hearing a word 
that they said ; but, lost in thought, fixed her eyes for 
some time so earnestly upon the the fat peasant woman's 
face that she relinquished her refreshment in some con- 
fusion ; while one of the agriculturists at whom she in 
turn also stared as steadfastly, imagined that his discourse 
interested her, and was thereby enticed out of his depth 
into a sort of rhetorical whirlpool, wherein he finally sank. 

The lumbering vehicle jingled and jolted along the 
dusty road, and then bumped and clattered over the 
uneven stones in front of the town gate. It stopped at 
the foot of the drawbridge, and the custom-house officer 
thrust a lamp in at the door, -which made the passengers 
blink like a roost of owls ; and the official lingered for a 
moment or two, after asking the usual questions, to make 
quite certain that the still white face he saw was that of 
the lady of Longanna. Quite unlike our pretty Manon 
of heretofore, was she that night. What seemed like a 
grey shadow rested upon her features, deepening and 
hardening their lines. 

Hers was now a face, which seen for a moment flat- 
tened against the glass in the chemist's shop window, 
Coquillard took to be that of a ghost. He was . this 
hopeful apprentice . just then supposed to be rolling pill 
paste ; but though physically he was up to his elbows in 
pilul. rhei, he was mentally up to his eyes in the horrors 
of the " Two Corpses," which, with a suppressed scream 
at the suddenness of Manon's approach, he let fall with 
a flop behind the counter. Before he had time to make 
up his mind as to whether or not the face belonged to a 



A WHITE FACE AT THE WINDOW- 203 

visitor from the other world, its owner had glided rapidly 
into the shop, and now stood by his side, with a hand 
tightening upon his wrist. 

" Wha-at is it ?" he asked, all of a tremble. 

" Hush ! hush !" she answered, in a low tone, glancing 
as she spoke towards the shop parlour. " Are they 
in?" 

" Mrs. Pomponney is at Mrs. Gobinard's. Mr. Pom- 
ponney is at the cafe, but I can fetch him in a moment." 

" At the cafe ; yes, I thought so. Look, here is a 
napoleon for you. You must keep that to buy some 
story books, and I want you to do me a favour. Where 
is Mr. Polyblank ?" 

" He's not at home. Mrs. Pomponney will be back 
directly." 

" Yes, yes, to be sure. I want to have a chat with 
her presently. There's no one in, then ?" 

" No . no one," the boy answered, wondering, and a 
little frightened. 

" You can do me a favour, then. You know the ex- 
periments Mr. Pomponney and the doctor have been try- 
ing together up there in the little room where he keeps 
the . where you took the basin from ?" 

" Ye-es." 

" I want to have a peep at the apparatus. It is for 
the sake of . it's only because I am very curious, you 
know, and " 

" Let me fetch Mr. Pomponney, ma'am. I'm sure he 
will be glad to show you the laboratory." 

" No ; there's no occasion for that. We will go up- 
stairs without him. I have a reason for not telling him 
that you shall know by-and-by." 

" But the key ?" 

" The key ! Haven't you got it ? He put it the other 



204 THE PRETTY WIDOW- 

<3ay . at least he told me he kept it in there . in that 
desk." 

Sure enough the key was in the place she had indi- 
cated, and she took it,, as she spoke, and moved towards 
the staircase door. " Come," she said, beckoning him, 
Xi or, stay. Give me a light and I will go alone." 

The youthful Coquillard looked at her blankly. He 
did not quite comprehend what all this meant, and he felt 
very uneasy. 

" I had much better fetch Mr. Pomponney." 

" No, no ;" and she tightened her grasp on his wrist, 
and pulled him in the direction of the staircase. 

He regarded her with his light blue eyes wide open in 
terrified wonder. There was something about her, it 
seemed to him, at once commanding and queenly, and 
spectre-like and horrible. "What dreadful misfortune was 
about to happen ? he asked himself, and for a moment he 
had an idea of breaking from her, rushing into the street, 
and crying aloud for assistance. Perhaps it would have 
been the Avisest course ; but little time was allowed him 
for reflection. He hesitated but a moment, and in that 
moment the opportunity passed away. Already she was 
half-way up the stairs. " Bring a light," she said. " Be 
quick !" 

He was some time fumbling with the matches and 
lighting a small oil-lamp, which he took from a bracket in 
the shop. She, however, did not wait for him, but 
hurried up the stairs, groping her way in the darkness, 
and, arriving at the laboratory door, passed her hand over 
it in nervous haste to find the keyhole. In spite of her 
hurry, though, she had not been able to effect an entrance 
when Coquillard came up. 

" I cannot turn the key," she said. " You try. Let 
me hold the light." 



A WHITE PACE AT THE WINDOW. 205- 

" I can hold it." 

" No, you may let it fall, or . there, I have knocked it 
out. You must light it again, and I will wait for you." 

He had unlocked the door before this accident occurred, 
and he left her standing just within the room, while he 
went down the flight of stairs to relight the lamp. While 
thus engaged he heard the jingling of glass, and cried to 
her, in alarm, not to move until he came back. He was 
not long gone, although he had to light a couple of 
matches; but when he returned he found her looking 
deadly pale and trembling. 

"Never mind the experiments," she said abruptly, 
" I don't care about looking at them, after all. Lock the 
door and come down again." 

He did as she bade him, and followed like one in a 
dream. Bidding him hastily good night, she passed out 
into the street, and in another moment the darkness had 
swallowed her up. Young Coquillard remained behind 
with the lamp in his hand, his eyes and mouth wide open, 
amazed and confused by this strange visit. A sudden 
dread crept over him when he th ought she might have 
come and taken him thus unawares for the purpose of 
defeating the famous experiment . for he recollected that 
she seemed angry while Mr. Pomponney was descanting 
on that topic on the occasion of her last visit to the shop. 
Thereupon he went quaking to have a look at the labora- 
tory. To all appearance nothing had been disturbed. 
But she must have had some motive for going into the 
room . must have done something, or why was she so 
agitated ? He recollected that he had heard the clinking 
of glass, and he cast his eyes around, wondering what 
reason she could possibly have for meddling with the 
bottles, which stood in dusty confusion. He would have 
concluded that she had accidentally knocked against one 



206 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

of the shelves, and thus caused the noise he had heard, if 
it had not been for her agitation. All at once the truth 
burst upon him suddenly as the lightning's flash. He 
turned his eyes in a tremor of apprehension to a corner 
where a certain blue glass bottle stood. The stopper had 
been removed. There was a label on this bottle, on which 
was inscribed the single word " Poison." 



CHAPTER XX. 

THUNDER AND LIGHTNING. 

Go back. 
She has been yours through all, and you are hers ; 
And though you went not back, there is a bar. 
That now for ever sunders me from you. . Home. 

A storm was gathering. The day had been hot and 
sultry. From time to time a hollow moaning gust swept 
through the dark deserted streets ; and now and again 
the pavement was spotted by large rain drops, but as yet 
the tempest held aloof. The storm might burst, however, 
as soon as it chose, and the elements rage in all their 
fury for what some people cared that night in the 
town of Saint Babylas. In a private room in Madame 
Gobinard's establishment was assembled a gay party of 
gentlemen, who had dined sumptuously at Pierre RaynaPs 
expense, and cared not the value of a tavern toothpick 
for foul weather. They were choice spirits these friends 
of the expectant bridegroom . bons vivants and bons en- 
fants they would have been called in the romances of 
their own country ; in British music halls, jolly dogs. 

For the most part they were young men who had seen 
life and were now in liquor. This was the farewell feast 
of a gay young bachelor, and these were familiar friends 



THUNDER AND LIGHTNING. 207 

in whose congenial companionship some of his uproarious 
"bachelorhood had been passed. You cannot be surprised 
then if a tinge of sadness mingled with the merriment . 
there were moments betwixt the cup and the lip in which 
regretful thoughts of the coming sacrifice would intrude 
unbidden, or that the voice of a jolly dog proposing the 
health of his host should betray a certain huskiness in- 
dicative of feelings which are said in the literature of 
dinner table-life to " do honour alike to the head and the 
heart." Loud, however were the cheers, and uproarious 
the acclamation, with which the other jolly dogs hailed the 
toast, and there was more than one moist eye and full 
heart in the little company. 

But there are maudlin periods in everybody's drink, 
you scoffers may suggest ; and it is the nature of a jolly 
dog all the world over, in his moments of enthusiasm, to 
be carried away by the belief that he has feelings which 
do him honour, and which Providence has wisely ordained 
should be a source of much gratification to himself, 
though perhaps of little value otherwise. A very jovial 
feast it was, though, in spite of this passing shadow, and 
Pierre Raynal was voted vocally, in the English style, 
the jolliest of jolly good fellows. The room became 
very hot as the banquet drew towards a close, although 
the windows were wide open ; and some of the guests, 
with loosened vests and flushed faces, were glad enough 
to step out upon the balcony to breathe a little fresh air. 
The wine had flowed freely, as might be seen by the 
flushed features and heavy eyes of most of the company. 
The moderateur-lamps, with globes of rose-coloured glass, 
threw a red glow upon the scene, which, with the figures 
of the men, lounging in various positions, with its dis- 
ordered furniture and littered table, had something of 
the appearance of the robbers' retreat that one is familiar 



208 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

.with at the theatre. It was about this particular period: 
of the evening, when the host, as sometimes happens 
with hosts, had slipped out of his guests' recollection,, 
and they were enjoying themselves hugely without refer- 
ence to him, that the waiter came in and whispered in 
Pierre RaynaFs ear, handing to him at the same time a 
sealed letter. 

" The man who brought it said you must have it at 
once, sir," observed Alexander, with a deprecating air. 
" I said you could not be disturbed, but he would not 
take no for an answer, and so really " 

" Very well ; Til see whether there's any reply." 

He turned the letter over carelessly in his hand, won- 
dering what it could be about, but without feeling very 
much interest in the matter. He knew the writing, and 
was, you see, so much in the habit of receiving notes 
from the loved one. It does not follow that he loved 
her any the less because he was not dying to see what 
was behind the seal. There is, according to words of 
wisdom, a time for all things, and suppose this should be 
one of those crossed sheets of pretty nothings with un- 
dotted i's which she so loved to write, and he so loved to 
read. This surely was neither the time nor place for its 
perusal. Playing with the billet then for a moment or 
two in his fingers, he at last decided upon breaking the 
seal, then read : 

" Come to me at once." 

These were the only words, unaccompanied by any 
signature . without any term of endearment. He no- 
ticed, too, in some surprise, that it was written upon a 
sheet of his own private note paper, surmounted by his 
monogram, and that the envelope enclosing it was also 
his. "What did it mean ? He rose from the table with- 
out attracting any attention, glanced round with the idea 



THUNDER AND LIGHTNING. 209 

of apologizing for absenting himself, saw he was not^ no- 
ticed, and followed Alexander from the room. 

" Where is the person who brought this letter ?" 

" Here, sir." 

It was the landlord of the house where he lodged, 
who smirked in expectation of proffered refreshment. 

" Where did you get it, friend ?" 

" From the Baroness de Grandvilain. She wrote it 
in your apartments, and is waiting for you there now." 

" Waiting for me ?" 

" If you please, sir." 

He was anything but pleased, for he had a foreboding 
of evil, and felt very uneasy. One course only was open 
to him. He must go at once and see what she wanted. 
He therefore sent Alexander in search of his hat, bade 
him tell the company that he would return in a few 
moments, and hurriedly left the hotel. There was no 
vehicle to carry him, but his lodgings were not further 
than the next street. It was fortunate that they were 
not more distant, for the storm so long threatening gave 
indications that at length it was about to descend in all 
its fury. The air was thick and sulphurous, and the 
silence for the moment was as profound as the darkness 
was intense, save where the glimmering street lamps at 
intervals emitted a feeble ray. 

As he reached the door, and was in the act of crossing 
the threshold, a stream of blue lightning tore athwart 
the sky, and for an instant the white houses on the oppo- 
site side of the street gleamed forth ghost-like, then 
vanished as suddenly, while directly overhead broke a 
deafening crash of thunder. He found the baroness 
standing in the centre of the room, and as he approached 
she remained silent and motionless, her face so white and 
bloodless, she seemed as though she had been turned to stone. 

14 



210 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

" Manon," he said, as he advanced, " what has hap- 
pened? Speak to me, Manon. Are you frightened by 
the storm ?" 

Whilst speaking he had reached- her side, and he 
stretched out his arms to encircle her waist ; but she 
shrank back from him, shuddering. 

" No, no," she cried. " Not yet . not again. Not 
till you know all." 

" Know all ?" he repeated, with a darkening brow. 
Know all ! What would she say ? Had she discovered 
his secret, or . dreadful thought . had some pecuniary 
misfortune befallen her ? Nothing was certain. Yet 
that could not be. Was he upon the point of allying 
himself to a beggar? No. She must have learnt the 
truth. His arms dropped slowly as she drew back. 
His lips, tightly compressed, seemed prepared to bar 
the passage to any hasty word which might rise unbidden 
before he was sufficiently master of himself to speak with 
safety. She also was silent for a moment ; and then in 
low tremulous tones she spoke, clasping her hands 
together, her white fingers twisting and tearing at one 
another in her strong agitation, as though she would 
have detracted from her mental agony by the duller sense 
of physical pain. 

" You know, Pierre," she said, " I told you that it 
would kill me if anything happened to part us . that if 
death took you from me, I should soon follow you. 
Perhaps you thought that those were idle words ; as I 
might think, probably, if I heard them spoken by some 
other ; but oh ! you would believe me if you knew what 
I have suffered to-dav since I learnt that we must 
part . since I learnt that henceforth you were dead 
to me." 

His lips quivered, and he made a motion of speaking, 



THUNDER AND LIGHTNING. 211 

but held his peace and waited for the end;, and, as he did 
so, there was noticeable in the expression of his eyes an 
intense curiosity and cowering dread which might have 
implied that he knew the thing that was to be spoken, 
but wanted to learn how its discovery had come about. 
Without removing her eyes from his face she took from 
her pocket the crumpled letter that had awhile since 
struck her down, and handed it to him to read. His 
hand shook slightly as he took it from her, but his features 
in no way changed as he read down the page of crabbed 
writing ; then he turned the leaf and read on slowly to 
the end. So very slowly, though, did he read, and so 
long did he linger over the last lines, that Manon could 
scarcely endure the torments of suspense she suffered. 
Yet, as she waited and watched for some sign of astonish- 
ment and indignation, and waited in vain, the foolish hope 
she had nursed, in spite of her reason, died slowly out, 
and left her despairing. 

" It is true, then V she said at last, hoarsely, " and 
there is an end to all." 

He did not raise his eyes to her face. He still seemed 
to be reading the letter ; at least he held it before him, 
probably from the same feeling which induces a criminal 
to delay giving the signal for the executioner's axe 
to fall. 

" It is quite true," at length he answered, sullenly. 

She pressed her hands to her face, and from her lips 
escaped a low, plaintive cry, such as might be wrung from 
a brave and delicate woman struck by a brutal hand. 
Even at this moment, however, a gleam of hope broke in 
upon her blank misery. He could not have meant to 
wrong her ! He was not altogether to blame. 

" Pierre/' she said entreatingly, " tell me. You did 
not know she was alive when you asked me to marry you. 

14 . 2 



212 THE PRETTY WIDOW- 

You deceived me ; you told me nothing of your former 
marriage, but that was because you thought it would 
pain me to know you had loved her first. And yet you 
might, for you knew how I myself had been forced into a 
hateful marriage while I was quite a child . with no will 
of my own. Oh, Pierre, you need not have doubted my 
love for you, or feared that I should have doubted 
yours." 

As she spoke she had, by almost imperceptible de- 
grees, crept up to his side. He still doggedly avoided 
looking at her, and now she took his hand in hers, where 
it lay passive between her slender fingers, irresponsive to 
their eager pressure. 

" Oh, Pierre," she continued, in a low tone, with a 
wistful longing in her tearful eyes, " you were forced into 
this marriage as I was, and you thought her dead ?" 

What struggle was going on in his mind? Was he 
still hesitating as to the course he should pursue ? But 
surely that were impossible when there were only two 
courses to choose from . the right and the wrong. But 
listen when he speaks : 

" I was forced into it," he said, looking up at last, 
" and I should have been a villain had I not married her. 
God only knows, though, what I have suffered since . 
what shame and humiliation. But I thought she was 
dead. I swear to Heaven I thought she was dead. I had 
all the particulars from Alexis d'Abligny, who brought 
me news from England. The whole story being, as I 
thought, buried with her, I knew it would only pain you 
to hear it, and so . I never told you." 

" Oh, thank Heaven for this," she cried, and hiding her 
face upon his breast burst into a fit of passionate sobbing, 
which, for a moment, he made no effort to check, being 
apparently too busy with his own thoughts to notice her. 



THUNDER AND LIGHTNING. 213 

Presently , the violence of her passion subsiding, she drew 
away from him again, and sank into an arm-chair stand- 
ing by the side of a table against which , he had been 
leaning. There, covering her face with her hands, she sat, 
silent and motionless. 

Without, the storm raged fitfully. The lightning ever 
and again lighting up the gloomy, old-fashioned room 
.with a sudden glare in spite of the heavy curtains almost 
covering the windows, whilst the thunder, rolling and 
rumbling over head, appeared at each return to grow 
nearer, louder, and more threatening. 

Suddenly she started up in a paroxysm of agony : . . 
" There is but one end to this if you still love me." 

He raised his hand on high and swore by Heaven that 
his love had in no way abated, and that he was ready to 
lay clown his life for her. 

" I believe you," she said, clinging to him, " and I 
know that you will think as I do. Is not life hateful to 
us in this misery ? Why, then, longer suffer when re- 
lease is so easy and so close at hand ? When but a brief 
hour of pain will set us free, Pierre/'' she continued, 
speaking rapidly in almost a whisper. " To-day I have 
been sorely tempted to put an end to my life, but I 
struggled against the desire, and wanted to see you once 
again to bid you farewell. Yet, now that we have met, 
I ask myself should we part ? See ! I have got poison 
here. What will it matter to us what the world may say 
when we are gone. What is the world to us when hope 
is dead ?" 

Ah ! reader, judge not this poor thing too severely. 
Remember she had been an actress, and had read the 
novels of her country, in which incidents of this nature 
not unfrequently find a place. Think of what she had 
suffered. How high her hope had soared, and to what a 



.214 THE PRETTY WIDOW- 

depth of misery she had fallen . enough to throw her 
mind off its balance. And, after all., do not similar 
scenes sometimes occur even in our land of propriety 
and decorum, and with persons, too, who have not trod 
the boards of the Chatelet Theatre ? Poor Manon, we 
cannot excuse, but we may pity you. 

She paused for his reply, and he stared in bewilder- 
ment at her white face and wild eyes, shining with a 
strange lustre ; whilst her slender lithe fingers were 
clenched upon his arm in the passion of her appeal. Her 
bonnet was removed, and her shawl had fallen to the 
ground. Her light brown hair was matted on her fore- 
head. The traces of her tears were still upon her 
cheeks. ]S T ever had she looked more beautiful, he 
thought, than at that moment ; but there was something 
dangerous in her loveliness before which he recoiled 
shuddering. Hastily loosening her grasp, he broke into 
a loud unnatural laugh. 

" You must be mad, Manon/'' he said. " I will take 
no poison. It seems we can't be married, but we need 
not die." 

Surely these were words of wisdom; and he would 
have been a fool to listen to the frenzied promptings of 
that poor tortured heart before him. Surely she was 
not mad enough to think that he must put an end to 
his life because there was an end to their love . as though 
men killed themselves about such matters ! Yet, mad 
woman as she was . desperate, passion-led, and unreason- 
ing . she was not so utterly bewildered but that, struck 
by his tone, something of the truth began to dawn upon 
her now at last ; and, at the crisis of her fate, the gilded 
mask slipping from the idol she had so long worshipped, 
revealed to her the foul imposture which it had hidden. 

A bottle of brandy and some glasses stood upon the 
table close to his hand, and their jingle, as, in moving, he 



THUNDER AND LIGHTNING. 215 

touched them, attracted his attention. He took up the 
bottle and twice filled a glass and emptied it. Appa- 
rently, the spirit nerved and steadied him, for, as he 
put the glass down again, the dark cloud passed from 
his brow, and he said : 

" We need not despair yet, Manon, for perhaps things 
are not as black as they seem." 

She looked at him in wonder, but made no reply. 

"The marriage was solemnized in an out-of-the-way 
country place in England. I know for a certainty that 
the clergyman who performed it is dead. The clerk is 

a poor man, and if it were made worth his while . 

Besides, I am not quite sure that the marriage was legal, 
for it was performed only in a Protestant church." 

Yet was she silent as death. The storm for the 
moment seemed to have ceased. The wind was hushed. 
Again he poured himself out some brandy. The clink- 
ing of the glass, caused by his trembling hand, was the 
only sound which broke the silence reigning in the room. 

" Perhaps, after all/' he said at last, " perhaps she 
could be bought off, and if she defies us, can be defied." 

It would be impossible to describe the effect which 
these few sentences produced on Manon. The man's 
coarse nature and inability to understand and appreciate 
the innate purity of the woman before him, had preci- 
pitated him into an irretrievable error. The shock she 
suffered by the disclosure of her lover's moral depravity 
might be compared to that sustained by the deceived 
votary when the Veiled Prophet bared his facial horrors 
to her view. It seemed as though the conviction which 
the last few minutes had afforded of Raynal's unworthi- 
ness, was the result of a life-long observation of his 
character, so clear, so certain was it. The shock was 
terrible . the sorrow more than she could bear. 

Pressing her hands to her forehead, her white lips 



216 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

moved, but she uttered uo word. Perhaps Raynal 
thought he had convinced and conquered her, for he 
made as though he would take her round the waist. But 
in a moment she turned upon him with flashing eyes. 
'.'Do not touch me!" she cried; with mingled fierceness 
and contempt, as, shaking loose his hold, she moved 
towards the door. "There is an end to all!'''' and then, 
as he sprang towards her, she added in a cry of agony, 
" God forgive you ! " 

But at that moment, as she stood there, terrible in 
her beauty, the storm burst overhead with a deafening 
crash ; the blue lightning poured into and seemed to flood 
the room. The whole building rocked like a ship at sea. 
Then, in the moment which succeeded, were heard pierc- 
ing screams, mingled with the sound of failing bricks, 
the hoarse shouting of men's voices, and the tramp of 
hurrying feet ; but in the room there was silence. In 
the blinding glare she fancied she had seen him fall ; and 
now, in spite of her wrongs, a woman's instinct caused 
Ivlanon to spring to the spot where he lay on his face. 
To turn him over and place her hand on his heart was 
the work of a moment, and it was an unspeakable relief 
to find that he lived. 

Gathering her dress closely about her, she hurried 
downstairs, and passed out into the pouring rain, heedless 
of the suggestions of the women gathered about the 
door, frightened by the lightning's blaze, but even more 
affrighted by the fire they saw burning in Manon's 
eyes. 

She was without bonnet or shawl, but was unconscious 
of the fact. Through the streets she hurried on, meeting 
no one by the way, and happily, favoured by the darkness, 
passed the drawbridge and the outer gate unnoticed, and 
found herself alone upon the marshes . alone with heaven, 



THUNDER AND LIGHTNING. 217 

out in the raging storm; alone in the world, loveless, 
hopeless, sick at heart, wearied with her experience of 
life, which, short as it had been, had brought so much 
bitter sorrow to her. The rain descended now in torrents. 
The sky above was black as ink, the marshes in some 
places were already flooded, and the landmarks of the road 
were fast disappearing. Yet, heedless of the danger 
menacing her, she pressed onwards, her clothes saturated 
and heavy with wet, her limbs trembling with the cold, 
her step faltering and slow, the power of volition and 
self-direction nearly gone ; for brain fever was coming on, 
and -when the day dawned cold and ghastly over the 
dreary marshes, it had her in its clutches fast. 

She had just strength enough left to reach Longanna. 
She felt that she must go home, though she scarcely 
knew why, and crawled painfully along. The deserted 
village street, in which not a soul was stirring, brought 
to her mind an account she had once read of a city of the 
dead, and she felt at that moment as though she were left 
alone by herself in the world . the last of an accursed 
race. At length, arriving at the chateau gate, she rang 
the bell loudly. Immediately was heard the sound of 
voices and of many feet within. The door opened to 
show a little group of frightened women, who shrank back 
in terror as their mistress appeared in their midst; bare- 
headed, drenched with the rain, her flesh grey with cold, 
and with dilated eyes, in which gleamed the light of 
madness. She seemed to make an effort to speak, but 
lacked the power, and passed on. When her hand was 
on the dining-room door, Madame Dubosq, who hitherto 
had been awed by Manon's appearance, caught hold of 
her, exclaiming in a terrified tone : 

" Not in there, madame ! Not in there \" 

But Manon broke from her and pushed open the door.. 



218 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

The blind was down, and a single candle cast a faint, 
yellow light upon shadowy objects. Joseph Polyblank 
was there., and the professor, and there was a third 
person. The form of a woman, over which they were 
bending, was stretched upon a sofa. It was Raynafs 
wife, who had left her bed and, in spite of the fury of the 
storm, made this jonmey to die under the roof of her 
whose brief dream of happiness she had for ever destroyed. 
TVhen Manon came at length face to face with her rival, 
she stood in the presence of the dead. 



CHAPTER XXI. 

DRAWING TO A CLOSE. 

So the dream it is fled, and the day it is done, 
And my lips still murmur the name of one 
Who will never come back to me ! . Amelia B. Edwards. 

The storm had left many traces of its progress in the 
streets of St. Babylas. A score of chimneys overthrown, 
Here and there a house partially unroofed. One wing 
of the old cathedral struck by lightning ; its grey stones 
scattered on the grass, with, grinning wry-mouthed from 
among them, three of the ugly faces that had ornamented 
its corners, carved by the monks three hundred years ago 
But in the suburbs the destruction of property had 
been still greater, and further out on the marshes hay- 
stacks, out-houses, labourers' cots, entire farmsteads even, 
had been carried away by the flood ; while among the 
back lanes of Longanna the furious elements had wrought 
wholesale ruin. Early in the morning, clamouring at 
the chateau gates, was a mob of ragged women alter- 
nately crying aloud for succour, and giving utterance to 
shrill reproaches. 



DRAWING TO A CLOSE. 219 

Many long faces were to be seen among the wealthier 
Inhabitants of the town, for a vast amount of uninsured 
property had been destroyed by the storm, and several 
persons, who hitherto had been well to do, were reduced 
almost to penury. Some of the principal shopkeepers 
talked of selling their business for what it would fetch. 
What was the use of stopping in a place where there was 
no money left ? Monsieur le Maire was actually seen in 
the Great Place running about distractedly without his 
hat ! Later on, it was said that there had been a severe 
run on the bank, and subsequently the rumour was that 
the bank had found it necessary to suspend payments. 

Those who had their wits about them, after the first 
moments of loud lamentation and hopeless despair, got 
pen, ink, and paper, and made a rough debtor and credi- 
tor account of their earthly possessions. By this process 
startling discoveries were made and conflicting results 
arrived at, the fallacy of which was afterwards attributed 
to mistakes in arithmetic, which perhaps were pardonable 
under such agitating circumstances. 

Among these busy calculators was Madame Gobinard, 
at the " Three Crowns." In her little office, across the 
court-yard, her busy pen chirped merrily, but madame's 
face was of the gloomiest. 

" Alexander \" 

That sprightly domestic, somewhat languidly, re- 
sponded. He, too, was indirectly a loser by the mis- 
fortune which had befallen the locality. A young lady, 
whom he had notions about, had an uncle who rented land 
in the marshes. What remained of its produce was now 
under water soaking. " Have you seen anything of Mr. 
Raynal this morning ?" 

" Not I, madame." 

" Ask whether he has been here." 



220 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

Alexander, departing gloomily to make inquiries, re- 
turned after a lapse of time with some animation ob- 
servable in bis deportment. 

" He has not been here." 

" Has any one seen him ?" 

" No one. "Whether anyone -will any more, is rather 
uncertain." 

" What do you mean ? Has anything happened to 
him ?" 

" No one knows exactly. One thing only is certain . 
but there is a rumour/'' 

Here followed the rumour in a whisper, jealously 
guarded by the closed door of Madame Gobinard's office. 
A little while afterwards, madame, continuing her 
accounts, cast up a long addition, and frowned darkly at 
the total. 

To the solemn visages abounding at this period in 
Saint Babylas's streets, the ruddy and joyous coun- 
tenance of the great literary Hon, Mr. Max, presented a 
pleasing contrast, as he strolled along the shady side of 
the leading thoroughfares, puffing placidly at a huge 
regalia. Little Paul, also radiant, and also provided 
with a large cigar, met Mr. Max in the Little Place, close 
to the door of the Cafe Leduc, and, hearing that he had 
breakfasted, proposed that they should take a mazagran 
together, and have a talk. 

The coffee served, they threw themselves into easy 
attitudes on the crimson velvet sofa, and Little Paul lit a 
fresh cigar. 

'.' This is an awkward affair about Raynal." 

" What is it ?" asked Mr. Max. 

" Oh, haven't you heard? I thought everybody knew 
of it." 

'" I should like to hear, if you've no objection. What 
is it?" 



DRAWING TO A CLOSE. 221 

" I know nothing for certain, mind. Be careful, 
please, not to quote me as an authority/'' 

" Fll be most careful." 

" It is only hearsay, mind.'" 

" Rest assured." 

" They do say, then " 

And the gentlemen laid their heads together and 
talked scandal under their breaths. 

Later in the afternoon, Max, strolling down the street 
where Raynal had his lodgings, cast his eyes towards his 
windows, and there saw Raynal (who by this had quite 
recovered from the shock of the lightning) beckoning. 
With great presence of mind Mr. Max . wishing to avoid 
an interview . waved his hand, as though mistaking Ray- 
nal's meaning, and went his way, smiling brightly- Less 
fortunate, however, was Little Paul, also strolling in the 
same direction. Raynal having caught his eye beckoned 
to him. in like fashion, and Cherami, taken off his guard, 
ascended to Raynal's chambers. 

He found the young man very pale and haggard, and 
with a rather nervous manner. Would Paul smoke ? he 
asked. No. Raynal fidgeted with a cigar-case lying 
upon the table. Presently he said . 

" This is a bad business." 

" Yes . what has happened ?" 

Raynal looked at him fixedly. Did he not know, then ? 
" You received a letter, I suppose ?" 

" From Madame Dubosq. I hope that the baroness is 
not seriously ill ? It was imprudent of her to be out in 
the storm last night." 

" How did you know she was out in the storm ?" 

" How ? . upon my word I hardly know. Some one 
said so . somewhere . at the cafe, I think." 

They were talking of the affair then at the cafe ! 



222 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

" Altogether it is rather an unfortunate business/' said 
Raynal, after a brief pause ; " but of course a day or two 
will set all right again. In the meantime I am bothered 
plaguily for a little money ." 

" If I could help you, my dear fellow/' burst in Little 
Paul, with somewhat overacted heartiness, " I wouldn't 
require to be twice asked. But you know me. The lot 
of money I spend, and the precious little I earn. Hand 
to mouth, you know, and never a shilling in my pocket.' J 

" Yes, yes, I know that." Here they shook hands. 
" Better times in store for all of us, I hope. You were 
talking the other day about an appointment you wished 
to obtain here in the public library. Have you heard 
any more about it ?" 

" No ; there's not much chance of that, I am afraid." 

" You're wrong there. I forgot to tell you yesterday 
I was talking to Tete about the office. It's almost a 
certainty that you will get it . with a little influence." 

" I am awfully obliged to you old fellow." Here a 
little more hand-shaking. " I wish to goodness," said 
Little Paul, " I could manage this little money matter 
for you. How can it be done ?" 

" Oh, that . never mind about it. Of course I did not 
expect you to have the money to spare. I thought, 
though, you might lend me your name. I know some 
one here who might then accommodate me . nominally 
for you. I should not like to ask for myself . for such 
a trifle." 

" Well, we will see about it. When do you want the 
money ?" 

" As soon as possible. It is only at this moment that 
I am pressed." 

" If I bring the stamp the first thing to-morrow morn- 
ing, will that do ?" 



DRAWING TO A CLOSE. 22$ 

" Yes ; thank you." 

Then having shaken hands for the third time, the 
gentlemen separated, and Little Paul descended the stairs 
with a thoughtful countenance. 

" Fll go and make inquiries for myself/'' he was think- 
ing. " Supposing his statement to be true, I don't think 
I ought to start in debt. What is really Raynal's posi- 
tion ? Will he ever repay me ? They do say . but then 
who are c they ?' " 

Who were they who went about spreading all kinds of 
strange reports regarding the postponed wedding ? Who, 
indeed ? Are there not always persons who " feel it 
their duty" . who " think it only right" . but " would 
not like it to go further," &c. &c. ? At ordinary times 
there was quite enough chattering and tale-bearing 
done by the good folks of Saint Babylas ; and even in 
these days of danger and disaster some sympathetic souls 
found a few spare minutes to say a word or two upon 
the subject of Manon's sudden illness ; and you may be 
sure that the paucity of real facts to work upon did not 
in any way prejudice the inventive powers of the principal 
tale-bearers. 

A score of reasons, each more extraordinary than the 
last, were ascribed as the cause of Manon's indisposition.. 
But next day something of the real truth crept out. 
The exact truth did not even then transpire ; but the 
rumours flying about the town settled down into one 
shape. There was something wrong about Raynal. 
That was why the affair had been broken off. 

But when the official inquiries respecting the death of 
RaynaPs wife took place, it was impossible that the facts 
of the case could any longer remain a secret. 

That wondrously staid and decorous little maiden, hard 



224 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

at work upon her everlasting stocking-mending, was 
seated at the door of her mother's house in the street of 
the Priests. Twilight had set in some time ago. It 
was nearly dark . too dark for almost any work but 
knitting . too dark for that, at last she came to think, 
and rising from her chair turned to go into the house. 
Her mother was out, and there was no one else indoors. 
It was for that reason she had taken her seat where we 
have found her. The mysterious disappearance of the 
sick lodger had made the laundress and her daughter a 
little nervous ; and the latter, left all alone, fancied that 
the passing strangers in the street would be better com- 
pany than none at all. 

Now, just as she was crossing the threshold to go in, 
a hand was laid upon her shoulder. " What makes 
you start so, my dear ?" 

" A dark, handsome gentleman stood looking down at 
her . a stranger to the little nurse. 

" I am not frightened," she made answer. " I did not 
liear you coming." 

" You have an English lady stopping here ?" 

" No." 

" No !" 

" She has gone away, we think. She went out last night." 

The dark gentleman was evidently surprised and vexed 
by this intelligence. 

" Where has she gone to ?" But on this point the little 
nurse could give no information. " We don't think she's 
coming back." 

" Had she paid her rent ? Did she leave anything ?" 

" There are some things upstairs.'' 

" Is your mother or any one else at home ? Your 
lodger will be back presently, I think. I was to wait 
for her. If her room is open I had better wait there." 



DRAWING TO A CLOSE. 225 

Seeming rather mistrustful of the handsome gentle- 
man's intentions, the little nurse, after a momentary hesita- 
tion, lit a candle and led the way upstairs. He must 
have been of a very thievish disposition who would have 
appropriated any of the rubbish scattered about the 
meanly furnished apartment ; but the child kept her 
sharp eyes fixed upon the stranger, and followed his 
every movement. He cast a scrutinizing glance around> 
and was not long before he caught sight of the old 
writing-case which had attracted Polyblank's attention. 
Glancing from it towards the little nurse and back again, 
he bit his moustache, and reflected for a few moments. 
Then with an impatient gesture strode over to the window 
and pulled it open. 

"I'll amuse myself by looking out until she comes. 
You need not wait." 

But she did not leave him altogether. She made no 
answer, but going as far as the door, left it standing wide 
open, and took up a position on the landing, from which 
she could keep a sharp look-out upon his move- 
ments. 

Seeing her object, he soon called to her to come back 
into the room. 

" How long has your lodger been with you ?" 

" A good long while." 

" And she has a good many friends, I suppose ? Why 
did not your mother send to them ?" 

" She only knew the two English gentlemen, the 
doctor and the professor." 

" Polyblank !" 

" Yes, and the wife of the English priest, who wrote a 
letter for her." 

" Oh ! she wrote, did she ?" 

With rather an uglv scowl for so handsome a gentle- 

15 



226 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

man, the stranger turned on his heel without asking any 
further questions, and went back to the window. 

" What did that fellow want to mix himself up in the 
business for ?" the stranger was thinking, looking at the 
moment at a light in a window opposite. " It was he, 
Fve no doubt, who wormed the secret out of her, then 
acquainted her with the position of affairs here, gave her 
all information, and urged her to write to Manon. She 
seems to have been very ill, if I may believe what she 
said in her letter. Why did they keep her alive ? They 
must have had some end in view. Ah, I see it now ! I 
can see their whole game. It was not Polyblank who 
wrote, but the clergyman's wife. Polyblank, instead, was 
trying to keep the affair dark. The scoundrel knew what 
would best serve his purpose. He would rather have had 
us married, and then turned up quietly with his little 
secret, and wrung a handsome annuity out of us for hush 
money. He must be greatly enraged at the failure of 
his scheme. As for me, I shall do yet : I can get a 
divorce. After all Manon loves me, in spite of the rage 
into which she put herself. She does love me ; and as 
long as that is the case I can do what I will with her. 
I have no fear on that score ; but now that that woman has 
found me out here, the rest may follow, and then " 

His meditations were here interrupted by the sound of 
footsteps on the stairs, which having also caught the ear 
of the little nurse, she ran down to meet the new comer. 
For a moment Raynal stood irresolute, listening to the 
sound of their voices as they conversed together in hurried 
whispers, then sprang towards the writing-case, and with 
a violent effort wrenched it open. A few ragged papers, 
.old letters, and bills met his eye, and these he tossed 
carelessly on one side, bestowing no more than a passing 
glance on them. 



DRAWING TO A CLOSE. 227 

Then he came to a letter in an envelope, with Australian 
stamps upon it. While he had this in his possession the 
laundress entered the room, and raised her hands in asto- 
nishment on seeing how he was occupied. 

" What are you doing, sir ? You must not touch those 
papers. The police will be here directly to take posses- 
sion of the effects." 

He did not seem to hear her. He was still reading 
the letter, and as he did so, his features contracted con- 
vulsively, and the perspiration broke out in large drops 
upon his brow. 

" Give me those papers," continued the woman. 

And she made an attempt as she spoke to draw away 
the writing-case ; but his hand tightened on it, and he 
held it fast whilst he still read on. 

" I cannot let you touch the papers," she said. " They 
are under my care until the officers arrive ; now that the 
poor woman is dead." 

" Dead !" He looked up suddenly and listened with 
a fixed, stony expression in his eyes, as though he scarcely 
understood the meaning of her words. 

" Yes, dead enough, poor thing ; but not dead without 
her share of suffering. And what does the villain care ? 
Not a jot, I'll stake my life on it. What do men care 
for the misery they bring on those who are fools enough 
to believe in them ?" 

"Where is she?" 

"At the chateau over there. At the chateau in 
Longanna, and it's likely enough there'll be two dead 
women under that roof before they have taken the poor 
Englishwoman away. The baroness, they say, is not 
likely to live out the night." 

He started slightly at this news ; then folding up the 
letter he had been holding in his hand, prepared to put 

15.3 



228 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

it away in the breast-pocket of his coat. The .woman- 
caught him by the arm. 

" Who are you, sir, who come interfering with these 
things ? Leave them alone. Put back that letter or I 
will cry for help. What's your name ? Where do you 
come from ?" 

" I have more right than any one to what is here," he 
said, shaking himself loose from her hold on him. " The 
woman who is dead was my wife." 

" What ! then you are the man who deserted her t 
The wife of the English priest told me all the story not 
an hour ago. You are this Mr. Raynal that the baroness 
was going to marry ! You have killed them both, then. 
But don't think you will go unpunished in another world, 
though you get off so easily in this.'"' 

While she was speaking, he turned away, with a gesture 
of impatience and scorn. It seemed as though the 
matters of which she spoke were of but trifling import 
by the side of some other subject occupying his 
thoughts. 

He opened the writing-case, and again turned over the 
papers it contained ; then once more took the letter from 
his pocket, to look at its date. 

" If I had had money I might have kept them quiet," 
he muttered, half aloud. " I ought to have married her 
long ago. Now it's too late . unless I make one last 
effort. Oh, what a fool I have been to waste so much 
time." 

He turned upon his heel without another word, and 
passing out of the room, began to descend the stairs. 
The laundress called after him : 

" Are you going away like that ? Have you nothing 
to say ? Leave me your address." 

" I will come back." 



DRAWING TO A CLOSE. 229 

" When ?" 

" In an hour or so. Be in no fear . you shall be paid 
what is owing to you." 

" I did not ask for it." 

"Well, well. I will return during the evening." 

About an hour afterwards Raynal rang at the chateau 
gate, and was refused admission." 

" Madame is too ill to see any one." 

" Let her know that I am here." 

" The doctor said she was not to be disturbed." 

" Is the doctor here now ? Who is it ?" 

" The English doctor, Mr. Peau-le-blanc." 

He turned away with a half-uttered oath. They were 
all conspiring against him. How could he hope to 
struggle successfully against such odds ? He went away, 
but returned in a short time with a letter which he had 
written at a cabaret in the village. This time he asked 
to see Madame Dubosq, but she sent out word that she 
could not leave the sick lady's bedside ; so he went away, 
after requesting that the letter might be given to Manon, 
and cursed his hard fate a thousand times as he walked 
home across the marshes. 

" And he never asked a question about the poor dead 
woman, lying there upstairs," the old portress thought 
as she looked after his retreating form. " A bad heart, 
that ; but he will meet with his reward. A cruel, bad man. 
And to think that she could love the likes of that ! Why 
are such men allowed to live, and go about making 
people miserable ?" 

Some portion of the old road was under water, and he 
was obliged to go a long way round to avoid the flood ; 
so that he was exhausted and weary when at length he 
reached the town gate. As he was entering the Little 
Place he saw Mr. Tete, the mayor, and Paul Cherami, 



230 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

walking along, arm and arm, talking and laughing. 
What he had told Paul about the appointment was only 
partly true. Raynal had heard that there was a chance 
of Paul getting it, but that it was not very likely. Appa- 
rently the latter part of the information was incorrect. 
The mayor would never be so friendly with Paul unless 
the affair were as good as settled. 

Raynal crossed the Place, but before he could reach 
them they had separated, and gone in opposite directions. 
He overtook the mayor. 

" Good evening, Mr. Tete." 

The mayor drew back, and coloured slightly. 

" Good evening," he said, then dropping his eyes 
passed on hurriedly. It was very evident that his inten- 
tion was to avoid Raynal's company. The rumours 
afloat were gaining consistence, and some of the truth 
was coming to light. Reddening deeply, Raynal entered 
the Cafe Leduc, and on the threshold, encountering an 
acquaintance he was in the habit of meeting there, was 
cut again. 

The lady behind the counter, too, did not accord him 
the gracious smile and inclination of the head with which 
she usually greeted his arrival, being at the moment re- 
markably busy at her needlework. Lastly, the waiter, 
at other times so ready with his proffered services, kept 
his place at the other end of the room, where he was 
trying a difficult side-stroke at a disengaged billiard-table, 
and, when summoned, approached slowly. 

Raynal glared defiantly around upon the assembled 
company. " There's not an idiot in the whole town who 
does not know every pro and con, and in and out of the 
cursed business," he thought ; " and this is how I am 
treated ; without having had a chance given me of saying 
a word in my defence. And all this coil about that 



DRAWING TO A CLOSE. 231 

.woman ! If they knew the whole truth, now, and what 
fear has been haunting me these two years past !" 

It was clear enough that the regular customers at the 
Cafe Leduc were not anxious for Raynal's society, and 
when he looked to the right or to the left, he found two 
or three groups with heads close together, mumbling, 
while their eyes were fixed upon him. He rose, at last, 
in disgust, and strode out of the room, slamming the door 
to after him. 

" Curse them all !" he said ; " as if I wanted their 
sweet looks or kind wishes. I can get on well without 
those, I daresay/'' 

But all the world, it would appear, was not anxious to 
shun him. On the contrary, there was one person, of 
rather a horsey exterior, who., catching sight of Raynal 
from the opposite side of the way, crossed over and tapped 
him on the shoulder. 

Raynal turned a white face to meet his. 

" Oh, it's you !" 

" Yes, it is. I have been looking for you all day. 
Twice at your place, where they said you were out. Two 
or three times at the ' Three Crowns/ Up and down 
everywhere." 

"You have taken a deal of trouble. What do you 
want ?" 

" I want my bill settled . that's all. Hire of saddle- 
horses, half-purchase money of dog-cart ; good long score 
I've got against you, one way and another . a couple of 
thousand francs and more." 

" You needn't be afraid ; you'll get it. What makes 
you so pressing now ?" 

" It's almost time I was beginning to be so ; your 
bills are long overdue. I can get neither principal nor 
interest. One need have the patience of Job." 



232 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

" Dont talk so loud, if you please. The people at the 
cafe door can hear you." 

" I'm not ashamed of what I say. I tell no lies." 

" Of course not. Who said you did ? But you're 
labouring under a mistake. You have heard all this 
nonsense they're talking about me in the town. You've 
heard, perhaps, that I had another wife alive when I was 
going to marry the baroness. Have you heard, though, 
that this wife is dead ? Between ourselves, the match is 
nothing like broken off. But keep this quiet, and have 
patience for a day or two more at the outside, and you 
shall have every penny of your bill." 

The horsey man, taken in by Raynal's truthful manner, 
nodded and winked mysteriously, and took his departure, 
leaving his debtor to go quietly home. Raynal found 
some letters waiting for him there from other persons 
Avho wanted their money, and could not possibly wait 
any longer. Among these was Madame Gobinard, who 
had a heavy account to settle, and would feel much 
obliged if Mr. Raynal could pay her what he owed. 

Even while he was engaged in the perusal of these 
vexatious epistles, a loud knock came at the door. 
Raynal bade the knocker enter. 

It was Doctor Tominet, very red-faced, and much out 
of breath, who threw himself into a chair without offer- 
ing any friendly salutation, and only removing his hat 
for a moment to wipe his head with a snuff-coloured silk 
pocket-handkerchief. Then putting it on again when he had 
done so, he scowled defiance from beneath his broad brim. 

" You expected me, I suppose ?" said he, at length 
breaking the silence. 

" No," replied Raynal, wearily, " I was not thinking 
of you ; but I'm not surprised. You, too, have come for 
money, I suppose ?" 



DRAWING TO A CLOSE. 233 

" We wont waste words. I have." 

" You can have nothing at this moment. You are ail 
alike ; you'll give no time and listen to no reason." 

" I've listened long enough. Besides the marriage is 
broken off, and you know I let you have the money only 
on the strength of your grand promises. You were to 
have been married to-day." 

"It has been put off, not broken off. I shall be 
married in a week or two. You must wait till then." 

" I tell you frankly, Raynal, I don't believe it. If half 
what I hear is true, the affair is finished for good and all ; 
and even if it were not so, she'll never get better of her 
illness. That vagabond quack . that pig of an English- 
man . he murders every one he gets into his hands. I 
would not give a big sou for her life." 

" I tell you, you are mistaken. But do what you like ; 
Pll not condescend to ask for indulgence." 

" Ask or not, I'll Avait no longer," cried Tominet, 
rising and buttoning his coat across his breast. " At 
noon, to-morrow, my fine fellow, if you don't let me have 
the money, I'll lock you up." 

" Very well ; do your worst." 

When Tominet was gone, Raynal locked the door and 
threw himself upon the sofa. But in a few moments he 
had risen again, and drawing forth the letter he had put 
away in his breast-pocket, read it through very slowly. 

"There is nothing left but to run for it," he said, 
aloud, as at length he returned the paper to the place 
from which he had taken it. " The game is up here, and 
I should be mad to remain any longer. No ; when I 
shall have got the money in the morning, by the help of 
Cherami's name, I shall depart at once. A thousand 
francs will do." 

Surely so small a sum might easily be obtained, and 



234 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

there were many places in the wide world where he might 
live happily, out of the reach of the strong arm of the 
law. With this reflection our rascal ate a hearty supper, 
took a stiff glass of grog, and went to bed. But more 
than once during the long night he woke up, struggling 
with some imaginary foe, and once, half springing from 
his bed, listened, with fast-beating heart and trembling 
limbs, to a fancied foot-fall on the stairs. 

" It's nothing," he said, leaning back, with a sigh. " I 
shall be glad, though, when I get away from this place. 
I wish now that I could have obtained the money and 
gone yesterday." 



CHAPTER XXII. 

WEARY WORK. 

La parole est une sotte traduction. . Nodier. 

It would, perhaps, have been the wisest course for Raynal 
not to have lost sight of his friend Little Paul, after 
obtaining his promise of assistance, until that promise 
was fulfilled. The first thing, next morning, instead ol 
making his appearance as Raynal had expected, Mr. 
Cherami sent a note by a messenger which contained these 
words : . 

" My dear Raynal, I am afraid you will be vexed by 
what I am going to say, and yet such old friends as we 
are ought to be privileged to speak frankly to one an- 
other. In one word, then, I cannot assist you in the way 
you suggested yesterday. Had I the money in my pocket, 
believe me nothing in the world would have given me 
greater pleasure than to have lent it to you. Since we 
talked together, however, I have been casting up my ac- 



WEARY WORK. 23 ;> 

counts, and find to my horror I owe five times as much 
as I thought I did. It will be with great difficulty that 
I can get straight again, and it would be impossible for 
me to retain my appointment here if I did not do so. 
Under these circumstances you cannot blame me if I 
hesitate before incurring fresh liabilities. If, at any 
future time, I can be of assistance, pray ask me ; and, in 
the meantime, believe me to be yours very faithfully." 

While Raynal was reading this letter, its writer and 
Mr. Max were taking their breakfast at the " Three 
Crowns/'' Mr. Max was leaving for Paris that afternoon, 
and the two friends had determined to drink a glass of 
wine together before he went away. " A very good glass 
of wine !" was Mr. Max's verdict on the liqiior which 
Little Paul had generously provided upon the occasion. 
Mr. Max had allowed him to pay. " Our friend, Madame 
Gobinard, has got some good stuff stowed away in her 
innermost cellars. Get upon the right side of her, dear 
boy. I almost envy you your exile when I think how 
many brave bumpers you may quaff in this out-of-the- 
way corner, and no one else in the world a bit the wiser. 
Good wine is so scarce now-a-days. And sinecures, too, 
you rogue. How you ever managed it, is more than I 
can tell/' 

" It is not even now quite settled," said Cherami, but 
with a little anxiety *in the tone of his voice. " There 
are slips 'twixt the cup and lip, you know. For instance, in 
the case of our friend who gave us a dinner upstairs two 
days ago, to celebrate a coming alliance." 

" Poor devil !" said Mr. Max. " "What has become of 
him, and what will?" 

" I didn't join him in that loan I spoke about," said 
Little Paul. 



"236 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

" You acted wisely, unless you wanted to lose the 
money." 

" I could not see why I should get myself into diffi- 
culties on his account. After all, I am indebted to him 
for only a couple of dinners." 

" He's a bad subject, I'm afraid ; you may recollect, 
ever so long ago, there were some very ugly tales told 
of our friend. A criminal prosecution, was it not ?" 

" As bad as that '<" 

" I hardly remember the exact particulars. Now I 
come to think of it, though, I fancy there was no formal 
charge against him . only strong suspicion. It arose 
out of an action over there in England. Wasn't it a 
question of an illegal transfer of bank stock ?" 

" I recollect something of it, now. It was supposed 
that our friend made a little too free with the signature 
of his wife's uncle, and they would have put him into 
the dock for it ; but, luckily for him, his uncle was 
missing somewhere in New Zealand, or lost at sea, 01 
dead; and so our friend slipped through. One thing is 
certain, though " 

« He's a bad lot." 

.'.' Precisely. Suppose we have another bottle ?" 

While the two gentlemen were yet at table Eaynal 
had called at Little Paul's lodgings, in desperate hope o1 
persuading him, even after what he had written, to join 
in the bill. But Cherami was not to be found, and then 
was now no time to lose. 

Resolved to leave no stone unturned, he visited th< 
stable-keeper, and, with his legs crossed, lounging easilj 
in the horsey man's arm-chair, gave a glowing account . 
perhaps a trifle too glowing . of his private affairs anc 
future prospects, and concluded by soliciting a smal 
loan. But the horsey man listened with a stolid coun^ 



WEARY WORK. 237 

tenance, chewing the while a tiny blade of hay ; and then 
laughed and shook his head, and said he would rather 
not. Pressed for an explanation, he still shook his head 
and chuckled ; but he would give no reason for his reluc- 
tance, so that at last Raynal went away in anger, vaguely 
threatening vengeance as he departed. 

Half-a-dozen other persons he called on during that 
morning's weary ramble, but the news of the interrupted 
nuptials had preceded him, and wherever he showed his 
face he met with the same reception. Decidedly the 
game was well-nigh played out in Saint Babylas, and our 
wicked wolf must seek pastures new in search of inno- 
cent lambs. 

In desperation, he even called on Tominet. The 
worthy doctor had partly retired from business, and had 
taken a little house upon the road to Longanna, at a 
spot which, standing on high ground, had escaped the 
flood. Very white walls had this little house, and very 
green shutters ; also a garden, with very prim flower- 
beds, with very few flowers in them, and box borders 
trimmed with almost mathematical nicety. Raynal 
found the doctor taking a nap in his arm-chair, 
and he woke up, hot and savage, to ask what he 
wanted. 

" How dare you come here ? My man of business 
has left me only a little quarter of an hour ago. You 
will find yourself under lock and key, my fine fellow, 
before the sun goes down." 

But Raynal had grown reckless. 

" Lock me up at once if you want to lose your money. 
Here Fll stop till he comes back. Lock me up, and you 
will never see a sou piece of what I owe you." 

Tominet, not altogether liking Raynal's tone, asked 
what he proposed. Then Raynal told him that although 



238 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

the marriage was off . (he found he was obliged to own 
to this much) . the baroness was inclined to pay a good 
round sum to induce him to give up all claim on her, 
return her letters, and so on. The only question was 
the amount. In the meantime, a few pressing debts 
must be paid. Would Tominet make a further advance ? 
He could please himself . do it, or leave it alone. After 
all, it was only like throwing away a sprat to catch a 
whale. But he knew his own business, Raynal supposed ; 
it was not for him to dictate. 

The doctor listened to all this patiently. He very 
nearly made up his mind to let the young man have 
some money. Then he decided he would not, and no 
arguments could change his decision. 

Raynal went away desperate. He had asked for and 
been refused a hundred francs; having sunk to that by 
easy degrees from a couple of thousands. How was he 
to get away from the place ? Whom could he now 
apply to ? Depressed by repeated disappointments he 
was walking moodily along, with downcast eyes, when a 
familiar voice called to him by name. It was the 
English manager, who had formed one of the company at 
the chateau dinner. 

Raynal was in no humour for idle gossip, but the 
manager, who was on horseback, regulated his pace so as 
to accompany him. 

" I thought you had gone back to England/' Raynal 
said, with an expression which seemed to imply that he. 
would have been glad had that been the case. 

" I have been there and have returned ; only for a 
couple of days, though." 

" It's a long journey to make for such a short stay." 

" Business, sir ! . business. You have got some circus- 
people in the town I want to make an engagement with. 



WEARY WORK. 239 

There's a trapeze fellow I mean to pick up cheap. I 
saw them before I went home, but had not then made 
up my mind to engage them. I have since thought the 
matter over, and have returned to see whether they will 
be tempted with English gold. By dealing liberally, I 
find one often falls over a bargain that shouldn't be lost/' 

This conversation began to have more interest for 
Raynal than it had at the commencement. 

"It's a good plan, I think," said he. 

"Well, I've done pretty well, I think, at most things. 
I've made my running rather fast of late years. One or 
two more lucky seasons, and I shall have put by enough 
to retire on." 

"Ah!" sighed Raynal. 

" And you, too," said the manager. " You have made 
a good match, if all I heard was true, and if am to 
believe my eyes. That was a splendid spread the 
baroness gave us the other day- A handsome place, 
too, the chateau; and not the only one she has got, I 
understand." 

"No, she has several; also property in England. But 
after all " 

" Well, I suppose it will be yours in due course. It 
will, you know, if you manage matters properly ; but I 
need not tell you how to act. Why, you lucky dog, you 
ought to be the happiest man alive; and you will be. 
By the way, it's coming off directly, isn't it ?" 

" In a day or two." 

" Yet you don't look over-joyful." 

" Come, now," said Raynal, with an air of confiding 
frankness, "I'll tell you what's bothering me. You 
knew me in old times, when I was always hard up. I'm 
no better off now. I ought, at this moment, as you say, 
to be the happiest man alive; and what do you think 



240 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

stands betwixt me and happiness ? A paltry thousand 
francs. I owe that sum, and must pay it immediately . 
this very morning ; and I have not the money. Fve no 
one whose secresy I could rely upon, or I would try to 
borrow the sum ; and I see nothing for it but being 
publicly disgraced, or exposing my poverty to the woman 
who loves me/' 

To this the manager listened very attentively ; and, as 
he listened, the fingers of his hand were turning over the 
gold in his trousers pocket. 

" I'd like to help you, Raynal," he said, after a 
moment's pause. " I think I could. I'm not quite 
sure. What is the latest time when the cash must be 
forthcoming ?" 

" It would be very kind of you to assist me in this 
little difficulty- Upon my word, I had no idea of asking 
you. In two hours' time " 

" That will do very well." 

"Where?" 

" At the place where I am stopping." 

"An hotel?" 

" Yes ; the 'Three Crowns.' You know it, of course." 

Kaynal's heart was in his mouth. For a moment he 
was not sufficiently sure of himself to venture to speak. 
Soon, however, he asked : 

" How long have you been there ?" 

" I came last night late, and I was out the first thing 
this morning." 

He probably then had not been seen by Max or Little 
Paul. But one of them might meet him before the two 
hours had run out. If so, Raynal's chance of the thou- 
sand francs would not be worth much. 

" By-the-bye," said the manager, " there was an 
Englishman at the baroness's the other day . a tutor, 
or a schoolmaster, or something of that sort." 



(C 



WEARY WORK. 241 

Yes.-" 

I want something in the translating way done. 
Rather particular work, with many technicalities. It 
struck me he would be the man to do it, and not likely 
to make an extravagant charge, eh ?" 

"I daresay not." 

"Well, I've no time to lose. It is something in con- 
nexion with the engagements I am about to make with 
the circus people . some papers to draw up. Tell me 
where I can find him, and I'll ride there at once." 

"Yes, to be sure . but . but " 

" What's the difficulty ? He's a schoolmaster in the 
town here, isn't he ?" 

" Yes." 

" I understood he was here at the college." 

" He is at a college. Not here, though . a long way off." 

"Where?" 

" Oh, Douai, I think ; besides, it's holiday-time. You 
would not find him. Let me see now. I can help you 
with what you want, I daresay " 

" What ! do it yourself ? Do you know English well 
enough ?" 

" No, not myself. I don't mean that ; but I can find 
some one. I'll go about it now." 

" In two hours' time then, at the 'Three Crowns.' " 

"I will be there." 

Raynal felt that his case was not so hopeless after all. 
It seemed quite certain from the Englishman's manner, 
that he meant to lend the money. The only thing to be 
feared was that some one might enlighten him as to his 
actual position before the two hours had elapsed. That 
was not very likely, however. 

Raynal called after him, "Where are you bound for 

now ?" 

16 



242 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

" The circus. I've just been to Longanna to see one 
of the company who lodges there, but he was from home. 
I suppose I shall find him at the booth, on the Great 
Place." 

He put spurs to his horse when he had said this, and 
departed at a brisk trot. It was all right, then. No one 
at the circus was likely to allude to the broken-off mar- 
riage. Indeed there were only two men in the town 
who were likely to speak to him on the subject at all ; 
and it would indeed be an extraordinary mischance if he 
were to meet them within the next two hours. Nothing 
could frustrate his expectations except . what happened. 

The nearest road to the Great Place lay through 
St. Abraham's Gate and the Street of the Priests. In 
the latter the manager met Professor Polyblank. 

Yes, there he was, sure enough; not, however, at 
all like the professor he had met at the table of the 
Baroness de Grandvilain, for that, if he recollected 
rightly, had been . anyhow towards the close of the 
repast . rather a jovial gentleman, perhaps a little too 
much given to classical quotation, but something of a 
wag in a small way . something of a jovial soul . at any 
rate a very affable gentleman, with rather distinguished 
manners. But this professor, who came shambling 
towards him with a stooping gait, with an unbrushed hat, 
with a sallow, haggard face and dreamy eyes, staring at 
vacancy . it was difficult to recognise him, and yet the 
manager pulled up short, and called, in English . 

" Mr. Polyblank !" 

The professor started, then turned and came towards 
him. 

" I beg your pardon ; did you call to me, sir ?" 

" To be sure. I thought I could not be mistaken ; 
but Mr. Raynal said you were not in the town. It's 



WEARY WORK. 243 

holiday time, I suppose, and you have come over from 
Douai?" 

" Douai !" 

" You're professor there at the college, are you not ?" 

" I have an appointment at the college of Saint Ba- 
bylas, close at hand . in the next street." 

" What the deuce made him tell me you weren't here, 
I wonder? I suppose he didn't know. Luckily I've 
met you, however. I suppose he wanted to do the friend 
he spoke of a good turn. Well, I don't blame him ; 
and he can't blame me for looking after my own interest. 
Which way are you going, sir ? To see the baroness, I 
suppose ?" 

" N . no," stammered the professor, colouring slightly. 

" You may recollect we had the pleasure of meeting 
for the first time at that lady's table. You read us 
some verses. Deuced clever they were too, I remember. 
Are they published yet ?" 

"Not yet." 

" But they will be soon, I hope ? And the baroness 
and Mr. Raynal. When are they to be married ?" 

" Never !" 

Polyblank had spoken with emphasis . indeed, in an 
excited tone, with a kindling look and an angry gesture. 
The other started. 

" The devil they're not ! I'd like to hear some fur- 
ther particulars," 

" Particulars ?" stammered the professor in a confused 
way. " Oh, I know nothing. I heard so, that's all. I 
know nothing." 

" You wont say, eh ? You're right . quite right." 
" But," he thought to himself, " I'll soon find some one 
else who'll tell me all about it." Then added aloud : . 
" I wanted to speak to you about some literary work I 

16 . 3 



244 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

think you might do for me; have you half an hour to 
spare ? If so, will you call at the circus on the Great 
Place, and ask for me ? I should be extremely happy if 
I could do you a service. I owe you one." And he 
rode off. 

When the two hours expired, Raynal presented him- 
self at the door of the " Three Crowns/' and asked for 
Mr. Brownsmith. 

" He's not in, sir/'' said the chambermaid. 

" I suppose he will be here directly. He appointed 
to meet me here at this time." 

" He went out, sir, half an hour ago." 

" Went out ? Well, anyhow I'll wait at the door 
here, so that I may see him coming." 

While waiting thus, the diligence came, rolling and 
rumbling over the uneven stones of the Little Place, and 
drew up with a nourish at the hotel door. The usual 
.crowd of idlers was already assembled in anticipation of 
the great event. 

As usual, the nimble Alexander was at the door, ready 
-to receive the luggage of any new comer who might feel 
inclined to patronize the " Three Crowns." As usual, 
Madame Gobinard stood in the background, ready to 
give a smiling welcome to the wayworn traveller. As 
usual, elaborate preparations were rewarded by small re- 
sults. Two strangers, only, arrived by the diligence, and 
neither put up at the hotel. 

To tell truth, judged from a British point of view, the 
two persons who thus arrived did not look like lucrative 
customers ; for one was dressed like a smali English 
farmer, and the other wore a blue blouse and heavy hob- 
nailed boots. Now, it was rather strange, the one 
dressed like an Englishman . and his French proved him 
to be a native of our little island . -had a sallow face, 



THE COMING DANGER. 245 

such as- might belong to a dweller in a large city, who 
kept late hours and breathed an unwholesome atmosphere ; 
while the man in the blouse, who was unmistakably a 
Frenchman, was the picture of rude health, a golden- 
haired, rosy-cheeked fellow, not at all like what every- 
body knows a Frenchman ought to be. 

Raynal, lounging against the gate, was for some unac- 
countable reason curiously interested in these travellers. 

"Who are they, I wonder?" he asked himself; and 
then he smiled. What were they ? What could it 
matter to him who they were ? 

What, indeed ! 



CHAPTER XXIII. 

THE COMING DANGER 

My apprehensions come in crowds. 

I dread the rustling of the grass ; 
The very shadows of the clouds 

Have power to shake me as they pass. 

Wordsworth . 

Among the travellers in the interior of the diligence 
was our good friend Mr. Pomponney, who had been as 
far as Calais to make inquiries after the welfare of certain 
chemicals consigned to him by a London house, which 
had somehow gone astray at Customs. Upon the road 
he had made great friends with the two strangers, and 
hearing that they were coming to Saint Babylas upon 
business, had eagerly inquired what business it was, and 
listened with intense interest to such details as they 
thought fit to impart to him. At the same time he, too, 
had given all the information that lay in his power re- 
specting the inhabitants of his native town, and altogether 
the journey had been a very pleasant one. 



246 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

Alighting before the hotel door, Mr. Pomponney bowed 
in his politest manner to his fellow-travellers, and they 
having bowed also, the chemist took his way across the 
Little Place, whilst the strangers entered the booking- 
office in the hotel court-yard. The chemist, however, 
did not take his departure before he had also bowed, very 
respectfully, to Raynal. 

" I trust that you are in good health/' he said ; " and 
Madame la Baronne de Grandvilain. I have been away 
from Saint Babylas since yesterday morning. I trust 
that neither Madame la Baronne nor yourself suffered 
any inconvenience from the storm." 

Raynal, colouring slightly, made some hasty reply, and 
turned away. The eyes of several of the bystanders were 
fixed upon him, and a broad grin was on some of their 
faces. 

" Here's a letter for you, sir, the English gentleman 
left, when he went out." 

It was the nimble Alexander who spoke, at the same 
handing Raynal a note. The other tore it open, and 
read : . 

" Dear Mr. Raynal, . Very sorry, but it wont G. 

" Yours ever truly, 

" Robinson Brownsmith." 

The manager, then, had found him out, and this chance 
was gone with the rest. What next ? 

He crushed the paper in his hands and strode rapidly 
away. The little crowd tittered among themselves and 
pointed after him. The whole town knew the story now. 
How could he exist any longer in this hateful place ? the 
baffled swindler thought, as he tramped onwards over the 
uneven paving-stones. By this time the game was well 



THE COMING DANGER. 247 

nigh over, and the reader and writer have very nearly- 
done with Pierre RaynaFs fortunes. Yet a little while, 
and the miserable farce will be worked out, and the un- 
happy rascal consigned to the outer darkness which lies 
beyond the words, " the end/' upon our last page. 

You may be sure good little Eelicite was on the look- 
out for the return of her lord and master, as the hour 
approached when the diligence might be expected. Afar 
off he saw her peeping from the shop door, with an 
anxious expression which changed to one of joyous re- 
cognition as he came within the range of her vision and 
waved her an anticipatory kiss. 

Unmindful of the presence of a would-be customer, 
who reached the shop door at the same moment that he 
crossed the threshold, Mr. Pomponney caught Felicite to 
his heart, and gave her a loud sounding smack on either 
cheek. 

" Behold me, my cabbage \" the chemist said in his 
native tongue. " Behold me returned after a journey . 
but a journey ! Behold me as tired as a dog, and with the 
hunger of a wolf/'' Then to the customer, whose pre- 
sence he had noticed for the first time . " a journey, sir, 
of over ten leagues; a journey from Calais, undertaken 
in the course of certain negotiations relating to a con- 
signment of goods from a foreign port." 

" Yes, yes," said the customer. " 1 want two sous 
worth of rhubarb." 

This order disposed of, Mr. Pomponney had leisure to 
dilate upon the dangers and difficulties of the journey 
just accomplished, and narrate at length the details of 
half-a-dozen interviews with the custom-house authorities, 
in which he, Pomponney, had got ever so much the best 
*f everything; except that, in the end, he had got 



248 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

no nearer towards obtaining possession of the missing 
chemicals than when he started upon his voyage of in- 
quiry. 

In the middle of these histories, catching sight of 
Raynal just outside the shop, the circumstances of their 
late interview occurred to him. " Since I have returned, 
my dear Felicite," pursued the chemist, " I have not, I 
trust, neglected any opportunity of extending our busi- 
ness connexions with the gentry of the neighbourhood. 
Although, hitherto, we have enjoyed the privilege of sup- 
plying the Baroness de Grandvilain, we have not . Ah, 
my dear sir, this is indeed an honour ! What may I 
have the pleasure of serving you with ?" 

These words were addressed to Manon's former lover, 
who had entered the door and approached the counter. 

" It is merely a trifling favour I wanted to ask of you," 
said Raynal, easily ; and then stopping, glanced mean- 
ingly towards Felicite, as much as to say, " I should like 
to speak to your husband, alone." 

Rightly interpreting the look, Mr. Pomponney winked 
mysteriously at Mrs. Pomponney, and nodded his head 
towards the back parlour. To this Felicite replied by a 
sort of appealing look which Mr. Pomponney mistook for 
a request to be allowed to make one at the coming con- 
ference. " My dear," said he, in a tone of mild expostu- 
lation, " Mr. Raynal and I wish to speak together, for a 
moment, in private. Doubtless Mr. Raynal has some 
matter on which he desires to confer with me. My dear, 
if you will allow us one moment." 

On this, good little Mrs. Pomponney retired in some con- 
fusion, and left the gentlemen alone. 

" If the matter upon which you wish to consult me is 
a professional one," began the chemist. An idea had 
taken possession of the worthy Pomponney. He was in 



THE COMING DANGER. 249 

the habit of prescribing in a general way for the more 
humble of his customers, and had achieved some small suc- 
cesses now and then. The news of his cases had perhaps 
travelled to Longanna, and he in future would displace 
the celebrated Tominet. It is true that his friend Joseph 
was anxious to obtain the position of physician in ordi- 
nary to the chateau, but then . All is fair in love and war ; 
why not in physic ? 

" No, no," said Raynal, biting his lip in mortification. 
"No, no. It is not. I don't want to consult you. The 
merest trifle in the world. I have come out without my 
purse, and wanted a hundred francs, for an hour or two, 
till I have time to get back to the chateau.'' 

The chemist's face beamed radiant. Almost better, this, 
than the consultation. Such confidence ! so friendly ! . 
and he opened the till. There were not more than twenty 
francs there, and he had about ten more in his pocket. 
Most likely Felicite had the money. Should he ask her ? 
No, it would be so much better to mention the matter 
casually during the course of the evening. Besides, why 
should he want to tell his wife of every little trifle ? 
This was strictly private business between gentlemen. 
There was no occasion to make a fuss about it. The 
Saint Babylas bank was at the next street corner. He 
could run there and back in a moment, and draw out 
the money. 

" May I trouble you to take a seat, sir ? One instant 
only. By the oddest chance, I have not as much in the 
till." 

He was rather vexed that it should have so happened. 
It would have been better had Raynal not chanced to 
light upon the till at a moment when there was such a 
very small amount of capital therein deposited. 

Raynal nodded assent, and taking a seat with all the 



250 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

carelessness he could assume, prepared to wait for the 
chemist's return. But he was a long while coming. 
Felicite, busy with some domestic arrangements in the 
parlour at the back of the shop at the moment when 
Mr. Pomponney was departing on his errand, now peeping 
round the corner of the blind which half covered the 
window in the partition door, wondered what could have 
happened, and whether it were possible that the smooth- 
spoken, wicked gentleman in the shop could have it in 
his heart to bring her Hyppolite into any sort of trouble. 

Meanwhile Baynal, beating his boot with the light 
cane he carried, and, in the old way, gnawing at his 
moustache, called all his patience to his aid, and waited 
silently. But he was doomed to meet with another 
disappointment. 

Before the bank counter, as the chemist stood with the 
cheque he had just written between his fingers, who, of 
all persons in the world, should slap him on the shoulder 
but the jovial Joseph himself, looking even in better 
health and spirits than he ever had been. 

" Pomponney," said the doctor, u it's an age since I 
have seen you. How are you, Pomponney ?" 

On Joe's side it seemed almost like a meeting between 
long-lost brothers ; but the chemist's manner was cold 
and formal. Perhaps he was, too, just a little bit ashamed 
of his own friendly intentions a few moments ago. 

" It's you, is it ? How do you do, sir ?" 

" It's I, sure enough. This little town has not nearly 
seen the last of me. I'll be the making of this little 
town yet, if it will allow me." 

The cleanly-shaven cashier smiled grimly at these 
words. The fame of Joseph's deeds had spread far and 
wide, and the great wooden-leg business was by this time 
historical. 



THE COMING DANGER. 251 

Joe noticed the cashier's expression, and a sort of twist 
of the chemist's features, and went on. " It is not every- 
body in the world who has lost confidence in me, Mr. 
Pomponney. The results of science may sometimes be 
defeated by fate or chance ; but, in the long run, sir, 
they triumph.'" 

" Yes, yes," said the chemist, fidgeting. This was his 
own style of talk, but he could not put up with it from 
other people. 

" I have not lost all my friends, sir, think you ?" 
pursued the doctor, as though in answer to a question. 
" Some of the highest in the land, sir . some of the best 
families in the neighbourhood, still honour me with their 
confidence, I am proud to say. Lonciong nobbless . 
lonciong nobbless est a moi. For the rest I care nothing 
. backed by the Baroness de Grandvilain, whom at this 
present moment I have the honour to attend in her 
serious indisposition." 

".Indisposition!" echoed the chemist. " What in- 
disposition ?" 

" Haven't you heard ?" said Joseph. " My dear Mr. 
Pomponney, you should keep up with the times. It is true 
that the details relating to Mr. RaynaFs ignominious dis- 
missal are known only to a few of the members of her 
household, and to the medical adviser, who of course is, 
as it were, one of the family; but the broken-off marriage 
is now the town's talk." 

Mr. Pomponney crushed the cheque between his 
fingers, and turned pale. 

" Is this true ?" he asked, looking despairingly towards 
the cashier. This gentleman, with a shrug of the 
shoulders, which seemed to say, " Understand, I am in 
no way responsible for what every one says," replied, 
'" Every one says so." 



252 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

Mr. Pomponney sank into a chair, and wiped his face 
with his pocket-handkerchief. 

" Thank Heaven, I heard of it in time !" he exclaimed 
aloud ; and then, as the other two regarded him curiously, 
he pulled himself together as best he could, saying, " I . 
I might have done something I should have been sorry for." 

Joe and the banker's clerk still regarded him with 
fixed attention, but could make nothing of his words. 
Indeed, he might have kept his secret easily, had it not 
been too large for him, and forced its way out, as it were 
against his will. 

" The villain !" he exclaimed ; " he might have ruined 
me. The atrocious miscreant !" 

" What ! Raynal has been trying to borrow of you ?" 
cried Joe, springing readily at this conclusion, which 
seemed" to him a very natural one, and just what would 
occur under the circumstances. 

" He has tried to do so, sir," replied Mr. Pomponney, 
rising. " He took advantage of my temporary absence 
from the town, and consequent ignorance of recent events, 
and in the most dastardly and hypocritical manner, en- 
deavoured to . to " 

Here Mr. Pomponney's feelings got the better of him. 
and he sank back once more, and wiped his head. 

" Was it a large sum he wanted ?" asked Joe. 

The chemist squeezed the paper more tightly in his 
hand. " A considerable amount, sir," he replied. " Per- 
haps not enough to utterly ruin me had I lost it, but 
more than I should have liked to lose . much more . 
much more !" 

There was a disagreeable smirk upon the doctor's face ; 
for the truth is, Joe, when he laid his hand upon the 
chemist's shoulder, had looked over it at the cheque he 
was filling up. 



THE COMING DANGER. 253 

" You've had a lucky escape, sir," said he. " Fru very 
happy I was the humble instrument of your preservation." 

Outside the bank door again, Mr. Pomponney glanced 
rather uneasily in the direction of his shop. It must be 
confessed that the task before him was not a very 
pleasant one. Raynal had not asked for a large sum of 
money. It is true that, large or small, Mr. Pomponney 
was perfectly justified in resisting any attempt at impo- 
sition ; but then, after all, was he quite certain that 
Raynal's case was as hopeless as was represented? Sup- 
posing Raynal was " a good man," as the phrase goes, and 
Pomponney, by refusing him, made him his enemy for life. 

Half-way down the street he had a good mind to go 
back and draw the money from the bank. Joe was still 
there, however, and would he not see through that little 
fiction about the largeness of the amount. In reality, 
Joe would have done nothing of the kind, but Mr. Pom- 
ponney' s conscience made a coward of him, and he dared 
not face his old friend. 

As he approached the shop, he gazed fixedly at the 
upper windows, in the vague hope of seeing his Pelicite. 
If he were only fortunate enough to do so, he might, by 
some signal, attract her attention, call her out, and send 
her back again with a message to the enemy. 

" You've only got to tell him so and so." He was 
rehearsing the words he would say to Felicite if he luckily 
caught sight of her. It is the way that people put it 
who employ others to do their dirty work. " You've 
only such and such a thing to do. Just say so and so, 
and don't put up with any of his nonsense." 

Thus our Pomponney could see quite plainly that it 
would be the easiest thing in the world for anybody else 
but himself to put this fellow Raynal off, and that most 



254 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

decidedly somebody else ought to do it. While, however ; 
he was thus reflecting, time rolled on, and it was ridicu- 
lous to think that he could much longer delay the evil 
moment ; but just when he was screwing up his courage 
to go in and brazen the affair out, he caught sight of 
Professor Polyblank approaching in the distance from the 
direction in which he had himself come, and, taking 
refuge in an archway, waited confidently for his arrival. 
What better scapegoat could he have chosen ? 

The professor came towards him with that uncertain 
hesitating gait which was peculiar to him. " What a 
poor beggar that fellow looks !" thought Mr. Pomponney. 
" Really, scarcely a creditable inmate of one's establish- 
ment. We must see, presently, when things have shaken 
down a little, whether we cannot make some change for 
the better, Mr. Polyblank !" 

The professor started, looked about vaguely, and at 
last came towards him. 

" You're going in, I think ?" 

" Yes." 

" You might undertake a trifling commission for me 
if you have no objection ; and I have a little confidence 
to make to you which I should hesitate to make to any 
one with whom I was not upon terms of close inti- 
macy. Your long residence under my roof may, how- 
ever, to some extent, justify the exception I make in your 
favour." 

Polyblank smiled and bowed, wondering what he ought 
to say, and what unexpected piece of good fortune was 
in store for him. 

" The fact is, then," continued Mr. Pomponney, " that 
man Raynal, who was to have married the Baroness de 
Grandvilain, has just come to try and swindle me out of 
a hundred francs. I don't want to see the fellow. In- 



THE COMING DANGER. 255 

deed, I would rather not. I might forget myself, and do 
what I shouldn't like to do ; and I thought if you would 
tell him for me " 

But here the worthy chemist was interrupted by the 
strange expression of the professor's face, and by the 
sudden laying of a heavy hand on his (the chemist's) 
shoulder. Turning quickly, he found Raynal behind 
him with a threatening expression of countenance. 

" He need tell me nothing," said the subject of the 
chemist's discourse. " I've heard all I want to hear. 
Don't let me hear you say half as much again, or I'll 
break your neck for you." 

There was something so threatening in the young 
man's tone and gesture as he uttered these words, that 
Mr. Pomponney could not refrain from staggering back 
a pace or two, and raising his arm as though to ward off 
an expected blow. The blow not coming, Mr. Pomponney 
gained courage to say : 

" We want no blustering here, sir, if you please. We 
want nothing of that kind !" 

Raynal stepped up to him with set teeth and a savage 
look about his eyes. " What have you got to say to 
me ?" he asked. 

But it would have appeared that the chemist had little 
to say under these circumstances, and was only too 
anxious to place a safe distance between himself and his 
assailant. In endeavouring to do this he lost his balance 
over some projecting brickwork, and assumed a sitting 
posture upon a little mound of cabbage-leaves and other 
refuse. Here Raynal left him, and strode away with a 
contemptuous smile. 

"You see, sir," said the chemist, still maintaining 
his position among the cabbage-leaves, but waving his 
hands with something of the old grand style ; " you see 



256 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

the sort of ruffian I have to deal with. I hardly know- 
how I refrained from chastising him as he deserved." 

Without pausing to inquire into the chemists motives 
for this singular forbearance on his part, Polyblank 
hurried after Paynal, and overtook him in a quiet by- 
street. Raynal heard footsteps behind him, and turned 
to see with whom he had to deal. 

" Can I speak to you a moment ?" asked the pro- 
fessor. 

The other with a bad grace stopped to listen. He was 
in a sullen rage, and had lost patience with the game he 
had hitherto played so perseveringly. Every chance was 
gone by this time ; the mask might as well be dropped, 
for there was now but little need of it. Why, then, be 
civil to this schoolmaster fellow ? "What use could he 
be of ? "What did he want, except it was to scoff at 
him, now that he was down ? 

" You will, I hope, believe me when I say that it is 
not idle curiosity that prompts me to inquire into your 
affairs. From what Mr. Pomponney said just now, I 
learnt that you were in want of a small sum of money. 
I am not aware whether after . whether, under the cir- 
cumstances . that is to say, whether you mean to con- 
tinue to reside in the town. I thought that in the case 

of your going, I might . But I trust that you will 

take this in a friendly spirit, as it is meant." 

Had Polyblank himself been begging for the money 
he could not have blushed and stammered more hope- 
lessly, and to most other persons his meaning would 
hardly have been intelligible. In this case, however, 
there was no occasion for waste of words. 

There was a small wine-shop close at hand, which 
-chanced at the moment to be empty, and here they 
talked the business over. Half-an-hour afterwards, at 



THE COMING DANGER. 257 

the Saint Babylas bank Raynal presented a cheque for a 
hundred francs, which bore the signature of Peter 
Polyblank. By an odd chance, Joseph, who had called 
in again to make some inquiry, was present when the 
payment was made. 

" That's your brother, isn't it ?" asked the cashier, 
when Raynal had gone, showing the cheque, as he spoke, 
to the jovial Joseph. 

" There's no doubt about that," said Joe ; and, to 
himself, he added, " What made him do this, I wonder ?" 
But the cause of the payment was not what most inter- 
ested the professor's vivacious relative. 

" He banks, does he ?" said Mr. Joseph, as he 
sauntered towards his cafe. " He's been making a nice 
little thing of it lately, one way and another. Well, I'm 
glad he has ; I'm sure I don't grudge him a two-sous 
piece, but I don't see why he need be quite so close 
about it. It isn't what I should have expected from 
him. It isn't altogether brotherly." 

Raynal, then, had at last got sufficient money to 
enable him to leave the town. The sum was small 
enough, and would but carry him a short way on the 
journey he was about to undertake, for there was no 
safety for him, he thought, until he should have placed 
the broad Atlantic betwixt him and the threatening 
danger. 

But without this money he could not have stirred, 
for during the last two days he had been almost penni- 
less. At any rate, now he could make a start, and 
destroy the traces if pursuers were already on his track. 
To get down to the sea-coast and over to England was 
the object he had first in view. The place where they 
wanted him most was the last place they would think it 

17 



258 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

likely to find him, and there he might be safe for awhile, 
until he could raise some money through a channel in 
which he felt pretty certain of success, and then take a 
passage for America. 

At any rate, he could get away from this hateful town, 
where every hand was raised against him. In three 
hours, at most, the diligence would start for Calais, and 
he determined that he would go by it. Three hours ! 
that was not a very long time to pass away. Three 
hours, and he would see the end of these accursed streets, 
in which he had walked so many weary miles and 
suffered such humiliation these two days past. Three 
hours, and danger would be left behind. 



CHAPTER XXIV 

EXIT. 

Mony a one for him makes mane, 

But nane sail ken where he is gane ; 

O'er his white banes, when they are bare, 

The wind sail blaw for evermair> . The Twa Gorbies. 

There had been so much to talk about in Saint Babylas 
during the last few days, it was surely no wonder if two 
insignificant travellers by the diligence attracted but a 
small share of public attention. A long while afterwards, 
when strange events had taken place, and had found their 
record in the pages of the local Gazette, this carelessness 
was not a little regretted in certain circles, and there 
were not wanting those . Pomponney, you may be pretty 
sure, among the number . who made belief always to 
have had some inkling of the truth, and to have put this 
and that together, and formed their own conclusions. 



exit. 259 

The only impediment these persons found to gaming 
universal credence lay in the difficulty of accounting for 
their previous total silence upon the subject. 

In justice to the less clever ones, who might have seen 
so much and yet saw nothing . who had every opportunity 
afforded them of gathering interesting details, but gathered 
none, it ought to be fairly stated, at once, that there 
really was nothing whatever at all peculiar about the 
appearance of either of the travellers, and that had you 
not suspected that they wore a mask and were not what 
they seemed, they were as uninteresting a couple as you 
could well meet with in a long day's march. 

In the official list of passengers by the diligence were 
recorded the names of Brown of England and Camus of 
Dijon, and they were both agriculturists. Mr. Pomponney 
at least knew this much : they had come to Saint Babylas 
upon business, and that business had something to do 
with the cultivation of beet-root . still more vaguely 
described, at the time as " something about beet-root." 

Whatever the something might be, however, it would 
appear that there was no immediate hurry in the business ; 
and when they had made certain little arrangements in 
the diligence office, Brown and Camus thrust their hands 
into their pockets and went out strolling. Without 
making any inquiry as to the whereabouts of any particular 
locality, they strolled in what seemed quite a purposeless 
sort of way up one street and down another, every now 
and then coming to a stand-still to stare about them, and 
then strolling on again ; and surely no one in the world 
could have looked as if he knew less what he was about, 
and where he wanted to go to, than Brown of England . 
unless, indeed, it were Camus of Dijon. 

Such very common-place and uninteresting loafers 
were they however, that nobody but a skittle-sharper 

17. -> 



260 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

would have been the least likely to trouble himself -with 
speculations upon their account ; and as no such disrepu- 
table gentry existed in the good town of Saint Babylas, 
Brown and Camus were allowed to stroll unheeded, and 
strolled on. But in the course of their wanderings they 
came to that street in which Raynal's lodgings were 
situated, and, halting before the door, Camus of Dijon 
said . 

" This is it." 

" Will you go in ?" asked Brown of England. 

" I think I will/' said Camus, in a dreamy sort of way. 
if Will you stop out here ?" 

" I might as well," said Brown, in an absent manner. 
" If you want me, perhaps you'll whistle." 

Left to himself, Brown of England lounged against the 
house-side, and hummed a popular street tune of his native 
land. An extra uprightness about Mr. Brown's bearing 
would have inclined a stranger to suppose that, some 
time or other, he must have been in the army ; but there 
was also that peculiar kind of angularity in his move- 
ments which a close observer may generally detect about 
an English policeman when he has assumed private 
clothes by way of disguise. But he had such an innocent 
sort of face, it was really like doubting the existence of 
truth in any shape to believe that its owner could mean 
mischief. 

Presently there was a light quick step audible in the 
.courtyard, and in another moment Camus was standing 
by Brown's side ; but it was not at all the same Camus 
who had left him a moment ago. There were still the 
light curly locks and ruddy cheeks, but there was an 
anxious, half-scared look about the eyes that seemed to 
say that something was amiss. 

" What's wrong ?" 



EXIT. 26 f 

" I hardly know as yet. I hope we're not too late." 

" Too late ? The devil !" 

So excited was Brown of England at the intelligence 
his friend had brought him, it was no wonder that he 
broke out into his native tongue ; breaking out at the same 
time into a cold perspiration, and wiping his face with a 
coloured cotton pocket-handkerchief. 

" Come along," said Camus ; " we've wasted too much 
time as it is. If we had not had the misfortune to listen 
to that fool in the diligence we should have known all 
about it long ago." 

Not at all like the two slouching rustics of five minutes 
since were Brown and Camus, as they walked briskly 
away, talking together in low, earnest tones. A while' 
afterwards, however, with their old manner on them, they 
were making inquiries at the diligence office. Were 
there any more places vacant for the conveyance to start 
two hours hence from the " Three Crowns ?" All had 
been taken but one. The three seats in the coupe in 
the name of Brown. In the interior, Guenillon, Grelet, 
Merlot, &c. 

Camus glanced over the man's shoulder and read the 
names upon the list. There was a note against one : . 
" Francois to get up at the cabaret at Longanna." 

" Is Mr. Francois a resident of Longanna ?" asked 
Brown. 

'' There may be more than one Francois in the village. 
The name is common enough." 

" To be sure. You might have seen him, though, 
when he came to book his place." 

" Ah ! However, I didn't. Let me see now how 
that was. He sent some one here to book it for him." 

" Didn't you know the some one ?" 

" No, I didn't." 



262 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

" There may be four or five hundred Francoises in the 
village/' said Brown of England ; " but I have a sort of 
conviction that's the gentleman we're looking after." 

" If it is, we shall find him without much trouble. 
In the meantime, let us go on with our inquiries." 

A hundred and one questions, pertinent and imperti- 
nent, did our travellers ask in all quarters of the town 
before they seemed to have obtained the information of 
which they were in search, and several miles had they 
tramped before eventually they turned their faces towards 
Longanna, at which place they had concluded they would 
find they person of whom they were in quest. 

Alone by themselves upon the marshes, a wondrous 
change came over these persevering pedestrians. They 
were no longer Brown of England and Camus of Dijon, 
nor were there, as hitherto, to be found in their talk any 
of those frequent allusions to trade and husbandry which 
had been so adroitly introduced into their conversation 
whilst making their inquiries in the town. They differed 
from agriculturalists in general in this respect, that they 
were only reapers, not sowers, and it was out of other 
peoples' crops that they made now and then a moderate 
harvest. Ugly crops were these, springing up for the 
most part in over-crowded cities, in crooked lanes, blind 
alleys, and back slums . rank and weedy crops of no 
advantage to any one in the world, except to the Brown 
and Camus brotherhood, who made their selections from 
time to time when there were any particular weeds made 
themselves conspicuous among the rest and required to 
be rooted out and laid by in strong stone boxes, specially 
designed for their safe keeping. 

An hour before the time the diligence was expected to 
pass through the village, the proprietor of the solitary 



exit. 263 

cabaret stood at the door of his establishment and 
gazed despondingly down the long white road before 
him. 

" It seems to me," he thought, " it's going to rain 
again. I suppose we shall be washed away altogether 
before we've done. Well, if we are, what odds ? . every- 
body's money is under water as it is. The question is, 
Will it ever come to the surface again ? In the mean- 
while, these are not the times to give credit. Bah ! how 
cold it has turned. I might as well go in and shut the 
door for all the custom I am likely to get to-night." 

But in this last idea he was wrong, for at that moment 
two of the villagers were plodding heavily down the 
street with the intention of dropping in to talk over their 
grievances while they drank a jug of beer ; and hardly 
had they taken their seats before a, third appeared upon 
the threshold. Not long afterwards a couple of bagmen, 
fatigued by a long and somewhat profitless journey round 
some of the neighbouring villages, came in, called for 
drink, lit their pipes, and cursed their luck ; then called 
for more drink, and, in a miserable sort of way, seemed 
to be enjoying themselves pretty well, all things con- 
sidered. 

After these a small farmer from a flooded barn on the 
marshes, very despondent indeed, called for neat brandy. 
Then a dark, handsome gentleman, at whom the customers 
looked shily from the corners of their eyes, drawing each 
other's attention to him by nudges, and nods and winks. 
He also called for brandy, and sat apart, biting his mous- 
tache meditatively. 

Undoubtedly times were bad, and the spirits of the 
customers at a low ebb, but they drank fairly, and what 
more could be desired ? Perhaps the cabaret keeper was 
inclined to be unusally down-hearted this particular 



-64 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

evening, for although undoubtedly he had been doing a 
much better trade during the last half-hour, and making 
larger profits than he had done any other half-hour the 
last six months past, he looked around -with a gloomy 
brow, and shook his head and sighed. 

After all, things were not as they used to be. Would 
they ever be in the old state again ? Not likely. "Would 
he ever again play another game at cards with such jolly 
dogs as had patronized his cabaret in those happy days 
before the manufactory was burnt down, and the village 
flooded? Would there ever be such parties of dominoes 
. such merry drinking bouts, all at the expense of the 
jolly dogs, and very much to mine host's advantage ? 
No chance of it. Why, there were no jolly dogs left 
above water in a circuit of three leagues . that he felt 
certain of . nor any but long faces and black looks likely 
to be found among his customers. But here, again, was 
the cabaret-keeper labouring under a wrong impression; 
for again the door was thrown open . this time to give 
entrance to a couple of strangers ; the first as jolly a 
dog, to all appearances, as ever wore boot leather, who 
introduced himself with a " Salut, messieurs, mesdames, 
la compagnie \" although the only lady present was 
a little girl of eleven years of age, the cabaretier's 
daughter. 

" Un joli brin de femmelote," he told her father they 
would call her down in his part of the country, which 
curiously enough was the cabaret keeper's country also. 
Upon the strength of this extraordinary coincidence, the 
jolly stranger and he shook hands very warmly, and the 
jolly stranger, right off, ordered a bottle of wine, which 
he said there was just time to drink before the diligence 
might be expected. 

" Ah, and another too,'"' said the landlord. " Will 



exit. 265 

you have the kindness to be seated, gentlemen, pendant 
que je vais aveindre la fine bouteille ?" 

At this phrase the brave Dijonnais laughed merrily, 
saying he was glad to see mine host had not forgotten 
his mother tongue ; but with regard to sitting down, 
there were plenty of seats disengaged, though no vacant 
table, unless the strangers were to share that at present 
occupied by the dark, handsome gentleman, who sat 
apart. However, why not ? The table was a large one, 
and the meditative gentleman bowed a gracious consent 
to the request for his permission ; indeed, he could not 
do otherwise, for Mr. Camus of Dijon had such a per- 
suasive way with him. 

The landlord was not long before he returned from 
his cellar, carrying a bottle very carefully in a little 
basket, and as carefully uncorking it, saying, as he filled 
his guests' glasses, " Vous me direz des nouvelles de ce 
vinot; il n'y en a pas de pareil au pays." 

It was a good bottle of wine, Mr. Camus protested, 
and loudly smacked his lips as he held a glass aloft be- 
tween his eye and the flaming candle. 

. <f And your friend/' said the landlord, greedy for 
praise ; " what does he say to it ?" 

The friend said, " Tres bong." He was an English- 
man, Mr. Camus explained; a gentleman with great ex- 
perience in agriculture, who had come over with him 
from England to make some inquiries respecting the 
cultivation of beet-root. It seemed from what Mr. 
Camus said that beet sugar was now largely imported 
into England, but that the consumption thereof by the 
English people could be almost doubled, and an enormous 
fortune made by proper management. The question was, 
ought the sugar to be manufactured in France or in 
England? Again, could the difficulty and expense of 



266 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

shipping be avoided by growing the beet-root in Eng- 
land, and could this be done as cheaply as over here ? 

These matters Mr. Camus and his friend Mr. Brown 
of England had gone into thoroughly, and had come to 
certain conclusions which at that moment they were not 
at liberty to divulge. Mr. Brown had come over to pick 
up a few wrinkles, and those wrinkles had been picked 
up, and Mr. Brown had got them in his head, and meant 
to turn them to account in due season. 

Mr. Camus had, it would appear, not only got his 
wrinkles in his head, but on the outside too, for at times 
he had a haggard, thoughtful look, which made him ap- 
pear old and wise. Upon these occasions, when the 
crows' feet round his eyes were most conspicuous, it was 
difficult to account for his beardless chin and luxuriant 
locks, but when he laughed and showed his white teeth, 
he was quite boyish. 

There was a rickety old cuckoo clock in one corner of 
the room, which Mr. Camus alluded to as the " dindelle," 
and, by this, it wanted at least a quarter of an hour of 
the time the diligence might be expected. 

" But they are never punctual, I suppose ?" said Mr. 
Camus. 

" Never, by any chance," the landlord responded. 

" There is time, then, for another bottle ?" 

« Plenty." 

" As long as we're not hurried/' said Camus, " ca me 
fait trop aller de guingoi." 

When the landlord was gone, Brown and Camus began 
to talk English, and of the two perhaps Camus talked the 
language best. 

" I suppose our friend is right in what he says about 
the time," observed the native of Dijon. 

" I suppose he wont much care, as long as there is 



exit. 267 

time to uncork the bottle and make us dub up for 
it." 

" I suppose not. It is to be hoped, though, the dili- 
gence will get in to an hour or so of the time they state, 
or we shall lose the boat." 

" There'll be the deuce to pay if we do that, and our 
friends all waiting to meet us." 

" It's no use to ask any questions of these boors. I 
wonder, now, if this gentleman could tell us ?" 

" If we only knew whether there was another boat to 
England later in the day. In that case, you see " 

" But the gentleman wont know anything about the 
English boats. Everybody isn't always wanting to go 
over to England." 

" To be sure ; that did not strike me. I fancied at 
first the gentleman was English." 

It was the dark, handsome gentleman, sitting at the 
other end of the table, who was the subject of these re- 
marks ; and who, by the rising colour in his face, seemed 
to be sufficiently acquainted with the language they were 
speaking to know that they had reference to him. As 
Mr. Brown, too, was staring at him with all his eyes, it 
was scarcely possible any longer to remain silent. 

" There is a boat to-morrow about noon," he said. 
" You will have plenty of time to catch that." 

" Ah ! you are English, then ?" cried Mr. Brown, de- 
lighted at the discovery of a compatriot. 

" Well, no." 

" No ! You surprise me. But you have lived there a 
long time, no doubt. You must have lived there, to pick 
up so good an accent." 

It must be owned there was nothing very extraordinary 
about his English, and the meditative gentleman listened 
-a little doubtfully to this praise, and fixed his eyes 



268 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

steadfastly upon Mr. Brown's face. Let the term of his 
residence upon the other side of the Channel have been long 
or short, he seemed to have picked up some of the insular 
prejudice. He mistrusted strangers, and might have 
taken Mr. Brown for a swell-mobsman, with designs upon 
his pocket. 

" I lived there for a short time/' he said, and here 
would have dropped the subject and backed out of further 
conversation ; but Mr. Camus came to his friend's rescue. 

" A splendid country, sir," cried he. " Some lovely 
spots in it. Some rich land, nobly cultivated. You may 
hare heard, sir, my friend and I have been making some 
inquiries hereabouts, respecting the cultivation of beet- 
root ?" 

The gentleman, yawning slightly, replied without the 
slightest show of interest, that he thought he had heard 
something of the kind, but was not listening attentively. 

" Yes, sir/' pursued Mr. Camus, nothing daunted ; 
" and that brought us into this neighbourhood, though I 
must confess we have met with a little disappointment . 
from a strange cause, too. You see, a lady living in 
these parts, the Baroness de Grandvilain she's called " 

The meditative gentleman's eyes turned quickly to- 
wards him at the sound of this name. 

" That's it," put in Mr. Brown, with a knowing smile. 

" This baroness, then, we are told, was to have been 
married to some fellow or other, and " 

The landlord had returned by this time with the 
second bottle. 

" I've been rather slow," said he. " My light went 
out. I was afraid of shaking the wine. You'll find it. 
worth waiting for, I hope." 

"And the diligence?" 

" No fear of that for another ten minutes." 



exit. 269 

" That's well. I have five minutes' talk to get through 
with this gentleman before then. As I was saying 



Here, landlord, another glass. You will drink with us, 
sir, I hope ? Come, it will do you no harm before your 
journey." 

" I did not say I was going a journey." 

" Did you not ? I guessed it, then. What put it in 

my head But as I was saying . this baroness was to 

have been married to a Mr. , Mr. ? What was 

it, Brown?" 

" Mr. Francois. Was not that what they told us ?" 

The meditative gentleman changed colour. 

" Why, what put that in your head, mon fieu ? How 
you talk ! It was Lenord, or a name much like it. 
However, this gentleman knows what it was, no doubt, if 
he lives hereabouts. A better bottle than the last, my 
brave ; the best I've tasted, too, since last Christmas time, 
one night when we were merry-making at my father-in- 
law's, and were singing. Do you know this song, little miss? 

J'ai ouy chanter le rossign6 

Qui chantait un chant si nouveau, 

Si bon, si beau, 

Si re'sonneau, 
II m'y rompait la t6te, 

Tant il prSchait 

Et caquetait ; 
A done pri8 ma houlette, 
Pour aller voir Naulet. 

What are the other verses, little miss ? And this diligence, 
is it never coming ?" 

During this time the meditative gentleman had been 
meditating, with his hand covering the lower part of his 
face, and his eyes half hidden by the brim of his hat, 
pulled low down over his brow. When the song came 
to an end, he broke silence, this time speaking in French. 
" You did not finish what you were saying about the 



270 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

Baroness de Grandvilain. What had her marriage to do 
with your inquiries ?" 

"Ah, to be sure. I forgot what I was talking about. 
On a great deal of the baroness's land round hereabouts 
beet-root is cultivated, and we wished to ask a lot of 
questions of her bailiff, if she has one. Do you know, 
sir ?" 

" I believe not ; I don't know." 

" Well, so they seemed to say ,. and that the land was 
all let out, and that it was a sort of companion, a middle- 
aged lady living with her, who managed about the rents 
with the farmers." 

" I believe so." 

" This baroness, from what they say, I should take to- 
be an easy -going sort of person . easily deceived V 

" Perhaps." 

" But quite young, I am told, and wonderfully pretty, 
and rich too. She has a fine estate over there, in 
England. It was her English man of business who gave 
us a letter of introduction. But this diligence . is it 
never coming?" 

The landlord had been standing outside the house for 
the last two or three minutes, and he came in as Camus 
spoke to say that it was close at hand. 

The meditative gentleman rose and walked towards the 
door. Mr. Brown drew out his purse and settled the 
account. The rumble of the diligence wheels was now 
audible, at most a hundred yards off. In a few moments 
more it had drawn up, with much jingling, jolting, and 
bumping, in front of the cabaret door. The people who 
had been drinking inside came trooping out to see the 
sight ; and one of the farmers recognising a friend upon the 
roof, called out to him loudly, as though he had been on 
the top of a mountain, and he bawled back again louder 



EXIT. 271 

still. The driver, too, -was bawling something to the 
landlord, and the conductor, adjusting a twisted strap in 
the harness, bawled loudest of all, by way of quieting the 
restive horses. 

As the meditative gentleman stood by the side of the 
door, the only silent person in the assemblage, his face 
wore even a more thoughtful expression than it had done 
any time during his interview with Mr. Camus of Dijon. 
Was it possible that he was meditating flight ? If so, 
why stop so long to think about it ? Why not run and 
think afterwards ? Oh, if he had only known how pre- 
cious was every moment, and that the danger from which 
he was flying was creeping stealthily upon him, to have 
him, in a few brief seconds of time, tight within its iron 
clutch ? 

A hand was laid upon his arm . Camus of Dijon ! 
" You have got a place in the inside. You must ride 
with us instead, in the coupe." 

" Thank you. I prefer the other place." 

" And we prefer your company." 

" What do you mean ?" 

" Don't speak so loud, or we shall be noticed. There 
is no occasion for a scene. I always avoid that sort of 
thing when it is possible. Suppose we speak English ? 
You can't begin to practise too soon. You will want all 
your knowledge of the tongue over there for your de- 
fence." 

" I don't understand," the other said, faintly. 

" Yes, yes, you do," replied Camus, with a persuasive 
smile. " You wont give us any trouble, I am sure ; 
besides" . and here his voice altered to a harsh, grating 
tone, at which the hearer shuddered . " besides, we are 
two to one, Pierre Raynal, and you are our prisoner." 

As Raynal turned towards him, another hand grasped 



ZIZ THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

his other arm. He stood now between Brown and 
Camus, each, holding him tightly. The precious moment 
was gone for ever. All chance of escape was lost. 

" Let us get into our seats/' said Camus. " I took 
three places, as I made pretty sure we should ride toge- 
ther. It was almost a pity you wasted your money on a 
place in the interior. However, it cannot be helped/' 

" I will get up first," said Brown. " Mr. Raynal 
can come next, and you follow. I have the bracelets in 
my pocket; but we have no need of those, sir, I think. 
I dare say we shall get on very pleasantly . considering." 

Without making any answer Raynal took his place 
between the two police officers, to whom, as the dili- 
gence started, the landlord standing at the door waved 
an affectionate adieu. As they rumbled onwards his 
voice was faintly heard above the clatter, bidding them 
bon voyage. In this cry, the farmers, villagers and bag- 
men joined in chorus, and to them Camus waved his 
hand in reply. 

" Be of good heart, sir," he said, turning towards 
Raynal. " Who knows ? You may get through with 
flying colours. There are so many quibbles and quirks 
in your laws over there . so many loopholes to slip 
through. Besides, every one is innocent until he is 
found guilty. Eh, Charley ?" 

Here he whom we have known as Brown of England, 
smiled grimly. It may have been possible that he knew 
more than he thought fit to say upon the subject of 
Raynal's chances. Some time afterwards, talking the 
matter over with a friend, he remarked, " We should 
hardly have taken the trouble we did to catch him, if 
the case had not been tolerably straightforward." 

Camus, whom the wine had, perhaps, inclined towards 
conversation, went on to inform his prisoner that he 



exit. 273 

need be under no apprehension upon the score of the 
legality of his capture, as all the necessary formalities had 
been most carefully attended to. The person known by 
the name of Brown carried in his pocket a warrant issued 
by a London magistrate for his (RaynaFs) apprehension, 
which instrument was presently exhibited, and its validity 
fully attested by the signatures it bore. 

The person of the name of Camus carried another in- 
strument, of French origin, entitling him to be his pri- 
soner's custodian as far as Calais, when he would be 
handed over to the safe keeping of the other officer, and ' 
taken by him to London. 

" But," he concluded, " there need be nothing un- 
pleasant between gentlemen. Of course, if you tried to 
escape it would be useless ; but you are too much of a 
gentleman to attempt such a thing ; therefore, as my 
worth friend here just now observed, there is no occasion 
for the darbies." 

Raynal, gazing fixedly into the darkness in front, paid 
no heed to this talk, and scarcely comprehended the 
meaning of a word that was uttered. One thing only 
he understood : the game was played out. All hope was 
over . the last chance gone. After all his schemes, and 
struggles, and agony of mind, he had failed at last ; and 
soon the gaol gates would close upon him, and God only 
knew how many weary years of his life be ground out 
within its pitiless walls. 

Half stunned by the suddenness with which the cap- 
ture had been made, he was as yet scarcely able to realize 
the full extent of the misfortune that had befallen him. 
In a few hours' time, in the loneliness and grave-like 
silence of his cell, he would have time to think ; but now 
everything seemed like a dream. 

The sound of the voices of the landlord and his guests* 

18 



274 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

died away in the distance. Lights flashed in the windows 
of a house here and there as the diligence passed, and 
now and then a door opened, showing the ruddy glow of 
the fire within. At a street corner the light of the lamps 
upon the diligence fell on the faces of a group of men 
standing there; now they had reached the chateau, which 
stood out black and silent against the black-blue sky; now 
it was past, and now they had reached the end of the 
village, and were out in the open country beyond. 

A cold and clammy mist hung over the marsh land 
and the dreary waste of water, covering a broad space 
farther than the eye could reach. The horses, in a cloud 
of steam, floundered onwards through the thick mud, 
and every five minutes seemed to be coming to a stand- 
still, and giving up the business for a bad job. Then, 
urged on again by shrill cries and guttural oaths from the 
driver, they floundered forward once more. 

The marshes past, came a high hill to mount, with a 
steep descent upon the other side ; in the performance of 
which the diligence zigzagged from side to side of the 
road, turning corners with a dangerous roll, like a ship 
in a rough sea. Down in the valley below they came 
then on a sleeping village, with a church tower and a 
churchyard, with glimpses of white wooden crosses as the 
lamps lit them up in passing. A hard-sleeping village it 
seemed, in which the heavy clattering and lumbering of 
the clumsy vehicle woke up only one solitary dog, that 
gave out half-a-dozen barks of sharp remonstrance, and 
subsided into silence again with a long whine. 

Beyond this a broken country, and a never-ending 
road, with a straggling row of lime trees on either side. 
Another village then, and then the same road stretching 
across more marsh land; then another village, and so on 
through the night. At times, if such a supposition were 



EXIT. 27 J 

not too monstrous, one might almost have imagined that 
Brown of England was guilty of snatching half-a-dozen 
winks of sleep at frequent intervals ; but Camus was 
always wide awake, and generally smoking. Did Raynal 
slumber also ? If so, it was with his eyes open. Yet he 
could hardly be awake . be alive to what was passing 
around. It was like the face of one who walks in his 
sleep . blank, meaningless, with dull and heavy eyes, 
stonily fixed upon vacancy. 

When day broke they were still rumbling onwards, 
now over a dreary barren country, yielding scanty crops 
of reedy grass, relieved at long distances by poor crops of 
wheat and rye, and fields of peas and beans. Coming to 
a halt in a quaint old fortified town, with moss-grown 
streets and crumbling walls and dilapidated battlements, 
Brown and Camus got down, helping their prisoner to 
alight also, and offered him some refreshment. He re- 
fused to eat, but took a long draught of cold brandy-and- 
Avater, while the policemen solaced themselves with cold 
pate and ale. Then the coachman called them back to 
their places, and they started once more. But, as yet, 
the journey was only two-thirds done, and there seemed to 
be but little chance of their reaching Calais in time for 
the morning boat. 

As though in a dream he heard the two men discussing 
the probabilities pro and con, but took no interest in the 
matter. What did it signify to him whether it was that 
boat, or the next, or any one ? As before, they were 
rumbling and jolting along the same endless lime-tree 
bounded road, and the same flat land and stagnant ditches 
lay right and left of them. The same melancholy vil- 
lages coming every now and then ; a couple of lean dogs 
yelping after them in one, in another a grey-headed idiot 
running before the horses' heads, and jabbering and 

18-2 



276 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

waving aloft his cap. A churchyai'd crowded with wooden 
crosses, on which the withered wreaths were thickly piled. 
The rain of a castle, one wall only left ; a score of wind- 
mills, only one at work ; still the same long road, and the 
marsh land again; but with a faint salt flavour in the breeze 
blowing across it, which told that the sea was now not far off. 

At last the sea itself, the crowd of shipping, the busy 
harbour and deadly-lively streets of Calais ; and now Mr. 
Camus's part of the journey was drawing to a close. Some 
weary hours yet to pass away, however, before the right 
boat started, and these passed in a private room of an 
hotel, the windows of which overlooked a sunless court- 
yard, much like what might be found in an English gaol, 
Mr. Brown remarked. 

Here, as they waited, the twilight gave place to dark- 
ness. The lights twinkled upon the harbour. Dusky 
forms moved to and fro in the obscurity, hauling heavy 
ropes and rattling chains. Men shouting from the- shore 
were shouted to by others from the boats, and now and 
then angry discussions were carried on in shrill tones, . 
men and women screaming together; the men screaming 
the loudest. 

The boat was alongside now, and they could go on 
board for an hour before it would start. That hour gone 
by, Mr. Camus had taken leave of his friend Brown and 
the prisoner, and stood leaning over a wooden railing, 
looking after them as the boat receded from the shore. A 
white wistful face looked out towards him from the deck 
of the steamer for a moment, and in another moment the 
darkness gathered over it, and Raynal's features faded 
from his sight, as their owner here fades from this history. 
With the punishment awaiting him at his dreary journey's 
end we have nothing to do, nor with the details of his 
future life. 



ONLY ANOTHER FAILURE. 277 

A wretched life, surely ; with glimpses of fleeting hap- 
piness ; mayhap moments of forgetfulness found in drink, 
lie was a rogue, a thief, a coward. He deserved his 
fate, you must allow ; but did all the world think so ? Oh, 
how he had been loved by one pure, unselfish heart ! 
And now that she lay at death's-door, was that love quite 
dead within her breast ? Who shall say ? There are 
some loves so enduring, no cruel outrage, no heartless 
neglect, can thoroughly crush them out. 



CHAPTER XXV 

ONLY ANOTHER FAILURE. 

II flit sage et savant; puis, comme tout s'acheve, 
Quand son &ge eut atteint uri siecle re>olu, 

II part pour le ciel, en nous leguatit ce reve, 
Car il avait reve" ce que vous avez lu. 

L'ecolier d'Aubantal. 

One evening, some weeks after these events, Professor 
Polybank was rather surprised to receive a visit from his 
brother Joe. It was not very often that the doctor made 
a call, for he generally had so much important business 
on his hands, he really had no time to waste in that way. 
How was it, then, that this evening was an exception to 
the general rule ? If you will have it, Mr. Joseph had 
a particular reason for calling. If you insist on further 
details, he wanted to borrow a couple of napoleons. 

Now, if the truth must be told respecting past trans- 
actions, there had been some few other napoleons bor- 
rowed from time to time, which had not been, strictly 
speaking, repaid at the time agreed upon for that purpose. 
Indeed, many of them had not been repaid without some 
considerable delay . perhaps, if we stick closely to facts, 



278 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

two-thirds of them had not been repaid at all. At least 
so it appeared from the testimony of some rough memo- 
randa on the subject in the professor's pocket-book. To 
the best of Joe's recollection, they had all been returned 
long ago, with the exception of one solitary napoleon > 
but then Joe kept no accounts. 

" I never did," he said, when speaking on the subject. 
" Perhaps I ought. It isn't fair to either of us to be 
so careless. But of course you're right, Peter ; you're 
always right in these matters. You've head enough for 
both of us, you have." 

The subject had then been dropped, and no subsequent 
allusion had been made to the balance for some weeks 
past. The brothers had not met very frequently. Peter 
had had so many other things to think about, he had 
forgotten Joe's little debt, as he had many others of 
Joseph's contracting:, long ago. 

When the door opened, however, he thought to him- 
self, " Joe's come to pay me." Surely this was one of the 
wildest notions that ever entered the professor's head ; 
and his head was now and then a rare storehouse for 
wild notions generally. 

« Why, Peter !" 

" It's you, Joe, is it ?" 

" It's I, Peter. How are you getting on, by this time ?" 

" It is rather a long time since I saw you, Joe," said 
the professor, thoughtfully. " It's a good long time ; 
isn't it a month ?" 

" Lord bless you !" cried Joe, who knew it was five 
weeks at least, " not half that time ; it's a good many 
days, though." 

" Some days are very long," said the elder brother, 
wearily. " I dare say it's as you say, Joe. I lose count 
of time now and then. My life is rather monotonous." 



ONLY ANOTHER FAILURE. 279 



ic 



I couldn't plod myself," cried Joe, heartily . " but 
you are made of different stuff. How long have you 
been in ? What's that you're doing ?" 

He alluded to an elaborate apparatus intended to boil 
water, upon the arrangement of which the professor, with 
his cuffs turned back, was very busily engaged, getting 
his fingers very dirty in the process. 

" I'm going to boil some water," he said. 

" For grog ?" 

" No, for tea." 

Joe looked at him with a pitying smile. It struck 
our doctor that his relative thus occupied presented a 
somewhat mean and insignificant spectacle. The appa- 
ratus was of tin, much blackened by smoke, and with the 
sides slightly battered in by long use and careless pack- 
ing. It was of a complicated make, and formed of several 
pieces, some of which fitted loosely, and fell apart, if 
great care were not used in holding them together when 
lifted; other stuck so tightly that the jerking outof the hot 
water was inevitable whenit became necessary to part them. 

As the adjustment of the series of tin pots of which 
this famous machine was composed required much nicety 
and precision, the professor put on his spectacles to the 
work, and, as has been already recorded, turned up his 
cuffs. It seemed to Joe that all this was very paltry, but 
he did not chafe impatiently as he sat watching the 
tedious operation. " Poor Peter," he thought ; " this is 
the way he has pottered his life away. It was so when 
we were boys together. He used to sew his own shirt- 
buttons on, and he blubbered if there was a blot in his 
copy-book. I would drop a great splutter of ink between 
the pages, and squeeze them together. We used to call 
that making a black beetle. Lord, what a fellow I used 
to be for larks \" 



280 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

There are some larks which are not nearly such good 
fun for the larkee as the larker ; and this was perhaps the 
style that Joe had gone in for. Sometimes he would 
appeal to his brother Peter, saying . 

" Do you recollect the fun we had at old Bagstock's ? 
These young brutes here at the college often put me in 
mind of the tricks I used to play there." 

At this Peter smiled grimly. He had never been re- 
markable for either fun or tricks. Quite early in life, 
before he had had time to be a boy, he had been obliged 
to be a man. Before he had any chance of having that 
fling which youth is proverbially entitled to, it was neces- 
sary that he should be serious. Before he was half old 
enough to leave off learning lessons himself, he was teach- 
ing other boys their lessons, to earn his own bread. 

Somehow it was not the same with Joe, about whom 
fate willed it otherwise. Joe was adopted, and had his 
schooling paid for, like a gentleman. He also had means 
found him to learn the medical profession. He learnt a 
good deal besides at this period, and saw much life . 
only just managing to crawl through the examination 
when the time came, but still crawling through somehow, 
just as well as if he had worked hard all the while. 

" I am not one of your humdrum sort," he would say 
to his brother. 

" No, Joe," Peter would reply. 

" I like to go ahead . to go right at a thing . to 
get past it . to get away !" he would continue, rather 
vaguely, but with great enthusiasm. 

" Yes, Joe," said Peter. 

In those days there was a deep and genuine admiration 
dwelling in Peter's heart for his dashing brother. He 
had some feeble aspirations of his own, but somehow 
the time never seemed to arrive when the neccessary 



ONLY ANOTHER FAILURE. 281 

projects for their fulfilment could be put into execution. 
Sometimes he began to doubt, too, whether the time 
ever would come ; but he thoroughly believed in Joe. 
There was no doubt . there really could be no doubt about 
Joseph. He must turn out something wonderful. Every- 
body said he would. It was, indeed, the most suprising 
thing in the world that after all he didn't. 

" That's rather a long job, isn't it ?" asked Joe, when 
he had watched the progress of the great tin pot trick 
for rather more than ten minutes, and there was still no 
sign of boiling water. 

" It's done fast enough usually," replied his brother. 
" The thing's a little out of order." 

" I should think it was, a little," said Joe. 

The professor went on with the operation, and Joe still 
regarded him with the same smile of pity. Methylated 
spirits were required in the working of the apparatus, and 
to-day an extra quantity was necessary. A small bottle 
which he had just emptied stood upon the table, but there 
was a larger bottle . Peter had bought a large quantity, 
in order to get it cheaper . in the portmanteau. To get 
at this it was necessary to take out first a number of 
articles lying on the top of it ; and among these was a 
packet of manuscript tied together with a piece of string. 

The professor laid this on the table near to where his 
brother was sitting j and Joe, for want of some other 
occupation, drew it towards him, and examined the first 
page. 

" Why, what's this, Peter ?" 

" That . oh, nothing. Let me put it back." 

" All right . all right. I wont hurt it. It looks like 
Latin verses . something you've been copying." 

" They're not copied. Give them to me, and I'll put 
them away again. They're only some things I have done 



282 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

from time to time, when I have had a few spare mo- 
ments." 

Joe did not feel much interested. 

" I suppose that water will boil some time before 
Christmas. I shan't be very sorry, either." 

" Will you have some tea with me ?" 

" I'm not a very good hand at tea. I find it disagrees 
with me rather. I suppose you've no brandy." 

" I have a little gin." 

" I don't much care for French gin : however, I'll take 
some to show I'm not prejudiced." 

The professor brought forth the liquor, and Joe, mixing 
himself a strong glass, drank it without any wry faces, 
and presently mixed another. Meanwhile Peter, having 
brought the working of the apparatus to a successful 
issue, made his tea, and sat down to it. 

"And what has brought you here?" he asked, at 
last. 

Joe looked a little confused. It had been his intention 
not to waste much more time before he came to the point; 
but this was not the proper way of coming to it. He felt 
hurt, too, at being suspected of an interested motive. 

" What should have brought me ? That's not a very 
nice way of putting it. You think I can't come to see 
you unless I want something." Then, to himself he 
thought, " I'll see before I go if there's a better chance of 
breaking it to him. If not, I'll drop him a line from the 
cafe. Perhaps, after all, that will be the best way. 
Something might occur of a sudden nature. I shall be 
able to decide what it's to be later on." 

" I did not mean to say that, Joe," said his brother, 
seeing him sitting silent and gloomy. " I did not mean 
to hurt your feelings. Tell me how you're getting on. 
Have they . is that affair . that Jean Gin business " 



ONLY ANOTHER FAILURE. 283 

" Yes . yes, there's an end of that. You need not rake 
it up, Peter. That's not very kind of you/' 

" No ; I beg your pardon. I didn't mean to talk 
about that. You're getting on well, I hope." 

" Pretty well. I'm not doing such a great deal at 
present ; but I shall make my way, I expect, in spite of 
my enemies." 

" I feel sure of that, if . if you're steady, Joe." 

" What do you call steady ? You don't suppose I'm 
to go on grinding away as some fellows do, making a 
penny out of their pills, and twopence out of their 
draughts ? Do you suppose anybody ever achieves great- 
ness, now-a-days, by the old-fashioned plodding, humdrum 
course, that was good enough for our great-grandmothers?" 

" I can't say," said the professor, who hardly followed 
his brother's argument. 

" You and I are different, Peter," continued the doctor. 
" You're slow and sure. Well, perhaps you're right. The 
tortoise won the race, you know, because he stuck to it. 
It's not a bad thing, mind you, that sticking business, as 
long as you stick to something worth sticking to." 

" Some of us have not much choice, Joe. I should 
like to change my calling if I could make a living some 
easier way." 

" I wonder now you never tried," said Joe, leaning 
back to have a good look at his relative, and regarding 
him in quite a different light from that which he had 
always viewed him in before. "Did you never have a 
notion of anything else ?" 

" Perhaps I have sometimes," said the other. He was 
leaning his head upon his hand, and tracing figures in 
the dregs of his teacup. 

" Do you know now, Peter, it's a most extraordinary 
thing, but I have never looked upon you otherwise than 



284 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

in the scholastic line. I couldn't picture you any other 
"way than teaching the young idea. You've always 
seemed to be working away so tremendously hard. It 
wouldn't be like you if you weren't doing it." 

" I have worked rather hard, Joe, in my time. I wish 
I could afford to rest a little." 

" You've not saved enough to be able to drop it, I 
suppose." 

" Drop what ?" 

" Enough to live upon, I mean." 

The elder brother rose angrily. 

" You know better than that, Joe," he said. " I 
might have saved something, but I need not tell you 
where my savings have gone. Do you think that because 
I work hard, I make much money ? You are very much 
mistaken if you do. No, Joe ; I am afraid I shall never 
be rich enough to take my ease. I have a few pounds 
put away, but only a very few . enough to pay for my 
medicine if I am taken ill some day, or for my funeral." 

Joe was silent for a time. Then an idea occurred to 
him. 

'.' Just tell me over again what you said about those 
verses. What did you mean to do with them ?" 

" Oh, never mind them. I had an idea once ; but I 
am afraid I could not find a market. It's not the right 
sort of thing. Taste is so changed now-a-days. It has 
left me behind. I don't think I am very practical." 

" I don't know that," said Joe. " I should rather 
like to have a look at the verses. Let me have some 
more hot water. This gin stuff is not so bad as it might 
be. You've got no tobacco, I suppose? Well, never 
mind ; let's look at the verses. Read some of them." 

" You wont care for them, Joe," said the professor. 
-" I don't think they are your sort." 



ONLY ANOTHER FAILURE. 285 

" What do you mean by my sort ?" asked Joe, indig- 
nantly. " Do you suppose I am not capable of appre- 
ciating them? It seems to me that a book of Latin 
verses, odes, and epigrams, and that sort of thing, would 
be exactly what would take. There can't be much of 
the same style." 

" I don't think they are altogether bad, Joe," said 
Peter, blushing a little, and nervously fingering the loose 
pages of the manuscript. " One or two of them, I 
really believe, are not at all bad." 

" I daresay they are all of them very good," replied 
Joe. " I don't see why they shouldn't be. Let me 
hear you read a little." 

Poor professor, he was only human ! Of course he 
read, without much further pressing, some of the cele- 
brated verses which he had read that day of the dinner 
at the chateau. When warmed to his work, he even 
carried his reading to an unnecessary length, and Joe, 
unobserved, yawned prodigiously ; also, unobserved, he 
took another glass of hot grog. 

" They're extraordinary," said Joe. " Why, we 
should be acting like fools to let them lie here, waste." 

" What can we do with them, Joe.'' 

Joe reflected. 

" There must be persons who would buy this sort of 
thing. London would be the best place, I should think. 
But in Paris there must be houses where they print the 
classics. It's worth the journey." 

" That was what occurred to me," said Peter. " But 
I'm afraid I shall hardly make the journey pay." 

" How so ?" 

" Well, you see," replied Peter, after a moment's 
hesitation, " I don't think I'm quite what's called a 
good man of business." 



"286 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

" Well, perhaps not/' said Joe. Then in a while he 
added . " Look here, Peter, I'm no author, you know, 
but I can talk a little. It will be holiday time directly ; 
suppose we were to go to Paris together ?" 

" That would be rather expensive, if nothing came of 
it," said the professor; "besides I'm not quite sure that 
I shall get any holidays. Prom what Roustoubique says, 
I fancy he wants me to remain in charge of the pupils 
who don't go home." 

" But you wont stand it !" cried Joe, indignantly. 
" It's infamous !" 

" How am I to help it ?" asked the professor, with a 
faint smile. 

" How ?" repeated Joe. " By publishing your book ; 
by making a name for yourself; by being independent of 
such a paltry tyrant." 

Peter leant his head upon his hand, and thought it over. 
It was a tempting bait, and the more he thought of it the 
more he liked the notion. Joe was in no hurry, but went 
on with his grog. 

" It comes to this," said he at last, " if you're game 
to venture a matter of sixty francs, I might run up to 
Paris and see what can be done. However, it's for you 
to decide. I don't like the notion of the stuff being 
wasted, and I can't help thinking that you might make 
a nice little thing out of it if we manage matters pro- 
perly." 

" There's no knowing. I have a great opinion of your 
judgment, Joseph, though you must allow you sometimes 
blunder a little." 

"Well, everybody does that, I suppose," said Joseph; 
" and some people's blunders are smaller than others' 
because they aim at such petty results. If I had not a 
soul above blue pills and black draughts, I daresay I 



ONLY ANOTHER FAILURE. 287 

should not go very far wrong; but you'll find some of 
these days, that by some stroke of genius . the awfullest 
fluke, everybody -will call it . I shall very quietly make 
my fortune." 

" I believe you, Joe," said the professor ; " and you 
shall try what you can do with the book ; and under- 
stand, before you set about the business, that half what- 
ever we make is yours." 

" Oh, that's all right enough," said Joe ; " we are not 
likely to quarrel." As Peter was writing out a cheque 
for sixty francs, Joe mentioned that little matter of the 
two napoleons, which amount was added to the other; 
and Joe presently took his departure, in high spirits and 
full of bright hopes of the future. 

The Parisian publishers must have been among the 
most dilatory persons in the world, for Joe was away a 
whole week before he could get an answer from the first, 
and then he merely said that he had not time that 
moment to go into the matter. At the cheapest of 
Parisian hotels the charges for living are such as tax a 
slender purse severely, and then Joe had a certain 
character to keep up, and some treating to do, which 
greatly added to the expense. When he had been a 
fortnight in the gay capital he yet had not succeeded in 
the object which had brought him thither ; but he had 
learnt one or two things. This was one of them : It was 
a much better plan to publish your book yourself, if your 
book were a good one and likely to sell. The difference 
in the profits under this system was enormous. As to 
the expense, some credit could be obtained, and with a 
matter of seven or eight hundred francs really magni- 
ficient results might be arrived at. 

All this was as clear as day, and with the aid of the 



28S THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

first four rules of arithmetic you might work the sum out 
as easily as Joe did. We know already that there was a 
little balance in the St. Babylas Bank standing to the 
credit of Peter Polyblank. Some days after the receipt 
of Joe's communication a large portion of this accumu- 
lated capital found its way to Paris, and the professor 
waited in great anxiety for tidings respecting its disposal. 
It arrived safely. Joe wrote at once to acknowledge the 
receipt, promising to write again next day. 

That evening, feeling a little restless, Peter went to 
the Cafe Leduc, in the Little Place . a most unusual 
proceeding on his part. 

Two or three of the fastest among the St. Babylasians 
were sitting at the next table, and loudly disputing about 
horses and odds. Their noise disturbed our good friend, 
who was trying to read the newspaper. " I wish they 
would be a little more quiet/' he thought. " I'm sure 
the Paris races do not interest me, and I don't want to 
hear anything about them." 

Poor innocent, he had no notion how much better it 
would have been for him if " Cora Pearl" had come in 
first. 

When three days had elapsed, and no tidings had ar- 
rived either of Joe or the money, the poor professor 
could no longer bear the suspense, and sent an urgent 
letter, threatening to come himself to Paris if he did not 
hear by return of post. This elicited a reply from Joe 
to the effect that he was coming back . and, sure enough, 
next day he came. 

When the professor arrived* at his lodging that even- 
ing Joe received him in a dramatic attitude. " Don't 
speak to me," he cried, " don't speak to me, Peter ! . I'm 
an infernal scoundrel." 



ONLY ANOTHER FAILURE. 289 

This beginning was certainly not encouraging ; but it 
prepared the professor for what was to come. It seemed 
that Joe was managing the literary business capitally . 
that everything was going on in a highly satisfactory 
way, very convincing details of which were introduced 
into Joe's narrative at this point. Nothing could have 
been better, in fact, only unfortunately the doctor fell in 
with a sporting friend, who persuaded him to go to the 
races. Here he had secret information imparted to him 
relative to a " dead certainty.'" Surely no mortal man, 
under like circumstances, could have resisted the tempta- 
tion. It is true that, strictly speaking, the money was 
not Joe's, but that made the opportunity none the less 
tempting. The only thing to be regretted was that the 
dead certainty Avas not as certain as it might have 
been. 

" Where's the manuscript ?" asked Peter, when he had 
somewhat recovered from the first shock. 

At this question Joe was confused. 

" Upon my soul," he said, " I don't know how to lcok 
you in the face." The professor's lips moved, but he 
could utter no word. What was coming next ? 

" You see, I was in such a state after that race came 
off, and I found what a fool I had been. I was nearly 
mad, and set to drinking raAV brandy by the tumbler- 
full, not knowing what I was about. The end of it 
was " 

" Well, well," said the professor, impatiently. 

" The end of it was I got my pockets turned inside 
out." 

" Do you mean to say you have lost the manuscript ?" 
cried Peter, aghast. 

" No, no ; hang it, not as bad as that ; it's only just 

19 



290 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

a little torn, and I think some of the brutes must have 
trodden on it." 

The manuscript here produced had certainly the ap- 
pearance of having been walked upon, and when examined 
several pages were found to be wanting. 

That night the professor re-read a large portion of 
what was left, and, tying it up very carefully, put it back 
into the tattered old portmanteau with a weary sigh. 
" Perhaps it might have failed," he said to himself. 
'. Perhaps what has happened is for the best. Some of 
the verses do seem to want touching up a little. Til put 
them away for a time, until I feel a little more inclined 
to revise them. Fm not in the humour just at present." 

With this reflection he put away the work which might 
or might not have made his name immortal; and when 
again he looked at it he had other projects in view, and 
after but a cursory glance at the first page or two, con- 
demned it as rubbish ; it has therefore never been printed, 
nor, indeed, has any other work from the same pen. 
Perhaps it is fortunate that we do not carry all our 
grand designs into execution, for if we did the laurel 
would not bear leaves sufficient for all of us. 



CHAPTER XXVI. 

GOOD-BYE AND GOOD LUCE. 

And so, weak heart, good-bye ! 

When that day comes you will remember me, 
Thinking it might have been, but may not be ; 

And so, good-bye ! good-bye ! . Donaldson. 

" Felicite," said Mr. Pomponney, " you will see." 

" I am glad of it," snapped Felicite, " for it's almost 
time I did." 



GOOD-BYE AND GOOD LUCK. 291 

She had had a hard day's work, had that poor 
little wife of the prophetic Hyppolite. She had been 
scrubbing and scouring, and things had gone wrong with 
her. Hyppolite, meanwhile, had rolled his pill paste, dis- 
pensed his pennyworths of pharrnacerie, discussed the 
events of the day with his customers, lectured the youth- 
ful Coquillard upon sins generally, but more particularly 
the sins of youth combined with inordinate appetite ; 
smoked his pipe, drank his half cup, played his " partie " 
at the Cafe Leduc, and returned home, thinking himself a 
mighty fine fellow. As usual, he was prophetic, and this 
time it was the quickly-approaching and inevitable down- 
fall of the Polyblank brothers, upon which he was 
oracular. When, however, the meek Felicite thus re- 
sponded, it for the first time occurred to Hyppolite that 
his prophetic fame was on the totter. But he was pru- 
dent, and refrained from questioning. Therefore, turning 
over on his pillow, he went to sleep without another word. 
Just at this moment, by the way, it did not seem to re- 
quire the powers of a Zadkiel to predict the downfall of 
the professor, for he had fallen already. Indeed, that 
very day he had received his dismissal from the Imperial 
College. In this result the machinations of the Bourdi- 
chon band had culminated. There had been dreadful 
doings in the professor's class during the last month, and, 
on a small scale, a sort of insurrection. One day Hous- 
toubique being summoned away on business, at the same 
time that one of the masters was away on account of 
severe illness, the professor's services were called into re- 
quest . (he now did all the extra dirty work) . as usher, 
after his duties as class master were over. 

The news spread like wildfire that the Poulet Blanc was- 
to take charge of the refectoire, and of a study during 
play hours. Instantly the heads of Bourdichon's band 

19.3 



292 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

were laid together, and a plan of action decided upon. 
Secret countersigns and watchwords were adopted. A 
whistle being absolutely necessary, Bardajos occupied the 
hour devoted to the professor's class to its manufacture. 
In the dining-room they found Mr. Polyblank' s dinner set 
out at the end of the table, in the place usually occupied 
by the absent study-master. It was a Friday. There 
was sorrel soup, after which a dish of haricot beans and 
boiled eggs. Two eggs were served to the professor, 
which were hastily appropriated by a couple of young 
gentlemen before Mr. Polyblank had observed them. 
Having finished as much as he could get through of the 
soup, he began to eat the haricots, when Master Bardajos, 
who had not been quick enough to steal the dish, asked 
the professor how it was he had not got any eggs ? 

" I don't know/'' replied Polyblank, simply. 

" Don't you stand it. You ask for them/'' urged Bar- 
dajos. Therefore, calling a garcon, the professor asked 
why the eggs had not been supplied to him" ? 

" They were/' said the servant, looking about with a 
puzzled air; and he went off to consult with one of his 
fellows who had helped to lay the tables. A noisy con- 
sultation ensued, with much gesticulation, ending with the 
servant's expressed opinion that one of the young gentle- 
men must have taken the eggs. 

" Search them, sir," he suggested. 

" What would be the use of searching us, now we have 
eaten our dinner?" said the youngest Moineau. Then, 
opening his mouth, he added, " Can you see your egg, 
sir?" 

At this piece of impertinence the other young gentlemen 
laughed boisterously, and the professor gave the youngest 
Moineau an hour's retenue. 

" That's your fault, you sneak/' said the youngest 



GOOD-BYE AND GOOD LUCK. 293 

Moineau, punching Bardajos in the ribs with his 
elbow. 

" Is it ?" retorted Bardajos, maliciously hitting him 
upon the pocket where the stolen eggs were. 

Meanwhile, the professor and the servants were going 
round the table searching the pupils. Presently it came 
to the turn of Moineau the younger, who would not be 
searched. 

" Empty your pockets, sir," said the professor. 

" I shan't." 

" Empty your pockets." 

" Empty them yourself." 

So the professor, in a rage, thrust his hand into the 
pocket containing the broken eggs, but immediately 
withdrew it, amidst general laughter. But Moineau the 
younger for this offence was led away to the dungeon, 
and then, the dinner being at an end, the others were 
marched out into the playground. For some time the 
scholars amused themselves by pelting the professor with 
small pebbles, and keeping him in a lively state of ex- 
citement by calling out his name in tones of deep dis- 
tress from remote parts of the yard, when he was walking 
in an opposite direction. When the play hour was half 
over, Bourdichon called Pepinet on one side. 

" Fll tell you something," said he, " if you'll swear 
not to split." 

" What is it ?" 

' ' Do you swear ?" 

" Yes, I swear." 

" There is a loose plank in the palings between this 
and the Proviseur's garden. We can squeeze through, 
and have a feast of gooseberries." 

" Come on, then." 

At the palings they met the eldest Moineau, who was 



29 4 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

also sworn in, and all three crept through the hole. A 
few minutes afterwards Bardajos's head appeared at the 
opening. 

" Go back \" shouted the others. 

" I've as much right here as you have." 

The noise brought the professor to the spot, and 
after a spirited chase the three fast young gentlemen 
were captured, and led away to the dungeon, where 
IMoineau was discovered asleep, but, awakening, was 
highly delighted at the notion of company. The prisoners 
were each to copy two thousand lines of La Fontaine, 
and had brought with them pens, ink, and paper, the pens 
being ingeniously tied together in such a way that five 
copies of the same line could be written at once with the 
same amount of trouble that is ordinarily taken in writing 
one. But a very short time was thus occupied, the 
young gentlemen soon abandoning their exercises in 
favour of sports and pastimes. A target being drawn 
upon a piece of paper and fastened to the wall, paper 
wings were attached to the pens, which were thus trans- 
formed into darts. Then sides were chosen, and a match 
commenced. When they were weary of this sport they 
fell to quarrelling, and thus passed away another hour or 
so. The twilight was setting in, and it was already too 
dark to see to write. 

" Hallo, you others, look here I" said Bourdichon. He 
had found a loose plank in the floor of the dungeon ; for 
this dungeon (cachot), in spite of its terrible name, was 
a first-floor room over a sort of out-house, attached 
to the infirmary, the entrance to which was from the 
street. 

" What say you to breaking through and escaping ?" 
said Bourdichon. 



GOOD-BYE AND GOOD LUCK. 295 

The other young gentlemen were easily persuaded, 
and they chose names appropriate to the work in 
hand. 

" Til be Cartouche/' 

"And I Vidocq." 

" And I Macaire." 

" But, I say, what am I to be ?" asked Pepinet. 

" Oh, as for you," responded the other young gentle- 
men, " you needn't be anything." 

Master Bourdichon meanwhile was examining the 
floor. Very soon he had pulled up the plank. Then one 
of the young gentlemen broke a hole through the lath 
and plaster with his feet, and the band went down on 
their hands and knees and peered cautiously through the 
aperture. It was pitch dark down below, and had an 
awful look. 

" What are we to do next ?" asked Cartouche. 

" Put down Pepinet as an experiment," suggested some 
other celebrated malefactor, but Pepinet raised a dismal 
howl at the proposition. When he was silent again, a 
strange noise was heard from below . the shaking of a 
chain and a ferocious snort. Evidently some wild animal 
was there. Perhaps it might get up at them through the 
hole. 

" Let's put dow r n Pepinet," once more suggested the 
French Jack Sheppard. 

" Hush, I tell you," cried Bourdichon ; and then, with 
a loud laugh, " why it's only a donkey." And in another 
minute he was forcing his way down the hole. 

" I can drop on his back/' he said ; but in this scheme 
he was foiled by the sudden giving way of treacherous 
laths. At the same moment the stable door opened, and 
the donkey's owner rushing in, a fight took place, fol- 
lowed by the capture of four celebrated prison breakers, 



296 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

afterwards to be led round to the college gate and handed 
back to the door-porter, with some trifling loss of dignity 
Surely, never had the unhappy professor spent such a 
day since he entered the walls. As he looked at his list 
of punishments he dreaded to think what Roustoubique 
would say to those fearful affairs of the gooseberries and 
the donkey. But alas ! the worst had yet to come. 
Roustoubique was not to return till next day, and poor 
Polyblank had been prevailed upon to pass the night in 
the college, and was to sleep in the absent usher's bed. 
This part of his task he most dreaded. 

For the last hour or so his youthful charges had been 
extremely quiet. It was a calm before a storm. 
"Whispers full of sinister import circulated round the 
study, and winks of evil meaning were from time to time 
exchanged. Nothing of importance, however, took place 
until all were in bed, when something in the shape of a 
panic was occasioned by a rumour that the lid had come 
off the youngest Moineau's " gentle" box, and that the 
happy family were crawling at large. Tidings of this 
disaster reaching Polyblank, the reptiles were chased, 
caught, and ejected through the window After which 
the other young gentlemen were able to go to sleep in 
safety- Presently, all was still. The professor, worn out 
with fatigue, closed his eyes and dozed. 

This was the moment chosen by the arch-conspirators. 
Bourdichon and Bardajos, rising stealthily, crept on hands 
and knees down either side of the dormitory. They were 
passing from bed to bed awakening the band. Like 
shadows from the grave then stole forth the trusty ones, 
gathering together the shoes of the slumbering virtuous. 
Then all got noiselessly back into bed, and Bourdichon 
and Bardajos turned off the gas at each end of the room. 
A signal was to be given by Bardajos. There was a 



GOOD-BYE AND GOOD LUCK. 297 

moment of intense suspense, and then his whistle sounded 
loud and shrill, and simultaneously twenty pairs of 
bluchers were hurled at the head of the devoted school- 
master, whose bed they covered. Awakening from his 
sleep, and supposing his life to be in danger, he bounded 
on to the floor and shouted for help. Next moment he 
received a heavy thump on the back from a bolster. 
Before he could recover himself, he got another on the 
stomach. Then one on the head, then one in the face. 
Fighting his way through his assailants he reached the 
door, opened it and rushed into the passage shouting for 
assistance. It was the worst thing he could have done, 
for next moment the door was shut upon him, and his 
efforts to force it open again were met by shouts of deri- 
sive laughter. 

There, in his shirt, the unhappy victim stood when the 
porter, a couple of grinning garcons, and Roustoubique 
himself, who had returned unexpectedly, came upstairs. 
At first they all roared with laughter at PolyblanVs 
woful figure. Then set about forcing the door. The 
riot being quelled, and some of the ringleaders dragged 
away and locked up, with a threat of expulsion next clay 
hanging over them, Roustoubique turned fiercely upon 
the professor. 

" Dress yourself, you fool/'' he said, " and go home. 
I don't want you here." 

Polyblank went home without any reply. He found 
the door locked. 

" We thought you were not coming, sir," said Felicite, 
from a window. 

" Yes, yes, I know," replied the professor, in an impa- 
tient tone. " Please open the door." 

She was surprised at the tone of his voice, and came 
downstairs in a hurry. " Has anything happened ?" she 
asked. 



298 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

"Happened? No." 

He passed upstairs hastily, and closed his door. He 
could not trust himself to speak. Shame and rage were 
tearing at his heart. 

" What a despicable wretch I was," he muttered, 
betwixt his clenched teeth. " Why didn't I knock him 
down ? why didn't I ? why didn't I ?" 

Alas ! his life through he had always, until too late, 
left the right thing unsaid and the right thing undone. 
There came a timid knock at the door : it was Felicite. 
She was the only friend he had found in this hateful 
place, and he now was treating her with rudeness. She 
would sympathize with him, but he turned his back on 
her. Often, before, he had so acted towards others who 
would have helped him; and they had thought him 
insensible to kindness because his awkward tongue could 
not speak the few proper words of thanks. 

" Mr. Polyblank," said Felicite, entering the room and 
laying her hand upon the professor's shoulder, almost 
caressingly, "I am sure you are in great trouble. Do 
let me share it with you. How can I be of service ? I 
and my husband will gladly help you if we can." 

This was a fib, as far as Hyppolite was concerned. 
He prophesied a person's rise or fall, but did not trouble 
himself about helping in either direction. 

" You are very good to me, madame," said the professor. 
" I am rather unlucky, I think, and I'm not sure that I 
am quite fitted for my business." 

" It is a very hard, and a very weary, wearing business," 
said Felicite ; " and I should have thought that a gentle- 
man knowing so much (she had a prodigious notion of 
Polyblank's learning) might do much better." 

" I wish I knew how," responded the professor, with a 
sigh. " I should like to find out that." 



GOOD-BYE AND GOOD LUCK. 299 

" Then I think I can tell you/' exclaimed Felicite, in 
great excitement. " The librarianship of the public 
library is vacant. My husband is connected with the 
museum, and he shall try and make some interest for 
you. One of Baroness de Grandvilain's friends has the 
gift of the place, so of course she will use her influence 
in your behalf. Is she well enough for you to ask her ?" 

She was still very ill, he answered, and if she were well 

he would not ask, because But while trying to tell 

the reason his voice broke suddenly. Then again was 
good little Felicite's hand laid iipon his shoulder, and she 
bade him in a low, soft tone never to mind, for he need 
not trouble himself to tell her. Of course she knew all 
about it ! As if such a bungler as Polyblank could keep 
such a secret. The ice broken, he told her all that he 
had suffered. How he had hoped . how he was a fool for 
hoping, where his love was so hopeless. And to this she 
replied with words of gentleness and comfort. 

Ah ! how is it that women always have some consola- 
tion to impart in such cases, when we men can only sit 
silent, or, speaking, speak beside the mark ? Never, for 
some months, had Polyblank slept so soundly as he did 
that night; nor arisen as he did next morning . so hope- 
ful of the future. Mr. Pomponney, urged on by that 
good wife of his, really went vigorously into the library 
business, and was very successful. He got several promises 
of support, and, with a letter of introduction, the professor 
set out to see Mr. Cherami, in whose gift the place was. 

" Cherami/' he repeated to himself, as he walked along. 
He fancied he knew the name, but could not recollect to 
whom it belonged. But he was not long in doubt. On 
entering the room he found himself in the presence of 
the Little Paul, from whom he took the famous Latin 
verses that night at the Cafe Leduc. With a slight blush 



300 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

Polyblank presented his memorial, and stated the case. 
Little Paul listened, twirling his moustache ; and when 
the professor had finished, he said : . " I regret to say, 
the place is already filled ; " and then in a sort of half 
bantering tone continued . 

" It were a pity, though, for a gentleman of your 
literary attainments to bury himself in an out-of-the-way 
hole and corner such as this wretched little Saint Babylas. 
On the contrary, go elsewhere, my dear sir, and become 
famous." 

The professor cowered a moment under the blow ; 
and then, an unwonted spirit possessing him, he re- 
torted . 

" You, though, sir, who are already half famous, are 
content to subside ignobly." 

" Ah, yes, my case is different/' replied the other, 
though with less confidence. 

" Tt is," said Polyblank, with flashing eyes. " I will 
go, as you suggest. It is perhaps the hand of fate that 
urges me onward. A few years hence, may be, I may 
have made my name and earned my niche, whilst you 
lie forgotten in your unmarked grave. Who knows. Good 
morning." 

And with this burst he went his away, striding proudly 
down the street, as though he had achieved a glorious 
victory; while Little Paul, ridiculous as it may seem, 
felt somehow strangely humbled and uncomfortable, left 
sitting there in his crimson velvet chair. However, the 
time for the statue or bust just indirectly alluded to had 
not yet arrived, and Polyblank had his living to seek. 
Well, he was not, he thought, likely to get anything to 
do in France, but he would return to his own country, 
and try his hand at a new trade. 

" I can't mend boots," said the professor, with rather 



GOOD-BYE AND GOOD LUCK. 301 

a painful smile, contemplating, as he spoke, his old 
botched-up half- Wellingtons, " or I should haA r e tried my 
hand at that long ago. But surely I can do something 
that a poor gentleman may do ; and if I can't, why Fll 
hide away somewhere, and die in the dark. At any rate, 
with Heaven's help, Fll never degrade myself again." 

There was some money due to him for his services at 
the college, and he rightly thought that it would be poor 
false pride not to go and get it ; therefore he went to the 
college and asked for Mr. Roustoubique. The Proviseur 
was in his own room, the porter said ; and Mr. Polyblank 
went in search of of him. The room, however, was 
empty, but seeing the Proviseur's hat upon the table, 
Polyblank sat down to wait. He sat by the table, and 
carelessly noticed an open letter lying there signed by 
the " Recteur," a superior officer, under whose control 
were Mr. Roustoubique and the Proviseurs of the other 
colleges associated with the University of Prance. 
Glancing from this letter, his eyes fell on half a sheet 
of paper lying by its side, on which the ink was not yet 
dry. Now, the name of the recteur was Constant, and 
on this piece of paper somebody, it would seem, had been 
imitating Mr. Constant's signature ; for there was it 
written, more than a score of times. The door opened, 
and Roustoubique hurried in. Polyblank rose to meet 
him. 

" Hallo !" cried the Proviseur, starting slightly, and 
changing colour. " So it's you, is it, come at last ? A 
pretty time of day, too, I must say." 

" I am *not aware that there was any hour fixed for my 
visit, replied Polyblank, coldly. 

" Oh, indeed, cried the other, taking his seat at the 
table. " That's what you thought, eh ? Then in fu- 
ture, allow me to tell you " 



302 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

" Allow me to tell you, sir, that my future does not 
concern you," said Polyblank. " You dismissed me last 
night, you must remember, and I am my own master now." 

Roustoubiquc's eyes and mouth opened with surprise. 

" You . you are going away, are you ?" 

" Certainly. You told me to do so." 

" Oh, very well . very well. As you like. Of course, 
you know your own business best. I hope you'll find a 
good place, and that they'll be better pleased with ydu 
there than I have been. Why I have kept you so long 
I don't know. Why I have kept you. I say . did you 
take a paper just now off this table ?" 

Mr. Roustoubique had been fidgeting about all the 
while he had been talking, and feeling in his pockets, 
and looking on the table and on the floor ; and he now 
asked the question, because Polyblank was thoughtlessly 
twisting a piece of paper in his hand. He had, in fact, 
in his absent way, possessed himself of those signatures 
which Mr. Roustoubique had been scribbling. Now, 
strangely enough, when Roustoubique recognised the 
half- sheet, and snatched at it eagerly, the truth flashed 
at once upon Polyblank, and he knew that he had to 
deal with a rogue. Holding the paper tightly, he laid 
his hand upon the desk, and, looking Roustoubique full 
in the face, said : . " Shall I tell you what I think of 
you?" The colour left the Proviseur's cheeks, and his 
white lips moved, but he spoke not. There was somthing 
unusual in Polyblank' s voice and manner, which, from 
the first moment, Roustoubique had noticed with steadily 
increasing dread. The worm was going to turn upon 
him at last. 

The Proviseur was in a mortal fright when he found 
Polyblank's eyes thus fixed sternly upon him, but he 
could make no reply. 



GOOD-BYE AND GOOD LUCK. 303 

" I'll tell you what I think of you/' said Polyblank. 
" You are a knave !" 

" How dare you address such language to me ?" cried 
Roustoubique finding his voice at last, though it was 
rather a weak one. " How dare you ? I've a good mind 
.I'll ring the bell." 

" Don't send for a witness/' cried the other, seizing 
him by the arm, "or by Heaven I'll beat you before his 
face. Give me, sir, what is due to me, and I will depart. 
Give me my money, and you shall have your paper back. 
Only be quick, and let me get out of this into honest 
air where I can breathe." 

In quite a pitiful, whining way, Roustoubique besought 
the ex-professor to be calm and reasonable, and not to 
talk so loud, begging him to believe that he (Roustou- 
bique) would always be a friend to him ; but he was so 
completely thrown off his guard that he could not pretend 
to any virtuous indignation. With unsteady hand he 
unlocked a drawer and produced some gold and silver . 
a paltry sum it was ; and Polyblank somewhat disdain- 
fully thrust it into his pocket without counting the 
pieces. Then having given a receipt, and handed back 
the paper, he turned to go. He paused, however, at the 
door, and said . 

" You have treated me very badly, Mr. Roustoubique. 
I might, at any rate, oblige you to give me a good testi- 
monial, but I do not require one. I intend to give up 
teaching." 

" I hope you will do well," said Roustoubique, with a 
sickly smile. 

" I hope so ;" and Polyblank went downstairs and 
turned his back upon the Imperial College of Saint 
Babylas for ever. 



304 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

And now there remained little else for him to do but 
repack that battered old portmanteau, in which he had 
brought his few chattels into the town some months, ago, 
and take his departure. He went back to the chemist's 
with the altered gait which since his interview with Little 
Paul, he seemed to have unconsciously assumed. Seeing 
him coming along thus, with an unusual glow on his face 
and sparkle in his eye, and actually swinging his walking- 
stick with quite a reckless sort of air, little Felicite at 
once concluded that he had obtained the vacant librarian- 
ship in search of which he had set out ; and Pomponney 
had actually opened his mouth with the intention of ob- 
serving that such was the result he had always anticipated, 
but Polyblank held up his hand and gravely shook his head. 

" No, my dear madam," he said, " Fve failed again, 
and so I'm going back to England." 

He did not look in her face as he spoke, and so he did 
not see the tears well up in her eyes ; but he took her 
hand in his, and gently pressed it as he thanked her . 
still with averted look . for her kindness to him. Then, 
less fearful of himself, he held out his hand to Hyppolite, 
who had been mixing medicines for dear life during the 
last sixty seconds, and who responded to this farewell 
greeting with the alacrity that some worthy creatures 
never fail to manifest at the hour of parting. Polyblank 
went upstairs, and gathered up his books and papers, and 
began very elaborately to fold up and stow away his 
other coat; but a sudden fit of impatience seizing him, 
he gathered up his two or three rags and tatters, and 
odds and ends, and flung them carelessly into the port- 
manteau. He felt a little nervous about further leave- 
taking; but, though he owed nothing for rent, having 
always paid in advance, he had yet to settle a few trifles 
in the way of housekeeping. 



GOOD-BYE AND GOOD LUCK. 305 

This done, and, once more, good-bye said, he walked 
slowly towards the " Three Crowns " . Coquillard, forced 
into the service by Felicite, carrying the portmanteau 
under protest, and taking it out of its edges against such 
house-sides and door-steps as he could conveniently knock 
it against, by the way. The diligence for Calais left at 
eight o'clock in the evening, and he had determined to 
dine at the public table, as he had done upon the day of 
his arrival. Therefore, having bespoken a place in the 
diligence, and requested Alexander to keep him a seat 
at the table, he had only one duty to perform, which 
was to see his brother Joe, and make arrangements for 
the future. 

In this matter he felt some slight degree of awkward- 
ness ; for . strange as it might appear in the case of one 
less familiar with the vicissitudes of fortunes . Joe was at 
that identical moment in flourishing circumstances. Yes, 
Joe had once more fallen on his feet ; and was indeed so 
much a rising man, just at this time, that the recognition 
of a needy and threadbare relative would necessarily be, 
to some extent, inconvenient. If this book, instead of 
being the record of the sufferings of Professor Polyblank, 
had been the history of the triumphs of the jovial Joseph, 
the few facts now about to be related might have filled 
many chapters with curious and improving details. 
Suffice it, however, to say, that after that little knock- 
kneed failure, Joe's patients having dwindled down to . 
for even those whom he used to physic gratis fought &hy 
of him, and sought the advice of the cheapest of the op- 
position doctors . he gave himself up to several weeks of 
dissipation, with the determination of leading a roaring 
life as long as his means lasted. His means being limited, 
the life he led grew necessarily less and less roaring after 
the first few days. 

20 



306 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

Up to that time, although public opinion was against 
him, he had kept his appointment as medical attendant 
to the Imperial College ; but at last he managed to lose 
it. He had an original theory with respect to tooth- 
drawing, and having the mouths of the college pupils at 
his disposal, it occurred to him, one unlucky day, that 
he would avail himself of that circumstance for the pur- 
pose of experimentalizing. That fatal morniug, while 
Joseph's hand was in, two-and-twenty young gentlemen 
lost a grinder each. You can easily conceive how loud 
were the lamentations which ensued, and how the suf- 
ferers wailed and gnashed the teeth which remained to 
them. Next day the account of this proceeding raised 
feelings of indignation in the homes of the pupils. Some 
parents wrote and protested. Other parents protested 
personally. Some threatened to take their sons from 
the college. Some did take their sons away. Rous- 
toubique, who long had been pining for such a chance, 
wrote a full, true, and particular account of the whole 
affair to the authorities, and Joseph was dismissed. 

It might be supposed that this would have had a de- 
pressing effect on our medical enthusiast. On the con- 
trary, he swaggered about the streets, and in and out of 
the cafe, as though the town belonged to him. As his 
money disappeared, it is possible that he was, to some 
extent, liable to the imputation of forcing his company 
upon those who would and could pay for him. The 
worthy Leduc, in those days, did not appear over-anxious 
to enjoy Mr. Joseph's patronage, and more than once 
hinted as much; but Joe was not to be easily routed. 
He stood his ground, in spite of frowns and cold 
shoulders ; and at length, when quite at his worst, he 
made the acquaintance of an elderly stranger, who played 
a game of billiards with him one day, treated him to a 



GOOD-BYE AND GOOD LUCK. 307 

glass of absinthe, and, four-and- twenty hours afterwards, 
offered him a medical appointment worth between three 
and four hundred per annum. 

After all, there is nothing astonishing in Joe's luck. 
Such things happen every day, and like windfalls are always 
dropping into some one's outstretched hands, though some 
of us, for all that, may stretch out oar hands a very long 
while before we catch anything. Joseph had come into 
his good luck about a week before the period at which this 
history has now arrived, and had borrowed money from 
his new friend, and purchased dazzling raiment. It was 
quite natural, therefore, that, meeting his brother on the 
sunny side of Imperial-street, he should remark upon the 
professor's shabby appearance. 

" My dear Peter," he said, " you'll never rise. Some- 
how you wont do it. It's no good trying to pull you up- 
with one, if you will pull back." 

A few days before Joe's stroke of luck, he, in a casual 
way, having called upon the schoolmaster to raise a 
small loan, had referred to some mysterious investment' 
that he had made, which, as he had termed it, would 
probably turn up trumps. After the stroke of luck, 
Polyblank made some inquiries about the investment, and 
was surprised to hear Joe say that he was sorry he had 
touched it, as matters had turned out; but he had got 
the thing on his hands, and could not get rid of it again. 
This, at the time, was rather vague talk; but the pro- 
fessor was soon to learn the truth. 

This last afternoon in Saint Babylas, Polyblank, as has 
been related, after booking his place, and engaging him- 
self for the table d'hote, went out in quest of Joe. The 
doctor was not to be found, and, after a fruitless search, 
the professor walked back towards the hotel. What 
should he do for an hour or two ? he asked himself- 

20.2 



30S THE PRETTY WIDOW 

Supposing, for the last time, he walked across the marshes, 
and took a stealthy peep at the old garden where he had 
spent so many happy hours ? He would not go into the 
house. He had thought the matter over, and decided 
not to do so. There was no occasion for him to pay a 
farewell visit, under the circumstances. At any rate, no 
more was required of him by the strictest rules of etiquette 
than to leave his card at the gate, with P.P.C. in the 
corner. During the last month he had called several 
times at the chateau to make inquiries about the sick 
lady, but had always been told that she was too unwell 
to see anybody. No doubt he would be told so now, 
were he to call. She evidently did not want to see him. 
The sight of him would perhaps distress her. But there 
could be no harm in taking a last look at the garden. 
She would never know it, and it would be a great plea- 
sure to him. 

"With this determination, therefore, he stepped forth 
briskly along the high road. He had gone about half 
the distance, when he saw a hackney carriage coming 
towards him, and, when even with it, a female voice with 
which he was acquainted called to him by name. He 
approached the carriage door, and saw with some surprise 
that the vehicle contained Madame Dubosq and his 
brother Joseph. 

" Peter," said the Dubosq, to Mr. Polyblank's un- 
bounded astonishment, and he, coming within reach, 
found his neck suddenly encircled by the Dubosq's fair 
arm, whilst at the same time a chaste salute was imprinted 
(by reason of his jerking his head at the critical moment) 
between his nose and his left eye. 

" Peter/' said the lady, "you must not mind my calling 
you so now. After what has occurred, Joseph must allow 
there can be no occasion for further concealment/' 



GOOD-BYE AND GOOD LUCK. 309 

Mr. Polyblank, staring very hard, was silent. 

" Joseph/' continued the lady, " would rather that our 
union had been kept quiet a little while longer, but 
events have now proved to him that the person upon 
whom he had depended was not to be depended tipon." 

As she spoke she cast a triumphant glance towards the 
doctor, whose aspect, strange to say, was anything but 
joyous ; and, all at once, it dawned upon the professor 
that he had got a new relation. 

" I must repeat/' continued the lady, " although Joseph 
was of a contrary opinion, that that person's generosity 
was not to be relied upon. It is true, as I have over 
and over again observed to Joseph, that she flings her 
money about like dirt upon dirt ; but the really deserving, 
as I have frequently pointed out to Joseph, she too often 
allows to go unrewarded." 

As Mr. Polyblank saw that the time had now arrived 
when he must positively say something, he said, "Indeed !" 

" By keeping our union a secret, as Joseph suggested, 
and by delicate inquiry ascertaining what this person felt 
inclined to . in fact, at what amount, to speak plainly, 
she estimated the worth of the best years of a life sacri- 
ficed to her interests, we should, as it were, have grounds 
to go upon/' 

" Yes, of course, you know," broke in Joseph, whose 
face was very red indeed, as he spoke. " She having said 
that my wife would not be forgotten, we wanted to know, 
you see, Peter, how far she was going to be remembered." 

Mr. Polyblank, finding that the time had once more 
arrived when he must again break silence, repeated his 
former venture, and said, " Indeed !" 

" Yes, Peter," cried the lady, eagerly, " and I had 
agreed with Joseph that our union should remain con- 
cealed for some time longer ; but the baroness having 



310 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

become aware of the fact, we have, as I tell Joseph, only- 
discovered a little- sooner than we otherwise should have 
done, to what extent the generosity of . of that person 
was to be depended on." 

The lady stopping here, the professor looked inquir- 
ingly from one to the other, wondering whether any 
further communications were about to be made to him ; 
and finding there was not, he said, hesitatingly, " So 
you are married ?" 

He was upon the eve of saying that they were old 
enough to know their own minds, but caught himself in 
time. For the life of him, though, he could not stammer 
out any of the words of congratulation customary under 
such circumstances ; nor indeed did Joseph's appearance, 
which was very much like that of a fatted calf upon its 
way to sacrifice, warrant him in indulging in ardent feli- 
citations. 

" You see, Peter," continued the lady, " Joseph's ap- 
pointment insures him a handsome income. A medical 
man is so much better married ; and I hope/'' she added 
playfully, " we have not been imprudent/' 

To this the professor somewhat lugubriously responded 
that he hoped so too. 

" Well," said the lady, after a rather awkward pause, 
" we must be getting on. Good-bye." 

" Good-bye," said Polyblank ; and it then occurred to 
him, for the first time, that Joseph knew nothing of his 
departure. It was not, though, he thought, the most 
convenient opportunity for making the communication. 
He therefore shook hands with them both, and promised 
Joe that he would write to him in a few days. As the car- 
riage rolled away in the distance, he stood watching it 
with a gloomy face. Joseph was having another start 
in life. Would he do well this time ? Would he and 



polyblank's last mistake. 311 

his wife live happily together ? Somehow, take her all 
together, Polyblank could not help thinking that she was, 
without exception, the most disagreeable woman he had 
ever known. Presently, with a sigh, he turned and 
walked on slowly towards the chateau. 

It was the last he ever saw of this promising couple. 



CHAPTER XXVII. 



polyblank's last mistake. 



Mais notre ancre a nous ! 

Pauvre petit chasse-mare'e, 

Tient au fond si fort . si fort amaree", 
Qu'il nous faut haler . haler . coup sur coup : 

Hissa . ho ! hissa! . hissa ! hissou£! 

De la Landelle. 

Before very long, Polyblank had reached the garden 
wall of the chateau, and came to a halt before that weak 
place in the fence over which, long ago, he had climbed 
surreptitiously to lie in the shade of the old trees by the 
water-side. Mounting now upon the palings, he peeped 
about and listened. He could see no one. All was 
still. He would venture. Since he had met Joseph and 
his wife, he felt more than ever convinced that he must 
not pay the baroness a visit. From what little he had 
heard of the story of Joseph's marriage, he was very 
.certain some petty meanness had been perpetrated. He 
knew very well that Joseph's honour could not be 
relied upon. He knew, also, that when such a woman 
as Joe's wife likes to be mean, she can be very mean 
indeed. Most likely they had wrung some money from 
the young baroness, and she, in giving it, had told them 
never to darken her doors again. If he were now to 



312 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

call, he argued, she might think that he, too, had come 
a-begging. Perhaps she would offer him alms ! 

Then he could not help reflecting how all whom she 
befriended seemed to turn upon her ; and he wondered 
whether, now that the Dubosq had gone, she was alone 
in the chateau without a friend. Since Raynal had left 
the town, she had never been seen abroad. Polyblank 
knew that she had been dangerously ill. He wondered 
whether she was much changed. He would have given 
a great deal to have caught one fleeting glimpse of her. 
Ah ! what would he not have given, could he have lived 
over again one of those dear old evenings now gone for 
ever! 

Thinking thus, he climbed cautiously over the palings, 
and walked slowly through the shrubbery to the water- 
side. As he walked he crushed the dead leaves lying 
thick upon the ground. It was the first day of winter, 
and a cold wind coming across the bleak marsh land 
sighed mournfully on the naked branches of the trees. 
The water ebbed slowly past, as it had done in the old 
time; but somehow it seemed now to make the scene 
very sad and dreary. There was the old place where he 
had been disturbed at his pic-nic, when she came rustling 
through the bushes. Oh ! how long ago it all seemed ! 
Why, at that time he was sanguine about his success at 
the college. Joseph had not yet arrived. He had 
not known what it was to feel the misery that 
he felt at this moment. "Well ! he had been alone 
in the world many years before this. Why should 
he all at once find the old loneliness more lonely ? 
Some persons tottering on the very grave's brink are 
ready to begin life again quite hopefully. Joseph's was 
one of these sanguine natures. Why should he despair ? 
He was going back to England . to that England which, 



polyblank's last mistake. 313 

according to some of its most persistent exiles, is ever 
dear to them . yes, to "that dear old country, where some 
hundreds of waifs and strays starve and die annually 
without being particularly missed or regretted. But 
such was not to be his case. Had he not made up his 
mind, whilst striding through the streets of Saint Babylas 
that morning, .that he was to be successful ? No doubt 
of it ; though just now he could not recollect exactly 
h*ow it was to come about. Now he was standing on 
the spot where first he fell a- dreaming. Yes, this was 
where he sat when he heard the rustle of her silk dress ; 
and there was . the rustle now. 

He had not time to reach the fence. He had not 
time to hide. She had caught sight of him from the 
garden, and came towards him with her hands stretched 
forth, in the old way, and with something of the old 
smile lighting up a poor little wasted face ; so pale and 
sad, he could scarcely have sworn to its ownership had 
it not been for the familiar sound of the gentle voice. 

" Dear Mr. Polyblank, I am so glad to see you. I 
have been so long wondering why you did not come/' 

He had forgotten all about his fancied ill-treatment. 
He had forgotten that he had to begin the world again. 
He had forgotten that there was any world beyond the 
chateau boundaries, when at once these words recalled 
him. 

" I have called several times," he said, " but they told 
me I could not see you." 

" I never heard of it. I thought you had never been 
here since that night. They should not have sent you 
away. I gave directions that I was to be told if you 
came; but I suppose your brother's wife did not wish 
you to see me." 

He said no more, for he could easily understand that 



314 THE PRETTY WIDOW. 

they had desired to keep him at a distance while their 
schemes were hatching. Walking silently by Manon's side 
on their way to the house he thought this over, and also 
thought that it was time to be going back to the ''Three 
Crowns," and yet he did not make any attempt to go. 

Presently Manon said : . " I have been very unhappy 
here, and I am going away. I have been so very un- 
happy since we last met, that I have thought sometimes 
my heart would break, and that I should die. Perhaps 
my heart is broken," she said, looking up at him with a 
sad smile; "but I am still living, you see. Yes, I am 
alive : but do you know I am quite alone in the world ? 
I am hardly twenty yet, and I have lost my father and 
mother, my husband, and . and I have seen a great deal 
of trouble. You, too, Mr. Polyblank, have told me that 
you have no friends or relations alive but your brother, 
and your life also has been hard. Now I thought " 

She paused here, plucking a flower and dreamily 
parting its leaves. With a violently throbbing heart he 
listened and waited, his eyes fixed on her face . so beau- 
tiful in its pale sadness . his ears greedily drinking in her 
softly spoken words. 

"Now I thought," she continued, "that I had yet one 
friend . not a very old one, perhaps, but one who, I fancied,, 
was sincere, and that one was you " 

The words rose half uttered to his lips, . If she could 
only believe how sincere he was . how his love had grown 
from day to day . how she was all in all to him . how . 
but she went on speaking, all unconscious of his agita- 
tion. 

" So I have been thinking what a weary life yours 
must be at that college, if the accounts which I have had 
of it are true; and that I could offer you a happy home 
if you would accept it." 



polyblank's last mistake. 315 

" If/' he repeated, the blood rushing in a tumultuous 
torrent to his face. 

" I have often told you," she said, "that I have a good 
deal of property in England. Now I am thinking of 
going over there to live. Will you come with me as 
my agent, to manage my estate and take care of my 
money for me, for I am not fit to look after my own 
affairs ?" 

Just for one moment he stood silent and motionless, 
while the blood flowed back from his face to his heart, 
the beating of which seemed for that moment to stop. 
One moment more, and he saw the full extent of the 
miserable mistake he was upon the very eve of making. 
She did not love him ; but, kindhearted and generous as 
she ever had been, she offered him now a handsome in- 
come, which he felt was intended to be a provision for 
him for life. And should he refuse the offer, because it fell 
short of the mad folly he had conceived a, while ago ? All in 
a moment this occurred to him ; and in that brief space he 
also saw the extent of the vast gulf dividing him from 
the idol he had worshipped. Yes, there she stood, young, 
lovely, rich, with the smiling world at her feet. Here 
he stood, a poor plodding, careworn creature . not formed 
to be a hero of romance, though possessing qualities 
which such heroes would frequently be the better for 
sharing. 

And would the gulf between them ever lessen, now 
that the days of anxious, grinding poverty were passed ? 
Would he ever rise to something higher, nobler . more 
worthy of her ? As he bowed his head to kiss her hand, 
he prayed to Heaven that such might be the case. 

And thus she at twenty and he at thirty began the 
world again. And was his life happy ? And did she 
marry him in the end ? Ah ! good reader, we have all 



316 THE PRETTY WIDOW 

of us our own ideas of happiness. Make Manon and 
the poor professor happy according to your own notion. 
One fact, however, must be recorded by the writer before 
this book be brought to a close, and it is this : . Here 
ended the sufferings of Professor Polyblank. 



THE END. 
