SEA OF ICE, 



OR THE 



ARCTIC ADVEJNTURERS. 



BT 

PERCY B. ST. JOHN. 



%'■ 



BOSTON: 

MAYHEW AND BAKER, 

208 Washington Strxet. 

1859. 



790718 



PREFACE. 



No work ever was published which has proved so 
delightful as " Robinson Crusoe." Naturally enough, 
there have been many imitations of so pleasing a 
production," such as the " Swiss Family Robinson," 
the "Robinson Chretien," and others. We make 
no apology for having conceived and carried out 
another version, which, though owing its idea to 
the works above-mentioned, is original in its scene 
and most of its events. The phenomena of tho 
north have been fully and correctly described on 
the very best and latest authority. The places de- 
scribed are those visited by Parry and Franklin. 

Percy B. St. John. 

(3^ 



NOTE 



OF THE AMERICAN PUBLISHERS. 



The thrilling narrative wliich follows was origi* 
nally published in England, under the title of " The 
Arctic Crusoe," which we have altered to that of 
" The Sea of Ice," but have taken no further liber- 
ties with the text of the author. 

Boston, Oct. 1, 18^. 

(4) 



CONTENTS. 



I ••■ I 



CHAPTER I. 

FAOI 

A Stoem. — A Hero. — Yotjno BoBiNsoir. — Eably Sea- 
manship «... 9 



CHAPTER .II. 
Ameeica. — A Hbsoinb. — Ambition and its Results. . . 21 

CHAPTER III. 

A FEAEFUL Tempest. — Dead Calm. — A Whale. — The 
Captuee. — Envy and Jealousy. — Icebeeos ahead. . 29 

CHAPTER IV. 
A Mutiny. — The Winter in the Ice 38 

CHAPTER V. 

« 

A Bear Hunt. — Alone on the Ice. — Shipweeck. . . 47 

CHAPTER VI. 
Shore. — The Island. — The Volcano. — The Foxes. . . 69 

CHAPTER VII. 

Examination of the Island 69 

1 ♦ C*) 



6 CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER Till. 
Tie SuLPHxni Pool 77 

CHAPTER IX. 

Thb Death Stbuoole. — The hot-well Gate. — Fibst 
Sunday 86 

CHAPTER X. 
Tribulations akd Cares. — A Boat. — A Sail! A Sail! . 96 

CHAPTER XI. 
Attempted Escape. — The Island of Despair. . . . .106 

CHAPTER XII. 

Mt Adventures on the new' Isijlnd, and mt Yotage 
home. — An extraordinary Discovery 115 

CHAPTER XIII. 
Stop and the Bear 126 

tHAPTER XIV. 
Winter. — The Esquimaux 137 

CHAPTER XT. 
The Indian Girl 146 

CHAPTER XVI. 
The Sledge. ...*.* 165 



CONTENTS. 7 

CHAPTER XVII. 
Breaking of ths Ice 166 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

lOLOOLIX ".••••. 177 

CHAPTER XIX. 
The Truce 188 

CHAPTER XX. 
Battle with the EsariMAtrx . . . . 196 

CHAPTER XXI. 
Great Bear Lake. — The Doa-BiBS. — Fort Franklin. . 206 

CHAPTER XXII. 
The Winter 217 

CHAPTER XXIII. 
Sad Events 225 

CHAPTER XXIV. 
Petershill. . • • • « • 2Z5 



m i 



THE SEA OF ICE, 

OR 

THE ARCTIC ADVENTURERS. 



t)HAPTER I. 



A STORM. — A HERO. — YOUNG ROBINSON. — EARLT . 

SEAMANSHIP. 

It was midnight, and the hour had come to change the 
ivatch. The night was dark and gloomy, the waves rolled 
mountain-high, the thunder roared with its horrid artillery 
over the watery hills, the lightning flashed, and the wind 
howled through the rigging with intense fury. It was on 
board a stout whaling brig bound for the Northern Seas, 
and in the sixtieth degree of north latitude. It was early 
in the summer, and just before the breaking up of the ice, 
so that, despite its being the month of June, it was bitterly 
cold at the hour of which we speak. By the lantern near 
the binnacle, and at intervals by the light of the storm, the 
state of affairs on board might be understood. Two men 
were at the wheel, watching with fixed eye the compass 
that guided them through the night, and listening with deep 
attention for every order given by the skipper, who with 
two men beside him was standing close to the wheel, his 
head turned towards the bows. The brig was under 
clos;e-reefed topsails, with a storm staysail — still, under 
the trying circumstances in which she was placed, almost 
too much canvas. Her rigging and running gear cracked 
and rattled, her masts strained, and her yards, though 
braced sharp up, yet shook at every plunge and roll of the 
vessel. 



10 THE SKA or ICK, OR 

'^ A dirty nighty captain," said a youth who stood near 
him — his form so concealed heneath sou'-wester and tar- 
paulin coat as to be confounded with his clothes ; '* the 
worst I have yet seen." 

" And as bad a one as ever I saw, Master Harry, who, 
man and boy, have buffeted the seas these thirty years. 
But the Polar Seas ain't like a duck pond. Mr. Williams, 
I think we must shake a reef out of the topsails ; she la- 
bors fearfully," continued^ the skipper, turning to a stout, 
short, thickset man, who, every inch a sailor, stood silently 
beside them chewing his quid. 

" Shake out a reef, sir ? why, I ain't sailed in this frozen 
ocean as long as you has ; but this I knows — any where 
else I'd stand by to cut away the mast if you .put another 
inch of sheeting on her. To my mind, bare polQs is the 
trim for such a craft in a gnle like this here," said the old 
sailor, dryly. 

" As you will, Mr. Williams," replied the captain, as he 
was by courtesy called. *'I have never yet found your 
experience fail. Besides, it is your watch, and I shall not 
interfere. Call me if there be the least change. The wind 
will chop about, I dare say, by morning. CJome, Master 
Harry, you must turn below a while, or I shall have you 
nodding in my watch." 

Both took one long look around, and though wind blew, 
waves. boiled and seethed, though the thqinder bellowed and 
the lightning flashed, yet there seemed no sign of an imme- 
diate alteration, and therefore the two went below to seek 
refreshment and rest. They descended by the companion 
to a small cabin, which had not too much accommodation. 
On each side was a kind of shelf, raised nearly three feet 
from the ground, and about two feet in breadth, which was 
dignified by the name of a sleeping berth. Around was a 
projection which served the purpose of lockers and benches 
— a kind of seat successfully imitated in certain modern 
conveyances. In the centre was a table, with above a 
swinging lamp, that remained ever steady amid all the 
shaking of the vessel. Against the bulkhead were sus- 
pended muskets, swords, pistols, and two fancy harpoons ; 
while above all arose an undefined odor of biscuit, rum, soup, 



THE ARCTIC ADVENTURERS. 11 

tobacco, cheese, soap, oil, combined with a close, rausty, 
faint smell, peculiar to the cabins of small vessels. The 
absence of women, soap, and fresh water was clearly to 
be noticed in the dingy color of the sheets, which might, 
however, have been whity-brown instead of somewhat 
dirty. 

It requires some little time to habituate the weak stomach 
of a landsman to the abominations of such dens as ships^ 
cabins were some thirty years back. But the force of 
habit is so great, that even the most delicate temperament 
will, during a long voyage, habituate itself to bear such 
invasion of its most sensitive of organs, and find, at the end 
of three months, nothing very remarkable about it. 

On the night in question there was now added to the 
other pleasures of the cabin a steam of wet coats, with a 
deafening, dull roar of the sea against the planks of the 
ship. Every now and then a huge wave would slap against 
the side, as if about to burst the frail rampart erected by 
the hand of man against its raging force. All who have 
witnessed the wonders of the deep have been struck with 
amazement at the seeming disproportion between the power 
of the billows and the wooden machine that in so many 
instances rides safely on its foaming crest. The mind is 
almost necessarily well affected by t^e thought ; and I 
think few have voyaged by sea without being more than 
evei* struck with admiration at the cunning of man's hand, 
and the wondrous provisions of Providence for our employ- 
ment and well being. 

But both Henry and Captain Shipton were already too 
well accustomed to all that concerned a seafaring life to 
feel at the moment any such influences. They were cold, 
wet, and hungry, and their first thought was for their sup- 
per. It consisted of cold salt pork, some potatoes and bis- 
cuit, washed down by rum diluted — the captain's with 
two thirds water, the young man's with double the quantity 
of the somewhat doubtful liquid which on shipboard re- 
places the purer element, one of man's greatest blessings. 

The captain was a little over forty, weather-beaten, fur- 
rowed, and his short hair nearly white. His physiognomy 
was open and frank, and remarkably intelligent. His gray 



12 THE SEA or ICE, OR 

eyes looked quick-sighted and sharp ; his mouth was some- 
what severe in expression, though in general a smile sat on 
his countenance. He was now, however, serious, and the 
general tone of his physiognomy was grave. 

Henry Maynard was a young man of about one and 
twenty. A little above the middle height, with an oval 
face, nearly black hair,' dark-brown eyes, his appearance 
was winning in the extreme. With, in general, a thought- 
ful brow and a countenance of marked intellectual charac- 
ter, ha won more by the sweetness of expression round his 
mouth than even by his mental powers. When he spoke, 
all were charmed, for he had one of the greatest personal 
advantages that fall to a man — a good voice. Adven- 
turous, bold, firm, industrious, fond of study, he seemed out 
of place in the cabin of a whaling vessel ; yet he wore the 
costume of a sailor, and was, indeed, chief mate of the Fair 
Fanny, What reasons had induced a young man of edu- 
cation and refinement to adopt this mode of l^e will by and 
by be seen. 

" And pray, Mr. Maynard," said the captain, as they sat 
over their frugal meal, "what do you begin to think of 
Polar researches, whaling, and so forth ? " 

*Wrhat it is, as*! expected, hard work ; with more storms 
than calms, and plenty of harder work in store,** replied the 
young man, catching at his berth, as a fearful lurch of the 
vessel nearly pitched him across the "table to where the cap- 
tain sat. 

"You may say that. Master Maynard. We've had 
pretty plain sailing as yet, and have got upon whaling 
ground right quickly ; but not a whale have I seen yet, 
and the men begin to fancy, I hear, we shall have but sorry 
luck;" and the skipper looked curiously at the young 
man. 

" You are aware. Captain Shipton, that in reality whaling 
is a secondary object with us ; that we certainly hope to 
pay part of our expenses with the proceeds of our fishing, 
but that I am here with other designs." 

"I know it, Mr. Maynard, or else why have you left 
your father's house, your fair future bride, and all the com- 
forts and luxuries of an English home ? For myself, I'm 



THB ARCTIC ADTJCXXUBBat. IZ 

a. poor man, and sail to win bread for my wife and little 
ones — God bless them ! — but with you it's another thing. 
I'm not a scholar, but I've had a better education than 
sailors generally ; and still I can scarcely understand your 
motives, having every thing in the world at your command 
— wealth, a girl you love, a happy home, and God knows 
what besides." 

" Mr. Shipton, I am not sleepy. If you can spare me an 
hour, I will, now that we are close upon the scene of action, 
explain to you fully how I come to be here, and what are 
the motives which have guided me, at one and twenty, into 
the Polar Seas." 

" I will wake up the watch through," replied the skipper, 
filling a pipe, and speaking in a hearty. tone, "to have this 
explained to me. Take a pipe, man — a sailor cannot live 
without it, and you know I cannot smoke alone." 

" To please you," said Henry Maynard, smiling, " I 
would take half a dozen whiffs ; but this is the last habit of 
the sea I shall learn, and as yet I cannot venture." 

And the young man sat down in his berth, his feet firmly 
fixed on the locker beneath, and began his story. 

As the reader is not aware of many particulars with 
which the worthy skipper was familiar, and which, there- 
fore, the other omitted, we must ourselves narrate, in our 
own words, the young man's tale, adding what he passed 
over often without mention. 

He was the only son of a wealthy merchant, who, in 
addition to a princely fortune gained by trade, possessed a 
fine estate in Devonshire, which, by a complication of cir- 
cumstances, had become the inheritance Of his wife. Rich, 
and liberal in his views, and having an only child, he had 
lavished on him all the stores of knowledge which a refined 
mind could impart, with the aid of an extensive and well- 
chosen library, and the advice and guidance of a friend, 
the pastor of the parish near which the mansion of the 
landlord-merchant was situated. Inhabiting Plymouth, — 
for there was his house of business, — Mr. Maynard left hia 
wife and child almost always at his country house, riding 
out in the evening on horseback to dinner. 

Business over, the pleasures of the merchant were hii 

2 



14 THE SEA OF ICE, OR 

fiunily, bis garden, and his books. In the society of his 
wife and chUd he found more delight than in the wider cir- 
cles which he also often frequented, being neither a hermit nor 
a misanthrope ; he would talk and walk with them, or, while 
they pursued their occupations or amusements, would read. 
The tastes of the young hero of Petershill were early devel- 
oped. A pond, or rather lake, at the extremity of the 
lawn, was perpetually covered by boats and ships, made for 
him by a retired sailor, one Timothy Stop, who, having 
served his father well on board one of his vessels, and hav- 
ing lost a leg, had been sent down to Petershill under the 
pretence of being a servant, but, in reality, there to end his 
days in honorable retirement With this taste arose very 
soon a devouring love of books of travels. Henry would 
learn his allotted tasks with avidity, that, this over, he might 
invade the library, and there, taking down Cook or Uak- 
luyt, Frobisher or Barentz, gloat like a miser over his 
treasures. 

His father, so that he learned his regular lessons and took 
a fixed amount of exercise, never interfered with his love 
for books. He even saw with pleasure his son studying 
works which to the future merchant-prince must be emi- 
nently useful — no man who trades with the whole world 
having to fear too much knowledge of the countries he deals 
with. In fact, it was a marked neglect of this necessary 
education which in days gone by caused so many unfor- 
tunate speculations. 

Henry was accustomed to rise at six, and go forth in the 
park to walk. In general he took Stop with him, and re- 
turned to Petershill to breakfast at eight. It was in the 
May of the year which saw his tenth birthday, when one 
day — it was a holiday, and his mother had slept in town — 
he entered the library at daybreak, searched over the 
shelves, and presently, impatient at not finding what he 
wanted, took a work at random from the singularity of its 
name. Then he went out alone, and disappeared behind a 
small wood opposite the house, a portion of which was still 
as wild as when the park had been reclaimed from the hand 
of nature. A hill, covered by bushes, briers, and wild 
flowers^ stood in the centre, reached only by winding paths 



THS iLBCTIC iLDVENTUBSBS. U 

tKrough the wood, somewhat rough for gentle feet* This 
was Henry's favorite retreat. 

At eight o'clock, on this occasion, he had not yet returned ; 
but as he was supposed to have gone down to Plymouth to 
meet his father and mother, no one searched for him, and it 
was only at five that, pale, excited, his eyes fixed as if he 
had seen some wild beast, he returned to the house, faint 
with hunger and thirst. He was asked by his father where 
he had been, and simply replied,' that he had spent the day 
at the retreat reading ; and no further questions were put, 
though his father begged him not to forget his meals another 
time, as such neglect was unwholesome. He dined almost 
in silence — a novelty which was ascribed to his being 
languid from want of nourishment so long. 

" I think you had better go and take a quiet walk, Henry," 
said his mother, when the dinner was over. " Take Stop 
with you, and be back to tea. But mind, don't run or heat 
yourself; you are quite feverish." 

" Thank you, mamma ; the air will do me good," he re- 
plied ; and nodding hi^ little thoughtful head to his parentB, 
he moved quietly out of the room. 

A few minutes later they saw him, with Stop by his Bide, 
walking quietly along the lawn towards his favorite wood| a 
book under his arm. 

" That boy has a wonderful taste for reading," said his 
father. ^^ By and by I must take • him into town, and gite 
him a little change." 

" I fancy he looks a little poorly lately. But Stop can 
take him out a little more, and I wUl ask him to ride beside 
me on horseback instead of sitting in the carriage of an 
afternoon," said Mrs. Maynard in reply. 

" You will do well, my love," replied the husband, who 
then as usual walked out into the open balcony, to admire 
the quiet prospect before him. 

Early next morning, and for about a month afterward^i 
Harry and Stop went out regularly every morning, return- 
ing about ten, as they now took their breakfast of milk and 
fresh bread and butter with them. At that hour they re- 
appeared, washed and cleaned themselves, and separated^ 
Hafry to his studies, and Stop to mend a boat or do somo 
little odd job for his beloved young master. 



IC THE SEA OF ICB, OR 

Their four hours of regular absence at length excited in 
the most lively manner the curiosity of Mr. and Mrs. May- 
nard, and one bright June morning they sallied forth, arm 
in ann, on an exploring expedition. They wended their 
way at once towards the wood, and entered it by a narrow 
path ; then, guided by voices, they made towards the famed 
retreat, advanced a little farther, to stand still in mute 
astonishment. 

The scene was one which both understood at a glance. 
The youth and his ancient comrade had chosen a side of the 
hill where bushes and weeds overhung a small hollow ; all 
this had been cleared away, and the cave increased in size. 
Around was a hut, built with stakes, boughs, and thatch. 
This had a small door, while inside could be clearly seen two 
old kitchen chairs and a table. About six yards in front of 
the hut were stakes driven into the ground, so as completely 
to shut up all access to the cave, though a ladder allowed 
any one to get over who had business within. Mimic can- 
non guarded two loopholes, and a goat wandered around, 
tethered to a tree. Sawing a plank was honest Timothy 
Stop, while Harry — an old umbrella over his head, a child's 
gun on his shoulder, a queer peaked hat on his head, a pair 
of horse-pistols in his girdle, a rusty hanger by his side — 
was, from a book he held in hiS hand, giving directions and 
commands. 

"Now, Master Friday," said he suddenly, "you may 
have your breakfast; I myself feel hungry." 

" Yes, Master Robinson," replied Stop ; "but first let us 
give the goat her second meal." 

And honest Tim . Stop, while Harry laid on a plank his 
umbrella, gun, and a volume, which all, doubtless, know to 
be " Robinson Crusoe," turned to feed the tame goat, 
which Mrs. Maynard recognized as one of her petted 
favorites. 

The father drew his wife back gently, and led her away 
without a word. When they were beyond the wood was 
the first time he attempted to speak. 

" But why did you come away so silently?" asked his 
wife. 

•< Because, jny dear Helen, he looked so happy, and for 



THE ABCTK! ADyENTUBBRS. 17 

the world I would not have disturbed his felicity. This is, 
perbup's, the happiest moment of his life. He lives in a 
world of his own creation. I can understand his feelings. 
'Robinson Crusoe' is, perhaps, the most fascinating book 
for boys in the whole world. You, a woman, can scarcely 
understand it." 

Mrs. Maynard silently acquiesced, and for some time no 
notice was taken of young Robinson and his faithful man 
Friday. At last, however, the devotion of the lad to this 
one idea became less great ; he read other books more fre- 
quently — still voyages and travels, and narratives of ad- 
venture by sea and land. Mr. Maynard then made alla- 
sion to his harmless amusement. 

" And so. Master Crusoe," said he, laughing, " you have 
got tired of your island and cave ? " 

" What, papa ! did you know ? " replied the boy, blushing 
crimson. 

" Yes, my son ; this three months have I known it, and 
80 has your mother," continued Mr. Ma3mard. 

" And you never scolded me," said Henry, with glisten- 
ing eyes. * 

" My dear boy, you seemed happy ; you attended always 
diligently to your studies, and I have always allowed you to 
amuse yourself as best yoy liked, so that you did no harm. 
But what made you enjoy yourself so much in your cave ? " 

^ Because I was a little like Robinson Crusoe. I should 
have been really happy to have been him." 

" But, my dear boy, you seem to think nothing of the 
privations, of the sufferings, of the solitude of poor Robinson." 

" But at last he had the company of his man Friday." 

" Then his life became bearable. But, my dear boy, he 
was alone for twenty years, with no mother, sister, friend, 
or comrade ; and, if you read attentively, you will note that 
his life was one continual struggle." 

^' But, papa, who ever gained a name without hardships ? 
Look at Captain Cook." 

" My dear boy. Captain Cook lived indeed, and did good 
service to his country ; but Robinson Crusoe existed only 
in the imagination of Daniel Defoe. It is doubtful if really 
a man could have gone through so many difficulties." 
. 2* 



It THS SKA OF ICl, OB 

** Robinson Crusoe is then an invention !" exclaimed 
Harry, almost inclined to burst into tears. 

" Yes, my boy, and one of the most beautiful inventions 
in any language. It is an amusing and a good book. We 
have, first, Crusoe suffering for his undutifulness to his 
parents, a slave ; then he is cast on a desert island. Here 
God takes pity on him, and places in his path varied means 
of existence, and at last comparative ease. In the end, 
when he has become a good man, deeply imbued with the 
love of his Creator, he gives him a companion, and ulti- 
mately releases him from his confinement. My dear boy, 
you may learn much good from this book ; I hope you may 
find it pleasant even when you are a man." 

Harry made no reply : he was very thoughtful, and pres- 
ently ran away to tell Stop that they had been believing in 
a fiction. It was hard to tell whose disappointment was 
greatest, the sailor's or the boy's. 

Years passed, and Henry reached the age of fifteen, and 
one day there was talk of his going to a public school, and 
then to college. 

"My dear father and mother," said he, very gravely, 
when he had heard what they proposed, " listen to me, I 
beg you. I know the value of learning. I- delight in books 
and the pleasure and knowledge they give; but at some 
time or other I must go to sea, travel, and see the world." 

" Go to sea I " exclaimed his mother wildly. 

"Listen to him, my dear," interrupted Mr. Maynard 
gravely. " Go on, Henry." 

" I know now a good deal, quite enough, if I continue to 
read, to be a merchant or a private gentleman. But now 
I dream of nothing but travelling, of ships, of strange lands, 
and my wish is this : Let me go two or three voyages while 
you are still young ; only one or two, just until I am a 
reasonable man. Then I will come home, and be your 
companion when you are old, tell you of what I have seen, 
what I have heard, and what I have felt. I will take books 
with me, seek to learn languages, and promise you that 
when you want me at home, I will go to sea no more. I 
do not insist I will not be an undutiful son, and go away 
if I coiild; but do let me just go to India once, to America 



THB ARCTIC ADVBNTUItERS. 19 

once, and then most likely I shall be satisfied. But, my dear, 
kind, good father and mother, I leave it to you to decide." 

"My dear," said Mr. Maynard, slowly addressing his 
wife, after some minutes of reflection, " the boy is right. It 
was by doing as he would do that I prepared myself for the 
brilliant career which has been mine. It was by voyage 
and travel that I learned to be a merchant. The boy is 
right. I am sorry he has decided thus, because we must 
part with him. But, Helen, Providence is good, and will 
restore him unto us. I know him well. If we curb this 
desire he will fret and repine. The desire to travel is a 
passion which is generally ^oon worn out, but which at first 
is absorbing." 

" O, my dear father," exclaimed Henry, his eyes flash- 
ing, his face suffused with color ; and then, turning to his 
mother and embracing her, he cried, ^^ Dear mamma, do you 
consent ? " 

" Don't kiss me, you bad boy, who want to leave ine," said 
the fond mother, with a Jook of sincere sorrow. 

" But if I go to schopl or to college, I must leave you," 
insinuated Henry in his softest voice. 

"Yes," said his father, thoughtfully, "and perhaps re- 
turn to us less the son that we have now, than after a long 
voyage." 

This decided the matter ; and it was agreed that Henry 
should depart in the first India-bound ship in which they 
could find a fitting passage, with Tim Stop as a servant and 
humble friend. And so he departed, and for eighteen 
months the house in Fetershill and the mansion in town 
were as if deserted. The spirit that gave them life had 
fled, and both Mr. and Mrs. rMaynard, though still happy, 
were far more grave and solemn than usual. They talked 
of the departed always in a hushed tone, almost as of one 
dead, and they listened with intense yearning for the sound 
of his voice once more. Four times, however, there came 
letters, long epistles of almost a volume each, which made 
smiles come again to both father's and mother's face, and 
gave them subject matter for discourse for months. 

One Christmas eve, in the morning time of the day, they 
were seated at their breakfast table in their house in town. 



iO THB tXA or ICIy OB 

•- * • 

Thej could from their snag break&st parlor see the street 
and the port, and were whispering still of the absent, speak* 
ing of the next day, and what a happy Christmas it would 
be if he could be there, and so on, when the London coach 
pulled up at their door — a young sailor, in jacket, black 
neckcloth, and loose pantaloons, leaped down from the box, 
and darted up the steps, after ordering his two large chests 
to be deposited on the ground before the door. An old man, 
with a wooden leg, slowly followed him. 

^ My child I " shrieked the mother. 

^ My beloved son ! " said Mr. Maynard, solemnly : ^ God, 
in his infinite mercy, be blessed ! ** 

Next minute he was in their arms. 

To tell how they looked at him; how they made him eat, 
and drink, and talk ; how they ransacked the house for things 
to tempt him with ; how they gave confused orders, which 
nobody obeyed, for servants, clerks, and porters were all 
flurried together ; how Mr. Maynard wrote a check doubling 
the* amount allowed for his people's Christmas-eve dinner 
and ball ; how both admired the tall, handsome youth of 
seventeen, nearly a man, sunburnt and darkened, but still 
frank, open, thoughtful Harry Maynard, — would require a 
pen and pencil combined of more felicitous expression than 
mine. I can only say that it was doubtful to all who was 
the happiest 

And next day, when there was a merry Christmas party 
got up in honor of the occasion, and Henry was the hero of 
the night, and told strange stories of what he had seen, and 
mimicked the Hindoos, and Hottentots, and other strange 
people he had met with, and talked about storms, and jibs, 
and hammocks, and forecastjes, and ratlines, and belaying- 
pins, there was no stopping him. And when he kissed sJl 
the girls, and most readily his little cousin Fanny, and sat 
next her ten times as long as near any one else, and laughed 
and looked fondly at his parents, one and all declared that 
they had nevQr seen such a Christmas. It was quite a fairy 
tale, or like the parable of the prodigal son. 

And Mr. and Mrs. Maynard were truly happy, drawing 
their joy from the purest fount on earth. 



THS ARCTIC ADYENTURKRl. 



h 



CHAPTER II. 

AMERICA* A HEROINE. — AMBITION AND ITS RESULTS. 

The. young man's next voyage was to America, the coun- 
try of his predilection, as it is ours. History, the pa'st, the 
stores of learning and philosophy, the arts, sciences, ^d 
relics of genius which have come down to us from Greece 
and Rome, have even little charm beside the wondrous phe- 
nomenon of a wild continent, peopled by savages as wild as 
their forests, becoming the seat of a vast and new system of 
civilized society. The United States is a nation and a gov- 
ernment apart, and can be judged by no rules laid down by 
writers and economists, who lived anterior to the foundation 
of the vast republic. Henry Maynard travelled for two 
years through the great Union, and came back, as all fair 
and impartial observers do, highly gratified and impressed 
with a very elevated view of the future of, perhaps, the most 
mighty nation of the earth, an offshoot of England, destined, 
from immense natural advantages, perhaps to surpass her. 

Our hero did not go to America to write a book. He did 
not, therefore, study mere fun ; he did not seek only for the 
anecdotical, the strange ; he did not ask why they spoke in 
a different tone to what we do, any more than he was as- 
tounded to find Devonshire and Yorkshire dialects different. 
His study was of the effect of institutions on the prosperity, 
well-being, and greatness of the nation. 

Henry Maynard was nearly twenty when he came back 
from his second journey — a man in character, appearance, 
and acquirements. His mind, previously nourislied and 
fortified by reading, had largely profited by travel, and in all 
his discourse and conversation his marked superiority over 
the general average of young men was clearly visible. He 
was not a great inventive genius, but he was a clever young 
man, imbued with generous impulses, great tact, acuteness 
and power of observation, and influenced by a devouring 



fl tarn iXA or ici, ob . 

thint for knowledge. This was greater than ever. He 
wished to know, to see, to learn. He found a large reen- 
forcement of information, collected bj his father during his 
five years of absence, and he eagerlj visited Petershill to 
lay in a fresh stock of thought and reflection, by assiduous 
reading. 

But he found a great hinderance to his projects. Cousin 
Fanny was now a permanent resident with Mr. Maynard. 
Left, about a year before, an orphan, and in very poor cir- 
cumstances, Mr. Maynard had at once adopted his sister^s 
only child, not for the sake of being called a good and gen- 
erous man, but because he felt duty and inclination to be 
both, in this instance, equally forcible in influencing him to 
the act. To Mrs. Maynard, the society of an amiable girl^ 
very sensible, pleasant, and even well informed, who, when 
her first sorrow was passed, became a companion with whom 
she could talk of Henry, and who was never wearied of the 
subject, was invaluable. 

Henry found that walking was now as agreeable, at least, 
as in ancient k.days, though now, if he had begun to play at 
romance again, it would have been at Paul and Virginia, and 
not at Robinson Crusoe. He guided Fanny's steps through 
every avenue of the park, took her to the seat of his former 
exploits, and there established once more his reading hilL 
But when Fanny was with him, it was no longer voyages 
and travels, but Milton, or Byron, or Shakspeare. 

And yet they often talked of that boyish freak, of Stop, 
and the cave, and the goat — and Henry would hint, that 
were he to be Robinson again, he would like to have a fair 
companion. He did not understand, Defoe, not he, or else 
he would have sent some angel of the other sex to rejoice 
his heart. And Fanny laughed and wondered how he could 
talk such nonsense. 

One day he was reading out Romeo and Juliet. They 
sat side by side, and were most intent on their bogk. But 
Henry often stopped, looked at Fanny, and sighed ; while 
she, her eyes cast down on the ground, blushed rosy red. 

At last Henry closed the book. 

" Fanny," said he, in a low tone, but speaking distinctly 
and gently, *' my feelings towards you have long been known 



THS ABCTIC ADVENTURERS. 23 

to myself. I do not love you as a coDsin ; I love yoD as 
Borneo did Juliet : listen to me. We are cousins, friends, 
nearly of the same age ; why should we not one day be hus- 
band and wife? See how happy papa and mamma are. 
There could be no greater felicity on earth than to pass 
through life as they have done." 

Fanny was silent one moment, her hand unresistingly 
placed in Henry's, and then she answered in a trembling 
voice, scarcely able to restrain her tears, — 

^ Henry, I will not conceal from you, that, under many 
circumstances, what you have said would have given me 
pleasure. It is sweet to be loved, and, perhaps, even still 
more to love. But I am an orphan, living on the bounty of 
your parents. Such thoughts must never enter our heads. 
Forget what you have said, dear Henry, and let us remain 
cousins and fiends. If not, let me go away. I will not 
cause your parents one " 

** Hush, Fanny ! " cried Henry, almost indignantly ; ** you 
do not know my parents. They are not only kind and de- 
voted, but they would do any thing for me. I am a pet, 
Cousin Fan, and the moment I say I wish you to be my 
wife, if you consent there will be no difficulty." 

" No ! no ! Henry. It would be the height of injustice 
on my part to take advantage of their generosity. Let us 
talk no moi*e of this. Even in listening to you, I am doing 



wrong." 



"No!" exclaimed Henry, fondly; "there can be no 
crime in listening to me — to me, your future husband." 

" Hush ! Henry ; do not talk in this rash way. Forget 
what has passed but as a pleasant dream." 

" Never ! " 

" Then my duty is clear. If you are not wise enough to 
end this painful scene, I must. Come, Henry, let us return 
to the house." 

And she rose, and Henry rose too, but with a smile of 
proud and unalloyed happiness that had never sat on his face 
before. They walked arm in arm towards the house, just 
in time to dress for dinner. When they came down to this 
meal, Fanny was very pale, her eyes were slightly swollen, 
and her whole mien betrayed extreme agitation. 



24 . THE 8£iL OF ICS> OR 

^ My dear Fannj, what is the matter ? " said Mrs. May- 
nard, gently ; " are you not well ? " 

** Quite well," replied the girl, faintly. 

" My dear father and mother," exclaimed Henry, as the 
servant closed the door behind her, ^ I can explain what is 
the matter. Fanny has this day refused to be my wife, and 
I think she is sorry for it ; but she thinks it her duty be- 
cause she is poor." 

"My sister's only child," said Mr. Maynard, who ex- 
changed a delighted glance with his wife, " is my child now. 
Fanny, it has been for a whole year our dearest hope that 
Henry might choose you for his partner for life. We never 
breathed a syllable about it, because we wished to leave him 
free. Fanny, Helen will tell you that your marriage with 
Henry has long been hoped for by us. Come, then ; make 
Henry happy if you can." 

" My dear uncle and aunt," cried Fanny, trembling like 
a leaf as she spoke, " I will not, when you are so generous, 
hesitate one moment. If you really do wish your son to 
marry a portionless girl, she will be proud to be your 
daughter." 

Henry pressed his father's and mother's hand in his, and 
then all sat down to dinner. 

" Now then to business," said Mr. Majmard, after some 
whispered talk between the cousins ; " Fanny is an orphan 
and my ward, with a fortune accumulating in my hands." 

"Hush, my dear sir; I have nothing, save what your 
bounty — " exclaimed Fanny, 

" You are mistaken. The wreck of your father's fortune 
I have collected together. I have found numerous debts 
due him abroad. These I am collecting and placing out in 
a profitable way. You will have six thousand pounds when 
you are of age. Now, as you are an heiress, you must marry 
my boy of your own free will. What say you, Henry, to 
fixing the wedding for Fanny's twenty-first birthday ? " * 

" Two years, my dear father ? " said Henry, in a tone of 
extreme disappointment. 

" Two years are soon passed, my boy, and at two and 
twenty you will scarcely more than have entered upon man- 
hood. I dare say you. will find some pleasant way of pass- 



THE AKCTIC ADVENTURERS. Su 

ing the time. Besides, I cannot consent to alter ihis part 
of my design. I am sure, Henry, you must own it is wisest 
and best." 

Henry made no reply, but he shook his head almost mourn- 
fully, and said, " As you will, my dear father ; but two years 
IS a long time to wait. God knows what may happen in 
that time.'' 

Many a time and oft did, in after days, these words come 
to the mind of both father and mother like a reproach, or at 
all events as a prophecy. 

But now none but smiling thoughts and ideas were in- 
dulged in, and the house was one of daily and hourly rejoi- 
cing. Henry, however, became more studious even than of 
yore, and devoured books — new scientific books, too — with 
the same ardor with which he had studied " Robinson Cru- 
soe " as a boy. 

Of course, his pleasant communion with Fanny, in walks, 
and, in the evening, by reading and communing together, 
was continued ; but there were times when he ceased almost 
all intercourse with any one, and shut himself up in his room 
alone, trimming the midnight lamp, and reading far into the 
night. 

One day he called his father into the library, closed the 
door, and asked him for an hour's interview. Mr. Maynard 
willingly acquiesced, a little alarmed, however, at the seri- 
ous expression of his son's countenance. 

" My dear father," he began, in a quiet, firm, and manly 
tone, " I have resolved on one more journey. Nearly two 
years will elapse previous to my marriage, when all expedi- 
tions must cease ; but ever since I was twelve years old, 
one desire has beset me — one thought has possessed me. 
Towards this have tended most of my studies. The desire 
to be stirring consumes me day and night, and I must go or 
become ilL I cannot sleep for the thought; My destiny — 
tliough I am no fatalist — seems in my dreams to stand over 
me and say, ' Go ! '" 

" Whither ? " exclaimed the amazed father. 

" To discover the magnetic pole," said Henry, quietly. 

"My boy, what madness possesses you?" began Mr. 
Maynard. 

3 



26 THE SEA OF tCE*, CTB 

^ Mj dear father, no madness. The means are in your 
hand — the end is glorious. If I fail, no great barm will 
be done ; if I succeed, our name will go down to posteritj* 
alongside Columbus, Magellan, Marco Polo, and other of my 
heroes. The means of execution are easy. You have a 
whaling vessel starting in a month. Give it extra provis- 
ions and instruments ; let whaling be subservient to mj se- 
cret designs ; leave the command to worthy Captain Ship* 
ton ; but let me, according to private instructions, be still 
leader of the expedition. By starting a week earlier than 
they intended, we may reach the ice in time to enter its 
confines this summer. I purpose wintering as far north" as 
possible ; and then, when summer comes again, continuing 
my voyage, either retreating, or making the great north- 
west passage, as fortune favors me.** 

Mr. Maynard listened to him, half in despair, half in ad- 
miration ; and at last, afler two hours of earnest discussion, 
the father yielded, and at tea time it was announced that 
Henry was about to make a voyage in a whaler, to pas9 
away in activity the period that must elapse previous to his 
wedding. 

The announcement was received with passionate grief by 
both mother and cousin ; but Mr. Maynard, now quite en- 
thusiastic in the cause, aided by the warm and earnest elo- 
quence of Henry, soon brought them to consider the project 
as one of less alarming import than they at first thought it. 
Neither was converted to a belief in its wisdom, but they 
resigned themselves ^to please the young traveller; Fanny, 
however, making Henry promise to journey no more after 
their marriage, except in places where she could pleasantly 
accompany him. 

Henry gave the promise freely, and then from that hour 
all was bustle and activity. There were many preparations 
to make, but wealth knows few difficulties ; and early in 
May Henry was ready, well provided with clothes, linen, 
provisions — wine, spirits, and tea and coffee entering large- 
ly into the composition of his winter stores, while arms and 
ammunition were provided in abundance. 

It was early one Monday morning that Henry lefli Pe- 
tershill, in company with his parents and future bride^ 



THE ARCTIC ADV£NTUBERS. . 27 

They were in an open carnage, of course very sad. Mr. 
Maynard was thoughtful in the extreme ; Mrs. Maynard 
wept freely ; and Fanny in vain tried to stay her tears.' 
Henry suffered more than alL He felt that a word of his 
woald cause all this sad emotion to change to joy. But bis 
things were on board ; his enterprise incited him on more 
than ever ; he saw^ in the loilg vista of the future, the. pride 
^d joy of success and imperishable fame. 

He could not hesitate ; and bidding all be of good cheer, 
he promised to return in time for the wedding day. 

The ship was already out of the port, lying to. A boat 
alone waited, with the skipper and four sailors, for the first 
mate ; and here, then, Henry bade them all adieu. 

He embraced the almost inanimate form of Fanny, placed 
her tenderly in his mother's arms, kissed her dear face, 
wrung his father's hands passionately, and then, to hide his 
emotion, leaped into the boat, and bade the men give way. 

When he turned, they were standing, that mournful 
group, watching him ; and as he stood up they waved their 
hands and kerchiefs, and he waved his cap and sat down. 

It was the last they saw of him for many weary years, 
and yet there they saw him still, every hour, every minute 
of their existence. 

The Fair Fanny { so yra& she now christened) was a stout 
brig, of four hundred tons, built for the whale fishery. She 
was strong in bows and beam, and had in fact nearly all the 
good qualities a vessel can have, except being a good sailer. 
The crew was ample in number and well chosen. The cap- 
tain was a man of great experience, the second mate had 
sailed in every sea, and Henry was the learned man, the 
thinker of the party. 

Williams, the second mate, was a blunt sailor, a rough, 
obstinate, pig-headed Englishman, who never saw any thing 
beyond the hour ; whose happiness consisted on board ship 
in ordering ^bout the men, in smoking and drinking grog ; 
on shore, in spending as rapidly as possible whatever he 
earned. He was already almost impatient for the voyage 
to be over, having received, in common with all, extra pay 
**this bout" — a circumstance that excited greatly the won- 
der and the astonishment of crew and officers. 



28 THE SEA OF ICE, OR 

This mysterioas fact was one that had roused general 
curiosity since their departure from Plymouth, and was 
nightly talked over round the windlass and in the forecastle. 

"It's my opinion," would Williams say, "that there's 
some screw loose. Men don't have extra grog, extra grub, 
or extra pay for nothing. It's contrary to reason. If we 
was now in the West Injies, or about the coast of Africa, 
I should say we were pirates or slavers." 

" So should I," would reply James Hulk, one of the 
men. 

Williams would then drop the subject, as if satisfied to 
throw out a suggestion, leaving his hints to rankle in the 
breast of the crew. 

" I say, Hulk, you've been in these here parts before, 
hain't you ? " one day asked Williams. ^ 

« Yes, I have." 

" Well, is there any natyves up in the north ? " 

" To be sure there is," replied Hulk ; " ain't there the 
Squimaus, what lives in holes in the ice ? " 

" That's it, then. Black cattle is running short and get- 
ing expensive ; so Master Maynard has sent his son out to 
kidnap the cold uns. Well, that Jack Williams should live 
to be a pirate, a-running after innocent savages as never 
did him no harm ! " 

This notion was gradually received, but none betrayed 
their suspicions to the captain, waiting the course of events, 
in most cases with extreme indifference, as the crew did 
not really much care how they made money, so that it was 
made. 

Such was the crew collected on board of the Fair Fanny j 
which we left laboring in a polar storm, and to which we 
now return, after these necessary preliminary observations, 
which were essential to the understanding of what follows. 



T^E ARCTIC ▲OYENTUSERS. 29 



CHAPTER III. 

JL FEARFUL TEMPEST. — DEAD CALM. — A WHALE. — THE 
CAPTURE. — ENVr AND JEALOUST. — ICEBERGS AHEAD. 

When Captain Shipton and Harry Maynard went on 
deck^ the scene was dismal in the extreme. It was bitterly 
cold. There fell a kind of watery sleet that clung to rig- 
ging and ropes, crusted the deck, and then blew up at every 
gust in damp dust against the eyes ; the waves ran moun- 
tain-high, and the ship was borne up at times forty feet above 
the level of the ocean, at others as many below. The brig 
rolled from side to side, its yards dipping in the water, and 
the deck at such an angle as to necessitate holding on by 
belaying-^pins and ropes'-end, to keep a footing. The wind 
drove them still towards the north. The sky was black 
and unbroken hy one blue opening, and nowhere could any 
one see fifty yards beyond the ship. 

None spoke. There is under such circumstances a cold, 
damp rawness in the air, which, with the sense of danger, 
makes men keep their mouths closed. The skipper, with 
Harry by his side, walked up and down the quarter-deck, 
looking anxiously for some sign which might give token of 
the storm abating. But gust succeeded gust, the wind 
howled through the rigging, and dark clouds came chasing 
each other across the sky, from their bed in the north-east, 
one unceasing succession of black vapor, mingled here and 
there with clouds more lightly tinted, but nowhere blue, or 
orange, or red, or of any of the more agreeable hues, which 
betoken the return of fine 'weather. 

It is in the Polar Seas only that a storm can be seen. 
Every where wind will raise the waves mountain-high, but 
here only does Boreas reign supreme. The wind seems to 
come forth from the ice-bound caves of the northern ex- 
tremity of the world, unchecked, unrestrained, with a blast 
like that of the hurricane. The seas \>e\Tv^ n^rcorw ^ wvtai 

3* 



30 THE SEA OF ICE^ OR 

here and there bounded by heayy mountains of ice, the 
waves are far more dangerous than in the wide ocean, where 
they swell in uninterrupted force for thousands of miles, 
aiid present to the mind an image of imposing grandeur 
which no land scene can give. 

At eight o'clock the captain and Harry went below to 
breakfast. At this moment the sea had reached the height 
of its fury. Above, copper-colored vapor, that shed night 
upon all visible nature ; below, black waves crested by 
white foam, that broke vault-like backward, and dashed 
upon the deck, unceasingly washed by spray. No one 
could be heard unless he spoke in a thick, screaming voice, 
that seemed to tear the throat painfully, while the masts 
worked in their sockets, as if about to break off from their 
junction with the deck. 

" When will this fearful tempest end ? " said the skipper 
gravely. 

" God knows," replied our hero ; " but where are we ? 
I fear we are approaching the chains of icebergs. It would 
be awful to face them in this storm." 

" It would. According to my calculation we are now in 
64° north. If so, unless the wind abates, we are lost." 

Henry made no reply, but sat down thoughtfully to his 
breakfast. He began to think that his zeal in the cause of 
discovery had carried him too far, and that it would have 
been wiser to have remained at home. But he would not 
give utterance to vain regrets, and feeling no inclination for 
conversation on any other topic, he remained silent. 

The motion of the vessel sufficiently showed that the 
storm continued ; but presently, just as the breakfast was 
over, the brig remained upright a moment, and then began 
pitching and rolling in a peculiar way, quite different from 
what had been felt for two days. The vessel appeared 
abandoned to herself without guidance; yards and ropes 
seemed about to be torn from their holding, and at every 
roll or pitch the brig shook in every timber like a man 
with the palsy, 

" A dead calm," said the skipper, rising and rushing on 
deck, followed by Harry^ 

When they came again on deck they found that the scene 



THE ARCTIC ADVENTURERS. 81 

had changed as if by magic All wind had ceased, the clouds 
were breaking up over the whole sky, patches of blue were 
seen above, and on the waters, here and there, the rays of 
the sun obliquely gilded the still heaving ocean. As far as 
the sea was concerned, the calm was worse than the storm ; 
for while the wind filled the small amount of canvas left on 
the brig, she rolled and pitched without the fearful lurches 
and shakings which now seemed about to knock the whole 
£eibric to pieces. Capable of guidance by the rudder, the 
movements of the ship were regular; whereas now, the flap- 
ping of the sails, now filled one way, now the other, was 
added to the motion of the waves, and each time the brig 
darted forward or backward, it stopped with a jerk that 
threatened to tear the sheets from their bolts, and the masts 
from their sockets. 

Still the sea was falling, and about twelve there was a 
dead calm; below, also, the ocean now only heaved and 
swelled, the waves broke no more, the brig was tossed 
gently and lazily irom side to side, and the captain and 
crew were able to look about them. 

As the billows sank to rest, first becoming long waves, 
then descending simply to a swell, they saw that nowhere 
were they in sight of land. "Water and sky were all that 
could be distinguished, and at twelve o'clock the latitude 
was found to be 64** 30' N. The air was very cold, even 
without wind, and all began to feel that they were within 
the polar regions. 

They were able even to satisfy themselves more fully of 
this, when a fog in the north-east clearing up, they saw a 
vast stray iceberg coming down as it were upon them in all 
its cold and massive might. Though alone, it was declared 
by the men to be the largest loose iceberg they had ever 
seen. It was jagged and pointed at the summit, and ap- 
peared from the reflection much more extensive than it 
really was. Henry desired to pull out to it ; but the captain 
protested against this, as from his examination it was much 
more distant than it appeared to be. Harry gazed curi- 
ously at this first specimen of 

" A cryatal pavement by the breath ot "Eeosea 
Cemented firm," 



32 TH£ SEA OF ICE, OR 

and lon^d for the hour when his adventurous feet would 
be fixed on the shores of the unknown world towards which 
he was advancing. 

" Would that the winter were corae," he said in a low 
whisper to the skipper. 

" Be not in a hurry," replied his friend ; " the winter will 
come fast enough." 

It was about an hour afler the above observation had 
been made, that Henry and the captain were startled by a 
cry which they had been expecting for some time. 

*' A whale ! a whale ! " said a man at the mast-head. 

" Where away ? " asked the skipper, while the men with 
one accord prepared for the exciting chase w^hich was about 
to take place. 

" Nor-west, about half a mile," replied the lookout 

" Out with the boats ! " cried Captain Shipton, in an ex- 
cited voice ; while Henry, unable to master his emotions, 
went below to fetch a harpoon. 

When he came again on deck, he found two boats in the 
water, each manned by twelve men. It had been previously 
arranged that Williams should command the one and Henry 
the other ; the skipper, from due regard to discipline, re- 
maining on board. After recommending great caution to 
his young mate, the worthy man gave the signal for start- 
ing, and the " ashen breeze " soon sent the two heavy cut- 
ters rapidly over the waters. The sea was still calm, the 
air cold, despite the sun that showed itself brightly enough 
, in the heavens, and the sky clear and open. In a few min- 
utes the signal-men announced the whale. 

It lay lik^a great weed-clad rock, still and motionless ; 
a calm, however, as deceitful as that of a volcano, as the old 
sailors all knew. They now, therefore, pulled with extreme 
caution. Henry could scarcely restrain his feelings, but by 
a great effort he succeeded in mastering his emotions and 
keeping silence. He stood upright in the bows, motionless. 
In his hand was his bright harpoon, fastened to a line of 
vast length. He was about to make his first experiment in 
whaling, and his position as chief mate made him extremely 
anxious to succeed. 

Williams, who stooA ready also, looked with a smile of 



THE ARCTIC ADVENTURERS. 33 

80om at the young man, who, never having seen a whale 
before, was about to compete with an old sailor, and who 
allowed himself to be carried away by his feelings suffi- 
ciently to feel excited. He was not aware that Henry had 
studied minutely in books every phase of this and all other 
deep-sea fisheries ; for not liking the young man, he con- 
versed with him not one minute more than required by his 
duty. He had, howevel*, little more time for thought. The 
whale was close to them. Its huge length was now clearly 
visible, and a slight uplifting of its side showed a tendency 
to move. Williams turned to give some direction to his 
crew. 

"Ah I what is that?" he roared, turning round without 
finishing his sentence, a fierce look of passion suflfusing his 
countenance, not unmoved with alarm. 

When he first turned, Henry, who was slightly nearer to 
the whale than Williams, noticing the movement of the 
huge animal, and fearful that he would escape, raised his 
harpoon, took aim, and let fiy. The harpoon hissed through 
the air, and struck the whale on the back, burying itself up 
to nearly the hilt. A loud cry of rejoicing from the crew 
proclaimed the palpable hit, and then they drew back, two 
standing by Henry to aid him in his further duties. 
» The instant the whale was touched, it lashed the water 
with its huge tail, snorted forth a volume of water, and then, 
making a dart downward, disappeared, almost taking the 
boat of the second mate with it in the vortex. A slight 
bubbling of the waters, a series of rippling waves then en- 
sued, and all was over for the moment. 

The cord, however, paid out with tremendous rapidity, 
one man pouring water on it as it ran over the bows, the 
other standing by with an axe, to cut all away, if the huge 
monarch of the seas put them in any danger. For some 
time no change took place. The cord uncoiled from its tub 
with fearful rapidity, and the crew waited with intense anx- 
iety for the moment when it should all be out. 

The moment came on them ere they could think, and 
they saw themselves dragged bows under, cutting the water 
apart with a wondrous power, which Henry could not but 
admire. He gazed, however, intently on iVe towv V\\Xv ^^ 



34 THE SEA OF ICE, OR 

axe, ready to give the signal, and fearful that a second of 
delay might risk the loss of crew and boat 

But still on thej went, ploughing through sheets of foam, 
that dashed its sparkling spray over all, and left behind a 
wake n^rly a mile long, and quite as wide at its extreme 
base. Not a word was spoken. All eyes were fixed on 
the distant point where the whale might be expected to 
rise. 

*• Stand by to cut away," whispered Henry, as their ve- 
locity increased to a degree that threatened to submerge 
the cutter. 

" Ay? ay ! sir," replied the sailor. 

At this instant the rope slackened, and the whale rose 
nearly a mile distant, so long was the line. He seemed to 
take rest but for an instant, for away he again darted in a 
direction nearly the same as that which he had already 
taken. The same precautions were immediately had re- 
course to, and the small quantity of line taken in was again 
paid out. But this time the whale did not go far, but came 
slowly towards them, casting up a column of water and 
blood as he moved. 

'*ne's finished, sir," exclaimed Hulk, respectfully; "he 
was a reg'lar snorter, but you touched him up beautifully. 
I never seed a whale better managed." 

The looks of the men testified their admiration of theiS* 
chief mate's skill, and from that moment the tars, who had 
hitherto doubted his youth, had full confidence in him. 

*^I am glad to have pleased you, Hulk," replied Henry, 
who really was very proud of his victory ; " but look alive, 
my hearties. He may be deceiving us." 

" All right, sir," continued Hulk ; and then he added in 
a half whisper, " Won't Williams be mad, my eyes I " 

" Why should he be mad ? " 

" Because, sir, he made up his mind to hit that ere 
blower hisself, and now you've a done it." 

*' It is very absurd on his part — pull in, coil away — 
the game's up with him," cried Henry, heartily, as the 
whale turned on his side and lay to all appearance dead. 

Henry then looked around, and saw that, while the ship 
was not more than a mile from them, the boat of Williamsy 



THE JlBCTIC ADXESTCKEStS. ^ 

from the direction the wbale had taken, hrr s fv on the 
other side. A light air that fanned his face warned him to 
be stirring, and it was with no unall satL^fiKtkin ihai Hesnr 
saw the sails of the brig fall, and the stoat Te»««l §uxr 
towards them, with the osoal majestic aspect of all }Mrge 
Tessels with a light and gentle wind. 

By the time the Fair Fanny was alongside, the whole 
of the rope had been coiled in, and the men were preparing 
to cut up the whale. 

^ Bravo, Mr. Majnard,** cried the jolly skipper ; ^ that 
prize does joa credit. It's a whale of the be^t fon. A 
pretty good beginning that, as snre as my name i<n*t i'ike.'" 

^A good b^inning,** replied Heniy, ''and oaie that 
bodes us luck." 

He then went on deck, and when the sails had been 
furled, the whole crew set to work to perform the le«9 
agreeable parts of their doty. Williams soon came op. in 
reality furious, but concealing his rage under an appearance 
of blunt good nature. Bot forward, he ezpnused Terr 
different sentiments. 

^ It's my opinion, Hulk," he said, when in the erening 
they were smoking a pipe, ^ that that ere youngster k no 
more twenty nor I am. He's a regular old stager made np, 
I can see. He twenty I he be blowed ! I goess he's been 
whaling longer nor that* 

'^ In his father^s fish pond," langhed Hoik, "' along with 
my old mesmate, Tim Stop." 

^ None of your larking observations, Mr. Hulk." replied 
WiUiams, with a look of superb contempt. ^ Ftc read 
afore now of a woman as they called Niny Qose, as lodged 
like a young gall at eighty." 

" Stow that," cried the men with one aoocwd ; " that is 
too much of a spun yam." 

"Well, I don't care, Tve idj notions," said WiUiams, 
sulkily. " Eight bells — turn in. He twenty ! hell never 
see forty again." 

Next day they killed two whales, of which one fell to 
the share of Williams, which put him in better humor, and 
for ten days the crew had undivided success. Then the 
ground faiHng, they determined to push farther north* 



86 TUB 6£A OF ICE, OK 

It was earlj in the morning afler they tui-ned towards 
the north, Henry and Captain Shipton were walking the 
deck. There was a chilly^ sensation in the atmosphere 
that was new. 

"You look anxious, Master Henry/* said the skipper, 
with a smile. 

*' I fancy I can feel the ice," replied our hero, who had 
been absorbed in his reflections. 

"Feel it!" exclaimed Captain Shipton; "why, look 
over the quarter, my friend, and you will see it." 

Henry rushed to the side, and looked over. Close to 
the ship the water had changed its color. It had now a 
dirty brown tinge, while here and there floated great pieces 
of loose ice, not large enough, however, to cause any im- 
pediment to the progress of the ship. 

Round about the floating stream of ice, which came thump- 
ing now every minute against their bows, fluttered petrels, 
dorchies, killewates, and other of the birds of these seas. 

Henry said not one word. He was on the verge of that 
mysterious sea, the secrets of which he had come to fathom, 
and he could not repress a strqpg feeling of rather natural 
emotion. He gazed vacantly towards the north, as if ex- 
pecting to see something strange on the edge of the horizon. 
But there was nothing to tell of their whereabouts but the 
chill, the floating ice, and the broad and dirty expanse of 
ocean waters, except that in the distance floated a hazy fog, 
which might have been mistaken for hills. 

" An iceberg right ahead," suddenly exclaimed a man 
aloft, about half an hour later. 

All rushed to examine into the truth of this statement ; 
and in a few minutes they could plainly discover a huge 
hillock of gigantic shape bearing down upon them. It was 
nearly thirty feet in height, and when, giving it a pretty 
wide berth, they passed alongside, it looked more like a 
rock than that which they knew it to be. 

This, however, was no ^litary mountain of ice, like 
that they had first seen ; it was the leader of a host which 
came within sight every moment, and which made the far- 
ther advance of the ship exceedingly perilous. Now a 
huge floe, or a field of packed ice, would wholly check 



THE AHCTIC ADVENTURERS. 57 

their progress, and when the stiff breeze carried them 
through, they found themselves, perhaps, surrounded bj 
icebergs. 

It was ilbout the last day of August ; the wind was south- 
erly, and the good brig advanced under all sail, forcing its 
way through a vast plain of loose and broken ice. It was 
the morning watch, and day had not yet fully broken, 
though it was all but day the whole twenty-four hours long. 
The brig was moving along almost without visible motion, 
80 calm was the sea under its heavy burden of congealed 
water. 

Suddenly the full light of day flooded the eastern hori 
eon, and Henry was startled by both the grandeur of the 
scene and the perilous position of the ship. 

Two vast icebergs were coming down upon them. The 
one on the starboard bow was not less than a hundred and 
fifly feet in height, while the larboard one was fully two 
hundred feet above the level of the sea. They were not a 
hundred feet apart, and they appeared gradually nearing 
each other as they advanced. 

** All hands on deck," roared Henry, springing up into 
the main chains. 

The whole crew were on deck in an instant ; but Captain 
Shipton saw at once that nothing could be done but wait 
the progress of events. The wind was light — the channel 
between the ice was narrow — and the floes rushed with 
such force on each side of the icebergs that any escape 
that way was impossible. There was no choice but to 
pass through the valley which lay between the two vast 
mountains. 

Nearer and nearer came the icebergs, settling down upon 
each other with fearful rapidity. The wind was light, and 
the brig advanced but slowly. Poles and fenders were got 
out, to push off the fearful accumulation of frozen water, 
and not one living soul on board the ship but waited for the 
critical moment with extreme dread. 

The distance between the bergs at their southern end was 
now not more than fifty feet. It narrowed at the other end. 
The crew held their breath. 

They were between the two heaving masses. 



88 THE SEA OF ICE, OH 

Every sail was now cracked on, while, keeping dose to 
the eastern iceberg, thej pushed the brig forward bj meant 
of poles. Every instant now seemed an hour. The wind 
scarcely impelled them forward at all ; still the two icebergs 
came closer and closer. The crew looked anxious and pale. 
Some sent up a silent prayer ; and yet they were at the 
mouth of the valley. They were actually grazing the east- 
em berg, and the western was not tin feet off. 

A long pole was thrust out on both sides, one tremendous 
push was given, and the Fair Fanny floated once more in 
an open space of water. 

^ Thank God I " said Captain Shipton,fervently, as, gazing 
back, they saw, ten minutes after, their late enemies meet, 
crash together with a fearful report, and then rapidly sepa- 
rate. All felt that, had they been between at that meeting, 
not a remnant of the ship would ever have been found. 

They were now fairly within the confines of the Polar 
Seas, and officers and crew prepared at once to cope with 
the difficulties of their position. 



CHAPTER IV. 

A MUTINY. — THE WINxfiR 15 THE ICE. 

It would be useless, when we have so much to tell, to 
narrate all the movements of the Fair Fanny during a large 
portion of the time that was occupied in beating up Baffin's 
Bay, in fishing, and endeavoring to find a channel on that 
desolate coast. They endured all the usual difficulties of 
Arctic navigation ; they were in constant danger from ice- 
bergs ; they every now and then were checked wholly by 
streams of ice, and by detached watery rocks from the great 
northern barrier. 

On one or two occasions they anchored in a convenient 
bay, and landed; but finding nothing pleasing or encour* 
a^ing ashore, soon again sought the shelter of their ship. 



tHB ARCTIC ADVENTURERS. 39 

m 

They were very successful, however, in their search for 
Ibod, which, heing principally fresh meat, was exceedingly 
welcome to the whole crew, to whom salt beef and pork 
were beooming wearisome. This is one of the worst parts 
of all long sea voyages, but is felt with more force in the 
Arctic regions than elsewhere. 

The excitement of the chase, one or two contests with 
bears, one of which neaVly proved fatal to some of the, crew, 
and fishing in the bay, were pleasing changes to men who 
had been cooped up so long in a small brig. 

Towards the middle of the month of September they were 
in latitude 74®. The weather was now intensely cold, the 
sea was covered by loose ice, a light wind made an advance 
in any direction almost impossible, and Captain Shipton and 
Henry" began to see that the nfoment had arrived to winter 
or turn their ship's head in the direction of home. 

Forward there were continual conferences among the 
men, who could not understand ^^ dodging about " in that sea 
without any visible aim or purpose. Williams, by his in- 
nuendoes and sly jokes on the chief mate, by his constant 
grumbling, kept alive a feeling of discontent, which was not 
remarked by our hero. 

Events, however, rapidly opened his eyes. 

It was a clear and lovely day; a fog which had hung 
round the brig had risen, and displayed before their eyes the 
somewhat dreary aspect of affairs. To the left rose, at a 
distance bf some fifteeii or sixteen miles, a small headland, 
near which they had anchored but a few days before. Right 
ahes^d could be plainly distinguished a compact body of ice, 
which stretched away to the right and left, completely check- 
ing all onward progress. Around were loose floes, which 
began advancing every hour with increased force and in 
greater numbers towards the south. 

To convey an idea of the hardship and difiiculty a vessel 
has to encounter when thus far advanced into the polar re- 
gions, it is necessary to remind our readers that the ice is 
here as hard as granite ; that it resembles floating stones ; 
and it would be difficult, indeed, to convey to the mind of 
any an idea of these mountains hurled fiercely through 
narrow gullies, encountering each other vj\l\v «i \va\&^ V&a | 



40 THE SEA OF ICE, OB 



KOff 



thunder, splintering off from hanging cliffs huge precipiceSi 
rending each other a<%under, until, losing their equilibrium, 
they pitch headlong down, whirling the water into eddies, 
and lifUng it alofl to the heavens. The sea is never stilL 
Its changes are like those of a kaleidoscope. 

*" Captain Shipton," said Henry, in a low tone of voice, to 
the skipper, as they stood on the quarter-deck, muffled up so 
that they could scarcely be distinguished one from the other, 
after a visit to the crow's-nest, " we must haste to winter- 
quarters. No time is to be lost. The season has advanced 
more rapidly than I expected." 

" But, my dear young friend," said the honest skipper, 
** how are we to reach the land ? The wind is falling, and 
without a stiff breeze it will be impossible to force our way 
through these masses of ice." * 

"We must tow by boats, and get as near the land as 
possible," said Henry, thoughtfully. 

" Go below, then, and arm yourself," replied the captain, 
quietly. "Now is the time to show firmness and deter- 
mination." 

" What mean you, captain ? " asked Henry, anxiously. 

" Williams has been throwing out hints — I understand 
them ; and it*s my opinion the crew will not winter here if 
they can help it." 

Henry looked surjM'ised, but went below, and, as advised, 
placed a pair of pistols in the pockets of his pea-jacket. He 
then came on deck, 

" Out with the jolly-boat," roared the skipper, as soon as 
Henry again stood beside him. 

The men obeyed quietly. Henry and the captain ex- 
changed significant glances. 

The boat was got out — a crew of nine men were put in 
it — a tow-line was fastened to it, and the orders given to 
tow to the westward. At this juncture Williams walked up" 
to his superior officers. 

" I don't understand this here hard-water business much, 
captain," said he ; " but to my notion we arn't doing any good 
by fetching up west. It's my opinion, that with this here 
breeze we might turn tail on the ice, and be out in a jiffy." 

" Quite possible," said Captain Shipton, quietly ; " but 



THE ARCTIC ADVE10URER8. ' 41 

both mjself and Mr. Maynard desire to make for Heame 
Bay." 

" What for ? " asked Williams, anxiously ; " why, the sea's 
a freezin' up, and there ain't no chance of getting out if yer 
don't do it this bout." 

" Mr. Williams," said Henry, mildly, " I think it time to 
inform you that it is my intention to winter in yonder bay." 

" Winter ! " roared Williams, actually turning pale, — 
** winter ! why, you're mad. Captain Shipton, are you 
a-going to have your carcass froze up by this young mad- 
cap?" 

" Mr. Henry Maynard is owner and captain of this ship," 
said the skipper, mildly ; '< I am but his servant, and what 
orders he gives it is my duty to obey." 

" I take no orders firom him 1 " exclaimed Williams, 
fiercely ; " nor, for the matter of that, from you, if you are 
mad." 

" Williams," said Henry, firmly, " no mutiny, if you please. 
I should be sorry to use forcfe or violence, but, at the first 
evidence of insubordination, I shall not hesitate to act." 

Williams muttered something between his teeth, and then 
retreated to the forecastle, as if giving way before absolute 
necessity. ^ 

Meanwhile the ship made but little way. The boat, 
though pulled lustily by its crew, was continually impeded 
by the floating ice, which drove them resolutely to the 
southward. As, however, the breeze began somewhat to 
freshen, their pace slightly increased, and at last it was 
found necessary to call in the boat. The men came on 
deck, the boat was hoisted up, and the Fair Fanny labored 
heavily through the turgid waters. 

Henry and Shipton, much encouraged by the yielding of 
Williams, conversed in low and guarded tones of their plans. 

" I think we shall make the land," said Henry, cheerfully ; 
" the breeze freshens up. In an hour or two we shall be 
safe." 

" Be not too sure ; this wind is the last spurt of the gale, 
and when it ends we shall be at the mercy of the ice." 

" Think you so ? Let us hope for better things. I won- 
der how the men will really take the matter." 

4* 



42 THI^ SEA OF ICK, OR 

** Well enough but for Williams,*' said the skipper, gaz- 
ing anxiously at the heavens. 

AAer the lapse of about an hour, the wind having risen 
to half a gale, they found themselves in the centre of a 
large open space of water almost wholly without ice, though 
ai^parently surrounded on all sides by icebergs, and the 
tossing, seething, cracking floes that poured to the east and 
west with a dark and distant roar. The wind, which was 
from the north-east, was bitter in the extreme, the atmos- 
phere was again getting thick and hazy, and night was 
rapidly coming on. A few flakes of snow also were noticed 
falling on the deck. ^ 

It was evident that winter was about to declare itself sud- 
denly and energetically. The ice-bound pool in which they 
found themselves was tossed by the waves — lashed into 
fury by the bitter blast — while every now and then a stray 
lump of ice would come thundering against the bows, turn 
the brig from its course, and shake the sails so effectually 
as to cause her to lose way. 

At this juncture, the whole of the crew were seen advan- 
cing with Williams and Hulk at their head. 

" Be firm, my friend," said Henry, clutching his pistols in 
each hand, inside his pocket ; " the crisjs is come." 

The skipper imitated his example, without saying a 
word. 

" Captain Shipton," said Williams, halting a short dis- 
tance from his supeirior, while the men crowded sullenly 
behind their spokesman, " I've bad a bit talk with the men, 
and they say as how they won't venter upon this here 
churchyard sea no farther. It don't stand to reason — no 
how. We're all willing to do our duty — to go aloft, reef 
and steer, haul aft and belay, fish and what not — but we 
won't be blocked up in this ice for no one. Winter's come ; 
there's no more whales to be found ; we've got a fair wind ; 
so let's run right out of this here ice — — " 

" No more, Williams I " exclaimed Henry ; " you shipped 
all for two years. You have done your duty; I must do 
mine. My orders are to winter up here, so as to start in 
the spring and try and reach the 110th degree of longitude. 
You know the reward, rily lads — five thousand pounds. I 



TUK ABCTIC ADTKNTUmCRS. 43 

want none of it. I>o bat second me, mnd mj thmn of the 
prize is yours." 

One of the men gave a faint ^ harrah I " which was fol- 
lowed up by two or three others. 

^ Silence ! " roared WiUianu ; ^ all thi« is gammoo. We 
ain*t going to reach no hundred and your granny of loogi- 
tade. Why, the hanimab quits these parts in the wiDt#T — 
the bears and the wolves cuts away, and you don't tell me as 
as men can live. No. So, Captain Shiptoo, if you will be 
guided by this here young lunatic, we won't; speak tlie 
word and it's settled." 

^ What do you require of me ? J? asked Captaia SbiplOB, 
with suppressed passion. 

^ Turn the ship's head to the south — run down to a port 
in Greenland, where we can spend a jolly winter, and well 
come back in the spring to work. If not, we've decided to 
do it ourselves." 

^^What say you, Mr^ Maynaid?^ relied the captaia, 
turning anxiously to Henry. 

^ That the man who shifls a sail, or steers a point from 
the western course I have given, shall, for this act of mutiny, 
receive the contents of one of these pistols in his head ! '* 
and Henry slowly raised his two pistols towards Williams. 

*^ Knock him down ! " roared the second mate — himself 
however, retreating. 

^ Back, every man of you ! " exclaimed the eaptain, im* 
itating the example of Henry. 

The crowd of sailors held back, whOe whispers passed 
from man to man. Williams retreated behind the crowd, 
and tried to induce the men to advance; hot there were 
many reasons that caused the crew to hesitate. In the first 
place, the sight of four loaded muzzles rendered the task a 
dangerous one ; but the chief motive was the respect and 
love with which in their hearts they regarded their two 
chief officers. 

" A precious set of cowards," sneered Williams ; " a cut- 
ting away twenty of ye before a boy and a man 'cause they 
got a pair of old popguns." 

^ I say, Mister Williams, belay that ; no more a coward 
nor yourself, do ye see ? But barkers ain't popguns ; and 



4i THE SEA OF ICB, OS 

if as SO jou like them playthings, just go and knock 'em 
down yourself." 

" Dolts — idiots I you'll be bunged up in this here sea 
like mummies friz in a hiceberg. I don't want no one to 
harm the youngster. It*s for his good as well as ours as I 
speaks, do you see ? so just rush in and disarm 'em." 

** Mister Williams," said Hulk, ** I tells you afore that 
ere's done four men will die. Besides, I dare say they 
knows best, and this here is downright mutiny ; and Jim 
Hulk aini in his forty-seventh year, as has served the king 
twenty, to turn towards the yard-arm. Captain Shipton," 
he added, turning, cap in hand, despite the cold ; '' I axes 
pardon, and if as how you'll say no more about it, Hulk's 
your man, fore and aft." 

9^\w2Lys thought you a good man. Hulk ; come aft, and 
no more shall be said about it. Now, then, hear my last 
words : down with your handspikes there, and return to 
your duty, lads ; and the last man shall be put in irons, and 
hanged on his return to England." 

The crew dispersed like magic at these terrible words, 
and the skipper, turning to Henry, lost the opportunity of 
seeing who was the last man. From that minute nothing 
more was heard of the mutiny. 

" You see, Mr. Henry," said the skipper, smiling, " all 
that is needed is a little firmness." 

" It is the secret of discipline," replied our hero, much 
relieved at the pacific turn affairs had taken. 

At this instant the wind suddenly ceased, a calm stillness 
spread through the air, and the ship was tossed at the mercy 
of the waves. All rushed to look over the side, but it was 
80 hazy that nothing could be distinguished. 

Obedient once more to the voice of their officers, the men 

* diligently obeyed the orders as they were given. The sails 

were furled, lookouts were placed, and every soul on 

board waited with deep anxiety the next sign of life which 

should be g^ven. 

There was a dull weight in the atmosphere ; the waves 
rose and fell with a long and sullen swell ; a few flakes of 
snow were floated against the face at every motion of the 
^hip. This motion gradually subsided, the stillness became 



THB ARCTIC ADVKNTCAERS. 4«> 

fearful, acnd then a roar as of artillerj was heard, with a 
simultaneoas flash of sheet lightning. 

The ship quivered, rocked from side to side, pitched, 
rolled, and then all was motionless — sea, air, water, brig, 
and for an instant the very breath of those who were deeply 
interested spectators of all that was passing around. 

^ We are frozen in," said Henry in a low, hushed voice, 
as of one under the influence of a solemn and extraordi- 
nary event. 

'« We are," replied Shipton, with a sigh, *^ and at least 
ten miles from the land." 

" It cannot be helped," said our hero, calmly. " Provi- 
dence watches over us, and we must do our best. Perhaps 
we are not finally frozen in, and may make way to-morrow." 

Williams came sullenly up, and asked what was to be 
done. 

** Wait until morning," said Henry, sternly, " and if the 
ice does not break, bring down the saib and topmasts. The 
sails will make an awning for the deck." 

" Veiy well, sir," replied Williams, who thought it wise 
to conceal his mortification and anger. 

The night was bitterly cold — snow fell heavily ; and so 
rapid was the progress of the freezing power of the atmos- 
phere, that before daybreak the ice was six inches thick 
round the brig, which was firmly embedded in its surface. 

When the short day now left to them had begun, all saw 
that their fate was sealed for the next nine months. They 
were irrevocably locked up by the iron grasp of a frost, 
which added inches in thickness every hour to the hard 
surface of the water. 

Immediate steps were taken to provide against the ter- 
rible inclemency of the season in this high and dreary lati- 
tude, where so many men have been tempted by a zeal that 
might certainly have led to happier and greater results. The 
yards, masts, and sails were taken down ; a sloping awning 
of planks and sails was made the whole length of the ship ; 
every aperture was blocked up ; the deck was covered by 
a coat of sand, and every possible provision was made for 
the health and comfort of the crew as far as could be done 
on board a merchant ship. 



46 THE SEA OF ICE, OR 

It was DOW that the previous studies of our hero became 
valuable, and that the skipper learned to appreciate his 
many wise precautions for the winter — precautions sug- 
gested by the failures and misfortunes of others. 

The temperature of the atmosphere was far below zero, 
and the condensation of the steam made it necessary to 
promote a systematic arrangement with regard to ventila- 
tion. 

It was arranged that the old sea watches should be done 
away with, that all should rise at the same hour and go to 
bed together. During the day large fires were kept both 
in the cabin and in the forecastle, while oil lamps burned 
in every part of the ship to prevent dampness. The fires 
were allowed to go out when all the men were in bed, the 
lamps then only diffusing warmth. This arose from the 
fact that coals were scarcer than oil. 

A considerable quantity of extra clothing, warm flannels, 
mittens, and other articles, were served out to the crew. 
Regular arrangements were then entered into for the long 
and dreary wintpr. 

They rose at eight, the fires were lit, breakfast ^ven out, 
and then all dispersed until twelve, to amuse themselves as 
they thought proper. Some made their way across the 
snow, which soon left no distinction between land and sea, 
to a high point which they knew marked the first jet of 
land, in the hope of finding game — a hope not very often 
realized ; others got up running matches on the snow, until 
twelve o'clock, when dinner was announced. In the even- 
ing they congregated round a large fire, which was placed 
in a stove amidships, and amused themselves each man ac- 
cording to his own fancy. Henry studied his books of 
modern travel; the captain joined him, and obtained as 
much information on the point as possible. Williams — 
who had given up all idea of mutiny for the present, from 
the simple fact that mutiny was now useless — told long- 
winded yarns to the men, who, after a short time, were as 
merry as under the circumstances could be expected. Pro- 
visions and comforts generally were abundant, and any 
wrath that might have been felt was studiously concealed. 

And thus the winter wore on — even the night of three 



THE ARCTIC ADVENTURERS. 47 

months' daration — without anj inconveDience or murmur- 
ing, save when the scurvy broke out slightly — a malady, 
however, quickly repressed by the exertions of our learned 
hero. 

In imitation of others, they also invented amusements, 
and even got up on Christmas eve a sort of burlesque play, 
which caused much mirth, and which, being followed by 
extra cheer on that ever-memorable occasion, was exceed- 
in^y gratifying to the crew. 

Several hunting expeditions were organized, but they 
rarely produced any other result than a contest with a bear, 
many of which animals were attracted by their keen sense, 
of smell into dangerous proximity with the vessel. 

The phenomena of the winter were many, bpt other and 
better bpportunities will occur of describing them during 
the progress of our strange and eventful history. 

The long night of nearly four months, the vivid corusca- 
tions of the Aurora Borealis, the death-like stillness of na- 
ture, the Welcome reappearance of the. sun, are subjects 
with which most readers are now pretty well acquainted. 



CHAPTER V. 

A BEAR HUNT. — ALONE ON THE ICE. — SHIPWRECK. 

And the winter passed without accident, and the month 
of May came, and the sun showed some slight sign of 
warmth. At the height of its power it thawed some snow 
on the housing of the tent — and yet the thermometer was 
still at zero — for the first time for eight months that it had 
been so temperate. This was comparaftve summer to the 
weary crew, for 'though the snow was "deep, and the air 
chill, yet the snow was softer than before ; and in compari- 
son with the depth of winter and its biting blasts, the air 
was balmy. 

Advantage of this state of things was noNV l^V^^xi \i^ ^\ax\. 



46 Tfi« g£A OV ICE, OE 

an expedition towards the nearest land. A sledge wfl0 
loaded with providions ; half a dozen of the best men, with 
Hulk and Henry, engaged themselves on the ice, but thej 
speedily found that they had selected rather a bad time fye 
their adventurous journey. They lost themselves, about the 
middle* of the first day, in a dense fog, and afler wandmng 
about for nearly twelve hours, were so utterly exhausted as 
to huddle together for warmth, almost careless of what fol- 
lowed. 

They had met with jagged lumps of ice, covered by soft 
snow; they had to leap from lump to lump, sometimes 
• across fissures at the bottom of which the water bubbled 
up, and on one or two occasions they had to save some un- 
fortunate member of their party at the peril of their own 
lives. 

Hulk got a thorough ducking, and was scarcely able to 
move. 

About midnight, however, the frost resumed its strength, 
and it was determined to erect a snow hut. They had a 
spade with them, which the men proceeded to use in turns ; 
and great was considered the favor of being the one in pos- 
session of this utensil, as it promoted warmth. A huge 
pile of hard snow was found, and they proceeded to dig 
into this. It was very solid and hard, so that they dug out 
square blocks, which they erected into a wall, and in about 
an hour had a hut sufficiently large for all of them to sit 
round a small fire, the smoke of which passed out of a hole 
made for the purpose. 

A plentiful supply of biscuit and tea was now served out, 
which set all in good humor, especially when Henry fur- 
ther consented to the men indulging in the favorite luxury 
of a sailor — a pipe. 

They then closed the aperture by which the smoke had 
been allowed to go forth, and drawing their blankets over 
them, slept soundly. In the morning they awoke, and 
though they began to feel very cold, were unharmed. The 
difficulties of their situation, however, were such that they 
determined at once to return to the ship, and wait a more 
favorable opportunity. 

This was done, though not without some trouble, as the 



THE ABOTIC ▲DYENTURERS. 49 

real situation of the brig was not discovered without dehj 
and wandering. It was finally, however, accomplished^ ta 
the general satisfaction of all. 

In the beginning of the month of June, a strong gale 
from the north, and a heavy snowdrift, seemed to threaten 
unusual duration to the winter. Frost came id again wiUi 
extreme severity, and the snow was once more as hard as 
ever. 

Another expedition was attempted towards some remark- 
able hills which lay in a westerly direction, but without any 
more good fortune than the first instance. Another kind 
of experiment was then determined on. 

Tracks of reindeer gnd musk oxen were now often seen 
upon the snow, and it was determined to use the last week 
of winter to lay in as good a stock of game as possible. A 
hunting party was then organized to follow the marked 
track of animals which had been found. They were from 
the land, seaward, which seemed to indicate that an island 
usually frequented by these animals was at no great dis* 
tance. 

Henry, with four of the best shots on board, Hulk and 
Williams also joining in, formed the party. They were 
armed with guns loaded by heavy shot, while eaph man 
carried in his belt pistols and a small axe, by way of pro- 
tection against more dangerous game in the shape of wolves. 

A fiask of powder, and one of rum, completed each man's 
equipment ; a sledge being provided to load with game, in 
case they should be fortunate enough to fall in with any. 

They started at early dawp in high spirits. There was 
the hope of an exciting chase, and then, in a few days, free- 
dom from their monotonous position, and liberty once more 
to sail along the waters of the boiling ocean. 

It became, therefore, a matter of great importance to 
have a stock of fresh food, which might vary the eternal 
and unwholesome salt provisions, which all were so anxious 
to get rid of. The chase itself, too, was one of those occu- 
pations for idle hours which men generally gladly welcome. 

The morning was cold. A hard frost made the ground 
pleasant to walk on. There was scarcely, any wind to 
drive up the loose snow from gullies and heaps, the track 

] 



50 TH£ SEA OF ICE, OK 

of the deer was clear and marked, and away they went 
merrily and cheerfully over the vast white plain. 

The sky was clear and blue, and the eye could glance, 
over a vast expanse of ground ; so that it was altogether a 
cheering and hopeful day, though to some it was to prove 
the most fatal and fearful of their existence. But none 
knew fear or doubt, and none more jolly than our party of 
hunters, on that cold and bitter morning. 

They did not march close together, but scattered them- 
selves over a line of about 4ifly or sixty feet, the man with 
the sledge keeping the middle. Every now and then they 
hailed each other to see that all was right, and that none 
of the party were straying too far. 

After advancing about five miles — they had a small 
compass with them — they found the plain change in apr 
pearance. The track was found to trend in an easterly 
direction, through a plain of a very rough character. Large 
pieces of ice, cast up from the sea during the tossing of the 
floes, had formed an irregular collection of rocks, which the 
wind in many places had stripped of snow. A halt took 
place, and then it was agreed that the sledge should be lefl 
on the edge of this wild icy pile of hills and valleys, while 
the hunters should advance with caution, there being very 
recent tracks on the little snow that was left in certain 
hollows. - 

** Hillo ! a bear has been here too ! " said one of the 
sailors, pointing to the mark of his paws. 

All looked around with a startled air, expecting to see 
the animal darting from behind some icy concealment. 

And yet, after the first moment of surprise, there was 
not one who would not have welcomed the animal as a 
boon. A halt was held for an instant, and then it was rer 
solved to pursue their course as if nothing had happened. 

" Keep a sharp lookout, lads," said Henry, darting up a 
rugged path between two jagged pillars of ice that stood 
like the ruins of an antique temple, dashed and broken by 
time. 

Standing still a minute, Henry, from a little height he 
had gained, looked onward. As far as the eye could reach 
was a vast and illimitable plain, white, fiat, dazzling to the 



TflE ARCTIC ADVE!^CRERS. Hi 

eye, save in the north-east, where seemed to rise a peak 
of rather lofty dimensions, which Henry at once thought 
must he the island towards which tlie reindeer and other 
animals were making their way, and thither he at once de- 
termined to make his way. 

Between this ohject and where he stood, at a distance of 
about a mile, was something black and dark, which might 
be a bear, or an ox, or a pack of wolves devouring some 
prey they had overtaken. 

" Come on, my hearties," said Henry, making a dash in 
the direction of the game ; ^ cotaie on ; here is game for the 
bold." 

Henry ran, as he thought, about a quarter of a mile 
without stoppings He then suddenly halted, as the whole 
scene was wrapped, as if by magic, in darkness, and he was 
covered in an instant with snow. Henry stood still, daz- 
zled, confounded, and not knowing what to do. Then the 
snow ceased, the air cleared up again, and all was as before, 
save that not a sign could he any where see of his com- 
panions, while not a trace was left of his own footsteps to 
tell in what direction he had come. 

And Williams carried the compass ! 

There was a pang at his heart a minute, and then he re- 
flected calmly. He knew pretty well the direction of the 
ship, and he saw before him the vast, irregular plain of 
jagged ice, on the other side of which he had parted from 
his companions. He at once, therefore, turned back. He 
did not, however, advance with the same rapidity which had 
characterized his former run. The snow which had fallen 
had been slightly naixed with rain, a certain indication that 
the breaking up of the ice was at hand. Henry hurried 
on, however, for some time, and yet appeared no nearer to 
the hummocks than at first. This puzzled him very much, 
and he looked back in search of the peak. 

It was not behind him ; it was at his side. 

" Merciful Heaven ! " he cried, " I have then come 
wrong." 

For an instant he was nearly transfixed with horror and 
fistonishment ; but knowing well the importance of rapidity 
of action, he- took once more what appeared to be the right 



52 THE SEA OF ICE, OB 

direction. At this instant a bird rose, flapping its wings. 
It was a ptarmagan. With the double view of securing 
some game and of calling the attention of his fellows, Hemy 
fired. 

The bird fell fluttering about twenty yards from his feet. 
He secured it, put it in his bag, and continued his jour- 
ney without reloading, so wild were beginning to be his 
thoughts. 

Alone on that terrible sea, miles away firom land, no 
guide to tell him which way to go — the heavens were now 
obscured and dark — the season so far advanced that the 
ice might break up and scatter — himself unprovided with 
food — his companions totally unaware of his rqal position, 
Henry felt that his sole dependence was in God ; and his 
lips earnestly whispered a prayer to Him who alone, he 
felt, could save him. 

A growl startled him. About fifty yards in advance was 
a huge bear, coming slowly on. Henry stood still, loaded 
his gun deliberately, and awaited the coming of the savage 
monster, which advanced as if certain of its prey. 

It was a large white bear, one of immense size, an ani- 
mal which probably weighed nearly a ton. Some of these 
creatures present the appearance of a small elephant in 
bulk, though they stand so much shorter on the legs, and 
have long, low necks. 

Henry, whose mind was braced up by the consciousness 
of his severe peril, felt no alarm in relation to the bear. 
He cocked his gun, and stood. The bear came on, on four 
paws, until he was within twenty yards, when he rose on 
his hind legs, gave a fearful growl, and then a yell of ter- 
rible anguish, as he sank on the snow. 

Henry had fired deliberately and calmly, and had hit his 
right hind paw, and so efiectually as to lame him. The 
bear, however, came limping on at a very slow pace, 
growling and yelling in a horrible manner. 

Henry fired both pistols when the bear was close to him, 
and then ran, leaving the animal quite incapable of follow- 
ing him. 

' At the end of a hundred yards he turned. The bear was 
•lowly, and but very slowly, following him up. 



Till: ARCTIC A.DVEXTURER3. 53 

Heniy Maynard was now too experienced in the charac- 
ter of the polar regions not to be well aware that night, 
which still prevailed for some few days longer, was rapidly- 
coming on. He therefore hastened to gain the summit of a 
small hill of ice, and to look round tlie horizon, in the faint 
hopes of discoYering some sign of the ship. 

He looked round, right round ; north, south, east, west, 
in every direction — nothing. Neither his companions nor 
that old brig, which, under present circumstances, was 
Paradise itself, could be seen. 

' Henry clasped his hands in agony, and then muttered a 
prayer, though scarcely able to collect his thoughts suf- 
ficiently to find words. 

Wl^at was to be done ? Night was rapidly coming on, 
and in a moment nothing could be seen. What was he to 
do ? Which way should he go ? 

His mind almost wandering, he ran up and down, 
hither and thither, in the desperate hope of finding a track 
left by some of his comrades, and was about wholly to 
despair, when the sledge met his view. It was where they 
left it, and there, at no great distance, were the pillars of 
ice between which he had passed. 

His heart bounded with delight, and as thankful a prayer 
as ever burst from man's heart went up unchecked to 
Heaven. 

And yet there was no track — the sledge itself was 
almost covered by snow — and he did not know in what 
direction to point his footsteps. 

He determined, therefore, to seek some place where to 
pass the night. When on expeditions, he had, with the 
sailors, often erected huts of ice and snow ; but alone he felt 
himself unequal to this task. He looked about, therefore, 
and presently saw, close at hand, a kind of hollow, formed 
by the accidental upheaving of two vast lumps of ice, which 
leaned against each other. 

A hollow space about seven feet high, and as many 
broad, had been left, and into this Henry was about to ven- 
ture, when he saw evident signs of its having been inhab- 
ited. It was doubtless the haunt of the wounded bear. 

His first impulse was to discharge a pistol into its dark 

5* 



64 TBB 8£A OF ICE, OB 

recesses — : be did so ; but wben tbe echoes had died away, 
all was still and silent as tbe grave. He therefore entered 
and groped about, but was very much startled to find the 
place strewed with bones. He felt convinced that his first 
surmise was right, and contemplated with no small dread 
the return of the savage brute to his den. 

l^aturally much alarmed, he drew the sledge up to the 
cavern, stood it on end, and leaned it against the entrance. 
Against this he piled up several loose pieces of ice, and 
after half an hour's hard work, blocked up his retreat, so 
that, save through a small hole, it could not be entered. 

In half an hour more it was all as hai'd as rock. Then 
Henry crept into his singular cell, where, by contrast with 
the outer atmosphere, he was warm. He took a draught 
of rum, and then lit a torch, which they all always car- 
ried with them in case of being delayed at night or of be- 
ing lost. 

• The cave was about six yards deep, and the bones of 
various animals, which could now by the torch be clearly 
seen, showed that the bear had made it his halting place 
for some days. Henry at once loaded his pistols and gun, 
placed his hatchet close at hand, and then closing up the 
aperture by which he had crept in, with his bag, laid him- 
self down to rest, after roasting in the flame of his pine- 
torch a portion of th^ bird, which, with a hard biscuit, he 
eagerly devoured. 

He was not very alarmed. He knew that he was not 
more than six miles from the ship ; he knew that his com- 
panions, beaten back by fear of the storm, or even still 
wandering, would soon announce his position to the captain, 
and that exploring parties would be sent out to find him. 
He even himself could in the morning find his way to 
the ship. 

For some time naturally his mind was tortured and 
racked by conflicting thpughts, by those unnamed dreads 
which come over the soul when something — it knows not 
what — is to be feared. 

At last, however, he fell soundly asleep, and slept he 
knew not how long. 

He was awaked by a whining howl. He was in the dark, 



TH< ARCTIC ADYCNTURERS. 66 

and a strange scratching noise was heard outside, accompa- 
nied by something between a bari^ and a whine. 

Henry knew it at once to be a polar wolf; and poking 
the end of a pistol between the sledge and the game-bag, 
be fired. A sharp howl followed, and then there was stiU- 
ness again. 

At this moment a roar like that of thunder was heard. 
Henry, who knew what it meant, dashed down the sledge, 
reckless of all consequences, and sprang out The noise 
was repeated in all directions. 

It was the first day of summer. The ice was breaking 
tip in every direction. 

Jets of water spouted up ; the huge mass of ice on which 
Henry stood rocked and swayed to and fro, as if about to 
tarn upside. down, and then began moving rapidly onward, 
whirling round all the time. 

At this instant Henry caught sight of the distant sails of 
his ship. They had, then, utterly given him up, for they 
were hoisting up the yards and setting the sails. The sun, 
which rose warm and iBright^ was melting the snow with 
singular rapidity; the wind was balmy and sweet, and 
came across the moving plain with increasing force every 
moment. 

All hope was gone. He felt it, and yet he clung to life 
with all the desperate energy of a dying man. 

The cave remained intact. The lumps of ice which 
formed it had grown into a solid mass of some extent. 
The iceberg thus formed was about fifty feet long and thir- 
ty wide, forming a small raft, which swayed to and fi^o as 
it came in contact with the breaking masses around. 

Every now and then reports like thunder showed that 
the ice-fields were breaking up still more every minute. 
There was a rapid tide, a current which brought down the 
breaking masses upon the iceberg with singular rapidity ; 
they were hurled against one another with a noise like 
thunder — huge lumps broke ofi*, and falling, some on the 
large floating mass which supported Henry, menaced to 
upset it. 

For some time this strange raft kept on in a south-east^ 
criy direction, turning on itself at every hundred yards. 



56 THE 8BA OF IGB, OB 

-It wns an this time in sight of the Fair Fcmny^ which, 
however, at the eud of an hoar, was under full sail, trying 
to force its way to the north. 

Henry^s heart beat high. They had not given up all 
hope of finding him. 

At this instant the iceberg whirled round as if it had 
been spinning, and our hero was cast to the ground by the 
shock. When he arose he found himself being carried 
rapidly in a north-easterly direction. He had evidently 
met with a powerful current, which was driving him to the 
very heart of the Arctic regions. 

The ship was now scarcely to be seen. It appeared so 
impeded in its progress by the ice as scarcely to move. 

Henry therefore gave up all hope of immediate assist- 
ance in this direction. He looked then about him to find 
what were his immediate prospects of escape from death. 

Around were huge piles of ice cracking, dashing, leaping, 
breaking in all directions ; while the huge lump on which 
he fioated did not seem very safe or steady. His gun, his 
pistols, his game-bag, and his sledge were all that were left 
to him at that moment in this world, while he was being 
hurried he knew not whither. 

Presently he noticed that another stream of ice was 
coming down in an opposite direction, and as he remarked 
that he was hurrying in the direction of the peak, he 
conceived that a current came round that mountain, went 
onwards a certain distance, and, then meeting that from 
Lancaster Sound, was driven back to the other side of the 
island. 

The hope of Henry's heart was now centred upon that 
desolate hill, which was not more than six miles distant. 

He saw at once that he was being carried in a direction 
that promised to bring him to the hoped-for haven ; but he 
was too well acquainted with the rapid changes so common 
in those seas to feel any confidence or certainty on the sub- 
ject. He moved, according to his calculation, at the rate 
of about three' miles an hour — a rate which would, if it 
continued, bring him to the end of his journey before night. 

The great danger was, of meeting another current, and 
being carried away to the east or west, in which case his 



THB ASCTIC ADVENTUBERS. 57 

peril would be great ; in fact he felt that, if he did not suc- 
ceed in making the Island of the Peak, he was hopelessly 
lost 

Clutching his gun, he as much as possible used it as a 
pole to impel his raiH; slightly to the eastward ; and he had 
the satisfaction, after about an hour's hard labor, to see 
himself within a moderate distance of the hill on which now 
his eyes were steadily fixed. 

His journey was not without constant peril — a peril pres- 
ently much increased by the dangerous propinquity of a 
huge iceberg, the shape and form of which seemed familiar. 

Apparently more within the force of the northern cur- 
rent, it had been more than a mile behind him, and now 
came rushing down upon him with alarming rapidity ; 
while, to add to his discomfort and uneasiness, he could dis- 
tinctly see, on its extreme edge, the bear he had met the 
previous day, crouching as if ready to dart upon him. On 
it came, crashing against all minor obstacles, shaking and 
threatening to upset at every moment, but clearly less deep 
in the water than that which supported our forlorn and al- 
most exhausted hero. 

At length it came close, and a collision was inevitable. 
Henry clutched his gun, and made ready for a spring, as 
he expected his own raft to be upset or^nocked to pieces. 
He determined the more readily to exchange positions, as, 
on a near approach, it was quite clear that the bear was 
incapable of harming him, it being quite dead, or, at all 
events, at the very last gasp. 

The icebergs met ; the smaller one grated, crashed, and 
then shivered into fifty pieces, just as Henry, by a desperate 
leap, gained a footing on the huge mountain alongside the 
bear. The pile of congealed water rocked violently, and 
then steadying itself, pursued its onward course. 

The island was now not more than two hundred yards 
distant, and Henry could clearly perceive a small bay at 
the foot of the Peak, into which he would gladly have , 

guided his raft. But this was beyond his power, for the ^ 

iceberg kept steadily on its way, and if it did not pass the 
island, would certainly not enter the sheltered cove, whicb 
to Henry was the haven of all present hopes. , 



58 THE SEA OF ICE, OR 

Close to the shore of the island there was a small collec- 
tion of packed ice, and against this the perpendicular side 
of the iceberg, on the edge of which was the bear, appeared 
about to strike. Henry kneeled down and prepared for the 
collision. It took place, however, with great gentleness; 
the hill shook, and then was quite stationary. Henry rose 
to his feet, and aware of the great value of his prize, pro- 
ceeded to make sure of the bear. By great good fortune 
*the animal, having advanced to the extreme edge of the 
cliff, — a last effort to jump into the water and swim, — lay 
80 that it could be pushed. Henry made, therefore, a des- 
perate effort ; the body moved, slid, and went away to the 
very shore, carrying a large mass of ice with it which was 
detached by its weight. 

Henry then crawled down a less perpendicular part of the 
berg, and leaping across the packed ice, was in five minutes 
more on the shores of the island, to which he had looked 
with so much anxiety all that day. 

On board the brig, to which the whole hunting party 
had returned in safety, the deepest anxiety was felt. Cap- 
tain Sbipton, when the disaster was known, though nearly 
mad with grief, and fearful in the extreme as to the result, 
acted with prudence and firmness. Guns were fired every 
quarter of an hour during the night, while it was deter- 
mined that at daybreak a new expedition should go forth 
in search of the lost one. When, however, tlie ice broke 
in the morning, the skipper felt that all human probability 
was against his young master being still alive, and yet he 
determined to do his duty. 

As soon as the brig could be got under weigh, despite 
the terrible perils of the situation, she was pressed under 
heavy canvas towards the north, and still every quarter. of 
an hour guns were fired, Henry not having heard, which 
must be ascribed to some peculiar state of the atmosphere 
at that moment. 



THfi AUCTIC ADYEStV&EHS. 59 



CHAPTER VI. 

SHORE. THE ISLAND. THE VOLCANO. THE FOXES. 

With so well-constituted a mind as that which early 
nurtui*e had given to Henry Maynard, the finst impulse on 
reaching land was to return humble and hearty thanks to 
Grod for the great mercy by which he had been saved from 
a terrible and fearful death — to which, indeed, he had been 
so near, that it took some time for his mind to be fully con- 
vinced of the reality of escape. As he knelt, he reviewed 
with shuddering the perils he had passed through, the un- 
stable fabric which had served him for a rail, and the good 
fortune, or rather the Divine Providence, which had direct-, 
ed him to this small spot of earth, instead of to the wide, 
open sea, where inevitable destruction awaited him. Now, 
at all events, he had his feet on the earth ; a solid portion of 
the soil of the world was beneath him, and the opportunity 
was given him to exert his energies for his salvation. 

Education and the training of his youth had fully pre- 
pared Henry for even the unusual and terrible struggle 
which he must necessarily make, be his future good or ill, 
and whether Providence designed his being wholly left on 
that spot of earth, or that he should be saved. 

He felt that it was quite possible, and in fact certain, that 
bis companions would seek him, hopeless as might be the 
search ; and as he knew that the ship had not yet sailed to 
any very great distance from the spot where he now was, 
his mind was invigorated by hope as well as by gratitude. 
Men had been placed in worse positions, and yet, by the 
great goodness of God, had escaped to tell the tale. 

He accordingly rose from his knees much refreshed, and 
proceeding to look around him, surveyed the character and 
appearance of his strange abiding place with great curiosity. 

Close to his feet lay the vast body of the white bear he 
had killed the previous day. It was quite stiff and cold, 



60 THE SEA OF ICE, OS 

despite the slightly genial warmth which began to spread 
like balm through the air. This at once was a sign of en- 
couragement. But though this animal offered him much in 
the way of self-preservation and utility, yet still he was too 
anxious to examine his new territory to do any thing as 
yet, even though so deeply essential to his well-being as 
securing food. 

The hill already alluded to was about half a mile distant, 
and as it was rather elevated in character, Henry deter- 
mined at once to climb to its summit, and thus discover if 
the Fair Fanny were still within the range of the horizon. 

He loaded his gun, saw that his axe was safe in his belt, 
replenished the priming of his pistols, felt for his hunting 
knife, and then prepared to start on his expedition, despite 
the immediate cravings of hunger. . 

There are, indeed, moments in a man's life when even 
the most imperious calls of nature are disregarded and de- 
spised, so fixed is the mind upon some one idea. 

It was at this instant that something of the truth flashed 
across his mind. 

He gazed out upon the sea, he fixed his eyes on the 
cracking ice as it floated by, he glanced at the arid shore, 
he listened and he heard no sound — an overwhelming 
feeling of desolation came over his souL 

He was alone. 

"And is it possible," he cried aloud, though no voice 
could answer him, no ear could hearken to his tale, — "is 
it possible that the dream of my childhood has come true, 
that I am left alone to live that life which once I so much 
coveted — alone — on an island ? O, let me see at once, 
let me reassure myself that it is not an island, or I shall 
go mad ! " 

He paused and looked around, as if expecting some re- 
ply. But none came ; not even the echo of his own voice/ 

"O father, mother, dear Fanny — and am I forever 
parted from you ? Is this reality, or is it arf ugly and fan- 
tastic dream, the child of fever ? It is not real. I am not, I 
cannot be alone ! Wake up, my soul ; speak to me, some 
one -— O heavens, it is so — I am — I am alone I ** 

He began, as he spoke, a frantic course towards the 



Til£ ARCTIC ADVENTURERS. 61 

moQDtsdn, but was soon checked bj the difficulties and as- 
perities of tbe road. Wherever there was a slope or a 
tendency to a valley, the snow was still thick on the ground, 
wet, thawing, and deep, and Henry was obliged to exercise 
extreme caution to escape falling into holes which would 
have sunk him up to his neck. Still on he went, using, 
despite tbe wild state of his mind, every precaution to 
escape accident, until at last he reached the bottom of a 
very steep acclivity which was completely free from snow, 
a stony, arid portion of land, which seemed to tK>ntinue to 
the very summit of the hill, the top of which was the ex- 
treme goal of his present wishes. So gre^t was his haste, 
that he several times stumbled; but at length his desire 
was accomplished — he was on the very apex of the peak, 
and there was no higher land above him. 

His first glance was for the sea, for in that direction was 
his hope of salvation. 

He looked from each extremity of the horizon to the 
centre, and then gave one long sweep round all ; it was 
in vain — nothing met his gaze. The whole sea was 
broken up by lumps of floating ice, by floes, and by ice- 
bergs ; but nothing in the shape of the sails of a ship was 
visible. He drew a long sigh, and proceeded to examine 
the hill on which he stood. 

It struck him ,at once that he was on the mouth of an 
extinct volcano. The hill was round at the top, and de- 
scended by a gradual slope to the centre, where a pile of 
snow was accumulated, concealing what might be a vast 
depth beneath. The examination of this Henry at once 
deferred until a more favorable opportunity, when the brief 
but rapid summer of these regions should have enabled 
him to do so with more satisfaction. 

He walked slowly round the hill, hoping, almost against 
hope, that he was on a long projection of the continent, on 
the mainlan4r indeed, instead of, as he feared greatly, on a 
deserted and uninhabited island. 

And yet, unless he fell in with a friendly tribe of Esqui- 
maux, he would not be much better off on the mainland 
than he would be on an isle in the middle of the sea. For 
a man unused to that climate, any attempt to reach the 

6 



62 THE SEA OF ICE, OR 

inhabited part of America along the shores of the Frozen 
Sea would be sheer madness. 

In a few minutes all doubt on this point was set at rest. 
The place which had given him refuge against the raging 
waves, was itself wholly surrounded bj the sea. It was 
about seven miles long and three broad, and nowhere could 
a glimpse of other land be seen, except far awaj to the 
westward, where a long line of blue hills seemed to be 
dearly distinguished in the distance. 

" Alone — on an island — in the Polar Seas," cried Hen- 
ry, in a state of mind bordering on distraction — ^ what am 
I to do ? what is to become of me ? " 

And he descended the hill towards the place where he 
had landed, his whole thoughts now directed to immediate 
preservation. He had noticed, on the edge of the bay near 
which he had been stranded, several pieces of wood cast up 
by the waves, which he was eager to possess himself of, 
while he hdd been considerably struck, on his way up the 
hill, by the presence of lumps of a substance which he be- 
lieved to be a kind of coal. Here, then, were two impor- 
tant discoveries, which it was essential to verify. 

Henry thought not of a fire for mere purposes of warmth, 
but he hoped that a huge beacon lighted on the beach would 
serve the purpose also of attracting his friends. On second 
examination he was more than ever persuaded .that the sub- 
stance which lay scattered at the foot of the volcanic hill 
was a kind of coal very common in the polar regions, — 
which some day may be our great coal-field, — and which, 
though not exactly the same as that known to the ordinary 
commerce of the world, is still usefiil and gives a brilliant 
light. 

It appears, indeed, a well-authenticated fact, that up in 
these cold regions, near the 

" frigid zone, 
Where for relentless months, continiial night 
Holds o'er the glittering waste her starry ughr$ " 

where — as Purchas has it — " foggy mysts, tempestuous 
winds, cold blasts, snowe, and hayle '* abound ; where ** un- 
equal seas amaze the hearer " and " amate the beholder ; " 



THE ARCTIC ADT£NTUBERS. 63 

whefie ^mdnBtroos icie islands, renting themselves with 
terror of their own massies," check progress — are con- 
eealecl treasures of minerals, which would, if known, soon 
produce some such combination as the Anglo-Icicle and 
North Pole Gold, Copper, and Tin Company. And so 
vast is the enterprise .of man, who already seeks his oil in 
these yery regions, that we anticipate^ at no distant day, the 
shores of the Frozen Ocean coming into competition with 
Cornwall, California, and Australia. 

To collect and pile up a supply of wood and coal was an 
occupation which gave Henry an hour of very hard labor. 
He begrudged it not, however, so much depending on the 
success of his plan. When he had piled up as much as he 
thought necessary for immediate purposes, he built a fire 
against a little hillock, and then proceeded, with a beating 
heart, to try the experiment of lighting it. 

On the southern slope of a stony eminence at no great 
distance, Henry had remarked some moss, of the kind 
which tempts the deer in such Ikrge numbers to certain 
islands, and of this he had torn up several handfuls, which 
he had exposed to the faint and sickly warmth of that cold 
and dismal semblance of the sun, which yet by comparison 
was so cheerful and pleasant. On this depended the success 
of his experiment. 

Never did so much depend before on a man being able 
or not to light a fire. His life, with the last hope of relief, 
were both at stake on the hazard of success or failure. 

A small quantity of gunpowder was thrown by him on 
to the moss, which he placed behind his pile of wood and 
coal, and then his gun, loosely charged with a piece of rag 
as wadding, was fired at this newly-invented tinder. 

The report was scarcely heard when a welcome flash 
was seen, and then a genial flame, as rag, moss, and gun- 
powder acted one upon the other. Henry was in ecstasies, 
and when a^ slight breeze which prevailed fanned the whole, 
and some Hmsdl chips he had chipped with his axe began 
first to smoke damply and then to blaze, a feeling of reljef 
and hope was infused into his whole being. 

Ten minutes later, and wood and coal, after resisting for 
an instant, by means of their damp state, Uv^ ^ot^^t q»^ 1\2A 



64 TUU SEA OF I0£, QH 

flames, burst forth into a fire, which roared, and blazed, and 
crackled, in a way that proved to Henry that, on that lone 
and desert shore, he at all events would be able to find, 
what in that desolate region was a necessary of existence 
at all times — fuel. 

The pleasurable sensation of a fire was so great, that it 
had a natural efiect upon his mind, which was in a far easier 
state than it had ever been since his first discovery of his 
having parted company with his companions on the hunting 
expedition. 

There is almost unlimited power in physical comfort. 
The absence of material and positive wants shows itself, 
not only in the person, in the appearance, in the look, but 
it affects the mind and character. Not only do whole races, 
that have been used to oppression and misery, rise, under 
the genial sun of liberty and prosperity, to an improved 
configuration and state of body, but the soothed soul sheds 
its light over the whole characteristics of the tribe, which 
becomes more generousf more kindly, better. 

Those who have never suffered, those who have never 
known want, can scarcely understand the kind of passion- 
ate delight which overspread Henry's heart and frame as 
he gazed at his bright and blazing pile. 

A certain amount of food and shelter was now imperi- 
ously called for. Henry ,was famished. 

For both these requisites he looked to the bear — to its 
flesh and its skin. 

Taking out his sharp knife, Henry began to attack the 
animal in as scientific a way as possible. He first opened 
the skin from head to tail, a task of less difficulty than he 
expected, he having lit his fire sufficiently near the animal 
for its gradually increasing heat to soften the hide and un- 
freeze its members. As soon as this operation had been 
successfully carried out to a certain extent, he cut out a 
large lump of flesh, which he then sliced into thinner por- 
tions, some of which he fastened on his ramrod and placed 
before the fire. 

This was a mode of cooking already familiar to him 
during some of his land expeditions, when he had first 
visited America. 



THV ABCTIC ADVENTVBERS. 6^ 

• 

He then continued his labor with the more ardor that he 
was very weary. Already had the time come when there 
is really no night ; but still nature exerted her imperious 
power, and he only succeeded in completely skinning 
the animal at a moment when he was sinking from utter 
exhaustion. 

Glad indeed was he of a morsel of roasted beards meat, 
when his hard work was over, and eqmdly j^ad was he of 
a good draught of snow-water slightly diluted with rum. his 
flask of which he determined to preserve as a cordial in 
case of accident or illness. 

It was, indeed, a wild and singular scene, away up in that 
frozen sea, where, probably, a fire had never been lit before, 
to see that lone and solitary youth seated beside that blazing 
pile, his gun close to his hand, the carcass of a huge bear 
dose by, and the sea moaning dismally at his feet. A cold 
wind swept overhead and fanned the flames, which cast 
every thing more than ten yards distant into comparative 
darkness ; a low hush seemed to be sighed forth by inanimate 
nature ; and the world, abandoned b^ all, was, to all appear- 
ance, left the inheritance of this the last man. But Henry 
hoped still; and the fond hope of being retmited to his 
fellows still sustained him. 

Having supped heartily, and gained confidence once more 
by an earnest appeal to his Creator, Heniy piled on wood 
and coal, and then entered within his shelter. 

Thick and freshly torn from the body of the animal, it 
was a coverlet by no means to be despised, and was so large 
that Henry lay within it quite at his ease. 

He had, indeed, so arranged the bear-skin, that he was 
able to get quite within it, and by presenting the open side 
to the fire, to have a prospect of being tolerably warm. 
He clutched a pistol with one hand, and then closing tlie 
aperture round him, was wholly concealed within his novel 
and extraordinary shelter — one, however, frequently made 
use of by hunters in icy re^ons. 

And thus he prepared to pass his first night on an islan^ 
somewhere about the 78th degree of latitude, in the middle 
of a sea which beat against the shores with a dull roar of 
waves and icebergs. 

6* 



66 THE SEA OF ICE, OR 

Above, the sky was clear, and a faint Aurora Borealis 
could be distinguished, but not of equal beauty with those 
seen during the intenser frosts, when the air appears to be 
more rarefied, and better prepared for optical illusions and 
effects. The stars looked singularly bright ; and altogether, 
for one cast thus suddenly on his own resources, it was an 
encouraging and pleasing sight for the regions in which it 
manifested itself. The sun, too, was perpetually visible, 
•though yet for a few days it gave but little light 

Henry, wearied and exhausted as he was, felt no inclina- 
tion to sleep. The novelty of his situation, the dim hopes 
of being saved, the dread of wild beasts, the prospect of 
being forever lefl to battle with the elements on that bleak 
shore, the apparent impossibility of passing a winter there, 
were all ideas that banished slumber completely. 

It was, we have said, a beautiful night, and gradually 
Henry, despite his unquiet thoughts, became soothed by the 
solemn stillness of that place, where man, doubtless, had 
never before trod, and where human voice had never been 
heard. The alternate moaning and roaring of the sea, the 
cracking of the flames, the hissing of the damp wood, the 
sputtering of gas escaping in sudden bursts, were the^only 
sounds which greeted his ear, and they were so monotonous, 
that Henry's eyes grew gradually heavy, and at last he fell 
off into a sound and refreshing sleep, without dreams or 
sensation of any kind. 

" What want you ? " suddenly exclaimed Henry, fancy- 
ing himself in the cabin of the Fair Fanny, and that some 
one was pulling him to wake him. 

He was awake, but recollection came slowly, and then 
he felt something tugging furiously at one of the paws of 
the bear. He at once guessed it to be a fox, and with a 
tremendous roar thrust his arm out and fired. A yell, a 
long and repeated howl, and the scampering of many feet 
6n the pebbly shore, proclaimed his victory. The foxes, 
whose presence had been attracted by the smell of the flesh 
of the bear, escaped with singular rapidity. 
' Having found his other pistol, and even loaded the one 
he had discharged, Henry waited a renewal of the attack ; 



THIS ARCTIC ADVENTURERS. 67 

bat the animals seemed sufficiently alarmed with one ex- 
periment. No doubt the human voice was even more 
terrible to them than the firearms, for they made no fur- 
ther attack. 

Henry arose for a moment to replenish his fire, and en- 
deavored as much as possible to raise a high blaze, which 
might thus be seen at a great distance. The wind had in- 
creased, and the waves broke with additional fury against 
the edge of the bay. Up rose the flames of the wood and' 
coal on high, making a flare which could be seen, doubtless, 
a long way off. "*' 

With this conviction, Henry ran up and down for some 
time, building up his fire, adding fuel, and then listening 
for some welcome response to his signal. He had at last 
placed on the pile a large log of very resinous wood, which, 
when once warmed through, gave forth flames which must 
have been visible from a very great distanoe. 

Great was the surprise and joy of our hero, when, ten 
minutes later, he heard distinctly the well-known sound of 
the only piece of artillery possessed by the brig, booming 
in the distance. 

Once — twice — thrice. 

Henry clasped his hands in an agony of wild emotion, 
which the criminal respited on the scaffold could only, per- 
haps, understand and appreciate. 

At intervals of five or six minutes it was heard for nearly 
half an hour, during which time Henry wholly exhausted 
his supply of fueL He tried to be calm, but his excitement 
was beyond all bounds and control. He cut huge pieces 
of fat from the carcass of the bear, and cast them on the top • 
of the pile to increase the blaze, and then, the firing hav- 
ing ceased, again lay down with hope, and yet with fear, to 
await the hour which was to decide his fate. 

Never, during the subsequent life of our hero — never, 
during his long and wearisome watches — did he feel more 
his dependence on One more mighty than himself, on One 
who, having saved him thus far, could wholly release him 
from captivity. Tumultuous as were his thoughts, he en- 
deavored to be patient and submissive, and he earnestly 



ft8 THE SEA OP ICE, OR 

hoped to be able to meet with humility even the terrible 
alternative of becoming, for the rest of his life, a dweller 
in that inhospitable place. 

He was young ; the world was dear and sweet, as it is 
always to the good and hopeful ; and it militates not against 
the sincerity of his faith, and the earnest devotion of his 
heart, when we confess, that he could not reconcile his soul 
to the prospect of a lingering struggle on that stony strand, 
with an unmarked grave for his final resting place. 

No. Sweet hopes came bursting on his beating heart, 
lovely pictures of home, of the domestic hearth, of her who 
was to be the companion of his earthly fortunes, and the 
sharer of his heavenly hopes. 

And he was suddenly awakened by the low, hushed call 
of a fkmiliar voice. The whole scene had changed as if 
by magic ; the verdure of spring lay on the whole earth ; 
trees with rich and golden fruits Were scattered around, 
flowers of such glorious hues as are seen only in the far 
East, pretty fawns and gentle gazelles played around, and, 
above all, a little way off, sportively asking him to follow, 
was a face, half spirit, half real, but so enveloped in vapor 
and light that his eyes were dazzled, and yet it was — he 
knew her well — it was his Fanny. 

" Come, come I " said the silvery voice he knew so well. 
^ Come, come to my home in yonder cave, where the cold 
is not, where joy forever dwells ; come, come, my own, to 
our own sweet home ; come, come, come ! *' 

And as the musical tones sank to his very heart, Heniy 
wept ; for even in his sleep he knew it must be a dream, O 
beautiful, far too beautiful! and so he awoke himself by an 
effort to wipe away the scalding tears, and shake off visions 
so delusive. 



THE ARCTIC ADVENTUttfiRS. 



CHAPTER VII. 

EXAMINATION OF THE ISLAND. 

When he finally awoke, it blew half a gale of wind, the 
sky was obscured by gray and heavy clouds, a fog concealed 
all objects at a distance of half a mile, and Henry's, heart 
sank within him. A small portion of the meat cooked the 
night before remained unconsumed, and on this he breakfast- 
ed ; and then, while waiting for tiie wind to cease and the mist 
to clear up, he collected as much wood as his strength 
would allow him to drag together. The sledge had accom- 
panied him on his singular raft, and to this he harnessed 
himself, and was able to draw considerable burdens. The 
result of his labor he piled near the smouldering fire, which 
he took care to replenish sufficiently to keep it alive. 

About an hour after he rose this labor was concluded, 
and by this time the wind had again fallen, and the fog 
was clearing away. 

No ship was any where in sight. 

The pang which came to the heart of the young man no 
pen could describe, no thought conceive. Alone, lost, aban- 
doned, now he felt himself to be. The gale, the ice, the 
mist, had deceived his friends, ai^d the hope he had lived 
upon during the livelong hours of rest was but a lure 
which had led him on to 'delusive prospects, now utterly 
annihilated. 

What should he do ? 

A gun was at his feet, loaded, ready. His brain whirled, 
his lips were compressed, a feeling of hate, of rage against 
the world, of defiance against Him to whom he owed his 
being, burst like an evil tempest on his heart, and he viewed 
with savage delight the prospect of quitting this life, and 
the horrid place where he was condemned to pass it, 
by suicide. 

He gazed around with eyeballs starting from, bia bftod— 



*V0 TH£ SEA OF ICE, OR 

he viewed the cheerless sea, the arid and unpromising land, 
the lowering but breaking sky — he vaguely reflected on 
Xhe wretched struggle for existence which he should have 
to sustain there, and then one glance on memory's page, 
one bright and glorious picture, flashed ficross his mind, and 
he wept bitterly. 

The scene on Calvary's hill had beamed like a reproach 
on his soul, and he bitterly and earnestly repented his 
thought of deserting his post. 

" God's will be done ! " he cried aloud ; ** whatever hap- 
pens, I will do my duty, and defend my life to the last gasp 
of breath." 

This was the only and the last occasion upon which the 
thought of suicide ever occurred to his mind. It was a 
mere wild and hasty thought, generated in an instant of 
madness, when alone a Christian can ever find relief in 
such a thought. Of course, to those who look on death as 
the end of sJl,-^ and fortunately those who sincerely indulge 
in this debasing view of man are few, — this abandonment 
of life may present some feeble promise of relief. But 
morbid and diseased natures only brood on such an idea, just 
^ y the morbid frame craves for unnatural food, and the wea- 
ned soul for frenzied excitement. 

*» A home was the first thing absolutely necessary in a cli- 
mate like that of Desolation Island, as Henry had in his 
first impulse called the place. This, however, was a matter 
so serious, and involving so many considerations of health 
and safefy,that Henry d^ not like to decide upon a locality 
without a careful examination of the whole island, which 
might present some more promising and protected spot than 
that which he now occupied. 

Having come to this resolution, Henry cooked several 
more pieces of bear's meat, which- he placed within his 
game-bag, and then, armed to the teeth, started, — the 
memory of Robinson Crusoe fresh upon his mind, half mel- 
ancholy, half pleasant, as he studied in his thoughts to imi- 
tate successfully the forethought and industiy of that solitary 
man, whose history he had studied so earnestly in his youth. 

All that was good of the bear he placed beneatii the 
BBimaYB own skin, piled some heavy stones upon it, and 
started on bis journey. 



THE ARCTIC ADVENTtTREHS. 71 

The place mhere he had located was near the centre of 
a baj or cote, not more than fiftj feet wide at the mouth, 
and not more than a hundred across any where. It was 
tiled with sand banks, and at low wate)r appeared so shal- 
low that any one ipight with safety have waded across. 
Henry felt satisfied, on a cursory examination, that, if he 
could but oMitriye nets, he might irom this bay derive a 
Qonsiderable amount of useful food in the shape of fish. 
' This was the more desirable, that he was determined to 
saye his powder and ball for purposes of defence, and to use 
none of it merely to procure game. His mind was already 
busily at work, contriving, reflecting, and examining into 
the pMribility of substituting for the weap<»is he had, some 
others which might prove more permanently useful. 

As he thought, his mind only grasped the prospect of en- 
during through the summer on thiat island. A winter resi- 
denoB, alone on that bleak place, abandoned by the animal 
creation itself during at least nine months of the year, was 
aomething he did not contemplate as possible ; and yet, in 
his present mood of mind, he felt that for this even he nmst 
prepare. \ . 

He skiited the bay with the intention of advancing rouncU 
the island along the shore. This he did, along a soU which 
he found to be less barren than he expected. The rapid* 
vegetation of the north was already visible in its effects ; 
the grass was two or three inches long ; a head of saxifrage 
was in full bloom ; and in one place our hero found a large 
bed of sorrel — a discovery of considerable interest, as in- 
volving a serious question of health. It was now clear to 
him that he would not be wholly confined to animal food, 
and could procure materials for a kind of salad in great 
abundance. This was a little &ct which materially assisted 
to promote peace of mind and hopefulness. 

And this was no small thing. On his being prepared to 
fi^ the battle of life with courage and confidence depend- 
ed every thing. This is true every where. Few men in 
this world but could contend effectually with the difficulties 
1b their path, if they &ced them boldly, and knew the value 
of a little selfnaacrifice. But in the position of our unfor- 
tunate hero all depended on himself-— iiol\^i\% o\i q>\v^x^« 



.■i 



72 THE SEA OF ICE, OB 

Advancing about half a mile farther, Henry was stopped 
by the clear and limpid waters of a stream, which flowed 
between banks presenting, in their badding verdure, quite 
an agreeable aspect. It was but a thin grass, interspersed 
with lichen and moss; but in that place the sight was 
cheering and animating in the extreme. 

As the water was cold and somewhat deep, Henry deter- 
mined to search for a 'place more likely to serve the pur- 
pose of a ford than that now before him. He accordingly 
followed the bank towards the hills, which on this side pre- 
sented one or two peaks. After advancing about a quarter 
of a mile, he began to ascend, the stream being now deeper, 
narrower, and with more precipitous banks. As h^e it 
presented insuperable difficulties, he pursued his way, until 
he came to the entrance of a narrow gully between two 
hills. 

It was a pretty view. The waters of the little stream, 
confined m harrow limits, had worn a channel in the solid 
rock, and fell through an aperture which presented the ap- 
pearance of a natural bridge, into a basin about twenty feet 
below, when, aflcr boiling and seething, it went away over 
stones and gravel, until presently it formed a still and quiet 
stream at a distance of a hundred yards. 

The face of the hill was jagged and almost precipitous, 
but Henry determined to climb it ; and, on reaching the 
summit, which he did after a pretty hard scramble, &und 
that he was in a small valley of very picturesque ap- 
pearance. 

It was about two hundred yards in length and nearly as 
many wide, a limpid, placid lake forming the centre, the 
overplus of which formed the little torrent the bed of which 
he had followed. A few stunted bushes, and the vegetation 
already described, gave a verdant aspect to the scene, while 
Henry's heart bounded with pleasure, as on the opposite 
slope he saw several deer cropping the short and newly 
un6*ozen grass. He was sufficiently near to have shot one 
of them if he had thought proper ; but he made no attempt 
to do so, both because he wished to save his powder, and 
not to startle animals which he hoped to capture in a more 
easjr and satisfactory manner. 



THE ARCTIC ADVENTURERS. * 7S 

. " This is the place for a home," he mentally ejaculated, 
as his mind turned to the cave and hut of Robinson Crusoe. 
•* And yet — no — the shore — the shore for summer. My 
fire may attract attention — this island is, probably, visited 
by whalers — I must not give up all hope of relief.** 

With these reflections he crossed the valley, having de- 
termined in his own mind to erect, after some fashion, a hut 
on the shore, and should fortune force him to attempt a 
winter in that place, to seek at all events to form a winter 
habitaion in the valley. 

When he had reached the highest portion of this side of 
the little chain of hills, he found that the soil of the island 
presented the appearance to the eye of meadows with 
scanty vegetation, and of marshes which probably would 
shortly be visited by the numerous wild fowls of that region. 
Already he had startled several coveys of auks, which, 
however, he did not attempt to shoot, having already be- 
gun to plan in his mind the way of making use of these 
without wasting powder and shot, to him so valuable. 

As travelling, to one who had so long been cooped up on 
board ship, was ybtj fatiguing, it now became necessary for 
him to return to his camp, and there to prepare fcH* the night. 
He had already laid out the plan of a kind of hut in hia 
mind, which would serve the purposes, of sleeping and 
keeping him safe from wild beasts for a few days ; and he 
was anxious to carry it out. His return to the place 
whence he had started was much more rapid than he could 
have expected; but he was already beginning to have a 
small geographical knowledge of his territory, of which he 
readily availed himself. 

His fire was not yet out, and speedily flamed up again 
on receiving the addition of a few coals which he had 
brought with him from the foot of the hill in his game- 
pouch. 

He then, after some refreshment, proceeded to carry his 
design with regard to a hut into execution. 

Close to where he had slept was a pile of stones, very 
similar in shape and in size, and which, from some freak of 
nature, had assumed something of a pyramidal form. It was 
by means of these, some wood and earth, and the beax't 

7 



74 THE SEA OF ICE, OR 

skin, that Heniy contemplated a temporary summer hut, 
which, perhaps, might serve him as long as he was con- 
demned to seclusion in that place ; and which, at all events, 
would give him time to erect a more convenient and per- 
manent place of shelter. 

His intention was to pile up four low walls, just to support 
a roof, under which he could crawl at night for the purpose 
of sleep, reserving to himself the privilege of erecting a hut 
in which he could sit upright, to the time when he should 
. be able to fabricate some torch or candle, bj which he 
. could do anj work which in his forlorn condition might be 
necessarj'. 

He moved a stone from the pile, and was about to carry 

it away, when he noticed that he had, by taking away this 

covering, displayed a hole, the depth of which he could not 

very well penetrate. He started, while a faint glimmering 

' of the tnith flashed across him, and then removed another. ^ 

Artistically and carefully laid on, these stones, he at once 
saw, were placed there by man's hand ; and a little reflec- 
ticm conveyed to his mind the fact, that he had discovered 
aa uhdempund Esquimaux hut, thus carefully covered up 
by its boUder, in the hope of finding it again after many 
days. 

Henry remdined stunned by his emotions. Not only was 
shelter thus beneficently afforded him, but, in all probability, 
the Indian hunters were in the habit of visiting that island ; 
and if so, there was a bright and hopeful chance of escape 
in this fact. 

" My Gk)d," he cried, « I thank thee ! " 

Then feeling his way with his gun, which he next dis- 
charged into the hollow, and finding it sound and firm, he 
leaped in, and by the dim light afforded by the hole, pro- 
ceeded to examine the place. 

It was about five feet high, by seven long and five broad. 
It was roofed with thick whalebones, on which flat stones, 
like slates, had been* placed, so as completely to keep out 
the wet and snow. The ground was beaten hard, and the 
whole was dry and tolerably warm. 

Several articles of use lay about — such as an earthen 
jar, narrow at the bottom and broad at the top, a spear head. 



THE ARCTIC ADVENTURERS. 76 

a few bone hooks, a small bow, two arrows, a knife made 
out of a walrus tusk ; all of which Henry looked upon as so 
many providential discoveries, for which he was deeply and 
earnestly grateful. ^ 

Having clambered up out of the hut, Henry determined 
to make of this place his temporary residence, as it would 
save him an immense amount of labor, and give him, during 
the milder season of the year, a shelter £at would allow 
him time to prepare for his battle with the winter months^ 

He determined to remove every thing he had into this 
place, and his first thought then was how to obtain his daily 
food, while he examined more fully into the capabilities of 
his island, and studied the. resources which might be availa- 
ble in his desolate and forlorn condition of existence. 

The means of existence were few. The island appeared 
to be frequented by wild fowl, deer, hares, and partridges ; 
but with six or eight charges of gunpowder only left, it be- 
came a difficult question to decide how these were to be 
captured. 

There were, doubtless, fish in the bay ; and to the dis- 
covery of this circumstance he^at once determinei^ext day 
to lend his whole faculties. ^^ 

The Esquimaux hut had on one side a bench, about two 
feet wide, which had evidently served the purpose of a bed, 
and probably of a seat This Henry also selected for the 
same purpose, and felt that, could he but find the means of 
making a lamp, and could he but have had the good fortune 
to have had his chest, even there his evenings might have 
been genial and pleasant. # 

At first he longed for books — for the intense and ever- 
recurring luxury of turning over the pages of history and 
travel ; and then, situated as he was, he restricted his wishes 
and desires to one single book — the only book which could 
be of urgent use to one who felt himself within the valley 
of the shadow of death — a book which, to those in danger 
and tribulation, has afforded more luxurious enjoyment than 
the thoughtless ever derived from the most entrancing poem, 
the most breathless romance. 

But books were forever a lost luxury to the recluse. 

As he lay, then, on his bed that night, he thought deeply 



7t TH£ >£▲ OF ICB, OR 

A^d anxiouslj of some means by which he could supply this 
want ; and then it was that an inspiration seemed to burst 
upon him, which determined him on a line of conduct at 
*bnce. And now it was that he felt the advantage of early 
reading, of having stored his mind with rich treasures, 
which now became inestimable. 

He determined to develop his plan more fully, if he 
ghould be fortunate enough to face the winter. 

It was this : — 

As soon as the labors of the day were over, he kneeled 
down and returned thanks for the past hours, and asked a 
renewal of that protection he so keenly felt the need of. 
Then he carried his mind back to his studies, and selecting 
a subject, strove to recollect its every part, and to bring his 
thoughts into shape on the point, until he seemed absolutely 
conferring with another on the subject. Sometimes he 
would, he thought, fasten on Captain Cook, and follow him, 
Btep by step, round the world, recollect his adventures, and 
apply his experiences, as much as possible, advantageously 
to himse]f. Then he determined to turn his mind to some 
mechaaioill science, and diving into the recesses of his brain, 
search for eomething useful. 

He looked forward to the time when he should be restored 
to society, and he could not bear to think that he should be 
transformed into an illiterate boor. It would have been 
curious to have watched his mind, laying out plans of study 
in history, philosophy, and the arts ; dividing his time into 
series, and planning^ui evening with the apostles, with the 
Romans, with the French. 

Such were the plans he indulged in, as, close to his 
beacon-fire, he devised of his existence and the future. 

It was a glorious evening now: The sun, moon, and 
stars were shining brightly in the heavens ; the wind blew 
warmly and gently over the land, and the waves broke with 
less than their usual roar on the strand. 

Suddenly Henry started. A strange noise was distinctly 
heard in the bay. He hurried to bis feet, his gun in his 
hand, and hastened to the edge of the water. 

It was a strange compound of puffing and snorting ; such 
n sound as, had he been in Egypt, would have proclaimed 



THE AKCTIC ADVENTURERS. 77 

to him the presence of a hippopotamus ; but which, from 
his knowledge of the polar seas, he knew to be caused by 
the entrance of a shoal of wabuses into the bay. 

This again was encouraging and cheering ; and he be- 
gan at once to turn over in his head the uses to which they 
might be put when he could master some of them. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

THE SULPHUR POOL. 

Hekbt was well aware that, cast away as he was on 
that desolate and all but barren piece of land, his life 
depended on his patience and industry. All he had learned > 
in his boyhood, all he had studied, he now assiduously sought 
to remember, that the place on which he had fallen might 
afford him as many resources as possible. His means were 
circumscribed. Fish and game, both feathered and other, 
appeared common enough, but the difficulty was to capture 
and preserve them. He did not fear much for the sub- 
sistence of the immediate hour ; but if he really was to be 
condemned to a winter in that wild region, he had mdny 
things to provide before the inclement season came on. 

A home, in which to pass the long and dreary eight or 
nine months of winter, must be founds- the Esquimaux hut, 
which would then be buried in snow, being quite useless at 
that period of the year. 

A storehouse also was needed, where he might collect 
fuel, food, and water ; and this being for nine months, would 
necessarily be no inconsiderable quantity. 

Food, despite the peculiarity of the climate, must, to be 
kept until the winter, be salted or dried, and carefully con- 
cealed in some place away from the animals which already 
had attacked himself, and which would certainly make 
havoc of no common character with his stores, if they were 
not protected effectually. 

7* 



71 TUB SEA OV ICK, OR 

It became matter of extreme and vital importance for him 
to decide upon the place where he could erect or choose his 
residence for the cold season. At first he thought of the 
valley, sheltered as it was, and likely to be warmer than 
most other parts of the island ; but then it became a very 
serious consideration as to how food and fuel were to be 
collected on the shore and taken up to this glen, which was 
by no means of very easy access. 

He determined, therefore, to spend a day in searching for 
some fitting locality, before he took any steps towards col- 
lecting any large stock of food. . 

Then came the very important consideration of the means 
by -which he- was to hunt and fish." 

He therefore determined to make the proposed journey, 
and while so doing, to reflect upon every contrivance by 
which he could make up for the want of gunpowder, nets, 
books, and lines. 

Having no ship to fall back upon, like Robinson Crusoe, 
he was cast utterly on his own resources. Every thing that 
his famed predecessor had found to his hand, he had to fab- 
ricate, and this with an extraordinary deficiency of tools. 
Fortunately he had a knife, a small axe, and a ramrod — 
articles which he foresaw would be of great and permanent 
use to him, and which he felt to be of such inestimable value, 
that his heart was filled with gratitude at the reflection 
which came over him, as to what he should have done 
without them. 

His thoughts necessarily were much directed towards the 
ultimate chance of escape, without which^ of course, his po- 
sition would have been at once insupportable. All kinds of 
ideas and of plans suggested themselves ; but all were vague, 
uncertain, and abandoned as soon as conceived. He thought 
that, had he but a bottle, he might launch It into the cur- 
rent, which evidently set to the south at the westerly end 
of the island, and thus, perhaps, make known his position ; 
but this thought, as vain and idle, he speedily abandoned. 

Then came the thought of a boat ; and so much was he 

struck by this fancy, that he was very near abandoning all 

else to labor with the wood he had found to make something 

tliat would carry him to the main land. But with such 



THE ARCTIC ADVENTURERS. 79 

rough pieces of wood — branches, with a few, and but very 
few, half-FOtten planks, the remnants of some unfortunate 
wreck — he saw at once that he should be undertaking a 
task quite beyond his strength and capabilities. The con- 
ception was therefore at once abandoned, or put off, at all 
events^ to better times, when he should be more fully pre- 
pared for the work. 

He determined, however, to take one step towards indi- 
cating his position, suggested wholly by a small fir tree 
which had been washed away probably from some distant 
island, and which, after wandering in the water for many 
days, had found its way into the small cove near which he 
had pitched his tent. This tree he with some labor man- 
aged to stand on end, by digging in the ground with his 
axe, and then piling a few stones round the bottom. He 
first, however, cut off the bear's head, and placed it on the 
summit of the pole, thus quite sure that any whaling vessel 
which came very near would be attracted by this novel 
signal-post. 

Having executed this task with all the energy which the 
object he had in view infused into his mind, Henry allowed 
himself to give his attention to the present, putting his trust 
for the future in Providence. 

As an immediate resource, Henry then cut off and dried 
in the smoke of his fire all the best parts of the bear's fiesh, 
which, when once in a fit state of preservation, he concealed 
within his subterranean hut, carefully placing the stones 
over the aperture by which he descended and ascended. 
He then melted in the earthen jar he had found in the Es- 
quimaux hut a quantity of fat, the manifold uses of which 
he at once foresaw, particularly for a lamp, which he hoped 
to be able to manufacture for the long winter months, during 
which, indeed, he hoped to create many things for his use, 
and even for his enjoyment, if enjoyment could be conceived, 
in so desolate a place. And yet, with a well-constituted 
mind, there is no position in which fortune can place a man, 
which has not its pleasures and its joys, w^hile time will habit- 
uate us even to any existence. How many have lived their 
whole lives in prison cells, sustained by conscious rectitude^ 
against wrongs and have speedily created W^^ycv^'^ ^qt 
themselves, eveii under these adverse cire\\ixi?X»jwifc"Sk\ 



9^ THE S£A OF ICE, OR 

Henry Maynard was, perhaps, happier, or ought to have 
been, on his desert island, than Bonnivard in his cell of 
Chillon, the Iron Mask in the Bastile, or any other of the 
myriad victims of despotism and bigotry. 

Henry, in fact, soon began to think and act as if he had 
made up his mind to pass the rest of his life on that deso- 
late island. He felt that it was the wisest course to pursue, 
and therefore tried in every way to prepare himself for the 
worst. 

But he always thus cheated his own soul, which was 
buoyant with the hope of escape, of which he thought at 
intervals, day and night 

And yet he planned a winter residence, he laid out his 
time for that long and dreary season, and he thought deeply 
as to all those things which were necessary for his perma- 
nent establishment 

Drying the bear's meat, melting some fat, and softening 
the great skin of his old enemy with some of the grease, 
caused the hours to pass away ere he was aware of it His 
journey was therefore necessarily put off until he had taken 
some rest Still he did not~ cease his labor, but occupied 
himself in searching for drift-wood upon a part of the shore 
which was now quite free from ice, and where pieces of 
various size were easily picked up by him. 

His good fortune in this particular was great, as he sub- 
sequently found that there was no wood on any other part 
of the shore, no current pouring in, and bringing the drift- 
timber with it A supply of wood on an island which pro- 
duced nothing but a few stunted bushes, was an event upon 
which Henry dwelt with no ordinary feelings of thank- 
fulness. 

He was weary, indeed, when he started with his sledge 
to fetch a few knobs of his heavy and stony coal — a coal 
which, from long exposure to the atmosphere, and mixed 
with lava, gave very little result for its weight. But Hen- 
ry knew too well the value of labor, in the short time 
allowed him, to hesitate at any amount of possible work. 

A second time, then, he made up his fire, and having 
supped, retired within his cave, where first he conveyed a 
i^FF hot embers to warm it. He had also taken the pre- 



THE AKOTIC ADVENTURERS. 81 

caution to spread the bear-skin over the top, except where 
a small orifice was left for breathing; and then, wearied 
and sore, he lay down again and slept for many hours with- 
out interruption. 

He awoke much refreshed, and at once sallied forth into 
the open air. The hour of sleep he felt was passed, and 
the labors of the day were at once commenced. Despite 
his fatigue, he had felt the inconvenience of sleeping on the 
bare ground, and had determined as far as possible to pre- 
pare the bear's skin as a mattress, or rather as a wrapper, 
in which he could lie with some approach to comfort. 

He was not very learned in preparing skins, but he care- 
fully scraped the inside, and over the entire surface spread 
a thick coat of grease ; and having thus softened the whole, 
succeeded to his great satisfaction in folding it into a parcel, 
which for safety he then lowered into his hut. 

This occupied him until breakfast time, when he armed 
himself and prepared for his promised excursion. One 
object of his walk was to procure a supply of sorrel, as he 
felt considerable uneasiness at living wholly on animal foody 
which he rightly judged to be dangerous to his constitution 
and general health. He knew well that the plant alluded 
to was a strong antiscorbutic, and therefore extremely valu- 
able to him in the position in which he was. 

This plant, he was aware, was found in most arctic re- 
gions, and, in fact, he had already remarked its presence on 
the island, with that of a few grasses, the uses of which, 
apart from their value as edible vegetables, he was already 
turning over in his mind. Wonderful, indeed, are the les- 
sons of adversity and necessity, teaching man to estimate 
every little thing which can minister to his health and 
comfort 

It is only those who have felt both hunger and thirst who 
can know the blessing of a little bread and water. 

Our hero began already to set a value, even a dispropor- 
tionate one, on every object which fell in his way. 

Henry's hope was, by taking a medium course between his 
first track up hill and that which had led him to the Heindeer 
Valley, as he mentally designated it, to find some posjition 
where he might erect his winter hut — ». ta^k Yi"^ ivi\\, \ft\i^ 



82 TJEIE SEA OF ICE, OR 

one of extreme difficultj in a land where, daring nine 
months, he risked being blocked up in the snow, without 
anj hope of release or escape. 

A sheltered spot, protecting him from the bleak north 
wind, which, driving along the clouds and rain, is so deadly 
in these regions, with some extraneous aid to protect him 
from the drifts and the accumulated snow, was what he 
wanted. Already his mind was busily engaged as to the 
best way of using the cave, which he felt it probable he 
should find in a hill of volcanic formation. His old lessons 
with poor Stop rushed involuntarily to his mind, and forced 
the ready tear to his eye, while the thoughts of others 
dearer still came flocking to his heart, almost unmanning 
him. 

" Let me not think of them ! " he cried aloud, " or I am 
lost On ! on ! to the search. Action alone can quiet my 
yearning heart." 

It was then about an hour afler rising, that, armed in his 
usual way, he began his reconnoitring expedition. The 
island which had afforded him such welcome shelter was 
not large, and he felt that he should be soon able to fathom 
all its capabilities and nesources. This added to his un- 
easiness, as he could not very well foresee what would be 
the nature of the local dispositions, on which so much of 
his comfort and safety depended. 

Space for moving about, for stowing away his necessary 
stores, with protection against the attacks of ravenous ani- 
mals, was indispensable ; and it was in reality, therefore, 
with very little hope of any favorable result, that he com- 
menced his journey. All snow had now disappeared from 
the island, while the sea itself showed very few remains of 
the icy winter amid which himself and his companions had 
lived so long. The grass grew almost visibly, several tiny 
flowers began to show themselves, and after wg,lking only a 
few hundred yards, Henry came to a small field of wild 
sorrel, which he began at once to pick, and fill therewith 
his game-bag. 

A few leaves which he placed in his mouth proved, as he 
expected, extremely refreshing; and he rose to his feet 
much inspirited, and even — so forcible is imagmation •— 



84 THE SEA OF ICE, OB 

small rivulet, paddling in a pond of water, which, to his utter 
amazement, was warm, and from which a strong odor and 
steam arose. Henry was surprised, indeed, but he left the 
examination of this phenomenon to a later period. 

He already, from the strong smell of sulphur which arose 
around him, began to guess at the nature of the spring 
which he had fallen upon ; but just then his object was to 
devise some means of escaping from the steady and patient 
pursuit of his three terrible enemies. 

The she-bear was standing still, swinging her head, at 
this moment, so that our young hero was able to look 
around him. 

He took the whole position in at a glance. 

He was thirty yards distant from a steep rock on the side 
of the hill, which it was probable the young cubs might find 
some difficulty in climbing. From the side of this rock 
came rippling a little stream of water, that fed tKe sulphur- 
ous pool in which Henry was standing. It was a regular 
and rocky basin, while the water was limpid and clear in the 
extreme. Not a weed, not a plant of any kind, was growing 
in the pond, or on the edge, which testified to the strong 
mineral character of the hot water, which Henry already 
mentally called his warm bath. 

He had no time, however, for a Yerj careful examination 
of the scene. He heard a savage growl and two low whines 
near at hand, which made him painfully aware of the true 
state of things. 

The she-bear, as if afraid of losing her prey, was coming 
on with greater rapidity, and in a few minutes was on the 
very edge of the pool, where she stood with her cubs, evi- 
dently much puzzled at the sudden disappearance of Henry, 
who was nowhere to be seen. 

This is what had happened. 

Hurrying rapidly across the pool, which grew somewhat 
warmer as he advanced, he found himself at the foot of the 
rock, and fronting a narrow fissure about five feet in height, 
and one and a half wide, through which, in a long and nar- 
row channel, not more than six inches wide, came pouring 
forth the sulphurous stream. 

A deep hollow space was clearly visible within, from the 
light which fell from its roof. 



THE ARCTIC ADVEKTtTRERS. 85 

Within this fissure Henry entered ; and then, when con- 
cealed from view, turned to examine the state of affairs 
without. 

The mother was standing on the edge of the pool, into 
which she had dipped one of her paws, and then withdrawn 
it with a look of surprise. She raised the paw in the air 
and examined it. Then, like a cat, she approached it to her 
lips and nose, and licked it. 

Meanwhile one of the cubs had boldly leaped into the 
hot pool, and was swimming across in the direction of 
Henry, who, astonished at the boldness of the animal, fired 
his gun without taking time for reflection. 

The cub yelled piteously, and then fell back dead in the 
water. 

Henry repented bitterly what he had done the instant the 
trigger was drawn. It was, however, too late. His re- 
pentance was the greater when he witnessed the scene which 
followed. 

The she-bear started to her feet and stood upright, gazing 
wildly around. She then jumped into the water, drew the 
cub out to the shore, and then the huge and unwieldy ani- 
mal began to try and move her young offspring to gambol 
again ; and fierce, thrilling, and awful was the growl which 
she made when she found that it could not stir. She had 
discovered .the bleeding wound ; the ball had pierced to the 
heart ; and connecting this evidently with the stillness of 
her young, she began licking it with great earnestness. 

But she soon seemed aware that the cub was dead, and 
then she changed her conduct. 

With a low whine she drew her remaining young one to 
her side, and for a few minutes she stood over the body of 
the slain, shaking her head in the same way already alluded 
to, and whining in a low and menacing tone. All the while 
she looked cautiously around, as if fearful of some mys- 
terious agency which might rob her of her other and last 
progeAy. 

Suddenly she gave a yell, snatched up the dead cub in 
her mouth, and moved away to a considerable distance, fol- 
lowed by the young bear. 

Henry breathed more freely. 

8 



86 THE SEA OF ICE, OB 

He did >not, however, lose sight of his euemies ; and his 
heart heat again tumultuouslj when the great she-hear, 
afler depositing the inanimate corpse at a distance of ahout 
two hundred yards, came slowly back towards him, leavin'g 
the young bear to guard the body of its brother or sister. 

Though his peril was so great, and what he had done so 
natural under the circumstances, Henry could not help 
being much touched by the maternal suffering of the savage 
animal, which appeared actuated by sentiments almost 
superior to those of instinct Indeed, while their offspring 
are young, even the most fierce and untamable beasts of 
the earth often manifest affection which it is difficult not to 
sympathize with, and terrible are the dangers they will front 
in defence of their little ones. 

But Henry knew that a fearful struggle was at hand, out 
of which it was difficult to conceive that he could come with 
the same good fortune which had already attended him; 
and all feeling, all idea, all thought, was given to the keen 
sense of self-preservation which nature has implanted so 
strongly in man, that, when under the influence of tempo- 
rary madness, he will, after the first plunge, struggle terribly 
even against a death he has voluntarily and wickedly 
sought. 

And Henry, even on that desolate and rocky shore, 
clung to his life with all the tenacity and yearning of youth 
and hope. 



CHAPTER IX. 

THE DEATH 8TBUGGLE. — THE HOT-WELL CAVE. — FIRST 

SUNDAY. 

Hexby looked eagerly around him to examine into the 
character of the place in which he had taken refuge, before 
he engaged in his desperate and terrible struggle with an 
animal whose natural ferocity was much enhanced by having 

*' her young offspring in so sudden, and to it so inex- 
ble a manner. 



THE ARCTIC ADYENTUBERS. 89 

formidable and serious enemy as its strength grew. To kill 
it, then, appeared his only alternative. 

He was unwilling to do this for many reasons. He cer- 
tainly regretted much to waste any more powder and shot, 
which seemed in serious encounters to be his only guarantee 
against death; and in the next place his heart rebelled 
against kiUing a poor creature that was not seeking to harm 
him, and which was of no value to him when it was dead. 
After gazing at the unfortunate beast, thus suddenly de- 
prived by him of its natural protector, he tamed away, and 
resolved to abandon it to its fate, even if, at a subsequent 
period, his companion in the island became troublesome. 

He now returned round the edge of the pool to the cave, 
which he was anxious to examine more at his leisure. He 
was doubtful at first about even thinking of it for a residence 
in the winter, from its being at the foot of what he now felt 
was in reality a volcano — and a volcano not wholly extinct, 
as from its innermost bosom poured a stream of hot water. 

He reflected, however, that in all probability there was 
no part of the island which in case of an eruption would be 
very safe ; and he remarked that the cavern was not on the 
side where the lava usually had flowed, the dip in the cra- 
ter's edge being in a different direction. He therefore de- 
termined at once to explore his new discovery more fully, 
and thus determine whether or not it was the place for his 
winter stores and habitation. He was already convinced 
that nothing so warm and safe could be found, if the exhala- 
tions of sulphur were not too strong. 

It was very probable, however, that in the winter the 
temperature of the water might be lower, and the strength 
of the sulphurous odor less. 

He entered the cave with very different feelings from 
those which filled his mind when he had sought it as a 
shelter against sudden danger, and proceeded to examine it 
with care. The odor was not so overpowering as he had 
thought, and a contrivance at once suggested itself to his 
mind by which he might obviate even that which existed. 
The good fortune which had thrown so much drift-wood in 
his way was now even more forcibly brought to his mind, 
and he determined to throw a rude floor over the pool **' ^ 

8* 



90 THE SEA OF lOB, OR 

the stream, which he could then cover with skins, and thus 
one great and important difficulty would be overcome. 

This idea suggested and mentally adopted, Henry de- 
termined to verify the truth of a suspicion which had flashed 
across his mind. 

The earth which formed a portion of the wall on the side 
of the hill had forcibly excited his attention and raised his 
curiosity. Besides, several wants were occurring to his 
mind, and he resolved as speedily as possible to provide 
against them. The cave was large, but it could not serve 
all those varied purposes for which his active mind in- 
tended it. . 

[Here commences the Journal of the Polar Hermit, from 
whose vague notes the previous portion has been compiled.] 

I looked forward to the nine months' winter with much 
dismay and dread, and numerous plans for shortening its 
duration suggested themselves. I began already to think 
of making my captivity less painful by providing myself 
with some companions, in the shape of those animals which 
existed on the island. So utterly desolate and forlorn was 
I, that coiJd I have secured and tamed the bear, I think I 
should have done so. It is not good to be alone. I should 
have disregarded the dangers of such a companionship, 
and even the difficulty of providing him with food. But I 
hesitated before the difficulties of catching him, and of 
taming him ; my thoughts turned to other ideas of a more 
feasible character, and I already began to devise plans for 
capturing a deer, a bii-d, or even a fox — any thing to which 
I could talk, or which I could occupy my mind in the win- 
ter months by instructing ; and reflecting on the wondrous 
expedients of Robinson, I even aimed at saving a small 
number of animals for food. 

I thrust my ramrod into the earth, tv'hich was soft, but it 
soon stopped. The wall of the earth was about five feet 
high, arched over by solid stone, and surrounded on all sides 
in the same way by rock. This convinced me that it was 
an aperture by which another inner cave could be reached. 
I accordingly began to use my axe as a spade, and worked 
away for about an hour without result, when I began to 
think that the hours for labor were passing, and hunger too 
began to make itself felt. 



THE ARCTIC ADV£NTURi£R3. 91 

I dined then on some bear*s meat, with a handful of raw 
sorrel, and went out into the air. 

The cub was still moaning over the body of the great 
she-bear, from which, however, I drove it, by throwing 
stones ; and then, as rapidly as I could, skinned the unfortu- 
nate animal with my hunting-knife. Having executed this 
to my satisfaction, I took the hide and laid it out flat in the 
bottom of the pool, piling a number of stones upon it to 
keep it from floating, or from becoming the prey of the 
wolves and foxes, with which, among other animals, my 
deserted island appeared to be infested. 

Having done this, I turned to go towards my home, still 
followed by the unfortunate cub, moaning and growling in 
a half-sad and half-melancholy way, that made me feel 
exceedingly miserable. I could almost have wished that I 
had killed it on the first impulse, but I could not find in my 
heart sufficient hardness to slay it now.- I therefore picked 
up a large stone, which I threw at it, uttering strange cries. 
But the beast came on, still growling and groaning, and 
would not stop; so, much against my inclination, I was 
compelled, as it savagely came up to me, to fetch it a heavy 
blow on the head, and then to despatch it with my axe. 

I was very sick and vexed at my murderous day's work ; 
but I could not help it, and determined, therefore, to think 
no more about it, but to use the creatures fortune had sent 
in my way in as profitable a manner as possible. 

I now also resolved to lay out my time in a manner 
which would be productive, and enable me to do what I had 
to do with satisfaction. 

I determined, accordingly, to spend the morning and the 
whole day in providing for the winter, in hunting, fishing, 
and collecting firing; while the first hours of evening — 
which, however, were not hours of darkness — were to be 
devoted to the improvement of my winter residence, and to 
the search after an inner cave. I could easily make a fire 
in the cavern, and work by its light. There was much to 
be done, and no time to be lost.' 

It suddenly occurred to me that the next day was Sun- 
day ; and I determined to think, when I retired to rest, of 
the best means of spending it in a way which wa& beciomin^ 



92 THE SEA OF ICE, OR 

one thus thrown wholly upon the mercy of God, and who 
had so much already, under the dreadful circumstances m 
which he was placed, to be thankful for. 

I supped, collected as much wood as I could, and then 
loaded the sledge, after which I retired to bed, deeply grate- 
ful for the Providence by which, this day, I had been 
carried through my difficulties. 

When I first awoke in tlie morning, I ahnost forgot, so 
heavy had been my sleep after the fatigue of the previous 
day, that it was Sunday. Weary and spiritless, I crawled 
from* my underground cell, and contemplated with consider- 
able dread the duties of the day. Suddenly the thought 
came rushing to my mind that it was Sunday — my first 
Sunday on Desolation Island — not the bright Sabbath of 
my Devon valley, nor the day of holy cheerfulness and 
peace, but a Sabbath in solitude, darkened round by fears 
of death, with all the terrors of loneliness, helplessness, and 
desertion thickening about me. 

First, my thoughts were bitter ; I broke into a passion 
of regret ; I was torn with desperate sorrow, and cursed the 
day and the fate which seemed to attend upon it. But in 
one moment this impulse of sin was checked, and my heart 
rose from its abasement of despair to the worship of Grod, 
whose hand had prepared, even in this uttermost part of the 
earth, a habitation fit for man. I feared, but in my fear 
, there was supplication. I hoped, and in my hope there was 
thanksgiving ; and both my hopes and fears, undistinguish- 
ably thronging, humbled me to repent the wretched feeble- 
ness of my soul, which dared to reproach the Providence 
that cast me there. No bird, indeed, had ever sung in those 
frozen solitudes; no chimney smoked under its trees; no 
hearth glowed amid the serenities of home ; no graves for- 
ever sacred to human love were there; but within that 
circle of eternal snow, how could I be alone ? How could 
he be alone who was not forgotten on earth, not forsaken 
by Heaven ? Distant, indeed, and perhaps divided forever, 
were the dear friends of youth — my father, whose hands 
would never cease yearning to clasp mine once more ; my 
mother also^ who would shed for me the sweetest tears, and 



TH£ ARCTIC ADVENTUKfiKS* ^S 

think of me with unremitting love as the days and years 
went by ; and Fanny, who would keep my name in her 
memory sacred ; and ^gain, here, where the giant icebergs 
moved slowly nodding to and fro, the Spirit of God moved 
forever also on the face of the deep. " The voice of the 
Lord is upon the waters. The God of glory thundereth ; 
the Lord is upon many waters." Were there not dangers 
in my native island with all its peace, if Heaven did not 
protect me? Was there not safety in this wilderness if 
Heaven did but direct me ? and amid all perils, was not the 
mercy of Him who disposes ail things sufficient to them 
who trusted in his name ? " Truly the light is sweet, and 
a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold the sun ; " and 
was I not blessed in this, that I had not been cast out to 
perish in darkness, or swallowed up in the waves ? And 
whether comforted or not, whether spared for deliverance 
and a return to my own land, or for a long exile, to be over- 
taken by destruction at last, there was a solace in the 
blessed promise given in the spirit of love, '^ Behold, we 
count them happy that endure." This was the consolation 
of my mind. I remembered these saving words, which 
gave grace and patience to my mind ; but I had no Bible 
in which to seek for other abundant assurances of mercy 
and help to the afflicted. Every fragment I could recall 
came to my memory as I strayed, on the morning of that 
Sabbath, near the dreary cave where I had slept ; but when 
my recollection failed, would not the encirchng sea, the firma- 
ment and its eternal lights, the murmur of the waters, the 
voice of the far-wandering wind, and the single wild flower 
springing at my feet, open themselves, like a glorious scrip- 
ture written with God's own hand, which I might read for- 
ever, and find rich in the proof and promise of his greatness 
and mercy ? 

This was the first calm, and I may say it was almost a 
happy, day I had yet spent. I roamed about, musing of 
heaven, of home, of myself, of friends far distant, of the 
hopes which, despite every wish to be humble and resigned, 
I could not but feel — hopes of escape, of being able to fly 
from this horrid dwelling-place, and after I had bowed to 
the will of God^ to regain my own dear nsAiW^ \mA> l^x 
wlu'cb no other exile ever longed so weanVy, 



94 TBB SEA OF ICE, OR 

In my walk I came, after some time, upon the edge of 
another stream, a little qaore distant than any I had yet 
seen, which appeared to have been almost buried in ashes, 
and yet along which the grass now grew green, and even 
some stunted shrubs were forcing their way up from that 
. arid soil. 

I had all along suspected that that island, previous to the 
late eruptions, had been inhabited by some of the Esqui- 
maux, either as a hunting ground, or even as a dwelling- 
place altogether of a small tribe. I found some sort of 
confirmation of my thoughts and suspicions on the banks of 
this small stream, in the presence of four more huts, which, 
however, had in two instances fallen in, and been almost 
choked up. 

Two, however, were still whole ; and on examination I 
subsequently found that a number of fox-skins were pre- 
served in one of these, which turned out of great use to 
me, as did the grasses on the borders of this stream. I 
still, in my calmest thoughts with regard to the strange race 
that had dwelt upon these desert shores, was often puzzled 
to think how they passed the winter, and almost lived in 
hope of finding some mysterious dwelling where they had 
constructed some winter Pompeii, that would give me some 
unheard-of resources. 

My night, which was like nobody else's night — for it 
was now never dark, except when, during heavy, stormy 
weather, the sky was overshadowed by heavy clouds * — 
came round, and still I was wandering about, wrapped in 
my thoughts, turning over in my mind many things which 
before I used not to notice ; more reverent, more humble, 
more trusting, I believe, than ever I had been before. 

And the sun dipped nearer to the horizon, and the sky 
looked red and purple, and the wind sighed across the arid 
plain ; and I stood alone on that desert shore, on the first 
Sabbath ever spent there by any Christian man. 

I sat down by my bright fire to supper, though my food 

♦ It is difficult to say which is most unpleasant, the lonp day of four 
months, durixig which the sun never sets, or the dreary night, when it 
never lises. The length of this day and night is determined by the lati- 
iode. It grows longer as you approach the pole. 



THE ARCTIC ADTEMTUREBS. 95 

was bear's meat and sorrel, with a heartier zest than I had 
yet felt. I was thoughtful and sad ; but when I reflected 
on what millions had suffered and Dome, and when I thought 
how easy it would be for Proyideuce to release me, I grew 
calmer, and went to rest. 

I had lain down about four hours, and wearied with mj 
long walk, I had slept very soundly, when I was startled, 
and somewhat alarmed, by a low and savage howl over my 
head, which made me start into a sitting posture without an 
instant delay. 

I listened I 

A hard breathing was clearly to be distinguished above 
my head, and then paws scratching at the stone, which I 
always drew after me when I descended into the cave below. 
The noise was too great for that of a^ fox, and the thought 
came into my head at once, that it was the great he-bear, 
come to revenge the murder of his family. I reflected an 
instant, and then it occurred to me that it could not be a 
bear, and, taking courage, I peeped through a chink, and 
met the savage, glaring eyes of a great wolf — tall, lanky, 
and ferocious. I appeared surrounded by a perfect army 
of savage animals, and this was more clear to me when I 
found myself presently attacked by two instead of one. 

They were savage and powerful brutes, and I hardly 
knew what to do. The charges of my pistols were too 
precious to waste on them — so, after some thought, I de- 
termined to try stratagem and cunning instead of force. 

I calmly knotted my belt to the band of my game-bag, 
and then added a small cord, which all our sportsmen had 
been wont to carry to drag their game along at times with ; 
and then, having made a noose, I prepared to act 

The horrid wolves snarled, and hissed, and scratched ; I 
clutched a pistol, and then pushed aside a small part of the 
stone. The animal's neck was through in an instant, and 
the next minute my noose was round. The wretched 
animal gave a terrific howl, but with such creatures I 
could have no mercy ; so with one hand I held the noose 
tight, and, without describing the disgusting scene that fol- 
lowed, I need only say that I soon despatched it with my 
axe, while the other fled^ and left me ioi i^^^^^^ Xkovy^ v 



96 THS SEA OF tCK, Oft 

should have been better pleased ia have served it the 
same way. 

Then again I blockaded myself in, and tried to go to 
sleep ; but my mind had lost all its elasticity and ease, and 
it was only ailer much meditation and thought that I was 
able to compose myself to rest These continual conflicts 
with the brute creation, though necessary, seemed to me 
very horrid, especially as I always had entertained a great 
dislike to taking animal life, even under any circumstances. 

But I consoled myself with the reflection that never, in 
the whole course of my existence, had I killed an animal 
for the mere pleasure of killing it. 

This comforted me somewhat, and I at last fell into a 
deep and refreshing slumber, during which my dreams 
were more pleasant than usual. To dismiss the subject, I 
may as well say, that I never saw any thing more of the 
wolf's companion, while the skin of the one I killed was as 
serviceable to me as others had been. 

None, however, were viewed by me with half the inter- 
est that attached to the great bear which had been one of 
the causes of my present extraordinary position, which 
would have been, at all events, tolerable if I could but 
hope for a man Friday. 

But, ungrateful creature that I was, I did not know the 
blessings Heaven had in store for me, even under my many 
tribulations and afflictions. 



CHAPTER X. 

TBIBULATIONS AND CABES. — A BOAT. — A SAIL ! A SAIL ! 

I ROSE next day remarkably refreshed with my rest, both 

in mind and body, and began to look around me for the 

best work I could do under my present circumstances. I 

thought it wise to make the search for an inner cave at 

n90^ AS tbia was to me a matter of the utmost importance. 



THS ABOTIC APYEXTURERS. 97 

Accordinglyj as soon as I had taken some refreshment, I 
started on my Journey, armed as usual ; for I had very 
great misgivings with regard to the male bear, which might 
be on the island, unless the female and her young had been 
carried to it- by one of the floating icebergs, in somewhat 
similar fashion to the adventurous journey which I had so 
perilously performed myself. 

I soon reached the sulphur cave, having skirted the pool 
instead of wading through the water, which, though warm, 
was none the more pleasant or wholesome on this account. 
I already turned over in my mind a hundred uses to which 
I could put an interior cave, if I could be fortunate enough 
to reach it — so fertile is^ the imagination of man even 
onder the most difficult and doubtful positions. 

I began to dig away with energy, and as I expected, 
found that the earth was a mere accidental slip, which had 
choked up an orifice that led probably into the heart of the 
mountliin. It was then with something like a feeling of 
awe and dread that I beheld the last rampart between my« 
self and the interior cave fall before the vigorous strokes 
of my axe, which, for its size, was very heavy. 

A rush of mephitic vapor nearly choked me, and I was 
obliged to seek the open air in order to regain strength to 
proceed. I then went down to the shore, and manufactured 
a torch of grass, and skin, and grease. This I lighted, and 
carried rapidly up to the grotto. 

It was much larger than the outer one, so large, in fact, 
as to be useless as a dwelling-place ; as in winter it could 
not be easily warmed, while its temperature could never, 
however, be very low. It was thirty feet long, fifteen wide, 
and twenty high, so that it would serve all the purposes for- 
which, in my mind, it was intended. 

The floor was of stone, and of a stone easily broken, bat 
which, when exposed for a few days to the air, became ex- 
tremely hard. This was exceedingly fortunate, as I had 
some very complicated plans in my head as to the uses to 
which this flooring might be put. 

At all events I was satisfled. I had found a place where 
there was every reason to believe I could pass the winter; 
and now my whole energies must be devoled \X) \?Ei^ \a^ ^ 

9 



THE SEA OF ICE, OB 

laying up stores for the long and weary nine months, which 
I constantly kept repeating to myself would come round 
with such amazing rapidity, and during which I could do 
nothing whatever for my subsistence. 

I had found the warehouse; now I had to commence 
other and more elaborate duties. 

Next day, however, in my anxiety to explore, I advanced 
fiarther to the westward on my island, and to my great sur- 
prise, and also to my great discomfort and annoyance, I 
found unmistakable signs of the volcanic nature of the place 
— every where basaltic remains, cracks, lumps of sulphur, 
and cinders. The farther I advanced the worse it seemed 
to be ; the fissures became deepep, so rude and dangerous, in 
fact, that I scarcely ventured to leap them as I at first had 
done, while I found at every step hot springs, which bubbled 
from the ground, and which were charged to a great extent 
with alum, sulphur, and other volcanic matters. The stench 
was fearful, and I almost shook with terror at the prospect 
of another eruption occurring. The air was hot and calm ; 
not a breath of wind was stining ; so that I really fancied 
myself in the regions of Pandemonium a moment, so apt 
was I in that place to allow my mind to be unreasonably 
and foolishly affected — here 

*' In desolate place, where dank moisture bred." 

By some strange accident, connected probably with the 
wind which blew during recent eruptions, the whole of the 
cinders were confined to this part of the island, which also 
seemed generally to be of a more volcanic character than 
that where I had chosen my residence. As I advanced, in- 
deed, the scene became truly frightful, and to my great horror 
and alarm, I saw that the last eruption had not been of very 
ancient date, the cinders under my feet being extremely 
fresh, and not dating farther back than the winter which 
was just over. 

I began, to be seriously affected in my thoughts, and 
meditated retreating to my own peaceable and compara- 
tively happy part of the island, my head splitting and my 
brain dizzy, when, from the still and silent mountain, I 
heard a low murmuring, followed by a shake resembling 



TH« ABCTIC ADVENTURERS. 99 

what I had heard of earthquakes. I sank with unfeigned 
and unhesitating terror on the ground, against which I in- 
stinctively pressed my ear. The shaking had ceased, but 
the noise continued like the crackling of a wood pile, like 
the escaping of air from a confined space, like the rushing 
of a river over rocks in a narrow bed. The quaking on the 
earth was now renewed at rapid and constant intervals, the 
sky was overspread by dark and heavy clouds, lightning 
flashed from the distant horizon, while from the summit of 
the hill burst a volume of smoke and flame. 

Then the sea began to rise and fall with singular ra- 
pidity, huge waves dashed with a heavy crash against the 
shore, large masses of floating ice were hfled up on the 
banks, and to my terrible and alarmed fancy, worked up to 
frenzy from my peculiar position, the whole island seemed 
about to be swallowed by the ravenous waves, which dashed 
against the shores of the island with unexampled fury. 

Then came a tremendous burst of smoke from the crater 
of the volcano, and all was over. 

I had taken to my heels, and was hurrying back to my 
residence, when I was suddenly surprised by this strange 
cessation of a tumult which did not trouble me again for 
some time, though it left en my mind a very vivid impres- 
sion of terror and alarm. The day was wasted, for I could 
not recover myself sufficiently to devise any thing new. I 
merely skinned the bears, supped, and then retired to rest 
in search of 

" Magic sleep ! O comfortable bird, 
That brooi^st o'er the troubled sea of the mind 
Till it is hushed and smooth ! O un confined 
Restraint ! imprisoned liberty ! great key 
To golden palaces, strange minstrelsy, 
Fountains grotesque, new trees, bespangled caves, 
Echoing grottoes, full of tumbling waves 
And moonlight/* 

My sleep, however, was uneasy and heavy ; I could not, 
even under the influence of the seductive god, get rid of the 
impressions of the earthquake and volcanic eruption. 

The day was now twenty-four hours long ; that is, there 
was no night, the sun never being wholly beneath the hori- 
xoD. I was in the region where the gr^at ^\ax ^\^^\b&\si^ 



IM THK SEA OF ICS, OR 

three moo tha, while the one day of the summer is as long. 
I had a watch, which I took great care to wind up, and 
which, by strictly observing the sun, I kept pretty correct. 
In the early part of the summer, and towards its close, there 
are about three hours of darkness ; but from the middle of 
June to September there is really no night, though from 
habit I use the word. As I emerged from my place of con- 
cealment, I noticed, at no great distance on the edge of the 
bay, a large flock of birds, which appeared to h^ve flown a 
long way, and to have taken refuge on the island. Their 
wearied appearance encouraged me to rush upon them, and 
as they did not, and probably could not move, I was able to 
kill a large number. 

These I smoked in the smoke of some damp wood, which 
I placed on a hot fire, and then loading my sledge with them, 
I took them to my storehouse, in the interior of which I 
piled them up. 

The instant this labor was concluded, it struck me that 
what I had done would be useless if I did not take some 
measures of security against the polar foxes or dogs, which 
already had not only attacked me, but had eaten up every 
remnant of the bear which I had left within their reach — 
80 completely, indeed, that some of his bones I had put 
by for useful purposes, and the rest I had consumed for 
firewood. 

The only means of ingress which existed to the cave, save 
a narrow fissure leading into the heart of the mountain, and 
from which the sulphur stream came forth, was the entrance 
I have already described. This I blocked up lis well as I 
could with sticks and lumps of coal, which I chose because 
of their future utility to me. 

I then continued my preparations with more courage, and 
next day, to my great delight, was able to prepare a much 
more efiectual barrier, having found, on the edge of a small 
indentation of the bay, a whole pile of the bones of sev- 
eral whales, which had been evidently lefl there by some 
whalers. 

This gave me hope and courage. If whalers had once 
landed on this desolate shore to pursue their profitable and 
aaefiil calliog, why should they not laud a^in? 



Ta£ AKCTIC ADVENTURERd. 101 

I cannot but say that this discovery had considerably un- 
manned me, when I made another, which still more forcibly 
reminded me of ideas and feelings I earnestly wished and 
desired to forget, and yet which, despite all my exertions, 
would recur to my imagination, each time almost with 
renewed force. 

It was the anchor of a ship's boat, which, holding a long 
boat, had probably been left behind in the hurry of an em- 
barkation, caused by some sudden storm ; or perhaps they 
had slipped their cable — if I may so speak of a boat — at 
the sight of an eruption, which was certainly quite enough 
to explain a party of sailors having acted with hurry and 
something like panic terror. 

I sighed deeply as I gazed at this evidence of others 
having visited this place before, and then securing what to 
me was a valuable prize, I turned to other avocations. 

I lived in such constant dread of the appearance of the 
male companion of the bear I had killed, that I could not 
be easy until I had taken some very active measures against 
him. My axe, my hunting knife, and an empty and useless 
gun, were the only arms I had. I therefore took an early 
opportunity of making, with a staS* of wood, and a whale- 
bone which I sharpened, a kind of pike, which on an 
emergency might serve me. 

I further erected, near the spot where I fixed the position 
of my fishery, a kind of fence, about twelve feet long and 
six feet high, of wood, very solid and firm, with, in the cen- 
tre, a hole through which I could pass rapidly. It was a 
strange and novel style of fortification, but I had great hopes 
as to its utility and the probable uses to which I might 
put it. 

Then I set to work at my fishery in earnest, and in this 
department was eminently successful. My hooks, and a kind 
of net I fabricated, were equally invaluable, so that a very 
few days enabled me to lay up a stock of fish, which, with 
the dried birds, promised to be useful in the extreme. 

I then dug a kind of pit in the interior of my cave, which 
, I contrived as much as possible to have narrow at the top, 
and growing larger as it went down. This was to contain 
my oiL 

9 ♦ 



\&i THK IKA OF ICBy OS . 

But when the reservoir had been formed, the next thing 
was to procure the oil itself, which was an article on whi(£ 
I depended in part for food, in part for light, and even to a 
certain extent for warmth. 

My plan for catching the sea-monsters which were to 
•npplj me with this invaluable matter was original and 
novel, if not very good. 

I knew the horror which all cetaceous animals have for 
sulphur, and I also was well aware that the seals and other 
such creatures, of which, when the tide was high, I knew the 
bay was full, were generally in the habit of going out to sea 
as the waters became shallow. I therefore, one morning, 
having provided myself with my game-bag full of sulphur, of 
which I found far too much on my island, advanced up to 
my knees in the water, along a rippling shoal near the en- 
trance of the bay, and cast the powder as I went profusely 
before me, just as the inhabitants of the bay wer^ about to 
move towards the open sea. 

I then landed, and at low tide I captured as many as I 
possibly could make any use of. Some of them were very 
long and ugly. I killed them not only for their oil, but for 
their skins, their tendons, &c. I manufactured a very large 
quantity of oil, some of which I poured into my well, which 
I then covered up, and the rest I filled some skins with. 

I occupied myself unceasingly for some time in laying in 
a stock of fish, of birds, and of fuel, until I began to feel 
that I really had provided tolerably well for one man against 
the rigor of the climate and the first crying wants of 
nature. 

Then, and only then, did I allow myself the luxury of pre- 
paring for my deliverance. 

I had, as it were, slyly, without allowing myself hardly 
to dwell on the object I had in view, collected in my sum- 
mer residence all the materials necessary to making a boat- 
of sufficient size to contain myself and a quantity of pro- 
visions fit to last during a journey to the mainland of 
America, which I was quite sure was not very far distant. 

I was in about 75° of latitude and 85** of longitude, which, 

from my knowledge of the character of the American coast, 

«« encouragingf as it gave me reason to believe I should 



TEA ABCTIC ▲DTJiCNTURERS. lOS 

And on tlie continent means of existence, while I endeav- 
ored to reach the inhabited parts of the New World. 

My boat was to be constructed of skins and wood, and 
as I had no regard to external beauty, and thought only of 
itfrength, my task was not so difficult as at first sight it 
might i^pear. 

My plan was to build it first, and then, taking it to pieces, 
to secrete it in my Esquimaux hut until the spring, when, 
with the whole summer before me, I could start on my per- 
ilous journey across the arm of the sea which appeared to 
divide the island from the main land; 

The seal and other skins were the principal materials, 
wood only serving to keep the rest of the boat in shape ; 
and at the end of ten days — which were really, under the . 
circumstances, ten days wasted — I had almost succeeded 
in completing my little craft, even to a pair of oars, a tiny 
mast, and a very small sail. 

Dark clouds overshadowed the sky ; there was thunder, I 
thought, in the air, and a heavy artificial night hung upon 
all nature, when I, by the light of a huge fire I had piled up, 
was putting the finishing stroke to my bark. It was really 
not dark save by comparison — in fact, I was wearied with 
light ; but it was a short change from the dazzling glare of 
the sun. 

I thought a storm was coming on, but I was mistaken ; 
it was merely a burst of clouds from the nor'-west, and the 
'setting in again of the season of real nights was not yet 
come. I had been so long accustomed to perpetual day, 
that I was taken quite by surprise at the suddenness of the 
transition. It soon, however, cleared up, and it was many 
days before I saw a semblance of darkness again. 

Presently I dragged my pirogue or canoe down to the 
water's edge, and launched it. It fioated admirably, with- 
out leaning to the right or lefl. 

I could not restrain a cry of unmitigated joy. 

But what is that out far away on the distant horizon ? 

Afirel 

I almost sank to the earth helpless and insensible, at a 
moment of time when I needed all my self-possession, all 
my calmness, and every oarticle of that ftlToicv^iXi vcA ««<Q3t« 



104 THE 6EA OF ICH, OH 

age, both moral and physical, with which nature had im- 
bued me. 

The fire which, as I gradually began to recover my 
senses, I saw was not more than about eight miles distant, 
could only proceed from a burning ship, or from the deck 
of a French whaler, on board of which, in these days, they 
were in the habit of melting down the whale blubber, by 
means of immense fires on the deck of the vessel. 

This was the supposition which I at once believed to be 
the correct one. 

Tumultuous indeed were my thoughts. The sea was 
calm, the vessel, of course, stationary ; my boat was ready, 
and a couple of hours would suffice to take me out to that 
ark of salvation which a kind and good Providence ap- 
peared to have cast in my way. 

Who can tell, I am sure I cannot, all the blessed thoughts 
of England, of home, of mother, father, and that dear face 
which hovered round me in my sleep, which followed me 
by day, which haunted every nook of the island, and was ever 
my sweet and innocent solace -«— that now burst on me ? 

My trembling fingers seemed hardly to obey their office, 
as, without waiting for food or water, I entered my boat, 
and, there being no wind, began paddling out across the 
waters of that terrible Polar Sea, towards that ship, whidi, 
like a pleasant lighthouse to the homesick mariner, was 
brighter to me than any of the most beautiful stars in the 
firmament. 

One piece of good fortune I had already been aware of 
for some time, and that was, that I had fallen upon an island 
situated in that part of the Polar Sea which, during the 
summer months, is wholly free from ice, where a clear and 
open expanse of waters encourages the voyager, and where 
also much of the fishing goes on. 

I was not sufficiently learned in the phenomena of these 
seas clearly to understand why this should be. In fact, I 
did not make much progress in information by being on the 
spot. Often those who travel know least. There were 
manj things I wanted to have ejiabled me to make just ob- 
servation. I contented myself with seeing that a thing 
was, without always knowing why it was so. 



THB ARCTIC ADYENTURES9. 105 

It aeemed strange, yery strange to me, that just as I had 
finished mj boat, jast as I had launched it on the edge of 
the bay, this ship should have come in sight. But I merely 
bowed to Providence, which was so good to me, and did 
not rack my brains to ask how this had happened. As I 
looked back at all the events which had occurred since my 
losing the Fair Fanny — at my contest with the bear, at 
my escape on an ice-rafl, my lighting by chance^ on an 
island, at my terrible combat with the other bears — I won- 
dered how it had been ; and it was only because I knew it 
was so, that I believed it. 

Reflection and thought told me that my having killed a 
huge bear myself alone, was an extraordinary fact; not 
rare, not unprecedented, but still a curious circumstance. 
But there was the broad simple fact, that I had killed the 
bear ; and my reason told me that bears might be killed 
sometimes in a different way from others. But I had not 
yet been two years in the arctic regions ; I had a great 
deal to learn.* 

I hardly know why, but every event connected with my 
Crusoe life, every little circumstance of the fact, flashed be- 
fore me now, perhaps because I believed it was over, and 
that I had seen the last of my hermit existence. 

O, what glad, what wild, what strange thoughts came 
over me now! as on that- wide and open sea — in that re- 
gion of desolation, where the gallant and the brave, the 
generous and the good among my countrymen, were in afler 
years to gain glory and renown — I sped in my frail bark ; 
escape, liberty, home, life, love, all tumultuously afiecting 
my heart, and almost depriving me of my senses. 

The prisoner whose life is forfeited to the Draconian 
laws of society, and who by some fortunate combination of 
circumstances is able to escape from his stone cage, and fly 
on the wings of burning hope to hide his trembling exist- 
ence in some secluded place, where man no more shall find 
him, could not feel more intensely the blessing of liberty 
than I did. 



• Our hero need hare been under no uneasiness of mind. Hunt«ni 
htTe done mnoh more wonderful things than ki\Un^ % "^c^M^wtt^ 



106 TUU ABA OF ICB, OB 

And jet life is a sacred thing, a thing worth, battling for 
even by the wretch who has lost all claim to call his life 
his own. 

I really had no fear for my life. I believed I coald pass 
over the winter season in safety. But I was alone, and to 
be alone is to be momlly dead. 

How little did I contemplate the almost miraculous event 
which was about to give me that society I least expected, 
while dashing from my lips the hope that cheered me now I 

But let me not garrulously anticipate. My story is so 
strange that I need not add mystery to it 

The sky is clear above, the sea is still below, and away 
there on the wide waters is the ship on which my soul is 
bent, and towards which «very fibre of my being is now 
yearning. 



CHAPTER XI. 

ATTEMPTED ESCAPE. — THE ISLAND OP DESPAIR. 

I NEVER could recollect the hour at which I started on 
my perilous and novel journey ; I do but know that, had 
there been the slightest breeze, my coracle would, ugly and 
shapeless mass as it was, have easily reached the ship, 
which, judging from the position of its deck, was, as I have 
already said, about eight or nine miles distant. So, at least, 
it appeared to me, and appears to me at the moment at 
which I write. 

I Sat down to my oars, and began to pull away with very 
great energy in the direction of the vessel. Though my 
mind was in any thing but a healthy state, I had sufficient 
command over myself to be very careful in keeping as 
<;losely as possible to a straight course. I had left a large 
fire on the beach, which, though it might serve as a guide 
to me, was not very likely to attract the notice of persons 
accustomed to those seas, who probably would be aware of 
the volcanic character of the island, and therefore regard 



THE ▲nCTIC ADViCNTtJRERS. H'7 

mj heBCon as a mere natural phenomenon. How could I 
expect that living man would seek a hermit in that place ? 
while whalers were not likely to go out of their way to 
vioit any wandering natives who might be hunting and 
fishing on those shores. 

By keeping my eyes almost constantly fixed on the spot 
I had but just le^ and turning round now and then to exam- 
ine the position of the vessel, I was able to advance for some 
time withotit any material deviation from the correct course. 

Presently, however, on reflection, I began to be singu- 
larly puzzled as to the real state of affairs. The vessel, 
though I kept my bows always straight in her direction, 
seemed advancing continually to the south. 

I at once then ceased rowing for a few minutes, and al- 
most instantly found that I was within the influence of one 
of the many changeable and contrary currents of the Polar 
Seas, a current which was carrying me quite away from my 
real destination. 

I immediately changed my mode of proceeding, and in- 
stead of steering due east, as I had up to this time, I began 
to move in a more southerly direction. The current was 
apparently very strong, the shape of my boat very un- 
wieldy, and ill suited to rapid navigation, and my excite- 
ment so great, that I could not make more than a couple of 
miles at most within the hour. 

Still on I went. No warrior on the red battle-field, 
rushing on to kill and slay his fellows for glory and for pay 
— no son of fame striving to win some dearly-coveted 
prize — no lover hurrying from afar, a little behind time, 
to the sweet try sting-place, ever kept his one object in view 
with more earnestness than I did. 

My prize was life — dear life — that treasure which we 
do not value half enough in ordinary times, but which, in 
hours like these, one comprehends and appreciates. My 
prize was more than life — 'twas home, a kind father, a 
mother's smile, a wife; all that makes that existence of 
which I speak so glad, so beautiful. 

The bright sun was presently higher above the horizon, 
a sun both warm and genial, and by its light I was able to 
miderstand my position better than I could have done had 
I had to sail under cover of the night. 



108 THS ISA or ICB, OB 

I was about six niiles from the island, whicli lay almost 
south-west, and an equal distance from the ship, which lay 
south-east. 

From the ship I said ; for it was a ship. Yes ; there she 
lay, still, motionless, her sails furled, and a thick smoke still 
rising from her deck — a kind of earthly paradise in my 
eyes, another Eden, into which I prayed to be admitted. 

With the morning arose a slight breeze, of which I 
immediately took advantage, it happening to be thoroughly 
favorable ; and, impelled by my little sail, and two oars 
vigorously plied, I advanced much more rapidly than I 
hitherto had done. But a fear that eame over me as the 
wind rose was soon realized ; for turning round presently to 
gaze at the distant whaler, I saw one sail after another fall, 
and then she was in motion — sailing away to the south ; 
not switll^ it is true, but much more rapidly than I could 
pretend to move. 

I did not curse. No ! never did I so far forget myself 
as to indulge in any blasphemous- repining ; but I should 
not have been a man, I must have been something more or 
something less than mortal, had I not felt a low sinking of 
the heart and a despairing sensation come over me as the 
beautiful vision of the previous hours seemed to fade from 
my grasp. 

I experienced a flash of renewed vigor, as I remarked 
that the brig had her yards braced sharp up, and that she 
was striving to beat up in my direction. 

Was I seen? Had a providential accident induced some 
of the crew to sweep the horizon with the glass, and my 
cockle tossed on the slowly rising waves been detected? 
I could not answer these questions, but there was a tiny, 
small voice within, which seemed to whisper words of hope, 
of joy unutterable. 

I soon, however, became aware that the brig was follow- 
ing a boat, which, under two large spritsails, had advanced 
so near unto me that I could, I thought, distinguish the 
forms of the men as they labored at their oars; while — 
such is fancy — I almost could have said that it was my 
own dear brig which lay so tantalizingly near me. 

I ceased rowing, and wildly hailed the boat, though I 



TnA ARCTIC ADVEN^TUBERS. 109 

ought to have known, that as its sails were harelj visible to 
me, mine could not be distinguished by them. I soon- then 
took to my oars once more, and began to pull with perfectly 
frantic ardor. 

The boat had lowered its sails suddenly "and disappeared, 
while the brig, squaring away her yards, appeared following 
with all 'speed in her track. I understood that another 
whale had been harpooned, and that all hands were in 
chase — quite as rapidly as the conviction was forced upon 
me that my hopes were gone, my seductive castle-building 
all a dream. 

And yet I repined not wholly. Never have I done so in 
'the course of a long and often a terrible existence. I never 
could feel utterly deserted, even when all reasonable ground 
foV hope seemed to have disappeared. 

No ! And this was the benefit of my early training, of 
my early education, which taught me never to be cast 
down ; for if deserted by man, contemned, despised, crushed, 
abandoned, I ever felt deep and profound reliance on Him 
who has so solemnly promised never to forget us. 

It often struck me what my position would have been 
had I been one of those unfortunate beings who glory in 
the endeavor to prove themselves no more than the meanest 
beast of the field, a mere particle of the earth, unbound by 
that silvery thread of chain-like force which eternally con- 
'nects us with heaven by the link of the soul. • 

I had already endured much, very much, and yet was my 
heart not dead to the most bright visions of the future, at 
any period of my terrible trial. 

But now I was a-hungered and a-thirst, alone on the 
wide sea in an open boat, and that boat unable to cope with 
the most trifling storm, much less with one of those squalls 
which sometimes burst with such untamed violence on the 
waters of the Frozen Ocean. I had nothing to eat, and 
nothing with which to slake my burning and ravenous thirst ; 
my wrists began to refuse their office, my arms ached, my 
forehead burned, and I felt as if I were about to die. 

I now stood up in my boat and gazed wildly at the dis- 
tant vessel, which had again gone about, and was now ad- 
▼ancing^ with all sail set, once mot^ m m^ d^3C^>ssRk\i. \ 

10 



110 VHB SBA or IOK9 OflT 

breathed more freely a moment, but all ex^rtkm on mj 
part was useless — it could do no good. All that remained 
for me to do was to steer mj poor bark as well as I could 
at right angles with the approBUihing brig, in the hope oC. 
finally meeting. 

Vain hope for the present About midday the vessel 
again heaved to, furled her sails, and appeared again en- 
gaged in making the best and quickest use of her prise 
possible. I could have cried with vexation and sorrow ; but 
I bore up against this weak, I will not say womanly failings 
as I have seen women bear up against evils of this kind 
even with more courage than men. I myself, at a later 
period, owed too much to the skill, devotion, and courage 
of a savage and wholly uneducated girl, to ever doubt the 
stout and good heart of woman — a blessing I the more 
valued, that I was wholly debarred from her society. 

With the light breeze which prevailed, I made scarcely 
any progress whatever ; while my weakness increased, my 
fever became terrible, my mind began to wander, and I 
sank at last, utterly careless of all around me, at the bottom 
of the boat, having had scarcely sense enough to fasten my 
little rudder so as to prevent the light craft from upsetting 
supposing only such a slight wind as now existed to prevaiL 

I was not only weak and exhausted, but I was in acute 
and intense pain, which, joined to a kind of delirium which 
seized me, leaves it always a wonder to my mind how I ab-. 
stained- from committing some rash act which would have 
utterly destroyed all my hopes. I was for some time in- 
sensible; but a very light northerly wind, which rose at 
even, and which by its chilliness seemed to give me some 
little vigor, aroused me once more. 

Never before or since did I know the pangs of hunger 
and thirst to the fearful extent which now overcame me. I 
sat up with difficulty — my eyesight was dim — my stomach 
writhed within me — a terrible pain in the back of my head 
produced weight and stupor — I seemed to see wild visions 
all around, and there away in th6 distance was — yes — it 
was — the Phantom Ship. 

I laughed aloud. 

'^ That js DO ship — it is a mockery, an iffnis/atuus that 



THl ARCTIC ADTfiNTUBILIlS. Ill 

lUm Idred me to destruction ! Give me back my island, mj 
cave, mj home. Ah ! ah ! where am I ? On the wide, 
wide sea! O, yes I On the wide, wide sea — food for 
sharics and whfdes — - pull away ! Let me reach yon ship — 
and I will teach them to treat me thus — Away I dark vision 
— away, wilt thou, I say — I will not see thee ! " 

How long I raved in some such fashion I cannot tell. I 
recoUect only that I sang songs — childish songs — snatches 
'Of nursery rhymes ; and they seemed to do me good — for 
I shed warm tears that soothed my scorching brain and left 
me sense to pray. But there was the ship ; I could clearly 
see its fires — they were again melting the blubber — and 
I seemed to make no progress towards it. This reflection 
made me rave again. 

I know not all I said, but I am su^e that I did say things 
only to be excused by the terrible revulsions of feeling 
which I suffered. 

I began to see ships on all sides, close to me, far away, 
whole fieets mocking my insane efforts ; and I clutched my 
hair, and tore it in my madness. 

I looked on mankind as my foe — the crew of the vessel 
ihat had tempted me, as my deluders and insnarers. I 
made rash vows of wreaking vengeance on the first of my 
kind I ever met again. I did, and thought, and said, a 
thousand foolish and bad things, that canxe faintly back 
afterwards to my calmer soul, and made me feel bitterly 
ashamed. 

Above all, I upbraided myself for my weakness in 
eoming away without food or water, called myself silly 
names, and behaved, in fact, like a weak and foolish child. 

I bitterly reproached my poor father for that two years 
of patience his tenacity and rectitude of purpose had im- 
posed — I always, however, had the intense satisfaction of 
feeling that, if ever I had reproached my father, it was 
-during a fit of temporary insanity, when no madness was 
great enough to make me breathe a whisper of complaint 
against the doubly sacred name of mother. 

Somehow or other, I fell off at last into a deep and long 
sleep ; for when I awoke I was cool, my whole body was 
diendied inth water, and on tastmg eome *m Vlti'^'WXncQL ^ 



Hi ' • Ta».•K▲^ (ur 10% <» -■ 

my cockle-shell of a boat, I fband it was rain-watu*. TfAs 
almost removed every trace of fever, and I rose to a sittil^ 
posture, weak, shaking in every limb, bat conscioas, and as 
one who had escaped the very jaws of death. 

The ship was nowhere to be seen, while I could only dis- 
tinguish in the vast distance the summit of ^e hill whiah 
was the prominent feature of the island, which, but yester- 
day so dreary a resting-place, was now the very end of 8^ 
my dearest hopes. The wind was not unfavorable. In 
fiu:t, it had shifted during my half-sleeping delirium, and 
my canoe was heading for Desolation Island, or nei^ly so. 
I could afford no assistance except steering. I tried to 
guide the boat nearer the wind, but it would not do. Her 
capabilities were limited. Like a tub, she could sail be^Nie 
the wind, but after no other &shion. 

I drank all the water I could scoop up with the paka ^ 
my hand, but it was after all but little, and afforded ^me 
only a temporary satisfaction and relief. Besides, the breese 
seemed inclined to increase; and if this really occurred,^ I 
was lost beyond all hope. My boat could not live teta 
minutes in that sea in presence of a mere capful of wind. 
It was, strange to say, very hot ; and this alone was alarm- 
ing. Gradually, however, I gained oourage as I observed 
that the wind was steady, and the distant island became a 
little more clear and distinct. 

Again, however, the horrid fever seemed approaching, 
and want of food begaa to affect me even more than the 
thirst which at first had been so very terrible. Still I clung 
to a last desperate hope, and tried to steer as well as I 
could for the island. I lost sight of it again as semi-dark- 
ness once more came on, it being now late in the season. 
Mind and body utterly prostrate, I lay finally in my boat 
to die, or strike what shore Providence was pleased in its 
mercy to lead me to. 

And there I lay upon my back, gazing at the heavens 
above, and aware only by the stars which guided me, that 
I was moving in a right direction. What visions came 
over me, what thoughts, what strange and wayward fancies, 
little dreams of joy and bliss that almost made me fancy 
tb^. death was oertain I I thought, too, about the stoaB, 



TBB AHOTIC ADTSXTUBERS. 113 

whether or no they were really worlds with inhabitants ; 
and it seemed odd, passing odd^ that the very world I lived 
in was as far away from me as those bright spots which 
dotted Grod's glorious firmament 

At dawn I was not more than a mile from my island, but 
I was within the influence of the current from the north, 
though I could see the edge of the ripple where the two 
streams were parted, and I was not more than a hundred 
yards from the influence of a force that would have sent 
me safely and quietly into my little bay, where I could just 
distingoish the pole on which was hoisted, by way of signal, 
. the bear's head. 

This was, however, rapidly fading from my view ; and 
DOW, indeed, was all earthly hope gone, all chance of relief. 
I lay down with a deep-drawn and heavy sigh — I resigned 
myself to my wretched and hopeless fate, for no matter 
where the current drove me, it would certainly not take' me 
there alive. Another night I could not exist. I suppose 
I was too weak and exhausted to be mad, for now I never 
thought with more distinctness, never reasoned more cool- 
lyi never reflected so like a philosopher. I not only no 
longer hoped, I no longer cared for life. I would not have 
niaed a finger to have aided my own destruction, but I felt 
wtek enou^ not to care how soon it came I knew not 
wheiice, to send me I knew not where. 

My whole soul at one time seemed unveiled to me. I 
law myself in all my naked reality. - My good and my bad 
qoalities aj^ared held up to a mirror, at which I gazed 
with avidity, and saw each fragmentary error and virtue 
distinct and apart. 

No man who lives at home, and reads by his fireside 
stories of shipwreck and losses at sea, of men saved by 
miracles, of rails floating under a burning sun for days long 
and weary, hot, blast-furnace, broiling, maddening days — 
of ships on fire, and men rescued therefrom — can concieve 
what is experienced by the cast-away on the wide and path- 
less ocean, where man travels and leaves no trail, and dies 
and leaves no stone to mark the little spot where his small 
share of dust and ashes repose. 1 speak of what I have 
..felt; and every moment oi thai mg)ni — Q^«t^ ^^>\^^\^ 

10* 



114 nn siA or loi, o» .' 

erery prayer, every wish, every panoramic picture of wluft 
might he, every strange supposition of possibility — is vrv^ 
idly impressed upon my brain as if it were yesterday. 

Though I was nearly at the end of that long and weari« 
some day of three months and more which occurs in this 
region, the sun being never quite below the horizon, the 
night was still not real. I only call it so from habit, because 
tli^re is no other division of time I am so fiimiliar with. 

I never found it more wearisome in its effects, than upon 
the water in a small boat. On my island, and in the ship, 
I had shelter where my eyes could be relieved, where I 
could create artificial darkness. But on the cold oceaa 
waves, there it was, that eternal sun, mom, noon, and night, 
now gradually becoming at midnight less distinct, but still 
there forever on the distant edge of the horizon, in all the 
huge grandeur caused by its proximity to the earth. 

But what was all this to me now, helpless, half-delirious, 
half-mad, floating at the will of the wind over that horrid 
sea, without hope or light beaming on my soul ? 

There was one comfort, however; death was coming 
rapidly upon me, and soon I should be where the wicked 
cease from troubling, and the weary are at rest 

Once or twice there came a puff, a gust of wind, which 
seemed about to cast me headlong into the sea. The boat 
shook violently, and had I not been lying down, would prol>> 
ably have upset. But the way in which I reclined made 
me act as ballast on the frail bark, which rocked several 
times to and fro, and then again settled into its own steady 
and gliding course. 

Whenever this occurred, there was a puff of wind, which 
I felt across my face with considerable relief, as the general 
state of the atmosphere had been during my voyage of dis* 
covery rather sultry than otherwise, a circumstance that had 
considerably added to my sufferings. 

But the agony of body was little to the savage agony of 
mind which sometimes tortured me ; an agony that brought 
to my soul sensations and ideas of so discordant a nature that 
I felt quite ashamed. I wanted to chase the Phantom Ship^ 
and striking one of its planks, let in the water, and sink all 
the crew, out of revenge ; I wanted to rouse myself up^ and ^ 



THA JkRCTlQ AI>YJ(irXI7BfiR8. 115 

tdnraiing mj eail, to head to the south-east, where lay my 
own dear native land. Who can say what schemes I did 
not fancy, what plans I did not forge in my brain ? 

I started suddenly. A strange sound met my ears — 
breakers were close ahead — a shoal, or land ? I raised my 
sinking frame, and found myself carried by a flood tide up 
a river, which took its rise on the plains of a low island 
of considerable extent, to which my guardian angel had by 
some onseen agency directed my boat 

I soon strack on a mud-bank close to the shore, to 
wliich with* great difficulty I crawled, roused to nuHneutary 
strength and vigor by the surprise and renewed hope which 
was infused into my frame by this most fortunate and 
remarkable escape. 

And yet I stumbled and fell, as soon as I touched the 
shore, from sheer, from utter exhaustion. 



CHAPTER XII. 



KT ADTENTUBBS ON THS NSW ISLAND AND MT TOT* 
AaS BOMB. — AN EXTRAORDINARY DISCO YERT. 

I FBLT almost dead as I lay on that low beach breathing 
with difficulty, and indeed fully expecting to die. I did not 
see how I was to move again, and yet so powerful is nature 
at the age at which I then was, that I soon began to rouse 
myself, and' to sit half up. I was on the edge of a little 
rivulet that fell into the larger stream — it was a small and 
pellucid rivulet, flowing on a sandy bottom, with some plant 
with large leaves floating continually away as it were on the 
surface, and yet firmly rooted to the ground ; it had some 
stOBted willows, too, upon its banks, with thin, long leaves, 
and some roots and briers, that bore a kind of berry not un* 
like the mulberry — but very small, very wild, and very 
unripe and yet one or two had the deeper color of maturity 
almost Qpon them. 



116 ' ma tsAor ic% 09 

I picked a few, I drank of the clear water, and I felt re- 
newed strength and vigor — that is to say, in comparisoii 
to what I had experienced during the latter half of the long 
and weary hours that had elapsed since I had departed from 
my island, which, hy comparison with that which I had 
found, was at all events my home. 

It is singular, even under such circumstances as those in 
which I was placed, to note the wondrous effect of this magic 
word. I had hut a barren island, a cave, a few articles of 
use, and a small portion of food, and yet I felt that it was 
my Arctic Home, and one which I should be ]^ad again to 
find and abide in for the present, so wearied was I with my 
effort to escape from my miserable, solitary, and disconso* 
late state. So much so, that I doubt if at that time I woaU 
have again tried even the most encoura^g mode of 
escape. 

I remained very weak for several days, during which I 
fed on mulberries, on a few shell-fish, which I found when 
I began to crawl about, and on some coarse wild chiooory 
which I traced out on the borders of the streamlet I slept 
beneath a little hut of willow boughs. Sometimes I thought, 
with fear and trembling, of the wild beasts which .might 
dwell on that island ; but my state of mind was in general 
such that this troubled me but little. I had reached a point 
at which fear was a strange and foreign sentiment. 

The island, as I soon found on walking about the third 
day, was covered by that rich arctic vegetation which has 
60 often excited the admiration and astonishment of- the bold 
and persevering men who have adventured since my time 
into these wondrous seas. There were, it is true, no trees, 
no shrubs, nothing but grass, weeds, a stunted willow or two, 
and the wild mulberry, or rather blackberry bush. 

The fourth day I felt stronger, and began to think of once 
more braving the sea, to return to my island home. While 
waiting, however, for a favorable wind, I determined to visit 
my new territory, which I began to look on in the light of 
a colony to be occasionally visited and kept in communica- 
tion with the mother country. At times, I almost thought 
of establishing myself there ; but the great difiiculty was, 
Jiow to construct a winter habitation. 



TBMc ARiJTlO ▲DT]^XUli£RS. 117 

. A Mef ewminrndon soon oonvinoed me that it was not to 
te Ihoaght of as a winter residence. It was sandy, there 
was no rock, and I saw at once that at times it was almost 
submerged in water. The springs which supplied the river 
appeared to be the last to freeze up in the winter, so that I 
eould cleariy discover the layers upon which the frost took 
tfect one i^ter another. 

■' It was marshy, damp, and therefore unwholesome. In 
my old island, I complained of too much fire ; here I was 
in danger of too much water. If in one place I was likely 
to be smokedr out, here I might very prudently dread being 
drowned like a rat 

Still it seemed such a pleasant place that I was loath to 
leave it, and I promised myself often the pleasure of re« 
tiuming to it, if my life was indeed to be frittered away in 
these desolate and lonely regions. 

There were a great many birds on the island, of which I 
killed a large quantity with my oars, and found a very large 
number of eggs, which proved a great comfort to me in my 
peeoliar and painful position. I saw many signs, also, of a 
kind <^ hare or wild rabbit ; but the animal was too swifl for 
me, and I never succeeded in capturing or even in seeing 
one. Still this, and the suspicion that there were beavers, 
aiOQsed all my latent Nimrodic propensities, and I deter* 
mined to make an early sporting tour on the island. 

It was much frequented by the larger kind of seals, &c., 
and this, too, was a very great encouragement. 

I determined in my mind to spend a large portion of the 
winter in building a more manageable and secure boat, in 
which I could easily make the run between the islands in a 
morning, the distance being not more than twenty miles. 

I did not, however, spend the whole time in building 
eastles in the air. I reflected calmly on the duties to be 
performed in my old island, and principally on the prepara* 
tions for winter, which it would be necessary to make. 
There was more fish to be caught and dried, more game to 
be killed, more wood and coals to be found, my cave to be 
arranged^ and many other things too numerous to be alluded 
to beforehand. 

I lost no time, therefore. I dried m^ b\T&%\ Y^Vi^fs^n^ 



lift tn tiA or 10% om 

eggs; I loaded my boat with them, still oohf waltit^ ifhe 
morning that should bring with it a steady and favorabUF 
breeze. I collected some grass, too, which I covered ap thoh 

cggjJ with. "^ 

It was about the tenth day, when I made ther agreeablo 
discovery that there were reindeer on the bland. I sawii' 
mother and her young one, always together, but keeping at- 
a respectable distance from me, having some dread, prob- 
ably, of my figure, or having been previously shot si, hf^ 
man. I followed them patiently, made traps for them with 
willow boughs, but all in vain. They were too cunnii^- 
for me. ■ 

I got the &wn close up in a comer once, and was very 
nearly- paying dearly for my rashness, as the mother then ■^■ 
rush^ boldly up, and began striking at me with her h<HrfMb' - 
I was obliged to defend myself with my oar, and it was cmlj ^ 
when the fawn was safe off that I was released from my^- 
dangerous combat I tried once to close with her with my'^- 
hlinting-knife, but the beast was too wary for me. 

^About an hour later, the wind I had been expecting came^- ' 
and cautiously entering my boat, I breathed a fervent 
prayer, and pushed off in the direction of Desolation Island. 
The sea was smooth dnd jquite open ; there was not an ice* ^ 
berg or a floe to be seen ; ,the sun shone brightly on the 
waters, and I felt quite invigorated and hopeful. I was 
tossed somewhat with my cockle-shell of a boat on the 
smallest waves, but I was never in very imminent danger. 
Despite the haze, which seemed perpetually to hang in that 
direction, I could soon see the island with its hills, and per- 
ceived, also, that I was making for it in a direct line. 

I can scarcely describe the sensations which came over ' 
me as I neared my wild and desert home. It was not joy^ - 
it was not pleasure, it was not happiness ; it was relief, rest, 
repose of mind. There, at all events, I had many things 
that were necessary and useful to man, shelter for the weary ' 
winter which could not be far distant now, and the thoughts' 
of which made me involuntarily shudder. I believe in my - 
heart I had little hope of getting over the rigorous season 
alive ; but I did not allow this fancy to annoy me ottetL; 
Ba&cient unto the day was the evil thereof 



TBS i^CTIC ADTBNTtmSBS. 119 

- I Qoold aeon distinguish my signal on the shore, my pole, 
nj bear^B head, the opening of the bay, the place where my 
hot was, and in' the distance the sulphur spring, over which 
bnng always a little cloud of vapor from the warm pool. 

I entered a small bight of deep water near the mouth of 
the hay, pushed my skm canoe close to the land, and leaped 
on shore* 

I never understood why something did not break, why 
lomething did not burst, in the deep Receptacles of my brain. 

A boat had been there during my absence, a large boat— 
there was the mark of its prow upon the shore, and there 
the marks of human footsteps, and there a fire they had 
made, and the bones and remains of a tleer they had shot 
and eaten. It was a maddening sight. During my ab« 
senoe^ then, relief had come ; some one had landed to search 
tor me, or to discover at least what my signal-pole upon 
that abandoned shore meant. And I was not there ; I had 
departed, and they had doubtless gone away, under the im- 
pression that some one had been wrecked on that island 
and perished* ■ • . 

Th^ were then gone, and such would be their report, 
that DO one would come again to that wild and desolate 
spot They would say that they had found traces of some 
unfi>rtnnate recluse on a volcanic isle, and that was all ; and 
they would print this, and ever after, any ships sailing that 
way would avoid the place as dangerous, and spare all 
Beireh as useless. 

I felt that I could have gone mad. 

But I landed my stores, pulled my boat up on the beach, 
and prepared to visit the whole island in search of some 
memorial, some sign of the persons who had happened upon 
my wild retreat My heart beat violently, my brain seemed 
on fire, as I advanc^ towards my Esquimaux hut, which 
was closely covered up as usual, while my wood pile was 
bat little invaded; and yet actually — yes, it was not a 
dream — a slight smoke arose from the place where I was 
nsoally in the habit of making my fire. 

The visitors to the island had but just gone ; their vessel 
could scarcely be out of sight ; and had I but arrived one 
day sooner, I should have accompanied iViem. 



120 ' * TBE SEA OP rci^ Ofl 

It was of no me repining, and I knew it ; hut it waa with 
great difficulty that I hitnight mj mind to think serkAOly 
on any thing apart from this terrible disappointment. 1 
knew that I had now^yery little time before me-— that'tfae 
winter would soon be coming on apace ; and jet I felt -in- 
clined to let every thing take its chance, and to do Botfiing 
for my preservation and safety. 

But having 4»oked and eaten some dried bear's meat 
and some eggs, which, after my long abstinence fixHn «ny 
thing but raw food, was a great treat, I felt revlTed, and 
made up my mind to visit my cave, where my treasures 
were collected, and to enter into calculations there with re-* 
gard to what other food would be required for the winter. 

I accordingly took my arms from their shelter in the kat 

— my gun mechanically, because I had no powder left to 
make it useful, and turned my steps towards the salphnr 
pool. 

All traces of the band of sailors that had landed on tiie 
island ceased at my hut, around which the land was prinei- 
pally^tones, and therefbre lefl no mark. I had not, how- 
ever, proceeded above a hundred yards, before my eyel 
began to grow dim, my knees to shake under me, my whole 
frame to quiver with excitement, and my mind to be affect- 
ed to a degree that made me weep tears that came welling 
up from the very bottom of my heart. I hardly knew 
what to think ; I hardly knew what was the meaning of 
my own tears — of my singular emotion ; but I stood still, 
my hanc[s clasped, and gazing — ay, like Robinson Crusoe 

— at the imprint of a foot ! 

It was not the imprint of two feet — and yet it was clear- 
ly repeated along the road to the cave, as far as I could 
see — it was one single foot, as if of a man who had hopped 
along for a wager — a' large, broad, sprawling foot But, 
then, how was it there was but one foot — a single foot ? 
and what was that strange little hole alongside, as of one 
who walked with a thick stick ? 

I had seen such a sign before, often ; but it was too wild 
a thought to think of How could he have come here? 
How could he be on this desert island ? By ^at means 
could be have gained a footing in this place ? 



THS JLR€TIC ADVENTURER*. 121 

And jet it was truly amazing — I began to be utterly 
bewildered. Was I on some enchanted isle, surrounded bj 
phmntasms and visions, or was I taking leave of my senses ? 
No ! There was the foot, there th^ mark of the stick the 
man might have leaned upon ; but — O, was it not the 
Inick of an old man with a wooden leg, and of an old man 
whose walk was iamiliar to me ? 

I was sure of it — it must be he ; and, yet, how had he 
come therq ? How had he accompanied these men ? And 
then he, too, must have gone away, convinced, that all was 
over, that I was irrevocably lost, and my friends would say 
prayers to Heaven for me, and give up all hope. 

Why had I left the island ? As I write I feel over again 
all the confusion, the wild distraction that came over me 
then. I was certain, in the deep recesses of my heart, that 
that was a fiuniliar foot, belonging to a familiar face. But 
what was the use of dreaming ? — so, heaving a deep sigh, 
I advanced on n^y way. 

Amazing ! on a stone, his back a little turned from me, 
^ying his sandal string or something, clothed in skins, with 
a strange tall hat, a perfect pile of clothes, is seated — a 
man ! Yes ! — be still, my beating heart — it is a man, a 
feUow-creature — wild or civilized, gentle or savage, it is a 
man. Once more I gaze on my kind ; once more I appear 
likely to have call for speech. I know not what to do. I 
advance, I stumble over a stone. 

He rises with a disjointed jerk, he starts, cocks a gun^ 
and points it I hold up my hands without firearms, hav- 
ing dropped my gun in my terrible excitement. 

**What cheer, messmate? Speak up — who are you? 
Where do you hail from ? " cries the other in plain English. 

Tes I There he is, with a wooden leg, and the old voice 
— there is no doubt about it. I made a rush towards him^ 
and sunk fainting on the ground. 

** Stop ! Stop ! " whispered I in a low tone, as I recov- 
ered my senses, speaking without opening my eyes, as if I 
feared to chase away the dream, '^ is it you ? " 

** Yes, my master, it's Stop," blubbered he ; " but what 
in the name of fate has sent you playing at Crusoe up in 
these horrid regions ? " 

n 



12t THE SEA OF ICE, OB 

^ And what," said I, wildlj, ^ what has sent joa hert 
aaerme?" 

^ Well, I can't say, Master Henry ; but here I is, and 
here I means to stay, if so be as we can't get off. But gel 
up, and be of good cheer. It's a jolly l^ind of place, too ; 
that 'ere cave is first rate. But do teU me how you came 
here?" 

I could not answer yet To hear him speak was too de- 
licious, and then I scarcely could believe it yet It could 
not be — it was impossible. I felt it A human voice on 
Desolation Island, and that voice the voice of a frieu^ was 
something too wild to credit, even though I heard it 

** Spe«&, Stop I speak I let me hear your voice — I have 
not heard even my own for weeks." 

^ Poor Master Henry ! " — he muttered, dashing away 
the falling tears. 

^ So it is you, Stop ? " I asked, almost timidly. 

^< Myself, and no mistake. At my post. Man Friday, 
and ready to do duty." 

<< Merciful Gk)d, I thank thee for all thy great goodness, 
and for this above all." 

" Gret up, sir," said Stop, affectionately, " and tell me all 
about it. I can't see yet how you 'came here at all. It 
beats me all up. Pm brought up by the run, run aground, 
en my beam ends, altogether lost." 

I did get up, and picking up my gun, walked slowly back 
towards the Esquimaux hut, my heart too full for speech, 
never wearied of gazing at my comrade, who had met me 
thus on that lone and deserted strand, at a moment when I 
thought myself abandoned by all the world. All my hopes 
of escape, all my views for the future, the very dream of 
home, was now renewed. Alone, I had been helpless. 
With a companion, I felt strong indeed. 

" Sit down," said Stop, stirring up the fire, putting on 
some more fuel, and then seating himself on a stone at my 
feet " Now tell me all about it." 

I roused myself from my semi-stupor, and sitting up) 
looked at Stop curiously, still almost Qoubting his existence^ 
fancying it must be a disturbed and wild dream from which 
J .should suddenly awake and find him gone, and myself 



THB ABCTIC ADYEKTURERS. 1^3 

once moire alone, entirely alone, on that bleak island in the 
Arctic Seas. 

^ Don't look so, Master Henry," said good old Stop, 
whose costume seemed to support my view of his unreality. 

He had on a coat of skins, thick loose trousers, a pointed 
cap with the fur out ; he wore in his belt a huge pair of 
pistols ; he had an axe, and a knife, and a huge gun — a 
double-barrelled gun — and a shot-pouch, and a powder- 
horn that was quite fabulous in size. 

** Do not look so. Master Henry," he repeated ; ^ it's all 
right., Tell me your story, and then we'U confer — we'll 
argue the point about getting away from this blessed place." 

^ When did you leave England ? " 

« In April " 

^ How was my father ? " 

." Jolly," replied Stop, heartily ; " quite jolly and hearty." 

^ And my dear moUier ? " I continued, still with a fixed 
and anxious look. 

^ Anxious, but full of hope — she says she knows youll 
grtbac^ " 

** God bless her ! And my dear cousin — my dear Fan- 
ny, how is she ? " I asked, brightening up a little. 

"Well — a little pale, 'cause she don't see you every 
day ; but, Lord love you, she'll be hearty enough when we 
gets home." 

" Shall we ever get home. Stop ? " said I, shuddering. 

''I should like to know the blessed reason why we 
gbouldn't," replied Stop; "I don't see no great thing to 
hinder it." 

" Indeed, Stop, I can almost believe any thing now. To 
see you, to hear you, to talk to you of those I love, is some- 
thing so astounding, so beyond all my calculations, that I 
feel again how good Heaven has been unto me, and why I 
should indeed hope on, hope ever." 

** In course you will — now. Master Henry, are you go- 
ing to tell me all about this here little accident as has laid 
yon <m your beam ends ? " 

I began slowly, calmly, now. I was convinced it was 
reality. There was my old friend, my old man Friday. I 
did not know how he came, I could not ima^e any thin^ 



Sii TBB SEl. OF lOS, OR 

about it ; bnt it was so, and I bowed with a glad heart, and 
thanked Grod for this great blessing. 

I told him' all my story, every particle of it, all my ad- 
Tentures since I left home ; and the good old man listened 
without once interrupting me. At last I ceased. I had 
reached the last, my meeting with himself. 

^ Well, if this ain't the queerest start ever I heard on. 
I believes all about Crusoe now — I do — yes — it's no use 
telling me it's all fun — it can't be fun — it's too true.** 

" But, my dear friend, now for your adventures. How 
came you here?" I said, shaking him once more by the 
hand heartily, almost convulsively. 

** Well, do you see. Master Henry, when you was gone, 
I felt a sort of odd — just like a fish out of water — noth- 
ing did me good — I couldn't smoke my pipe no more.' I 
was uneasy, you know, unhappy, and took to chewing hor- 
rid. ' Well,' says I to myself, ' this won't do, old boy. 
Cheer up. What's wrong ? Ah ! order to quit come at 
last? Shan't move on? No. Well, I turned it over, 
and you see, I turned it over so often, I found it out at 
last." . 

" And what was it. Stop ? " I asked gently of the old 
man. 

'^ Idleness, Master Henry, just idleness — and that's what 
it was. Says I, 'Tim, this won't do. Your hammock's 
strung wrong — you're in the wrong berth ; turn out. 
Your berth's alongside Master Henry.' * But you're old,' 
Bays my other me — * you can't do it It can't be done.' 
* It must,' says I, ' and what's more, it shall.' So I deter- 
mined to come and look you up." 

" Grod bless you. Stop," I repeated, wiping my eyes, which 
were ever flowing, despite every effort to check them. 

" Don't talk so, Master Henry. How was it to be done? 
There was the stopper on me. Says I, * Old boy, this will 
never do. Never try, never have.' So down I goes to the 
Three Jolly Sailors, and I turns up an old man-of-war's 
man like myself, who had got a good berth, captain of a 
whaler, and I just told him I had a mind to go whaling. 
Didn't he laugh? my stars ! * What, with that old stump ? ' 
^tjrs he. ^ It's true I've got but one fin ; but then I'm A 1, 



TBS ARCTIC ADVEHrrUREBS. 125 

i^rm skipper, Tm on the quarter-deck, and I can give orders 
with never no arm at all.* ' And I can take a pleasure-trip, 
. old sea-cow, with never no legs/ says I. * O,' says he, 
-^^ that's your tack, is it, my old sea-horse ? ' — he was very 
fond of me, and always joked, — ^ you wants to pay your 
way. I thought you wanted to go seeking fortune at this 
time a day. All right — send up your traps — shilling 
a day for grub is all I shall charge you — you can hang up 
your hammock any where — rum I don't encourage on board 
my brig — never drink it myself, and don't want to see any 
one else do it. Had too much of it once — never could 
tackle to it since.' " 

^ He must have been a good fellow," said I, really inter- 
ested. 

** He was. A good sort of chap as you don't meet every 
day. Surly dog, sober, never wanted no liquor,' saved 
money, owned half the ship. * Well,' says I, * if you never 
.drinks no rum, why is it you put up at the Three Jolly 
Sailors ?' — * 'Cause I look after my men. Stop — I settles 
down in the middle of it, and there ain't half the drinking 
there used to be. I acts as wet blanket, they says ; but I 
don't care. Stop, many a poor woman and child gets a 
meal of victuals through your wet blankets. I am a wet 
blanket'" 

^ That's a good idea," said I, laughing. ^ I never saw a 
wet blanket in that light before." 

^^ Nor I. But I think he was right, after all," replied 
Stop, gravely. 

** To be sure he was," continued I. " In this cold and 
desert pl&ce I have found that it is clothing and plenty 
of wholesome food that keeps one alive and warm. I 
do not think I shall ever care for warm drinks or spirits 
again." 

" Won't you, though ? " said Stop, curiously. 

*< No. But go on." 

** Well, we sailed right away north to catch the whales ; 
and didn't I keep a lookout for the Fair Fanny f I'd 
been up here before in my younger days, and I knew the 
ground. So I brings old Spithead up here, and two months 
ago we meets the Fair Fanny. 1 need not tell you, Master 

11* 



If6 TBI tkjL OF iCB, om 

Henry, how I felt. They had tried to find you, bat didn't; 
they had seen a burning mountain, and now they were 
going home to tell their tale. They wanted me to go with 
them ; no, I said, I would not I didn't dare to £Eice your 
fiftther and mother. So we worked our way through the 
ke, fished about here, and at last we came close here in 
duise of a whale. A man sees yon bear -figure-head, and 
away we come, ' pull away heartily,' and find you had been 
here, but were gone. They wouldn't stop, but I would. I 
told 'em to fetch me when they started, or to call again 
next spring. They told me as I was a old madman, but 
I didn't care ; so they gave me my chest, some powder, shot, 
some grub, and here I am, and thank God for it, for I have 
found my dear young master." 

^ How can I ever repay such devotion ? " said I, embrft> 
cing him. 

^ By keeping up your spirits, Master Henry : it's low 
spirits puts half on 'em off the hooks. We'll get off, if ai 
how they don't fetch us. Never mind how, but we'll 
get off." 

And with this earnest assurance he rose to see to oar 
dinner. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

STOP AND THE BEAB. 

I CAN scarcely describe all the different sensations that 
came upon me, when I by degrees became thoroughly con- 
vinced that I was no longer alone, that I had my old friend 
Stop with me, and plenty of powder and shot, and ship 
biscuit, and some tea, and many things to which I had been 
long a stranger. I do not compare these latter with the 
blessing of a companion, but still they were pleasant in the 
extreme. And then Stop was so patient, laborious, and 
handy ! He knew every thing, and could do any thing. 

** What think you of my cave ? " said I, after a few days 



THl AWiTlC ▲DT^tUBERS. 127 

had dapsed, during which we had hunted, fished, and li^ 
in wood and ooaL* 

« First rate.- 
- ** Do you think we can winter there ? " 

« Why not ?" 

^ Bot the sulphur will he unpleasant," I replied, and then 
explained my plans for obviating this inconvenience and 
making the cave habitable. 

" The very thing," he said ; " that comes of our playing 
at Bobinson Crusoe, eh ? Learnt something then ? " 

^Yes, indeed I did. Stop, though I never thought it 
would prove of use to me." 

^ One never can tell. Master Henry, what may turn up. 
Who knows? Esquimaux may turn up next — dogs — 
dedge — all that ~- won't we walk into them, and away we 
go, tally ho!" 

'■ ^ I am afraid the volcano has frightened them away," I 
replied ; ^ they used to come here plentifully enough once." 
-■ **And they'll come again," said Stop, heartily. "You 
say this island is full of game — good — them chaps knows 
it, and they'll come again — you be quite sure of that." 

** I hope so," I repUed. 

^ So do I — and hoping ain't no harm ever. Suppose we 
hunts to-day. A couple of them deer will make some fine 
dried venison, guvemer." 

" With all my heart — I do not often see them, but there 
IB a fiock, and they keep their distance up in the valley. I 
saw two old ones and two young ones yesterday." 

** Kill the old ones, catch the young ones — that's it," 
said Stop, heartily. 

And so it was agreed; and after breakfast, we armed 
oorselves, and away we went, Stop trotting along with his 
wooden leg, with fdl the vigor and energy of a young man. 
We very soon reached the foot of the HtSe hill at the mouth 
of the valley. 

^£U>llo! guvemer," said Stop; "here's a pretty stiff 
place. How is we going to do this ? " 

" I must go up first," said I, " and haul you up afterwards." 

• " A boat was lent on shore to procure turf or peat for fuel, and some 
pteimi of tolerably good coal were found.** — Farr^fi Fini Vo-^a^e. 



128 TdB SEA OF iCBy OB 

And up I went with an agility and activity that sur- 
prised even myself. When I had climbed to the top of the 
little hill, I held out my cord, which Stop caught hold of, 
and in this way got up without much difBiculty. 

Here we separated. I took to the left, crossing the 
stream by means of the wild and curious natural bridge 
over the water, and Stop followed up the valley to the right 
We both moved with extreme caution, for there away in the 
valley, the rich and genial vegetation of which really sur- 
prised me, we could distinctly see a small herd of deer. 
LfOw and slowly we bent and moved, until as if by common 
consent we halted. We were within a short distance of the 
timid animab, and they — startled a little — held up their 
heads and snuffed the air. 

''Fire!" said Stop, quite excited at the sight of the 
valuable game. 

We fired at the same instant, and two tall deer fell, we 
being so near that our aim was deadly. 

" Bray vo. Master Harry I " cried Stop, across the valley ; 
^ that was a jolly good shot Now then to catch them young 
uns. Heave ahead, Master Harry, and give us that long 
rope of yourn." 

I crossed over and joined him. 

'^ What are you going to do ? " asked I, laughing at the 
solemnity of the old fellow. 

'^ Groing to do a little bit of lasso business," replied he, 
gravely. 

The two fawns had not yet moved away from the bodies of 
their mothers, — or rather mother, for we afterwards found 
it to be a, whole family, — and were gazing stupidly at us, 
not knowing whether to flee or not 

" Now, Master Henry, if we can only catch these here 
chickabiddies, we're all right — they'll be company for us in 
the winter ; and perhaps, if game's scarce, they'll give us 
food to escape with in the spring." 

" But I do not see how you can catch them," said I, 
shaking my head. 

'* Wait a while," replied Stop, who began walking on in 
his funny way towards the fawns. 

I sat down, for I was tired, and watched him. The little 



THB AROTIO ADVENTURERS. 129 

animalfl did not seem veiy timid—- they were, as it were, 
stunned ; and then Stop made a strange noise, imitating the 
cry of the female reindeer, which made the little ones hold 
op their heads and stand quite stilL Stop chose this instant, 
and away went the cord swinging ; and, to my utter aston- 
ishment^ the two &wns, which had heen standing close 
together, as if for protection, fell on the ground "helpless. 
The ooxd had gptxe right round them, and pulled them to 
the ground. 

** rve done it beautifhl I " he cried merrily ; *' come along, 
goTemer." 

I followed and assisted him to tie the fawns together in 
such a way that, though they could walk, yet it was impos- 
sible for them to escape. 

^ What shall we do with them now ? " said I, as we began 
to skin the large ones. 

^ This here is our grazing gFbund, and the back cave's 
oar stable," replied Stop ; ^ we can leave 'em here in the 
day, and lock 'em up at night." 

« So we can." 

^And then, guvemer, we must make hay — no time to 
lose — go ahead. These here quarters of ven'son is prime ; 
won't they do us good this blessed winter! Why, they 
weighs at least seventy pounds each." 

I proposed we should carry them down to the shore. 

Stop acquiesced, and we fastened one by its heels to our 
two guns, which wq rested on our shoulders, and away we 
went down towards the mouth of the valley. We then 
rolled* the animal down the hill, and followed cautiously 
after. Having crept down and resumed our load, which, 
with one or two rests, we conveyed down to the shore, near 
my underground hut, we began to prepare it for being dried 
and stowed away. I was sitting on the edge of the hut, 
while Stop had selected a large stone, and there we were, 
cutting, scraping, and quartering the meat with all the 
science of which we were capable. 

" I never thought to turn butcher," said I gravely, for I 
' did not like my trade. 

** No more didn't I ; it's all a chance, you see. A fellow 
-must do many things he don't like, and butcV\m\\^\<& ^x\& ^ 
them. I expect we'll have to turn laWots, c)cJte\i\«T%^\wc\\- 



190 mm 8BA OF 101, OK 

en, boatmen, all sorts of things, if we stops in {his preckms 
place*" 

** Who knows ? " replied I, for I was moodj and thoogfa^- 
ful ; " sextons, perhaps ? " 

** No," said Stop, solemnly ; ^ no. I expect one is pre> 
served precious long in this place. It's cold and it's Milt; 
and I don't expect as one ever dies here. What's this ? " 
he asked, taking a small bag^ which lay at his feet 

** Sulphur and charcoal," said I, laughing, as I explained 
mj strange experiment in fishing. 

'^ A queer start, that," he replied, much amazed ; ^ itfa 
wonderful what one learns in these places. Who'd a-thoa^ 
of sulphur for bait in any civilized place ? " 

" No one. The Lord preserve us ! " I cried, as I started 
to my feet, made one bound to the guns, slipped, and felly 
spraining my ankle so violently that I could not move. 

« Eh ? — how ? — what ? " said Stop, rushing to pksk me 
up from the ground. 

'^ A bear!" I replied, my eyes closing for one instant & 
actual agony. 

" Never mind," said Stop, coolly, though I saw him, as I 
opened my eyes, peep at the animal and shudder a little ; 
" you get up, and Til manage him." 

I got up with his assistance, but it was as much as I oould 
do to sit up. I was of no use whatever in the struggle 
which was about to take place. The bear, a huge mon- 
ster, — probably the male which had left the extremity of 
the island, where it got its living by fishing, in search of its 
mate and young, — was coming slowly along at not more 
than three hundred yards distant. Stop coolly picked op 
his gun, clutched the bag of sulphur and charcoal, felt for 
his knife and axe, and then began hopping towards the bear 
with so droll and comical a run, that, under any other cir- ^ 
cumstances, I must have laughed. As it was, I trembled 
with fear lest my old friend should, especially with the de- 
fect of the wooden leg, be unable to contend with so power- 
ful and even agile a beast as the great polar bear.* 

* To kill a bear is no uncommon feat for one man, though certain in- 
credulous people doubt it. The following is the account of a cohteit, 
from the pen of Webber : " So seating, or rather stretching ourselyei 
upon §ome mossy boulderB, ftcaUexed axoMxv^, Ntct Oc^axxaAl n«.^ the aeizt 



THE ARCTIC ADVUNTUSCRS. 131 

I could not at first understand why he had run away 
from my neighborhood ; but I soon disc6vered that he was 
•bout to use the little palisade which I had erected as a 
means of protection in the contest He soon reached it, 
and hung his bag on the centre poles, which left a passage 
for himself. He then cocked his gun and waited. 

Tlie bear looked very undecided. Sometimes he walked 
on four legs, looking to the right and left, then onward, and 
growling; then he would sit upon his hind quarters and 
look around. This mode of proceeding the huge beast re- 
peated several times. At last he approached to within a 
small distance of Stop, whom he now appeared to see, and 
gave a terrible growl. 

^ Fire ! " roared I, much alarmed at the prospect of a 
near contest 

But I did not know Stop. 

^ Silence," cried he, in return, shaking his fist at me, and 
Btill looking at the bear. The animal was sitting up, look- 
log round, it seemed, to find where my voice came ^om, or 
smelling, perhaps, the game which we had been cutting up, 
when Stop gave him one barrel. 

The responsive howl of the bear was something terrible 

half hour .reiy cosily, although an occasional eddy of the wind would 
hixnff up to our ears the distant babble of the hounds in the yalley, and 
tike long, mellow wail of the driver's horn, both showing the game was 
on foot; yet neither of us rose, even; so entirely had we become cloyed 
of this sport ! Soon the full chorus of hounds burst upon us, seemingly 
close at hand; still neither of us rose. Suddenly we heard a heavy 
crashing through the underbrush, and before we had time to think, an 
ciMHrmons black bear rushed past us. * Hah ! new game,* I exclaimed, 
as we both sprang to our feet and fired our rifles after the unwieldy brute. 
It was evidently hit, but kept on with undiminished speed across the 
lid^e. The dogs, wiui bristles erect and savage yells, came pouring after, 
while we, thus unexpectedly aroused to the wilaest excitement, snouted 
like madmen as we followea after on foot, loading our guns while we ran. 
We knew the bear was wounded, and would take to the first large tree it 
to. The comb of the ridge was about a mile wide here, and the 



DDond a general level. We heard the dogs baying furiously now. 
•He's treed already ! ' chuckled Charlie. * Let's approach cautiously.' 
We feared it might resort to its common trick when treed by the do^s ; 
seeing the hunt^s approach, it rolls itself up into a ball, and dropping 
to the ground, makes off again. We, however, managed to get fair shots, 
and brought it down. It was a very large animal of the species, and we 
wound a merry blast, both loud and long, in honor of our unexpected 
vmnpti. 



132 THE SEA OF ICE, OS 

— - the beast then gave one bound at the palisade, and 
another fearful cry arose as Stop fired his second barrel, 
right in the bear's mouth it appeared to me. Round came 
the animal behind the stakes, which luckily were de^ly 
embedded, so quickly that Stop could scarcely pass through 
the narrow aperture* which I had left for that purpose. The 
bear tried to follow ; *in vain, however — - the hole was too 
smalL 

Stop, just as his head passed through the aperture, gave 
him a blow with the axe, which he held in both hands, but 
at the same moment he fell. 

I literally screamed with horror. But he was up in an 
instant, and thrusting his hand into the bag, cast a whole 
handful of the corrosive compound into the animal's face. 

The yell of the wounded and blinded beast was terriUe ; 
he gnawed at the posts, and then, shaking himself violently, 
again rushed round the palisade, behind which Stop was 
doing his utmost to load his gun. I could not tell whether 
he succeeded or not, as the bear, guiding himself probably 
by the sense of smell, was on him again without a moment's 
delay. 

The scene was terrific and horrible. Stop, with his 
wooden leg, hopped about with an agility and ^energy which 
really surprised me, cutting with his axe, throwing hand- 
fuls of sulphur, and whenever he had an opportunity, 
trying to load his gun. The bear tried every way to 
get at him, whisked round the barrier, climbed over, it, 
made feints, roared, yelled, growled, and seemed actuated 
by madness. 

At length Stop fired at him again. The bear, which he 
had actually touched through the barrier, gave a fearful 
roar, dashed at the palisade, and down it went, carrying 
my poor unfortunate friend Stop with it. Despite my 
agony, my helplessness, my utter inability to walk, I rose, 
and began crawling towards them, my gun on my back, my 
pistols in my belt. I never, despite my dreadful sufierings, 
took my eyes off the gallant old fellow, whose devotion to 
me seemed likely to bring him to an unexpected and dread- 
ftil death. 

Stop clutched the bag as he fell, and in the other h$nd 



■raB ARCTIC ADVENTURERS. iSd 

held tbe ftxe. The bear oame upon him ; but Jreoeiving n 
handful 0f dust in bis eyes, •stood up, jelled, -and began 
^ shaking himself in a furious rage, which boded ill for poor 
6top. 19ad my generous friend not been crippled by 
having only one leg, he might now have easily escaped 
towards me, and have enabled me to take deliberate aim at 
the monster ; but he was afler the old sailor before he could 
more than steaidy himself on his legs, and Stop deliberately 
led bim away from me. The bear was badly wounded, and 
Rowing wei^ 4rom loss of blood, or the scene would soon 
have been over. As it was. Stop was able to face the 
savage and maddened animal, still throwing the corrosive 
powder into his mouth and eyes, whence it scattered over 
all his wounds, and still striking blows with his axe, which, 
however, seemed only to irritate and madden the huge 
brute. He tried still to leap, but his leaps werer not pow- 
erfbl ; and every now and then he rolled on the ground, as 
' if to shut up his wounds^ or get rid of the agony which, no 
doubt, he was suffering. 

And still I crawled on, in the desperate hope of assisting 
my friend. 

The struggle continued ; Stop struck out still, but weari- 
ly ; the bear seemed to take longer rests ; when suddenly, 
more maddened, I suppose, than ever, he gave a roar which 
made me almost start to my feet, and dashed headlong at 
the old sailor. Stop raised his axe with both hands, and 
aimed a furious blow. It told ; but as Stop gave it, he lost 
' his equilibrium, and fell into the awful and horrible hug of 
the arctic monster ! 

I shrieked, and closed my eyes. 

When I opened them, all was over. There they lay, 
"both still — motionless — the bear on top. Stop under. 
There was a low and horrid moaning, and that was all ; but 
' that moaning came from the bear. How I crawled — how 
long I took to do so — to the horrible scene of this fearful 
and unequal combat, I never knew. My b^ain took no 
note of time; the shock wa£ too dreadful — the change 
too sudden. I cared for nothing now. My friend, my 
companicm, my solace, my hope ^- there he lay, helpless, 
* masked, beneath the huge axid hleefloxka cax^idfi^ ^ ^Cco^ 

12 



IH THB 8SA OF IGSr 09: 

polar bear, which seemed to faaye resenred its visit for tbi 
time when - 1 had gained the inexpressible delight of # 
companion and a friend. 

** Stop I Stop I m J dear Stop I ** I cried, or rathte sobbed* 

^ What cheer, mj hearty ? ** said he, though very Bsdntlj:. 
^ Did him, though, big as he was. Tm just a little fainl^ 
but all right ; he's rather heavy." 

I could not reply ; the revulsion of feeling was too much 
for me. I could not help him — ^no, not I. I was helpless 
as a child, and I gazed mechanically at him, as by d^rees 
he disentangled himself from the weight of the bear, and 
pale, bloody, and torn, sat upright by my side. * 

^ Are you really unhurt ?" I askedyiiolding out my hand 
to him. 

'^ No bones broken, thank God ! He had me, though ; 
but he was weak, and my knife was long and sharp ; and 
there he is. Didn't he try to hug me, though ? Never saw 
such a brute. I hope there's no more on your precious 
island. It's warm work, Master Henry." 

I was in too much pain to reply ; but I smiled at him as 
well as I could, and never felt happier in my life than when 
I saw him get up, go wash himself and return, still pale 
and wearied, but whole in skin and bones, the blood being 
all that of the bear. 

'^ Now, then, guvemer, let's back to dinner ; a little bit 
of something to eat will do us good. I do feel rather faint." 

*^ But I cannot walk," said I, pointingrto my ankle. 

" There's the sledge," replied the oldfellow, heartily. 

And there it was, and he put me on it ; and, though it 
cost him dearly, for he was hardly able to draw me, still he 
did it ; and at last we came to the hut, where, when we had 
.taken refreshment, we crawled in and lay down, both in- 
capable of any more exertion that day. 

It was six hours later when I awoke, and found myself 
alone. 

" Stop ! " I cried. 

No answer. 

I lay still, for I guessed his errand. In about half an 
hour he returned. As I expected, he had been catching 
the deer and putting them into the cave, where he gave 



tM ABOtlC ADTtNTURBBS. 185 

(Bern a few handfiils of grass and some salt, and listened 
ihem in. 

He then brought some boiled sorrel and chiccory, which 
he gave me to eat, and bandaged my ankle, and then once 
more lay down beside me in the hut He remained silent 
for some time ; I thought he had gone to sleep, and did not 
disturb him. 

^ Guv'ner 1 ** at last he exclaimed. 

"Yes." 

^ Terrible day this," he said, as if musing ; ^ oughtn't 
we to fetum thanks — eh ? something of that sort of thing 

— eh?" 

^ I have, Stop, my dear friend — I have returned thanks 
heartily — but if you like I'll do so with you." 

** But do you see," cried Stop, "I — I — never learnt no 
pirayers." 

** What I " exclaimed I ; "it is not possible." 

* No I I never did," said Stop — "I was nobody's boy. 
Never had no father — no mother — no friends — was 
just knocked about at Portsmouth — did jobs — errands 

— got in prison once for begging when I was starving 
— ran to sea — been about all my life — and had no 
time for them sort of things. But I'm getting old, Master 
Henry, and I feels I ought to know something about these 
things— eh?" 

Here was a task, a glorious task before us — here was 
woriL for our vrinter evenings. I had not asked at home — 
it never struck me -^ about Tim's religious ideas. I knew 
he was very ignorant, but did not beUeve that he did not 
even know the Lord's Prayer. 

** Shall I teach you a prayer ? " said I. 

** With all my heart, Master Henry," he replied ; " I feels 
the want of it to-day." 

And I taught him the simple and beautiful prayer which 
is best suited to the poor in knowledge and the meek in 
spirit, like Stop ; and he learned it easily — that is, in two 
or three evenings he knew it perfectly, and would say it 
regularly every night. When his first lesson was over, we 
' taued about religion generally ; but I found that the good 
old man was almost beyond me here, bavm^ m \3da ^»(xn^ 



ef a yerj oreditable life, picked ap hose aad tbeve, by Ms 
and scrapSy very clear and defined nodons of his dotiefl mA 
hopes. 

We talked for some time seriooBljyand then Sto^ oeaieid, 
and I left him to his thoagbts. 

** Guv'ner," said he, suddenly; 

<" What is it?" replied I, starting — I had ahnostdozed 
off into a sleep again. 

"' About them deer/' he continued^ in a thonghtfiii kind 
of muttering tone* 

" WelL" 

*< Don't they draw sledges sometimes ? " he asked me, 
kk rather an excited vmce. 

" Yes I " replied I quickly. 

^ Then we'll try that plan^^ said he^ ^ I don't see why 
we shouldn't reach the main land in that way. We must 
feed 'em up and give 'em a little escefcise — ' and practise 
ourselves driving — but it'a to be dime— *yesy it'sr te be 
done — I know it is." 

'< I think so too," I answered; ^and, Stop, it's the most 
brilliant idea we have had yet It can bo done. We must 
take care of them." 

''That we will," said Stop; ''well fiitten 'em uprW^^ll 
give 'em exercise, and if we don't dine at homenextClhridt- 
mas twelvemonth, my name isn't Stop — that's alL" 

" I pray to Heaven that what you say may ba right ! " I 
replied fervently. 

" Good night. Master Henry," he said, musing. 

" Good night. Stop." 

And with this brilliant idea, this bri^t ra^ of hop% to 
cheer and support us, we turned round and sou^t vefiage in 
sleep. It was some time ere I was able to whdiy get ever 
the excitement roused by the idea; but at last I d^ and I 
did not awake until honest Stop called me to l^eakfkst 

I rose and found my ankle much relieved: by its long rest 
I was even able to walk in the course of the day, and next 
morning resumed my duties with alacrity, as winter waanow 
rapidly approaching, Mid the term of all out^«k)or work was 
Bearly over. 

We fished,, salted, smoked, cured; collected wood and 



Tm ABCTIC ADTSKTVRSR8. . 1&7 

efjoal; onptied the Esquimaax huts <^ their contents ; made 
kflj after some fashion ; indeed, we worked with ardor and 
sest up to the very last moment allowed us by the snow and 

poatj which soon began to manifest itself in a way that drove 
us wholly for shelter to our qave, whichy however, was as 
jet but ill prepared for our reception. 

.. We, however, went heartily to work to set our house 
in order. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

WINTEB.-— THE ESQUIMAUX. 

• 

The long and dazzling day, which with little intermission 
had now lasted three months, — I find from habit I oflen 
used the words day and night, though night really did not 
MOgty — was just over, and this warned us to be ready for 
the .winter season, when we should have a night to counter- 
balance this long light, even more wearisome with its con- 
tinual darimess than the unchanging brightness of the sun. 
We had, however, some little time to prepare for this, as the 
long night lasts from November to February, and it now 
wanted nearly six weeks of that time. 

Snow began to fall, the sea began to lose its waving mo- 
tion, and with extraordinary rapidity the winter came upon 
us. We were pretty well prepared for the severe season, 
both as to provisions, fuel, and lodging. 
: During the leisure hours which we could spare from 
hunting, fishing, and laying in coals and wood, we had pre- 
pared the cave for our reception. The fissure in the roof 
had been partly closed up, and the rest built over, so that 
the snow might not come in, and yet that the smoke might 
escape that way. 

The birds soon began flying over our island from the 
•north, but without stopping, as if they had been too far be- 
hindhand to have a minute to waste. It was painful to 
tee those happy creatures flying away ixoQi ^hia «fi\di v&.^ 

12* 



198 mB WBM, OV M% OB 

inhospitable regum towards tlM j^aasant sond^.niem saa 
and food awaited them^ while we wete bound to boitow 
in a hole in the earth, nneertain as to the possibility ol 
our passing through the xigefs and diffieultiea of an aretie 
winter. 

^ Don't be down now, gor'ner,'' woold Stop say; ^M 
nothing. Them Inrds is Inoky, I know. Btrt dbeer upy 
captain ; we ain't going to lay our bones here neither. We 
ain't no Robinson Crusoes, to stop thirty years in this blessed 
place. No. We'll start in the spring, that we wilL" 

^ I hope so, Stop ; your courage and hope are equal to 
your devotion and generosity; and I should not murmur 
when I have been so inexpressibly blessed. But 'tis sad to- 
feel that for so many months we shall be utterly shut up in 
that cave." 

^ Not shut up. I expect we'll have a run or two on the 
snow, and perhaps we'll have a bear^hunt to make as liTdty." 

*^ I don't £inoy yoa want any more bear hmaring^" said I^ 
laughing. 

'^ Don't I, though ; let 'em oome. With this plaee for a 
fort, I don't care for the biggest among 'cm. We'd oat* 
flank him." 

And let it not be supposed that, while we thus talked, wtf 
wasted our time. We were busily engaged in filling up 
our winter quarters all the while. 

* In our interior cave we had placed the deer, though we 
already began to fear that we should be unable to support 
them through the winter. We had laid in a veiy large 
stodc of hay, considering the difficulties of the labor, and 
we had left the animals to shift for themselves until the lasl 
moment But now they were driven into winter quarters 
like ourselves. , 

They were wonderfully tame in a very short thae, and 
this made us very unwilling to put one of than to deaths 
as we originally proposed. 

" No, I can't do it, guv'ner," said Stop ; " that brute looka 
at me so knowing — it does — as much as to s»y, *01d fol- 
low, you've took me, and you must keep me ' —^ so we musi 
let them live as long as we can." 

"< With all my b^" said I. 



XHE'ABOnO AI>¥BNTV»BR8. 189 

Our Mmpeme imd- btuaaoe oosduet in tliia particakur 
wm amply rewarded by the oompanionship thej afterwards 
proved to us. We found in them a constant and everlasfrp 
lAg atmuemeBt^ simply becaoae they were a change from 
the mcmotODy of the life we were compelled to live. Other 
ooasiderations^ howerer^ drove these thoughts from our 
minds for the present. 

There were many things to be thonght of, besides anuise- 
menft, by two such hermits as we were, with such a pros- 
pect as we had before us. 

It was quite possible that, when once the whole sea was 
frcmn up, we mights be visited by some of the prowling 
animal creation, whose scent would soon enable them to 
diioover our retreat. This caused us^ in the first phioe, to 
fortify our home. 

We had so arranged our door, by enlarging the fissure at 
the top, that we had to ascend six feet by steps to get in and 
oat. This was a matter of real necessity, as otherwise we 
dioald have been confined to our cell durine: the whote of 
tkewintar. 

A stieng door made of wood and thongs was so arranged 
that the more pressure there was from without, the more 
firmly it resisted^ When the snow became very deep, wq 
OMd omneives to go forth every morning and clear it away 
a little^ whenever it encroached too much on our premises. 

We made the door low and narrow, both to keep out the 
eold and to make it more easy for defence. 

We had paved the fioor in the way suggested to my 
mind dnring my sunmier visit, and had made in one comer 
a most warm and comfortable bed of skins. Some of these 
also served to make a kind of curtain, which we hung before 
the door, to keep out the draught Another use we put 
them to was a chimney. As we never made a great fire, 
we were able, after some experiments, to make a fine of 
skins, which carried away, at ail events, a great part of the 
smoke. 

In the mcMming early, as soon as we were really closed 
up within oor cavern, we waiit out and collected some clean 
snow, which was Ihe only means wo had to procure water 
for drinking and cooking. We then UM^itod. «i t»fflK^<(!^ 



140 TBB ISA ow icsy om ' 

qamti^ for the day's uie, the water of the pdol hmng too 
charged with minend sabstanoe to be of use to na in auj^ 
ealinary way. 

Then we breakfasted, and- despite the ntmost rigor of tfav 
weather, we scarcely ever MM. to take a run orer the 
snow. We never remained out long, the difference between 
the temperature of the cave and the op&k air being so very:^ 
great as to make the effect too painful for hmg endurance. . 

We found it necessary, after a few days' experience, to 
erect a pole over our chimney, whidi kept the snow fimn 
blocking up the orifice. The smoke of our fire used to 
creep up thb pole, though sometimes it was so neaify^. 
choked up as to force us to open our door. 

The heat of the water in the sulphur pool undoubtedly^ 
made the cavern bearable. Without this assistance, we 
should assuredly have never lasted through the winter. 
Even as it was, we were compelled to be extremely eeo^~ 
nomical with our fuel 

We had left a hole in the middle of the fioor which coyw. 
ered the pool, which fitted a rude vessel found in the £a« 
quimaux hut, and by this means did we melt the snow and 
do a part of our cooking, the water being exceedingly hot 

We divided the cave into two rooms — one for sleeping^ 
one for a sitting room during the day — more to break 
the monotony of the scene than for any real advantage we 
derived from this laborious piece of work. 

Our provisions, as well as the hay, wood, coal, &C., were 
kept in the back cave, in which, as in our own, having plen- 
ty of oil, we continually burned a lamp. We used frequently 
to go into the warehouse and stable, and amuse ourselves 
with the deer, which we also often took for a run on tfaft 
snow, having noticed that confinement told somewhat heav>r: 
ily upon them. 

We divided our time into regular watches ftrom the first. 
The morning was spent in preparing our meals and in 
adding to the comforts of the cave, in a run on the snow 
when practicable, and in attending to our animals. We 
then dined, about midday as near as possible, and then we 
began working at our great task — the boat which we hoped 
was to take us away in the spring. 



ARCTIC ADtTJUrxmfiRS. 141 

0«rw6oftw8»bot]ittk tiapted.ta the tafik, asd' ohf tools 
bat few -— «n aixe apiece, a koife, and a amaU saw in 
the handle of Stop's knife. But we did not intend pre^ 
for a long navigation. I believed the coast of 
to be not far distant, and I felt satisied, that if 
we veaehed that shore,, whatever the dangers and diffir 
oolties to be overcome, we shoidd-stilibeable to reach the 
domaiBg of civilisation^ 

It wttBy therefore, with, extreme delight thai I labored 
with mf old friead six hours a da; at the framework of 
our canoe, which we intended lining with skins sewed to- 
gether, and then coating with a kind of glue made from 
the intestines of the seak and other amphibiousr animals in 
tiM bay. 

. We weee so confident of our escape, that we neglected 
manj things whieh we should have devoted oar attention 
te^lMd we believed in the possibility of spending anodier 
winter in this desolate region. But I, for one, did. nothinf^ 
^ the kind. Since the arrival of St^,. my hope of escape 
had been aroused, and I fek eertaia <^ agaia seeing the 
hmae I so longed to revisit.' 

I wae* able, during that long and unchanging winter, to 
aBpreeiate the blessing of society.r I do believe that, wholly 
moDib ia tfai^ cave, night and day, no human ea^ to hearken 
ta>me» no. hoaiaa voice to reply to me, I should have gone 
SMid under the leaden weight of io monotonous an existence. 

Seiitode ia a pleasant thing for essayists and moralists to 
write about ; bat who that has tried it has not repented the 
tthd? The non^ the hermit, the prisoner^ have each their 
leparale tale of sorrow to relate, of dark and gloomy sorrow 
too. That it is not good for man to be alone^ I repeat from 
the bottom of my hc»irt 

It would be a very weary and unremunerative record to 
tell, day by day and month by month, our life during that 
honid eaipdYity, It had few chaagee in it The long night 
waa-the most wearisome thing of all; and yet, though the 
sun was wholly beneath the horizon, we could see very 
plainly at noon. It was a faint, cold, moonlight kind of 
day, but I am persuaded I could have read by it. 

Indeed, I did read by it, now I lemeiScdbex^Nv^ €k\»<^ 



14S THB 8BA OF ICI, OS 

had brought with him, wrapped round some things In S^ 
chest, the contents of which were invaluable, two or thi^ 
old newspapers. Now, thej were partly torn, and after a 
time I almost knew them by heart ; and yet, so inveterate 
is the habit of reading when once acquired, that I actoalj^ 
would sit down to peruse these papers of an evening^ OV^ 
after I knew them almost by heart 

I spelt through advertisements, articles, paragraphs, t 
read them to myself, I read them out to Stop, who at last, dioQ 
fellow as he was, would start the subject of an evening. ' 

'* Guv'ner," he would say. 

« Yes, Stop." 

** Boy brought the paper yet ? ** 

" All right, Stop." 

** Then let us have the latest news, captain, if you please.*^ 

And then I would read out, in the gravest tone poi^ 
Bible, a paragraph or two, with which we both were sooif 
pretty familiar. '^ 

But a discovery was made, in the middle of January^ 
which quite upset the newspapers. 

Stop's chest contained clothes and food. There weM 
some biscuit, some flour, and, though in small quantities;^ 
some tea and sugar, more precious to me than Stop's to^ 
bacco was to him — for the old sailor, true to his seaman'^t 
habits, could not help smoking. One day, we cleared out 
the chest, and placed the provisons it contained in our stoi^ 
with some idea of pulling the chest to pieces, in order to 
use the wood in the construction of our boat 

At the bottom of the box, under the pile of biscuit wUch 
filled a compartment, we found a parcel, again wrapped in 
an old newspaper. 

" What is this ? " said I to Stop, somewhat anxiously. , 

I saw his eyes glisten, as he raised his head and looked 
affectionately at me. 

" What is it, Stop ? " repeated I, a flush of hope filling 
my heart, and animating my whole being. I was so anxr 
ious, I did not dare to look. 

Stop nodded his head. I perfectly understood him. I 
fell into his arms, and wept with joy. 

I then opened the parcel with reverence, and almost with 



» 



TH]^ ARCTIC ADyEKTUBEBS. 143 

V^e- — feelings which any hody who takes my circumstances 
Into consideration will understand. 

It was the Bihle. 

No dull evenings now. As soon as our working hours 
were over, we sat down. Stop, touching his hat, asked my 
permission to smoke, which I could not refuse to the old 
^low ; while I, taking down my book, opened it and read 
finr about an hour. I could have gone on for hours, but I 
preferred keeping it as a treat Then I closed the book, 
and we talked over what we had read. Gradually, per- 
haps, we worked round to other things, and spoke of home, 
of our friends, of our chances of escape ; but each day 
more and more we felt the pleasure and delight renewed at 
our dear discovery. 

It was on the second of February that, one morning, 
gasing out in search of the expected luminary, we saw, after 
«Q absence of eighty-four days, the blessed sun, the sight of 
which we hailed with all the delight of fire-worshippers. 

Jt was, I belief e, only by the exercise of excessive pre- 
eantions that we escaped being frost-bitten and laid up. 
The cold was so excessive at times, that ten minutes was 
aD I could find courage to remain in the open air. During 
this month (February) Stop was ill with severe pains in 
hiB amputated leg. He used to complain seriously of pains 
in his toes, those which had long since been parted from his 
body, and I was compelled to nurse him with great care. 
He was now an old man, and I still the more appreciated 
his admirable and gallant devotion to me. 

And yet he had a wondrous constitution, an iron frame, 
and soon got over his illness. 

I will not weary you, my friends, with many more de- 
tails of our winter's career, but pass on to the month of 
liay, when events occurred of a serious and startling char- 
acter. 

The weather had grown milder, the sun was visible at mid- 
night, and all denoted that the winter was about, at no very 
. distant period, to break up. We began going out to a much 
neater distance from the cavern, always keeping a careful 
feokout for beasts of prey, which were likely at this time to 
be roaming about after a residence on the main land. 



144 9HB fiBA. OF tCEf OB 

For «ome days, how^fwtr^ fiothiiig oc ciirr e d of anyiM- 
pQrtance. 

Bat on the 5th of May, I think, occmved jb -opretit of 
«nch wondroos novelty to as, that. I must reoard itibUy. 

It was a bright, dear, fioa^ moraing, and Slop bad 9006 
oat itMiming about the island in -laareh of 8Mne t fthi i nB t 
that the snow was aboot to melt away, and the eavdi:toolibr 
up onoe more its treasures for oor use. There was ^tda 
.wind, and it was very eold. I had w>t felt Tory ^w^ ia the 
tBoming, and did not go oat so ^ariy as Stop. About half 
an hour before dinner, faowerer, I Tentuiod forth, asora^ 
however, with a Tiow to meet Stop than to wander aboat 
mjTself. 

There he was, listlessly hobbling along idne anow, Into 
which his wooden legironld dip,«s li k were ne>rer going to 
oome up again. He was gaang carelessly aboat^aadotood 
still once now and then, as if to rest himself 

He was tbo far for me to hail him, and I dierefove meraly 
made signs to him to hurry, when, castin^my lodka-towards 
my old encampment, I started, rubbed my eyea, shattlMi&y 
opened them again, and began running towards Stop in a 
Tery wild and frantic s^le. 

^ What is it, guv'ner r " he said, as I came up to him. 

" Look I " 

He looked across in ihe direction I indicated, and grew 
almost as excited as myself. 

^ What is it ? " said I, in a low whisper, pointing still to 
the north. 

" Smoke," replied he, earnestly. 

<< Where there is smoke there is a fire," said I, endeav- 
oring to be calm. 

"There is," exclaimed Stop, earnestly. ^*Let us be 
cautious. No one knows who may be there." 

" Most certainly there are men yonder," I continued, in 
a low, husky tone. 

'' I think so," said Stop ; "but Heaven knows what kind 
of men." 

" Natives, of course," I answered. 

" Then dangerous. I don't know what sort of men they 
are." 



TBB ARCTIC ADVEKTDISCRS. 149 

. ^ Not very dangerous," I replied, ^ahd if friendlj, oiur 
saviours." 

« Bat how have they come here? " asked Stop, musing. 

<< By sledges," I said. 
• *^ Then, in Heaven's name, let us go down to them,^ ho 
•zdaimed, ^ and see who and what they are." 

** Come," I said ; and, armed to the teeth as we were, we 
advanced towards the beach, trembling with excitement, 
hcqpe, and yet not without some fear as to the final result. 

For my own part, I had but one thought, one idea, one 
dream — that of flight by means bf these savages. 

We had soon got over the space that divided us from 
the hillock behind which the fire was concealed, and at a 
glance we took in the whole scene. . 

There were about a dozen Esquimaux collected round a 
niall'firey arid near a kind of hut of snow, which' had been 
hastily erected on the shore. They were probably in con* 
•nhadon, for almost immediately . ^ey divided into three 
parties, one of which seemed about to come our way, one 
atarted in an opposite direction, while a third, composed of 
women and children, remained at the hut. 

** Come away, guv'ner," said Stop, hastily ; '^ this is no 
place for us. Them gentlemen will walk into us in a min* 
nte, if they see us. I must use my ' dot-and-carry one ' (hii 
frnvorite wotd for his wooden leg) to some advantage." 

We hastily retreated, accordingly, before we were per* 
ceived by any of the party 9f those strange, stunted, and 
wild savages, who, from some inexplicable motive, have 
chosen the arctic regions for their dwelling-place. 

A very small run took us far enough out of sight to ena- 
ble us to walk more leisurely. 

** Ajod now. Stop," said I, " what is to be done ? " 

I believe I trembled with anxiety. 

^ Well, guv'ner, there's several plans in my head ; so, if 
yon please, we'll argue the point." 

''I am willing to listen to any thing you have to say. 
Stop ; but lose no time, as, if we do not use this chance of 
escape, we may never have another." 
- •* Avaet that ! " cried Stop — ** I mean to escs^e without 
them stunted savages — but if as how we can \sa^ >^«d^ 

13 



IM THS BKA OF ICK» OB 

whjy 80 macb the better. But bere's tbe pool, and here's a 
dry stone ; so let's sit down and talk, captain." 

I did so, though mj thoughtavwere not so collected, nor 
my mind so much at ease, as my now experienced and 
methodical companion, who, previously to deliberating on 
the subject in hand, was coolly and quietly lighting his pipe* 



CHAPTER XV. 

THB INDIAN QIRL. 



The warmth of the sulphur pool had already acted on a 
small portion of the snow around its edges, and had thus 
left a clear, open space, in one corner of which we sat 
Nowhere else could even the slightest patch of any vegetation 
be seen. All around was snow — white, dazzling snow, on 
plains and hills, chill, bleak, and cold, and aU the more so, in 
my eyes, from the dim chance of escape which seemed to 
offer itself to me. The sky was bright and clear ; and we 
were at no great, distance of time from that weary period 
of eternal day, which, grand as it may appear, and beautiful 
as it seems, in prose descriptions and in poetry, is painfully 
monotonous, though so useful to the voyager in those bleak 
and inhospitable regions. 

Stop said nothing for some time, smoking his pipe with 
all the deliberation and solemnity of an Indian sachem, 
while I endeavored to repress my impatience, and longed 
to begin, at all events, to talk of flight and escape. 

At the end of a few minutes, however, I could no longer 
keep down the burning desire of my heart 

" Now, then, Stop, what is to be done ? " said I quickly. 

" Guv'ner," replied Stop, putting his finger to the side of 
his nose, and holding his pipe at some distance in his left 
hand, " are you ready to fight ? " 

" If necessary, but only if absolutely necessary," I ex 
. churned. 



THE ARCTIC ADVENTURERS. 147 

• Well, you know, captain, we two, with guns and leaden 
bullets, could easily manage all these varmint." 

« But why so ? " 

" I don't say we ought to do it, or is to do it. But I only 
tells the whole story. Well, suppose we kill 'em all off, 
why, in course, you see they came here somehow, and it's 
my opinion they came on sledges.*' 

*< Certainly," I said. 

" Well, we kills them, and we catches the dogs ■ " 

« Yes." 

^ Then away we goes, a-following our blessed noses over 
the sea." 

" We should never do it." 

^ That's exactly my opinion ; it don't stand at all to rear 
son. We ain't used to them dogs, we don't know the way, 
and then we ain't bloody minded." 

" Certainly not. Stop. Killing is out of the question. 
What do you propose next ? " 

** We must make friends with them creaturs, guv'ner. 
We must lejt 'em see our power, that is, the use of our guns ; 
and then we must try and get 'em to pilot us over the sea 
to the main land ; that's what we must do." 

" Exactly my own opinion," said I ; ** but now how is it 
to be done ? " 

•* Well, I proposes to fall upon the women unawares like, 
and take some prisoners " 

*• That will not be very friendly," I replied, anxiously, 
and yet half inclined to laugh. 

•* No ! but then you see, captain, when we got a girl or 
two, we brings 'em up here, we treats 'em well, we gives 
*em, if need be, the two deer, which they'll be glad of, 
and some other things, and then we sends 'em away to their 
friends, happy and friendly like." 

" That's the plan, Stop," said I, eagerly, " that's the plan." 

** Very good, guv'ner," continued Stop ; ** that being your 
opinion, it's just settled — down ! down ! " he added, falling 
flat on his face, and drawing me afler him, behind the large 
Btone on which we had been sitting. 

" What is it ? " said I, in a low, hushed voice. 

^ I don't know yet," replied Stop ; << it's on^ of \k«ai vc£b?> 



148 THB SKA OF lOB, OM 

mab of 'Squimaoz — but whether man or woman, I can^t 
just say." 

'^ Lie then still, in Heaven's name ! " said I ; ^ this may 
be the good will of Providence to save us." 

" Now, guv'ner," whispered Stop, "you're young and ac- 
tive. Every thing ci^-pends on you. The creatuF ain't 
armed, I don't think, and he's following our track — so per- 
haps it's a curious woman. When she comes right up, yoo 
must jump up and catch her. Then it's all right" 

I nodded assent, laid my gun on the ground, and my axe, 
60 as not to be encumbered. 

The stones behind which we were concealed were two in 
number — large, black stones, which had lain there proba- 
bly since the creation. They were parted on one side, at a 
distance of three feet, but met on the other at right angles, 
leaving only a narrow chink, through which we could 
plainly see. 

" Hush ! " said Stop, in a low, timid whisper. 

I scarcely Breathed, for I plainly heard a light and cau- 
tious step upon the still firm snow ; I kept my eyes fixed 
earnestly on my tiny loophole. 

My astonishment, when the stranger came in sight, is far 
more easy to imagine than to express. 

It was a woman, and yet not an Esquimaux ; and as fi^r 
as my knowledge of races went, an Indian girl of the arid 
district hunted over by the Hudson's Bay CJompany — a 
member of a tribe which, in its ardor for the chase, is 
sometimes tempted up so far as the Great Bear Lake. 

Who can tell my sensations ? If my ideas were correct, 
this girl was a prisoner, therefore a friend, and if of the tribe 
I suspected, sure to know my own tongue. 

I knew that the most deadly hostility existed between this 
tribe and the Esquimaux, as the former often undertodiL 
vast journeys towards the north, to combat, pillage, and 
scalp the unfortunate races, that in process of time have 
probably been driven so far north by this very state of 
things. 

She was very young, and though with many of the dis- 
tinctive marks of her race about her, she wore, in considera- 
tion of the dimate, more clothes than »he would otherwise 



TlIJi ARCTIC ADVEyTURERS. Ii9 

have done Her head was covered by a peaked cap, her 
tunic was thick and had other clothes beneath it, while not 
an inch of her naked form was any where to be seen, as 
would surely have been the case in a warmer latitude ; 
though with a kind of coquetry which was perfectly wo- 
manly, she had them tight fitting and well made. 

She had pleasing features, which were at this moment 
highly in play. 

She looked cautiously around, gazed at the pool curiously, 
glanced at the undoubted marks of a habitation beyond, and 
smiled as she noticed the faint curling of a wreath of smoke 
above the pole which crowned the summit of our cavern. 

She looked then back stealthily, and being assured that 
the was not followed, she moved slowly towards the cavern. 

I was on my feet with the rapidity of a beast of prey, and 
with one bound I was at her side. 

" Ugh I " was her only word. 

^Moke no noise" — I whispered, quite satisfied she 
would understand me. 

I never heard a sweeter, a more cheerful laugh than 
burst from her lips. She laughed heartily and without con- 
trol, as if she were too happy to be able to contain her 
feelings. 

^ You understand me, then/' I said, <^ and know that we 
are friends?" 

" Grood — pale-faced — English," she replied, in gentle 
and yet proud tones. 

^ In the name of all our dear hopes," I exdiaimed, turning 
to Stop, '^ come into the cave, and confer with this girL 
She is a Chippewaw." 

" Yes — Pale-face young — old head — very wise — 
know Indian girl — Indian girl Chippewaw." 

^ Well," said Stop, shaking his head as he followed with 
the guns, '^ this is the most wonderful thing ever I seed." 

And then, to the amusement of the girl, he hobbled 
along on his wooden leg — a thing she had probably never 
seen before ; while I, who had at once let go my hold of the 
Tgirl, walked beside her to the cavern, my brain in a whirl, my 
heart bursting with thankfulness, so deep, so earnest, so over- 
whelming, tl^ I with difficulty kept down the rising tears. 

18 • 



lAO THB 8BJL OF ICK, QE 

We entered the c&ve, lit two lamps, and motioned to the 
girl to be seated. In order to show our good feeling, and in 
mj case, to have time to collect mj thoughts, we drew forth 
our choicest food, and offered to cook it for her. 

She shook her head and rose to her feet 

** What does she mean ? " asked Stop, rather puzzled. 

^ Are you not hungry ? " I said, myself hardly able to 
understand her manner. 

^ Yes ! Indian girl hungry — no like Esquimaux food — 
glad to see deer-meat — but Indian girl — Wah-pa-^iosh -«- 
wait on warrior. Warrior eat first" 

^Them's rummy customers, them Indians," said Stop, 
laughing — ^ and the Esquimaux as you tell me of must be 
rummier. If they stows in blubber at the rate you have 
told me, a young girl as has eat better don't come natural 
to it. And how she knew that dried stuff was deer-meat I ^ 

'* They are very acute," continued I, watching her with a 
smile, as she began toasting the dried meat on a rude 
attempt at a gridiron, made from the ramrods of my pistob. 

'^ They just are, guv'ner. Now, this is what I call a nice 
family party, ain't it ; " and Stop laughed heartily at some 
conceit of his own. 

*^ What are you laughing at ? " said I, almost mechan- 
ically. 

" I was just a thinkin', guv'ner, what precious queer yami 
"we shall have to tell when we gets homei. It will be so 
funny." 

** But we are not yet home. Stop," said I, very gravely. 

^ No, we ain't — there's a few miles of salt water, and 
some odd miles of land, and a good many months, too, afore 
we do it — but it's as good as done." 

** I hope so, fervently, Stop — but now let us talk to the 
girl," I continued, as, after serving us, she sat down and be- 
gan quietly to eat 

" How long have you been a prisoner, Wah-pa-nosh ? " 
•aid I to her. 

" One — two summer — one — two winter," she replied. 

" Whtre do you come from ? " 

** My tribe live on Saskatchawan," she said, in a tew, 
•amest tone, ^^hunt up on Great Bear Lake onoe-^meet 



TH«: ARCTIC ADYSNTUBERS. 151 

Esqtiimanx — mj warrioia very brave — hate Esquimaux 
•-— fight — take.scalp —r Esquimaux run awaj — find Wah- 
|Mi-no6h in wood — take her.** 

^ And should jou like to return to jour tribe ? " asked I, 
gently. 

^ If no get back, soon die — all winter here — no summer 
•— warm on my river. Wah-pa-nosh — no wigwam, but in 
three moons marry Bounding Elk — if get ba^." 

** Then, Wah-pa-nosh," continued I, " you are willing to 
assist us to escape, to take tis to your tribe, and then show 
ns the way to a trading^port ? " 

Wah-pa-nosh laughed her hearty and happy laugh once 
more. 

^ Pale-face take Indian girl back — show her father, her 
mother. Laughing Bird's face again — they friend ever — 
take Pale-face Great Salt Lake if please." 

** Tis agreed, Wah-pa-nosh," said I, earnestly, " and when 
I get bade to my father and my mother, and her who is to 
he my wife, Wah-pa-nosh shall have rich blankets, and the 
Bounding Elk the best rifle in my country." 

** How Pale-face come here — leave young squaw, old 
fiither, old mother ? " asked the girl, abruptly. 

I told my story briefly and simply. She understood 
me the better, that she had been to Fort York, and had 
teen ships, and had a vague conception of whale-fishing: 
and then, in broken, disjointed phrases, she told me about 
some pale-faces who had gone up to the frozen sea by land, 
thus exciting my curiosity largely. 

I afterwards found from the people of Cumberland Fort, 
where, to pass away the winter, I wrote this narrative, that 
she alluded to Franklin's extraordinary overland journey 
to the Coppermine River, and the Arctic Sea, amid dan- 
gers, snfierings, and difficulti^ not greater, unfortunately, 
than those I had yet to endure, and of which, even as I 
write, I knew not the complete end. This will be ex- 
plained in its proper and fitting place. 

" And now, Wah-pa-rnosh," said I, " you know this coun- 
try better than we do. How are we to escape ? " 

^ Eall all Esquimaux," replied the girl, fiercely ; ^ load 
ime — two — three sledge — plenty eat — Wah-pa-nosh 
guide away to the land under the &\m.** 



15i THB 8BA OF ICBy OB 

** Nay, Laughing Bird, I wonld not kill them. I would 
rather return with them to their homes, and then start 
away to your country.** 

** Pale-face warrior no like scalp — good for Pale-face. 
Make present to Esquimaux — much eat — hog — six hog." 

*^ That's it,'* said Stop, laughing, ^ they just are hogs. 
What shall we send them ? " 

** We must give almost all our provisions,** I replied, " if 
we journey with them." 

^ No, guv'ner, we must provide for a precious long jour- 
ney — and I votes for keeping the biscuit and dried meat 
— give 'em the anchor, the oil, and the two live deer." 

" Live deer ! " said the Lidian girl, glancing curiously 
Around. 

'^ Ah, you doesn't know half our secrets yet," said Stop,: 
rising, and lighting a torch. 

The girl at once took it out of his hand, and began ex- 
amining the whole place with considerable interest. She 
started as she noticed the guns for the first time. ^ Fire- 
bow,** said she, ^^ Esquimaux much 'fraid — no touch Pale- 
face." 

And she laughed with renewed confidence when she 
found us so strong and powerful. 

^ Good," said she, clapping her hands as she entered the 
inner cave and saw our interior arrangements ; '^ Pale-face 
clever — good wigwam — stone — mountain. Deer, good 
present Esquimaux, Tuski hog — eat three — two moutlrfuL" 

'< Must the poor brutes be sacrificed ? " I asked, turning 
to Stop. 

" It stands to reason," said he ; we're a-going away, and 
they'll never get their living their two selves again. They've 
been fed too long. Besides, guv'ner, them Tuski, as sh6 
calls them, must have something, and this '11 be a great 
present." 

" Very well, Stop ; tether them so that the girl may lead 
them down. She had better go on first, and prepare the 
savages for our reception." 

" That's it, captain." 

** Good," said the girl ; " Wah-pa-nosh ready." 

•The deer were tied together, and a string fastened to 



THB UIOTIC ADYSNTCBERS. 153 

Aem, by wlucb We -led them fbrth into the open air, afler 
slightly confining their front legs, so that they might not 
pull the girl too violently. 

^ Now go," said I, in a low, hushed tone, my heart throb- 
bing with an earnestness and violence quite painful. ^ Go^ 
now, and remember, Wah-pa-nosh, we trust wholly to you. 
Act fairly to us, and you shall not forget it You shall 
reach your home in safety, and see Bounding Elk, and your 
fiuher and mother once more." 

'^ Wah-pa-nosh say it — Wah-pa-nosh mean it — speak 
troth — Pale-face and her — friends." 

As she spoke, she placed her hand gracefully on her 
heart, laughed again that laugh which was so sweet, and 
pleasant, and cheerful to hear, took the deer-thong in her 
band, and went on her way merrily and earnestly. 

** Now, guv'ner, let's, pack up all we want," said Stop, 
hastily retreating into the cavern. '^ Them devils will be 
wanting every thing." 

^ Yes, Stop ; and then before they come up here, we had 
better let them see what our guns are." 

" The very ticket, Mr. Henry," he continued. " I say, 
look alive's my motto now. We never knows what to 
do with savages. I've seen a pretty sprinkling of them 
animals, and they're pretty much of a muchness. If they 
knows you're strong, they treat you well ; if they find you 
weak they'll ill use you." 

** With some it is the case," said I ; " but not only with sav- 
ages, Stop. It's human nature every where. The rich and 
the strong and the bold are pretty well treated every where 
— but be weak and poor and timid, Stop, and there's very 
little chance for you. That's the way of the world, Stop, 
and it can't be expected savages will be better than 
civilized." 

"In course not, guv'ner," replied Stop — " now all these 
here skins is valuable. We shall want them. So I moves 
to put most our bread and meat inside 'em — we may then 
trust a little to hunting, and a little to fishing. We can 
give the Esquimaux the oil, and the old fox-skins, and 
the fish." 

^That is exactly what I meant to propose " was my 



154 TBI •!▲ or lOK, OR 

reply. *^ Put the Bible safe^ Stop — and here, the powdtf 
and ball.** 

" My eyes/' said Stop, ** here's the boat That will de^ 
light 'em. I'll show 'em how to put it together. Leastwise 
the girl will ; I dare say she'll speak the language better 
than we can." 

" Could we not use it ? " I asked, musing. 

" No, guv'ner, it won't do for rivers. I'll soon rig up a 
bark one, if it's wanted, like them I've seen in New O* 
leans. Master Henry." 

Talking, speculating, hoping, the time soon slipped by, 
and our goods were packed and piled in a comer in less 
than an hour. We then armed ourselves to the teeth, with 
gun, axe, hunting knife, and even with pistols, having 
cleaned the ramrods for that purpose, and sallied into the 
open air. 

*< Now, guv'ner, my idesL is, that we must be as bold as 
brass — and give these here salvages an idea of our know- 
ing a thing or two — just off." 

" I am quite of your opinion," I replied ; ^ but. Stop, we 
must be very cautious, and if we have to shoot, one must 
do it at a time." 

" Right, guv'ner, right Ah ! there they are ; ain't they 
going it ! " exclaimed the eccentric old sailor. 

As he spoke, we came in sight of the Esquimaux, who 
were standing in a group round Wah-pa-nosh and the deer, 
and listening with wild eagerness to the account of the In- 
dian girl. 

We afterwards discovered that the two hunting parties 
had only just returned, and that Wah-pa-nosh had only that 
moment finished narrating her meeting with two wondrous 
men, armed with lightning, and who, pitying the want of 
success of the Esquimaux, had sent them two deer. 

" Now, guv'ner," said Stop, hurriedly, " here they comes 
— a precious set." 

The Esquimaux had seen us ; but instead of rushing for- 
ward as we expected, they stood still, examining us with 
great caution. Wah-pa-nosh holding the deer in one hand, 
and raising the other on high, was still speaking. 

At this instant a bird, a kind of hawk, the first I had 



TH1^ ARCTIC ADYfiNTURCRS. 155 

BOtieed this season, sailed overhead, but within shot. I 
ijowly levelled my gun, took very cautious and deliberate 
aim, and tired. 

Down went the bird like a stone, falling within a few 
jards of the Esquimaux. 

They stood motionless, utterly unable to move, so wild, 
so overwhelming was their astonishment. 

** Ifs all right," said Stop, laughing — " they're satisfied. 
They've had enough. They won't want another hint of 
that kind." 

^ Let us advance," I replied, afler quietly re-loading. 
^ Wah-pa-nosh is making signs to us." 

" All right, guv'ner — here goes — dot-and-carry-one." 

And the old fellow, his head martially erect, his gun on 
H^ hollow of his arm, advanced before me to meet the- 
wffidering throng of savages, over whom Wah-pa-nosh 
towered by a head. 

In two minutes more we were the centre of this wild and 
lingular group of dwellers in those northern regions, on the 
bofders of that vast sea, whose waves 

"doroU 
From ioe-bound shore to sonny isle.** 



CHAPTER XVI. 

THE SLEDGE. 



The Esquimaux examined us with mingled wonder and 
admiration. They glanced with timidity and dread at the 
firearms we held in our hands, and then held up the bird 
and looked at the hole ; shook it, and as the ball did not 
come out, their simple wonder was even still more increased. 
It was quite evident that this particular band of savages had 
never happened on such a chance before. The white men 
-*- at all events their firearms — were quite new to them. 



15G THB 8BA OF IC1| OR 

They talked among themselves, they ehattered, they 
danced round us, thej felt our clothesf and suddenly catch* 
ing sight of the end of Stop's wooden leg, they l<M^ed al 
him with even still greater wonder thim before. They 
stooped down, passed their hands up and down k, and agaia 
talked and laughed with great heartmess. 

Wah-pa-nosh stood meekly on one side. In presence of 
the Esquimaux, she assumed all the well-known manner of 
a girl proud of her tribe, and of her superiority over such 
savages as those which now herded round her in a groups 
as wild as the beasts of the field. 

But what principally attracted our attention, and excited 
in us feelings which it would be vain to attempt to convey 
in words, were the sledges and dogs. These animals were 
snuflUng round the frightened deer, only kept from devour 
ing them by the whip of one of their conductors. ^ 

''What think you, Stop?" said I; ^ are these ^eavea-i 
sent savages to ti^e us safely to the main land ? " 

I spoke cheerfully, and assumed a calmness J did not feeL 

^ Well, I don't think them creaturs is exactly Heaven- 
sent — they're too dirty, and smells too strong ; but I think 
them sledges is very pleasant to look at ; and do you see, 
guv'ner, we must make haste, as the blessed summer is 
coming on, and we have no time to lose." 

" You are right, Stop," I answered, turning to Wah-pa- 
nosh. " Will our sister translate what I say to the chief?" 

" Got no chief," said the girl, with an expression of great 
disgust; "talk like hog — but Wah-pa-nosh say what Pale- 
face like." 

She then told the Esquimaux to be quiet, for that we had 
to confer with them. 

One of the decrepit little creatures advanced close to mCy 
and made signs that he was ready to listen. 

The Chippewaw girl acting as interpreter, the followmg 
conversation took place. 

"What have you come tp this distant island for?" I 
asked. 

** To hunt, fish, and prepare food during the summer ; and 
then, when winter froze the sea asain, to return to their 
borne/* was the substance of what they said. 



TBS ARCTIC ADtSKTtTBEBS. 157 

^ Where is your home ? ** 

« Akkoolee." 

^ And where is Akkoolee ? " I continued. 

The man who was carrying on the conversation pointed 
towards the south-east, and Wah-pa-nosh nodded her head, 
intimating that the information was correct. 

** Will they consent," said I to Wah-pa-nosh, ^ to take us 
back at once to the continent, on condition of our rewarding 
them handsomely for so doing ? I will give them the con- 
tents of our cave, save and except what we require for our- 
selves." 

Wah-pa-nosh now stood erect, and spoke with considera- 
ble animation to the Esquimaux, whom, in the mean time, 
we examined curiously, leaning on our guns all the while, 
and taking every precaution against any act of treachery 
on their part 

They were very ill-favored, especially the old women, 
who had wrinkled skin, inflamed eyes, hideous black teeth, 
the whole set off by a costume that made them look like 
animated bundles.* Altogether they were the most de- 
graded and stupid-looking specimens of humanity I had 
ever seen* 

^ She don't seem to agree with them dirty salvages," put 
in Stop. ^ Look at that old woman shaking her black fist 
in the gill's face." 

"They do not seem to agree," I replied; "but wait-a 
moment, and Wah-pa-nosh will tell us sdl." 

The girl at this instant turned towards us. 

They had come to hunt all the summer, as they knew the 
island to be rich in fish and game, and they did not feel in- 
clined to return until the season was over. If we would 
wait until the winter, they engaged to take us over to the 
main land, and set us on our way towards the south. But 
they had quite made up their minds to remain the time 
they had come for. 

I replied gravely, that I wished to leave at once ; that I 

* Frobisher, in 1576, owns that liis men took them for witches of the 
North. " The old wretch whom our sailors supposed to be a witch had 
her buskins pulled off, to see if she was doven-footed ; and, being Tery 
tglj and deformed, we let her go,*' 

14 



158 THK 6BA OF ICB, 0» 

was willing, when once on the nuda Uuid, to hunt for them 
a few days with our guns ; but that I could do nothing of 
the kind if we remained all the summer on this bland, of 
which I claimed to be the owner, and where we should re- 
quire all the game and fish for our own subsistence. 

They replied that they would think about it, and theo 
went away towards the deer, which they slaughtered in an 
instant, and began devouring, after scarcely warming it 
before the fire. The refuse and oSbI they gave to the .wild 
and hungry dogs. 

Wah-pa-nosh now approached us, as we walked a litde 
distance ofi*, and told us, that the Esquimaux were evidently 
not inclined to depart; that by some words she caught they 
had made up their minds to dawdle away the time until it 
was too late to go — until, in fact, the ice broke up and the 
sea was impassable for sledges and dogs. 

" Now, then, guv'ner," said Stop, " this here business be- 
comes serious. We ain't got no time to lose, and I votes 
for deciding on the instant" 

"I fully agree," was my reply. "Wah-pa-nosh, yoa 
know these creatures ; what is your advice ? " 

" Esquimaux eat like hog — sleep like big snake now — 
one — two — three — six hour. Give Esquimaux more 
eat — sleep all day. When sleep, Pale-fisice take one sledge, 
leave boat and cave — stock behind pay sledge — 'Wah-pa- 
nosh guide Pale-face to big land." 

" That's it," said Stop, " that's the very identical thing. 
Wah I I'm your man." 

"I agree also," exclaimed L "They will not take us 
fairly. We must act independently for ourselves." 

" Hoorah ! " cried Stop, much delighted. " It's settled. 
Now, girl, speak up. You know these imps better nor us ; 
so out with it — what's to be done ? " 

" Wah go speak Esquimaux — one beast no eat enough 
yet — ask him taste Pale-face fish — he say yes — make 
him harness best dog, go fetch. Bring back — eat — Pale- 
face take sledge fetch more — load — go." 

" Splendid — glorious ! " said Stop, rubbing his hand 
with intense energy. " That's it, Wah I You're a tip-top 
girl'* 



THS ARCTIC ADVENTURERS. 159 

Wah-pa-iidsh langhed in her sweet and quiet way, and 
strolled among the Esquimaux, who had made a kind of 
tent of wood, skins, and snow, within which all were now 
huddled, after a gorge which placed them on a level with 
the lowest animals. 

As the girl had hinted, one of the Esquimaux, who had 
been keeping the dogs off, had come in for a smaller shate 
than the rest, and he, instead of lying down, was sitting up 
on A stone, musing, doubtless, about the strange beings with 
whom he had suddenly come in contact. 

The Indian girl looked at him with a smile, and then 
asked him if he would like to see the white man's cave, and 
bring down some fish to eat. 

The savage nodded assent. 

" Then put on the dogs, and show the pale-faces how you 
can drive — they never saw a sledge before. We can 
bring down a large load of fish and meat." 

The Esquimaux looked at her half-cunningly, half- vacant- 
ly, and then lazily rose, and after some delay and difficulty, 
harnessed the dogs, and drove after us towards tl^e sulphur 
cavern. 

Great, indeed, was his surprise, when he saw the pool 

of steaming water, and halting on its edge, put his hand 

' down to taste it. His grimaces proved that he at least was 

a stranger to the island, as indeed were the whole party, 

who knew of it only by tradition. 

He then got off his sledge and followed us, guided by 
Wah-pa-nosh, into the cavern, where Stop had made a great 
blaze of lamps to receive him. 

The delight, the astonishment, the wonder of the savage^ 
at the comforts which the white men had collected around 
them in this desolate region, can scarcely be described in 
words. He looked blankly and vacantly round for a few 
minutes, and then began examining every thing with a kind 
of childish curiosity, which was exceedingly amusing. 

I gave him a biscuit, which he eagerly devoured ; and 
then, Stop having already secured all we required, I opened 
up all our stores to him. His wild delight was shown by 
his rising up, jumping, dancing, and cutting all the most 
ridiculoog capers and antics I had ever mtaesi&^m\iv^^^< 



160 THS SEA OF IOB| OB 

Wah-pa-nosh gravely checked him by saying that he 
should carry some down to show his companions, and suit- 
ing the action to the word, she gave him an armful of fi^, 
took up another herself, and left the cave. We followed 
also, bearing some presents for the inhabitants of the tent. 

" You stay behind, guv'ner,** said Stop, winking at me — 
^ you get ready while I and Wah bamboozle these here sal- 
vages. I mean to do it prime." 

" Very well. Stop," replied I, smiling, as I returned into 
the cave. 

I was* alone for the first time for weeks past, and I felt a 
very solemn feeling coming over me, on this, probably the 
last occasion on which I should ever see that place, which 
for so long a time had afforded me shelter and protection. 

I earnestly tlianked the Almighty for the manifold bless- 
ings which had been granted to me, and prayed that, in the 
bold adventure I was about to make — one of the boldest 
ever made by man — I should be equally protected and 
guarded. 

I walked up and down the cave, I looked in every part 
of it, and then I went into the open air, and strolled slowly 
down until I could see the encampment. 

My surprise was very great indeed at the spectacle I now 
beheld. 

All the Esquimaux were on foot, and dancing away in 
the wildest and strangest way I ever saw men dance. They 
kicked about, they waddled, they rolled, they jumped, they 
tumbled, while Stop with his wooden leg made attempts to 
follow their example, which excited roars of laughter fix)m 
the savages. 

Presently, under his guidance, they held hands, formed a 
circle, and began whirling round with an agility which, with 
their short and stumpy limbs and their uncouth garb, seemed 
truly surprising. Stop shouted, screamed, encouraged them, 
set them going again, and whenever they stopped, passed 
round a bowl which he had placed near the fire, and from 
which all the savages drank with avidity. 

I saw at a glance what he was about. 

" Pdor wretches," thought I, " you are having your first 
lesson in inebriety. I doubt if the result will amuse you 
so much as the beginning;** 



THE ARCTIC ADYSKTUBERS. ICl 

Stop had taken from a comer, where he had stowed it away, 
— we never thmking of using it, — a bottle of very old rum, 
which he had had in his chest, and this, after regaling the 
Esquimaux with salt fish, he was freely dealing out to them. 

Wah-parnosh meanwhile sat calmly beside the sledge, ap- 
parently gazing intently at the scene, but in reality keeping 
the dogs quiet by feeding them with bits of meat which she 
took from a pile on the other side. Her eyes were never 
taken off her enemies, whose movements she regarded with 
undisguised disgust. 

The scene soon changed in features. One by one, the 
unfortunate savages stumbled to the ground, until presently 
not one was left on his legs. 

Then Stop advanced towards the Indian girl, got on the 
sledge, and she giving the well-known signal, away came 
the dogs in my direction. As they reached me, they halted 
and took me on the sledge. I gently scolded Stop for what 
he had done. 

^ Now, guv'ner," said the faithful old fellow, looking as 
contrite as he could, ^ you see them fellows must be still a 
goodish bit. If they'd ever had a chance of learning to 
drink elsewhere, you might a' blamed me; but this is a 
taste they'll never forget, nor have another chance of see- 
ing. I was afraid they would not sleep long enough ; so I 
put a little grog in their noddles, which will save our shoot- 
ing one or two, perhaps, about the ownership of this blessed 
cart without wheels." 

" Well, Stop, you did it for the best, I know ; and I must 
not scold you. That is right, Wah ; pull up " 

She did so admirably, and showed a command over the 
dogs and the reins, knew the names of the dogs so well, that 
we began to have very great hopes of our ultimate and 
even speedy escape. No time was, however, now to be lost ; 
the Esquimaux might rouse up to a desperate struggle, in 
which they would act with all the more ferocity considering 
their intoxicated state ; and then, the season was far ad- 
vance's, and the crossing the ice, if summer came suddenly 
upon us, would be attended with great danger. 

I and Stop hurried on, brought out our bundles, and be- 
gan packing them with care and rapidity, keeping ouit «^q& 

14* 



162 THE SEA OF ICE, OB 

turned continually in the direction of the Esquimaux. A 
Bledge, twelve dogs, and a girl who was intended for the 
wife of one of the part/, were prizes thej were not likely 
to part with \ery readily. But aided by our intelligent 
and delighted friend, we in half an hour had packed the 
sledge, fed the dogs, seen to our arms, and were ready to 
start 

It was not a Tery long time before the arrival of night ; 
but on the white snow and the dim day of that season, even 
at midnight — soon all day — we feansd not to start with 
such a guide as the earnest and sagacious Chippewa w. 

The last thong was tied, the dogs had devoured their 
last morsel, Wah-pa-nosh held the reins. Stop and I sat 
above her on the luggage, our guns in our furred hands, 
and there was nothing to delay us. 

" All right? " said Wah, who was very fond of this con- 
ventional phrase. 

'* All right ! " replied Stop, heartily, his honest features 
actually grinning with delight — '^ all right. And now, in 
Heaven's name, my good girl, start us." 

" Young Pale ready ? " asked Wah. 

" I am," said I, slowly — "I am ready ; and Heaven be 
good unto us in this terrible undertaking ! " 

Away at that instant went the dogs, scampering along 
the beaten track which we had made towards the sea, dash- 
ing away as if they had but a few hundred yards to go, and 
not miles upon miles across the frozen sea. 

" I say, Wah," said Stop, " ain't you getting too close to 
them salvages ? " 

" No Traid," replied Wah, laughing ; " if him wake — 
do nothing — fire-water take away brains — make noise, but 
can't run." 

" There, guv'ner I " exclaimed Stop, " ain't that proof I 
did right ? But still I don't see why we pass so close," he 
added, clutching his gun. 

" Btffet path to sea — follow trail to Akkbolee — straight 
— no lose." 

" But Akkoolee, that's where them shavers come from — 
it ain't safe " 

*' Quite safe — all gone hunt — fish." 



THE ARCTIC ADVENTURERS. 168 

** O I i see ; but a littie more to the right, Wah. There's 
ft fellow waking up, and them dogs will bark.'' 

At this instant several of the Esquimaux, hearing a 
noise, raised their heads heavily, saw what we were about, 
started to their feet, and as it appeared, startled by the im- 
minence of the peril, shook off all drowsiness, though not 
all the effects of their feast and drinking bout, and began 
their 'onslaught by a shower of arrows from some, while 
others be^n to harness dogs to the light and unloaded 
filedgeiB — all yelling and stamping like demons. 

*• O, O !" exclaimed Stop, as an arrow glanced off Eis 
thick coat of hide ; '^ this won't do. If you want fighting, 
you shall have it.** 

^ Stop," said I, laying my hand on his arm, while we still 
sped swiftly on, now over the bay — '^ shoot not at those 
poor creatures unless our lives are in danger. We have 
done them injury enough already." 

^ Gruv'ner, they ain't a-going to catch us, and take us 
back, that's all. I won't harm none of them, if they don't 
harm hone of us. But the deluding serpents, they ain't 
drunk at all — here they come over the snow. My eyes, 
how they scamper I They'll catch us in no time." 

« Shoot soon," said Wah. 
I . ** Listen, Stop. Let us try an experiment first. Pull 
up, Wah ; let them come near. Shoot the first dog — that 
will check them. If they do come upon us, and would take 
odr lives, why. Stop, I suppose we must defend them." 
.' Wah checked the dogs in an instant, and we stood up, 
levelled, and fired, both at the same dog. 

One sledge was about twenty yards before the other when 
we fired. Our aim was fatal. The dog fell, and the others 
began struggling wildly to get away. 

This was quite enough. The Esquimaux appeared at 
once to recollect our peculiar and to them supernatural 
power, which the fumes of drink, and the feeling of alarm 
at the loss of their sledge, dogs, and captive, had at first 
made them forget. 

Away we went again, and this time without being fol- 
lowed. 

We soon found the value and importaxi<^Q ^"^ \k^ \^^»» 



164 THK SEA OF I01| OB 

which the Indian girl had had, of endeavoring to retnm 
back upon the old trail of the Esquimaux, which was clear 
and defined, no snow having fallen in the intervaL The 
trail was towards the south, with a slight bend at first to- 
wards the west, which became more marked as we ad* 
Tanoed. 

Away I away ! over sloping hills, over long plains, be- 
tween piles of ice and snow, over an eternal plain of das- 
sling white, that weaned our eyes the more thaf there was 
nothing on the horizon to relieve us or excite hope. Away ! 
away ! until soon all traces of the island were left behind. 
We travelled with great rapidity, the dogs being rested and 
unusually well fed. Sometimes they would have halted^ 
but then Wah-pa-nosh cheered them on, using, too, her long 
thongs with all the dexterity of her most ingenious captors. 

Away ! away ! when night is on the plain, and darkness 
broods over our heads, until the dogs begin to slacken their 
pace, and give unmistakable signs of fatigue. We have 
travelled nearly eight hours, and yet no sign of land, no 
hills but icebergs. The latter part of the journey has beei^ 
over a sofl and melting snow that wearies the dogs much, 
and prevents their advancing. 

Then the snow begins to fall, blinding our eyes, and in 
ten minutes obliterating every mark, every sign of the old 
trail. 

O, now for that long and wearisome day, which would 
have guided us so well — for that sun ever above the hori- 
zon, as it shall be soon for months upon months. But no ! 
the heavens are obscured, gloom hangs around, the snow 
falls heavily, and Wah disconsolately allows that she has 
lost her way. 

The dogs lie crouching and panting on the ground, still 
and motionless, their long tongues hanging out, or licking 
now and then the snow to quench their thirst. 

Away ! away ! Up they start, and off they go, wildly 
over the marshy and soft plain, the ice actually cracking 
beneath our weight as we advance. We are nearly two de- 
grees farther south already by my calculation, so wild and 
80 rapid has been our journey. 

But why are the animals so eager i^ow ? 



THE ARCTIC APYENTUltfiRS. 165 

« Smell prey,** said Wah. 

** Well, I thought I did see a prowling fox jist now,*' re- 
plied Stop. " He warn't not ten yards off — but gently, my 
boys ; you ain't going to catch him — there he goes. Well, 
the best thing we can do is to shoot him, or else these beasts 
will be breaking the sledge all to smash." 

The animal, evidently some stray beast quite worn out 
with fatigue, was now so near that Stop easily carried out 
his intention, and the dogs, immediately tearing him to bits, 
again lay down at the call of the Indian girl. 

" We must camp," said I. 

" Well, guv'ner," replied Stop, " I think that's about the 
wisest thing we can do." 

" No,", said Wah, shaking her head ; " snow too heavy — 
cover up — bury — ^ " 

"The girl's right, the girl's right," exclaimed Stop — 
^ahl thank God, there is the blessed sun; the snow is 
stopped, and away we go, cheerily, gooh mosh, sqtia — . 

g) — "he added, trying to imitate the noise by which the 
dian girl hurried on the dogs. 

The sun had just peered up over the horizon, and the 
snow did cease to fall as we started again, at a very slow 
pace, however, at first, until the dogs warmed at their work, 
and soon galloped on with as much rapidity as ever. 

But the sun soon brought about effects of the most pain- 
ful nature. Rain began to fall, the snow began to melt, the 
ice began to crack ; and after a painful and wearisome jour- 
ney of four hours, we pulled up on the edge of a large 
stream of open water, with huge pieces of ice floating here 
and there on its surface. 

Our fate appeared at this critical moment to be finally 
sealed. 

How were we to escape from this stupendous difficulty ? 

The stream of water spread to the right and left as far 
as we could see, while it was only by perpetually keeping 
on the move that we avoided sinking into holesy and being 
at once cast upon the mercy of the waves. 



166 THK SEA OF ICE, Oft 



CHAPTER XVII- 

BBEAKINO OF THE ICE. 

Our position was now indeed terrible. I could not stop 
to survey it* The thaw was taking place with sudi ex- 
treme rapidity that I fully expected to be again brought to 
a dead stop by the fatigue of the dogs, when the ice would 
surely crack beneath our weight, and precipitate ns into the 
raging sea below. On then we went, clinging to the sledge 
with frantic energy, too excited to eat, unable to stop to try 
and find a pool of fresh water — and always beside the 
edge of the channel of open water, along which the a:«ck- 
ing ice went pouring along, rolling by icebergs revolving, 
huge sheets of ice being shivered into lAts as they met 
heavier pieces, until at last we came to what appeared the 
end of tins channel. 

We lost no time in taking the direction of the land, 
which we could now clearly distinguish to the west, and 
the weary, panting dogs, carried on still by their extreme 
terror, made one more tremendous effort, and then, finding 
themselves on a solid ground of ice, lay down utterly, and 
for the time hopelessly, exhausted. ' 

" Here's a pretty go — that land is five miles off, gu v'ner," 
said Stop, drawing a long and weary breath. '^ I'm done 
up, if the dogs ain't." 

" It is indeed terrible," I replied, faintly ; " but for the 
moment we are safe. The dogs may revive presently." 

" Eat," said the Indian girl, sententiously. 

** That's tip-top advice," exclaimed Stop. " I am regular 
famished, and I dare say, for that matter, the girl is the 

* Any person who may conceive our narrative extraordinary may refer 
to Von Wrangle's ** Narrative of Journey to Polar Seas," or to a tale, 
by Percy B. St. John, called ** The Ivory Mine." These adventures on 
the Frozen Ocean will almost make those of Henry appear tame. — Edi- 
tar Sea of Ice 



THB ARCTIC ADYSNTUBERS. 1G7 

bot bleas her heart, she don't speak for herself. 
Look at her—* there she is a looking at the dogs' feet, a 
wiping their mouths^ a giving them some meat to eat, just 
as if she wasn't nearly dead herself. Them Indians is ter- 
rible hard to beat down, gav'ner. Eat this ven'son ; it's 
beat The fish is Salter; Luckj too — this pool is melted 
anow ; it ain't as sweet as sugar, and if you stirred it much 
the salt would come up; but it's better than nothing, and 
will set a fellow up a bit. Come, Wah, eat, there's a good 
girL We want aU our strength." 

**Qood," said Wah-paniosh; "old One-leg — wise — 
good in couneiL" 

This was said with a little laugh and an all but covert 
floeer at th» good fellow's loquacity ; which, however, was 
oompletely lost upon him. 

" Hunger's a great relish, guv'ner. This old tough meat 
easts joUy well— though I do begin to have enough. Now, 
tften, suppose we do have a council, as the girl says, and 
see what is to be done." 

** Good," again replied the girl, who was sufficiently aware 
of Iwr superior knowledge to step quietly into the position 
of adviser with white men, while with those of her own 
odor she would have remained oompletely silent. 

" The dogs will be rested in a couple of hours," said L 
*As soon as that time is passed, we must hurry on towards 
Aeland." 

" Thafs my complete opinion, guv'ner — just as if I had 
said it myself." 

"No good," put in Wah-pa-nosh, rising and speaking 
with animation. " Ice melt Uke snow — sun begin to make 
fire in air — one — two hour — ice," pointing to that on 
which we rested, "water— break up — small — little big 
bit — all gone. Dogs tired — never move — best make go 
— frighten, shoot but go." 

" There's a deal of reason in that girl," said Stop, " a 
deal of reason." 

I was about to speak in reply, when I was stopped by 
an event which made speaking impossible and unnecessary. 
A loud crash was heard, a bursting up of rushing and con-^ 
lined waters, and tken away I went sprawling into a dee^ 



168 THK SKA OF ICl^ OR 

pool of water, which blinded me, took away my breaiihy 
and then my head coming in contact with a projecting lamp 
of ice, I became insensible. Fortunately it was a very 
slight blow, and I remained unconscious not more than a 
moment I then scrambled on my knees and looked 
around, totally unable to rise higher, as the sea was rocking 
in a most fearful manner. 

The dogs cowered close to the ice in abject terror, Stop 
was crawling towards me, while the Indian girl, her face 
calm, and yet looking anxiously our way, dung to the 
sledge, whidi had slid some yards from its original position* 

The ice on which we halted had suddenly been violently 
detached from the great mass which stretehed away to the 
north, and in so doing had moved a small but heavy iceberg 
on its edge, which, losing the perpendicular, had fidlen 
heavily on the thick sheet of ice, and driven its southern 
edge many yards under water. It was this violent disrup- 
tion, and the downward plunge of the ice raft, that had so 
suddenly plunged us to leeward; while the sea, coming 
madly rushing up, had flooded us with its cold, salt waves. 
The iceberg had reversed its position, and this necessarily 
with a violence which kept the sea in motion for some dis- 
tance, and rocked the last refuge of the unfortunate ref- 
ugees with painful rapidity. 

" It's all up, guv'ner," said Stop. " This here cold water 
business has done for me. I feel in a shiver all over. 
And I can't get up neither. Well, I suppose I may as well 
lay still, as get up and be drowned. Who'd a thought it? 
— drowned like a rat at last." 

" Be not down-hearted," I replied, still on my knees ^ 
" we shall get out of this." 

" Well, it's well you think bo, Master Henry — and if 
we do, we'll just never no more come up in these parts. I 
take it roasting's better than freezing, after all — and Td 
rather be up among the darkies, though they are not as 
sweet as amber, than with a set of fellows as has dogs for 
horses, a few sticks for a stage coach, and a lot of rocking 
ice for a high road. I calls it a rocking horse road, with 
more fun nor is wanted for nothing." 

While the honest old fellow was grumbling, the raft <ji 



THE ARCTIC ADVENTURERS. 169 

ioe was settling down, until it was but faintly shaken by 
the waves. Stop was trying hard to get up, which, with 
his wooden leg, was difficult. I was soon on my feet, and 
was obliged to assist him to rise, which he did with many 
groans, as he had been much bruised in his fall. 

^ It is strange, too," said he, as he got on his legs, ^^ that 
water should be so hard. It isn't natural at all. Here am 
I, knocked into half a dozen cocked hats — O ! Well, old 
bones ain't young bones ; and I shouldn't wonder if old Tim 
Stop were laid up with the rheumatiz. That would be a 
pretty go." 

" I hope hot, my good old Stop," I replied, as ' I assisted 
him to take a seat on the baggage. ^* But what is to be 
done to get out of this terrible position ? The sledge is no 
use, the sea is quite broken up, and this rafl is moving to 
the south." 

" Not quite broken up," said Wah. " In shore hard yet ; 
no much water ; hold up." 

" That girl's the making of us," replied Stop. " I see 
what you mean, Wah — make a raft of this ice. But I 
can't pole. I'm unable to stand." 

" Never mind, Stop," said I, ** we'll do it This is, in- 
deed, a fine opportunity, suggested by her ingenuity." 

At the same time, I drew two long pieces of wood from 
the sledge, gave one to Wah, and then began to try and 
steer the ice raft through the dangerous navigation of that 
extraordinary channel. 

It was a very difficult undertaking. The current was 
strong and steady, the lumps of ice heavy and dangerous, 
and our vessel by no means steady. Our advance was 
extremely slow and tedious. We kept on moving quietly 
to the south, but still steering towards the shore, which here 
seemed to lie due north and south. 

** I say„guv'ner," said Stop, suddenly, with a loud cheer, 
** all right now ; ship shape that." 

I turned, and found that, while my attention was drawn 
off from the woi:thy fellow, he had taken the blanket which 
served to cover our load, and by means of our guns and 
some sticks, had erected a sail, which, acted on by a fair 

15 



170 THE SEA OF ICE, OB 

and rather stiff breeze, sent us at once at a very steady 
pace through the water. 

^ Ugh ! " exclaimed the Indian girl, laughing and clap- 
ping her hands, while I thanked the old fellow for his useful 
and ingenious contrivance. 

All we had to do now was to guide the raft, to push off 
any invading floes or bergs, and to aid our progress a little, 
when we could, by means of the poles. 

It was a wild and wondrous scene. The sun, which in a 
few days would set no more, had disappeared for a short 
time, leaving still a faint effulgence on the edge of the 
horizon. The scene was not covered by darkness, but by 
gloom ; and in the poet's words, I might have described the 
scene, without much fancy, thus : — 

*' Like to a man by Tiolence awaked, 
I turned my rested eves on every side, 
Standing erect, and looking earnestly 
To sain mtelligence of where I was ; 
And true it is, I found me on the brink 
Of the valley dolorous of the Abyss 
Which gathers the deep sound of countless woes. 
It was obscure, profound, and vaporous ; 
So that, by straining to the depth the sight, 
I could not in it any thing discern." 

Closed and serried clouds in fierce array came pouring 
fix)m the caverns of the north, which alofl was the direction 
of the wind, though we felt it so differently, to go fill other 
lands and more sunny skies with gloom. I felt as if we 
were, in that crepuscular light, actually within the palace 
of the Wind and Thunderbolt, where are forged all those 
fiery and chilly blasts which in turns sweep every sea and 
continent. The fierce north-west wind, when it travels over 
the vast plains of America, unchecked by mountains, retains 
its chill influences to the twenty-sixth degree of latitude, 
where, under its bitter and biting blast, people have been 
frozen to death.* Many of my readings occurred to me, 

• In Texas, a country in general too hot, I have known instances of 
men, camping out on the edge of Galveston Bay, being frozen to death, 
during; a normer, while under the influence of sleep, and, in one instance^ 

dnnk. 



THE ARCTIC ADVENTURERS. 171 

fts they will at such times. I thought of old Barentz,* and 
Behring, of glorious Cook, and others, and wondered if, after 
all, 1 should live to tell what 1 had endured, seen, and felt. 

My reveries were, however, suddenly interrupted. 

" Make ready," said Wah, who had glided unperceived 
to my side. 

" What is it, girl ? " I asked, shaking off my reverie, 
which had for a moment completely isolated me from all 
around. 

" Hard ice come — mount sledge again — young Oak go 
join old Oak " — pointing to Stop — " take down sail." 

I distinctly saw before me now a low and level plain of, 
as yet, unbroken ice, which we had nearly touched. To 
lessen the collision, I sung out to Stop, — 

" Down with sail, old boy ! — cheerily O I " 
♦ " Ay, ay, sir," said Stop, as he obeyed with the rapidity 
and precision of an old man-of-war's man. " What's up, 
guv'ner ? " 

" Land O ! " I replied. 

" Thank Heaven," said Stop, drawing a long breath, as 
if much relieved. " I ain't uncommonly fond of land, as a 
matter of principle, but I do say Tm glad to hear that." 

I' saw the Jndian girl rush to the head of the raft, and, by 
a well-directed thrust with her pole, she almost arrested the 
progress of the singular machine on which we were floating. 
Then it glided slowly on, and grated harshl}i against the 
solid ice, but without any very serious collision. 

" Now quick," said Wah, bounding back with the agility 
of a fawn. " Glouk, glouk, glouk ! " 

Up started the dogs, snuffed the air, which to them was 
probably redolent of land, and away they started with re- 
newed vigor, we having been four hours on that strange 
raft, in peril of our lives. 

" Bravo," shouted Stop ; " this is the way. Cut away, 
you young 'uns — you'll be home soon." 

• In the early part of the seventeenth century, Barentz, who had been 
sent out by the Dutch to discover the north-west passage, was wrecked, 
and, with his companions, fifteen in number, passed the entire winter in 
the seventy-sixth parallel of latitude, deriving a subsistence from eating 
Ibxes. They escaped to Lapland in the spring, In open. boatA. 



172 THB SEA OF ICB, OB 

We were, it is true, rapidly approachiDg^ the sliore, 
which was low, bleak, and dismal ; every where snow, snow, 
snow ; though we thought we could distinguish some signs 
of low bushes or trees. The dogs, though considerably 
revived, did not proceed with that wonderful velocity which 
had characterized them at first starting from my winter 
island. Still, it was not long ere we were within four hun- 
dred yards of the shore. 

" Gently, Wah," said I, as I felt the ice cracking once 
more under our weight, and that with a rapidity which was 
quite alarming, and reports, the nature of which cannot be 
described, so strange were they, told us that the same was 
taking place every where. 

Wah shook her head, and urged the dogs by voice and 
whip to their utmost speed. And well was it, for the hind 
part of the sledge now sank into the water as we proceeded,^ 
BO soft and wea]k was the ice. 

'* On, brave girl," I cried, as I perceived how wisely she 
was acting; ''you should have been a warrior, not a 
woman." 

Wah laughed and smiled proudly, despite the danger ; 
and then pointing forward, seemed to concentrate her whole 
energies on the last desperate struggle. 

The ice close to the bank had parted from the earth, and 
was moved backwards and forwards, sometimes touching 
the shore, schnetimes receding from it, and leaving a gap of 
four or five feet in width. This Wah bad taken in at a 
glance, despite the gloom which still prevailed. Stop, who 
had recovered his iron activity, secured the guns by rolling 
them in his thick blanket, while his stock of powder was 
made impenetrable to a ducking, which was iEill we had to 
fear for our sledge, whatever might happen to ourselves. 

" Warrior, hold fast," said Wah, in a low, hissing tone. 

She had chosen her moment well. Running in her dogs, 
as the great icy cover of the ocean receded a moment, she 
waited until the inevitable turn took place, and then 
launched the yelping crew full speed up the bank, which 
was steep and rough. 

One instant decided all. In we plunged, with a splash, 
into the flowing waters ; and then the energy and strength 



/ 



/ 



THE ARCTIC ADVENTURERS. 173 

of our untiring little animals drew us out of the water on to 
the snow-clad bank ; and bringing us into contact with one 
of the bushes I have already alluded to, the sledge was 
upset, Wah dashed out upon the snow, while I and Stop 
suffered a similar accident. 

" Well," said Stop, when he gained his breath, " Fm 
dashed if this don't beat horse-racing, cock-fighting, and 
every other wicked nuisance. Dogs were never intended 
for horses — that's clear." 

" Let us not complain," I replied, in a low, hushed voice, 
as I rose unhurt to my feet, thanks to snow ; ^^ to these 
animals we owe that we stand here on the soil of America, 
with but the prospect of a long journey between us and 
home." 

** Well, that is sommut, guv'ner," said Stop, rubbing him- 
self, and growling like an old bear. ^^ But if it is Ameriky, 
it ain't a bit like the Ameriky I've seen. I saw a jolly lot 
of houses and ships. Well ! well ! There's a wonderful 
change come over the place." 

"My dear Stop, in America, which seems a land pro- 
vided by Heaven as an outlet for the energy and cooped-up 
industry of the Old World, there is every climate. It ex- 
tends from the utmost northern limits of the world to nearly 
the utmost southern limits. It's a wonderful country, Stop ; 
and what is more wonderful still, we stand upon its shores." 

" Good I — big land," said Wah, who, with her Indian 
agility, had soon leaped on her feet. " Take little rest — 
go on — find house — one, two, six — ten — five." 

" Well, that is a rum way of counting. I fancy that girl 
would say the Lord's Prayer, as boys do the multiplication 
table, backwards. But how far is it, girl ? " 

" Long way — travel all day — rest little bit." 

" But how, my good Wah ? " asked I. 

"Lift up sledge — make tent side of — dog sleep — run 
fast morning.^' 

The old fellow laughed in a droll kind of way, but did not 
explain the cause of his laughter, though I fancied I guessed 
his meaning. But as I never knew, I need not venture on 
an explanation which might prove erroneous. 

He joined us in raising up the skdga, ^VikXv ^^ 'sara^ 

15* 



174 THB SEA OF lOBy OR 

righted, and with the blankets and some skins made a kind 
of bed and tent, on which we gladly laid our weary limbs. 
Wah handed us some meat, and then crept under the shel- 
ter, and I foUowed. We were all so weary that I believe 
not a word was spoken, but that all were fiist asleep in five 
minutes. 

I seemed to have been in the arms of pleasing slnmber 
about five minutes, when a tugging at my arm made me 
start. Wah was standing over us and pointing to the sun, 
which had been up some time, though the small hours of 
day had not arrived. I stretched myself and got up, and 
found, to my great surprise, that she had kindled a fire with 
our fiint and steel, over which some meat was cooking. 

" No time lose — snow melt soon — walk then — *' 

^ Walk ! ** said Stop, ruefully, holding up his wooden 
leg. ^ Shall we have to walk ? ** 

I did not reply. I was struck dumb at this idea. I 
knew that, at his age and with his infirmity, it would be 
impossible for my poor old friend to proceed at the pace, 
through the vast wilderness we had to cross, which was 
requisite if we would effect our enterprise in the summer, so 
as to reach the nearest fort before winter. I certainly felt 
more confidence about passing a winter half-way, after one 
in the region we had left ; but it was a sad dash to my 
hopes. 

" I wish I had never been bom," said poor Stop, with 
tears in his eyes. '' I hope I may die, and let you advance 
at a proper rate." 

« Hush I " I began. 

" Old Gray-beard good friend — no leave him — walk fisur 
as can — find rivers — trees — make canoe — One-leg sit 
in canoe." 

, " It*s all very fine, young woman, and One-leg, as you 
call me, is very much obliged to you — but we shaU walk so 
precious slow — can't we keep the dogs ? " 

"No — much eat — get hungry — eat us " and the 

girl laughed. "Take them long as snow last — to other 
big water." 

" What 1 " I exclaimed, in an agony of surprise and dis- 
Mppointment ; " another sea ? " 



THE ARCTIC ADVENTURERS. 175 

"Yes,** said the girl, looking at me in great astonish- 
ment 

*• But how are we "to cross it ? " 

"Find Esquimaux canoe — take like sledge — leave 
sledge and dogs for it — change " and the girl laughed. 

" Another sea I " groaned Stop. 

** This big island T- all round water — not wide one place 
^-rnake canoe with skins — if no find Esquimaux." 

My thoughts reverted a moment to the original object of 
my journey. I knew very well that I must be on the land 
which coasts Baffin's Bay, and if that land was in reality an 
island, it was probable that the channel between this island 
and the main land was that very nor'-west passage I had 
come out to seek. But just then my ambitious thoughts 
had fled far away, and my most earnest desire was to return 
to that home which to me was earthly paradise. 

" You crossed it in canoes ? " I said. 

" Yes — cross one, two times — Esquimaux travel long 
way — i^ght where sun set — go see big river — big tribe 
there." 

*^ But do you mean to guide us west? " said I, pointing in 
that direction. 

Wah nodded her headi 

"Why?" 

"Big stone — little stone — all stone," pointing to the 
south. " No eat — no drink — die." 

** You know best," I continued. " And I place the whole 
direction of this journey in your hands. You expect to fall 
m with a river?" 

"Yes; big river — make canoe — perhaps find one — 
keep gun — ^ Esquimaux fight — great big number — shoot 

— eat prisoner." * 

" My eyes and limbs ! " said the old sailor, with a grin — ^ 
" here is a pretty kettle of fish. A race on the snow again, 
then a sea voyage in a canoe — then a long trot to the west 

— then a skrimmage and a bit of robbing — and then a 

• Frankim arrived at the mouth of the Mackenzie River on the 7th of 
July! 1826, where he encountered a large tribe of fierce Esquimaux, who 
pUlaged his boats, and it was only by great caution, prudence, and for- 
bearance, that the whole party were not massacie^ 



176 THE SEA OF ICB, OR 

long journey up a river. If that ain't work for five years 
for old One-leg, I'll consent to eat hira." 

" Nonsense — one winter I believe possible — that is all. 
If it pleases God to take us from this bitter wilderness, we 
must not grumble at the time it takes to do it." 

" Young Oak right — one winter — Great Bear Lake — 
rest — fish, and then down — Lake of the Woods — my 
home," striking her heart to signify we should be welcome. 

^* Them blessed dogs is done eating, I see — so here goes. 
I've done. Well, I must say the longer this sledge-work 
lasts, the better." 

So saying. Stop walked to the sledge, mounted it, and in- 
vited me to follow, which I did with great willingness ; 
and in five minutes more we were dashing away to the 
south-west, at the full speed of our animals. 

We halted for the night at an abandoned Esquimaux 
village, where we found some remnants of blubber, which 
served for the dogs, but no canoes. 

We took a long rest, under the advice of Wah-pa-nosh, 
and started in the morning with renewed vigor. 

But as our journey was performed without events of any 
consequence, I may as well state that we had not seen many 
suns sink in the. west, when we found ourselves on the edge 
of the salt water spoken of by the Indian girl, but found it 
hard frozen enough to enable us to risk crossing it with 
our sledge. 

Away, then, we went once more — dashing, splashing 
through the soft and slushy snow, that almost melted as we 
fiew, until we at last, aftev the most painful and disagreea- 
ble portion of the whole of our journey, came in sight of the 
fires of a large Esquimaux encampment, which Wah ex- 
plained was on an island.* 

* It was the Igloolik of Parry, and the channel was that of the Hecla 
and Fury. — See Parry*8 Second Voyage, 



THE ARCTIC ADVENTURERS. 177 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

IGLOOLIK. 

A HALT was declared at a respectful distance from the 
island, and Wah-pa-nosh, whose wonderful Indian sagacity 
had guided us thus far, now informed us that there were 
one hundred and twenty fires in the camp, that they were 
the relatives and friends of the men we had already en- 
countered ; and then she said, — 

" Young Oak fresh — Old Oak tired — like rest — go 
into village — Esquimaux much 'fraid gun — like pale-faces 
too — big ship — come here before — no touch Pale-face. 
But Indian girl go — make journey by self — no go to little 
red man wigwam." 

** Now, girl, none of your chaff; Fm a old sailor if I 
wn't a old soger — and I means to say this, you're com- 
mander-in-chief; and what you says we'll do." 

" Exactly 1 " exclaimed I ; " Wah-pa-nosh, we will stand 
by you to the last gasp. We will escape together or die 
together." 

The girl fastened a keen, a gratified, and smiling look 
upon me as I spoke, and then laughed with a heartiness I 
was quite pleased and surprised to witness. 

" The young Pale-face is a man — his voice is true as 
the arrow of the hunter — his color is white, but his heart 
is very red, and Wah-pa-nosh is very happy. A bird sings 
in the woods who calls Wah-pa-nosh to its nest — it is the 
wild bird of the woods, and to Wah-pa-nosh the voice is 
very sweet. But Wah-pa-nosh sees a long way before her, 
and she will never forget her pale-face brother, who saved 
her from the wigwam of the Esquimaux. Muskwash is a 
great warrior — his wigwam is empty — when it is full his 
heart will be glad ; there will be no cloud before his eyes, 
and he will see his white brother. Wah-pa-nosh has heard 
her pale-&ce brother, and it is very ^od." 



178 THE 8BA OF ICB, OR 

This was spoken in a mixture of English and French. I 
was able to follow with great difficulty ; but I thoroughlj 
understood the general outline. 

^ I am glad that Wah is pleased ; she is the sweet sing- 
ing bird to us." 

^ No/' said she, laughing and blushing, why, I could not 
tell at first. ^' No ! white man — Fale-face no call Indian 
girl singing bird — got singing bird at home — in great 
father country." 

** Thank you, Wah," I replied ; " then I will call you 
sister." 

" Yes, sister — very good — good — Wah, Pale-face sis- 
ter. Now, what do ? " 

" We ask you," I replied. 

" Old Oak same ? " 

" Always follow the guv'ner." 

** Esquimaux island big. Hide plenty. Little bit night 
come soon. No moon. Lie on island one — two hour. 
Then go. If Esquimaux come — fight" 

" As you will, Wah ; speak, and we obey always," was 
my quiet reply. 

She at once took the advantage of a long snow-drift 
which had been formed against an inequality of the ice, and 
led the dogs round by a circuitous route, until we lost all 
trace and sign of the Esquimaux village. Then she turned 
again to the south, and we galloped along .at our usual 
speed until we came to a halt upon a long, low, narrow 
neck of land, covered with patches, utterly free from snow 
on its southern side. 

To our great dismay we then saw that the channel be- 
tween the shore and Igloolik, as it had already been named, 
was quite free from ice — dark waves rolling up the shore 
and carrying on its bosom icebergs, floes, hammocks, every 
thing to the far-off south, there to melt as they came in 
conjunction with the warmer waters of the great North 
Atlantic Qcean. 

" Sledging is done for," said Stop, with a very wry and 
sour face, — " all up." 

" No ! canoe plenty — village one mile off — Wah go 
fetch kayak — lend gun " 



THE ARCTIC ADVENTURERS. 179 

" But shall I go with you ? " said I. " Stop will stay and 
guard the sledge and dogs." 

Wah nodded assent, and took the gun without saying 
another word. 

Away, then, we moved, with all the caution which the 
occasion demanded, skirting the southern edge of the island, 
as Wah declared that the northern and eastern would be 
alive with Esquimaux fishing in air-holes opened up in the 
ice — a favorite and productive occupation. The island 
was here almost wholly free from snow, the earth being 
soppy and marshy in some places, dry and hard in others, 
where rock and stones prevailed over the alluvial soil. The 
vegetation, which had been kept warm and ready by the 
coat of snow,, was every where springing up, and in some 
places we found stunted bushes, as well as grass, sorrel, and 
sassafras. Hillocks rose at a small distance from the sea, 
which kept the Indian girl and myself concealed from any 
who might be wandering about the interior of the island. 

Wah walked first, moving with all the cat-like caution of 
her race, while I kept close behind, my gun clutched firmly, 
and certainly a little nervous and excited at the novel 
position I was placed in. I had never shed human blood, 
and I fervently hoped that such a dire necessity might be 
spared me on Uie present occasion. I knew perhaps better 
than any man how sweet was life, and I also knew that it is 
as dear to the most degraded savage as to the wisest man 
who sits in high places and makes laws for those beneath 
him. Besides, my errand was scarcely to be justified. I 
was about to deprive these obscure and unprotected beings 
of one of their most useful and valuable articles. It is true 
that the salvation oriife was the object; but if this reason 
were to excuse thefl, what would become of society at large ? 

I felt I could have traded with the Esquimaux, and have • 
exchanged something for a canoe ; but then I should have 
been compelled to have given up the girl, which I was de- 
termined not to do, under any pressure of peril or personal 
danger which might occur. 

I did, to speak the truth, feel very much ashamed of the 
part I was playing, and consequently experienced very little 
confidence as to its final result. 



180 THE SEA. OF ICE, OB 

On we journeyed in complete silence for about two miles, 
when Wah halted. 

^ Hist 1 ** said she, placing a finger on her lips, and stand- 
ing erect and motionless. 

"What is it?" 

"Nothing — seen something — stoop low — crawl like 
one snake — follow Wah." 

" Crawl like a snake," thought J to myself) with a dry 
grin ; " yes — very like a snake in the grass." 

We were at the bottom of a small slope which rose like 
a glacis towards the east It was covered by soft grass, 
very short and thin, but very pleasant and cheerful to the 
eye. Along this Wah glided like a serpent, keeping her 
gun always in front, and crawling slowly and deliberately 
forward. Again after a few minutes she halted^ 

" Ugh," she whispered, with a low, noiseless laugh, as she 
motioned me to come up to her side. 

My heart beat tumultuously — my eyes grew dim with 
excitement ; then, and in obedience to her signs, I advanced 
to her side. 

" Look I " said she, pointing with her finger. 

We were looking down upon a winding river of con- 
siderable width, on the opposite banks of which, higher 
up, and at some distance, were the huts of the Esquimaux 
peering up, so that we just saw their roofs. A few stunted 
bushes intervened to protect us from discovery. 

Several kayaks and oomiaks * lay up the stream, but in 
dangerous proximity to the village. There were, perhaps, 
a dozen, some large and some small ; but any one of them 
would have served our purpose. Still I did not see how 
they were to be approached without danger of discovery 
and a terrible collision. The Esquimaux, being terrible 
thieves themselves, would probably be all the more ready 
to punish guilt in others. 

I saw at once how perfect had been the training of the 
Indian girl — how cool was her courage and her judgment, 
untrammelled as they were by any of those compunctions 
of conscience which troubled me. She laid down her gun 

• 

♦ Men's canoes, women's canoes. 



THE ARCTIC ADTEKTUBEBS. 181 

by my side, took off a good paart of her dress — in the first 
place her mocassons — and then taking my knife from my « 
belt, was about to start witfaioat siaying a word, her eyes 
fixed all the while on the boats. 

'' Hist ! " I said, imitating her cantion and low tone of 
voice, and pointing to the bank, where I could plainly a^ 
the back of a human head. 

** Ugh I " replied the startled girl, and then she latighed 
again in her mellow tones; ''old squaw — very old — no 
good — Esqaimiaux no give eitt — fish for self." 

And clutehitig her kmfe, she made one step forward, and 
prepared to crawl upon the poor old creature with aU the 
cat-like stealthiness of the red'^kin race. 

•*Wah,"saidL 

^Wah listens," she replied^ keeping her eyes fixed on 
the head. 

''Don't kill her," I exclaimed, looking imploringly into 
her fine eyes. 

"What you take Wah for I ~- no kill squaw — Wah 
Christian ! " 

And without another word she began her cautious advance, 
leaving me startled, indeed, at a revelation which, however, 
meant nothing more, as I afterwards found, but that, having 
been brought up in a fort, she had been prevailed on by an 
English lady to be baptized, while she had on the same oc- 
casion promised to do her utmost with her people to put an 
end to the practice of indiscriminately slaughtering women 
and children. 

She moved along, apparently carelessly; so that, had the 
woman turned, she would not have been too much surprised ; 
but it appeared that the poor old creature was either too 
deaf or too absorbed in her task to take any notice of her 
approach, which indeed was as noiseless and quiet as that 
of one of the creeping things of the forest. 

Suddenly she stood right over the woman, and with 
wondrous rapidity clapped her hands on her mouth — 
still not without a slight, faint screech from the ancient 
Es<j[uimaux dame, which, however, scarcely reached me. 
Ta an instant I was beside my bold and active companion, 
assisting to gag and tie the old cro&lKXX^) n^Vo \x\i\^ ^^t^Si^^ 

16 



182 THE SEA. OF ICE, OB 

most hideous aud extraordinarj specimen of antiqaitj I iiad 
ever seen. 

Wah pointed silently to a tiny canoe, just enough for one, 
in which the woman had crossed over from the village to 
the little bight, which seemed, from the numerous fish she 
had caught with a primitive hook and line and rod, to be 
abundant in the finny tribe. 

Wah delayed not one moment, but entering the canoe, 
pushed out 

(< Wagh ! " she exclaimed, unable to restrain her wonder 
as she felt herself carried up the stream, she never having 
had occasion to notice before the phenomenon of the tide* 
But with this one exclamation all sign of wonder ceased, as 
8he*began paddling vigorously for the opposite shore, which 
she reached in a very few minutes. She then landed, fas- 
tened the canoe, and began her slow and cautious advance 
up the bank towards the place where the fieet of large boats 
lay, all the Esquimaux being out fishing in their smaller 
ones. 

On she went with stealthy and silent step, until she 
reached a slight bend in the river, when she was completely 
lost to sight. 

My anxiety was now terrible. I expected every minute 
to hear her cry, and to behold her flying from her late 
captors, when I should be compelled to cover her retreat by 
the use of firearms. I sat then moodily alongside the old 
woman, who glanced at me from her bleared red eyes with 
a fierceness which showed the tensity of her rage and fury. 
She probably expected to be finally put to death, or at all 
events to be robbed of her fish and canoe — intentions 
which, under the circumstances, she had every right to ex- 
pect to see carried out. 

I noticed with extreme satisfaction, after about ten min^ 
utes, that the fiood tide was at its height, and that, if it did not 
yet turn, it was at all events stationary. This I saw by the 
position of the canoe on the opposite bank, which, after lying 
up stream for some time, then floated carelessly out into the 
water, sometimes moving up, sometimes down. Then ten 
minutes elapsed, and the canoe was carried close in shore 
bjr the action of the ebb tide. 



THE ARCTIC ADVENTURERS. 183 

At this instant Wah came in sight, standing upright in a 
large kayak, which she paddled along with extreme ra- 
pidity towards me. The wind, the tide, and her impel- 
ling force, were all favorable ; and it was not many min- 
utes ere she was at the edge of the water, motioning me to 
enter. 

" And the squaw ? " said I, unwilling to leave the poor 
old creature in that wretched state. 

^* Make haste — > Esquimaux come too much quick ; soon 
untie squaw." 

I made no further remark, but stepped cautiously into 
the frail, but somewhat large bark, in the' bottom of which 
I laid my guns, and took up a paddle which I began to use 
with all the energy and science I possessed. The open sea 
was not half a mile from us, and then we had about two 
miles along shore to go, to join Stop. 

Meanwhile the old fellow had nestled cosily under shel- 
ter of the baggage, laid an axe close to his hand, and 
another above his head, and then had lit a pipe, which he 
began to enjoy with all the luxurious solemnity of an old 
sailor. He was excited and alarmed as to the consequences 
of our expedition ; and altogether the extraordinary adven- 
tures, which overwhelmed him daily, began to have a cer- 
tain effect upon the worthy fellow's mind. 

" All this is mighty queer, Mr. Stop. Are you quite 
sure it's all right ? Am I up in them cold seas I hear tell 
of, or am I dreaming ? — I can't make it out. No. First I 
pops upon a island, then I pops upon Master Henry — Grod 
bless him ! — then a Indian girl — that's the conclusion of 
the affair. Now, Stop, is that girl sweet upon him, or is she 
not? That's what you'd better see to, Mister Stop. No 
nonsense. There's Fanny at home, a-crying her blessed 
eyes out about her poor Henry, I know. No, I can't allow 
it — no gallevanting. Master Henry — Stop says it — no 
making love to copper kettles — no tinkering work — no. 
I'm right up and down, straightforward ; and if I sees any 
nonsense, I shall speak up like a man. Sometimes I think 
he's too grateful to the girl. He's young, and she's young, 
and it comes as natural to young people to love as to smoke 
this pipe. But Henry's as good as married, wid ^«i S&'^^&sl^ 



184 THE SEA OF ICB, OB 

and one's white and the other's red — it won't do. Be- 
sides, he'd be turning hunter, trapper, or something of 
that sort." 

How I laughed when he first told me this, I can scarceLj 
describe. Ah me I I wish I could always have laughed at 
it altogether. Poor Wah I Good, fidthral, devoted girL 

^ A pretty pair of children — talk of robbing orchards. 
Ain't they gone on a nice expedition? A boat stealing. 
May do up here among the cold 'uns, but won't do nowhere 
else. Where'd they go to in England ? Ah I Mr. Stop, J 
fJEUicy this climate don't improve the morals. Dog stealing's 
nothing, I suppose ; " and the old feljow lai:^hed heartily, 
closing his eyes as he did so, to expel the tears that came 
involuntarily to fill them. 

When he opened his eyes, he started, an^ then sat staring 
before him with blank astonishment. 

Four Esquimaux, armed with spears, bow and arrows, 
and knives made of iron hoops off* some barrels they had 
received from certain whalers, stood menacingly in front oJT 
him, shaking their spears, drawing their bows, and dancing 
and capering in a wild and strange way. They pointed to 
the dogs, they pointed to the sledge, they pointed to the 
north, and made signs which Stop soon understood. 

" A pretty set of liars you are. You mean, you dirty, 
ugly little landlubbers, to say that Pve killed the owners 
and stolen the sledge — do you ? No ! I did not kill any 
of them ; and if I did take the sledge, why see, you ugly 
baboons, I lefl a prime boat and lots of grub for it." 

The Esquimaux shook their heads, and one advanced so 
near as to take up the axe, which lay above the head of 
Stop. He then turned to his companions, who began to 
examine the tool with great eagerness and delight. Stop 
clutched the other axe, felt for his pistols, drew his cap 
nearly over his eyes, to protect himself from their arrowy, 
and waited. 

" When you've done with that there plaything, youll just 
give it up," said Stop, who knew the value of an axe to us. 

The Esquimaux turned round, advanced close to Stop, 
and one of them began making a speech — chiefly, however, 
hj signs. 



THE ABCTIC ADYENTUBfiRS. 185 

' He pointed to the sledge and dogs, which he gave Stop 
to understand were the property of his tribe ; he pointed 
to the north, and sang in a low, monotonous tone what 
sounded like a death-chant ; then he pointed to the axe^ and 
placed it under his garment, and then held out his hand to 
Stop to shake. 

" O, I see, that's as plain as the spelling-book ! We've 
stolen your sledge, killed your friends, and all that; but 
you see an axe wMch you value — ^and you are willing to 
be friends and forget all, if I give you the axe. Here's a 
pretty go, and no guVner. Well, I suppose I'd better do 
it ; but I wish they'd make haste, or else we shall have the 
whole tribe here." 

He then made signs to the Esquimaux to keep the axe. 
But at that instant another of the savages saw the second 
implement of the same kind in the hands of Stop, and made 
a dart at it. Stop rose to his feet and waved it round his 
head with a tremendous cry. 

"No! you thieving landlubbers — this is mine, and I 
mean to keep it. Sheer off, or I tries ite sharpness on one 
of your topworks." 

- The Esquimaux hesitated ; but they were four, and their 
adversary . but one man, without any of those alarming 
weapons the Esquimaux had so recently seen in the hands 
of the crew of the Hecla and Fury, as I afterwards learned. 
They accordingly prepared their bows, raised their spears, 
one even lifting the light axe to throw it at the unfortunate 
victim of their desire to Hbe possessed of so valuable an 
instrument 

In his hurry to rise. Stop had not used his usual circum- 
spection with regard to his wooden leg, which had got en- 
tangled in the reins of the weary dogs, who, after just 
raising their heads, had again laid them down to sleep tdfler 
their unusual fatigue. As therefore he waved his axe in 
one hand and drew a pistol with the other, he fell backwards 
on the sledge. 

On came the Esquimaux, with a horrid yell of delight 
and anger. 

Stop did not lose his self-possession. He righted himself 
at once, and levelling his pistol, though l^m^ W<:3K«^jAs»^\iRk 

16* 



184 VMB SBA OP urn, OB 



irad. Two odMT cracfa of goM^ aid two oiker streims 
of fire, foUowod afawMft al Ike ame iocta|il» and three 
EnquiBMniT bit the doel, or niber, fell eprairlbig on the 
damp earth, while the olhcr fled with bociid jeDs and 



^ Bj jmgo I " ffTckwiod Slop^ lisin^ ^ hece^e a piettj 
go!- 

<<llaheharte — BO talk — wotkl* eaid Wah, fringing 
tohk tide, and letting Iqom the ataitled dogau 

She then eooUj deepatchcd the woimded BegniniawTj and 
aetoallj took thexr sei^ befiwe I oonld inteffere. 

^ And that giri caDed henelf a Qirietian,* said J, tonung 
awaj in deep disgnst. 

I knewy however, that for a eentmj, white men, who 
ihoold have known better, i^oried in the nnmber of aca^ 
thej coold show.* 

Bat this was no time ibr reflecdon or thought It was 
an hoar for rapid and immediate action, and we all did act 
without a won). The eonteptB of the sledge were trans- 
ferred to the canoe, chiedj bj the Indian giri. I trembled 
so, I was so nervooslj convalsed, that I was of little ase. 
I had wounded a man at all events, if Wah-pa-nosh had 
finally killed him. It is true, I had no choice, for Stop's 
life was in their bands ; and under the circumstances I was 
really not to be blamed. But taking human life is a sore 
thing; and those who so coolly talk of the necessity of 
capital punishments in their closets, should know what it is 
to take life with yojor own hand, and what a fearful and 
dreadful thing it is to be cut off in the full pride of man- 
hood. 

War may be necessary ; some say it is ; but it is not the 
glorious, splendid thing some would make it. A great bat- 
tle sounds well, when described by the poet, who talks of ^e 
clarion and the drum, and the clang of arms, and the shock 
of cavalry, and the waving plumes, apd the exciting mix-* 
ture of activity and solemnity about it ; but he teUs you not 
of all the horrid and vile scenes which catch the eye, when 



« * The white scouts and border men, on both sides, during the American 
inin^ scalped unhesitatingly. 



THB ARCTIC ADYENTITItERd. 1B7 

the excitement is ower, and tbe mind takes in the ivhole 
under the influence of reason and calmness. 

But I cannot moralise when my task is to describe. 

We had loaded our boat with every thing valuable; I 
had laid the first axe on the bodies of the slain, to inti^ 
mate that I offered it in payment of the kajak ; Stop and 
I were in the canoe, and Wah on shore letting go the 
thong — that thong that served as painter — when we saw 
that we were pursued on two sides. On the shore side, 
we saw coming a crowd of savages — shrieking, crying, 
yelling, and gesticulating in a way that was really and truly 
frightful to hear. At the distanee of about two hundred 
yards out at sea, and evidently trying to head us, was a 
fleet of boats, some manned by men and some by women, 
but all intent on reaching us before we started. 

Wah bounded into the canoe and seized a paddle, in 
which we imitated her, and began pulling ^ for dear life ** 
out upon the dancing waters of that gloomy sea. It was 
evident, however, that the kayaks and oomiaks would over* 
take us, and- equally evident also what would be our fate 
after what had happened on that unfortunate island, wher^ 
we on our passage carried rapine, slaughter, and death* 

^ No run away," said Wah, shaking her head -^ " fight." 

^ I see it I I see it ! " I replied, now very stem and dew 
tdrmined ; for I at once saw tile ImmineBee of the danger. 

We were now about a hundred yards firom the shoana^ 
quite out of any danger from the missiles of the crowds 
which yelled, and shrieked, and danced, to encourage their 
fellows ; while we were not more than eighty yards fiN)m 
the advancing kayaks and oomiaks. In t&a^ minutes they 
would be aboaid of us. We laid in our paddles ; I and Stop 
took our guns ; Wah seized a bow and arrow, her prize 
from the Esquimaux ; and all prepared with stem brows 
for that last terrible struggle -^ resolved, at all events, to 
sell our lives dearly. 

^ Guv'ner/' said Stop^ in a whisper. 

"Yes." 

" My sight ain't as good as it was," he continued. 

« WeU, Stop." 

^ And we must fire quick, guv'ner« Yo^'d. \^U^ ^^xac^ 



188 THE 8RA OF ICB, CM 

up and blase away, while I load* Mind, it's no age wasting 
powder. Every shot must hit its man.** 

I nodded, and levelled my gun, and as rapidlj raised it 
again, as an unlooked-for event checked mj fire and prob- 
ably saved the life of a salvage. 

We all sat still and waited* 



CHAPTER XIX. 

THE TBUCE. 



The kayaks had ceased rowing, and a small, light canoe, 
holding one man only, was seen advancing towards us with 
signs which Wah at once declared to be indicative of a pa- 
cific humor. I and Stop at once laid down our guns upon 
our knees, and waited until the messenger of peace came 
sufficiently near to speak with her. 

He then addressed us in his own language. 

I pointed to Wah, who looked fixedly at the little savage, 
and said two or three words. 

The man hesitated, and then, after a few words from 
Wah, he made a speech, speaking for some little time with 
great rapidity. The Indian girl, when he had finished, 
quietly translated his words. 

They were to the effect that the Esquimaux were sorry 
that any thing should have happened to disturb the friendly 
feeling they experienced towards the English ; that they 
had been kindly treated by the qien in big ships, and were 
therefore willing to forget and forgive all that had happened, 
on two conditions — one of which was, that we should make 
presents to the widows of the men who had been killed ; 
the other, that we restore to them the girl of their tribe, 
whom we had taken away from a hunting party, with their 
dogs and sledge. 

I made angry signs that I would not accede to the second 
request, and then added that I could not to the first, beinjr 
too poor. 



THE ARCTIC ADYENTUREBS. • 189 

Wah^ranslated my reply ; upon which the parlementary 
made a rapid sign to his fellows, which was responded to 
by yells of the most fearful description, by a volley of ar- 
rows, and a general rush towards us. I had: no remedy ; so 
I fired into the very thickest part of the group, handed th^ 
gun to Stop, and then fired again, he load^ing in sucU a way 
that the Esquimaux could not tell what he was about* 

I had fired four jehotB, when a hftltof the Esquimaux 
took place ; and at this moment a light lEur being felt to fan 
our cheeks, we hurriedly rigged a tiny sail, and then took 
to our paddles, and began our course /across that tossing sea, 
whose dark waters seemed to threaten ps every moment 
with destruction. The kayaks meanwhile had wholly ceased 
rowing, and presently returned to the shore with mourn- 
ful cries, which made us first aware that our shots had 
really told. 

And here we were once more upon the op^i sea — in 
what latitude or longitude I could not tell ; but sailing along 
to the land before us, which I was unable to say was or was 
not an island, or that continent we so eagerly sought. And 
our sole guide under all these difficulties w^ a young In- 
dian girl. 

We soon lost sight of Igloolik — to my great delight, as 
the very idea of it made me sad and melancholy ; and abou^ 
three hours later we came in sight of fresh land, and were 
soon in the shelter of a bay, and close to a shore with rock9 
running along its edge, and above that a level plain, clothed 
with rich grass, with plants in flower tt- a cheerful and 
pleasant sight. 

We landed at once, and after taking some food, had a 
conference as to our future proceedings. We were, as I 
afterwards discovered, on Melville Peninsula* 

" Now, Wah," said I, " have you ever been here before ? '* 

The girl nodded. 

"When?" 

" When me take prisoner, brought here." 

" How did you travel ? " 

"In canoe." 

" But not along this coast? '^ pointing to Hx^ ehore^ of 
Ike bay. 



190 TBE SEA OF ICE, OR 

^ No. Carry canoe over land — another big watl^ there,** 
pointing to the west 

"• I tell you what, guv'ner, this is a kind of blind naviga* 
tion. It's my opinion we're down amongst some thousand 
of islands, and will get oiit of this blessed country in about 
half a century. What's to be done ? Building materials 
don't turn up every where." 

** What do you advise, Wah ? " I asked. 

*' Drag canoe — make sledge one, two stick, drag — find 
river — go down — reach big water — sail 'long shore." 

^ Well, this is the queerest sailing ever I knew ; we're to 
drag this here craft at our tails along the land. Well, I 
suppose it's all right" 

'* It is the best plan, Stop. The girl is right — what we 
should do without her I do not know. I shall never be 
able to reward her." 

'" Well, that's considering, guv'ner. Some people is sat- 
isfied with one thing, and some with another. I dare say 
Wah won't be very particular greedy." 

** What you say. Gray-beard ? " said Wah, laughing. 

'< Nothing particular. But what are you going to do 
with them two whalebones ? " 

" Make sledge," replied Wah, who had taken two long 
whalebones from inside the canoe, and was fitting them un- 
der the frail machine. We rose to aid her, and then pro- 
ceeded to take that rest we so much needed. 

Wah turned the canoe upside down, and got under it, 
while I and Stop lay down in our furs beside a fire of 
wood, weeds, and a kind of peat we discovered near the 
camp. 

Aifler a rest of rather longer duration than we intended, 
we rose and breakfasted, loiwied the small boat, and Wah 
starting off* over the plain to show us the way, we drew it 
by a leathern thong, and commenced our journey. I and the 
Indian girl took the boat duty in turns, Stop being unable 
to be of any service in this particular, on account of his in- 
firmity. Our journey was pleasant enough for some hours 
while over a grassy plain ; but soon this ended, and rocks, 
stones, and rugged glens took the place of the level ground. 
Uere our labor was w^ty heavy. Indeed, it was ft>r four 



THE ARCTIC ADVENTURERS. 101 

days a most fearful and horrible journey. Over wild hills, 
barren and desolate ; generally without water, found some- 
times in holes just in time to save us from perishing ; our 
canoe a burden to be carried now, our provisions beginning 
to run low, the sky threatening and fearful,* and the summer 
stalking on with fearful rapidity. 

Scarcely a word was interchanged. "We were a gloomy 
and silent party. I think I can see ourselves now, creep- 
ing up a horrid glen, composed of basaltic rocks, quartz, 
ore, sandstone, and flinty slate, with not a blade of grass, 
or shrub, or tree, to diversify or change the scene ; poor 
Stop, loaded with a huge pack, his gun slung on his 
shoulder, crawling up the hill-side, aided by his knife, 
which he planted in the fissures of the rocks ; I and Wah 
-— she behind pushing up the frail canoe, I standing on a 
ledge above, hauling it up by the deer-skin thong — all faint, 
weary, exhausted, and more inclined to sit down and die 
than to exert ourselves. 

At last, crawling along on our hands and knees, Ming 
up the boat by slow degrees, we reached the top of the 
mountain. 

Our burst of joy and relief may be conceived. 

At, our feet, some thousand jpf yards distant only, was the 
sea, with a river falling into it, on the banks of which were 
bushes and green grass, while the waters of that portion of 
the Arctic Ocean were entirely free from ice. Down we 
went, despite our weariness of foot, down the steep declivi- 
ties of the mountain, until we reached the beach, where we 
launched our cifooe, and slowly paddled along the coast un- 
til we entered the river, on the grassy bank of which we 
lay down to rest « 

I fell asleep at once. 

'I was awakened at last by a touch from the hand of Wah, 
who gravely pointed to Stop. 

He had laid down his gun, his axe, his pack, and his shot 
and powder-pouches, and had brought them near me. Then 
taking off his wooden leg, he had placed it under his head, 
and to all appearance lay dead on the ground. A low 
moaning alone showed that he was still alive. I tried to 
rise, but I could not — I could only ciwwV k\A ^"^ >x. 



192 THB 8£A OF IC£, OB 

oome to this — that after enduriDg such fearful perila, we 
were to perish on that bleak strand at last ? 

^It's all up — I can't go a step farther," moaned old 
Stop. ' Fve taken my leg oiT, and Pm going to* die. Mais* 
ter Henry, you go ahead. This old carcass is worn out ; 
but you are young, and may yet escape — cut away, ga^- 
'ner, and leave me. It's of no use talking. I can^t put 
that leg on no more. Dot-and-carry-onie will be buried is 
this here grimstone land." 

^Stop," said I, in a faint tone, ^doA*t make me worse. 
I feel dying already, and if you talk this way, I shall never 
get up again." 

^ £h, what ? " exclaimed the old fellowj sitting up, and 
proceeding to buckle on his leg with great gravity-^'' guv* 
'ner ill ? Well, Stop will wait He can die any timer 
But, Master Henry, no nonsense — if you die, what am I 
to say to your father and to your mother, eh ? And poor 
little Fanny. O, my I " 

And the poor fellow actually cried aloud as his w^ak 
state compelled him to lie back once more. 

I now explained to Wab, that our state of body was 
caused by living on salt provisions, by our superhumian 
fatigue in crossing the rugged hill of the Melville Penin- 
sula, and above all, by want of water. I added, that we 
could only hope to proceed after two or three days of com- 
plete rest, taking during that time nothing but fresh meat, 
with plenty of green herbage, such as sorrel, &c. Even 
with this diet and repose, I ddd not hold out much hope of 
our final escape from this dreary wild, and begged h^r to 
take the canoe and depart on her way home, leaving us to 
our wretched fate. 

The girl knelt down by my side, took my hand, placed 
her hand upon my forehead, looked at my parched lips, and 
shook her head. 

" 111," said she ; ** two — ^ three day rest make well. Lie 
still — Wah hunt, fish — fetch sorrel — try. No talk about 
Wah go. What Wah done, make Pale-face talk so ? Wah 
never leave white brother. Wah only die once — great 
Manitou shake him head, and send girl back, if she leave 
ber /Kends. Not" she added, standing erect; "Young 
Oak be quiet Talk no mox^ oi "^^^^v ^^r 



THE ARCTIC ADVEXTUUERS. 193 

She then took my gun, some fish-hooks, leaped into the 
canoe, and began paddling up the river. 

And there- we lay, helpless as two children, op. the 
ground ; shivering, though Wah had covered us up with furs ; 
our ankles swelled, our heads, on fire, our eyes hot and fS^ 
verisb, and our miAds wandering. 

" This is what coflres of poking up in NoMjeui's Land," 
muttered Stop. " I should like to know what we want up 
here in these here piles of ice and rock. There ain't noth- 
ing to catbh, there ain't no glory, aiid I'm blest if there's 
any fbn. 01"-:— and ha groaned terribly. 

" What is it, Stop ?^' I asked; unable'^to look' at him, but 
shivering all the: time undei* iny bear^ih.- 

" Don't know — aches an^ pains —^sleepy too;** and 
away he dozed; I did the dafne, until' the li^t step of Wah 
awoke me. I saw at oiice she had been unsuccessful, b^ 
her slow and reluctant step. 

^' No game, no fish," she said, sitting down beside me, and 
speaking in a soft, low voice — "only this ; "' and sHe'^showed 
me a handfhl of iorrel. • 

I gladly put some of this in my mouth, and gave some to 
Stop, who, however, a little delmous, asked for something 
more solid, and Would not accent any explanation. 

Our larder was utterly ienipty/'. There was not a rem- 
nant of food left. 

Never, to my dying "day^ shall I" fi>rget the devotion of 
that dear good girl, on that terrible night, When I and Stop 
expected but to diie. Sh6 bathed bur burning forehea<tt 
with water ; she boiled son}e sorrel in a little Esquimaux 
vessel, until it became a glutinous mass, and fed us with it; 
she wiped our eves,, when pain brought tears to them ; 'she 
bore patiently the whining and repining of jjoor old Stop ; 
she refused to take the least rest ; and wHen' at laiSt He had 
dozed off to sleep, and I was quiet,' she crept cautiously 
away, took up my gun, and glided along the shore with aU 
the calm dignity of her race. 

And she had never seen her sex treated in any other way 
than severely ; she had lived in her youth among those who 
ill-used women, and made them beasts of burden, and knew 
not the blessings given them by Heavetv. \^>aft ^Q«a.t ^^r^^^ 

17 



194 THE SEA OF ICS, OB 

in the lands called Christian and civilized, the gentle beings 
who minister to us in sickness, who cheer us in difficulty, 
who delight us in prosperity, are not treated as they should 
be. It is only the brute, degraded and demoralized by 
drink, who beats and strikes ; but there are a thousand in- 
stances of neglect, and unkindness, and ingratitude meted 
out unto the fair half of creation, which the law knows not, 
regards not 

I was musing on this and other things, when I saw Wah- 
pa-nosh bounding like a mountain elk down the hill-side — 
a whole deer upon her shoulders. She paused not until she 
reached the fire. Then she cast the animal at our feet and 
set to work. She skinned it rapidly — cut several pieces 
off, and put them to broil — broke the marrow bones, and 
proceeded to make of their contents a kind of soup very 
much appreciated by the trappers and hunters of the Rocky 
Mountains. As soon as it was completely ready, with a 
mixture of sorrel and a hard bit of salt meat we had re- 
fused to eat, she gave it to us to drink. We swallowed it 
gladly, and felt so much relieved that we were able then to 
sit up and eat a tolerably hearty meal. 

The delight and joy of poor Wah-pa-nosh was beyond all 
expression. She handed us the hot broil ; she watched us 
eat; she ate herself, at our earnest request; she gave us 
more soup ; she laughed as she saw us evidently revivingj 
and kept cutting more meat until we begged her to stop. 

" Where have you been, girl ? " said Stop, when his hun- 
ger was appeased, pointing to her feet, which, despite her 
. mocassons, were cut and bleeding. 

" Poor Wah ! " I exclaimed, " why have you not attended 
to your wounds ? " 

The girl looked gently and smilingly at me; and then 
rising, went and bathed her feet, which she afterwards 
rubbed with venison fat, and having mended her mocassons, 
put them on again. 

Then she came and lay down, utterly exhausted, and 
went to sleep. 

When I awoke, Wah and StQp still lay calm in repose. 
I did not disturb them, but got up, and, found that I was 
much better, and quite able to mo?8 about (^quietly then 



THS ARCTIO ADVENTURERS. 195 

Stirred up the fire, and had cooked an ample supply of veni- 
son, when Wah started to her feet. 

" What you do that for ? " she asked, almost angrily. 
" Squaw work.** 

" But you were weaiy and tired, Wah, and I could not 
wake you." 

"Never mind — squaw work — no work for warri- 
or " and she took the ramrod out of my hand. 

"Well, what cheer, guv'ner? That little puss is an 
awful good nurse. I feel all the better for* that ere soup. 
It warmed me, it did ; and I think I could walk a bit." 

" No walk — canoe," said Wah. 

" Well, that's better. So you're better too. Master Hen- 
ry. I*m glad of it. Wasn't I rather queer about the upper 
story, eh, guv*ner ? " 

"All right now, Stop," said I, without answering his 
question, unwilling to remincf him of his weakness — to 
avoid which I rose and busied myself in helping Wah to 
prepare the canoe for departure. 

In half an hour more we departed from that bay, which 
I have in my own mind always designated as Sickness Bay. 

I need not tell all the weary episodes of that journey, — 
how we coasted, landed to rest and avoid squalls, crossing 
here and there narrow necks of land — I could no{ say 
whether they were peninsulas or not— and dragging or 
carrying our boat. I need not descant on our sufferings 
from hunger and thirst ; the poor Indian girl our only stay, 
I and Stop being still unable to hunt. I will only say that, 
after three weeks of fearful vicissitudes, sufferings, and 
perils, we passed round what I now am sure was Point 
Tumagain, and at last found ourselves at the mouth of a 
large river. This we began ascending, until we reached 
Lake Con-ge-ca-tha-wha-cha-ga. 

Now began our perils, as our devoted companion had 
warned us. We were surrounded on all sides by hostile 
tribes — by the Esquimaux, the Copper Indians, the Hare 
Indians, the Dog-Rib Indians, and other warlike races — 
some of whom were armed, she said, with guns given to 
them by the traders^ who twice a-year visited the mouth of 
the Mackenzie Biver. These, however^ vrexe ^bi^^^ ^2s^ 



196 TH£ SEA OF ICE, OR 

Louoheux, or Quarrellers of Mackenzie, with whom it is uot 
likely we should come in contact* 

Weak and forlorn as we were, we determined to run the 
gantlet of all these dangers, and hegin our ascent of the 
Hood River, reached Contway-to or Bum Lake, and then 
taking a rest, pushed for the Yellow Ejiife. 



CHAPTER XX. 

BATTLE WITH THE ESQUIMAUX. 

OuB journey was now very laborious; heavy portages 
occurred continually ; the liver, being confined wiUiin high 
banks, rushed along madly, and we had continually to leave 
the water and carry our boat over falls, along stony ways, 
and sometimes away round over rocks and hills at some dis- 
tance from the rushing torrent. We at last, however, came 
to what Wah declared would be our last serious portage. 
It was, however, painfully laborious. Stop, who was now 
much recruited, took a large package on his shoulders, while 
I and Wah carried the boat. 

Away then we went up a steep bank, along a plain, then 
up the sides of an arid and rocky mountain, until we reached 
the summit, where, in a kind of hole in the rock, we were 
compelled to rest for the night For several days we had 
been reduced to live upon fish, which was not pleasant, as it 
did not enable us to cope with fatigue in the same way that 
meat did. Still we were so grateful for any thing that was 
thrown in our way, that we did not complain. 

On beginning our march early next day, we saw clearly 
in the distance the waters of another river, which subse- 
quently proved to be the Coppermine. We reached it 
towards the evening, and Wah intimated that we must 
descend its waters. 

♦ On this part of the world consult the valuable work of Sir John 
Franklin, " Second Expedition to the Polar Sea," 4to, London. Mm- 
rajr, 1828. 



TUK ARCTIC ADYENTITRERS. 197 

'^But that will take us down to the sea again/' I said, 
somewhat anxiously. 

"Not go all way down. Pass Esquimaux village — 
then land — carry canoe again.** 

" This is a odd kind of navigation this,*' said Stop, grave- 
ly shaking his* head; "a carrying our ship on our shoul- 
ders, and then a blind sailing. Where we are going to I 
don't know. Wah does, you will say. Good — if the 
guv'ner's satisfied, I am ; so go ahead." 

The river was not very wide, nor very deep, but it was 
exceedingly grateful to our feelings to travel on its waters, 
and to paddle with the current, instead of carrying the boat 
over mountains and hills, slowly and laboriously, all the 
more from the fatigue which Stop experienced. 

" If it were not for this boatiug. Stop, I don't think you'd 
ever do it," said I, as I assisted him in. 

" I don't think at all — I know I should not — it doesn't 
stand to reason. An old file like me, with a ' dot-and-carry- 
one,' was never made for travelling." 

Stop occupied the bows of the boat, Wah the centre, with 
a paddle, while I had the other, and the duty of steering. 
The river flowed over an uneven, stony bed, betwixt pre- 
cipitous rocky walls, and was full of rapids. . It could not 
be descended by any boat having a greali^r draught of water 
than a few inches ; and even a smaU canoe must frequently 
be carried over land for some distances, to avoid the numer- 
ous obstacles which occur.* 

For several days we travelled in this way, until we 
reached a spot where Wah said we musf soon turn off 
towards the lake, where she purposed camping for the win- 
ter. As we must pass a place where the Esquimaux usually 
camp in large numbers, she warned us that great caution 
was now to be observed. 

It was about two hours before the usual period for our 
evening halt. The river had widened out considerably, and 
presented the appearance of a small lake, and as we entered 
it, we at once distinguished, on a loiy, flat bank, a long line 
of huts of a conical form. We could also distinctly per- 

• Franklin deiqnb^ aU these diffieoUiM va k^«i VEL\«wRjes»%^«wSB\'^. 

17* 



IM TH£ SEA OF ICE, OR 

oeive a (>erfect dood of Esquimaux strolling carelessly 
about among the tents. 

*^ Ugh ! " said the Ii^ian girl, pointing to the crowded 
encampment 

^ Guv'ner, here's a army I " exclaimed Stop. ^ I think 
we'd better cut and rim for it" 

"No," interrupted Wah; "run — Esquimaux catch di- 
irectly — make 'fraid — shoot — no run a^r. Try not see 
at all" 

The open lake was about three miles long and a mile 
wide. On the opposite bank to where the Esquimaux were 
encamped were some bushes and elevated ground, and be- 
yond this, hills. Over this we had to travel and carry our 
boat, which was to be abandoned at the last extremity only. 
Wah pointed to one spot, the only place where we could 
land with the boat ; and stooping low, we cautiously direct- 
ed our course towards it 

" ril just freshen my priming," said Stop, in a low whisper. 

" Do," replied I, mechanically ; for the horrid necessity 
of bloodshed was a thing I abhorred. 

On we went floating down the lake, which was so shallow 
in places that we stuck fast, thus delaying our advance sev- 
ersd times. Still we did progress, and in about an hour —^ 
' more than half of which we had been lying aground — we 
were three hundred yards from the beginning of the " port- 
age," and about three quarters of a mile from the Esqui- 
maux encampment 

" They've seed us ! they've seed us 1 " cried Stop, with a 
flourish of his gun. 

" Paddle," said Wah, calmly, urging the canoe onward 
with redoubled zeal. 

I imitated her. 

But there they came — a cloud of men and women, some 
in the water, some in flat boats : all yelling; screaming, cry- 
ing, in the most fearful fashion, as we could even tell aj^ 
that distance over the quiet waters. 

"Yell away," roared Stop — "you may scream your 
blessed selves hoarse, but it won't do. We're not going to 
be frightened with rattles and noises like children. Pull 
awa^, guv'ner." 



THE ARCTIC ADVENTURERS. 199 

" Stop," said Wah, suddenly, as we glided slowly up to 
the bank. 

I did so, and it was really a wondrous sight to see that 
girl guide the bark canoe quietly up, and make it strike a 
point in the shore which enabled us to leap on the bank 
and unload with the greatest ease to ourselves. We did 
this with extreme rapidity, and then carried the canoe up 
some little distance, and looked about. 

We were about fourteen feet above the level of the river, 
which for some distance was skirted by precipitous banks, 
except at this one landing. Two clumps of bushes marked 
the spot where the cliffs commenced, and within one of 
these I concealed myself, while Stop took possession of 
the other. 

Wah stood upright on the summit of the bank, warning 
the Esquimaux back with her hand. 

On they came -:- a motley herd of at least three hundred, 
armed with spears and bows and arrows, urging their boats, 
each, holding only one man, by means of their long double 
paddles, with extreme rapidity. Others c^me rushing on 
in the water, rarely reaching above their knees. All yelled 
and brandished bow and spear with extreme fierceness. 
They were within a hundred yards of the shore already. 

"You are nearest," said I to Stop — i'fire over their 
heads, and make them stop." 

'* Never fear," he replied, " but PU let them see the gun 
is loaded." 

On they came — still crowding and coming within dan- 
gerous proximity. 

Then came on me that horrid thirst for blood which is so 
inexplicable. I saw red. I suppose the ground of our feel- 
ings on such occasions is fear, and that worked up to a pitch 
of feverish excitement, we cannot control our ideas, even 
our vision. A man who spent his life in the slaughter- 
house declared that he always saw red when he killed. 

Stop levelled and fired. He was a very good shot, and 
he struck the paddle out of the hand of the foremost Esqui- 
maux. A halt of the whole party at once took place, and 
in a minute they were clustering together in a mass. I 
noticed many articles of European mauufojs^Vws^ — ^jssssi\s% 



200 THE SKA OF ICK, OR 

them, hatcheU, knives, and other things,* which made me 
more uneasy, as thej probably would be led to expect that 
we too had such articles at our disposal. 

Wah now raised her voice, and she afterwards explained 
the conversation. 

** What want you with the Pale-faces ? ** she asked. 

^ Who are you ? " said a startled Esquimaux, recognizing 
his own language, while the others formed in line. 

^ A friend of the men that come in big ships,** she con- 
tinued. 

^ Where are the big ships ? " asked the Esquimaux, 

" A long way off." 

^ What are Uiese white men doing here ? " 

« Hunting." 

^ Well, then, Esquimaux hunt for them. Come to tents 
— got big boat, white tent too. White man leave t behind." 

** The white men are in a hurry^ They have to return 
to their friends. They cannot stop with the little men of 
the north." 

A pause of some duration now ensued, during which the 
Esquimaux appeared to confer in whispers ; some pointed 
up the river, some down, some across to us. 

** They are going to fight," said Stop. " We're safe for 
a skrimmage." 

" I fear it, my friend. But as it is not to be avoided, let 
us contend until the last gasp. Better die at once than 
perish by slow degrees up here." 

The Esquimaux divided into three groups — two very 
small in numbers, one large and numerous. As soon as the 
smaller detachments had started, the main body made a 

♦ Franklin's Second Expedition says, ** The boatt»were drawn up on 
the shore, out of the reach of any flood ; and the remainder of the arti- 
cles that we had brought to give the Esquimaux were put into boxes and 
placed in the tents, that they might be readily found by the first party 
of that nation that passed this way. They consisted of fish-hooks, lines, 
hatchets, knives, files, fire-steels, kettles, combs, awls, needles, thread, 
blue and red cloth, gartering, and beads sufficient to serve a considerable 
number of Esquimaux for several years." 

t " The tents were securely piloted, and the Union Jack hoisted, part- 
ly for the purpose of attracting the attention of tiie natives, and partly 
to show them the mode of using the tents, which may prove to be v^ 
useful in their summer joumeyB.— FrankMn,*a Second EapedUion, p. 2&i, 



THE ARCTIC ADVENTURERS. 201 

rush at the landing. We fired instantly, and loaded with- 
out looking to see the result. 

Some, terrified by the explosion as well as by the fatal 
wounding of two of their party, had halted; but several, 
undismayed by the fate of their comrades, were rushing 
forward. My heart grew sick within me. I had little hope 
of escape. Their numbers were alone suflScient to over- 
whelm us. Even if we did succeed in driving them back, 
it was under circumstances that made me miserable. I was 
no wild trapper of the mountains, utterly regardless of 
human life. I looked upon it as a sacred thing, as dear to 
the untutored creature who dwelt in those arid wastes, as 
to the man living in the lap of luxury and enjoyment. 

But self-preservation made me certainly more callous 
than I otherwise should have been, and I determined not to 
be taken alive. 

About twenty of the hideous little creatures had reached 
the landing, brandishing their spears and preparing their 
bows and arrows. The ascent was steep and difficult, 
especially in the face of two armed men. Two were before 
the others, and these paid for their rashness dearly. They 
fell beneath our volley, and were carried away by the 
stream, which just here is deeper than usual. 

But not one of the others halted. They appeared mad 
with rage, and the desire to avenge their companions hs(d 
doubtless its effect in making them reckless. 

" Load," said I, in a low tone to my companion, " load — ^ 
fire once more ; then it will be hand-to-hand." 

" I am ready," replied Stop, in a low, husky tone, that 
denoted his extreme emotion. 

I was driving the bullet home, when Wah, whose opera- 
tions we had not remarked for some time, stood up between 
us. She had been lying on the ground, and peering over 
the bank, under the shelter of a large, loose stone. This 
stone was supported by a few small ones underneath. These 
Wah had been cautiously removing. 

The Esquimaux, at least twenty in number, were climbing 
up the steep bank on their hands and knees, one behind the 
other, when Wah rose, took the axe from, her belt, and 
using it as a lever, tried tp start the lump of r<yi^% \ "%»>:« 



202 THE SEA OF ICB, OB 

her object and shuddered. But, closing my eyes, I still 

rammed my bullet home. 

\. A shriek, a wild yell, such as I never heard before, and 

^ wish never to hear again, made me open my eyes. The 

1^ stone had disappeared, and Wah stood erect upon the bank, 

looking calmly and triumphantly at the consequences of her 

wild and terrible deed. 

Not an Esquimaux was to be seen on the bank. They 

were struggling in the river, amid a whirl of water and 

earth, the stone having carried away a perfect avalanche of 

* mould with it. Three bodies floating down the stream told 

of the terrible havoc she had made. 

" Now is our time ! '* I said ; " let us fly, and leave this 
horrible scene." 

^ Hist ! " whispered Wah, gliding to my side with all the 
stealth of a cat. 

" What is it now ? " I asked. 

« Look." 

I looked. On the edge of the bank, at some little dis- 
tance below where Stop was posted, I distinctly saw four 
men crawling along upon their hands and knees, now stop- 
ping, now moving on, but always with more caution than I 
conceived belonged to their race. 

I communicated the fact to Stop in a low whisper. 

A sheet of flame and the crack of a gun immediately fol- 
lowed; and three of the men rose to their feet. The 
fourth never moved. His companioi.s yelled fearfully, and 
then came running on. I reluctantly enough followed Stop's 
example, which, however, only checked the progress of one 
of the bold little warriors of the tribe. 

" Ugh," said Wah, darting forward with her axe, to meet 
the two men, who were within twenty feet of our ambush. 

f*Stop, gal," roared my old companion, jumping up, and 
laying down his gun, into which he had already slipped a 
charge ; " this is the thing for them." 

In one hand he had a pistol, in the other a knife, and he 
looked indeed a strange and wild being as he rushed on to 
meet the Esquimaux in hand-to-hand conflict. I had no 
time for observation on the strangeness of the scene, for 
they closed at once, Wah attacking a man armed with a 
Bpear, Stop one provided mlVv a'EiWco^^wxi^xfe. 



THE ARCTIC ADVENTURERS. 203 

The opponent whom Stop had undertaken to cope with, 
waved his hatchet about, exceedingly awkwardly it is true, 
but he was more than a match for the bold but feeble old 
man — at all events, so I feared ; and it was with eager 
haste that I rushed forward, ramming my load as I ran. I ^ 
caught up the good old man's gun as I passed, thrust the 
ramrod down, still running on, and returned it to its place. 

When I again gave my undivided attention to the scene, 
my very veins appeared to refuse their office, and my blood 
seemed to cease to flow. 

Stop lay on the ground on his back, as did his adversary, 
both still and motionless. Wah, too, was down, and the 
Esquimaux was poising his spear to strike. He stooped, 
however, first to pick up the shining axe which lay at his 
feet, an attempt to throw which, as if it had been a toma- 
hawk, had brought Wah to the ground. 

This hesitation cost him his Me. As he rose to take aim 
at the girl, I fired. I saw him fall — I knew that he was 
dead — I distinguished Wah crawling up ; but my first im- 
pulse was to rush to Stop. 

'< Speak to me, my dear friend I " I exclaimed in passion- 
ate tones. 

" We're victorious," he replied. " Ah ! the incompletes 
should never go into a regular engagement. It was that 
blessed dot-and-carry-one nearly lost me my life. I shot 
that poor wretch with one of these here popguns, and got 
his axe against my legs at the same moment. Luckily it 
was the timber one, and I only fell. Well, who's killed 
and who's wounded-? " 

" Too many. Stop ; but up, my friend, and let us be mov- 
ing." 

" Make haste," said Wah. « They think a bit — no fight 
aga\n- Bun after us by and by ! " 

Stop rose, took his gun, picked up the other axe, and 
then we returned to our canoe, which, without a moment's 
delay, we hoisted on our shoulders, and struck off at a brisk 
pace towards the hills. We found the first steep enough, 
and we were soon obliged to walk with more calmness, 
though our anxiety to proceed was very much quix;kened by 
the sight of a small party of Esquimaux shuffling along 



204 THE SEA OF ICE, OR 

after us in the distance, evidently bent on visiting us with 
retribution for our terrible deeds, though Wah declared 
their motive to be nothing else but plunder. 

A beaten path or trail, the track of both Esquimaux and 
reindeer, led us now down the side of the hill to a plain 
below, which was bounded, so winding was our way, by the 
very cliffs of the rivet we had just left. Wearied as we 
were, we advanced to the very extremity of the level plain, 
which now became undulating. Our surprise may readily be 
conceived when we found here, on the edge of a small 
grove of trees, the mouldering remains of a boat, built by 
men of my own land, a bag of some farinaceous food, quite 
decayed, and five muskets.* 

** What in the name of Heaven is this ? " I exclaimed, 
turning to Stop. ^ Have some of our own adV'Cnturous race 
made here a stand and perished ? " 

** It looks like it, guv'ner," said Stop, looking mysteriously 
at the unmistakable signs of home that lay before os ; '^ but 
as yonder come them ugly imps, I votes ror making a stand 
on the graves of our brothers." 

I agreed at once to this, and we then hastily examined 
the old muskets. They had been covered by the canvas 
boat, and by the bag of food, as well as by some wood, and 
though rusty outside, were apparently quite serviceable. 
They were loaded, and we contented ourselves with renew- 
ing the priming and pricking the touch-holes. They were 
then laid on a log, and lashed with willows and leather 
thongs, their muzzles pointed directly along the path by 
which the Esquimaux were coming. We then laid a train 
and sheered of, not at all satisfied as to what would happen 
to ourselves if we remained close to our battery. 

In about a quarter of an hour, a band of Esquimaux 
came in sight. They moved with rapidity, and their talk 
was loud and furious. Several dogs accompapied them, 
and all were armed with spears, bows, and axes, just as if 
they had been out on a foray with the Dog-Rib, Loucheus^, 



* " I therefore determined on leaving the boat, half a bag of arrow- 
root, and five muskets, by which the loads were reduced about fifteen 
pounds a man."— FranA;/tn'9 Second Expedition^ 4to, p. 270. 



THE ARCTIC ADVENTURERS. 205 

or Athabasca Indians. They came straggling on, examin- 
ing the trail, and shouting at each other. 

When they were within forty yards, Stop snapped a pis- 
tol over the train, and then we levelled our guns and fired. 
The battery was discharged at the same instant ; a tremen- 
dous smoke was seen, and as the echoes and the vapor died 
away, we looked in vain for our pursuers. Three had paid 
again the penalty of their dogged courage ; the rest had 
fled before our unexpected volley. 

We found on examination that one gun had burst, one 
had not gone off at al), while three had done good service. 
The best of these, after another trial, was given to Wah, 
who, I really believe, now felt quite ready to meet with the 
whole race of Esquimaux in deadly combat. 

We could not camp there after this scene, and advancing 
some distance farther, our indefatigable Indian guide shot a 
reindeer, which was, under the circumstances, a piece of 
.good fortune which we duly appreciated, especially when 
the hilly path and the sponginess of the low grounds is con- 
sidered. 

Just as night fell in, we noticed some gray arctic mar- 
mots,- {Arctomys Parryi,) but we valued our .ammunition 
too much to shoot one of them. The Whiskey-John, or 
Canadian crow, owed his safety td the same cause. 

Our journey was very severe, and at last we struck away 
over rocks of old red sandstone, clay slate, and greenstone 
in ridges, towards Dease's River. Some of the ridges were 
precipitous and two hundred feet high, while the valleys 
were swampy and full of lakes. A few rare and thin 
clumps of pine we found in some sheltered spots, but the 
country in general was barren and naked. Many signs of 
natives were found, which made us very cautious, while 
sand-flies were tormenting and troublesome. To make up 
for this, we killed some partridges with stones, which we 
cooked in a wooded valley on the banks of a small stream. 
A few wolves tormented us here, but did not venture very 
near. 

On we went, over rocks and hills, building a shelter at 
night with blocks of sandstone, making a fire of black 
lichen; until at last we reached Deaa^'^'Kvi^x* ^^^t^ ^^ 

18 ' 



206 THE SEA OF ICE, OB 

found bushes loaded with ripe whortleberries. A short 
journey in our boat soon brought us to a bay in Great Bear 
Lake, the end and object of our journey for the present-^ 
having been two days travelling since our combat with the 
Esquimaux on the ** Bloody Falls " of the Coppermine. 



CHAPTER XXI. 

6BEAT BEAB LAKE. — THE DOG-BIBS. — FOBT FBANKLIN. 

It was a pleasure I can scarcely describe to be once 
more on the waters of a lake — the more that poor Stop 
was almost worn out, and I began to have very great doubts 
of the possibility of his ever reaching the outskirts of civil- 
ization. Fatigue, want of proper food, of regular rest, and 
his infirmity, all were against him. In fact, he looked so 
ill and broken that I began to view with fear and trembling 
the hour when he and I would part company in this world, 
to meet no more until that great hereafter, of which he en- 
tertained so little fear. I once or twice mentioned my sus- 
picions to Wah ; but she smiled, and said, " No," and used 
such gentle persuasions, such coaxing reasons to prove that 
all might escape in safety, that I took heart once morcj and 
determined to hope to the very last. 

The weather was still fine, an agreeable breeze was 
wafted across the waters of the lake, lofty hills appeared to 
our right, while we left innumerable islands to our left. In 
one of these we halted for the night. The wind was so 
fresh the next morning, that we had to keep close in shore, 
and towards the afternoon we halted in a deep bay, where 
Wah caught several fish,_which, broiled over a hot charcoal 
fire, proved a great treat 

On the evening of the third day we were at what is 

called Cape Macdonnel, and far away in the distance I 

could see the Cloutsang Eesa, or HiU of Scented Grass. 

I determined to remain N^li^re I was, however, and to cross 



THE ARCTIC ADVENTURERS. 207 

the lake in the morning. We accordingly supped, made a 
tent, arid rested for ten hours without moving. 

There was a tossing of the waves in the lake, in the morn- 
ing, which made me doubt the capabilities of the kayak ; but 
Wah assured me there was no danger, and I therefore pushed 
out^ using a small, a very small sail, instead of paddles, 
which was a great relief to all parties. Several times I was 
compelled, however, to lessen the sail, but only for a short 
time ; and after a really dangerous and anxious journey, we 
at length arrived under the shadow of the hill alluded to. 

We were about half a mile from the shore, and standing 
close in for it, poor Stop sleeping in an uneasy and painful 
posture, which made me anxious to land, when Wah placed 
her hand upon my shoulder. 

- " What is it, girl ? ** said I, speaking in a low tone, in 
obedience to her hushed signal. 

"Red Skins," she replied. 

I confess my heart beat with more than usual rapidity, 
when, following the direction of her finger, I noticed, rising 
above a clump of trees, a spiral column of smoke that hith- 
erto had been concealed against the dark ground of the 
mountain. 

" IVhat race are they ? " I asked. 

" Don't know — may be Dog-Rib — may be Hare — 
may be Loucheux — " and then her eyes lighted up — 
" may be Chippewaw." 

" If they are Dog-Ribs," I asked again, " what are we 
to do?" 

" Run or fight," replied Wah, with a glance of profound 
hatred and contempt. " Dog-Rib hate my people. Take 
Wah to wigwam. Wah die first." 

" Then we must keep on," I said, taking down the sail 
and using my paddle. 

" Qood" replied Wah, who took to hers with alacrity. 

We were now about a quarter of a mile from a point, at 
the extremity almost of which was the cluster of trees and 
the fire, which the quick eye of Wah had so rapidly de- 
tected. Our object was to turn this point, follow the land 
for some distance, and then go on shore where we could 
escape the searching eyes of the Indians^ who^ tho^^ "cis^x^ 



20^ ^UIC SEX OF ICE, OR 

as clever as those of the United States, have yet keen eyes 
and a quick intelligence truly remarikable.* 

I hoped that, by concealing our sail, we should be so low^ 
in the water as to escape detection, especially as the Dog- 
Ribs could not expect to find either friends or enemies at 
that season on the waters of Great Bear Lake. 

We were mistaken ; for scarcely had we opened up the 
fire, which came in sight in about ten minutes, than we 
heard a faint cry, and saw two canoes strike out so as to 
cut ofi* our retreat to the land. The eanoes were filled with 
armed men, for we could plainly see their spears, and Wah 
declared that one of them had a giin. 

^ Quite possible," said I ; ^ they have commerce ¥^th the 
traders. But most likely they have no powder." 

" Most likely yes," replied Wah. 

"But are not these Indians very friendly to the whites ? 
Do not they hunt for them, trade with^them, and show them 
every kind office ? " 

" Yes I when whites many — few kill. Dog-Rib much 
fond kill.f Chippewaw friend, go to Fort Norman, Cum- 
berland—Dog-Rib, bad, dirty." 

♦ " Our Indian guide," says Franklin, " had never been nearer Fort 
Simpson by land than the lake of the elevated land, and only once by the 
course of the Mackenzie, many years before the fort was built ; and yet 
if he had not been led aside by falling upon the track leading to the In- 
dians above-mentioned, he would have come upon tbe Mackenzie directly 
opposite Fort Simpson. His course, he told me, was governed by his 
recollection of a particular mountain, which he remembered to have no- 
ticed from the Mackenzie, and which we now passed within two miles ; 
but on his former visit, he did not approach it nearer than eighteen miles. 
Its outline must have appeared so diflferent when seen from these dis- 
tances, that one can hardly ima^ne a less observant eye than that of an 
Indian recognizing an^ of its distinguishiug points, especially as it was 
not a detached mountain, but formed one of a line of hills of considera- 
ble extent." 

t Franklin, in his deeply interesting narrative of his Second Polar 
Expedition, says, ** By the return of our men from Fort Norman, we 
learned that one of our Dog-Rib hunters had murdered a man of his 
tribe, in the autumn, near the mouth of the Bear Lake River. The cul- 
prit being at the house, we inquired into the truth of the report, which 
was found correct ; and he was in consequence instantly discharged from 
our service. His victim h id been a man of notoriously loose habits, and 
in this instance had carried off the hunter's wife and child, while he was 
in pursuit of deer, at a great distance from the fort. The husband pur- 
sued the guilty pair the moment he discovered their flight, and, on over- 
taking them, instantly shot tUe. i&^lahsT ; but the woman escaped a 



THE ARCTIC ADVENTURERS. 209 

The girl was so evidently alarmed at a prospect of falling 
into the hands of the Dog-Ribs that I determined at once 
not to risk any thing of the kind, but, now I had commenced, 
to run the gantlet of the whole race, and make every effort 
which a brave man can make — to escape if possible, but to 
fight if the necessity arose. The brave man, like the brave 
nation, exhausts every honorable avenue to peace ; but when 
closed up by bad faith, or by adverse circumstances, he 
necessarily turns to the red-handed demigod of war, and 
stakes all oti the battle-field. 

" Stop," I said quietly. 

" Ay, ay, sir," he exclaimed. 

" Pirates on board," I replied, with a smile. " I think 
you must handle an oar." 

" Where away ? " cried the honest old fellow, with all his 
usual alacrity. 

I pointed out the two canoes.* 

similar fate, bjr having the presence of mind to turn aside the muzzle of ' 
the gun when in the act of oeing discharged. She did not, however, es- 
cape punishment ; her husband struck her senseless to the ground with 
the stock of his gun, and would have completed her destruction, but 
for the cries and entreaties of their only child. This transaction adds 
another to the melancholy list of about thirty murders whi(!h have been 
perpetrated on the borders of this lake since 1799, when the first trading- 
post was established." 

* Franklin gives the following deeply interesting account of the Dog- 
Bibs. It is very similar to the Mandan and Osage traditions. "The 
Dog-Rib Indians, being derived from the same stock with the Chippe- 
v^ans, have many traditions and opinions in common with that people. 
The first man, they said, was, accoroine to the traditions of their fathers, 
named Chapewee. He found the world well stocked with food, and h? 
created children, to whom he gave two kinds of fruit, the black and the 
white, but forbade them to eat the black. Having thus issued his com- 
mands for the guidance of his family, he took leave of them for a timCf 
and made a long excursion for the purpose of conducting the sun to the 
world. During this, his first absence, his children were obe^ent, and ate 
only the white fruit, but they consumed it all; the consequence was, that 
when he a second time absented himself to bring the moon, and they 
longed for fruit, they forgot the orders of their father, and ate of the black, 
which was the only kind remaining. He was much displeased on his 
return, and told them that in future the earth would produce bad fruits, and 
that they would be tormented by sickness and death — penalties which 
have attached to his descendants to the present day. Chapewee himself 
lived so long that his throat was worn out, and he could.no longer enkry 
life ; but he was unable to die, until, at his own request, one of his 
people drove a beaver's t«oth into his head. The same, or another, (for 
there is some uncertain^ on this head,) lived with his family on a atxait 
between two seas. Having conitnicted ii'mt% Xk^ cnX^^isifiL, v^^^^^^k^- 

18* 



210 TH£ SKA OF ICB, OR 

"0! the thieving Dog-Ribs — I suppose they are that 
elegant set Wah is always talking about Pull away, guv'- 
ner. * I think two white men and a good girl like Wah will 
be able to teach them a thing or two they do not know" 

We all now began to use our paddles with all the energy 
of which we Vrere capable. We were by this time prac- 
tised oarsmen in our Esquimaux canoe, and the light kayak 
sprang gayly over the waters. It required no very keen 
eye to tell that we went three feet to their two* They soon 
discovered tliis, and gave up the chase. 

We, however, at the earnest solicitation of Wah, advanced 
another mile or more, until we came abreast of Narra-£lla, 
or Deer Pass Bay, which we then entered, and steering for 

tity were taken that the strait was choked up, and the water rose and 
OTerflowed the earth. Chopewee embarked with his family and canoe, 
taking with them all manner of birds and beasts. The waters corered 
the earth for many days, but, at length, Chapewee said, ' We cannot lire 
always tiius — we must find land again;' and he accordingly sent a 
beaver to search for it. The beaver was drowned, and his carcass was seen 
floating on the water ; on which Chapewee despatched a musk-rat on the 
tame errand. The second messenger was long absent, and when he did 
return was nearly dying with fatigue ; but he had a little earth in his 
paws. The sight of the earth rejoiced Chapewee ; but his first care was 
about the safety of his diligent servant, the rat, which he rubbed gently 
with his hands, and cherisned in his bosom until it revived. He next 
took up the earth, and moulding it with his fingers, placed it on the wa- 
ter, where it increased by degrees until it formed an island in the ocean. 
A wolf was the first animal Chapewee placed on the infant earth ; but 
the weight proving too great, it began to sink on one side, and was. in 
danger of turning over. To prevent this accident, the wolf was directed 
to move round the island, which it did for a whole year, and in that time 
the earth increased so much in size, that all on board the canoe were able 
to disembark on it. Chapewee, on landing, stuck up a piece of wood, 
which became a fir tree, and grew with amazing rapidity, until its top 
reached the skies. A squirrel ran up this tree, ana was pursued by Chape- 
wee, who endeavored to knock it aown, but could not overtake it. He 
continued the chase, however, until he reached the stars, where ho found 
a fine plain and a beaten road. In this road he set a snare made of his 
sister's hair, and then returned to the earth. The sun appeared as usual 
in the heavens in the morning, but at noon it was caught by the snare 
which Chapewee had set for the squirrel, and the skv was instantly dark-, 
ened. Chapewee's family, on this, said to him, * You must have done ' 
something wrong when jou were aloft, for we no longer emoy the light 
of day.' *I have,' replied he, 'but it was unintentionally. Chapewee 
then endeavored to repair the fault he had committed, and sent a num- 
ber of animals up the tree to release the sun by cutting the snare ; but the 
intense heat of ttiat luminary reduced them ail to ashes. The efforts of 
the more sensitive animals being thus frustrated, a ground-mole, though 
8uch a grovelling and unknown beast, succeeded, by burrowing under the 



THK ARCTIC ADVENTURERS. 2H 

a clump of pines, soon felt our frail bark grate on the shore. 
A small stream was immediately discovered, up which Wah 
towed the boat, sometimes up to her chin in the water, 
while I started off in chase of a deer, which I succeeded in 
shooting and bringing back to the camp. On my return, I 
found that Wah had concealed the canoe, with every exer- 
cise of art her education could give, under a heavy and 
steep bank overhung with brush, and had also chosen the 
oamp with the eye of an Indian warrior. 

In the centre of the grove of trees, or nearly in the cen- 
tre, a tree had fallen, full of years, and carried away two or 
three otliers with it. This made a tiny clearing, and lefl a 
considerable supply of dry wood. Wah-, however, very 

road in the sky, which it reached, and cnt asnnder the snare which hound 
the sun. It lost its eyes, however, the instant it thrust its head into the 
li^ht, and its nose and hands have ever since been brown as if burnt. 
Chapewce*8 island, during these transactions, increased to the present 
size, of the American continent ; and he traced the course of the rivers 
and scraped out the lakes by drawing his fingers through the earth. He 
next allotted to the quadrupeds, biros, and fishes their different stations, 
and endowed them with certain capacities ; he told them that they were 
in a position tqj^rovide for their own safety, because man would aestroy 
them whenever he found their tracks. But to amuse them, he said that 
when they died they should be like a seed of grass, which, when thrown 
on to water, springs again into life. The animals objected to this ar- 
rangement, and said, ' Let us, when we die, be as a stone, which, when 
thrown into a lake, disappears forever from the sight of man.' Chape- 
wee's family complained of the penalty of death entailed upon them for 
eating the black nruit ; on which he granted that such of them as dreamed 
certain dreams should be men of m^idne, capable of curing disease and 
of prolonging life. In order to preserve this virtue, they were not to tell 
their dreams until a certain period had elapsed. To acquire the power of 
foretelling events, they were to take an ant alive and insert it into the skin 
of the palm of the hand without letting any one know what they had 
done. For a long time Chapewee's descendajits were united in one fam- 
ily ; but at length some young men beinpr immoderately beaten in a game, 
a quarrel ensued, and a general dispersion of mankind took place. The 
enemy fixed his residence on tiie borders of the lake, taking with him a 
dog, which, in due time, had pups ; and the Indian, when he went out to 
fish, carefully tied them up, to prevent them straying. Several times, as 
he approached his tent, he heard a noise of children talking and playing ; 
but on entering it he only perceived the pups tied up as usual. His curi- 
osity being excited by the nofse he had heard, he determined to watch 
them. One day, pretending to go out and fish, according to custom, he 
concealed himself in a convenient place. In a short time he again heard 
voices, and rushing suddenly into the tent, beheld some beautiful children 
sporting and laughing, with the dogs! skins lying by their side. He 
&ew tne skins into the fire, and the children, retaining their proper 
forms, grew up, and were th$ ance8t<»s of tUe Dog-£Lib ns-tiosk.." 



S12 THB SSA OF ICS9 OR 

quietly made a fire, only large enough to cook onr food ; and 
when that was done, she covered up the ashes so that they 
yielded warmth to our feet, but gave no light 

The embers of the fire occupied the middle of the en- 
campment, and some hastily-cut boughs formed a tent for 
myself and Stop, with the addition of a blanket hung on 
the branches of two small pines that grew close together. 
Opposite was the large pine log, which did not wholly rest on 
the ground, and behind this Wah took up her station ; our 
guns and ammunition were also placed there for safety. 

We ate in silence, for the uneasy manner and anxious 
looks of Wah had their effect on us, though we did not like 
to acknowledge it She peered every now and then into 
the gloom of the pinewood, and at last wishing us good 
night, glided behind the log, and was heard no more. 

** That girl is terrible unquiet," said Stop, in a whisper, 
as he drew his bear-skin over his shoulder. 

"-Very,-" I replied ; " so much so, that knowing her ex- 
perience of this horrid place, I shall be glad to be off in the 
morning. Let us, however, sleep and rise as soon as possi- 
ble. Were I not utterly weary I would go forward now." 

There are presentiments in this world which sometimes 
turn out true, and make us believe in them. 

I lay still, watching the stars and the moon and the sky, 
and thinking of the home I was hurrying to, until stars and 
moon were obscured by clouds, and the night — it was now 
late in the season — was quite dark. Then I saw two moons, 
the tall, dark trees vanished, and I was far away in dear Eng- 
land, that precious island which I loved with every throb 
of my heart, as only the weary wanderer loves his country. 

Suddenly the tall trees reappeared, the gloomy sky was 
visible, and I saw one — two — three — five dark figures 
glide into the camp, and one man with a long stick stir up 
the fire. I drew a long breath — I tried to fancy it was a 
dream — but, no ; it was real — we were surrounded by * 
Dog-Ribs, and unless ^ miracle saved us, their prisoners. 

" To arms ! " I thundered, scarcely knowing what I 
said, and bounded to my feet 

It was too late. They fell upon us, and poor Stop And X 
^ere overpowered in an instant, while men threw on wood 



THE ARCTIC ADVENTURERS. 213 

and made a roaring fire. They then caught sight of the 
deer, drew it to the fire, and uttered cries of joy. Then 
they talked in some hideous jargon, that appeared to me 
not human, and one counted three on his fingers, and point- 
ed to us with signs that we were but two. This seemed to 
puzzle them ; bqt after a brief conference, they determined 
to put off the search for our boat and companion, as I 
thought, until the morning. 

I had often read, and I had heard too, of the cruelty of 
the savages, and I knew that these wild men were exqui- 
sitely refined in their tortures, and gloried in the pleasure 
of beholding the sufferings of thek perishing victims. I 
was prepared for the worst, then, and stood between two 
powerful savs^es, sullen and resigned. I was not, however, 
prepared for the immediate commencement of those fright- 
ful trials of a man's courage which are so common among 
them. The Dog-Ribs, however, seemed very angry at our 
having given them so long and wearisome a chase ; • and one, 
whose hideous and ferocious mien I shall not easily forget, 
made a sign relative to us, which I too soon understood. 

Stop's wooden leg and white hair saved him from the 
severer trial. They only bound him to a tree, fast by 
the arms. 

But I, as young, and fit for the torture^ had a foretaste of 
their horrid and malignant cruelty — the universal charac- 
teristic of this race, who, if they Imve suffered injuries, have 
repaid them by overwhelming the borders and wilderness 
with tragedies which can scarcely be narrated. 

They toc^ two young pines, and they forced them as close 
as they could with their united force. Then they placed 
me beU|^en them, tied my ankles and wrists to the saplings, 
and lettnem go. 

Never, no, never shall I forget the torture of that moment. 
I was fastened by my wrists, which were too wide apart for 
^e to hang in any other position than one of agony. Cold 
perspiration poured down me, my eyes started from my head, 
hideous visions passed before me ; and then for an instant 
I became insensible. When I recovered, poor Stop waa 
sitting against his tree, looking up at me with a glance of 
anguish I shall never forget, while the seven Dog-Eib 



214 THB SBA OF ICS, OR 

8ATa|:^ were deToaring the deer with a greediness truly 
fcartuL With a fire before them, they ate it raw, every 
particle, until the bones only were left. 

I was parched with thirst, and I thought this the prelude 
of that death I fancied I longed for now — no; I had a 
faint and miserable hope, and still I trusted in my God. 

The horrid wretches, having devoured the deer, and some 
fish and dried meat we had brought up to the camp, and 
being probably weary with racing as well as with their glut- 
tony, afler seeing that we were safe, stirred up the fire, and 
lay down to sleep off* their orgy. 

** Water," said I, faintly and unconsciously. 

^ I can't move," groaned Stop. ** That girl's gone, clean 
gone, and it's all up with us. These murderous thieves 
will kill us. Master Henry. I should like to shake hands 
with you before I die, but I shall not." 

"Stop," replied I, forcing my voice, despite my agony; 
" that brave girl is doing something even now for our good ; 
be sure of it" 

" I hope so," he said ; and both relapsed into silence. 

It was a fearful and gloomy scene. Our position was 
horrid and ghastly. And there on the ground lay the 
gorged savages, their whole forms brought clearly into light 
by the blazing pile. 

What is that rising like an avenging angel from behind 
the pine log ? It is Wah, and Stop's long knife is in her 
hand. Up she gets, without sound, without noise, kneels 
on the log, her face bent over one of the sleepers. I fain 
would close my eyes, but I cannot It is the hideous sav- 
age who proposed the torture. At the same instant the 
knife is at his heart and her hand upon his mouU^ Wah 
had disappeared. A Dog-Rib slowly raised Im head, 
startled by a faint cry from his companion ; but hearing 
nothing, and seeing that we were safe, he lay down once 
more. • 

Then up rose Wah again, and stepped boldly over the 

log, without a sound as heavy as the breath of one of the 

.sleepers. In her hand were three guns, and to my mind 

hazarding all upon a chance, she walked boldly across to 

me, bid the guns behind in a thick bush, and then slowly. 



THE ARCTIC ADrENTUBEES. 215 

calmly, ciit my thongs. I should have fallen like a stone, 
but she held me up, and let me slide gently, softly on the 
ground. She soon did the same for Stop, and then bidding 
OS have a quarter of an hour's patience to revive the circu- 
lation, moved away with the same stealthy step, and stood 
by the guns. 

Quite twenty minutes passed ere we were on our feet, 
and then I felt I could do no more than crawl to the boat. 
I accordingly turned my steps that way. 

•* Where you go ? " said Wah, stamping her little foot on 
the ground, and pointing to the Dog-Ribs. 

She saw by my countenance that I was not disposed for 
bloodshed ; and quick as thought levelled her gun and fired. 
Up sprang the Indians with a frantic yell, just in time to 
receive Stop's well-aimed shot, and then mine, for I now 
knew that there was no choice. Before I had rested my 
gun on the ground, Wah had loaded, and away she went in 
full chase of the Dog-Ribs, who, surprised and three killed, 
fled towards the hills. In a few minutes Wah returned, 
and her first act was to build another fire, and that a larger 
one, about fifty yards from the other. 

" No more Dog- Rib now," she said, with her old merry 
laugh — " they had quite enough." 

And she had killed three men. But such is the force of 
education, and the good of those circumstances called civ- 
ilization, which drive such scenes daily farther ft'om our 
doors. I recollect now well that a white woman, taken 
prisoner with six others by seven Indian warriors, killed 
every one in their sleep with a knife, and escaped, to the 
amazement of the whole American frontier.* Now that I 
write this, I could tell a hundred fearful tales of blood con- 
nected with Indian warfare. 

I watched that savage and all but untutored girl with real 
admiration. She had saved our lives, when all human hope 
was over; and though the means had been terrible and 

• An historical fact. "Henry C. Watson records, in his useful books 
on border warfare in America, some incidents which, were they not au- 
thenticated, would appear the invention of some demon. The border 
wars are one horrid tale of massacre, scalping, torture, and desolation. 
The story of Wyoming is enough. 



SI 6 TBI SEA OF ICE, OB 

bloody, I could not — franklj, I did not complun. Stop 
had but one regret, and that was, that the whole gang had 
not shared one fatc« I waa very callous on the subject, my 
•ufferings having been fearful, and my prostration of mind 
almost as bad. 

I drank some water, and some of that wana broth Wah 
had made several times before, and then exhausted I went* 
to sleep, waking only when the sun was midway in Ihe 
heavens. Strange to say, a stifiness excepted, I did not 
feel the results of my sufferings as much as I expected. 

We soon hurried to the boat, and with grateful hearts 
away we sped on the waters of Great Bear Lake, and the 
third day reached the temporary end of our journey. 

We were on the lake, Wah was rowing and Stop sleep- 
ing, while the kayak sped along under the influence of its 
little saiL I sat still, reflecting on the terrible scenes of 
my short and checkered life, and on the hopes which kept 
me alive, when suddenly raising my eyes, I saw what made 
my heart bound with surprise and delight. A cluster of 
houses, as I fancied, in that heated state of my im^nation, 
were clearly visible on the shore. I turned the boat inland, 
reached the bank, and sprang up it, delighted to see even 
the sign where European life had been. 

There was a long, low building, about forty feet long by 
twenty wide, in a tolerable state of preservation in the cen- 
tre ; another not quite so long to the right ; and a third to 
the left — none whole and complete, but capable, with very 
little labor, of being made so. 

They stood upon a dry, sandy bank, about eighty yards 
from the lake and twenty-five above it. Behind, at a dis- 
tance of about one hundred and fifty feet, the groun<^ros« 
to a ridge, which was covered by small trees that promised 
fuel, all the large ones having been cut down to form the 
old trading fort and its stockade, the ruins of which were 
close at hand. 

This ridge bounded the view to the i\prth, while to the 

west the prospect was pretty, embracing a small lake and 

the mouth of a river. Four miles of Bear Lake were seen 

*^ the south-west, while a hill in front was distinguished| 

9Ugh thirty-six miles off. 



THE ARCTIC ADVENTURERS. 217 

The soil was clayey, while some boulder stones of gra^^it^ 
limestone, sandstone, and trap-rocks, were scattered about 
the lake not far from the shore. 

The trees around were black and white spruce, and larch, 
some of which reached the height of sixty feet. 

This was Fort Franklin. 

Here our adventurous countryman, who is now still, wan- 
dering in the icy regions of the north, I hope, had spent a.' 
winter but one y^ar before, in company with others of thosjO 
ardent searchers after knowledge, who belong almost exclu- 
sively to the Anglo-Saxon race. 



CHAPTER XXII. 

THE WINTER 

. ' . ■ » ' 

We had already determined to winter at this place, 4^-, 
spite the vicinity of those diflTerent tribes of Indians, which . 
Wah had often mentioned to us with so much apprehensioxu^ 
We could not hope to arrive at the stations of the Hudson^ 
Bay Company before winter set in, and it was much easier 
and more prudent to pass the long cold season in Fojt,. 
Franklin, than to risk being snowed up in some wild desert 
place on the banks of the other lakes. 

Besides, we were utterly unable to proceed, in fact. Stop ', 
was weary and exhausted; I was ill and overcome, and thQ^ 
last scene had hopelessly shaken me. Wah hi^d all th^., 
elasticity and undaunted vigor of her race ; but this could 
not last forever. 

We accordingly landed our stores, and selected a room in 
the long building, which we proceeded at once to make as 
comfortable as it was in our power to do. We cleared the 
fireplace ; we divided the room into three compartments — 
one for general living, one for Stop and myself, and one for| 
Wah -7- so arranged that the warmth Of the fire should reach 
all parts. 

19 



S18 THK SEA OF ICS, OR 

We als^ repiured the two outer rooms, with a view to 
exercise in such weather as rendered out-door -travelling 
impossible. This was, however, not expected to occur 
Terj often, as G0° north latitude was a very different cli- 
mate from 75^. 

As 8o6n as these arrangements had been made, Wah got 
us to make two small rafls of dry wood, while she fabricated, 
with deer-skins, sinews, and some twine, a net for the pur- 
pose of catching fish, and as soon as the rafts were ready, 
she at once set to work to procure this useful article of 
food. She was immediately successful in catching a large 
supply of Bear Lake herriog, salmon, some trout, tittameg, 
and carp. 

Stop assisted her by splitting open and drying the fish 
on the shore, and I, without venturing to any very serious 
distance from the fort, became the hunter of the party. I 
crawled, however, about with such difficulty, that I was of 
' Tery little use. In fact I lived in constant dread of those 
horrid savages, whose cruel treatment had partly, I think, 
affected my mind. 

We were driven to work inside the house for four days, 
in consequence of incessant rain, which was new to us. At 
the end of this time several deer appeared in the neighbor- 
hood, and I succeeded in killing three, which was a consid- 
erable stock for us. 

A heavy fall of snow soon warned us that the inclement 
season was coming on ; and then, about ten days later, the 
lake was slightly frozen over. The birds, too, on the 12th 
of October were all gone, a few stray ducks excepted ; so 
that we noted this in our minds as the beginning of winter. 
It was very cold, and we began to make an immense fire, 
having laid in a good stock of wood from the ridge and from 
the old stockade. We brought our kayak inside the house, 
as it was a thing too valuable to be parted with., 

This season, Wah told us, was the very best for fishing ; 
and accordingly we made the experiment. Holes were 
broken in the ice, and two rude nets used. The take was 
very great, and all not wanted for the day were frozen, and 
lasted good until the spring. 

Heavy snow-storms several times kept us wholly within 



THE ARCTIC ADVENTURERS. {19 

doors ; but when once on the ground, the snow was welcome, 
as we then could use a rude sledge to bring wood, which we 
found necessary, as our consumption with a twentj-four 
hours' fire was very great. 

We observed many animals in the neighborhood during 
this severe period, such as wolves, foxes, martens, hares, 
mice, and reindeer, while over our heads flew ravens, Cana- 
dian crows, snow birds, wood-peckers, red-caps, crow-beaks, 
Canada rock and willow partridges, a few hawks and owls ; 
we saw also other hardy beasts and birds. 

We rose about nine, breakfasted, went fishing if possible, 
came back to dinner at one, took exercise on the snow until 
four, always with our guns in hope of game, and then we 
returned to the fort to sup. In the evening, I read the 
Bible, and began teaching Wah to read, which was a toler- 
ably easy task, as the wife of her master at the fort had 
commenced the task for me. 

Old Stop used to grunt and groan, I could not tell why, 
as I sat down beside Wah, guided her fingers on the book, 
and talked to her for hours at a time, striving to eradicate, 
some of the evil effects of her savage education. I strove 
above all to instil religious ideas into her mind. This was 
difficult, as she had tradition and early culture against me ; 
and these are hard things to contend with ; still I perse- 
vered, and I do believe succeeded in giving her many simple 
notions of right and wrong, of heaven, God, and her duties, 
which I have no doubt were productive of a certain amount 
of good to her mind. There never was a more fallacious 
notion than that a' little learning is a dangerous thing. 
Better much learning than little—- better little than none. 

Stop was not of this opinion." 

" Now, Master Henry," he said to me one day, " what is 
the use of putting ideas in the head of that poor savage as 
is going to marry — mind that — a regular heathen like 
herself -r- a fellow as would scalp you and be proud of it ? '* 

** My . dear Stop, I think it my duty, placed in the 
situation in which I am, to give instruction to that young 

girl " 

" Young girl, ypung girl ! " uttered the worthy old man — 
^that's it, and you're a young man.** 



290 THK SEA OF XCS, OR 

mi • ' 

I 

I Stared at him, and mj attention being drawn by some- 
tUflll; ebe,teade no replj. ~ ' "^ 

Towards the latter end of November, I was sitting in the 
Ibrt, mending my mocassons, while Stop was manufacturing 
a new wooden leg out of a log he had found, which gave 
bim great satisfiiction. He used to call it his new ship for 
-Hie spring Tojage, and cut manj a joke about it as he cut 
te w^M>d itself with his long knife. He had roughly shaped 
it with an flixe, and was now polishing and beautifying it 

^ That is a fine piece of woiiananship. Stop," I said, 
langhing. - - 

• ■ •* Middling, guv'ner,'' he replied. 

I would have made some joking answer, when Wah 
bomded into the room. 

' ^ Dog-Itib ! " she cried almost frantically, as she looked 
at me with a tenderness and gentleness which I had never 
Htoen in her eyes before. 

^The accursed miscreants!" I replied, jumping to my 
feet 

We were armed in an instant, and sallied forth in front 
of the fort There they were, about three hundred paces 
off, coming on in a long line. We levelled our guns at 
once, and made signs to them to keep off, calling at the same 
time to imaginary persons within to be ready. 

The Dog- Ribs, who were about thirty in number, held a 
conference, which ended in one man advancing alone and 
unarmed towards us. 

He was an old man, and continually made signs for us 
not to hurt him. 

He spoke at last to Wah ; but she shook her head, and 
signified that she did not understand him. He then uttered 
a few words apparently with great difficulty, which Wah 
now comprehended. 

"Want fish — meat — live in fort with us," she said, 
turning to me with a cold and sneering expression. 

" No ! " I exclaimed fiercely ; " tell him that not only will 
I give them nothing, but every Dog-Rib who comes within 
reach of my gun shall die." 

Wah's eyes sparkled with delight as she gave my answer. 

The Dog-Rib held up his hands in token of extreme 



THE ARCTIC ADYSNTUBERS. jt'2l 

astonishment; and coming nearer, said that he and his 
friends had hunted for the white chiefs who had built that 
fort, that they had been very kind to them, had given them 
shelter, and in exchange for coal had given them food. 

I bade Wah narrate the scene at the Deer Pass. 

I kept my eye on the old man as she spoke, and I could 
plainly see a glance of agony on his face as she told of 
the slaughter of his people in such boasting terms. I felt 
satisfied then that they had come for revenge, and at once, 
and in peremptory tones, ordered him back, repeating my 
injunction for them not to come near the fort. 

A wild cry of real anguish from the whole party startled 
me, and I began to hesitate in my suspicions. Were they 
really hungry ? 

I bade Wah say then that I did not think it consistent 
with my safety to let them come to the fort until my friend^ 
came back, but that if they would retire to a distance, I 
would go hunting for them for a day. . This they agreed to 
at once, and did as I told them. By great exertion, I suc- 
ceeded in two days in killing five deer, with which they 
departed much delighted, and we saw no more of them. 

The days were so short in December that we had scarcely 
time to hunt, so that we fell back upon fishing, which we 
did with nets and spear both, but no longer with the success 
which had at first attended us. 

One or two straggling Hare Indians, and one day two 
Loucheift Indians, paid us a visit. They were armed = with 
guns, and very quiet fellows ; but I did not let them enter 
our room, as the sight of Wah might have excited their evil 
passions — a female Chippewaw being a prize much coveted 
by the more northern Indians. 

The sun did not rise until about eleven o'clock one morn- 
ing, and this was our shortest day, lasting five hours. The 
nights were, however, brightly illuminated by the moon, 
with constant appearance of the Aurora Borealis. 

We kept Christmas. I read some chapters in the morn- 
ing, and had a sermon discourse with Stop and Wah. Then 
we took some exercise, and sat down to a meal composed of 
a roast joint of deer-meat and fried fish, with pelted snow- 
water for. our drink. It was very sobex ^u\«t\»assssiKc&^\s^ 

19* 



fft TU AEA OF ICB, OB 

««CBJofedil — aj, and the piwpect of thmt jojaoa Christ- 
iHi wtxt jw« wldcfc we now had ereij reason to hope for. 
Fresh ft«h sooa became rare, and the dried fish injarioas 
iMaUh ; so that when Wah anDoanced the track of a 
deer. I detemined to go in chase. The days were 
•bofft, aod Booie ndgb^ be at a great distance ; still fresh 
leai «a» so wanted that I took no note of time or danger, 
and: ateoBpanied bj the Lnfian girl, started on the ex- 



TWa Hiow was deep and not hard enoogh ibr oor feet, 
ttMl is to taj, it had no crasi, so diat trarelling was ex- 
tnmidj fiaigaittg. But the stdke, in our position, was a 
gteat oae; and led and enooon^ed bj mj persevering 
faide» I eootinned on mj waj. The wearisome character 
af the chase maj be judged when I saj, that we travelled 
Ibar c oaae c uti ve dars in porsoit, passed the night withoat 
ire» wrapped in oor bearskins and bdiind a wsdl of snow, 
and on the morning of the fifth daj were not jet ap with 
Ike animaL Hie track, however, was dear and distinct, 
aad d e f oa rin g a mouthful of dried meat and a ptarmigan, 
ve started. I saw that Wah was nearlj exhaasted. As 
for mvseK I coold scarcely crawl ; but .still on I went, until 
at last we saw htm near a dump of trees. He was near 
enoogh for a shot, and both fired 

He was hit, and "badlv, for instead of taking safety in 
flight, he came bounding furiooslj towards us. The Indian 
girl darted behind a tree, and be^ui to load. I, encumbered 
with mv great snow-<shoes, looked around in vain tor a shel- 
ter, and he was upon me, striking at me with his fore-feet 
I foD backwards, mv feet up in the air. The moose bent 
down his horns for a rush, when he received Wah's shot, 
and then a well-directed blow of her knife. 

To clear the snow, and to make a fire, was the work of a 
fow minutes ; and then we cooked and ate a meal which we 
certainlv had well earned. TTe then cut down some small 
trees, especiaUv pines, and made a huge fire. This done, 
we made us each a hut of boughs and snow together, crept 
in oar bear^ins. and took the rest we so much needed. A 
aledge of branches was easily made in the morning, with 

•*dl we started on our journey httck to the fort, where we 



THE ARCTIC ADVENTURERS. 3^2$ 

arrived after an absence of eight days. Poor Stop had 
given us up for lost, and was warm in his congratulations 
as to our success, when at last we reappeared. 

In February fish began to be again plentiful, and despite 
the otters which attacked our nets, we caught a fair supply. 

About the middle of April the thaw commenced, and the 
temperature being very warm, we began to prepare for our 
departure. ■ We were, however, deceived, as severe weather 
set in again ; and May arrived, and still we were at the 
fort. Birds began now to flock from all parts, and soon 
flowers were found budding — amongst otneris, the white 
anemone. 

It was about the end of the first week in June, the sun 
was warm, the air balmy, the kayak fioated on the lake, its 
little sail was up, Stop was resting in the house, and I lyas 
looking at Wah fishing. * 

Presently she drew some trout from the lake, and came 
up slowly to where I was sitting on a log, underneath the 
fort She laid the trout at my ^et, and sat down. 

" There is fish in the lake, there is game in the woods, 
there are birds* in the air — why go?" said Wah, suddenly. 

" Why go ? " I asked, singularly struck by her remark. 

" Henry brave young warrior — Stop old man — journey 
long — Henry st>p here — hunt — Wah fish — live. All 
the country ours." 

" My dear girl," I said, anxiously, " reflect on the 
wretched winter, the uncertainty about food, and the feet 
that I wish to be with my friends in my own country." 
>. " Why ? " she replied quietly. " All country good. LikQ 

^wwarmer — go Slave Lake — build wigwam, hunt, flsh, be 
jB^t trapper, great warrior. Young Oak got quick eye. 
I^^deer escape from him." 

I^as silent, struck dumb with surprise and grief. I 
could not mistake her meaning. Our long association, my 
earnest determination never to give her up' to her perse- 
cutors and enemies, the Indians, the circumstances which 
had driven me to- the exhibition of qualities an Indian girl 
would admire, long and gentle familiarity, had awakened in 
this poor uneducated child, feelings which she sought noti to 
disguise. Her meaning clearly was, that I should \v^<sft?ccc^ 



234 THK §!▲ OF ICB, OB 

a wild hanter of the woods, like many of my feliow-ooontrj- 
men, and take her for mj squaw. 

I knew not what to say, or what to do. I sat confused 
and stupefied. But at length, rousing myself, I spoke. 

^ I am a Fale-face, and must go back to the land of the 
Pale-faces. I have a father, a mother, and, and—^a young 
girl who waits my return to be my wife." 

** How you know ? " said Wah, sharply. 

** I am quite sure of it, Wah. She is my father's broth- 
er's daughter, lives at home, and waits for me, I know." 

^ The white squaws are very beautiful," she said, in a 
low, sad tone. 

" Not more beautiful than you are, Wah. They are 
white, but with your dark skin you are very pretty." 

" Then why not take Wah ? — Wah good squaw — light 
fire — hunt — fish — do everything make warrior happy. 
Wah not like red-skin warrior now. White much better. 
No beat, no scold squaw, no leave her die in wood when 
old. Wah has listened to all the Young Oak has said, and 
it is very good." 

I sat humiliated, bowed down, utterly overcome with a 
grief I could not master. My own lessons, my own teach- 
ings, my pictures of another kind of life from that she knew, 
had turned against me ; and Wah, her imagination fired by 
the idea of a happy home with a pale-face warrior, had 
cherished feelings which, in the simplicity of her heart, she 
saw no reasons for concealing. 

" Wah," I said, taking her hand, " I have for you the 
afiection of a sister, but my heart is forever gone. A white 
man may only have one squaw, and I cannot give up Fanny. 
Besides, I am not a warrior. I detest and abhor war — I 
only fight when attacked. If you knew, however, Wah, all 
the gratitude I feel, all the sdOTection 1 have for you, you 
would not think me ungrateful. I shall never forget you. 
I will, on my return to England, send you presents that will 
make your tribe worship you." 

** Wah will not go back to her tribe. Her skin is red, 
but her heart is white — the forked tongue of the Pale-face 
and his reading in the Big Book have blinded her eyes. 
She cannot see the Manitou of the Indians. She will go 
and live in the big houses of the whiles. I have said." 



THS ARCTIC ADVENTURERS. 2*^6. 

And rising, she w^tlked away with a slow and measured 
sthp towards the fcrf, 'leaving me overwhelriaed witlT sur- 
prise, bewilderment, and sorrow. 

" I knew it," said Stop, when he had wormed the secret 
out of me — " I knew it. But it can't be helped ; and I 
must say, Master Henry, you've acted like a man. Now 
if as how she had taken a fancy to me, it wouldn't have 
been no matter. Fm free, and I do think, if she'd have 
been christened, I wouldn't mind marrying her. But Tm 
a weather-beaten old tar, and it ain't likely." 

That night we packed up our goods, and began our jour- 
ney towai^ Cumberland House. 



CHAPTER XXIII. 

SAD EVENTS. 

We were a grave and serious party as we started at 
early dawn on our downward journey, which was to be by 
Great Bear Lake River, into the Mackenzie, and then up 
that stream to Great Slave Lake, Athabasca Lake, thence 
to Cumberland House, across Lake Winnipeg, Lake of the 
Woods, to Fort William on Lake Superior. 

It was a tremendous journey ; but we had gone through 
so much that I had every hope of being able to succeed in 
this our last undertaking. 

Wah was the same as ever — light-hearted, gentle, 
smiling, with her beaming bright eyes, her white teeth 
showing, and all the same courage and constancy which had 
always characterized her. She had loaded the boat with 
great care, after it had undergone complete overhauling, 
and we started therefore with every chance of success. 
Stop was much renovated in health. His vigor had in 
great measure come back to him. He had been spared all 
absolutely unnecessary toil during the winter, had had, un- 
known to himself, the choicest morsels and the be&t f<yyL, 



2:26 TBB SEA OF ICE, OR 

eren when we were somewhat deficient in Bnpplies ; and as 
I looked at his hardy complexion and keen eje, I had great 
hopes of even his reaching the settlements in safety. 

Alas ! how vain is the pride of youth, how foolish and 
idle its calculations ! White hair and old age smile at the 
Tanity of younger years and see it die away — the old oak 
stands, the young rose-tree bends and breaks before the 
blast. 

Our journey for the first day was in sight of pleasing 
looking hills, with pine and larch trees on their sides, and 
bare of all save scanty grass as they rose. The stream 
glided swiftly, the lake discharging itself through this chan- 
nel into the Mackenzie. Once the current was so swift 
that we had to land, and carry first the contents of the 
kayak, and then the kayak itself, for about two hundred 
yards. But then the stream widened, and we loaded and 
entered our boat again with considerable satisfaction, as the 
labor of the portage was very severe and fatiguing. 

On we glided, Stop at the helm, I and Wah paddling — 
sails were not safe in this shifting and winding river, where 
sudden gaps in the hills created streams of air exceedingly 
dangerous — and making considerable way. We had at 
first determined to take the return trail, by which Franklin 
and his party had struck across the land and arrived in 
fourteen or sixteen days at the river. But I dreaded the 
fatigue of walking for poor Stop. Would that we had done 
so, if we had consumed even two more years on the dreary 
journey I 

A year or two of my life would have been as nothing to 
have altered the course of events. 

About two hours before night we halted to cook a meal, 
intending to camp below the rapids, which Wah said began 
about a mile below. We expected a long portage, and 
therefore rest and refreshment were imperatively needed. 

The place where we had halted was picturesque. The 
river widened considerably as the hills and high ground re- 
treated somewhat. The spot on which we built our fire 
was tlie very point of a little space of land, naked and bare 
as well could be. Behind, at a distance of a hundred yards, 
was a thick clump of trees, while the same occurred about 



THE ARCTIC ADVENTURERS. 227 

two hundred yards on the opposite side, where, in fact, a long 
line of wood began. The stream was, from some 'cause, — 
apparently from coming sharply round another point just 
above us, on our side, — very rapid near the opposite bank, 
towards which the force of the current was directed by 
some stones and rocks that turned it sharp round. 

We, on coming round, had been swept within the vortex, 
and had only escaped a wreck by Wah leaping into the 
water and dragging us ashore. 

We now made a brisk fire, by which Wah warmed her- 
self and dried her wringing clothes, and then we began to 
eat with an appetite which will, scarcely bear describing 
on paper. 

" Sun go down quick," said Wah, who was very solemn 
and earnest in her tone. 

Is there an instinct of coming ill — some mysterious 
music, which the soul alone can hear, coming away from 
the realms beyond the grave ? 

" Let us be on the move," I replied, looking gently at 
her, as I helped her to rise. 

She took my hand eagerly and pressed it within both 
hers; then, having lt>ounded up with all her native agility, 
she took hold of her gun and turned towards the boat. 

" Ugh," she said, and levelled her gun. 

I followed where she pointed, and dbtinctly saw a head 
moving along in the water cautiously. It moved in the 
direction of our boat, and the object evidently was to steal 
that article so valuable to us. 

The crack of Wah's gun was heard, and then up leaped 
the skulking wretch, held up his hands, and falling back in 
the stream, was swept away by the waters. 

'' To the boat," said the Indian girl, as she moved down 
to the bank, loading her gun. 

" To the boat," repeated Stop, as the hideous war-whoop 
of a dozen Indians — Dog-Ribs on the war-trail, a quarrel 
having recently taken place between them and the Lou- 
cheux — was heard behind us. 

I turned to cover their retreat. The Indians came 
bounding along from, the thicket above alluded to, but halt- 
ed an instant at the sight of my levelled gun. I looked 



228 TUE SEA or ice, ob 

back and saw that Wah was asdUtiog Stop into the canoe. 
I then slowly turned to join them, when the Dog-Ribs — 
at least I heard that so thej were — made a motion to ad- 
vance. I fired. They came on whooping and jelling with 
extreme ferocity, and with sounds that seemed to me more 
terrible even than usuaL 

I retreated still, loading as I went ; but they came on 
too swiflly, and I was about to turn and fly, when Stop 
and Wah made themselves heard. This caused a diversion 
which enabled me to reach the boat, which instantly was 
pushed off. 

The Indians, who had lost several of their party, began 
running down the bank with threatening gestures, and 
clearly had made up their mind to cut off our retreat by 
gaining the portage above the falls before we did. 

This was a terrible fact, because Wah had told as that 
the rocks on the other side were impassable. Still our 
only course was to reach the portage, which could eanly be 
defended, — it was a path along which at times only one 
man could walk, — or to cross the stream and defend our- 
selves among the steep rocks until the Indians were wearied 
or picked off by our guns. 

This latter course, after a short race, we pretty well saw 
to be the only practicable one. Still we should have tried 
the other, and have attempted to run the gantlet of the sav- 
ages, bad not a startling incident compelled us to alter our 
determination. 

We were within a hundred yards of the head of the fall, 
and had agreed to fire steadily one after the other at the . 
whooping and yelling Indians, who, strange to say, kept back 
a little more than was necessary, and had loosened our guns 
for the trial, when Wah gave the kayak a sudden sweep 
towards the opposite shore, that unfortunately sent us into 
the suction of the current, and forced us to give all our 
attention to saving ourselves and the boat. 

This we found a terrible and doubtful struggle, and yet 
we worked with all the energy of which we were capable, 
with all the strength of our arms. 

Wah could not speak ; she merely pointed to a rock snr- . 
mounted by a bush, just above the fall itself, where I plainly 



THE' ARCTIC ADVENTURERS. 229 

saw the heads of three painted warriors, peering* out with 
the malignant certainty of the panther; and watching for 
the moment when thej could take us at a disadvantage. 

^ What- is to be done?^ said I at last, in an accent of 
wild despair. 

^ Heaven be mercif ul unto us," put in Stop. 

« Wah," continued I, "what is to be done? " 

" Shoot the fall," she replied calmly. 

I looked at her in silent mnazeinent. Her great eyes 
flashed a fire I had never seen before ; her tawny skin was 
sofiused by a deep red, the hectic flush of fever ; and she 
gave me a smile <^ confidence, and resignation too, that al* 
most unmanned me. 

" Lie down quite still," said she to St(n), who obeyed me* 
cfaanically. " Don't move, or all drown.*^ 

The old fellow was so amazed that he did not reply. 

"Now Toung Oak— -sit like lump of stone— turn ri^t 
or left, drown. Hold paddle, middle." . 
• She stood up herself, beautiful as the Pythoness, gave 
the canoe a sheer round, and headed directly for the fall. 

A wild cry of wonder, rage, and admiration burst from 
the horrid crew behind. It was cast back by the echoes of 
the hills, but Wah did not move — no, not even a muscle. 
She had laid aside her cloak, and wore her simple Indian 
costume, her tunic, having even prepared for swimming 
by taking off her leggings. Her cap fell into the boat, and 
her long hair waved in the wind. 

At a sign from her, I had- corked the powder-horns, and 
covered the pans of > the guns with a light skin case made 
on purpose. 

Then I sat quite still, ray eyes fixed on Wah. 

At first the course of the stream seemed not to be so very 
rapid ; but by degrees its velocity increased so that I was 
quite dizzy — and- at last the rocks seemed to whirl by — 
the sky, hills, stones, trees,- all were blended into one — and 
down, down, down, we seemed to go, while Wah extended, 
swelled, and stood a giant by my«ide. 

Ha, ha, ha ! those demon heads, and that wild, woful yell ; 
and then, O Qod! that shot fired from a gun -7- whence 
came it, whither did it go^ and why bad \t\y^Ti %»^^ 

20 



280 TIIK SEA OF ICE, OB 

I Mw, heard, felt no more. 

The kayak whirled round, turned over, and I was cast 
into a deep vortex of rushing waters. Mj ears heard buzz- 
ing sounds, my eyes saw horrid monsters of the deep, and 
then I lay gasping for breath on a low sand bank. 

Up I crawled, and the setting sun was shedding its golden 
livery of light upon that terrible fall of waters. 

I was alone. 

I shuddered and looked around. 

About a hundred yards below, I saw Stop crawling on 
his hands and knees in about six inches of water towards 
something, I could not tell what. I thought, however, it 
was the canoe, turned upside down. 

But where was Wah ? 

Nowhere could I distinguish a sign of the Indian girl, 
whose devotion, courage, and sad resignation had endeared 
her to me more than ever. I clutched my gun, which had 
never left my grasp, and moved down the bank. When 
I was near Stop, within twenty yards, I hailed the old man. 

" Where is Wah ? " I said, anxiously. 

The old man rose to his feet, and looked at me wildly. 

" Is slie not with you ? " 

« No." 

" I feared it. I feared it," he replied, with a groan — 
** that is her then clutching hold of the boat." 

I bounded to the place ; there she lay under the boat, 
which she grasped with her convulsed fingers. 

" Wah ! Wah ! " I said. 

** Defend the pass," she replied, in a hoarse whisper, 
" defend the pass ; go. Wah no die yet. Young Oak take 
all three gun — shoot — defend the pass." 

" But, my dear girl, where are the other guns ? " I replied, 
as I removed the boat from her grasp. 

She made a sign I readily understood — they were lashed 
in their proper place inside the boat. . 

" Sit me up," she said. 

I sat her up against a large stone, on which I spread 
my cloak. 

**Now go — make haste — Wah see Young Oak fight 
Uke a brave," 



TBK ABCTIC ▲DTBNTUREBS* 231 

I took the three guns and ran up the path hy which the 
Dog-Ribs could alone get at us. I had scarcely reached its 
mouth, when I saw them coming on, eleven of them, headed 
by one with a gun in his hand. I understood but too well 
that flash, that report, now. 

I took a position, I placed my two guns beside me, and 
picking out that man, I fired. 

They doubtless thought us all dead ; for they came on in 
single file along a ledge of rock, with a yawning precipice 
of thirty feet below and one of ninety feet above. The man 
with the gun fell back, clutched at the nearest warrior, and 
the two tumbled headlong into the wild rapid. I fired 
without mercy again, two quick shots. The whole band, 
startled, amazed, in .an agony of despair, rushed one against 
the other — a mad crowd; and the ledge not. being twelve 
inches broad, the first man was pitched into the stroan), and 
none being able to check their own impetus, every one was 
carried over the rocks into the fearful whirlpool below. 

I returned slowly down the borders of the stream, with 
no regrets, no compunction now. I did not pity one of 
them, such was my state of mind. 

A look at Stop told me that Wah was dying. The ball 
had struck her shoulders, and had glanced aside and pene- 
trated the lungs. She was sitting up, wrapped in skins, and 
drinking large draughts of water — a sure sign of her speedy 
dissolution. The wounded to death ever crave the simple 
liquid of the running stream. It is the only thing that will 
refresh them. 

" Welcome," said Wah, in a low, soft tone ; " how many 
Dog-Ribs have gone to the bad hunting-grounds of their 
people ? " 

"All!" I replied, solemnly; and then falling on my 
knees beside her, I cried, passionately, " Wah ! dear Wah, 
think not of these things. You are dying — you have not 
many hours to live. At this moment, even the wicked 
begin to think ; you, who are good, will listen to the words 
which preserve immortal life." 

The fierce eye of the Indian girl fell ; a soft, placid, hope- 
ful expression took the place of all savage feeling. 

" Henry," she said, " shall ^^ m^^X. \r^ V5ws«v \ss^ ^^sw. 
heaven ? " 



Mi THF. CGA OF IClfi, OB 

^ Ym! O, jet!" I puskmatdj said. << PkAse fCkKl, we 
•hall meeU" 

. ** Then tell me all— lell me of Him wko died, yon say, 
fiirall; red.bUusk.wkiile.'' 

I looked at Stop — the scalding tears were flowing down 
his cheeks, convuLsive throbs shook his frame, his hands 
were clutched in prayer. He knelt on the groand, still, 
moiioQiess, his eyes fixed upon her faoe. 

For an hour or more I explained to her all that I knew 
myself, in simple, plain language — perhaps a little dogmad- 
oal ; we are idl so — I answered her objections, I read to 
her, and did eveiy thing to aid the happy depsurture of her 
pure, innocent, and unsophistioated spirit. 

At the end of the hour, I paused and prayed within myself. 

*^ Henry," ahe said again — she had never until ibis day 
called jne so before — *^ teaoh me -hew to pray." 

I shall never forget the bursting of the heart I felt at tins 
instant. The prejudices, the -education, of her race were 
utterly vanqubhed. And who will say that love is not a 
noble power? And I yerily do believe that it was her 
simple love for me which gave my words the influence they 
seem to have had. 

I prayed, and she repeated my words, slowly, calmly, 
and with eamiest faith — yes, there wilb no mistaking her 
accents — with earnest faith. 

At this instant the bodies of the Indians, driven by the 
rifl, came slowly, one by one, and stuck in the shallow water. 
I watched the face of Wah with deep anxiety. There was 
not even a sign of exultation. 

" Poor fellows ! " she said, " they knew no better." 

I looked at Stop, and fairly sobbed aloud, as I saw how 
completely the savage spirit of this child of nature was 
tamed. 

^' Lay my head on your shoulder," she said. 

I do so. 

"Good by, Henry — good by, Stop — don't cry any 
more. Where is the sky gone? I — I — I — cannot see 
you, Henry. God — Ueis — i/ou ! " 

She had died like a babe in its «y «i^ without a 

»gh, without a groan* 



Tn ABOTIC ADTEirrCBERS. S3d 

. *• We*d better bury ourselves too," said Stop, groaning. 
" We've lost our best friend." 

<< We have lost a faithful, good, and noble friend. Stop 
— one whom I shall recollect every hour of my life. 
We will bury her in the morning as a Christian should be 
buried." 

^ Amen," said Stop, solemnly. 

I examined the canoe. Like her that guided it, it was 
past being" of any further use to us. 

There remained our guns and our bear-skins. One of 
these we took and wrapped Wah in it ; then we lit a great 
fire — a huge fire — to keep off the wolves and vultures 
that began already to hover round our camp. 

We rested a while on the ground, and then we sat up by 
our fire to watch by the dead. In Stop's knapsack the 
Bible had been saved, and, by the fitful blaze of the old pine 
logs, I read aloud, with solemn voice and earnest tone, 
several chapters. 

Then we heaped on wood, and lay down for a few hours 
to sleep. 

I awoke before dawn, and gazed around, scarcely recol- 
lecting the events of the day before. I almost expected to 
hear the pleasant voice of the Indian girl calling me to 
breakfast, and it was with a start and a pang I caught sight 
of her inanimate form wrapped in her own bear-skin. 

I rose, and went beside her body ; and never before, and 
never since, did I pray so fervently. 

Her f^ce was calm, gentle, and beautiful in death. Not 
a muscle was there visible. All was soft, placid, lovely. 
Scalding tears fell from my eyes, as I gazed on the face of 
her who had loved certainly not wisely, but so well. 

There Was a tall pine standing by itself, within ten yards 
of where she died. At its foot we dug her grave. We 
made it as deep as we could, and then we lowered her into 
it, placed the broken canoe over her, and casting one last, 
long look, covered her slowly up, our sobs choking our utter- 
ance, our grief unable to find vent in words. 

We made a mound over her, and we covered it with 
stones, that no wolf or bear might desecrate her dear tomb ; 
and then we went on our way, le«wui^\^^^vs3A^\«i^»k^s^ 

20* 



M4 i«B tc4or loa, <m 

Ike te€«i 4ht wolves, and viiltareSy that rushed madly on 
their prey. 

Can I tell what passed for thirty day^ ? — how we wan- 
dered down that river, half-staryed, wearied unto death, sad, 
de^M>ndent, despairing? We oould not, and we did not, 
recover from the shock occasioned by Wah's death. We 
hanted, and we fished ; we walked akmg the banks of the 
river, we made our way sk>wly akmg, resting whole days ; 
we eodored starvation finr nearly a whole w^k*; «id then, 
whsB hope was neariy gone, and we began to repent having 
not laid our bones beside those of poor Wah, we saw in the 
dtslaaoe the flag of £ngland waving over a fort 

We erawled to it, and were recikved with a wdeonie I 
shall never forget They gave os food, shelter, warm beds, 
chMbes, and never asked wfaenoe we came. 

Ten days after it was, that, recruited from omr stnpendous 
fiitigues, we told our strange and eventftil history — a his- 
tory that those who heard could scarcely credit 

We did convince them, however ; and then they advised 
US to rest another week, when they offered to take us down 
to Fort William, and insure us a passage to Old England. 

I agreed ; and here, where I write these Hnes, I live in 
the earnest hope, that in three months from this I may un- 
brace those I love, and see once more dear Old England 



XITD OT RIHBT MATIfARB'S WABBATTVa. 



f 

THB ARCTIC ▲DVfiNTUXERS. tSb 



CHAPTER XXIV. 

PETBRSaiLL. 

THBBE'was a ftad house in Plymouth all this while — ^ 
Mid and sorrowful and hopeless '^— a house of knouming and 
grief. The shock had been terrible indeed. when Henrj 
went away on that long and weary journey, which' others, 
too, soon started on, whose names are now forever famous 
in history. Still, though he had departed on a voyage 
which must be a dreary blank for so many years, there was 
hope and trusting in that house of Petershill^ that he would 
return safely, and end all their troubles. 

Mr. Maynard rode down daily to his place of business, 
but with an earnest gravity none had ever noticed on his 
face before. He studied, too, the wind with unwonted 
earnestness, and took note of all whalers that came in and 
went out — asking letters from the first) sending messages 
by the latter. 

^ And at home in Petershill, Mrs. Maynaid and p6or little 
Fanny talked of Henry in hushed whispers, wondered 
where he was, shuddered as the wind howled between the 
trees round the house, and were grave, and solemn, and 
earnest, .as people are when the loved ones are far away, in 
danger and in tribulation. 

They sat reading often, talking always, and working with 
a serious pleasantness at things for the wedding; Fanny 
was making an embroidered waistcoat for Henry for the 
happy day, and Mrs. Maynard was manufacturing some 
wonderful neck-tie with flowers and stars, for the same joy- 
ous occasion. 

And thus the time passed, sadly, but hopefully ; and they 
counted the months and weeks, and then the weeks and 
days, and then the days and minutes, as the time fiew on ; 
aad sommer went, and winter came, and summer was round 
again, and drawing on towards the end. o{ \\;^ ^»s«et« 



1st TBS ISA Of ICE, OB 

Onee, and onlj once, there cune news. A ship had 
•poken the Fair Fanny, and the words ** all's well " came 
to them as rich music to the ear of the 8ongi>loving amateur, 
and the ** jes * of the loTed one to the eager ear of the 
loTcr. 

It was nearlj winter now ; and towards the end of that 
season, or at latest the next, he would come. 

For a long time the ladies comforted themselves hj long 
talks with old Stop about the young master, and listened to 
him reTerentlj, because he had been at sea, and knew 
something of the perils and dangers of the main. He told 
them all the comforting tales he could ; and then that com- 
fort departed, for old Stop unacoountablj disappeared with« 
out leaving a trace behind. 

Thej guessed — the j thought he had gone on some wild 
expedition to look for Henry ; but no evidence came to con- 
firm or change their opinion. 

It was in the library. A bright coal fire burned on the 
hearth, casting its light fitfiilly into every comer of the 
room, and playing in holes and comers with the dark 
shadows that flitted back, or were chased awav as the blaze 
rose or fell in the clear, bright grate. 

Mr. Maynard and his wife sat one on each side in their 
arm-chairs, gazing at the fire, while Fanny, who had just 
mng the bell for lights and tea, stood looking out of the 
window, peering into the darkness of the park. 

At this instant a slow, heavy, and reluctant step was 
heard in the passage without — a step that came hesitating- 
ly along. 

Fanny's heart began to beat There was a low presage 
of ill she could not keep down, and she clasped her hands 
in agony, and turned round. 

The door was open, and there stood Captain Shipton, the 
lights carried by the servant casting his whole person into 
strong relief, but hiding entirely the expression of his face. 
His hat was in his hand, and he advanced timidly and 
fearfully. 

^ Where is my son ? ** exclaimed Mr. Maynard, starting 
to big feet. 



THE AROTIC Al>yEir'C€REE3. ^S97 

■^ My ISoyl " repeated the mother, "as she ibse, staggered, 
and fell back. 

*< Where is Henry ? " said Fanny, adrandog with super- 
ittttaral cakn to 1ms side. 

The skipper raised his You^h hand to his eyes and dashed 
away a tear. 

Mr. Maynard groaned aloud, the mother fainted, and 
Fanny sank in a chair, looking at the sailor with her great 
eyes so strangely that he was quite alarmed. A burst of tears 
then relieved her, and she listened still without moving. 

** Captain Shipton/' said Mr. Maynard, when he had suc- 
ceeded in restoring his wife to consdonsness, ^ what is the 
news you i>ear me ? I hope I am a Christian, and able to 
receive any diastening in « humble spirit. Is my eh^d 
dead?" 

** I do not know — that is the truth," replied the skipper. 

*^ Then he is not dead ! " exclaimed Fanny, bounding for* 
ward; ^sit down, captain — sit down, and tell us all. If 
you do not know of his death, his being alive is possible, 
and we can hope. Speak, I implore you." 

The sailor sat down, allowed the young girl to take his 
-cap and coat, and, oflen interrupted, told his tale in rough 
and plain, but earnest language. 

^ Glorious old Stop ! " said Fanny, when he told of speak- 
ing a whaler in which was the old «ailor; '^he has gone 
where I should be." 

^ God bless you, child I** replied Shipton ; '* behas gone 
where fwne should be. 'Tis looking for a man with the adr 
dress of the world. If Master Henry has escaped, which 
is quite possible, he is on the main land of America by this 
time, and coming home." 

^ It is possible, and that is all," said Mr. Maynard, sol- 
emnly ; *^ we will pray day and night for his happy return. 
Shipton, you are not much inclined to return, I suppose." 

*^ I came, sir, to ask you to send me back," replied Ship- 
ton. ^I thought as how if I took in victuals for two years, 
and most of the same crew, with a little extra pav for the 
men, I might look about the islands up there, and just see." 

^ Yen shall go, Shipton, and the men shall have double 
pay. Engage jthem all at once " 



\ 



i88 THS SXA or ICB, OB 

^ Xot an, Bir, if joq please," said Shipton, besitat!^^. 

" What mean you ? " 

** Whj, 8ir, the men say, and it's my belief, too, tbat if 
Williams liad wished to find Master Henry that terrible 
night, he would. He gave him up at once, and came back * 

^ But. why, in the name of Heaven's mercy ? " asked Mr» 
Haynard wildly. 

^ Because you see, sir, Master Henry was yonng, and the 
men liked him, and he was so much cleverer than Williams 
— and Williams was jealous." 

The rough sailor stopped, as if he felt he had said enough. 

^ Shipton, I am not a revengeful man ; but Williams had 
better never want a crust of bread, and turn to me for it 
To leave my son, my brave child, to that dreadful fate, be- 
cause he envied him ! " 

** No, my husband," siud Mrs. Maynard, in choking ac* 
cents ; " if Williams were starving, you would feed him 
still. You expect mercy, and you will show mercy. My 
poor, poor boy ! " 

^ You are right, wife ; but let him go at once, and never 
set foot on a ship of mine again. Shipton, you had better 
take a good rest this time — your pay will run on until the 
spring." 

'* Thank you, sir," said Shipton ;- ** I have a wife and 
children at home, and these things are pleasant for one's 
family. Have you any thing else to say, sir ? " 

" You will sup with us, and sleep ? " said the merchant, 
quietly; 'Mt is late already, and we have much more 
to hear." 

** Captain Shipton," asked Fanny, who all this time had 
been silent, listening with eager ears and watching every mo- 
tion of the sailor's face, "do you really feel any hope at all ?" 

" Young lady, there is a God above who knows : I know 
nothing. But his escape is quite possible. Whole tribes 
live winter after winter up in those regions, and he may 
have fallen in with one of them. This is my hope — al- 
most my belief." 

"It is possible — it is probable," said Mr. Maynard, 
musing. " Yes. The boy had read much, too much of those 
regions. But al^ alas ! it is all my own &ult." 



THX ABCTIC ADVENTUBERS. 230 

** How ? " asked Fanny, gently. 

^ I should have agreed to your marriage^ dear child, when 
he wished it," continued Mr. Maynard. 

^ Hush ! " said Fanny, bowing her head under a weight 
of emotion ; ^' do not say any thing of the kind. Do not 
grieve so, my dear sir. I, to whom he is all the world, 
have hope ; so then must you." 

- She said this valiantly, did that good and gentle girl ; but 
she did not feel so valiant as she looked, and as her voice 
sounded. But there is comfort in the brave voice of the 
young ; and Mr. and Mrs. Maynard went to bed that night 
with a faint gleam, a glimmering of light, to illumine the 
black darkness around. 

Not so Fanny. She spent the night in prayers and tears ; 
alone she lost fdl courage, all hope, all idea that he would 
be restored to her. But youth, is not easily beat down ; 
and she, too, as the days went on, hoped on, hoped ever — 
a little, and but little, but that little sufficed to keep her 
alive. 

Now Petershill w&s sad indeed. Winter passed away 
cheerlessly, without a ray of sunshine to the heart — a long, 
bleak, blank season of cold and chilL There was no merry 
talk now in the old mansion, no smiles ever illuminated the 
face now, as they talked of the departed ; and then one day, 
as if by common consent, they went into mourning. 

There had beeYi for several days talk of the Sttle hope 
there was left now ; calm reason began to have sway, and 
to show how little, very little chance there was of his get- 
ting over one winter in the Arctic Sea. So, one morning, 
all came down to breakfast ia deep mourning. 

Mrs. Maynard started, and then clasped Fanny frantically 
in her arms. 

** My child, my only child ! Have you then given him 
up too?" 

^< I found the dress in my room, and I put it on," replied 
Fanny, sobbing. 

*< Come 1 come 1 " cried the father, striving to hide his 
emotion ; " we have not given up all hope. • But this garb 
IB fit for those who have such sore reason to grieve as 
we have." 



^40 THE aSX OF ICE, OR 

And the monrniiig wu taken off no more in that boose. 

Scraps of news and iDtelUgence came at long intemds, 
to rouse afresh the wound which never dosed, but kept aU 
in an eternal state of undeeided despair. 

Stop's ship returned and said that he and a boat's crew 
had found the signs of one man being on an island, but 
could not find the man himself. Stop, however, certain that- 
the hermit was Henry, and still alone, had remained behind. 
The ship had not been able to revisit the island, as an earlj 
winter season drove them nnexpeciedlj to the south. 

This kept hope alive even against all probability fyr^ 
twelve months longer. 

Then came Shipton back, with the amaaing intelligence 
of having found the island, and a piutj of E^nimanx on 
it, who complained of having been roUied of sledges and 
dc^gs, bj two white men, who had also taken with them a 
Chippewaw girl, a prisoner of war. 

This rous^ intense hope that the fugitives had gmned 
the continent of America ; but it was the last vague rumor 
thej heard of the absent. 

Time passed so rapidly, that even this piece <^ news. 
cea.<ed in its effect ; and hope again departed. 

Mr. and Mrs. Maynard oflen thought that Henry having 
escaped with an Indian girl, had caused a pang to Fanny, 
and sounded her to that effect by many a strange allusion 
and sly question. But she did not even understand them. 
Siie had too much confidence in the affection of her dear 
Henry to suspect him one instant 

Years fied, and Fanny, though pale, and with a strange, 
anxious look always, was a lovely won^n; and Mr. and 
Mrs. Maynard were much older than years should have 
made them ; grieving no longer 'bitterly as at first, but 
resigned to the inevitable past, and looking to a glorious 
future — not here^ but there ! 

It was a bright August evening, and they had walked 
out towards' the cave, the stockade, and all the old signs of 
the young Robinson's fancy, as they would have walked to 
the grave of some beloved one, to mourn and meditate. A 
young man, who was junior partner to Mr. Maynard, had 
Fanny on his arm, and was striving all he could to make- 



THB ARCTIC ▲DYSKTrrREBS. 241 

himself agreeable to her. His visits were enclonraged by 
the parents, as thej looked with deep regret to the time 
when Fannj shoald be left alone in the world at the head 
of a large business and rich estate. 

Mr. Markham was received by Fannj as a friend ; and 
if ever she dreamed of the ideas of her adopted parents, it 
was gratefally; but she never meant to yield to their 
wishes — no, never. 

Thej sat some of them on a bench at some distance from 
the cave, iu front of which a path now passed from the 
new lodge. They could see it but faintly through some 
bushes, but they knew where it was, and that was quite 
enough. Mr. and Mrs. Maynard it was that sat, and Fan- 
ny and Mr. Markham* stood a little apart. 

^Sfiss Fanny," said the young man at last, — he was 
quite familiar with her, — *' Mr. Maynard this morning ad- 
vised me to speak frankly to you. Ho is kind enough to 
say that he thinks I should make you happy." 

^Has he then ^ven up all hope^ " replied Fanny, in a 
low tone. 

^ I think it quite natural that he should," said Mr. Mark- 
ham, a little piqued. 

** Then I have not, and never will. Ah I " What a wild 
thriek was that 1 " Henry I Henry ! " 

And away she bounded over the grassy ground. 

The aged couple, more aged from sorrow than from years, 
rose wildly. They understood th^ shriek. It was a shriek 
of wild and frantic joy. Yes ! conyng down the path, 
gently supporting Stop, who tottered with suppressed emo- 
tion, was a tall, dark man, with beard all over his face, 
whom they hoped — yes, they believed, — O, yes — it was 
their child. 

He caught the fainting girl in his arms, and came run- 
ning with her, carried up in his arms, to beside his parents. 
No person could trace the wild emotions of that scene, from 
which Markham walked away, not to invade its sacred 
eharacter. He entered the house, and told the servants 
who was come, and then sat down to read some business 
letters, though not without some pain at his great disap- 
pointment. 

21 



24:2 THE SEA OF ICE, OB 

How be kissed them all — and how Fanny kissed him 
first, and then old Stop — and how the father and mother 
looked at each other with a beaming light in their eyes, 
that had not been there for years I Aiid how they all 
talked wildly and madly — and how strange and yet fa- 
miliar all the voices seemed — and what a man Henry 
looked — dark, tanne^ and bearded, bat still Henry ! 

^ And so you knew me ? " said the Arctic Crusoe at last. 

^ At a glance," replied Fanny — ^ what aman you are ! " 

^ And what a lovely woman ! " said Henry, with beaming 
eyes. 

^Bot where is the Indian girl?" suddenly exclaimed 
Fanny. 

Henry looked at Stop with a look of vacant astonishment 

^ Don't stare as if you were frightened," said Fanny, 
who was wild with delight ^I mean the Indian girl you 
ran away with," 

** Alas \ " replied Henry, dashing away a tear — " her 
death is one of the sad events of my long history, which 
will touch you most" 

All were hushed, and then they went into the house — 
and Henry Maynard was restored to the home of his father. 

It was late that night when they all went to rest, afler 
listening to Henry's wondrous tale, which afterwards he 
had to repeat a hundred times, for none were ever weary 
of listening to it 

There was joy in Petershill now — more joy than ever 
had been known there before. And Mr. Maynard entered 
his counting-house once again with an elastic step that sur- 
prised his friends ; and Mrs. Maynard brightened up and 
became cheerful and pleasant once more. 

And old Stop was a hero in the whole country round, 
y^ho had to tell the tale of the Polar Seas to many a won- 
dering auditory. 

Shipton received a handsome retiring pension, and went 
no more to sea. 

Merrily ring the marriage bells, and merrily come the 
eager crowd to see, as, on a bright frosty morning in De- 
cember, Henry and Fanny are wed. They are a li^ndsome 
couple — he so dark and manly, with his beard and mus- 



THE ARCTIC ADVENTURERS. 243 

tache, for he cannot live withoat them now ; she so fair, so 
delicate, so beautiful, leaning on his arm, as, amid loud 
shouts and greetings, they come forth from the church, man 
and wife, forever united in this life — companions until 
death shall part. ^ 

They had been sorely tried, and their trials were for 
good. A happy union it was, and one that Mr. and Mrs. 
Maynard lived many years to see. A sight they had 
longed for as hopeless greeted them, and made their hearts 
glad, in the persons of several grandchildren, who soon 
found out the famous cave, and there in the warm evening 
would listen, as we hope some of our readers have done, 
with unwearied attention, to the strange and eventful his- 
tory of the Arctic Adventurers. 



THE end. 

