FALSE COLOUES. 

CHAPTEE I. 

THE VAKGEAVES. 

** Yes, pleasant society enough ; but about as 
much like the real thing, the thing I mean, as 
those gardens are like country-house gardens, 
or as I am like you, Isabelle . to go even wider 
of a well-defined mark than I have gone before." 

** Poor dear Cecile ! when will your fate and 
will agree?" a second speaker said, cheerfully; 
'* now as far as ignominious 'me' is concerned, 
I am quite happy in this society, that you find 
pleasant enough : it's as good as we can ever 
hope to mix in, you know that, Cecile ; and 
after all, who is more respected and looked up 
to than papa, about here ?" 

"No one," the one who had spoken first, a 
'§M of about twenty-seven, answered, quickly, 
laughing as readily as she spoke. '* No one ; 

VOL. I. B 



2 FALSE COLOURS. 

and that proves so much, doesn't it ? Proves 
that the neighbourhood is so entirely right, 
and he is so entirely worthy, and I am so 
utterly in the wrong in not finding everything 
all-sufficient. Well, how are we to mix in 
* pleasant society' this day? that is all I ask." 

" Why, there is Mrs. Foster's garden-party 
. don't pretend to have forgotten that." 

"No, I won't; and after this garden-pa^rty, 
there is a long dark hour of nothingness, and 
then the hour with the company of singers we 
have been beguiled into joining, and then bed, 
and then the consciousness of a day well spent 
to soothe us to slumber." 

" Cecile, how you do contrive to grate on 
one's feelings!" This second speaker was a 
young lady about twenty-one. " You don't 
like to be quite happy yourself, and so you 
won't let me be quite happy Vv^hen I have 
everything to make me so ; where did you get 
your discontent from ? not from the Vargraves, 
I am sure." 

*' Don't bother your brains by attempting to 
solve the mystery of my discontent," Cecile 
answered, with good-natured, tolerant scorn- 



THE VAKGRAVES. 3 

fulness ; ''let me have your white chip-hat, to 
arrange some rose-buds in for the benefit of Mrs. 
Foster's guests ; and don't tell your father 
what I have been saying; don't, please, dear." 
She went out of the room as she made this 
request, and made her way up to her own bed- 
room, singing blithely enough as she went. 
She, Cecile Vargrave, was only the niece of 
this house in which she lived, and the one 
with whom she had been talking was the only 
daughter. But it had always been Mr. Var- 
grave' s aim, and Mrs. Vargrave' s ambition, 
that neither observant friends, nor the girls 
themselves, should be able to detect any differ- 
ence in the manner of their treatment. But 
though the treatment had been applied for the 
last five years, the treated ones did not in the 
slightest degree resemble one another. The 
twigs had both been carefully bent in precisely 
the same direction. But the one was of stronger 
growth than the other. Cecile, who had it in 
her power to do so much, had it in her will to 
do so little, that Mrs. Vargrave found herself 
at times giving unwilling heed to the memory 
of the scandal she had heard of Cecile's mother 



4 FALSE C0L0UB6* 

having been a woman who was strongly sus- 
pected of no origin at all. The girl had lived 
with them for the last five years. She had 
been taken to the same safe marts, she had 
been adorned by the taste of the same milliner. 
The same riding-master had instructed Isabelle 
and her to come down to their saddles, and 
swing off in a canter, without any other move- 
ment than a gentle swerve, however hard their 
horses pulled, during the hours of fullest 
excitement in the Row. Yet for all these 
advantages, and a thousand others which 
cannot be enumerated here, Cecile, to the best 
of Mrs. Vargrave's knowledge, was as absolutely 
unsought as when she had come to Bayswater, 
fresh from a struggling life somewhere, five 
years ago. 

She came into such a different atmosphere 
. an atmosphere which was redolent of peace, 
and plenty, and respectability . and yet she 
could never bring herself heartily to feel and 
declare that the one she had left was less 
pleasant to her. *' How rejoiced you must be 
to have nothing more to do with the humours 
of landladies, and the discomforts of third-rate 



THE VARGRA\^S. 5 

lodging-houses," Mrs. Vargrave would say to 
her husband's niece, pityingly. *'My poor 
ehild, your mother seems to have been utterly 
unable to combat real-life difficulties of any 
sort." This, Mrs. Vargrave would say after 
Cecile had given a vivid account of how they 
had been routed here by insolence, and made 
to flee thither by impostures. And then Cecile 
would return all Mrs. Vargrave' s sympathy, 
unused, by saying : 

'' I rejoice in this, in your kindness, of 
course, aunt ; but that was fun of a sort, and 
neither mamma nor I ever fretted about it. 
Quick marches and unexpected turnings out 
never upset us ; we were vagabonds at heart, I 
believe." 

This was a dreadful speech for a girl to 
make who was situated as Cecile was situated. 
*' She does not know the full meaning o her 
own words, and she destroys herself," Mrs. 
Vargrave would say, hopelessly ; "do all we 
can, we shall not be able to say an^ihing of 
her mother that any one can care to hear, and 
the time will come, when Cecile marries, that 
we shall be asked questions." 



t> FALSE COLOURS. 

" I can answer all I am asked with a clear 
conscience," Mr. Yargrave would reply to this ; 
" I know nothing, I suspect nothing, I can say 
nothing." 

" That is all very well and very clever, 
James ; but it will reasonably be asked how, 
then, did you come to have the charge of the 
child?" 

**I can answer even that ; she arrived, with 
two large trunks and a shaven poodle, late one 
night, just as we were going to bed, if I re- 
member rightly . announced herself as my 
niece, and handed me a letter from my dead 
brother, entrusting her to my care." 

" And all this only makes it more than 
desirable that she should not speak of her 
mother, of whom we know nothing, and herself 
as 'vagabonds at heart,' " Mrs.Vargrave said, 
earnestly; "she is nearly twenty-eight now, 
James, and Isabelle is of age ; it is time we 
thought seriously of their settling." 

" We have been thinking seriously about it 
ever since Isabelle was seventeen; additional 
serious thoughts on this subject will wear me 
out ; besides, I don't want to get rid of them." 



THE VARGRAVES. 7 

'' Nor do I want to get rid of them ; but we 
can't stay with them always, and really it's of 
Cissy I am thinking most, if anything should 
happen to us ; Isabelle will always win friends." 

*' And Cecile, if I'm not mistaken, will always 
command fortune. I hear them coming now. 
I told them to show themselves to me before 
they went to Mrs. Foster's garden folly.'* Then 
the two girls came into the room, and stood to 
be inspected. While they are being reviewed, 
an attempt shall be made to describe them and 
their home. 

This latter was situated in pleasant Bays- 
water, in one of those wide, open roads branching 
out of one of the older squares, which have, 
amongst their chief attractions, the fact that 
they are close to Hyde Park and Kensington 
Gardens. Between this road and the highway 
which runs along outside the Park railings up 
to the Marble Arch, a long, large span of orna- 
mental ground, called Ladbroke Square, lies, 
and this square was to be the scene this after- 
noon of the croquet-party to which the Misses 
Var grave were bidden. 

Mr. Yargrave had lived in this Bayswater 



8 FALSE COLOURS. 

district from a period long anterior to its be- 
coming the fashionably prosperous place it now 
is. He had rented a house on the same site as 
the one he had since built and now occupied, 
for many years, until, indeed. Fortune smiled 
upon him with sufficient brightness to justify 
him to himself in such expenditure. Then he 
realized one of his wife's day-dreams, and 
enabled her to live in *' a house of their own," 
a proceeding which she had a vague idea, what- 
ever the original cost, must be more economical 
than being obliged constantly to disburse for 
rent and taxes. 

It is difficult to say exactly what Mr. Vargrave 
was. He spoke of himself as an Italian ware- 
houseman on a wholesale scale, but this Mrs. 
Vargrave expressly desired might be considered 
as merely one of Mr. Vargrave' s jokes. True, 
he imported dried fruits and dry wines on an 
extensive and remunerative system, but this he 
did outside some even larger transactions on 
the Stock Exchange, on which he must have 
had some sort of agency, or with which he 
must have had some safe and agreeable under- 
standing; for he never played see-saw on an 



THE YARGEA^'ES. y 

exaggerated scale. He was not a beggar one 
week, and a millionnaire the next. In fact, he 
was a safe man in all respects, and one who 
was well reputed (as his daughter Isabelle said) 
all round the region in which they dwelt. Well- 
reputed not only as one who could pay his way 
promptly, however liberally his way might lead 
him, but also as a sagacious, keen, intelligent 
man, who was capital ballast to the light- 
hearted, light-headed lady, his wife. 

At the time of her introduction to the reader, 
Mrs. Yargrave was a handsome, happy-looking 
matron of forty. A well-satisfied wife, and a 
not unreasonably i)roud mother, and a " very 
model aunt," her husband's niece, Cecile Yar- 
grave, declared. Two-and-twenty years ago her 
husband had fallen in love with her sweet 
beauty, and had married her for it, hopeful of 
nothing beyond, and perfectly contented with it. 
Eut he got more than he had bargained for 
with himself. In addition to her sweet beauty 
she had a sweet temper, and a heart so light 
and afi'ectionate, that he consistently forgave 
and overlooked all the faults and follies of her 
equally light head. 



10 FALSE COLOUKS. 

Not that these were very numerous, or that 
they were of much importance, now that he 
was wealthy and prosperous. But time was 
when he had been a hard-working, poor, and 
struggling man; and at that time, his wife's 
inability to make the calculation that five 
purchases of the value of twenty pounds each 
would amount to a hundred when viewed en 
masse, was very trying to him. It was not 
that she had a weak woman's desire to lavish 
money for the sake of show ; but she was 
utterly unable to look beyond the hour and the 
counters whereon the things looked so pretty. 
It was certainly no regardlessness of, or in- 
difference to, money that actuated her ; for 
when the bills came in, she would bemoan 
herself freely and honestly, and launch out 
accusations of imposition in their charges 
against the most unexceptionable tradesmen. 
"It is a matter of fact that the bill is a 
mistake, or an imposition, James," she would 
say, earnestly; *'why, I was only in the shop 
five minutes, and here's twenty pounds ! 
Common sense tells you it is a mistake 
on their parts, doesn't it?" "But you pro- 



THE VAKGRAVES. 11 

bably bought something during those five 
minutes," he would gently insinuate. And 
then Mrs. Vargrave would knit her white brow 
until the blue veins stood out in clear relief, 
and after a great effort at reflection, would con- 
cede that she had " got one ten-guinea dress, 
and a five-guinea mantle, and several other 
things that didn't, all of them, come to more 
than five pounds;" which last item she would 
mention in a triumphant manner, as being in 
itself confirmation strong of the truth of her 
conviction that " the bill couldn't possibly be 
twenty pounds." 

But with exception of this hair-brainedness 
with respect to the after-claps bills are sure to 
prove, Mrs. Yargrave was neither a weak nor a 
thoughtless woman. Her fair beauty, unmoved 
by any strong emotion, unchequered by any 
cruel reverses, lasted long after her daughter and 
her niece grew up, first to divide homage with, 
and then draw it nearly entirely away from, 
her. And she accepted the situation. Never 
for a moment, light-hearted woman though she 
was, degenerating into a frisky matron, or 
suffering her demeanour for one instant to 



12 FALSE COLOURS. 

provoke the remark that she forgot either her 
years, her daughter, or her dignity. 

Moreover, she was, despite that natural 
desire which she expressed just now to see her 
girls settled, an admirable mistress of a house 
in which young girls lived. In a set such as 
that in which they visited . a semi-suburban 
set, in which every movement was marked, 
and every possible thought and hope debated 
and commented upon . in such a set as this 
even, she achieved the proud triumph of keeping 
the two girls almost nameless. Yet this she 
effected without insisting on any depressing 
seclusion. They were allowed to go to balls. 
No girls in town were better up in the theatres, 
and every point, both of actors and plays. 
Mr. Yargrave's Sunday dinners were things of 
note, and not the least attraction of his table 
were the two pretty cousins. They were taken 
to everything that was spoken about, and that 
everybody declared everybody else should see. 
They were much addicted to giving and 
going to those little evening parties which are 
so fatally conducive to flirtations of a fragile 
order ; but they were never suffered to lavish 



THE VAEGRAVES* 13 

themselves about the squares and shaded roads 
of the neighbourhood for many hours during 
the sultry summer days. They were never, or 
very rarely, on view, in becoming morning 
dress, on a rustic seat, practising the trans- 
parent imposture of pretending to read, or to 
tat, and obviously waiting to be startled by a 
salutation from the casual acquaintance of last 
night's dance or concert. While they were 
younger, and under orders, Mrs. Vargrave im- 
planted a haughty detestation in their minds 
of the habit of " holding themselves cheap." 
To this they superadded, when they were 
grown up, a delicate instinct of reserve, which 
caused their seldom-made appearance in the 
familiar and dearly-loved haunts of Bayswater 
girls to be a prized thing. 

But this afternoon the two pretty cousins 
were going by invitation to play croquet in 
Ladbroke Square. Mrs. Foster's garden-party 
was given on an important occasion . the 
publicly announced approaching marriage of 
her eldest daughter, Amelia, to a Mr. HeiDburn, 
a Somersetshire squire of large proj3erty. 
Amelia was to bid farewell at this fete to all 



14 FALSE COLOUES. 

her young friends . to bid public farewell to 
them, that is ; for they were severally, promised 
that they should see a good deal of her and 
her dresses during the few days that were to 
intervene between this party and the wedding. 

The two Misses Vargrave were to be head 
bridesmaids. They were chosen to lead the 
procession of eight, not so much on account of 
the great intimacy which existed between the 
families, as on account of their great superiority 
of look and style to any of the other Bayswater 
belles then out. It is time to say something 
about these looks of theirs. Isabelle, as the 
daughter of the house, claims the first place, 
in spite of being Cecile's junior by six years. 

She had a great deal of her mother's beauty, 
without that sweetness which has been re- 
marked upon. Fair beauty, of that pale, clear, 
satin-skinned kind that looks high-bred, and 
that is generally, as in Isabelle' s case, found in 
company with a small, thin, aquiline nose. 
Her hair was light brown, or would have been 
light brown had it been permitted to repose 
smoothly upon her head, as nature intended it 
to do. As it was, it was so much crumpled 



THE VARGRA^-ES. 15 

and puffed, that where it stood up in transparent 
billows on either side of the parting, it looked 
j)ale amber-colour. Beautiful eves of the same 
light brown shade as her hair, with a touch 
more of gold in their brown than was on her 
locks naturally, perhaps. A figure that pro- 
mised well for being full and large in after- 
years ; that was full indeed now ; shoulders 
that sprang out freely, and that had not much 
droop in them ; and a firm, small, round, 
compact waist, that did not look as if it could 
be easily compressed into a still smaller 
compass. Not a tall girl, but one who carried 
a fair amount of dignity, from a way she had 
of holding her head well up. Which erectness 
might be due to hauteur, or might be due to 
tight-lacing : it was extremely difficult even for 
her most intimate friend to decide the point. 
A decided voice, and a decided manner towards 
every one in the world save her cousin Cecile, 
of whom, for some reason which she herself 
was utterly unable to discover, Isabelle Yar- 
grave stood enough in dread to make her very 
deprecating. Every one said that Isabelle 
was " quite a Vargrave," in spite of her having 



16 FALSE COLOURS. 

a great deal of her mother's fair beauty, for 
she had her father's aquiline features, decision, 
and self-possession. But about Cecile this could 
not be said ; she was not quite a Vargrave, or 
quite an anything else about which they knew 
aught. She was quite herself, quite sufficiently 
endowed with a power of making herself look 
almost plain when she had been asked out to 
ornament a room, and was feeling herself bored, 
and a power of glowing into almost beauty when 
she pleased to do so. Bays water often felt as 
it gazed upon its unbroken ranks of unmarried 
daughters that it would be well rid of her. 
Yet this feeling did not arise from any un- 
towardness in her own conduct. She never 
bewitched the lovers of their daughters, she 
never beguiled the affections of a son. They 
only felt that she could do thoss things if she 
liked, and were generally conscious of being 
under a lion's paw, however quietly she de- 
meaned herself. 

And the girl with the dubious antecedents 
and the mother about whom nothing was 
known, did demean herself very quietly 
during the trying period of her admired 



THE VARGRAVES. 17 

girlhood. Still it was hard to believe that 
quiet and herself had been Mends fi-om the 
birth. A graceful creature, full as a tigress 
of subtle movement, with a fervent, full, 
earnest-eyed face, the colouring of which was 
creamy and pecuhar, looking dark by daylight, 
and very fair by night. Eyes with black 
pupils, and black lashes and brows, and very 
brown hair. A full mouth and a firm chin, 
and a voice that could be like a ringing bell, 
but that she could also tone down into some- 
thing most wonderfully full and soft. Above 
all, with such a habit of quiet about her. 



VOL. I. 



18 FALSE COLOUES. 



CHAPTEE II. 

MAY AND DECEMBEB. 

Amelia Foster, the eldest of a family of nine, 
was generally allowed to have done a good 
thing for herself in having won the heart and 
the offer of the hand of Mr. Hephurn. " It is 
true there is a disparity as far as age is con- 
cerned, but then Amelia was always sedate 
beyond her years." This is what was said by 
the Foster family, and by friends of the Foster 
family ; and the saying had all the strength of 
truth. No one could contradict or even doubt 
either statement. There was a slight disparity 
in the ages of the contracting couple, seeing 
that Mr. Hepburn was something over sixty, 
and Amelia was not twenty-one ; and Amelia 
had always been remarkable for a certain pru- 
dence and reserve, and sedateness of bearing. 



MAY AND DECEMBER. 19 

which had caused her to be denominated both 
sly and stuck-up by her youthful compeers. 
But now that this cautious and discreet May 
was going to marry such an unmistakeable 
December, no one could deem her charac- 
teristics to be other than the best for her to be 
possessed of. Amelia had met and conquered 
him in the course of a visit she had paid to a 
friend in Paris, some short time before the 
period at which these chronicles commence. 
The engagement had been formally entered 
upon and announced, but Mr. Hepbm-n had 
not yet been exhibited in Bayswater. It was 
understood that the re-organization of Glene, 
his place in the country, would entirely absorb 
him until the wedding, and as this absorption 
betokened great care for the decent ordering of 
the establishment, and consequently great con- 
sideration for her future comforts, the bride- 
elect bore his absence with the most exemplary 
patience. 

On her return from that highly successful 
trip to Paris in the character of a bride-elect, 
Amelia had deported herself with her usual 
admirable decorum, and had withdrawn herself 



20 FALSE COLOURS. ' 

entirely from the frivolities and gaieties of the 
Bayswater world. This croquet-party was the 
first lapse into anything like social communion 
with her old friends and school-fellows which 
she had yet made, and it was to be the last 
before her marriage. This concession, which 
to some young girls would have partaken of the 
nature of a sacrifice, was made to circum- 
stances which many people would have re- 
gretted. But Mrs. Foster, on behalf of her 
daughter and the family generally, refused to 
consider that there was anything to regret, 
either in the age or absence of Mr. Hepburn, 
the owner of Glene. 

It was to be a very grand wedding ; and was 
to take place the following week . the last week 
in June . and Isabelle and Cecile Vargrave 
were to officiate as bridesmaids on the occa- 
sion. Naturally it formed the subject of the 
whole conversation between the three friends, 
indeed between Amelia and every one to whom 
she talked at all this day. People who knew 
Miss Foster well remarked that beneath all her 
customary quiet and composure, there was a 
strong feeling of elation. Every allusion which 



MAY AND DECEMBEE. 21 

she suffered herself to raake to her future state 
was a proud and well-satisfied one. She struck 
the key-note of the tune to which she meant 
her married life to run in the minds of that 
Bayswater coterie which she was about to quit, 
in the reply she made to an old lady who 
ventured to hope that she '' had well con- 
sidered the responsibilities which she was 
going to assume." " Mr. Hepburn thinks me 
fit for the position of the greatest importance 
in the county," she said, rather pompously. 
** People who know nothing of Glene can form 
no idea of what my responsibilities will be." 
The two Vargraves stood by and heard her say 
this, and mentally resolved that the gorgeous 
invitation she had extended to them to visit 
her at Glene should never be practically 
accepted. 

Though Miss Foster literally stood in the 
relation of May to the December of her future 
husband, she was not such a fresh and glee- 
some embodiment of the month as to force a 
feeling of gentle pity from all such as beheld 
her. A young woman with a tall, erect, thin 
figure, and a handsome-featured, sharp-expres- 



22 FALSE COLOURS. 

sioned face, she was one who could adorn 
herself in the most matronly of robes, and 
wear it as if it was hers by right of time, if 
such were Mr. Hepburn's desires. She had 
been the eldest daughter of a house where a 
great deal of domestic forethought and dis- 
cretion was demanded from the eldest daughter. 
And co-existent with this demand, and strength- 
ening the qualities it cultivated in her, there 
had always lived an intense desire to free her- 
self from its tedious claims by changing and 
bettering her condition. 

So in furtherance of this desire Amelia 
Foster had never wasted her time in the ordi- 
nary frivolities of her caste and her age. She 
had never suffered herself to fall in love, and 
to her credit be it said, she had never suffered 
herself to flirt, or to be flirted with. She had 
passed a stony, unemotional girlhood, and now 
she had won her reward in gaining the con- 
sideration of a man who wanted a young wife, 
but who did not want to be worried and made 
jealous either of the past, the present, or the 
future, in his declining years. Amelia had set 
his mind completely at rest on the subject of 



MAY AND DECEMBER. 23 

his being the one lord of her allegiance during 
their first confidential conversation. "It is 
never pleasant to speak of what may take 
place after one's death," she had said, steadily, 
" still I think it may be satisfactory to you to 
know that I shall be quite as well pleased if 
you make my enjoyment of whatever you may 
leave me, dependent on my not marrying again, 
as if you leave me unfettered." 

" Unsolicited, I should never have thought 
of binding you in such a way," Mr. Hepburn 
replied; " but as you wish it, I will strengthen 
the assurance I shall be happy to take with me 
into another world, that you will never bear 
another name than mine." 

When Amelia narrated this conversation to 
her parents, they rather reproved her for what 
they deemed the injudiciousness of a request 
founded upon the first flash of a romantic 
attachment to the man she was about to 
marry. But Amelia quickly undeceived them. 

" I care for money and position more than 
for anything else in the world," she said, 
decidedly ; "I know what I am about : my 
offer of giving up what I never should care to 



24 FALSE COLOURS. 

have, and may never have the chance of, 
whether I care for it or not, has improved my 
prospects. Mr. Hepburn may live till I am 
too old to love any one else or to be loved by 
any one else ; but I shall never be too old to 
enjoy luxury." 

The out-door reunion was nearly at an end, 
when there came in haste from the Fosters' 
house, which opened into the square, two or 
three messengers, bearing tidings of import- 
ance, apparently. Mrs. Foster was addressed 
first, and as soon as she had listened to the 
address, she advanced upon her daughter. 
" Amelia," she said, in some anxiety, arrest- 
ing that tall young lady in the act of bending 
to circumstances, and looking for a lost ball 
under the sweeping branches of a laurel, 
** Amelia, Mr. Hepburn has arrived." 

In a moment there rushed into Amelia's 
mind the remembrance that Mr. Hepburn was 
not legally her own yet, and that she had pro- 
mised him that she would not indulge in any 
more suburban dissipation between the period 
of his parting with her in Paris and his com- 
ing to claim her as his bride. For a moment 



MAY AND DECEMBER. 25 

she was taken by surprise, and that not a 
pleasant surprise, so palpably that Cecile Yar- 
grave said . 

" How fortunate that we were all on the point 
of going away ; come, Amelia, we shall excuse 
you, and Mrs. Foster will receive our adieux 
and disperse us ; we were all just going, we 
were, indeed." 

*' I would almost rather that Isabelle and 
you come in with me," Amelia said, slowly re- 
covering herself; *'you see to the rest, mamma; 
I must go." 

*' Alone, too," Cecile said, quietly. 

'' No, not alone ; you will see Mr. Hepburn 
sooner or later, and it's just as well now ; 
come in with me." Then the two went in 
together to meet a man who was to exercise 
such an influence over their lives as should be 
felt by both of them until their lives ended. 

" I was out in the square with my friend. 
Miss Yargrave, and I have brought her in to 
introduce you to her," Amelia said, introducing 
Cecile to a tall, stout, old gentleman, who ad- 
vanced to meet them as they entered the room. 
He was a portly, fine, upright old man of sixty- 



26 FALSE COLOURS. 

four or five, with grey hair and a grizzled 
moustache. His features were fine, unthick- 
ened and unflattened by age. His complexion 
was soft, fair, and delicately rosy, more like 
that of a young girl than a man, old or young. 
This, and the soft oiliness of a well-modulated 
tone, gave him the touch of effeminacy which 
struck those who saw him as being in direct 
opposition to his robust and manly growth. 

He was an excessively agreeable, gentle- 
manly man. Cecile felt the sure conviction at 
first sight of him, that the judgment which 
stands at the head of this paragraph had been 
pronounced upon him a thousand times by any 
number of old and easily' pleased people. He 
was a man who very much desired to be agree- 
able, and who furthered that desire not by any 
studying of and consideration for the idiosyn- 
cracies of others, but by a generous display of 
his own habits, and an equally lavish display 
of expectation of these habits being admired 
and approved of. His bright, keen blue eyes 
roved inquiringly over the faces of those on 
whom he was bringing his agreeable manners 
to bear, roved inquiringly and suspiciously, as 



MAY AND DECEMBER. 27 

if it had occurred even to him as being "within 
the bounds of possibility that the recipient of 
his civilities might not rank them highly as he 
himself did. *^ A strange mixture of blandness 
and volubility," Cecile thought, returning his 
elaborate bow; "what a mercy that he isn't 
going to bring those characteristics to bear on 
a sensitive woman." 

" Some of the arrangements I am making 
compelled me to come to town," Mr. Hepburn 
explained : " the opportunity of seeing you was 
not to be missed, and I was anxious to make 
my friend Mr. Scorrier known to you, Amelia." 

As he spoke he turned slightly round, still 
holding the hand of the lady he was going to 
marry ; and the two girls became conscious 
that somewhere in the shade of the curtains 
another gentleman was standing waiting to be 
spoken to. 

*' I am very happy to see any friend of 
yours, Mr. Hepbm-n," Amelia said, very pro- 
perly; " papa and mamma will be very happy, 
too," she added, quietly; and then she shook 
hands with Mr. Scorrier, and wondered if he 
had a place near Glene, and whether he ranked 



28 FALSE COLOURS. 

as highly, or more highly, in the county than 
Mr. Hepburn. Before she could take any steps 
towards satisfying herself on this point, her 
mother came in from a highly-successful last 
view of the garden guests, and soon Mr. Foster 
arrived from the City, and the future son-in- 
law suffered himself to be persuaded to stay to 
dinner. 

Meanwhile Mr. Scorrier and Miss Vargrave 
exchanged a few remarks. 

" Town is very pleasant just now," he said. 

"Yes, I believe it is," she replied; ''the Moiit- 
ing Post and the Court Journal both say it is." 

" But you don't quite agree with the Morn- 
ing Post and the Court Journal ? ' ' 

" Yes, I do, whenever I get into their atmo- 
sphere ; but, as a rule, I think there is more 
dust and heat in mine than they suffer from." 

" Miss Vargrave' s taste inclines towards the 
country," Mr. Hepburn suggested, with the 
most winning smile of which he was master. 

*' To what is pleasant in it," Cecile said, 
getting up to go away . a movement which 
brought relief to the mind of her friend Miss 
Foster, who was not at all well inclined that 



MAY AND DECEMBER. 29 

one of her familiars should make disclosures 
regarding the sort of life she (Amelia) had 
hitherto led. 

*' Miss Vargrave finds everything, even 
change, monotonous," Amelia said, addressing 
both the gentlemen, when Cecile had left them ; 
and Mr. Scorrier laughed, and said he could 
understand that, when the change was from 
trying to cure typhus to trying to mend broken 
legs, as it was in his case. 

^' My friend Mr. Scorrier has lately set up in 
medical practice very near to Glene," Mr. 
Hepburn explained, in answer to Amelia's 
questioning glance ; " and his profession has 
not quite torn away all the interest he used to 
feel in his Paris and London life yet . it will 
in time." 

" Of course it will in time," Mr. Scorrier 
laughed, with a little dash of vexation in the 
laugh ; *' about the same time, I should say, 
as Miss Vargrave learns to like dusty heat 
in London, and a career of cabbages and cows 
in the country." 

" Reasonably -regulated minds conform to 
circumstances, and enable their possessors to 



30 FALSE COLOURS. 

be happy anywhere," Amelia said, more se- 
verely than she would have spoken if Mr. Scor- 
rier had been the scion of a powerful house 
among the squirearchy, which she had at first 
taken him for, instead of the mere country 
surgeon he proved to be. And Mr. Scorrier 
regarded the fair speaker with non-admiring 
eyes. " She's a handsome, under-bred, snob 
of a woman," he thought, as it fell to him to 
lead her into the dining-room ; " and when 
she's mistress of Glene, he won't be master ; 
and I shall not be welcome there ; " and as he 
conjured up this possibility, Mr. Scorrier dis- 
liked the practice near Glene, upon which he 
had but just entered, more heartily than ever. 

In spite of the shadow of dissatisfaction 
which was hanging over his face now, it could 
be seen, as he took his place at the table, in the 
glare of the gas, that he was a very fine, open- 
faced young man. There was quite enough 
easy grace in his bearing, quite enough good- 
tempered arrogance in the untainted-by-pro- 
vincialism tone of his voice, quite enough 
assured appreciation (apparently) of his own 
position in his manner, to have justified 



MAY AND DECEMBER. 31 

Amelia Foster in the mistake she had made 
about his status at first. But he was only a 
country surgeon : and he came as a sample of 
the friends and associates of the master of 
Glene, of whom she had given her family and 
friends the impression that he only mixed with 
the mighty ones of the earth. She felt very 
much disgusted with her future lord and master, 
and she dared not show such disgust yet. In 
the midst of her anger, it occurred to her as 
being within the bounds of possibility that Mr. 
Hepburn might resent her having an eye to 
aught but his worthy merits. 

The future bridegroom and his incongruous 
friend left the Fosters soon after dinner. But 
before he left, Mr. Hepburn further aggrieved 
his Amelia. " I hope it is not to be a show- 
wedding ?" he said. 

" I have left all the arrangements to 
mamma." 

" Then I hope you have given her to under- 
stand that I dislike unnecessary parade." 

"lam afraid," Amelia said, struggling hard 
to subdue her rising wrath, and succeeding 
through the strength of the interest she had in 



32 FALSE COLOURS. 

achieving the position he could give her ; " I 
am afraid I have thought more of the real 
importance of the step we shall both take that 
day, than of what will be going on about us ; 
can you be angry with me ? " 

She asked this very softly, and she was so 
young and fresh in comparison with himself, 
that he could only assure her that anger was a 
feeling he should always find it impossible to 
indulge in towards her. ** Still," he added, 
*' as the importance of the step was your prin- 
cipal consideration, you might have expressed 
a wish against there being any unnecessary 
parade." 

" We thought of your friends, too," she said, 
softly ; and then he made self-command a very 
hard task by telling her there would only be 
two of his friends present, the rector of the 
parish in which Glene was situated, and Mr. 
Scorrier. 

" What a fortunate thing for a young man 
in his position to have secured your patronage," 
she said, speaking very steadily and unimpres- 
sively, and so betraying unconsciously the an- 
noyance she felt. 



MAY AND DECEMBER. 33 

" Not patronage in the ordinarj- sense of tha 
word. I would have you to understand thai 
now beforehand ; it is real friendship which I 
feel for this young man." 

" Still I can but think him very fortunate to 
have gained such fi'iendship, especially in his 
position," the young lady said, as sweetly as 
she could. 

** I hope he may never find that his position 
holds him down. I had thought it an honour- 
able one while he fills it honourably, as I hope 
and trust he will, for I am interested in him 
as the son of an old friend." 

*' Indeed ! " Amelia said ; " was his father a 
surgeon before him?" 

" His father was a . well, a long and painful 
story hangs to it. His father was very much 
to blame in early youth ; this boy has never 
known any parent but a mother ; you must be 
very kind to him, Amelia, for the sake of my 
old friend, who wronged both him and hia 
mother." 

Meantime the task of entertaining the subject 
of this conversation had devolved upon Mrs. 
Foster, and Mrs. Foster had essayed to do it 

VOL. I. D 



34 FALSE COLOURS. 

readily enough. Her first theme was her 
daughter. Her second, judiciously indicated 
to her by Mr. Scorrier, was the Miss Vargrave 
whom he had seen in company with her 
daughter that evening. 

" Miss Vargrave is a great friend of Miss 
Foster's, I think I understood ?" 

" Yes ; Amelia is very fond of her ; very 
fond, indeed ; though, of course, there is a 
great difference in their ages." 

" I should not have thought that," the guest 
said, politely, in the belief that Amelia had all 
the advantages of seniority. 

" Would you not, indeed ! Well, though 
Cecile Vargrave wears wonderfully, still I see 
her going fast . fast ; and I grieve over it, for, 
as I say, what has she but her looks, poor 
penniless girl?" And Mrs. Foster looked 
depressed as she propounded this problem to 
the young man, who was giving signs of a 
dawning admiration for Cecile. 

"Oh! her face is her fortune, is it?" he 
said, lightly. 

" Yes ; and I hope it may prove a fortune 



MAY AND DECEMBER. 35 

to her. Amelia has insisted on her being the 
first bridesmaid at her wedding." 

" Will that distinction benefit Miss Vargrave 
very much ? " he asked, laughing. 

" It will show the estimation in which we 
hold her ; and that, little as it is, we are glad 
to do, not only for her sake, but for her 
uncle's. He is most kind and generous to 
her ; but he is not a rich man, and he has a 
daughter of his own ; so if we can aid Cecile 
in getting off, we will. Now, Mr. Scorrier, 
don't you know any one in want of a most 
excellent wife?" 

" No, I don't," he said, briefly, with diffi- 
culty repressing an expression of strong dis- 
gust, as he thought, " so vulgar-minded women 
blur the fair ideal many a man has of a girl. 
What has that poor girl done to be degraded 
by being brought to market by this old lady '? 
Anyway, I am glad she is to be first brides- 
maid, for I shall like to see her again." 

While he was so thinking, they were rejoined 
by Mr. Hepburn and Amelia. In the course 
of his farewell speech to his future mother-in- 
law, Mr. Hepburn gave that lady to understand 



36 FALSE COLOURS. 

that only two of his friends would grace the 
ceremony, one of whom was Mr. Scorrier, and 
that he was averse to all parade. 

"But that's all nonsense, now that the 
dresses and breakfast are ordered," Amelia 
said, scornfully, when he was gone. 



GLENE. 37 



CHAPTER III. 

GLENE. 

Back in the days of Queen Elizabeth there had 
been a Glene, and a Hepburn had been in 
possession of it. It had been but a small 
tenement, with towers at either end of it, in 
ihe earlier days of her Majesty's undefiled 
career. But a little later on, Hepburn went to 
Court, and deported himself so satisfactorily 
there, that the queen organized a progress 
which should take in the possibility of resting 
her royal person for a night or two at Glene. 

In those days things were not said and done 
with the apparently magical velocity of to-day. 
The queen made her progress eventually, but 
a sufficiently long space of time intervened 
^between the communication of her intention 
and the carrying of it into execution, for Hep- 



38 FALSE COLOURS. 

burn to effect a great change both in his life 
and in his house. Briefly, he married a 
wealthy wife, and with her money he built him 
a beautiful mansion on one of the many slopes 
of Glene, in Somersetshire . a mansion in 
which a queen might deign to be entertained 
by her subject, and in which a subject might 
dare to entertain his queen. 

Had such a thing been possible, the Hep- 
burn of the Elizabethan period would have 
stamped the building with his own lineaments. 
As this was an architectural feat which no one 
cared to undertake, he was content with stamp- 
ing it with his individuality to the degree of 
building the south front in the form of the 
initial letter of his name. 

Glene, the house itself, was beautifully 
situated. It was built on a piece of table-land 
that came in the middle of a long sweep of 
sloping ground, which stretched away above 
and below the house to a great extent. 

Now in the days when this story commences, 
the south front, the " H " of Hepburn, was 
veiled and draped with a luxuriant growth of 
roses, whose branches had assumed the dimen- 



GLENE. 39 

sions of trees, magnolias, jasmine, myrtles, 
and other shrubs, which had seen three or four 
generations born and buried. The battlemented 
summit of the mansion was crowned with rich 
red and white blooms in summer ; the quaint, 
heavily-bastioned windows were darkened by 
them. It was the best horticultural show she 
had seen for the season, young Mrs. Hepburn 
thought, as the carriage that brought her . a 
bride . to her new home, wheeled round to the 
south front, and pulled up at the iron-bound 
little black oak-door which opened into the 
hall. 

The housekeeper, Mrs. Bingham, the widow 
of a man who had been land-steward to Mr. 
Hepburn's predecessor at Glene, had ranged 
the servants in an imposing-looking phalanx to 
receive and welcome their new mistress. After 
their several manners, these servants strove to 
look the gladness and welcome which they must 
not speak, and were supposed to feel, as the 
young lady . the bride whom their master had 
brought home . stepped out of his carriage, 
and entered her husband's house for the first 
time. But Amelia had no glad looks and no 



40 FALSE COLOURS. 

gratitude for the welcome to express in return. 
" She was a handsome young lady, tall, and a 
fine figure of a woman, and beautifully dressed, 
and she looked almost too tired to smile." 
That was all the servants could say about her 
yet. 

In truth she was very tired . ^very tired, in- 
deed . strong as were her muscles, and sound 
as was her constitution. For all her hard and 
practical nature, and profoundly sensible way 
of looking at things, she had indulged in a few 
hopes and illusions which the experience of her 
married life, short as it had been, had proved 
to be empty as air, and false as a mirage. She 
had married an old man, after having made 
great concessions to him during the time of 
her engagement ; married him with some sort 
of hope that she would be well recompensed for 
what some people deemed the sacrifice she had 
made. This hope had been disappointed . 
crushed out from the very first. He was kind, 
and he was fond. But his fondness she would 
gladly have bartered for more indulgence and 
greater freedom. He was an old man, but by 
no means a doting and easily led old man. 



GLENE. 41 

She had thought to win the most absolute trust 
and confidence from him by that offer she had 
made respecting the terms on which she should 
enjoy her jointure, did he die and leave her. 
He had accepted and acted upon that offer 
gratefully at the time ; but now he seemed to 
think that it was only the right and proper 
thing for her to have made it, and she pur- 
chased no iDrivileges by it, but had just '' given 
it for nothing," she told herself, ill-temperedly. 
She had not enjoyed her honeymoon. On the 
contrary, she had been more unhappy and dis- 
contented during that first month of her mar- 
ried life than she had ever been in all her life 
before. She had longed to taste the fruits of 
the wealth for which she had married a man 
who was a year or two older than her father. 
She longed to travel luxuriously, and to be re- 
markable in some of the gayest cities of the 
world, for her state and splendour, and her 
youth, in sharp contrast to his age. But he 
disregarded this longing, even when she hinted 
at it plainly. Excitement and Continental 
cookery disagreed with him; he told her, 
moreover, he thought that " two people who 



42 FALSE COLOURS. 

were to be all in all to each other while they 
lived, stood a better chance of becoming ac- 
quainted in solitude than in society." Accord- 
ingly he carried her away to a secluded spot, 
near Derwentwater, quite out of the tourists' 
track, and stayed there until Amelia hated the 
Lake district and all connected with it.] 

He was a man of a polished manner . 
polished with the polish of fifty years ago. 
He was cheerful in temperament, unaccustomed 
to change, and desirous of no greater breaks 
in the monotony of their lives than little even- 
ing strolls with Amelia by the lake -side. The 
way in which he ate the bread of cheerfulness, 
and drank the new milk of cows in this quiet 
farm-house, in which he had secured lodgings, 
irritated and depressed the young lady he had 
married, to a degree she dared not show as yet. 

" How bored you must be here after the life 
you lead at Glene," she broke out abruptly one 
night, as she was sauntering by his side, tired, 
weary, and intensely disgusted with the length 
of a story void of point, which he had been 
telling her. 

** The life I have led at Glene is not much 



GLENE. 43 

gayer than this, and far less happy, for I have 
not had you there," he said, gallantly, and 
Amelia shuddered as she listened, and felt 
what a prospect this shadowed forth. 

" But it must be better there," she told her- 
self, hoping against hope. " We must know a 
lot of people, and there will be something more 
to do than to pick up mosses, and grub after 
ferns. I shall die of him and myself, if we 
stay here much longer." 

After this it will readily be understood why 
she could not respond more heartily than she 
did to the welcome given her by the Glene 
household. She was very doubtful of them 
and of herself. doubtful of their having the 
power, or the knowledge, or the freedom of will 
to be conducive to the furthering of that gor- 
geous comfort, and ostentatious luxury, for the 
enjoyment of which she had married Mr. 
Hepburn. 

All the details of that first evening at Glene 
grated upon her harshly. They had been mar- 
ried a month now, and this coming home of 
hers took place in July, the month of roses. 
Glene never looked better at any time of the 



44 FALSE COLOURS. 

year than it did at this season, which Mr. 
Hepburn had selected as the one in which to 
introduce it and its new mistress to one an- 
other. But Amelia, though her heart would 
swell with elation one moment at the thought 
of reigning over this beautiful old place, would 
suffer sullen doubt, and the expression of sullen 
doubt, to cloud both heart and countenance 
the next moment, as the fear that her rule 
would be but a cramped and fettered one 
assailed her. 

So many things jarred upon the habit of 
mind of the girl who had lived the quick, 
ever-changing life that is lived by the daughters 
of wealthy, indulgent people in the gay metro- 
politan suburbs. It has been said that Amelia 
never had wasted any of her time in flirtations of 
an unremunerative order, but she had otherwise 
lived the modernised edition of a young lady's 
career. Consequently, the even tenour of the 
way in which it was evident Mr. Hepburn was 
accustomed to go, loomed tamely and insuffi- 
ciently before her. 

She got out of the carriage and went into 
the house, though he asked her to stay a mo- 



GLENE- 4 5 

ment to look at an enormous blush-rose tree in 
full bloom, which he had planted when he first 
came to Glene as the owner of it, three or four- 
and-thirty years ago. ** Fussing about a rose 
the instant he comes home," his wife thou.f^ht, 
angrily, as she threw one scornful glance to- 
wards the tree at which he was pointing with 
her sunshade; " and carrying an umbrella, too, 
as if he did not look enough like an old fogey 
without that." She would not wait to see how 
gladly and respectfully, and withal heartily, his 
household welcomed him when he came on into 
the house at last. She might have forgiven 
his fussing about his rose-tree, and looking an 
old fogey, if she had noted the kindly, well- 
bred courtesy which made him remember some- 
thing that was dear or interesting to the 
meanest in his house, and mention it as if it 
were- interesting to him. But she would not 
wait ; she had gone on, asking impatiently to 
be ** shown to her room," whither she and her 
maid quickly wended their way, too much put 
out at his having had a thought of anything 
beyond showing her off proudly and triumph- 
antly, to betray the curiosity and admiration 



46 FALSE COLOURS. 

she felt about the stately mansion through 
which she was passing. 

Presently she put on a loose wrapper, and 
sent down word to Mr. Hepburn that she 
" hoped he would excuse her, and sit down to 
dinner without her ; she was tired." A mes- 
sage from him in return begged her to exert 
herself sufficiently to dress and come down. 
And she had lived with him long enough to 
feel that she had better do as he desired. When 
she went down at length, she found him await- 
ing her in evening dress, and actually . already 
disregarding the conventional privacy of a 
bride's first evening at home . by his side stood 
Mr. Scorrier. So she wrapped herself in a 
gloomy and grand silence, which they did not 
seem to remark, but talked themselves, rather 
cheerfully than otherwise, of agricultural and 
local matters, steering clear of all mention of 
the great names of the county, which she had 
carefully learnt from '' Dodd's Landed Gentry." 
" "When you know what a dull little place 
Danebury is, you will understand how rejoiced 
I was to see your carriage bringing you home 
to-night, Mrs. Hepburn," Mr. Scorrier said to 



GLENE. 47 

her, when the ice had been melted a little by- 
aid of the wine. The remark made Mrs. Hep- 
burn gather up her gloves and her irritable pride, 
and prepare to withdraw herself. But even 
when she was alone in the big drawing-room . 
which it would be no affectation to dignify by 
the name of saloon in her future letters to 
former envious and curious friends . even when 
she was alone, with everything that was beauti- 
ful about her, she could not get over the smarting 
sensation which Mr. Scorrier's remark had 
caused her to feel. Apparently her advent had 
been of importance to him, and to him alone, 
as an event that was likely to break the mono- 
tony of his life. But how about the monotony 
of hers ? Why it was better that such mono- 
tony should remain unbroken, mortification-en- 
gendering as it was, than it should be relieved 
only by one whom she was resolved to regard 
and treat as an inferior. 

That her husband had a warm feeling of 
regard for the young Danebury surgeon; that 
Mr. Scorrier, if her husband's will was carried 
out, would be a frequent and an honoured guest 
at Glene ; and that she would be compelled to 



48 FALSE COLOURS. 

treat him with a civility in which there should 
be no half-hidden sting of superiority ; all this 
was, and must be. If he had been the son of 
some noble, noted, or honourable house, no 
amount of brainlessness or worthlessness would 
have been drawbacks to the intimacy in her 
eyes ; but, as it was, he was only a surgeon . 
only a young, unknown, clever, gentlemanly 
country surgeon ; and she was one of those self- 
punishing creatures . a woman who was always 
uncertain about, and anxious to make good and 
secure, her social status. The dread that an 
intimacy or even an acquaintanceship with one 
a little beneath her might affect her claims on 
the consideration to be gained at any price of 
any one a little above her, had been about 
Amelia all her life. That this anxiety should 
rob her of all tact and discrimination, and cause 
her to blunder very often, was only natural. 
She did not possess the seldom-failing test which 
is inherent in the gentlewoman born and bred, 
by which the true metal can be detected from 
the base. She would hover about too long on 
the debateable ground, waiting for some one 
about whom even she felt assured to show her 



GLENE. 49 

what was the safe line of conduct to be pursued 
with regard to some new acquaintance. And 
then she would follow the path shown with 
undue avidity, or avoid it altogether in servile 
imitation, as only a treacherous narrow-natured 
woman can. Yet with all these blemishes of 
bad breeding in her character, she was so coldly, 
quietly correct in manners and ideas, that she 
invariably gained from those who knew but 
little of her, the reputation of being " a nice, 
ladylike girl." 

Her dread of compromising herself . of doing 
anything that might lead even the servants to 
suspect that she had not been born to a state 
equal to this which surrounded her at Glene, 
kept her very quiet. She was afraid to seem 
interested, in fear of being pronounced unac- 
customed. So she sat still and was dull, and 
suffered the longing to go out and look about 
this kingdom over which she had come to reign, 
rather than gratify it under the auspices of the 
housekeeper ; sat still and wondered whom she 
eould take as her guide in this strange country, 
where she had no predecessor's visiting-list to 
consult, since clearly her husband did not 

VOL. I. E 



50 FALSE COLOURS. 

properly estimate the advantages of his exalted 
position. 

They sat a long time over their wine that 
night. It seemed, even to Mr. Scorrier, who 
was not at all too anxious to rejoin the lady of 
the house, that they were very long in doing so. 
As soon as she had left them, and Mr. Hep- 
burn had seated himself in his chair, Arthur 
Scorrier had given way more freely than he had 
done before to the pleasure he felt in seeing his 
old and kind friend home again. " It has been 
hard work for me at Danebury without you, sir," 
he said. " I had constantly to remind myself 
that yours was an absence of special happiness 
to yourself, in order to bear it patiently." 

Mr. Hepburn gave his hand to his guest, and 
some of his best claret to himself. " It will be 
better for you next year, my boy," he said. 
" You will join the hunt this winter, and will 
find that the best men in it are men of your own 
stamp. Danebury will assume a very different 
aspect in your eyes before the year is out." 

*' My mother has been staying with me while 
you were away," Mr. Scorrier said. 

** Your mother here ! " 



GLENE. 51 

"Yes, while you were away," the young man 
answered, half apologetically; "she has not 
moved out of that quiet little home of hers for 
so many years, that I thought it was a good 
opportunity of giving her a change." 

" I always understood fi-om you that Mrs. 
Scorrier had a great dislike to travelling, and 
that she was perfectly happy and satisfied in her 
place of abode," Mr. Hepburn said, coldly. " I 
am very much surprised to hear of your having 
brought her up here for nothing." 

"My mother had a not altogether unnatm-al 
desire to have a look at what is likely to be my 
home for many years," Mr. Scorrier replied. 

Old Mr. Hepburn threw himself back in his 
chair, and made an impatient movement with 
his head, and an exclamation with hi*s tongue 
that defies spelling. 

" "Women always want to have a look at what 
cannot possibly concern them," he said, in a dis- 
pleased tone ; "it was inconsiderate of you to 
upset your mother . to break into the habit of 
years, and give her a necessarily brief and un- 
satisfactory peep into a new life. I should have 
opposed the scheme, had I been at home." 



UNIVERSrW OF ttUNOIS 



52 FALSE COLOURS. 

"Had you been at home, I should not have 
.proposed it," Arthur Scorrier answered. "I 
respect your disinclination to meet your old 
friend's widow . though I think it morbid, mind 
you, sir," he added, eagerly. " My mother won- 
dered why I would not let her have a glance in- 
side Glene, which, of course, I would not do ; 
she has no idea that yours has been a system- 
atic avoidance of her." 

Mr. Hepburn smiled urbanely, and nodded 
his head, in acceptance of the idea of credulity 
on Mrs. Scorrier' s part, which was just sha- 
dowed forth in her son's speech. 

" In reality, it is a thing that is very imma- 
terial to her, whether I see her or not, and it 
would be, or rather I will say it might be, pain- 
ful to me. Though so many years have passed, 
the circumstances of poor Scorrier' s death are 
fresh in my mind as if it had happened yes- 
terday ; and while that is the case, I would 
very much rather not see his widow, your 
mother. You, and she too, must forgive me 
the indulgence of this ' morbid fancy,' as you 
are pleased to call it, Arthur ; you must respect 
it too, if you value my happiness." 



GLENE. 53 

He spoke with some emotion, and Arthur 
Scorrier felt uncomfortable. He had promised 
his mother, when she left him to go back to her 
home in Penzance, that he would use his in- 
fluence with Mr. Hepburn, and get her hus- 
band's old friend to meet her face to face. 
*' It would be a comfort to me to see one who 
saw the last of him, Arthur," the good lady 
had said, with tears in her eyes, " just to hear 
if he mentioned me during his last hours ; it 
would be a comfort and a pleasure ; and mine 
has been a hard fate, but for you, my son." 

In reply to this little unreasonable burst of 
craving for a very slight and dubious comfort, 
Arthur Scorrier had undertaken to mention his 
mother's visit, casually, and to bring about . 
not a reconciliation, because there had never 
been a quarrel . but a fair understanding be- 
tween his kind old friend and his loving old 
mother ; and this was the result of it. This 
disavowal of her, and almost expressed deter- 
mination to keep her at a distance, was the re- 
sult of the attempt which he now felt he had 
been unwise to make. 

" I will respect it, in the way you mean. 



54 FALSE COLOURS. 

certainly, sir, as you desire me to do so," he 
answered, slowly. 

"Why, you see," Mr. Hepburn explained, 
recovering his affability and usually satisfied 
demeanour in a moment, " a thousand things 
would make an interview between Mrs. Scor- 
rier and myself painful to me ; at least now 
particularly. I am just married, just beginning 
life, with an affectionate and admirable wife. I 
could not fail to have painful recollections of 
the time when your father was similarly situ- 
ated with regard to your mother; and as I 
am no stoic, my dear boy, I could not stand 
it." 

There was a pause for a few seconds after 
this, then Mr. Hepburn resumed : 

" As for Mrs. Scorrier, or any one else, see- 
ing Glene, you know the great objection I have 
to making a show of my house. You are as wel- 
come in it, Arthur, as if you were my own son ; 
but I established the rule of refusing admission 
to staring strangers when I came here first. 
Highly as I value all the privileges of my posi- 
tion, perhaps I value my privacy more highly 
than any other one of them. Shall we go and 



GLENE. 65 

look for Mrs. Hepburn now, and ask her for a 
cup of tea ?" 

'' The foibles of old age are rather hard 
to put up with," Arthur Scorrier thought, 
shrugging his shoulders, as he followed his 
host to Amelia's presence; ''he seemed to 
forget that I was a free agent when he was 
almost scolding me for having had my own 
mother in my own house." Then the recol- 
lection of a long list of systematic benefits and 
kindnesses received fi'om Mr. Hepburn ever 
since his boyhood, swept across his mind, and 
obliterated all feeling of annoyance at the 
foibles, and the fruits of them. 

Opening out from the further end of the 
drawing-room, there was a large conservatory, 
filled with the rarest fohage and flower-plants. 
" It has just been stocked afresh in honour of 
the bride," Mr. Hepburn said ; and Amelia was 
trying to look gratified at the honour, when 
her gratification was dashed by her husband 
asking : 

" By the way, Arthur, I hope I did not 
forestal the completion of your conservatory by 
sending you those plants down ?" 



56 FALSE COLOURS. 

They were at the door of the little palace of 
glass, looking in upon the gorgeous rows of 
scented and unscented hlooms, as Mr. Hepburn 
spoke. A sudden desire to seem generous in 
her husband's eyes, and to show Mr. Scorrier 
that she too would not object to patronising 
him, and giving to him out of her abundance, 
seized upon Amelia. Accordingly she stopped 
his answering Mr. Hepburn's question imme- 
diately, by saying, *' Have you a greenhouse, 
Mr. Scorrier? I will tell the people to give 
you some of these plants ; I don't suppose 
they are too common in Danebury." 

'* No, they are not too common,'* Mr. Scor- 
rier said, carelessly. He was ignorant as yet 
that it was the lady's plan to put him in the 
position of the obliged inferior. " No, they are 
not too common, but I am the happy possessor 
of a very fair show of them." 

" I suppose you are not horticulturist enough 
to know that these are new and rare sorts," 
Amelia said, lifting her eyebrows in her ejffort 
to make him understand that he must have 
overstated facts in declaring that he had a very 
fair show of " them." 



GLENE. 57 

" Yes, I'm told they are new, and I see they 
are rare, though I am not much of a horticul- 
turist," he replied. " Mr. Hepburn was kind 
enough to remember that my conservatory was 
empty when he was giving the order for yours 
to be stocked. I hope you will come and see 
it soon," he continued; ''just as though he 
thought himself my equal, or moved in the 
same set I shall be in," Mrs. Hepburn said to 
herself, indignantly, as, without replying to his 
invitation, she made her way back into the 
drawing-room. 

By-and-by, when Mr. Hepburn was taking 
her the round of that portion of the house 
which he found to be easy of access to himself 
after dinner, they stopped before a portrait of a 
long past Dame Hepbm-n, whom Arthur Scor- 
rier declared to be " something like Miss Var- 
grave." The likeness was not very strong, 
indeed it could only have been discovered by 
the eyes of one who was anxious to find it, and 
use it as a means of mentioning the one to 
whom it was likened. Still it was strong 
enough for Mr. Scorrier's purpose. 

" There is the same look of gentleness and 



58 FALSE COLOURS. 

power combined about the brow and eyes, that 
makes Miss Vargrave's face so interesting," he 
said, appealing to Mrs. Hepburn. 

"I don't see it at all," that lady replied. 
"Cissy Vargrave's forehead is too low for her 
to have much of what I call ' power,' and, I 
suppose you mean the same thing, mental 
power." 

" Her forehead isn't high certainly . a high 
forehead is a ghastly thing in a woman . ^but 
it's high enough for plenty of intellect of a fine 
order." 

*'It would be a fortunate thing for her if she 
was as clever as you suppose her to be ; she 
might do something with her brains then to 
maintain herself. I always think she ought to 
go out as a governess," Amelia continued, 
appealing to her husband ; " she is really not 
entitled to be in the position her uncle's mis- 
taken kindness places her in for a time." 

*' Ah ! " Mr. Hepburn rejoined, trying to look 
interested, *'you are speaking of your friend, 
Miss Vargave." 

" I am speaking of Cissy Vargrave. We 
were never very intimate, only one likes to be 



GLENE. 59 

kind to every one ; there must be equality in 
order to make great intimacy pleasant between 
any people . don't you think so, Mr. Scorrier ?" 
" I am a poor judge of what constitutes 
social inequality between middle-class people," 
he said, rather contemptuously ; and Mrs. 
Hepburn had to remind herself that there was 
something undignified in fighting with the 
Danebury surgeon's opinions as to caste, in 
order to constrain herself to keep silence when 
he included her in what she considered such 
derogatory mention. 



60 FALSE COLOURS. 



CHAPTER IV. 

NUMBER NINE, THE CRESCENT. 

The house, number nine, The Crescent, Pen- 
zance, was a model of neatness and respecta- 
bility, inside and outside. It could be seen by 
all such as are accustomed to look for causes 
in results, that it was the home of an elderly 
lady of comfortable means and unrestrained 
power to spend the same. A cleanly, well- 
attended-to little house, with not a detail con- 
nected with paint, varnish, and plastering 
neglected. The curtains that peeped through 
its vividly fresh, green Venetian blinds were 
always deeply red in winter, and purely white 
in summer. Its glass and brass knobs always 
shone brightly. Its tiny bit of space in front, 
enclosed within always unbroken railings, was 
full invariably of the most seasonable and 



NUMBER NINE, THE CRESCENT. 61 

brilliantly tinted flowers. Undriven snow was 
the example aimed at apparently by the cleaner 
of its door-steps. It shone down every other 
house in the curved row of neatly built, two- 
story houses known as The Crescent, Penzance. 
Twenty-eight years ago number nine. The 
Crescent, had been taken by its j)resent occu- 
pant, Mrs. Scorrier, who had come to it in her 
first great grief, and had got attached to the 
unpretending little place, and remained in it 
ever since. Her great grief was the death by 
drowning, in Mount's Bay (here close to Pen- 
zance), of her husband. She had a smaller 
grief . one that she was very quiet about. 
But it leaked out in some mysterious way, 
notwithstanding her reticence, and it was 
shortly known amongst the current tenants of 
The Crescent that this husband, whom she 
lamented so unfeignedly, had never placed a 
wedding-ring on her finger. 

Three or four years before her first appear- 
ance in Penzance, Mrs. Scorrier had been 
living a happy, dull, unromantic, good life in 
her father's house in one of the eastern coun- 
ties ; for she was pretty, and superior in 



62 FALSE COLOURS. 

manner and appearance to the agricultural 
class to which she belonged ; and so she was 
gaining much honourable and admiring men- 
tion from her compeers, when a change came. 
A gentlemanly tourist saw her, and made love 
to her; and pretty, gentle, confiding Mabel 
Wilmot left her home to become the wife of a 
man who had always some plausible reason 
to give for not making her such just yet. 
So matters went on quietly enough until her 
son was born, and then she pressed her claim 
with a vigour that startled Mr. Scorrier into 
promising to attend to and comply with it. 
With a view to the fulfilment of this promise, 
he left her in the London suburban home which 
had been hers since her elopement, and went 
away to see some members of his family and 
to consult his men of business. The poor 
young mother, who was waiting so anxiously 
to be a wife, took her last leave of him with 
passionately loving trustfulness. That she had 
done so was a comfort to her in all her after 
years, for the next thing she heard of Mr. 
Scorrier was through Mr. Hepburn's lawyer. 
Mr. Hepburn had been boating with his old 



NUMBER NINE, THE CRESCENT. 63 

friend, Mr. Scorrier, in Mount's Bay, when the 
boat had upset, and there was an end of him, 
and the one who was no wife was widowed. 

After a while, the poor, broken lady, whose 
own family were alienated from her, came 
down to Penzance, and made her home within 
reach of the graveyard where was buried the 
drowned man who had wrecked her life, and 
been so dear to her. She had come down, 
and shown herself most unwisely regardless of 
appearances at first, for she wore a widow's 
dress, and still suffered the third finger of 
her left hand to be unadorned by the wife's 
ring. But as she lived very quietly, as she 
was sweet and kind to all such as it was in 
her power to show sweetness and kindness to, 
the few who had noticed the want forgave it. 
Then, after a time, before her boy reached 
years of observation, she strengthened her 
claim to being considered the legal widow of 
the man she mourned, by buying a plain gold 
ring, and putting it on herself, and telling a 
little fable to her son of the past happy day 
when his father had given it to her. 

She had never sought to get into society, or 



64 FALSE COLOURS. 

made friends, or rendered herself conspicuous, 
or in any way courted remark and investiga- 
tion. Accordingly, when the few who had 
noticed and tattled about her, when she came 
here first, died out, or moved away, her story 
was as utterly forgotten as if it had never 
been whispered, and the new generation who 
sprang up and dwelt in The Crescent knew 
her only as the excellent widow-lady whose 
house always looked so nice. So completely 
had she lived down rumour and suspicion by a 
long course of quiet integrity. 

Before he had left her on that journey from 
which he never returned, Mr. Scorrier had pro- 
vided for her amply. He had made her a gift 
of money, had paid it into a bank in her 
name, and had further paid in another sum of 
ten thousand pounds, to be dedicated to the 
sole use and service of his son. Consequently, 
though he died without a will, and without 
further mention of her, she had no ground of 
complaint against him on the score of improv- 
idence. He had taken care that she should 
have enough and to spare. Moreover, Mr. 
Hepburn wrote to tell her that the interests of 



NUMBER NINE, THE CRESCENT. 65 

his dead friend's son would always be dear to 
him, though he must decline holding any per- 
sonal communication with herself, giving as a 
reason for this avoidance of her **that the 
sight of one who had been so dear to, and so 
injured by, Mr. Scorrier would be too much for 
his mind and nerves, which were painfully and 
dangerously sensitive." This reason and the 
result of it were alike painful to her. But she 
was a patient, enduring, gentle-hearted woman. 
So she gratefully accepted all the ki dness 
which Mr. Hepburn heaped on Arthur from his 
boyhood, and never resented his avoidance of 
herself. Even when it came to the critical 
question of deciding what was to be Arthur's 
career, she consulted the stranger who ignored 
her, before she gave voice to her own wishes on 
the subject. And when it was settled, when 
Arthur had walked the hospitals, and passed 
his last examination, she stoutly subdued all 
outward signs of sorrow when she found that 
Mr. Hepburn's generosity in almost giving 
Arthur an excellent practice in and about Dane- 
bury would be the means of making her a 
stranger in her son's house. 

VOL. I. F 



6'6 FALSE COLOURS. 

She had always patiently accepted Mr. Hep- 
burn's treatment of herself . patiently accepted 
it as a sort of tacit moral rebuke and punish- 
ment for her youthful dereliction from the path 
of virtue and propriety ; for her early curse in 
having loved exceedingly unwisely and well- 
But though she thus patiently accepted it her- 
self, she did sometimes wonder what her son 
thought about it. It was so very much to 
her, that the man who had seen the last of the 
one who had been the husband of her heart, 
should sit in the seat of the virtuously scorn- 
ful above her . so very much to her, that she 
did not quite realize of how very little import- 
ance it seemed to the younger mind, in which 
dwelt no painful knowledge, no suspicion of 
the reason why. Arthur thought it what he 
called it . a morbid feeling on the part of Mr. 
Hepburn . ^nothing more. 

That one little journey up from the bold, 
beautiful Cornish coast, to the midst of the soft- 
smiling Somersetshire slopes where her son 
lived, had been the only break in the placid 
routine of her life which Mrs. Scorrier had 
known for twenty-nine years. It had been a 



NUMBER NINE, THE CRESCENT. 67 

very delightful visit, without any drawbacks, 
unless the slight one of not being able to catch 
a glimpse of either the interior of Glene or the 
person of its owner could be counted as such. 
Arthur's house was very pretty, and his esta- 
blishment was well-appointed. It seemed to 
his mother to be conducted on a spacious and 
grand scale, by comparison with her own two- 
storey house in The Crescent. Moreover, it 
appeared to Mrs. Scorrier that she was plunged 
into a vortex of dissipation while she was 
Arthur's guest. The handsome young sur- 
geon, who had studied medicine and sundiy 
other things in Paris, Vienna, and Berlin for 
some years, was very popular in the neighbour- 
hood. Mrs. Scorrier experienced some of the 
sensations of a grancle dame when she was roll- 
ing in the Danebury fly to a dinner-party at 
some place in the vicinity. She experienced 
them even more fully when the owners and 
occupants of these places rolled in return to 
her son's house ; for Ai'thur had a fine taste in 
giving dinners, and people were very glad to go 
to him. 

But now the season of dissipation was over, 



68 FALSE COLOUKS. 

and she was back at number nine, alone with 
her two middle-aged servants, and her one 
middle-aged spaniel again. The days at Dane- 
bury had been very bright, so bright that she 
had been dazzled out of all thought of the 
great expense at which Arthur must be living. 
But now the days were past, and she had time 
to think and to fear. 

It had taken some time for her to settle down 
and resume old habits after this great event. 
Not that she was an excitable or feverish- 
minded woman, but because she fancied she 
had a great deal to do after an absence from 
home. Her servants were trustworthy; still 
it was a point of duty with her to go over the 
contents of the linen-trunk and small plate- 
closet, list in hand, before she could con- 
scientiously pronounce that all was right. 
Then she had a few visits of ceremony to 
receive and make on a few intimate friends, 
who marked their sense of the glories in which 
she had been participating, by coming in their 
best bonnets and clothes, and speaking in de- 
preciatory . not to say contemptuous . terms of 
Penzance and the society they knew. 



NUMBER NINE, THE CRESCENT. 69 

It was SO delightful to the poor woman who 
had been weak, but never wicked, and who had 
waited so patiently, and fought such a quiet 
unpretending little fight for consideration and 
honour . it was so delightful to her to speak 
out in open proud terms of her son and his 
successes. To talk of his possible marriage 
with some girl of degree, of whom she, his 
mother, might speak '' as one of the so-and- 
so's," and in whom she might glory as in one 
who added glory to her son. It was the dream 
of her life that Arthur should marry well ; that 
he should marry some woman with a stainless 
name. The dream of her life . her nightly 
prayer . the one thought which she had pon- 
dered over and cultivated from the birth of her 
boy. Worldly consideration and respectability 
were as dear to the heart of this woman, who 
had sacrificed them to love in her youth, as 
they were to the master of Glene, who would 
not meet her, because . she felt that was the 
reason . because he could not hold his hand 
out to one who had been but the mistress of 
his friend. 

As has been said, her story had died out 



70 FALSE COLOURS. 

now ; but even if it had not done so, who could 
have judged her harshly, or even smiled cyni- 
cally, as she sat and prophesied about her son ? 
She was sitting in her little drawing-room, a 
perfect temple of purity and cleanliness, sur- 
rounded by a few friends, discoursing about 
Arthur and the esteem he was held in. The 
hot August air was coming in at the open 
window, its fierceness slightly tempered now by 
the fresh evening sea-breeze. A few people 
had come away from the broiling open parade 
to walk in the shade of the trees that grew in 
The Crescent, and amongst the number was a 
party of four, two of whom were young ladies, 
and very pretty. The old ladies assembled in 
Mrs. Scorrier's room gathered round the win- 
dow to look at this group, and one of them 
remarked, "How full Penzance is of pretty 
girls just now ! Mr. Arthur should find time to 
come home ; or has he any counter-attraction ? '* 
"I don't think there is at present, but I 
should set my face against any watering-place 
young lady as a wife for my son; you never 
know who people are, and it does behove young 
men to be so careful.'* 



NUMBER NINE, THE CRESCENT. 71 

" Still it is SO much better that a medical 
man should be married, that you will not be 
sorry to hear he has found a wife," another 
lady said. 

" No, rejoiced ; for I am convinced Arthur 
will choose wisely," his mother said. " So 
much depends on a wife ; she makes or mars a 
man ; but my boy can only choose well ; he is 
so good." 

Meanwhile the party of four, evidently 
strangers, judging from the way they looked 
about them, passed and repassed the window 
several times. " Backwards and forwards 
here, in front of the dove-coloured old lady's 
abode, if you please, uncle!" the prettier of 
the two girls said, when the uncle appealed to 
suggested extending their promenade beyond 
the limit of the terrace. " She's a picture of 
peace, and I like looking at her ; besides, her 
mignonette reminds me of London." 

" Out of which you were most impatient to 
get . please remember that. Cissy," the other 
girl remarked. 

" Yes, I know I was. Amelia's wedding 
put the finishing-stroke to my hardly sustained 



71} FALSE COLOURS. 

endurance this summer ; but that is no reason 
why I should not like the mignonette." 

''Didn't Mr. Scorrier tell us that his mother 
lived in The Crescent?" Isabelle said, ab- 
ruptly. " Of course, this is The Crescent." 

" And of course my embodiment of peace in 
the dove-coloured satin is his mother," Cissy 
said, carelessly; "and it was in the hope of 
seeing her that I urged coming to Penzance . 
that is the train of argument running through 
your mind, I know, Isabelle." 

" I wonder if AmeHa and Mr. Hepburn will 
meet us here, as Amelia promised," Isabelle 
said, avoiding answering her cousin's remark. 

"I hope, if they do, that Penzance will 
seriously disagree with your father and mother, 
in order that we may flee at once ; she would 
be worse than a croquet-party at her 
mother's." 

" Will you never stay with her at Glene, 
Cissy, after all that has been said about our 
going?" 

" No, never," Cissy answered, rather 

quickly. 

" I believe it would be pleasant," Isabelle 



NUMBER NINE, THE CRESCENT. 73 

urged, '' because Amelia would never be able 
to give herself airs to us." 

*' I couldn't stay in her house, and see her 
give herself airs to anybody," Cissy re^Dlied. 

" Why ? you needn't care about the people 
down there, and it would be a nice house to 
stay in. I can't think what has set you so 
against going." 

*' Her impertinence to Mr. Scorrier." And 
the words fell upon the ears of Mr. Scorrier' s 
mother. " I couldn't stay in her house and 
witness it, and as I don't care to come out in 
the character of a female Quixote, and fight 
either a troop of asses or windmills, I shall 
keep out of temptation. I shall stay away 
from Glene." 

*' Did you hear that young lady . the darker 
one of the two . mention anyone's name?" 
Mrs. Scorrier asked, turning her gentle face, 
now slightly flushed, back towards her friends. 
** My son's name and Glene . looks an aristo- 
crat . every inch of her." And then the 
ladies leant as far as they could out of the bal- 
conied window, and watched the graceful form 
of Cissy Vargrave as long as it remained in sight. 



74 FALSE COLOURS. 

Who could it be ? The question occupied 
all Mrs. Scorrier's waking hours that night. 
Who could it be ? and how would it be if her 
boy loved the lady and the lady loved her boy ? 
"An aristocrat, every inch of her." Probably 
a member of some old Somersetshire family, 
and a friend of Mr. Hepburn's. There was an 
unmistakeable tone of angry resentment in this 
girl's voice when she had spoken about *' some 
one's impertinence to Mr. Scorrier." " She 
would be a wife for him to be proud of, indeed," 
Mrs. Scorrier thought, suffering her imagina- 
tion to run away with her. " A wife for him 
to be proud of . a proper mother for his chil- 
dren. I have always felt that I owe it to 
Arthuj: never to give my consent to his marry- 
ing beneath him ; I must find out who these 
people are, and give a hint to Arthur ; such 
things are often brought to a happy climax by 
a timely word." 

The following day Mrs. Scorrier went out 
with all the importance of having a special 
mission about her. She haunted the principal 
shops down near the Parade long after the 
marketing was over, in the hope of seeing the 



NUMBER NINE, THE CRESCENT. 75 

distinguislied strangers pass. At length, just 
as she had suffered herself to drift into the 
purchase of a serpentine goblet, for which she 
had no earthly use, the Vargraves came into 
the shop, and Mrs. Scorrier heard them give a 
large order, and direct that the things should 
be sent to " Mr. Vargrave, at the Queen's.'' 
** A lovely face and a good name," the old lady 
thought, heaving a sigh of satisfaction as they 
departed. " Mr. Digby is attending some one 
at the Queen's. I'll get him to look at the 
visitors' book and see where they are from ; 
most likely they have a place near Danebmy, 
though I never heard Arthur mention them." 
Acting on this belief, Mrs. Scorrier wrote to her 
son before she saw Mr. Digby, her doctor, and 
after expatiating on the beauty and grace of a 
girl whom she had just seen, she went on to tell 
him that she had just found out that the girl's 
name was Vargrave, and that she had tried to 
find it out in consequence of having heard her 
(the girl) speak in the ''most flattering terms of 
Arthur when passing through The Crescent the 
night before." '' At any rate, that letter can 
do no harm," Mrs. Scorrier thought, as she 



76 FALSE COLOURS. 

sealed and directed it. ** And if it's any one 
some people may consider above him, it will 
give him confidence to approach her." Mrs. 
Scorrier prided herself much about this little 
display of tact and worldly wisdom which she 
was making. Further, she prided herself on 
the discrimination she had shown, in at once 
detecting that " there was something very 
superior" about the young lady who had been 
noticed by her outside the window of number 
nine. Vargrave was a well-sounding name, 
and she had no doubt about its being a good 
and old name. A faint hope arose in her 
heart, that her own family, the brothers and 
sisters who had cut her because she had dis- 
graced them . (how she shivered even now, 
as she remembered the terms in which her 
affectionate relatives had upbraided her for that 
disgrace which she had brought upon them un- 
wittingly, and unwillingly, poor creature !) a 
faint hope arose in her mind now, that they 
would come back to her kindly. Come back 
to her kindly, and own her as one of them, and 
give her again, after long years of loneliness 
and estrangement, the jproud, safe feeling of 



NUMBER NINE, THE CRESCENT. 77 

belonging to, of being of kin to, the Wilmots. 
They would be sure to do this when she could 
write and tell that her son had married a lady 
of name and repute, whose antecedents were all 
good, and who might be honourably mentioned 
before all men. Poor old lady ! she trembled 
with pleasure and hope, as she thought of all 
that her son's marriage might do for her. For 
these years of solitude had only deadened, not 
killed, the family feeling. And she felt that 
though all social odium had long ago been lived 
down by her, the sting of having felt it once 
would never be quite eradicated, until she had 
been received with respect, if not with honour, 
in that old eastern country homestead where 
she had been born. And this would be, she 
felt sure that it would be, when Arthur had 
won some highly-born young lady for his wife, 
and that wife had owned her as a mother. 
Mrs. Scorrier drew a deep, grateful, thankful 
breath as she told herself that her long career 
of patient, quiet endurance, had not been a 
penance vain for the fault and folly that was 
less hers than another's. 

Meanwhile, the fair foundation on whom 



78 FALSE COLOURS. 

this fabric of hope and pride was built, was 
having a very turbulent time of it in her own 
feelings. The subject of the autumn campaign 
had, as usual, been largely discussed in family 
council before any definite plan was formed. 
Change of air and scene, and consequently 
change of custom and diet and thought, were 
essential to them; for they were all pretty 
well worn out with their share of the London 
season. Still, essential as change was to the 
constitution of the family, Mr. Vargrave felt it 
to be even more essential, in the present 
rickety state of finance, that his balance at his 
banker's should be a ' considerable one. And 
this balance was severely affected by the dress- 
ing and driving, and riding and dancing, 
which had been going on for the good of the 
girls during the last twelve months. " A short 
time abroad would do wonders for us all," 
Mrs. Yar grave had plaintively suggested ; 
** and one may live very inexpensively in 
Paris, and for next to nothing at some places 
on the Ehine." 

" I think we will defer a scheme of economy 
to be carried out at the Grand Hotel until next 



NUMBER NINE, THE CRESCENT. 79 

year," said her husband ; " and -while I am on 
the subject I may as well make the same 
remark about Brighton and Scotland. I'll 
have no going to stay at some Highland 
shooting-lodge that will involve twelve new 
evening dresses a-piece." 

*' Let us go to the Land's End," Cissy said, 
suddenly. Apparently she had taken no 
interest in the conversation before it reached 
this point. " Let us go to the Land's End, 
Uncle James. There is a cheap and secluded 
sound about the name of that locality. I 
shouldn't think people even dined there, much 
less dressed for dinner." 

" Dreadfully out of the way, and we shall 
never see a soul," Mrs. Yargrave objected. 
" Oh dear ! I made quite sure that the 
interest of that legacy would have given us a 
good treat abroad this year." 

" That legacy " was a fair sum left to Mrs. 
Yargrave, in the spring, by a cousin of hers. 
On the strength of the interest of it paying for 
everything she could ever want, she had 
already dipped deeply into the principal. But 
as this was a weakness with which he was 



80 FALSE COLOURS. 

perfectly familiar, her husband only called her 
attention to the fact now, by saying . 

"I am afraid you must lower your flag. 
We will gratefully accept something less mag- 
nificent than a treat abroad at your hands . 
say the payment of your own fare down to the 
Land^s End.'* 

" And that will be to Penzance," Cissy said, 
quietly. " Why not turn a joke into real 
earnest. Uncle James ?" 

** What is that we have been hearing lately 
about Penzance ?" Mrs. Vargrave said, knitting 
her brow in vain endeavour to recollect some- 
thing vague. 

** That a great many pilchards and mackerel 
are caught there," Cissy answered, calmly. 

" I believe mamma means that Mr. Scorrier's 
mother lives there," Isabelle said, laughing. 

" Ah ! the pilchard and mackerel fact is 
the more interesting of the two, you see," Cissy 
replied, looking her cousin full in the face ; 
" we can live for * next to nothing,' as Aunt 
says of the Ehine towns, upon them." 

'* I shall tell Amelia we are going to Pen- 
zance, if papa decides to go there," Isabelle 



NUMBEE NINE, THE CPwESCENT. 81 

replied; "it would be nicer if they met us 
there.'* 

" It would quite do away with both the plea- 
sure and the pilchards," Cissy said, half 
laughing. 

'' And it would oblige you girls to have very 
different sea-side dresses, if Mrs. Hepburn 
meets us, from w^hat you will want if alone 
there," Mrs. Vargrave put in, eagerly. " I 
would not give my consent to your appearing 
in those blue serges if Amelia is to be there . 
not for a moment ! You must have white 
ones. I saw some at Marshall and Snelgrove'a 
the other day that will be the very thing for 
you ; that shall be my little present to you 
girls out of the legacy, as I can't give you the 
trip abroad." 

So finally it was settled that the Vargraves 
should try Penzance this year, for a change. 
And as Isabelle carried her design into execu- 
tion of asking Mrs. Hepbm-n to join them 
there, it came about that Arthur Scorrier 
knew Cissy was there before he received his 
mother's letter. Much as he wanted to see 
Cissy again, keenly as he remembered her and 

VOL. I. G 



82 FALSE COLOUES. 

all her charms, and dearly as he would have 
liked to find out without delay whether or not 
he was as keenly remembered by her, he could 
not leave Danebury. His professional obliga- 
tions bound him to remain, and so he could 
only respond warmly to his mother's eulogium 
on the beautiful girl who had mentioned his 
name flatteringly in The Crescent, and hope 
that Miss Cissy Vargrave would soon be 
staying at Glene. While there was a chance 
of Cissy's coming there, he resolved to keep 
the peace with Mrs. Hepburn, though that lady 
in some of her phases was very hard to bear. 
He would not have been so tolerant to her as 
he was, had he not seen that the husband re- 
garded him as warmly and well as the wife did 
coldly and ill. Still, had it not been for the 
thought that it would be pleasant to have free 
ingress into the house, should Miss Vargrave 
come there to stay, Amelia would have carried 
her point, and Mr. Scorrier and Glene would 
have lapsed asunder. Not that she disliked 
him personally ; but she did look upon him as 
a barrier between herself and the great people 
whom she was sighing to know, on equal terms. 



NUMBER NINE, THE CRESCENT. S3 

As yet these had only come about her gradually 
and with caution, in a way that did not pledge 
them to further intimacy, and she looked for 
the cause of this guarded caution in the wrong 
direction. 



84 . FALSE COLOUKS. 



CHAPTEK V. 

MRS. hepbuen's condescension. 

On the whole, looking at the matter from 
the point of view that had been hers while she 
was still Miss Foster, living in No. . . , Lad- 
broke Square, Bayswater, Amelia saw her 
marriage was a mistake. She was not given 
the opportunity of flaunting herself in the gay 
light in which she would have been visible to 
former friends and acquaintances, and new 
people did not come about her to be dazzled 
with the lightning rapidity which she had 
attributed to them in anticipation. Before she 
had been resident at Glene for one week, she 
discovered that, if she was to be a happy 
woman, it must be in Mr. Hepburn's way, not 
in her own. 

And his was a very quiet, uninteresting 



MKS. HEPBURN S CONDESCENSION. 85 

way. It had come to be an understood thing in 
the neighbourhood that Mr. Hepburn did not 
care for society, and so would not attend to its 
calls, and repay it for any time, trouble, or 
expense bestowed upon him. He had gone on 
in his uneventful, unpretending course so long, 
that even now, when he married a young wife, 
no one thought that it would be either prac- 
ticable or worth while to attempt to move him 
out of it. The owners of adjacent places 
" supposed they must call on the young wife," 
and did call, after a time. But she was not 
the type of young wife whom they had ex- 
pected to see, and so they pronounced her a 
failure in most cases. She was a hard, al- 
culating, town-bred girl, of the second order, 
and she was palpably anxious to take her 
place . the place that was hers by right of 
her husband . amongst them. Naturally this 
anxiety made her feel the time they kept her 
waiting, before they indicated their willingness 
for her to take this place, very long and weary. 
Day after day, Glene and all its beauties grew 
to be more and more tedious in her eyes, and 
the aggravation of her spirit was increased by 



86 FALSE COLOURS, 

the satisfaction she saw Mr. Hepburn felt in 
his marriage not having broken up his long 
routine of quietness. 

It was worse, ten times worse, than the 
dreary time at the lake -side farm-house, for 
then she had the prospect of a change to look 
forward to ; while here, now that the looked-for 
change had come, there was nothing beyond it. 
It was in vain that she told herself constantly 
that he must soon, in reason, remember his age 
and her youth. He never seemed to have a 
thought of the latter fact. There was an 
elderly comfortableness about all his arrange- 
ments, but there was no provision made for a 
possible burst of youthful exuberance of spirits 
on her side. 

She put herself in open opposition to him 
for the first time on the receipt of an invita- 
tion to a large dinner and ball that was to be 
given at Castlenau. Castlenau was the court 
of that division of the county, the seat of a 
great nobleman, the Earl of Ellington, whose 
second son, the Honourable Walter Bracey, 
desired to represent the political views of those 
who were Conservative-minded at the forth- 



MES. Hepburn's condescension. 87 

coming election. Mrs. Hepburn soon found 
out that to visit at Castlenau was a great 
thing, and that not to visit at Castlenau was 
oblivion. Accordingly now she strenuously 
advocated the acceptance of this invitation, 
and Mr. Hepbui-n just as strenuously op- 
posed it. 

*' I shall feel that I am a mere nobody if I 
am not there," she said, in an injured tone. 
. *' You are more likely to feel yourself a mere 
nobody if you do go," he re^Dlied. ** Walter 
Bracey will have found out before that time that 
I don't mean to support him, and this is, as I 
tell you, a purely political affair ; besides, the 
woman hasn't even called on you." 

'* What woman ?" Amelia asked. 

** Why, Lady Ellington," Mr. Hepburn re- 
plied, in rather a louder key than he usually 
spoke in ; " a woman who, if she wasn't in the 
peerage, would be black-balled in respectable 
society." 

** She sent her card, if she didn't call in 
person," Amelia said, angrily; '' and I'm sure 
I for one can forgive any one doing that in pre- 
ference to driving twenty miles." 



88 FALSE COLOUES. 

" Then I really wonder at you being so 
anxious to drive twenty miles to dine and 
dance before her, in return for the dubious 
honour.'* 

" Can't you understand that it is dull for 
me here sometimes, Mr. Hepburn ? I have not 
outlived all taste for pleasure," Amelia answered, 
bitterly. 

*' But I fail to see what pleasure you can have 
at Castlenau," Mr. Hepburn argued, brightly. 
** I have told you my opinion of the lady who 
would be your hostess. I have more tha,n 
hinted that her attentions to you have been 
tardy, and that now they are paid, they are due 
to a cause which is not flattering to you. It 
is quite past my comprehension how you can 
care to go." 

" Everybody's attentions have been tardy, as 
far as that goes," Amelia said, suddenly. "1 
detest morning calls from people who have 
nothing to say to me, and to whom I have no- 
thing to say, and morning calls have been my 
only taste of society since I came down here." 

"Yes," Mr. HeiDburn said, in a well-satisfied 
tone; **itis, I think, pretty generally known 



MRS. Hepburn's condescension. 89 

that I dislike miscellaneous visiting ; the few 
friends I have are true, and you will, I hope, 
soon appreciate them as fully as they deserve 
to be appreciated." 

" My being civil to old Mrs. Pottinger and 
her daughters needn't prevent my going to 
Castlenau," Amelia urged. 

Mrs. Pottinger was the widow of the late 
Eector of Danebury, and, with three or four 
unmarried daughters, still lived on in the vil- 
lage. They were some of the sharpest thorns 
in Amelia's flesh, for they had the painful 
habit of dropping in at Glene very often, and 
of never having anything fresh to say. But 
they were really good, genuine people . people 
who, to Mr. Hepburn's certain knowledge, had 
led pious, praiseworthy lives for the last thirty 
years, under troubles that had sometimes 
threatened almost to swamp them. Mrs. Pot- 
tinger had been left a widow, with a large 
family, and little to live upon, just as the 
bloom and interest of youth fled from her. 
She was neither a clever woman nor a worldly 
woman ; but she was sensible in a practical, 
straightforward way, that seemed to be an infi- 



90 FALSE COLOURS* 

nitely commendable thing in Mr. Hepburn's 
eyes. The art of pushing was one that she 
had never learnt, and that was utterly beyond 
her practising by intuition; but she had a 
great gift of gentleness, and a power of pa- 
tience. And these two qualities had actually 
endeared her to the man who lacked both gen- 
tleness and patience himself, but who prized 
them above all other attributes in women. 

Accordingly a real, thorough friendship ex- 
isted between the master of Glene and the in- 
habitants of the little trellis-covered house in 
the village, where Mrs. Pottinger and her 
daughters lived. For years the ladies, to 
whom his wife found it so hard to be civil even, 
had been his chief advisers and almoners in 
the matter of all parochial charities. Long 
ago his kindness to, and interest in, her and her 
children had caused Mrs. Pottinger to make a 
mistake. But she made it in her own mind 
alone, and no one but herself knew that a few 
of the days of her monotonous existence had 
been brightened by the hope of being mistress 
of Glene. But now she had banished the very 
memory of that mistake. There were no back- 



MRS. Hepburn's condescension. 91 

thoughts, no lamentations over what might 
have been had she been younger and fairer, 
and Mr. Hepburn more susceptible, to make 
her other than she seemed . a most loyal and 
sincere friend to Amelia. But Amelia was one 
of those in whose nature it is to turn' a cold 
shoulder to every good feeling evinced towards 
them which does not add in any way to their 
lustre or importance. The sent card of Lady 
Ellington was a treasure of far greater value 
in the eyes of Mrs. Hepburn of Glene, than 
the kindliest acts of heart-courtesy and interest 
from the unimportant widow. 

Unfortunately for herself, Mrs. Hepburn had 
not the art to conceal her hopes and fears, her 
small ambitions and disappointments. Thou- 
sands of women feel them . act upon them . 
suffer by them. But to the fevv' only is it given 
to live as though they felt them not. She was 
a cold-natured, calculating girl. But her cool 
nature and calculating spirit led her into the 
commission of as great social errors as the 
most hot-headed perversity could have done. 
The strongest element in her character was 
subserviency, and this led her to do all sorts of 



92 FALSE COLOUKS. 

things that seemed expedient to the shallow 
judgment that dared not be free. In her un- 
married days she had always regulated her 
friendship and acquaintanceship by a very 
simple rule. Those who were blessed enough 
to find favour in the sight of such as were 
recognized as her social superiors by Amelia, 
were civilly treated by her also. Those whom 
the great ignored, she ignored too, in the 
presence of the great. This was her simple, 
unvarying rule, and she was pleased to believe 
that it had answered very fairly. 

On the morning of the day after the receipt 
of the invitation to Castlenau, Mrs. Hepburn 
was sitting out on the lawn, under the shade of 
a huge, sweeping copper-beech. She was very 
well pleased just now, for she had carried her 
point, and she was gratified and almost happy 
in the consciousness that she was going to 
"dine and dance," as her husband phrased it, 
before Lady Ellington on this day fortnight. 
Intuition told her that she would not enjoy 
herself as a guest to the manner born would 
do. But at least she could profess to enjoy 
herself, and she could impress the fact of her 



MEs. Hepburn's condescension. 93 

doing so uiDon less well-endowed friends who 
were not allowed to enter into the secret recess 
of her mind. Lady Ellington, as her hostess, 
could not slight her. Amelia was one of those 
people who are self-punishing to this degree, 
that they are always anticipating slights. 
Lady Ellington could not slight her; and if 
other people did . well ! there would be no 
need to mention it. It will be seen that her 
own pretentiousness and mean pride were her 
surest foes. No one would have treated her 
as, in her self-flagellating imagination, she pic- 
tured herself treated. 

But this morning she was feeling specially 
satisfied, happy, and well assured. She was 
arranging sentences in a letter which she in- 
tended writing to Cissy Vargrave the day after 
her Castlenau campaign . a letter in which the 
great event should be so touched upon that 
Cissy should believe it to be one of many. 
During all the years of their intercourse, Mr. 
Vargrave 's orphan niece, about whom Amelia 
had always been careful to speak slightingly 
whenever she mentioned her (Cissy) to stran- 
gers, was the one whom it had been Miss 



94 FALSE COLOURS. 

Foster's chiefest aim to impress. Now, though 
things were changed and Amelia was well esta- 
hlished, and Cissy was as insecure socially as 
ever, this aim still lived and flourished, and 
caused Mrs. Hepburn to be torn by conflicting 
feelings. For while she was desirous on the 
other hand of getting Cissy to Glene and 
crushing her, so to say, by the sight of Glene 
grandeur, she could not bear that Cissy should 
see that Glene grandeur was rather a sad and 
solitary thing. 

As she sat there, giving as deep and serious 
thought to the matter as if it had been a really 
deep and serious thing in itself, a shadow 
crossed the line of sunbeams on which she was 
gazing out abstractedly, and, [looking up, she 
saw Mr. Scorrier coming towards her. It al- 
most seemed lately that there had been a better 
feeling between this pair. The lady had ceased 
from her hitherto incessant attempts to make 
him feel his position to be less worthy than it 
was, or less worthy than she thought the posi- 
tion occupied by the friends of Mr. Hepburn of 
Gierke should be. And he accepted the change 
in her easily enough. Accepted it principally 



95 

out of liking and regard for her husband, and 
a little because she was a young, good-looking 
woman, with a possibility of agreeableness 
about her if she liked, and a great deal because 
she was a probable means of his again meeting 
Miss Vargrave. So now, when he saw her on 
the lawn, he turned towards her instead of pur- 
suing his path into the house in search of Mr. 
Hepburn, as he had at first intended. When 
he neared her he raised his hat, and the sun 
fell down lavishly upon his bright fair hair, and 
rendered his smiles radiant, and she remem- 
bered how her husband looked, and how young 
she was, and how, after all, Cissy Vargrave 
would have the best of it, if this thing came to 
pass. 

The thought, and the annoyance it caused 
her, made her face flush, and gave her altogether 
a warmer air than she was wont to have, when 
she gave him her hand, and said, " Good morn- 
ing." This unusual warmth encouraged him 
to speak of something that was near his heart. 

" Have you given up the idea of going to 
Penzance this month?" he asked. "I hear 
from my mother that your friends the Var- 



96 FALSE COLOUES. 

graves are there, and I remember you spoke of 
going there at one time." 

''How does your mother know the Var- 
graves?" she replied, disregarding his ques- 
tion. 

He laughed. " That fact requires a little 
explanation. My mother lives such a very quiet, 
uneventful life, that she has got into a habit of 
noticing trifles and associating them with other 
trifles . what ladies call putting two and two 
together, I believe; she was sitting at her 
window the other night, and she heard some 
people, in passing, mention Glene and me, and 
the next day she found out these people to be 
the Yargraves." 

** Glene and you! Do the Vargraves think 
you live at Glene?" Amelia said, with a little, 
cross laugh. 

** Scarcely that," he answered, carelessly. 
"Can't you fancy an Eton apothecary being 
mentioned by the misguided in the same breath 
with Windsor Castle? But you did not tell me 
. are you going to join the Vargraves at Pen- 
zance?" 

" No; it's impossible now," she said, shortly 



MRS. HEPBUKX S CONDESCENSION. 

feeling that she was -wronged in some way by 
his allusion to an Eton apothecary and Wind- 
sor Castle. "No; it's impossible now. I 
have a great many engagements this week ; and 
the week after we are bound to go to Castle- 
nau, though I should have infinitely have pre- 
ferred sands and sea-breezes." 

** I almost wonder at Mr. Hepburn going 
there," Arthur Scorrier said, gravely. 

She shrugged her shoulders as if she implied 
that the exigencies of their position must of 
necessity be sealed books to Mr. Scorrier. 

" Because it's a regular transparent bit of 
popularity-seeking," Mr. Scorrier went on; 
" and Walter Bracey is not the man we want, 
or the man Mr. Hepburn would support at all." 

*' But this affair is quite outside politics," 
said Mrs. Hepburn; "of course peoj^le who 
don't visit at Castleneau put down everything 
that goes on there now to political purposes; 
but, as Mrs. Walter Bracey was saying the 
other day, when she v;as over with me, dear 
Lady Ellington is a girl at heart still, and 
delights in giving a ball a,s much as her 
youngest daughter does. 1 wish," Mrs. Hep- 

VOL. I. H 



98 FALSE COLOUES. 

burn continued, with a sudden access of crush- 
ing magnanimity, " that we could get you an 
invitation ; I am always sorry when young 
men are debarred from anything of the sort." 

** You're very kind," he said, drily; and 
Mrs. Hepburn fancied he was smiling. 

** When the Castlenau people come to us I 
shall ask you to meet them," she said, pre- 
sently ; and again, as he was impatient to turn 
the conversation back to the Cissy Vargrave 
topic, he only said, " You are very kind." 

Presently, as he sat there gazing abstractedly 
down at the grass at his feet, and wondering 
how he could most easily revert to the subject 
that was most interesting to him, Amelia stole 
a glance at him from under her pale lashes . a 
sly, cautious glance, that could not be quarrelled 
with even if it was caught, but that would 
leave an unpleasant impression of having been 
watched and measured on the one who was 
conscious of it ; the glance that only a deceit- 
ful, demure, safe woman can give. 

"Did you ask me if Cissy Vargrave was 
coming here to stay?" she asked, slowly. 

He started and looked up, but her glance 



MRS. hepbuen's condescension. 99 

was averted, and lie only saw a very composed, 
demure, rather sad face, bent towards the 
earth meditatively. 

*' No ; I hadn't asked you, but I was going 
to do so," he answered. 

She shook her head. " I am afraid not. I 
don't see how I well can have her here, con- 
sistently with what I consider my duty. I have 
a very high idea of what we women owe to the 
men we marry, Mr. Scorrier; and though I 
like Cissy Vargrave for herself, I owe it to my 
husband to quell that liking and not bring her 
into his house." 

She had a feeling . a hope . as she said this, 
that she was doing more than enunciating pro- 
per views. What the feeling was, or in what it 
had its rise, she could not tell. She only fan- 
cied that if this dawning interest for Cissy, 
which Mr. Scorrier was displaying, could be 
crushed, it would be a very good thing. Why 
it would be a good thing she did not stay to ask 
herself. It was merely a momentary feeling, and 
she obeyed it, because it agreed with some pre- 
vious feeling, which again she did not stay to 
define as jealousy. 



100 FALSE COLOURS. 

" Are you speaking of Miss Yargrave . your 
friend?" he asked, when the meaning of her 
words struck him. 

*' Yes," she said, still averting her eyes from 
his. ** You see the mistress of such a house as 
this has responsibilities; I could not reconcile 
it to my conscience to bring Cecile into a fresh 
fastidious society that would be sure continually 
to question who and what she was. Papa and 
mamma were so good-natured, and liked and 
respected her uncle so much, that they disre- 
garded all that sort of thing . so would I, if I 
were still in London; but here, where people 
have time to think about things, and ask ques- 
tions, I should compromise myself." 

*' You will never do that, Mrs. Hepburn," he 
said, jumping up ; and again, as he took off 
his hat in farewell salute to her, the sun fell 
down and rendered him radiant, and she re- 
membered that her husband was old and feeble, 
and saw that this man who had wearied her 
with questions concerning Cissy was in the prime 
of his bloom and manhood. "You will never 
do that, Mrs. Hepburn." She could not deter- 
mine whether he meant commendation or not. 



MRS. HEPBUPvX's CONDESCENSION. 101 

It was dull and tedious sitting there when 
she was left alone, although her morning-dress 
was perfect, and the lawn at Glene was a 
triumph of originally good turf and superior 
management. She could not take delight in 
such things when none were by to see her take 
delight in them. Accordingly she soon got up 
and sauntered into the house, and found Mr. 
Scorrier with her husband. 

Eather than be by herself, she went into the 
room where they were. She was feeling so 
dull and discontented that she would have 
sought any society just then. Mr. Hepburn 
held his hand out to her, and smiled as she 
came in, and her face set itself more harshly 
than before. " This familiarity and kindness " 
to her before another man " was tasteless " 
she told herself, and then she tried to make 
herself believe that she did not care whether he 
thought it tasteless or not, and reminded her- 
self that he was only the Danebury surgeon. 

'' I am just going down to have luncheon 
with Scorrier," Mr. HeiDburn explained to her. 

'' Mr. Scorrier once asked me to go and see 
his conservatory," she said. A craving to go 



102 ' FALSE COLOUES. 

with them, not to be left alone, but to go and 
further disparage Cissy Vargrave in his eyes, if 
she could, seized her. 

"I repeat my invitation for to-day, Mrs. 
Hepburn. Will you come and have luncheon 
in my den, too?" Mr. Scorrier said, with as 
much heartiness as his desire to be quit of her 
presence would permit him to infuse into his 
tone. 

She was pondering something so deeply that 
she did not answer him immediately, and he, 
not liking her well enough to patiently wait her 
pleasure to speak, recommenced the conver- 
sation with Mr. Hepburn, which her appear- 
ance had interrupted. " So, as I was saying, 
I hope to be free early in next week for ten 
days or a fortnight." 

" I will come, Mr. Scorrier. Thank you. 
I mean I shall be happy to come," Amelia 
interrupted, abruptly. " Where are you going 
to next week, did you say ? " 

*' I did not say, but I will. I am going to 
Penzance, to stay with my mother." 

A dark, angry flush suffused her face, and 
she glanced at him in the same sly, cautious 



MRS. Hepburn's condescension. 103 

way which has been ah-eady noticed. But she 
did not speak or take any other notice of his 
remarks. 

*'You won't stay for this affair at Castlenau, 
then, Arthur?" ]\Ir. Hepburn asked. 

" What affair? " Amelia said, quickly. 

" Why, this dinner and ball. I almost think 
that, if I were in Arthur's place, I should go ; 
but I am old, and my dancing days are over, 
and I heartily wish I could avoid it." 

" I did not tell Mr. Scorrier we would get 
him an invitation. I said I wished I could get 
him one," said Amelia, who much feared there 
was some mistake which might compromise her 
with the Countess in the matter. 

'' Oh ! he has an invitation. Every one 
with a vote has, as a matter of course," Mr. 
Hepburn said, testily. And then Amelia went 
to prepare for her drive down to Danebury, to 
have luncheon with Mr. Scorrier. 

She was' feeling very sore and very much 
disgusted about several things. Amongst 
others, it was galling to find that when she 
came down with pomp and glory from her high 
estate, and expressed a loftily kind wish to do 



104 FALSE COLOURS. 

him a great favour, that he should have had 
the favour in his iDocket the whole time. It 
was not the least sharp part of the sting that 
he should have had the magnanimity to strive 
to spare her feelings by refraining from telling 
her that this was the case. The tables were 
turned upon her with a vengeance. She had 
been trying to crush what he might deem 
his claims to greater consideration than it was 
her will and pleasure to accord him, by show- 
ing him in what high social esteem she was 
held. And he had actually abstained from 
putting the fact before her of himself being held 
in equal esteem. She was deeply mortified, 
and yet she could not hate and despise him 
any more. 

They all then drove down through the park 
to the village in her pony-carriage. Amelia 
was neither a skilful nor a graceful driver, but 
her pair of bays and her little park xDhaeton 
were alike perfect. She was never quite at ease 
when she was guiding her spirited little steeds, 
and the knowledge that she was not so, and 
that she did not appear to be so, always dis- 
composed her temper. Now, on this occasion, 



MRS. hepburk's CONDESCE^'SION. 105 

she was feeling specially out of tune with her 
surroundings. Married woman as she was, 
grancle dame as she believed herself to be, she 
was cut to the core at the thought of this young 
man, whom she had sneered at as a " country 
surgeon," having a higher feeling of admiration 
for Cecile Yargrave than for herself. Even 
with Glene and all its glories freshly in her 
mind, she could not help hoping, if this visit of 
his to Penzance boded what she feared, that 
his house might prove to be meanly propor- 
tioned and furnished. She could not help wish- 
ing that there might be something in its order- 
ing and appointments which should cause 
mortification to Cecile, if ever the latter came 
there. And yet she could not hate and despise 
him an}^ more. 

They reached his house. Her husband had 
pointed out its garden-wall to her, on two or 
three occasions when they had been driving 
through Danebury, and she had looked at the 
same with the sort of tepid interest one is apt 
to feel for a place one does not know or care 
about. 

But now she did look about her with interest, 



106 FALSE COLOURS. 

as she passed through the gates and along the 
broad, sweeping, well-kept drive that led up to 
the entrance -door, which was shaded by a 
porch, covered in these August days with a 
thickly-starred jasmine and a wealth of cream- 
coloured roses. A long, two-storied house, 
verandahed and balconied into absolute beauty, 
with a number of large single-paned plate-glass 
windows gleaming out irregularly through 
masses of foliage and flowers. A pretty flat 
lawn in front, with a few shrubs and flower- 
beds on it. A limpid little sheet of water to 
the left, larger than a pond, smaller than a 
lake, with a reed-covered island about the size 
of a dining-table in it, and one dull but grace- 
ful swan floating on its breast. A conservatory 
to the right, running out from a door at the 
end of the house, through whose bright panes 
masses of rich colour, carefully grouped, could 
be seen. This was the exterior of Mr. Scorrier's 
house ; and as Amelia looked about her, she 
could not help feeling that its tasteful, unpre- 
tentious beauty would be quite in keeping with 
Cissy Vargrave and Cissy Vargrave's ideas. 
"I could not bear to see her here," Mrs. Hep- 



MRS. Hepburn's condescension. 107 

burn thought, compressing her cunning-looking, 
rabbit-shaiDed mouth, as she walked through 
the porch into the pretty entrance, which was 
more ante-room than hall. 

" Here, you see, in my drawing-room, I am 
wanting in all those little ladylike uselessnesses 
that speak of the feminine presence," Mr. 
Scorrier said, throwing open a door, and usher- 
ing his guests into a softly shaded, green- 
tinted room, that if it was wanting in certain 
*^ ladylike uselessnesses," certainly was want- 
ing in little else. Those who are impatient of 
uj^holstery details had better skip the remainder 
of this page, for Mr. Scorrier' s drawing-room, 
as being closely illustrative of the man, de- 
serves, and shall have, a full description. A 
room, rather long and narrow, with a deep, 
high bow-window at the further end ; panelled 
walls in rather light, unvarnished, exquisitely 
carved oak, and four light pillars of the same 
(carved oak), springing from floor to ceiling, 
and dividing the window-recess fi'om the rest of 
the room. A moss-patterned carpet, green and 
Irown, several low couches, all small, and easy 
chairs of pomegranate-coloured velvet *; a piano 



108 FALSE COLOURS. 

in oak-case ; a low, long oak book-case full of 
splendidly bound volumes ; a velvet-covered 
table (pomegranate-colour too), supported by a 
shaft that sprang from the midst of a group of 
lions shaped out of the same oak. These 
things made up the furniture, the mere up- 
holstery part of the room. But scattered about 
in artistic confusion, were bronzes and sta- 
tuettes in marble, mosaics, enamels, books, and 
photographs. 

"All this in Danebury!" Mrs. Heiaburn 
exclaimed, surprised into speech and out of 
politeness. 



A TRANSFORMATION. 109 



CHAPTER VI. 

A TRANSFORMATION. 

"1 WILL go and order luncheon," Mr. Scorrier 
said, as soon as he had brought his guests into 
this room. *' Old Mrs. Wakely, my house- 
keeper, would he thrown out of gear by the 
thought of a lady at the table, if I didn't give 
her ten minutes' grace to make what she will 
think fitting alterations ;" then he went away, 
and Mr. and Mrs. Hepburn were free to do 
what people invariably do in an amusingly 
furnished room . namely, peer about, and criti- 
cising if they do not covet. 

*' His practice scarcely justifies all this, does 
it ? " Amelia said, when she had made the tour 
of inspection, seating herself as she spoke on 
one of the low couches, and trying to look 
round contemptuously. There was a curious 



110 FALSE COLOURS. 

conflict of feeling going on within her. She 
was not quite sure as to whether she felt more 
pleased or aggrieved at this display of refine- 
ment on the part of Mr. Scorrier, which he 
had evidently not designed for her. 

''Oh, I don't know," old Mr. Hepburn 
replied ; " he has private means." 

*'What made him settle down as a mere 
surgeon?" 

*' My wish?" 

" And why had you a wish on the subject of 
the career of a young man who was no relation 
to you ? " 

'* I believe I have already told you why, 
Amelia. I knew his father." 

"What is his mother like? " Amelia asked, 
in a low tone. But before Mr. Hepburn could 
reply to this question, Arthur Scorrier came 
back into the room. 

*'Now, Mrs. Hepburn," he said, "come, and 
be indulgent to my bachelor entertainment," 
and then he offered her his arm and led her 
into the dining-room. 

*' I am glad it is a bachelor entertainment," 
Mrs. Hepburn said, rather earnestly, as she 



A TRANSFORMATION. Ill 

took her seat at the table, " at least," she 
added, in rather a confused tone, " one is glad 
of anything for a change, and it has always 
been my fate to be entertained by men's wives." 

" Now, I was just thinking that a wife at the 
head of his table was the one grace wanting 
here," Mr. Hepburn said, looking about him 
approvingly. The table was round, and brightly 
set forth, and presently Mrs. Hepburn's atten- 
tion was attracted by some old and richly 
chased little silver-gilt salt-cellars." 

" These are lovely ! " Amelia exclaimed. 
*'Why, they are like ours, only smaller." 

" They were my mother's contribution when 
I was putting 'my house in order," Arthur 
Scorrier said ; " the only really valuable i)ieces 
of plate she had, I believe . my father's first 
present to her ; had you noticed that they were 
the same pattern as yours, sir?" he added, 
addressing Mr. Hepburn. 

"No, I had not," Mr. Hepburn replied, 
courteously ; " singular coincidences of the 
kind are apt to occur about i)late that was j^ro- 
bably purchased about the same date. I see 
the crest has been obliterated." 



112 FALSE COLOURS. 

" I suppose my father wanted to avoid 
paying tax for it,'* Arthur laughed. " By the 
way," he continued, ** nothing of ours is 
marked with a crest. I don't know what mine 
is, Mrs. Hepburn. Isn't that a degrading con- 
fession, and are you not surprised at it ? " 

**No, I'm not surprised at it," Amelia said ; 
but there v/as no covert sneer in her manner 
of saying it, as there would have been a short 
time ago. " Of course you could get it drawn 
from the heralds' ofiQce, if you liked." 

** I should rather not do it, if I were in your 
place, Arthur," Mr. Hepburn said, advisingly. 
" Every young man who can get hold of a 
crest to which he has ever so remote a claim, 
sticks it on a signet-ring and a dog-cart, and 
whatever else he can conveniently place it on. 
I should prefer a simple cipher if I were in 
your place . it's better taste." 

" But you can't call a son's claim to his 
father's crest a remote one," Amelia argued, 
and then felt sorry that she had spoken in 
favour of Mr. Scorrier's adopting an honourably 
distinctive badge, which she should sorely 
grudge to Cissy Vargrave*s husband. *' If I 



A TRANSFORMATION. 113 

felt sure that lie would marry her, I would sug- 
gest his adopting a pill-box even now," she 
thought, savagely ; and then she looked at his 
frank, high-spirited, handsome face, and marked 
his look of breeding, and felt regretful for the 
savage desire to snub him which had seized 
her but a moment before. *' But if he goes 
hankering after a wife whose connections or 
want of connections will only lower him socially, 
he will deserve any amount of snubbing," she 
told herself. 

By-and-by the conversation turned to the 
seasonable topic of travelling. 

''It's so natural, after having lived all my 
life in London, to think that it's absolutely 
necessary to go somewhere else in the autumn," 
Mrs. Hepburn said. '' I have the feeling on 
me now, though, of course, I couldn't have 
fresher air or lovelier scenery anywhere than 
at Glene." 

"Yes, you have plenty of fresh air and good 
scenery here, but it's inland air and scenery, 
and what one wants in autumn are sea-breezes 
and coast-scenery. Why don't you go down to 
Penzance now your friends are there ? " Arthur 

VOL. I. I 



114 FALSE COLOURS. 

Scorrier asked, forgetting, in bis eagerness to 
secure a means of communion with Cecile 
Vargrave, that his mother's iDresence would he 
a harrier to Mr. Hepburn's helping him. 

" Because I saw quite enough of my friends, 
as you persist in calling them, when I was 
living near them," Amelia said, coldly. 

" And I may add, because I have an insur- 
mountable objection to Penzance," her husband 
added, with equal coldness. Then the spirit 
of quiet enjoyment and geniality which had 
been about this trio before, fled, and they each 
felt that the sooner they separated the plea- 
santer it would be for all. 

They went back to the drawing-room that 
was so striking in its oak-panelled unconvention- 
ality, and when Mrs. Hepburn was sitting wait- 
ing for her ponies to come round, Mr. Scorrier 
came up to her, and addressed her with greater 
heartiness than he had ever expressed towards 
her before. 

" You will come again . this first visit will 
not be your last ?" 

She looked up half sullenly, half smilingly. 
«< Why should I come again ? You only ask 



A TEANSFOKMATION. 115 

me because you want my husband, and ho 
would come without me." 

" I must not have you leave with that im- 
pression ; it is too mortifying to me ; you make 
me feel that I have been signally wanting in 
one of the finer attributes of hospitality . what 
have I done ?" 

"You have not done anything yet," she 
said ; and it was all sullenness now . sullen- 
ness unredeemed by an attempt at a smile. 

" What is he likely to do that can be dis- 
IDleasing to you, my dear?" Mr. Hepburn 
asked, speaking sharply, and looking sharply 
at them both ; and then Amelia threw off the 
sombre cloud that had settled over her with an 
effort, and rose up laughing. 

" Why, if he married a Miss Pottinger, for 
instance, I could not help being displeased, 
I should never have the courage to come here 
and bore myself." 

"I shall never marry a Miss Pottinger," 
Arthur Scorrier replied, as he offered his arm, 
and led her out to her pony-carriage. "Mean- 
time, until I commit a similar iniquity, let 
there be peace and good-will between us." 



116 FALSE COLOURS. 

He spoke lightly, in the merest jest. But 
there was sober earnest in her tone as she 
answered, 

*' So be it . until you commit a similar ini- 
quity, as you say." Then the old husband and 
the hard young wife drove off together, and as 
Mr. Scorrier watched them through his gates, he 
thought, 

*' We shall both regret the day he married 
the blameless creature whose name was never 
even whispered in connection with a girlish 
flirtation. She either wants to play a dan- 
gerous game, or she is conjuring up a more 
dangerous reality." And then he went about 
his work again, disliking his old friend's wife 
more in this first hour of her partially relent- 
ing towards him, than he had ever done 
while she had been half insolently opposed to 
him. 

"As we are in the village, I should like to 
call in and see Mrs. Pottinger," Mr. Hepburn 
said, breaking a silence which had lasted from 
the time they had exchanged " good-bye " with 
Arthur Scorrier. 

*' As you please," Mrs. Hepburn replied, 



A TKANSFORMATION. 117 

quickly. " I was thinking myself that it was 
time that I went to see her." 

There was something so unusually acquies- 
cent in Amelia's voice and manner that Mr. 
Hepburn looked at her in surprise, telling him- 
self that it must have been the concession he 
had made in the matter of Castlenau which 
had wrought the happy change. He thought he 
would improve the occasion. 

" I don't care at all for society, as you 
know," he said, in a tone that showed how 
eminently praiseworthy and commendable he 
thought such "not caring" was, " still, I like 
to see old friends about me in my own house. 
I wish you would sometimes ask those girls up 
of an evening to have coffee and a little 
music." 

" Girls find coffee and a little music dull 
without anything else ; but if they will find 
any pleasure in coming, I shall be very happy 
to see them." 

Another concession ! Amelia had not been 
so amiably ready to fall in with his views since 
their marriage. 

"You could always ask Scorrier to come in, 



118 FALSE COLOUES. 

too,'* he said, as they turned down the little 
side-road in which Mrs. Pottinger's was 
situated; and Amelia, still affable, answered, 
*' Yes, he is good-natured enough not to mind 
trying to hel^D amuse the poor old things." 

This was only the second time that Mrs. 
Hepburn of Glene had condescended from her 
high estate so far as to call on Mrs. Pottinger. 
She had often pulled her ponies up at the 
widow's door, and left baskets of vegetables, 
and fruit, and flowers, but in her narrow fear 
of getting intimate with wrong people, and so 
damaging herself in the county, she had never 
'' gone in " after making the compulsory return 
call on just coming to Glene. As she went in 
this day there was an odour of dried lavender 
and pot-pourri, of old-fashioned stocks and jas- 
mine, and a great air of respectability and quiet 
that made her wish for a moment that she 
could ''feel like it," feel settled, feel satisfied and 
contented . as was her husband, for instance. 
They went into a comfortably furnished, faded, 
chintz -covered room, where the odour of dried 
lavender and pot-pourri strengthened, and there 
they found the widow, Mrs. Pottinger, and her 



A TKANSFOBMATIOX. 119 

four unmarried daughters doing the work that 
was established in their minds hy habit and 
custom as the " right kind of work to do of an 
afternoon." This was wool-work, all stiff in 
design and sad in colour, copied from much 
pricked and worn patterns of forty years ago . 
patterns that were kept alive, so to say, by much 
brown paper and gum at their backs, and that 
would never gratify the vulgar gaze even when 
finished. For it was a fixed and immutable 
law in Mrs. Pottinger's house that everything 
which, in the distorted imaginations of the 
dwellers therein ranked as pretty, should be 
covered up religiously under large and grotesque- 
patterned chintzes. 

" And so you really have been to luncheon 
at Mr. Scorrier's!" Mrs. Pottinger began, as 
soon as her guests were seated. Mrs. Pottinger 
was a slim, tight-figured old lady, with cleanly- 
cut aquiline features, that were now becoming 
beaky . an old lady who spoke in a flat mono- 
tone, and who prided herself still on the posses- 
sion of a waist. She was likewise much 
addicted to the pleasure of telling people what 
they had been doing lately, without waiting to 



120 FALSE COLOURS. 

know whether such show of knowledge on her 
part would be agreeable to them or not. An 
old lady who took an active interest in her 
fellow-creatures still, an interest which would 
lead her to get out of bed at unseemly hours, 
and peer through the blinds to see when and 
how her neighbours came home from market 
and other places. This habit of hers had 
driven her only married daughter and son-in- 
law out of Danebury, for, as her daughter said, 
"It is too much to do an uninteresting thing 
one hour, and to be told of it by mamma the next." 

" And so you really have been to luncheon at 
Mr. Scorrier's ! " she began, to which remark 
Amelia smiled a faint assent, and Mr. Hepburn 
replied, heartily: 

" Yes, it has been my wife's first visit there, 
and Arthur entertained us well. Did he not, 
Amelia?" 

" Very well indeed," Mrs. Hepburn said, 
carelessly. She did not wish to discuss either 
Mr. Scorrier or Mr. Scorrier's menage just yet. 

" He is a very superior young man, don't 
you think?" Mrs. Pottinger went on; and 
Amelia asked impertinently : 



A TRANSFORMATION. 121 

" Superior to what ? . his x^osition and the 
people he lives amongst ? Yes, I think he is.*' 

^' I mean superior to most young men of the 
day," Mrs. Pottinger, who evidently declined to 
feel rebuffed, re^Dlied : '* his house is too fantastic 
for my taste, but he has travelled a great deal, 
and picked up queer notions that don't quite fall 
in with our ideas." 

" I thought his house very perfect," Amelia 
said, steadily; ''it didn't strike me as being 
fantastic at all." 

"Didn't it, really! Well, as I said to his 
mother, when she was staying with him, and 
she agreed with me . most excellent and de- 
lightful person, his mother . I was quite sorry 
you were not here, Mr. Hepburn, to make her 
acquaintance, you would have been charmed 
with her . I told her so, and added that she 
would have been delighted with you, and she 
said she hoped to meet you some day." 

"Don't you know his mother?" Amelia 
asked, quite disregarding the fact of the latter 
part of Mrs. Pottinger' s speech being merely a 
long parenthetical interruption to the statement 
she was about to make, relative to the same 



122 FALSE COLOURS. 

sentiments being held in common on a certain 
subject by both Mrs. Scorrier and herself, 
"Don't you know his mother?" 

" No, I do not," Mr. Hepburn replied, testily. 
It was very disagreeable to him to hear remarks 
made about that fine avoidance of Mrs. Scorrier 
w^hich he had explained so satisfactorily to her 
son. 

" We used to see a great deal of her while 
she was here," one of the Misses Pottinger 
struck in ; '' she was always asking us there, 
so different from some mothea:s, who are afraid 
if a girl looks at their sons." Miss Pottinger 
quite flushed up in excitement as she said this, 
and Mrs. Hepburn regarded her with a gaze 
that said only too plainly, "No mother need be 
afraid of you." 

'^ Yes, it would be very nice for us if Mrs. 
Scorrier came to live with her son," a second 
Miss Pottinger said, enthusiastically ; ^' she 
paid us so very much attention that we missed 
her very much when she left. I do wonder that 
Mr. Scorrier does not have her with him ; he is 
not likely to marry, I should think." 

*' There is no one for him to marry about 



A TEANSFOEMATION. 123 

here," Amelia said, contemptuously, disregard- 
ing ruthlessly the claims to his consideration 
which the Misses Pottinger might be supposed 
to have by lenient and easily satisfied people ; 
and then, being away from the influence of his 
presence, she went on to give utterance to one 
of the views respecting him with which she had 
fortified her dislike to him at first. " Mr. 
Scorrier can't afford to marry anybody; men in 
his position have need to marry vdves who can 
heli3 them up." 

"I think you will find that Mr. Scorrier, when 
he does marry, will do so to please himself, with- 
out much regard to other people's thoughts on 
the subject," Mr. Hepburn said, energetically. 
*' I hope he will marry well and ;happily, and 
soon . above all, soon; I should like to see him 
Vvith a wife in his youth." 

*' I have no doubt he will gratify you, if you 
only let him know your wishes on the subject," 
Amelia said, suffering her temper to rise, but 
keeping it in check, because she would not let 
the Pottingers think that all was not bliss in 
this marriage of hers ; " for my own part, I 
can't understand taking a wild interest in a 



124 FALSE COLOURS. 

man's marriage before there is the faintest pro- 
ba;bility of his marrying at all. Can you ?" 

" No, I can't," Mrs. Pottinger said, promptly, 
actuated by the amiable desire of agreeing with 
both Mr. Hepburn and his wife ; " but then, 
you see, a Mrs. Scorrier would be rather an 
important person in our village society. We 
naturally feel that a good many of our little 
social pleasures would be made or marred by 
her, so we can't help questioning what she 
might be like." 

" A bright fate for anybody, that, certainly ! 
Humdrum and monotonous as my life is. Cissy 
Vargrave will find hers more insignificant still 
if he is fool enough to marry her," Amelia 
thought. And then she put on the appearance 
of listening politely .to some of the Pottinger 
platitudes, while in reality she was indulging 
herself in the reflection that if such a marriage 
should come to pass. Cissy's excitable, impatient, 
discontented nature would wear itself out in the 
ignominious bondage it would be placed in, be- 
tween the neglects of some and the attentions 
of others. 

The good temper and easy acquiescence in 



A TEANSFOEMATION. 125 

any suggestions he made, wliicli had so sur- 
prised and pleased Mr. Hepburn half an hour 
before, were quite gone now. She looked as 
she felt, weary, cross, and v\'orn-out, as she sat 
there and thought, this then was all her mar- 
riage had brought her. This ! that she should 
spend her young life in a humdrum, monotonous 
way, and be made by circumstances to find her 
keenest interest and greatest pleasure in the 
hope that her old friend Cissy Vargrave might 
know nothing brighter. Then she angrily 
checked these thoughts, trying to di'ive them 
out, and crush them down, by telling herseK 
that, after all, she had no reason for supposing 
that Cissy would ever be nearer and dearer to 
this young man than she was at present. Even 
if Arthur Scorrier did go to Penzance, a thou- 
sand things might occur, and probably would 
occur, to prevent his meeting with the Var- 
graves. Besides, something might stop his 
going to Penzance. She rose up to go away, 
giving the Pottingers a far warmer invitation to 
*^ come and spend the evening at Glene," in 
her haste, than she would have accorded them 
had she felt cool and collected as usual. She 



126 FALSS COLOUBS. 

would go home and send a verbal invitation to 
Mr. Scorrier to come to them this evening, 
'' for the sake of amusing the poor, dull, prosy 
Pottingers;" and if he came, she would say- 
just one or two little words to him about the 
Yargraves that should show him what she 
thought of them. She was quite absorbed in 
these determinations as she drove home . quite 
absorbed in the work of proving to herself that 
the sudden desire to entertain these people was 
due, solely and wholly to the fact of her having 
discovered that the sight of any one at Glene, 
was better than the solitude she had recently 
endured. And that the other resolve, the in, 
tention of saving Mr. Scorrier, at any cost, from 
the Yargrave snare, was due to the fact of his 
being such a favourite of her husband's. " I 
will find out what his mother is like, and get her 

on my " she checked the reflection, and 

changed it into the words, " and get her to 
regard it as a onesalliance." For somehow or 
other Amelia had learnt that the fear of her son 
making one was one of the strongest and most 
painful feelings in the old lady's mind. How 
she had arrived at this knowledpje of the eenti- 



A TRANSFORMATION. 127 

ments of the old lady, mention of whom was so 
rarely made, it is hard to say. But she had 
arrived at it. She felt that it was so, and 
for some reason or other she was very glad 
of it. 

It was well for their married happiness per- 
haps that she had something to think about on 
this occasion, which carried her outside Mr. 
Hepburn's influence, as it were. For Mr. 
Hepburn's influence would have been a depress- 
ing one had she been sympathetic to it : an an- 
noying one had she been unsympathetic and, at 
the same time, observant. On the face of it 
she had been very conceding in act and deed (if 
not in manner always) this day, and it was, or 
rather it would have been, had she observed it, 
hard to find these acts and deeds disregarded, 
or regarded as trifles now. She had accepted 
the invitation of his favourite, and she had ex- 
tended invitations to his friends the Pottingers, 
and this was a great move in the conciliating 
direction away from her resolution to have "No- 
thing at all to do with them," with which she 
had been fraught when she first came to Glene. 
But Mr. Hepburn was evidently ill-pleased about 



128 FALSE COLOURS. 

Bomething. Whether it was with her or with 
another, it was difficult to determine. He 
showed his displeasure as they drove home by 
maintaining a grim silence, and a rigid ex- 
pression of face ; and of these signs of dis- 
pleasure Amelia took no notice. When he 
reached home, he manifested it more openly. 

" I thought it in very bad taste your talking 
as you did about Mrs. Scorrier, Amelia," he 
said, in a vexed tone. 

*' Talking as I did about Mrs. Scorrier ! I 
scarcely mentioned her," Amelia said, and then 
she added, quickly; **Your friends, the Misses 
Pottinger made themselves geese about her ; 
but that they do about every one they men- 
tion." 

" Arthur is surely the best judge of whether 
it would be agreeable to have his mother live 
with him or not," Mr. Hepburn went on, just 
as though the scheme of Mrs. Scorrier' s doing 
so had been started by Amelia. 

*' I think it would be a hateful plan for him 
to have her there," Mrs. Hepburn answered, 
with considerable energy. *' It's one of those 
houses that are pleasant enough to go to as 



A TRANSFORMATION. 129 

we went to-day, but that would be odious with 
a mistress in it." 

" Not with a wife for its mistress. We shall 
have him there with a wife soon, I hope," Mr. 
Hepburn replied ; and then he went on, " I 
look forward to seeing him settled in the best 
way a man can be settled before I die." 

''I think," Amelia said, rising up slowly 
(she had seated herself to listen to Mr. Hep- 
burn's views respecting Arthur Scorrier's set- 
tling) . " I think I had better go and dress 
for dinner now." 

" You will be too early; come out on the 
lawn with me." 

''As you please; but I am very tired." 
Then she made a step forward after him to- 
wards the door, and he heard her stagger, 
catch hold of a light chair that turned over in 
her grasp, and looked round in time to see 
her falling to the ground quite cold and in- 
sensible. 

He was only lately married, and his hopes 
as to what might eventuate from his marriage 
were high, consequently he was very much 
frightened now at what looked very like physi- 

VOL. I. K 



130 FALSE COLOURS. 

cal delicacy in bis wife. She had not been 
having too much excitement since her marriage, 
he had taken care of that, and this day she 
bad been subjected to the test of only the 
gentlest driving exercise. He was shocked and 
disappointed and frightened. She had always 
seemed to be so sound and hard and hearty ; 
so entirely free from all that over-sensitiveness 
of mind and body to which some feminine 
flesh is heir. This sudden failing of that 
sound, hard heartiness, on which he had so 
strongly relied, upset him very much. In a 
minute, as he stood looking at her crumpled 
up on the carpet at his feet, he thought of all 
the restoratives of which he had heard . water, 
burnt feathers, toilet vinegar, a doctor ! The 
last was likely to prove the most efficacious. 
He rang the bell, and when the servant came 
in, he ordered that a messenger might be des- 
patched, desiring Mr. Scorrier's immediate 
attendance on Mrs. Hepburn, and then he sat 
down and watched her as she gradually panted 
back to consciousness. 

"What is it that has upset you so," he 
asked; as she recovered, and sat up, looking 



A TRANSFORMATION, 131 

very white and stricken still, as lie had never 
seen her look before. 

"Nothing . I turned giddy," she said, and 
then she stood up and muttered something 
about **now she would go and dress." 

*' Wait here, Amelia ; I have sent for 
Scorrier ; do wait here, and see him, my 
dear." 

"Sent for Scorrier!" she said, sharply; 
" what utter absurdity ! " 

"My intense anxiety about you was the 
cause of the absurdity," he replied, in rather 
an injured tone. " I wanted to know what was 
the matter with you. The attack has shaken 
me more than it has you, Amelia," he added, 
tenderly ; "it will be a satisfaction to me for 
Scorrier to see you." 

" It will be no satisfaction to- me, but only 
a great annoyance," she said, retreating towards 
the door. And then he resumed authority, 
told her that " this was mere senseless preju- 
dice," and then was left alone . till Mr. Scorrier 
came . to ruminate on the probabilities of his 
wife proving contumacious. 

She v/ent upstairs, and went through the 



1B2- FALSE COLOUES. 

ceremony of dressing with an impatient anxiety 
that did not escape the eyes of her maid. Ap- 
parently, Mrs. Hepburn was more desirous of 
setting off such natural charms as she was 
possessed of, with all the artifices of art she 
had at her command this day, than she had 
been since her marriage. Usually when they 
were alone . and they were always alone at 
Glene . she was content with whatever dress 
the taste of Olive, her maid, condemned her 
to wear. But this day she took the selection 
into her own hands, and routed all Olive's 
suggestions. Hitherto the handsome young 
wife of the old master of Glene had seemed to 
affect sombre colours, and matronly forms in 
her attire . putting ten years on to herself, if 
she put a day, by such reckless indiscretion in 
the choice of dress, as Olive was wont to aver. 
But now some change was wrought -in her 
judgment respecting what it would be fit and 
proper for her to wear, to sit down to dine 
alone with Mr. Hepburn in. At length she 
stood arrayed in a soft, filmy Indian muslin, 
about which a trellis-work of the most ex- 
quisitely delicate embroidery seemed to creep . 



A TRANSFORMATION. 133 

a robe so soft and transi^arent that it only 
veiled and did not dim the brightly blue crys- 
talline silk, over which it fell . when at length 
she stood arrayed thus, it was evident that her 
youth and good looks were going to assert 
themselves in a way she had never encouraged 
them to do before. Then she sent down to 
the conservatory for some crimson flowers, and 
placed them in her hair and on her bosom ; 
and then she decked her hard, white, thin, 
well-formed hands, with sparkling rings, and 
looked at herself in the glass, and was pleased. 
In the glass, too, besides the reflection of 
her own good looks, so well set off, she caught 
the face of her maid set in a stare of amaze- 
ment and amusement. It was not her policy 
at all (if policy she had) to turn round and 
detect, and force an explanation from the 
shrewd waiting-woman. But she determined 
to do away with both these feelings in Olive's 
mind . these feelings which were so vividly 
portrayed in Olive's face. Accordingly she 
waited, in apparent unconsciousness, for a 
minute or two, fashioning and refashioning the 
disposition of her flowers. And then her 



134 FALSE COLOURS. 

CTinniiig eyes (they were cunning in spite of 
being well-formed and good in colour, and alto- 
gether what people generally called fine) raised 
themselves, and she turned round. 

" Mr. Hepburn is more particular about the 
way in which I dress to receive such old and 
valued friends as Mrs. Pottinger and her 
daughters, than if I were dressing for a ball," 
she said; and Olive thought, " Mr. Hepburn 
can never think to please them old things by 
getting her to look like their granddaughter.'* 



MES. Hepburn's weakness. 135 



CHAPTER VII. 

MRS. Hepburn's weakness. 

Mr. Scorrier had obeyed the summons to 
Glene without delay. Amelia had barely put 
the finishing stroke to her preparations for the 
gratification of the pride of the eye in the 
Pottingers, by quelling all conjecture in her 
maid, before there came a knock at her 
dressing-room door ; and she was told that 
Mr. Scorrier had arrived. 

" I don't want the doctor here ; you can tell 
Mr. Hepburn that I will come down," she 
said; and then she hastily gathered up her 
arms . her fan and all the paraphernalia of 
female warfare . and went down stairs to sub- 
mit to an investigation into her state of health. 
Mr. Hepburn met her in the hall, and began a 
reproof of her imprudence in " having exerted 



136 FALSE COLOURS. 

herself so far, when Scorrier could just as well 
have gone up to her." But she smiled so 
deprecatingly in acknowledgment of this re- 
proof, and seemed altogether so very much 
softened by the effects of that faint, feminine 
lapse out of herself of which she had been 
guilty, that he tried to turn the reproof into a 
caress, which she could not bear after all she 
had gone through this day. She put his arm 
down, away from her quickly, and went on 
hurriedly into the drawing-room, apologizing 
for her action as she went. 

'. A straw would knock me down just now . 
it would, indeed, Mr. Hepburn ; it's the first 
time in my life that my nerves have given 
way, and I can't recover directly.'* With these 
words she came into Mr. Scorrier' s presence, 
beautifully dressed, flushed from some cause . 
weakness perhaps . with a flush he had never 
seen in her face before, a little agitated, and 
very much altered. 

But not more altered than he was. She had 
seen him last gay and lively, or at least as gay 
and lively as it is possible for a man to be when 
there is no special call made on these qualities; 



MRS. Hepburn's weakness. 137 

and now he met her stiffly and gravely and 
professionally, in a way that made her very 
much wish that she had not fainted, or that her 
hushand had not sent for Mr. Scorrier towards 
her restoration. 

*'I turned giddy . it was sudden and com- 
plete prostration; I am not very strong, and I 
suppose I had heen over-fatigued this morning," 
she said, in reply to his inquiries. Then she 
placed herself in a chair, with her back to the 
light, and began fanning herself vigorously, 
hoping the kindly shade would conceal the un- 
usual brightness of her eyes and burning of her 
cheeks. 

" There is no sign of weakness, or of any- 
thing but the most perfect health in that," he 
said, when he had felt her pulse. 

''I knew it ; I did not wish you to be sent 
for ; but now that you are here, I may be 
spared writing a note which Mr. Hepburn 
would have had me write otherwise. Come to 
us at eight to-night, will you ? . the Pottingers 
are coming." 

"lam afraid I am not free to-night," he 
said. 



138 FALSE COLOURS. 

"So many engagements in Danebury! really 
I beg your pardon for having given you such 
an unceremonious invitation." 

She spoke bitterly now; the evening did loom 
so long and heavily before her. 

"It's no pleasure engagement, it's a business 
engagement, Mrs. Hepburn." Then he turned 
to Mr. Hepburn and assured him that there 
V7as no need for anxiety. " Every sign of Mrs. 
Hepburn's indisposition has passed;" and then 
the dinner-bell warned him to depart. 

Mr. Hepburn went out as far as the hall- 
door with him, questioning him anxiously as 
they went. 

"You said that to reassure her, Arthur," he 
said, earnestly ; " but tell me the truth . it 
would be a terrible thing for me to lose her, or 
to see her suffer." 

" Mrs. Hepburn is as sound in health as a 
roach, sir ;" Arthur Scorrier replied ; " perhaps 
change of air and scene would strengthen her 
though, and keep her in as sound health as she 
is now." 

" But I have always considered Glene the 
healthiest place in England. We stand on a 



MRS. Hepburn's weakness. 139 

height; we get the breeze that blows straight 
away from the Devonshire moors down that line 
of valley ; and the drainage is perfect." 

" Still Glene may not suit i>Irs. Hepburn's 
constitution. Hovrever, dinner is the object in 
hand with you now," he added, laughing; '^you 
can think about when it would be well to travel 
by-and-by." Then he went away, leaving Mr. 
Hepburn rather ill-pleased with him for not 
taking a deeper and more intense interest in 
Amelia's health. 

" You gave me a terrible turn, my dear . 
thank heaven it is no worse than it is!" Mr. 
Hepburn said to his wife, watching her with a 
sort of observant fondness that she felt it was 
hard to have to endure ''at her age." She 
was constantly remembering her age now, and 
contrasting it with his ; and this, not because 
she wished to do it, but because she could not 
help doing it. 

" No worse than it is ! I told you it was 
nothing, and Mr. Scorrier told you the same 
thing, which, by the way, was not too polite of 
him," she said. Then they went in to dinner, 
as they had gone in to dinner every day since 



140 FALSE COLOURS. 

she first came to Glene, and were served, with 
comfort and orderly celerity, to a dinner that 
was as unexceptionahle as were all the dinners 
at Glene. But the edge of her appetite was 
taken off; perhaps it was by the reflection 
that the evening would be very long, and that 
the Pottingers were coming. 

** Arthur advises change of air and scene for 
you, my dear," Mr. Hepburn said, with a 
little gulp, as soon as the servants left the 
room. " I must find out where you wish to 
go, and when it would be well for you to go." 

"You would not leave Glene ! " she cried; 
and she looked aghast at the proposition that 
was made so entirely for her good. 

" I would not leaver it for any lighter con- 
sideration. But your health is everything." 

** What nonsense this is ! " she said, an- 
grily. *' My health ! What does Mr. Scorrier 
mean by pronouncing me robust one instant, 
and counselling change of air and scene for the 
good of my health the next ? " 

" I thought," Mr. Hepburn began, and then 
he paused, and seemed to be considering 
whether it would be advisable for him to 



MRS. Hepburn's weakness* 141 

finish the sentence he had commenced or 
not. 

''You thought I valued your comfort less 
highly than I do, when you believed that I 
would consent to a plan that would be any- 
thing but a pleasure to you," she said, in a 
low voice. " I shall be distressed . really I 
shall . if you say any more about taking me 
away ; my health does not need it, and I am 
getting fond of Glene." 

Then they heard that Mrs. and the Misses 
Pottinger had arrived, and Amelia rose up 
hastily. 

"We must not let them feel they are too 
soon," she said, in explanation of her hasty 
movement, as she passed Mr. Hepburn at the 
door ; and he could not help thinking how 
very much more amiable she had become this 
day, though to think so was treason against 
what she had been before. 

Evidently the Pottingers had come antici- 
pating a sort of little gala. Justifiably so ; 
for had not Mrs. Hepburn said that she should 
ask Mr. Scorrier to meet them ? and with Mr. 
Scorrier for a fellow-guest, and Mr. and Mrs. 



142 FALSE COLOURS. 

Hepburn for their host and hostess, a gala it 
would have been. 

But now, by reason of the absence of Mr. 
Scorrier, the festival was robbed of half its 
festivity, in the eyes of the younger ladies. 
The Misses Pottinger were all past that age 
when prettiness is easily attainable ; that age 
when the hair asserts itself as a silky and 
luxuriant fact, no matter how badly arranged 
it is, and the quick bloom of youth will mount 
to the cheek, however slight the encourage- 
ment it may receive to do so. They were 
compelled to be very painstaking now in the 
matter of their toilet, when they desired to 
create a favourable impression. That they 
had taken such pains to-night was palpable. 
Mrs. Hepburn almost felt pityingly towards 
them as she thought of the circumspection 
with which they must have moved and had 
their being, from the moment they had in- 
ducted themselves into the creaseless, starchy 
muslins in which they now appeared. 

"We were quite alarmed about you," Mrs. 
Pottinger said, as Amelia went forward to meet 
her, and Mrs. Pottinger' s face assumed an ap- 



MES. Hepburn's weakness. 143 

pearance of the deeiDest and most intense 
anxiety. "We saw the groom pass at a full 
gallop, and then pull up at Mr. Scorrier's 
door, and I said to Fanny, ' Depend upon it, 
that's no* invitation, carried at such a pace . 
dear Mrs. Hex)burn is ill ! ' It was quite a 
relief to us all when we saw Mr. Scorrier come 
back, and we asked him how you were, and he 
spoke of it as a slight attack." 

' ' It was nothing at aU . it wasn't worthy 
the name of * an attack,' " Amelia said, decid- 
edly. "I felt faint, or sick, or giddy, or some- 
thing, and Mr. Hepburn made un unnecessary 
fuss about it, very much to my annoyance." 

" Mr. Scorrier tells us he has recommended 
change for 3'ou," Fanny Pottinger said, eagerly ; 
" so unkind of him not to think of something 
else that would strengthen you ! What would 
Glene be like if you left now ? " 

"Does Mr.* Scorrier think me weak?" 
Amelia asked, tartly, disregarding the flattery. 

" Yes ; he said bethought it was weakness." 

*' I shall be stronger by-and-by, under his 
advice," said Mrs. Hepburn; and then she 
moved to the piano and opened it, and sug- 



144 FALSE COLOURS. 

gested that one of the Misses Pottinger should 
play something . " for we must make the best 
of each other to-night ; " she explained. " Mr. 
Scorrier had a business engagement, and could 
not come, and everyone else we know lives a 
hundred miles off." Then, when they heard 
that Mr. Scorrier had a business engagement, 
they felt that their circumspection in the matter 
of the muslins had been vain, and that there 
would be no gala at Glene that evening. 

It was a hard, long evening for Amelia, and 
indeed it is difficult to see in what way one bit 
of the hard length of it could have been ob- 
viated. The sweetest amiability and the most 
intense desire on her part to please, would 
scarcely have wrought a beneficial change in 
the social atmosphere. They had no interests, 
no hopes, no memories in common. Mrs. 
Pottinger' s experience of the world was limited. 
Before her marriage she had been a governess 
in a midland county clergyman's family. From 
thence she had moved to a western county, and 
become the wife of another clergyman. She 
had always been admirable in her family and 
exemplary in the parish. She was good, but 



MRS. Hepburn's weakness. 145 

she was dull, with a deep, satisfied, good- 
tempered dulness that was a dreary thing to 
endure. Her daughters were cut after the 
same pattern as herself, with an even more 
limited experience, for they had never mi- 
grated from Danehury. Amelia felt all her 
usual topics of conversation were cut from 
beneath her feet as she talked with these 
women, and knew that, if she touched on any- 
thing beyond local gossip, it would merely lead 
them into a conversational cul de sac from 
whence there would be no escape. 

She almost envied the facility with which 
her husband talked, and led them to talk in 
return. Not that the words of either led to 
much, but they passed away the time, and that 
was something, since the time had to be passed 
away. She was not a clever woman or a bril- 
liant woman, but she was used to the flash, 
and glitter, and ever-changing aspect of London 
life, and a great greyness clouded her horizon. 
Now that she was brought into the leafy wilder- 
ness, and offered no excitement in the place of 
that flash and glitter, she began to recognize a 
great truth. She had stultified the feelings of 

VOL. I. L 



146 FALSE COLOUKS. 

youth witbin her breast while they were hers to 
indulge freely. They were not hers to indulge 
freely any more, and they now would assert 
themselves, and struggle to have fair play. 
" The worst that will ever happen to me will 
be having to bear a horrible heart-ache," she 
thought, with painful prescience ; *' and I'm 
strong enough to bear that in silence." 

What a long, hard evening, unredeemed by 
any prospect of anything a shade brighter ! 
She looked at the group assembled in that 
drawing-room as it was reflected in the large 
glass at the end of the room . looked at it as 
though it had been a picture, and pondered 
over it. In the foreground she saw herself, a 
girl still . a hard-faced and sad one . but only 
a girl, with long, long years before her to live, 
in the nature of things, and a vow upon her 
always to live to herself, unloved and unloving. 
Then she glanced at " the girls," . as their 
mother called them still . the girls whose girl- 
hood was so venerable in comparison with her 
own, and remembered that they were the 
children of the old lady in the background, 
who looked a fitting mate for the old gentle- 



MES. Hepburn's weakness. 147 

man with whom she (the old lady) was growing 
so garrulous ! She could not help feeling that, 
if Mr. Scorrier had come, she would not have 
had so much time to draw comjDarisons that 
were hateful to her. She could not help re- 
membering that he was chiefly anxious to fulfil 
his business engagement, in order that he 
might be able to get away to Cecile Vargrave's 
presence. 

*' I could bear to have her living there, so 
near to me, if he had been different," she 
thought ; though in what she would have 
wished him to be different it was hard to say. 
But at any rate the thought of him as he was, 
and the thought of Cecile and where she might 
eventually be, irritated Amelia almost beyond 
all power of patiently enduiing the society 
which she had brought upon herself this 
night. 

If she had only been able to go on looking 
down upon this young Danebury sm-geon ; if 
she had only been able to go on distrusting 
her own prudence in holding intimate com- 
munion . the intimate communion which her 
husband seemed to desire . with this mere 



148 FALSE COLOURS. 

parish professional ; if she had only been 
strong enough to hold to her first intention of 
keeping him in the second place always, she 
would not have grudged the position of his 
wife to Cissy Vargrave. But she had not been 
able to do any of these things, and so she did 
grudge that position to Cissy, who had never 
succumbed to her in the old days of girlish 
intercourse and rivalries (all unconnected with 
the heart) at Bayswater. 

It is a difficult thing to decide what made 
Mrs. Hepburn remember this night that she had 
never been in love. But the memory of this 
truth did cross her mind, and she could not 
shake it off. She had always been watchful 
and wary over her affections, not suffering 
them to stray into forbidden or dubious paths. 
She had always conducted herself in a cool 
and exemplary manner at balls and pic-nics, in 
opera boxes, and in running the gauntlet of the 
morning promenade and afternoon drives in 
the Park. No man had ever pressed her hand, 
or looked into her eyes lovingly, or won loving 
looks from her. She had always been cool and 
collected, and her course of conduct had an- 



MRS. Hepburn's weakness. 149 

swered admirably. Had she not married 
young and well ? What other girl of that 
Bayswater coterie to which she belonged had 
married a man whose ancestor had entertained 
Queen Elizabeth, and who had, at the same 
time, been fortunate enough to have in his j^os- 
session the very mansion in which such enter- 
tainment had taken place ? But, on the other 
hand, what good did this glorious fact do her ? 
She never saw any one to whom she could tell 
it, and it was an honour and glory that, gloated 
over in private only, was very apt to pall. 

She was roused from these reflections by the 
fluttering towards her of Mrs. Pottinger, and 
gathering her faculties together, she was en- 
abled to understand that some question had 
been asked her which was of great importance 
to the others, and which had fallen unmean- 
ingly on her ears. 

'' I say that, of course, you'll be too happy," 
Mr. Hepburn was saying ; " but Mrs. Pottinger 
will have the assurance from your own lips." 

" What is it ? " Amelia asked. 

''Why, it's about this ball at Castlenau," 
Mrs. Pottinger began, explainingly. " An invi- 



150 FALSE COLOUES. 

tation has come for us, . for me and two of 
tlie girls, . ^through the interest of my brother- 
in-law, Mr. Pottinger . the lawyer, you know, 
who is Mr. Walter Bracey's solicitor. Oh ! you 
will be delighted with Mr. Pottinger, Mrs. 
Hepburn; such a head he has; it's wonderful, 
as I often say, where he keeps all the subjects 
his brain is busy upon ; such a deep mind, and 
such judgment ; you will appreciate him, but 
the world generally does not know what he 
is/' 

"But about this ball?" Amelia asked, im- 
patiently. 

** That is what I am coming to. Mr. Pot- 
tinger, with his customary kindness, and in the 
midst of his own enormous responsibilities, is 
always thinking if he can do his nieces a kind- 
ness. So now he has procured us this invita- 
tion ; and as, for many reasons, I don't care to 
go, I am anxious to find some one who will be 
kind enough to take them. Mr. Hepburn says 
you will be so kind ; but I cannot think of im- 
posing on you so far; I could not, indeed." 

The vision of splendour and county consi- 
deration which the invitation to Castlenau had 



MRS. Hepburn's weakness. 151 

conjured up, was pretty well broken already. 
But as Mrs. Pottinger spoke it was utterly 
shattered and destroyed . this, that she had 
deemed an honour and a privilege, was shared 
apparently by every obscure person in the 
region round about ! 

" They may just as well go with us," was 
all she could bring herself to say. And then, 
although it was growing late, Mrs. Pottinger 
would grow ecstatic, and stay to consult the 
beneficent lady of Glene as to what dresses 
the girls should wear. 

" As if it mattered how a lot of old maids 
arrayed themselves ! " Amelia thought, angrily, 
when the Pottingers were at last on their way 
home in a Glene carriage. " What a first ap- 
pearance it will be for me to make, to be sure ! " 
This was the sort of thing, then, for which she 
had sacrificed her youth, and the youthful 
power and happiness of loving well . this, that 
she should chaperone about a lot of middle- 
aged women, who would not add to her pleasure, 
or her prestige, in any way. Her heart was 
dull and heavy that night as she put off the 
filmy muslin and the crimson flowers. Better 



152 FALSE COLOURS. 

to have been the mistress of some meaner 
place than Glene, and to have known a little of 
the joy of early mistress-ship, than to be closed 
in as she was on every side from every gratifi- 
cation which she had led herself to believe she 
should have. Even her pleasure in the coming 
ball at Castlenau was tarnished now, and yet 
again, after that ball there would be nothing. 
She felt that if she did go to bed she could not 
sleep. So she sat down and commenced a 
long letter to Cissy Yargrave. It is so natural 
to turn to a friend, or on an enemy, in time of 
inner troubles. Her letter to my heroine shall 
be transcribed, as it will help to a clearer 
understanding of what is to come : . 

"My dear Cissy, . I have been waiting im- 
patiently for another letter from Isabelle, 
giving me some more satisfactory address than 
' Post 0£&ce, Penzance.' I want to hear that 
you are settled at some charming hotel, look- 
ing on to the Esplanade, where we can come 
and join you shortly. Glene is so unhealthy 
now that my medical attendant has ordered 
Change of air for me; therefore, it is out of 



MRS. Hepburn's weakness. 153 

the question that I should try to heguile you 
away from the fresh sea-air, as I had hoped 
and intended to do. If my health obliges me 
to remain away fi'om Glene for any length of 
time, I believe I shall actually fret. Brief as 
my experience of my new home has been, I 
am devoted to it . as, indeed, any one with the 
smallest taste for the beautiful, old, and inter- 
esting, must be. It is something to have 
married into a family that has been powerful 
and considerable for so many generations as 
the Hepburns have been. The only drawbacks 
to the most perfect enjoyment here are the 
great distances between ourselves and the only 
friends we can have in the county, such as the 
.astlenau people, &c. ; for it would be pride 
aping humility, indeed, if we were to pretend 
to be on terms of equality with the village re- 
spectabilities about us. However, I am not 
put to any pain or annoyance by this, as none 
of the excellent doctresses and lawyeresses ex- 
pect to be made uncomfortable by invitations 
to Glene. Do you remember Lady Ellington 
and her daughters. Lady Clara and Lady Au- 
drey, holding a stall at a bazaar for the benefit 



154 FALSE COLOUBS. 

of poor governesses once ? How she will laugh 
when she sees the moveable monkey pen-wiper 
I bought that day ! Write and tell me your 
plans soon, as it may be that I shall have to 
make up my mind quickly as to where I shall 
go for change of air. I should battle on at 
Glene (it is so hard to leave a magnificent place 
that is your own, for more or less uncomfort- 
able lodgings), but I have not the heart to dis- 
regard my husband's anxiety about me. Do 
let me know about your stay at Penzance . not 
that I am likely to be able to join you there ; 
and do believe that at some future time I shall 
be delighted to welcome you at Glene. I sup- 
pose things go on much as usual in the dusty, 
glaring squares, of which you must be even 
more heartily tired than I am, seeing that you 
have lived more grown-up years in them. Do 
you know anything of Mr. Scorrier's mother? . 
she lives at Penzance. 

" Your affectionate friend, 

** Amelia Hepbukn." 

This letter was received by Cecile Vargrave 
one morning, just after she had been bathing, 



MRS. Hepburn's weakness. 155 

and had come in to breakfast in very good 
fresh spirits. With an utter disregard, or for- 
getfulness for once, of the sacredness of corres- 
pondence, she claimed attention from all at 
the table, and almost asked for their comments 
upon it, by saying, when she had brought her 
reading to a close, " Isn't that a delicious 
effusion, and uncommonly like Amelia?" 

*' It's very delightful to hear from her her- 
self that she is so happy," Mrs. Vargrave said, 
warmly. 

" And it's very delightful, as we most likely 
shall stay there some day or other, to hear that 
Glene is such a charming place," Isabelle added. 

" And it's most touching to hear her tribute 
to her husband's anxiety about her health,'* 
Mr. Vargrave put in, laughing. 

*' But the most delightful and touching sen- 
tence in the letter is the gratifying acknow- 
ledgment she makes of my well-established 
seniority," Cissy said, with a smile that would 
have been brighter had she not been a woman 
wincing under the vengeful mention of some- 
thing that another woman deemed less than 
pleasant. 



156 FALSE COLOURS. 

*' I am sure Amelia could never have thought 
you would care for that, my dear," Mrs. Var- 
grave said, with a large air of explanation. 
"It is only weak-minded women, who wish to 
seem younger than they are, who are sensitive 
ahout their age. Amelia knows you too well, 
and thinks too highly of your good sense, to 
speak of you being a little older than herself 
in a slighting way; and it's very pretty of her 
to speak in that way about being willing to go 
away to please her husband, though she is so 
fond of her own home . very pretty indeed." 

''Very," Cissy answered; *' I'm going to 
write and tell her so." 

" If you do write to-day, give her my love, 
and tell her that I hope we shall see her here, 
if only that I may carry back a favourable 
report to her mother about her," Mrs. Vargrave 
said, heartily. Then Cecile got herself away, 
and wrote as follows : . 

** My dear Mrs. Hepburn, . Our stay at 
Penzance depends on that most variable of 
all things . a woman's will. Aunt may issue 
marching orders to-morrow. I am very sorry 



MRS. Hepburn's weakness. 157 

to hear of your health and Glene not agreeing, 

and of your being such a distance from Castle- 

nau, &c. I do not know anything of Mr. 

Scorrier's mother. Have you any well-founded 

suspicion as to her selling mackerel here, which 

I can endeavour to verify for you ? Perhaps 

you may be intending to have that frail fish 

direct from a Penzance purveyor ! " 

Then she wound up by asking Mrs. Hepburn 

to believe her to be "Mrs. Hepburn's very 

faithful 

** Cecile Vargrave." 

About the same hour that Amelia was em- 
ployed in writing to Miss Vargrave, Mr. Scor- 
rier was busy with a letter to his mother. The 
last sentence in his long weekly letter to her is 
the only one which need be copied here : . 

**I have been working harder at business 

during the last few days than I ever worked 

before even at pleasure, in order that I may 

the sooner feel free to run down and see you. 

Don't be astonished if I drop in upon you in 

a day or two. 

" Your affectionate son, 

" Arthur." 



158 FALSE COLOUES. 

He must have made up his mind when to go, 
even while thus writing with apparent uncer- 
tainty ; for the next morning, when Amelia met 
her husband at breakfast, after his usual sum- 
mer morning stroll about the grounds of Glene 
and the village of Danebury, almost the first 
words he said to her were . 

*' Where do you think Arthur Scorrier is off 
to this evening?" 

" I don't know ; but I do know where I wish 
to be off to," she said, quickly. ^'1 am sighing 
for the sea. I do wish you would take me to 
Penzance." 

Mr. Hepburn's face fell. 

*'Any other part of the coast . I dislike 
Penzance. That's where Scorrier is going, and 
I thought him foolish, for really it is a singu- 
larly unattractive place." 

*'0h! Mr. Scorrier is going there, is he?" 
Amelia said, carelessly. " How sudden he is 
in resolution, and movement too ! Hasn't he a 
mother, or an aunt, or something living there?" 
and then she opened " The Times," and feigned 
to dismiss the subject from her mind. Still, 
as she had made up her mind to over-rule her 



MRS. Hepburn's weakness. 159 

husband's *' senseless antipathy " to the only 
place on the coast to which she had the most 
remote intention of suffering herself to be 
taken, she read the dead-season articles with 
but a wavering eye and a wandering mind. 
*' It shall not all go smoothly as a marriage- 
bell just yet," she thought, bitterly ; " and they 
shall not be h'ee to laugh together over my 
weabaess and want of change of air." Then 
she finished her breakfast very quietly, feeling 
very well satisfied with herself for having writ- 
ten that letter to Cissy over -night, . she had 
placed it in the letter-bag on her way in to 
breakfast, and being an accomplished fact it 
was a powerful weapon. 

*^ I have already written to Cissy Vargrave, 
telling her I shall be happy to join them there 
. as was agreed before I knew you had some 
aversion to Penzance," she said. "The climate 
wooild do me good ; but never mind ; I shall 
get strong at Glene, without doubt, in time." 

" The cKmate at Torquay would suit you 
better," he said, anxiously, " or the south of 
France. Amelia, I will have no trifling with 
your health : it is much to me that you should 



160 FALSE COLOURS. 

be well and look well ; your friends will think 
you are unhappy.'* 

" Oh ! my friends," she said, impatiently ; 
" if I don't feel well and look well, I really 
shall not make what my friends may think 
about it my greatest trouble." Then she went 
away abruptly, leaving him to ruminate on 
what would probably be her greatest trouble 
did she neither feel nor look well. 

Later in the day, while she was loitering 
about after luncheon, wondering wearily what 
she could do with herself to pass away the 
long hours until dinner . not only what she 
could do with herself this day, but the next, 
and the next, and so on through an appar- 
ently interminable vista of time . Mr. Scorrier 
came up to see her before he left the 
place. She could not help infusing more 
than the former hauteur and stiffness into 
her manner when she saw him approaching 
her. For she had not expected to see him 
this day . she had not expected to see any one 
in fact ; and being deficient in that genuine 
love of the beautiful which induces a woman 
to dress herself to the best of her power on 



MRS. Hepburn's weakness. 161 

all occasions, she was conscious now of looking 
dowdy, almost slovenly. Moreover, she was 
puzzled at the inconsistency on his part which 
had made him pronounce her to be in good 
health the night before, and brought him to 
see her in his medical capacity the morning 
after. Consequently she met him stiffly and 
haughtily, bowing to him politely, but not offer- 
ing him her hand. 

** I have come, at Mr. Hepburn's request, to 
see you before I leave Danebury for a week or 
two," he explained. 

*' I am quite as well as I can ever hope to 
be while I am dull and bored," she said, 
gloomily. " I understand now the bitterness 
of the complaints you made against the stag- 
nation of your village life the first time I saw 
you." 

He laughed : "I was a discontented dog 
then ; now I fancy that, under some conditions, 
I should find my village life pleasant enough, 
if I had a settled interest there." 

*' You mean, if you had a wife," she said, 
quickly. 

*' Well, I think I rather meant if I had 

VOL. I. M 



162 FALSE COLOUKS. 

landed property in the place ; but I dare say a 
wife, as you say, would do much towards recon- 
ciling me to being only a tenant-at-will, and 
that will another's." 

" Take my advice and my experience,'* she 
said, gravely ; " don't follow the example of 
your friend Mr. Hepburn, and take a London 
girl for your wife. There are times when, in 
spite of my having everything to make me 
happy, I find the difference striking indeed . it 
strikes me down, and I never had the craving 
for excitement that was raging in all my young- 
lady friends and acquaintances." 

*' Perhaps it is because you lead such an 
utterly unemployed life," he suggested ; and 
Amelia did not thank him for the prosaic sug- 
gestion. 



UNSETTLED. 163 



CHAPTEE VIII. 

UNSETTLED. 

To very few people is given the great grace of 
being able to stay where they are on a fine day 
and do nothing. If they stay where they are, 
they do something active or tiresome in cele- 
bration of the weather. Or if they do nothing, 
they go to some distance to do it. I have only 
known one Englishman who thoroughly appre- 
ciated sun-heat and repose, and he always 
found life a lovely thing when he could lie for 
hours on his own grass-plot and watch green 
lizards. 

One morning the day broke in Penzance with 
almost exceptional splendour. The waters of 
Mount's Bay at once went into that brilliant 
royal livery of theirs which they invariably wear 
in the presence of the sun, . ^that livery of 



164 FALSE COLOURS. 

opal, and turquoise blue, and deep, deep green, 
which no British waters save those that beat 
the Cornish coasts know. 

It was very hot . hot with a lazy intensity of 
heat that made some people long to lie down 
and let the day go on without thinking, and 
others long to be off on exploring expeditions. 
The Queen's Hotel was very full, consequently 
great excitement reigned as to whose claims 
would be recognized as just by the letters-out 
of vehicles of all descriptions. The Land's End, 
the Logan Bock, the natural granite faces, these 
were the chief bournes to which the hearts of 
weary tourists turned. The tesselated pavement 
of the big hall of the hotel was covered with 
hampers of all sizes, packed by experienced 
natives who know how very hungry and thirsty 
admiration of the beauties of nature is apt to 
make the wandering stranger. Every minute 
two-wheeled dog-carts, or wagonettes, drawn by 
one or two of the famous Cornish greys, pulled 
up at the door, and divers sorts of bipeds, in 
search of the picturesque, stepped into them and 
were lost to view. 

None of the usual types were wanting. There 



UNSETTLED. 165 

were the inevitable bride and bridegroom ; he, on 
the strength of the novelty of their relationship, 
hiring a much more expensive carriage than his 
reason told him he could afford ; she, on the 
same grounds, refraining from protesting, in the 
mildest degree, against what she felt would be 
the cause of sore pinching in the housekeeping 
when they got home and were not ashamed to 
pull each other up for extravagance. There was 
the old parson in silk gaiters and broad-brimmed 
hat, who was probably a don in his own land, 
an archdeacon or a rural dean at least, but 
who here, in the rush and hurry of tourist-life, 
was simply regarded as a much be-daughtered 
old gentleman, who might be deprived of his 
locomotive powers without compunction, if only 
the drivers proved venial. There were the un- 
mistakeably hard-run London peo^^le, too tii'ed 
and pulled by the race of the last few months, 
to show in their face or manners how genuine 
their enjoyment of this comparative rest and 
tranquillity was. There were the brace of Oxford 
men spending their "long" together on a 
walking-tour. There was the consumptive hope 
of the family down here, in the Italy of England, 



166 FALSE COLOUKS. 

on a forlorn hope. There was the still young, 
jolly couple who, having married in their boy 
and girlhood, are now surrounded by a troop of 
big boys and girls, who call their parents by 
their Christian names, and are all clamorous to 
go in different directions. There was the single 
lady, the unprotected female, in dust-coloured 
barege and a Leghorn hat, who may be the 
English Kosa Bonheur, or one of our most 
popular authoresses, judging from the sketch- 
ing apparatus and note-book she carries about 
her, to say nothing of the further evidence of 
the eternal absorption in the beauties of nature 
in which she indulges before people, and her 
unvarying austerity to all those whom the 
vicissitudes of hotel-life put in her path on the 
stairs. Lastly, there were the Vargraves, in the 
various stages of exhaustion and prostration 
from the heat, early morning as it was, still, 
after the manner of people out for rest and a 
holiday, battling fiercely and fatiguingly with 
each other as to how rest might best be ob- 
tained, and the holiday enjoyed. 

" It does seem a shame not to go on the 
water on such a day," Isabelle said; *^do 



UNSETTLED. 167 

get a boat with an awning, papa, and let us 

go." 

" It seems a great mistake to be down here 
and not to see any of the mines," Mr. Vargrave 
said. 

" Now I should propose our not tiring our- 
selves," Mrs. Vargrave put in, freshly; '^if we 
could get a nice open carriage, and just drive to 
all the principal points along the coast, getting 
out and walking whenever we feel inclined, we 
should be turning this fine day to good account, 
I think; what do you say. Cissy?" 

*' I say . nothing," Cissy replied ; " and 
that is just what I should like to do." 

" Only we ought to make up our minds 
before every carriage in the place is secured by 
somebody else, if we don't follow your plan," 
Isabelle said, and then she went and leant her 
arms on the window, and watched some more 
departures. 

Presently a well-appointed wagonette and 
pair of horses pulled up at the door. " An 
arrival," Isabelle said, as a gentleman sprang 
to the ground, and she caught sight of an 
elderly lady still sitting in the body of the 



168 FALSE COLOURS. 

carriage ; *' it's your dove-coloured old lady of 
The Crescent, Cissy," she was saying, when 
she was interrupted by the waiter oj^ening the 
door, and announcing Mr. Scorrier. 

He was a stranger to the old people, and 
perhaps, had he called on them in this way in 
London, they would have remembered that he 
was a stranger, and caused him to remember it 
also. But as it was, Mr. Yargrave (on whom 
the responsibility of regulating all these 
women's whims fell heavily) received him 
pleasantly, as a man can receive a stranger 
in a strange place, when he feels that he can 
be quit of both as soon as he pleases. 

*' I scarcely expected to have the good fortune 
to find you at home on such a day as this. I 
came last night from Danebury ; and having 
heard that you were here, I thought perhaps 
you would (if you had nothing better to do) go 
and spend a short time at St. Michael's Mount 
. . it's well worth seeing." 

" I have been seeing nothing else since I 
have been here," Cecile said. But she did not 
say it as if to see it closer, in his company, 
would be wearisome to her. 



UNSETTLED. 169 

" It would really be delightful to make a 
pic-nic there to-day," Mrs. Vargrave said, 
getting up and looking out at the grand Mount, 
as if it had never struck her before. And then 
it was proposed, and carried without a dissent- 
ing voice, that they should accept the uncere- 
monious invitation and the im^oromptu plea- 
sure, and that Mrs. Scorrier should be induced 
to come in and wait until such time as they 
could be ready. 

She came in beaming, ready to like them 
all, and to strive to make them like her. With 
the clear-sightedness of a great affection she 
had seen, from the manner of her son, during 
the very little conversation she had held with 
him on this subject, that if his heart was not 
already given to, it was more than well-inclined 
towards this girl, whose graceful stateliness, 
and lovely face, had so favom*ably impressed 
her the other evening. The mother was more 
than ever anxious that her son should succeed 
in his suit, when the young lady came forward 
to meet her this morning ; came forward with a 
flushing brow, for the thought that his mother 
might be hers some day would obtrude itself. 



170 FALSE COLOUBS. 

It would obtrude itself, though Cissy was not 
at all given to over-estimating the value or the 
meaning of masculine attentions. She was 
not one of those misguided ones who imagine 
that every man who suffers himself to be kind 
is striving to be tender; or that if a man 
sought her society, and took delight therein for 
four or five hours, he must be contemplating 
the best way of securing the same to himself 
through life. Still, though she was not one of 
this numerous and unfortunate class, she was 
a very woman in her power of penetrating into 
motives so transparent as Mr. Arthur Scorrier's. 
And she had thought of him a great deal since 
that day of Amelia's wedding, when he had 
scarcely stirred from her side all day. This . 
the having thought so much about him . and 
the feeling that now, on the first opportunity, 
he had brought his mother to see her, 
caused the flush to rise on her face. And the 
flush rising on her face caused the hope that 
he might win her, to rise more highly in his 
heart. Altogether they were both in an auspi- 
cious mood, and were not likely to disregard 
their privileges and opportunities during the 



UNSETTLED. 171 

long sunny hours they -^ere going to spend to- 
gether at St. Michael's Mount. 

She was prettier than ever. Prettier, far 
prettier now, with the glow that was the off- 
spring of the sea-air and the sun, and the 
inner excitement upon her face, and in the ex- 
quisite simplicity of her morning dress, than 
she had been as he had seen her last . in the 
elaborate bridesmaid's toilette, which had been 
designed by Amelia. But if she contrasted 
favourably with herself as he had seen her last, 
how far more favourably did she contrast with 
Mrs. Hepburn, as she had appeared before him 
the day before, slovenly and out of spii'its ! 
The brilliant, blue Swiss cambric, the daintily 
delicate collar and cuffs, the carelessly ar- 
ranged, but fastidiously kept, silky dark hair, and 
last, but very far from least, the winning face 
that would kindle at his approach, completed 
his subjugation. He determined to win her 
for his wife, not only if he could, but as soon 
as he could. His heart swelled warmly as he 
thought of the beauty and the grace of the 
home he had made for himself in Danebury, 
and of how she would add to and deepen every 



172 FALSE COLOURS. 

charm it now possessed, when she became its 
queen. 

The drive to Marazion, the village just oppo- 
site to that "Castle in the Sea," St. Michael's 
Mount, was a very pleasant one to them all, 
although the springs of the carriage were not 
too good, and they were strangers yet. But 
they started with the praiseworthy intention 
with which everyone should start for an outing 
on a summer day . they were determined to 
make the best of things, in order that they 
might give the lie to the old prejudice which 
deems it lack of wisdom to engage in any 
exploit which compulsorily binds strangers 
together, without full occupation for any length 
of time. " Cissy, his mother is evidently full 
of beneficent intentions towards you," Isabella 
said, as soon as they were out of ear-shot of 
the room in which they had left Mrs. Scorrier, 
on their way to put on their hats. 

" Perhaps she thinks my uncle's will be a 

nice, safe house for her son to spend his idle 

time in, when he is up in town," Cissy said, 

struggling hard to speak as she did not feel. 

*' You'd murder any one at this moment who 



UNSETTLED. 173 

seriously accused a Scorrier of mercenaiy mo- 
tives," Isabelle said, quietly ; "you know you 
would, and I know it too. Well, dear, your 
fate has come, . that is, if you can make up 
your mind to bear Amelia's foot on your 
neck." 

*' She will never have an opportunity of put- 
ting it there," Cissy said, " even if I, or he, or 
his mother, or fate . for you're mixing us up all 
together . do the best or the worst jou imagine." 

*' Never have on opportunity ! If you go 
and put yourself near the park-walls of Glene 
in an inferior position, my dear Cissy, you 
know her too well not to feel she will make the 
opportunity . and so do I." 

" I don't want to discuss improbabilities ; 
and I don't want to keep any one waiting, so 
I'll go on," Cissy said, in answer to this. 
Then she went down, and in a few minutes 
more the Vargrave contribution to this pic-nic, 
in the shape of a couple of hampers . one of 
wine and one of provisions . and the Var- 
graves and Scorriers themselves, were packed 
away securely, if not comfortably, in the 
wagonette, and on their way to Marazion. 



174 FALSE COLOURS. 

*' And now we must hear all about the Hep- 
burns," Mrs. Vargrave said, genially, when 
they were clear of the town. ^' Cissy had a 
most delightful letter from Amelia . that's Mrs. 
Hepburn . yesterday." 

*'Mr. Hepburn is Arthur's greatest friend," 
Mrs. Scorrier said, confidingly ; " but do you 
know, singular as it may seem, we have never 
met!" 

" Never met ! dear me ! " Mrs. Vargrave, 
who was not at all staggered by the fact, said, 
in a tone that implied the deepest interest. 
''Well, I have never seen him myself, but I 
have heard that, though he is much Amelia's 
senior (she was a girl with our girls, you know), 
though he is much her senior, he is a man 
whom any girl may esteem, even love." 

" Whom have you heard that from. Aunt ? " 
Cissy said, saucily; and then Mrs. Vargrave 
remembered that she had not heard it at all, 
that she had no stronger grounds for her asser- 
tion indeed, than the fact that she had once or 
twice expressed a hope that such might be the 
case. But she did not word this remembrance ; 
she only shook her head with that air of playful 



UNSETTLED. 175 

deprecation which old ladies are apt to assume 
when they have nothing to say in answer to a 
direct question. Then she was saved further 
embarrassment by Arthur Scorrier saying, 

" Whoever Mrs. Vargrave has heard it 
from, she has only heard the truth ; he is a 
man whom any woman^any good, sensible 
woman . might find it easy to esteem and 
love." 

" I do believe, if Arthur were his son, he 
could not care more for Mr. Hepburn than he 
does," Mrs. Scorrier said, looking round on 
them all with her eyes swimming in tears. 
** I always feel that there must be something 
quite superior about him, and it makes me 
regret so much that we hp^ve never chanced to 
meet." 

" There is a prospect of your doing so now, 
Mrs. Scorrier," Cecile said. '^You will be 
sure to see them if your son stays here any 
time, for Mrs. Hepburn tells me they are coming 
to Penzance . for her health, she says," Cissy 
added, tm*ning quickly towards Mr. Scorrier, 
who sat at her right hand. 

He grew scarlet as he answered : "I believe 



176 FALSE COLOUES. 

they have given up the idea of coming to Pen- 
zance though ; he does not Hke the place . at 
least, he does not like to come to it." 

And then poor old Mrs. Scorrier gave the 
reins to confidence and a desire for sympathy, 
and would tell them that Mr. Hepburn's dislike 
or disinclination to come to Penzance arose 
from a reason that did honour to his heart. 
" He was my husband's dearest friend and 
companion, and he saw my husband drowned 
in those very waters," she said, tearfully, point- 
ing towards the bay. " It told on us so 
differently : I came to the spot that had seen 
the last of him, and have lived here ever since, 
and Mr. Hepburn got away, and can never 
bear to look upon it. Men and women are 
so different, are they not?" Then there was 
a pause for a few moments; for when a tragical 
story has been told, no matter in what words, 
it is hard to go back to the commonplace at 
once. Mrs. Scorrier herself was the one to 
relieve them from this difficulty into which she 
had plunged them. She led the way back to a 
brighter path easily enough, by saying: 

" So you see, though we have never been 



UNSETTLED. 177 

personal friends, Mr. Hepburn and I, it is only 
natural that I should wish to see both him and 
his young wife. Such a trying difference in 
their ages," Mrs. Scorrier said, shaking her 
head in doleful sympathy with the tryingness 
of it. *' Such a test, you know, for them both, 
as I say." Then the old ladies went on to 
call Mrs. Hepburn "a poor young thing," 
though in their hearts they did not pity her in 
the least ; while the young ladies questioned 
Arthur Scorrier about the Glene menage, 

" Glene is a glorious place, isn't it?" Isa- 
belle asked. *' Amelia has managed to give us 
a vague idea of its grandeur . being about 
second only to Windsor Castle . in her letter of 
yesterday to my cousin." 

*' It is a glorious place ; but I don't believe 
she cares about it," he said. 

" There you are very much mistaken . she 
does care about it very much," Cissy said. 

'' When other people are by to be impressed 
by a show of such caring ; but she told me the 
day before I came here that I was to be parti- 
cularly careful, and avoid taking a London- 
bred wife to live in my country home." As 

VOL. I. N 



178 FALSE COLOURS. 

Arthur Scorrier said this, his eyes and Cissy's 
met, and each understood that the other dis- 
trusted Amelia Hepburn as far as they were 
concerned. 

*'. There was a plan about our going to stay 
at Glene," Isabelle said, a little discontentedly; 
" but Amelia has taken it into her head that 
Glene is unhealthy because her * medical ad- 
viser ' says she needs change of air. I suppose 
her * medical adviser ' recommends what he 
thinks she would like." 

"I am that distrusted individual," he said, 
laughing. " Glene is one of the healthiest 
places in the world ; still, for all that, I don't 
think its air suits Mrs. Hepburn.'' 

*' Glene is a very ancient family possession, 
is it not ? " Mrs. Vargrave asked. 

"Yes, very," Mrs. Scorrier answered, 
promptly. "I used to hear Mr. Scorrier 
speaking about it ; he was as fond of Glene as 
if it had been his own, instead of his friend's ; 
it has been in the family ever since the Con- 
queror, I believe, though it's not entailed, which 
makes the fact a prouder thing, I always think ; 
it has gone on from father to son, from father 



UNSETTLED, 179 

to son, as regularly as if it had been bound to 
go so." 

As Mrs. Scorrier brought her commendatory 
mention of Glene, and the way it had been 
handed down from generation to generation, to 
a close, the carriage pulled up at the door of 
the inn in Marazion, where they learnt that 
fate favoured them in the matter of the tide 
being out sufficiently to admit of their walking 
over to St. Michael's Mount. 

It is not all easy pleasure getting to St. 
Michael's Mount. If you watch the hour of 
the tide being out, you can walk to it over a 
rocky road, and shatter your unaccustomed 
feet to pieces against boulders. There are a 
few retainers' and fishermen's houses at the- 
foot of the Mount, and a few boats lying about,, 
to take the unwary who suffer themselves to ba 
caught by the tide back to Marazion. When 
these dwellings are passed, the tough ascent 
commences, and it is sufficiently of the nature 
of a precipice to make one wish that the lord 
of the castle, who is doubtless a model of 
courtesy, would have a lift, such as is used in 
lofty hotels, for the benefit of invaders upon 



180 FALSE COLOURS. 

the grand seclusion of this castle by the 
sea. 

Native helps, born to the fatiguing manner 
of this place, brought the hampers over, and 
led the way up the slippery path among 
rocks which lead to the first platform, from 
which twenty cannon bristled at them. Then 
a long uneven line of roughly-hewn steps 
showed them the way to a little iron-girded 
black oak door, which is the chief entrance. 
Much of the romance of the place is brushed 
off when that narrow entrance-door is passed; 
for though there is a good deal that is 
antique and interesting about both the archi- 
tecture and furniture inside, there is nothing 
that corresponds to the rough, grand majesty 
of the exterior of it. 

They followed the ordinary routine, went 
into the guard-room and gazed at the helmets, 
and old stirrups, and bridles and cuirasses, and 
tried to feel interest, not to say pleasure, in 
the result of such gazing. And then they 
went on to the Chevy Chase room, and uttered 
ejaculations over the three-hundred-year-old 
arm-chair, and the five-hundred-year-old bed- 



UNSETTLED. 181 

stead, and looked at the niche in the wall 
where the skeleton was found some years since 
. . another illustration of the kissing crust and 
warden pie and naughty nun story. When 
they had done all this . "wasting precious time 
in the doing it," Arthur Scorrier thought ; for 
while the tour of inspection lasted he could 
get no private word with Cecile Vargrave . 
when they had done all this, they went out on 
to the grassy slopes, where broad patches of 
borage in full bloom gave pleasant promise of 
claret-cup to come. 

Presently the pair on whom the chief interest 
of this story is designed to centre found them- 
selves apart from the others, down low among 
the rocks, where the waves were beating. How 
they got themselves apart it is not easy to say ; 
though, judging from the celerity with which 
they did it, they found it an easy thing to do. 
As they neared the margin of the water, he 
pointed out a hollowed space in a rock that 
"might almost serve for an arm-chair," he said, 
and there she placed herself, whilst he stood 
over her, watching her graceful good looks with 
appreciative eyes, until he longed to claim them 



182^ FALSE COLOURS. 

for his own. There was no use in dallying 
with opportunity. From a thousand signs, - 
brief as had been his acquaintance with her, he, 
had taught himself to believe that he was a 
little more than another to this girl. They 
were together now ; but how, unless something 
could be assured, some ground made securely 
his own at once, how might it be after this day 
was past? She would go back to her kaleide- 
scope life in London, and in the enforced 
contemplation of its ever-changing pattern and 
hues, would naturally soon cease to think of 
the country surgeon who had stood by her side, 
and watched the waves beating on St. Michael's 
Mount. ** She shall not forget me . whatever 
comes, I will put it out of her power to forget 
me," he thought, stung by the fear of such a 
possibility. And all the while he was thinking 
these things, Cecile was talking to him about 
the view, and the heat, and the coming 
luncheon. 

** Won't you be glad when we are called up 
to have something to eat, Mr. Scorrier ? I shall; 
because I have said all my sayings about the 
freshness of the air, and the beauty of the 



. \ 



UNSETTLED. 183 

scene ; and it has been hard work, because 
you have not given me a helloing responsive 
word.'* 

*'No, I shall not be glad when we are called 
up to have something to eat," he said, sitting 
down by her side, looking at her so intently 
that she fell to jolaying with the brim of her 
hat to cover her embarrassment. He was re- 
membering Mrs. Hepburn's caution to him 
against seeking to win a London girl for his 
wife, and wondering if he could win her, how 
this brilliant creature would live a prosy village 
life. Suddenly, he had no doubt or fear about 
what might follow, if only he could win her. 
Suddenly, he resolved to try at once. 

*'Were you disi)leased with me for coming 
to-day, and for bringing my mother ?" he asked. 

*' How should I have been displeased, or 
anything but well pleased?" she answered. 
" In the barren wilderness, would not one wel- 
come a foe, much more a friend? Mrs. Scorrier 
saved us from a family dissension this day by 
bringing us here ; they all wanted to go dif- 
ferent ways, in order to properly enjoy this mar- 
vellous imitation of a southern summer day." 



184 FALSE COLOUES. 

** And what did you want to do ? " he said. 

** To stay where I was . until you came." 

The words were very few and simple, but 
they contained a world of meaning to the man 
who heard them. 

" And when I came, you were content to quit 
those plans . ^to break up and alter them for 
me?" 

*' Yes, for you and your mother." 

He did not quite relish the conjunction, still 
he could not complain of it. But it threw him 
back a few minutes, and every minute was pre- 
cious, since, if once interrupted, this tete-a-tete 
might not be secured again. 

*' Could you have done what your friend 
Mrs. Hepburn has done?" he commenced, 
abruptly . "have given up the town-life of change 
and variety and excitement, for the almost un- 
varying solitude of the country ? " 

"No, I couldn't." 

" You could not ? it would be too great a 
sacrifice." 

"Far too great a sacrifice," the girl said, 
shaking her head solemnly. 

" Then I will try to get something in Lon- 



UNSETTLED. 185 

don," he exclaimed; but she only glanced at 
him quickly, and went on : 

** I could not have done what she has done 
for several reasons : in the first place, love and 
sympathy are more essential to me than they 
are to her, and I could never expect either from 
a man who might be my father ; or if I got 
them from him, I couldn't give them in return, 
and that would be unpleasant." 

" But could you do it for the sake of one who 
could give you love and sympathy in return . 
could you do as she has done in that case ? " 

" In that case I should not be called upon to 
make any sacrifice." 

" You would not feel it to be a sacrifice . a 
sacrifice beyond the power of making ; you could 
do it . you will do it ? " 

''I could do it," she said; and then he 
possessed himself of her hand, and she would 
not return his pressure while she was saying, 
** but I would not do it if it involved an equal 
sacrifice from the one for whom I make mine." 

" Make it for me," he said. 

She was ready, ay ready to make it for him. 
He felt that by the way in which her pliant 



186 FALSE COLOUKS. 

form swayed towards him; he read it in the 
glorious, softened glow that spread over her face. 
She could make a sacrifice gloriously, for it was 
in her to make the one for whom she made it 
feel that he was the one who obliged by ac- 
cepting it. 

" It would be none if made for you," she said, 
in a low tone. 

*' Then you will make it . you will be my 
wife?" and now he grew into an agony of 
anxiety for her answer to be given him before 
that summons came to luncheon, which might 
cut into the midst and upset the nearly made 
arrangement. 

*' I can't say yes, dearly as I would like to 
say it ; there is so much to be said to you before 
I ought to bind you by assenting myself. You 
have your way to make in the world . you must 
not be clogged." 

He began to pray and protest, to claim and 
use his right to caress which her acknowledged 
love had given him. But she kept him off. 

*' No, no ! . not till you have heard what I 
have to tell you, and convinced me that it need 
be no obstacle to our marriage ; " her brow 



UNSETTLED. 187 

blazed as she said this, and she looked so 
strong in her beautiful pride for him, that his 
love rose higher than ever. 

"When may I be told . when may I con- 
vince " 

'' They are calling us . come ! " she said. 
" We will come here again by-and-bye." Then 
they went up to the platform to dinner. 



i88 FALSE COLOURS. 



CHAPTEK IX. 

SETTLED. 

It had been very tedious to these two young 
people to walk through the castle in the wake 
and under the observation of others, therefore 
it may be supposed by some people that it was 
to the full as tedious to sit down in a space 
between some overhanging rocks and have 
luncheon in the society of others. There would 
be great reason in such a supposition ; for has 
it not been told that they had just been saying 
and thinking many things that were emotion- 
engendering? However, appetite is a great 
king, to whom nice emotions give place very 
often, and in spite of what had just gone 
before, they did not find the luncheon-time 
tedious by any means. 

Indeed, on the whole, Cecile regarded it 



SETTLED. 189 

as rather a relieving interruption to a most 
thrilling occasion. For all her light nature 
and light training, and still lighter habit of 
life, the girl had a quick, keen sense of honour, 
and it did not seem to her that she would be 
obeying its dictates in receiving and recii^ro- 
eating the vows of a man who was not perfect- 
ly cognizant of who she was, and how she 
was situated. That he should know these 
things in time, before she finally accepted 
or rejected him, she was quite determined. But 
it was a hard matter to tell off glibly, without 
more prelude than had yet been played, the 
dubious story which was to be told about her- 
self. "If he can take me with the shade over 
me that is over me, and will never reflect on 
my mother, I will go to him," she thought; 
'' but not else, and not while he is ignorant or 
merely tolerant." And then she remembered 
that there was yet another impediment to this 
marriage scheme which he had laid before her 
this day . remembered more than this, that she 
had no money, and no hopes of ever having 
any money, and that he was a " poor struggling 
man" (ricZe Amelia Hepburn's letters concern- 



190 FALSE COLOURS. 

ing him and other things at Glene) who could 
not afford such an encumbering hixury as a 
penniless wife. 

*' He shall not be mortified ; I will tell him 
all this by-and-by, and then in reason he will 
be obliged to confess that I am wise in saying 
it can never be." So she thought, eating her 
chicken and lobster salad, and sipping her 
claret, enjoying these delicacies with the keen 
appetite that was born of the sea-breeze, and 
that refused to be impaired by all these sor- 
rowful doubts concerning her future. 

For she was very sorrowful in the thought 
of having to give him up. That which he had 
thought, or affected to think, a sacrifice on her 
part, did she agree to his proposition, would 
have been no sacrifice to her. She could take 
up her abode " anywhere, anywhere, out of the 
world " or in it, under certain conditions, with 
the most perfect and complete reliance on her 
own power of making herself happy and com- 
fortable. A life in a country village, or in a 
London centre or suburb, or in Ireland, or in 
Egypt, would be all one to her, provided those 
conditions were fulfilled. Love, peace, and 



SETTLED. 191 

rest would bring happiness and contentment 
even to her restless heart and soul. " If I 
were only everything to a man, he should find 
that he was everything to me," she thought. 
Yet she was not ready to say he should be 
everything to her, until he had shown himself 
to be indeed regardless of some things which 
she felt bound to tell him. 

Luncheon was over at last, and then Mr. 
Scorrier began to look impatient, and as if he 
thought it was quite time for them (for her and 
himself) to get back to their old station under 
the cliffs by the sea. But the opportunity 
which she had so confidently declared she 
would make, delayed itself. In the first place, 
the helps who had brought their hampers over 
were not conversant with the heady nature of 
sparkling wines when taken under a burning 
sun; consequently, the effects of the large 
ends of bottles which they had with some fore- 
thought reserved for themselves, became ap- 
parent in sundry inefficient and futile efforts to 
pack up the debris. "If we don't clear this 
up for ourselves, it will never be done for us," 
Cecile said. " Come, Isabelle, let us make a 



192 FALSE COLOURS. 

beginning." Then Isabelle, who was tired 
with the delights of the day, and who had no 
pleasant love-making to look forward to after 
she had cleared up, consented slowly, and pro- 
ceeded to help her cousin and Mr. Scorrier, 
whose annoyance at the delay caused him to be 
very much of an obstacle and stumbling-block 
in Cissy's path. 

At length the last fork was found, the last 
hamper was secured, and then Cissy stood up, 
pushing her hat back off her temples, and de- 
clared herself to be very warm and exhausted. 
*' I shall just go down and dip my hands in the 
sea and cool my forehead," she said. 

*' Sea-water put on under a broiling sun like 
this will tan you terribly," Mrs. Vargrave re- 
monstrated. But Cissy was bent upon cooling 
her brow in the way she had mentioned, and 
when she went away in the direction of the 
rocks, Arthur Scorrier followed her. Mr. Var- 
grave and Isabelle were contented with cooling 
their brows from the summit of the battlement 
platform, and old Mrs. Scorrier and Mrs. Var- 
grave remained alone. 

It would show great ignorance of human 



SETTLED. 193 

nature generally, and old-lady nature particu- 
larly, if it was asserted and believed that these 
two elderly gentlewomen did not immediately 
proceed to confidences. Every circumstance 
attending them, every condition of horn-, time, 
and place, were in favour of their doing so. 
And they did it. 

** It always makes me sad to watch the 
.waves for long," Mrs. Vargrave commenced. 
Now it never had made the excellent lady sad 
for one moment before in her life, but just now 
she felt languid and sleepy, and so she believed 
herself to be speaking the truth, and nothing 
but the truth, when she declared herself to be 
feeling sad. 

"So it does me," Mrs. Scorrier responded, 
quickly ; " but then my great sorrow comes 
from the sea . from this very sea that is rolling 
before us, in Mount's Bay too." 

"I had not heard of it before to-day," Mrs. 
Vargrave said, gravely. 

'' No, I dare say not, though it seems to me 
strange that any one should be at Penzance for 
an hour, without hearing the story that is told 
to me at the corner of every street where I can 

VOL. I. 



194 FALSE COLOURS. 

catch a glimpse of the water." Then Mrs. 
Scorrier told the story over again of her early 
desolation through her husband's drowning . 
told it with quiet pathos and very few tears, 
'* and I knew nothing of his family, and have 
never heard of them since ; I have been cut off 
from the poor comfort even of their sympathy,'* 
she wound up with. 

''But what comfort you must have in your 
son," Mrs. Vargrave said, saying it rather be- 
cause she could not think of anything else to 
say, than from any strong conviction on the 
point of Arthur being a comfort to his mother. 

"I have, indeed," old Mrs. Scorrier said, 
Akindling to the theme ; " my only comfort, and 
only pride in life ; but he will soon be more to 
some one else than he is to me . or at least 
some one else will soon be more to him than I 
can be or ever have been ; we mothers must 
look forward to that." 

" I only hope he will choose well," Mrs. 
Vargrave said, finding herself utterly unable to 
avoid thinking of her own niece, in connection 
with the subject of Mr. Scorrier' s choice. 

" I hope he will . well in every way ; he is 



SETTLED. 195 

my only child and hope, you know, and all my 
pride is in him. I never had any for myself, 
Mrs. Vargrave, but when he was born I began 
to be proud for him, and if I was proud for 
him as a baby, think what I must be now." 

" Yes, of course," Mrs. Vargrave said, with 
a promptitude that was worthy of much j)raise, 
seeing that she did not see in what way Mr. 
Scorrier was worthy of a greater measure of 
maternal pride being lavished upon him than 
any other mother's son. 

" But though I'm so proud and happy, and 
blessed in my boy," Mrs. Scorrier went on, 
warming to her topic, *' I always feel what a 
thing it would have been to have a daughter." 
This was a graceful concession on Mrs. Scor- 
rier' s part to Mrs. Vargrave' s claims to a right 
to have judgment also on the subject, though 
she had nothing loftier than a girl to exercise 
it upon. *' My son has been away from me 
for years ; I should have kept a daughter with 
me till she married, and then my life wouldn't 
have been so lonely." 

"But they all do marry, sooner or later," 
Mrs. Vargrave said, philosophically; "and 



196 FALSE COLOURS.. 

before they're married they are thinking about 
being so, and absorbed in their own hopes and 
fears. Our children only take after us in that 
respect . we ought to remember that ; it is 
natural, they wish to go, and they will go." 

*' Are you likely to lose either of your girls 
soon?" Mrs. Scorrier asked, with pardonable 
curiosity. 

*'I don't know that I am yet; and life is 
uncertain, and neither Mr. Vargrave nor 
myself are as young as we were. We should be 
very glad to see them settled, or to know they 
were likely to settle, and our principal anxiety 
is about Cecile . naturally." 

"That is your niece," Mrs. Scorrier said, 
feeling very hopeful. She felt sure that now 
she was going to hear " all about that sweet 
Miss Vargrave," and that the *'aH" would 
transcend her expectations. 

"Yes," Mrs. Vargrave said, settling herself 
down as it were into a more confidential posi- 
tion. " Cecile is my niece, or at least my hus- 
band's niece, and we know no difference in our 
feelings between her and Isabelle. " At least," 
the truthful lady continued, "we know very 



SETTLED. 197 

little difference between them ; but it exists, 
and in one way and another it must be shown 
in time, and felt by the dear girl herself. I 
have always hoped that something or other 
would happen in business, you know, to enable 
Mr. Vargrave to give her the same as he is 
going to give Isabelle ; but nothing does seem 
to happen as one could wish it in that way," 
Mrs. Vargrave continued, with vague amia- 
bility. 

"And she has no parents," Mrs. Scorrier 
said, compassionately. The discovery that 
Cecile had no money, and would have no 
money, was an obstacle, though not an insur- 
mountable one, to this union in her eyes. 
Doubtless the young lady came of a stock that 
would counterbalance all deficiencies of that 
sort. Arthur wanted other things more than 
money with his wife. 

''And she has no parents." 

Mrs. Vargrave shook her head, in the nega- 
tive. 

" Poor thing ! Has she been an orphan 
long?" 

*' Her father died seven or eight years ago, 



198 FALSE COLOUKS. 

her mother later, I believe, but we never knew 
her." Mrs. Vargrave stammered a little as 
she said this, and grew confused, under a sense 
of being sorry that she should have let herself 
stray into a path of speech that led to Cecile's 
mother. From which Mrs. Scorrier, unworldly 
as she was, soon deduced the fact that Cecile's 
mother was to be avoided, even though she was 
dead. 

" I think it is getting chilly here now the 
sun is clouded," she said, softly; "shall we 
walk down to the rocks and see the tide coming 
in?" She rose up as she asked this, settling 
her shawl over her shoulders, and moving a 
step or two in the direction in which Arthur 
and Cecile had gone some time before. Mrs. 
Vargrave did not find it chilly, and did not care 
about seeing the tide come in. But the " dove- 
coloured old lady," as Cissy had called her, had 
a quiet will of her own that was hard to resist. 
Accordingly, the two matrons went down the 
boulders directly, as far as they felt that they 
could go with safety and comfort. When they 
reached this point, the young people (Cecile 
and Arthur) were still far ahead of them . out 



SETTLED. 199 

on what looked like a perilous pinnacle of rock, 
.with the tide all round them, save where one 
craggy ledge left a pathway . a difficult but 
safe pathway back to the Mount. The roar, 
light but unceasing, of the waves prevented 
them hearing themselves called. PerhaiDS, too, 
they were a little absorbed in the subject they 
were discussing. 

" What could have induced them to go out 
there?" Mrs. Scorrier said, in rather a vexed 
tone ; "young people are so thoughtless." But 
she wronged them. They had not been thought- 
less in their selection of the position in which 
they had placed themselves. They had wished 
to secure themselves from interruption from 
any one less light of foot and steady of nerve 
than themselves, and they had succeeded in 
their design. 

When Cecile had packed up the last plate 
and lashed up the last hamper, assisted by Mr. 
Scorrier, she had felt very full of confidence as 
to the ease and power with which she would 
revert to and settle the subjects he had opened 
before luncheon. But on her way down the 
rocky pathway to the water's side again, this 



200 FALSE COLOUES. 

confidence had failed her, and she began to 
wish, . first, that her task was over ; secondly, 
that there had been no need for her to set 
herself such a one. 

It may be remembered that almost the last 
words spoken between the young people before 
they had been called to luncheon, had been an 
entreaty from him that she would make the 
sacrifice . that she would be his wife ; and a 
declaration from her that she could not say yes 
to this entreaty, " dearly as she would like to 
do it," until she had told him something that 
she felt she ought to tell him, and had been 
convinced by him that this something was in 
truth no obstacle to their union. Perhaps she 
was only too ready to be thus convinced. Per- 
haps she was going to be obstinate . obstinate 
with that most annoying of all obstinacy, which 
strengthens itself with the belief that it is for 
the good of another. He could not tell what 
she meant to do with him, and with herself, as 
he walked by her side back to the spot where 
she had promised to settle the question. 

Nor could she tell what she meant to do with 
him, though she was not at all undecided as to 



SETTLED. 201 

what she would like to do. As far as she could 
judge, a marriage with him, while it would 
satisfy her heart, would not involve a single 
sacrifice of taste, or feeling, or custom. There 
was nothing in the life she was leading now 
which she would be false enough to feign to 
regret, if she did after all leave it for him. It 
was a gay and glittering life . more of the 
kaleidoscope order, indeed, than Amelia's had 
been while she was Miss Foster. Still, gay and 
glittering as it was, it was eminently unsatis- 
factory, fitful, and feverish to Cecile Vargrave. 
Things which she looked upon as attributes and 
non-essentials were regarded and esteemed as 
chief elements, and vital necessities almost, by 
the peojple with whom she lived. Moreover, 
she was always in the position of not having 
her life in her own hands, and of being com- 
pelled to be extensively obliged to those who 
regulated it as she did not like. Besides all 
this, there was the ever-present sense of inse- 
curity . a sword was always hanging by a hair 
above her head . a thunder-bolt was liable to 
fall upon her at any moment. The old weakly- 
constituted story that always seemed to be 



202 FALSE COLOUES. 

dying out, and that yet would not die, would 
rise up vitalized by other people's sense of 
honour and duty, when the occasion arose. This 
she had always been given to understand, and 
she had accepted the inevitable, and been grate- 
ful to those who spared her such a resuscitation 
while they felt they could. Still it had always 
been a spectre in her path, and she could not 
bring herself to feel that she could ever regret 
leaving a society in which it mocked her from 
every corner. 

Now the occasion had come, and she was 
going to be brave enough to attempt the resus- 
citation herself. She would not leave it to her 
uncle and aunt ; they would try to revive it 
with too great a tenderness . a tenderness that 
would put the man for whose benefit it was 
done at all, in the painful position of having 
his generosity appealed to. So she went down 
prepared to handle it boldly, roughly even, if 
she saw need to do so ; and the determination 
to do this made her path over the rugged rocks 
a terrible one. 

" Not here," she said, when they reached 
the spot where they had been sitting before 



SETTLED. 203 

luncheon; "we're too close and hemmed in 
here, and I should fancy some one behind me, 
and on either side, and should be hampered in 
my speech, and I don't want to be hampered ; 
let us go out further." 

So they went out further, stepping over little 
chasms, and wading through little shallow 
pools, until they reached the place where they 
were eventually seen by Mrs. Vargrave and 
Mrs. Scorrier. 

"And now, what are you going to say to 
me?" he said, as they stood clearly outlined at 
last. 

"I thought I had a great deal to say," she 
answered; "but it all amounts to this, and can 
be said quickly . I should like to be your wife, 
but I can't be." 

"You shall be, vrhoever comes between us," 
he said, hotly, taking her hand. Her words 
conjured up the vision of an accepted rival in 
his mind, and Mr. Arthur Scorrier was quite 
determined to crush and disregard the claims, 
however well established, of any such super- 
fluous being. 

" Hush ! listen to me," she said, a little im- 



204 FALSE COLOUKS. 

periously; "it's nothing of that sort that you 
mean. I am as free as air in that way, but I 
am fettered still ; you have asked me to be 
your wife on the strength of seeing me as I 
seem to be, not as I am. I live with my uncle 
and aunt, and have their name, and am treated 
in all respects as their daughter is treated; but 
I'm a sham;" and now her violet eyes were 
lifted up half boldly, half beseechingly towards 
him, "I'm not a Vargrave . my mother was 
never married." 

" That was no fault of yours," he said, ten- 
derly, clasping her hand more closely than be- 
fore, though a quake respecting his own mother's 
feelings on the subject passed over him as he 
spoke ; " that must not stand between us. 
Why, if you had erred instead of your mother, 
I should love you, and want you just the 
same." 

" You would be weak in that case . you are 
only wrong now; indeed, indeed, you are 
wrong. How could it be well for you to take 
a wife with a stain on her, and no money to 
compensate in the lightest degree for it : that's 
the plain hard truth . that, if I didn't feel you 



SETTLED. 205 

deserved the most honest treatment from me, I 
could never bring myself to word. I'm a penni- 
less, illegitimate girl . that's the long and the 
short of it ; and doesn't it sound horrible ? " 

Again she looked up at him, and this time 
her eyes were full of tears. 

" As you say, that is the long and the short 
of it ; and now let there be an end of it . will 
you be my wife ?" 

" You ask me that again, because you feel 
bound in honour to yourself not to desert me 
for my misfortunes, without giving me another 
opportunity to mend them, which I could not 
be mean enough to take." 

" You could not do anything mean, and you 
are not going to try to do anything to make me 
miserable: marry me, Cissy." 

" Ah ! men don't believe that a woman can 
understand the point of honour ; why I might, 
and surely should, be detrimental to you," she 
said, quickly. 

*'How do you know . I mean what makes 
you cling to such a misguided notion?" he 
said. 

''Eeason, and a certain hardly acquired know- 



206 FALSE COLOURS. 

ledge. Now look here ; my life hasn't all been 
spent in Bayswater, under the wings of my dear, 
careful, kind uncle and aunt. I led a nomad 
existence for a good long time after I was suffi- 
ciently grown up to attract attention. My mother 
used to be very, very restless ; she could not 
bury her dead and feign to be satisfied and 
happy while living under a cloud ; so we used to 
wander about, and we were not good managers, 
and did not always bear ourselves at Boulogne 
as we did at Baden ; and some way, as such 
things do leak out, it leaked out that we were 
not of the order of the Philistines ; that we 
were, in fact, Bohemians ; and people fought 
shy of us, or were insolently intimate, and the 
end of it is, I have had to suffer that which it 
is well your wife should never have suffered. 
What a fearfully long speech I have made," she 
said, in a different tone. 

'' And a purposeless one, Cissy, darling, if you 
think that it is going to alter my choice and 
intention," he said, firmly. 

" No, not a purposeless one ; for I am 
strengthening myself in my resolution by re- 
calling these incidents ; they are so unlike 



SETTLED. 207 

whatever happens to me in my quiet life now, 
that it makes me feel as I think of it all, that 
I can't be the same person who went through 
them." 

" Well, rest and be thankful that the nomad 
existence is over," he said ; " forget it, or if 
you like, look back upon it as a page of romance, 
the reading of which will occasionally relieve 
the monotony of Danebury." 

** I'm sometimes uncertain whether I am 
thankful that it is over ; I'm a vagabond at 
heart, and that life was more to my taste than 
the one I lead now. That is another argument 
against my accepting your offer . I might sigh 
for the old times and old habits ; I should never 
sigh for the thoroughly res23ectable visiting and 
weariness I have had in London." 

"You are making difficulties," he said, half 
laughing. " I would take you to some of your 
old haunts . I love the Continent quite as much 
as you do . and you should look upon them 
from a new point of view." 

*' From which I should be expected to be 
ashamed of them ; no, that wouldn't do. I should 
never feel anything but sympathetic about 



208 FALSE COLOUES. 

foreign vagabondism, and it's hopeless to try 
to make me think that I should do so ; but you 
would be justified in feeling disgusted, if people 
that I couldn't and didn't wish to keep at bay 
in those days were free and easy with me ; it 
wouldn't do. Give it up." 

"Never," he said, smiling; "if any one of 
whom I disapprove is too free and easy with 
you, I shall know how to protect you." 

" But I mightn't wish to be protected. 
Though I might not think the free-easiness 
proper, I mightn't object to it; besides, Amelia 
Hepburn, though she does not know all I have 
told you, suspects a good deal, and she would 
never spare me in an English country neigh- 
bourhood. I should move about weighted with 
the knowledge that I was suspected of having 
been guilty of a miscellany of iniquity." 

" Now I shouldn't have thought that you 
were a girl to regard puerilities of that sort,"^he 
said, with a sort of good-humoured authorita- 
tiveness that she felt it was not at all bad to be 
subjected to. " What does it matter what im- 
pression Mrs. Hepburn has given of you or 
gives of you ? . she could never counteract the 



SETTLED. 209 

impression one sight of yourself makes ; be- 
sides, how can you bring yourself to put up 
these people, of whom you have never even so 
much as heard, as barriers between us ?'* 

" And I shouldn't have thought you were a 
man to argue on false premisses in that way," 
she said, half laughing. ''I don't know the 
people about you now, I allow, but if I went 
among them I should know them ; and as for 
Amelia, she would soon (if we were thrown 
much together) have the power of making me 
very miserable ; she would thinly veil the feeling 
that you were very much to be pitied for some- 
thing, and I should understand her and feel a 
culprit." 

" Since you have no better reasons to adduce 
for thinking it advisable to make me unhajDiDy, 
I shall not allow you to put them up as ob- 
stacles. You shall tell me you will marry me, 
and brave all these trifling annoyances for my 
sake : all that you have told me has only made 
me love you the more . it is settled." 

He said this just as his mother and Mrs. 

Vargrave came down to look for them . or 

rather just as the old ladies made their voices 
VOL. i. - p 



210 FALSE COLOURS. 

heard by the young people. " They are want- 
ing us; we are keeping them," Cecile said, 
turning and beginning to retrace her steps hur- 
riedly. 

*' Give me your hand," he said, taking hers 
without waiting for her to give it to him ; " the 
rocks are slippery . you will fall. Now say it 
is settled before we rejoin them ; I cannot go 
back in the state of uncertainty you compelled 
me to be in all luncheon time ; say it is settled 
as I wish." 

" I feel I am being fearfully imprudent and 
selfish," Cissy said, softly. 

" That is not definite enough for me. I 
want to hear you say that, between us, it is 
settled that you are to be my wife." 

" As far as I am concerned then . yes !" 

*'And you only are concerned," he said, 
earnestly. "Whom does a man marry . the 
girl herself, or her family, or friends, or foes ? 
You only are concerned. You have made me 
so happy by this promise, Cecile." 

" What if I should break it ?" she mut- 
tered. 

*' You would not be so cruel . I was going to 



SETTLED. 211 

say you will not be so base," he said, reproach- 
fully. 

" Not of my own will, or for my own 
pleasure ; I love you, and it will go harder 
with me than with you, if others make me feel 
that I may do you an injury by wishing to 
stay with you and love you all my life. One 
favour, . quickly, Arthur, . don't speak of it to 
any one till we have talked together again." 

*' There is no good in delaying," he urged. 

** But I insist . I beg rather, you will not 
speak of it till after seeing me to-morrow, at any 
rate." 

"I suppose it's as well to promise that, since 
it's settled," he said. 



212 FALSE COLOURS. 



CHAPTEK X. 



Though they had to the best of their ability 
settled the great question which must of neces- 
sity be a vexed one to every unsettled man 
and woman, it is a fact that they did not ex- 
perience any great sense of elation on their 
way back to rejoin their friends. Arthur 
Scorrier did make an opportunity, in getting 
Cecile over a chasm, to press her hand most 
reassuringly. But the assurance conveyed in 
that pressure was not quite strong enough to 
overpower all her considerations as to what her 
own people and his mother would think of her, 
for having suffered herself to be led away into 
what looked very much like a solitary flirtation. 
** What a goose they will think me ! " was 
her inward reflection, as she stepped up on the 



213 

ledge where Mrs. Vargrave and Mrs. Scorrier 
stood. 

" You have got yourself most terribly sun- 
burnt . quite red, Cissy," Mrs. Vargrave said, 
complainingly, turning round and beginning to 
toil up the pathway without delay. Mrs. Var- 
grave saw that the solitary time on the rocks 
which the young people had passed had, for 
some reason or other, not been quite pleasing 
to the mother of the one who might be looked 
on as the executive power. ''And no one's 
mother shall think I want to throw either of 
my girls at her son's head," she thought. 
Accordingly, she spoke reprovingly to Cecile 
regarding the sun-burn, which was nothing 
more than a blush, and altogether deported 
herself as one who had a right to feel ag- 
grieved. 

There was a slight, a very slight, but still a 
perceptible change, too, in Mrs. Scorrier' s 
manner, Cissy found. " The dove-coloured old 
lady " had lost a shade of the soft, soothing 
tone which had seemed to be aU over her 
before. She spoke kindly to Cissy still, but it 
was with a stiffer kindness than seemed well to 



214 FALSE COLOUKS. 

the girl who had been treating the old lady's 
son so very openly and honourably. 

" I shall really feel quite glad to get back 
home, and have a quiet cup of tea with Arthur," 
Mrs. Scorrier said; and when she had said 
that, somehow they all understood that it had 
been in her mind at one time during the day 
to propose their all spending the evening 
together. 

" I hate tea,'* Arthur said, " and no amount 
of quietness makes a cup of it endurable to me ; 
does it to you?" he added, appealingly, to 
Cissy. 

** No ; but then I don't like comfort and 
quiet, and tea and respectability," Cissy said, 
defiantly ; "as I told you just now, I'm a 
vagabond at heart." 

"I think, if Mrs. Vargrave likes, we had 
better be getting back now, Arthur," Mrs. 
Scorrier said ; "by the time we reach Penzance 
we shall have had a nice long day." 

" A very long . I mean a very nice day," 
Mrs. Vargrave said, promptly ; " yes, I should 
like to go now." And then they met Mr. 
Vargrave and Isabelle, and walked away to- 



"only yourself to blame." 215 

gether to the landing-place, for the tide was in 
now, and they would be obliged to go home by 
boat. As they went. Cissy possessed herself pf 
her uncle's arm, and hung upon it for refuge, 
as it were ; and somehow even he felt that all 
had not gone quite well with some members of 
the party. 

" Don't let yourself veer away from me on 
any pretence whatever," Arthur said, warn- 
ingly, to Cissy, while he was seeming to hand 
her into the boat ; " you are mine now, and I 
won't allow any vacillation." 

" I am in a great state of bewilderment . a 
confusion of ideas respecting wrong, right, and 
myself ; and I haven't even a * little dog at 
home ' on whose decision as to my identity 
I can rely. I can only trust to myself, 
Ai-thur." 

By the time she had said this, the old ladies, 
and the hampers, and the now utterly incom- 
petent helps from Marazion were adjusted in 
the boat. In another minute they were off, 
pulling against a ground-swell and a wind that 
was dead against them ; feeling that wind and 
tide were literally against them . against their 



216 FALSE COLOURS. 

separating and getting rid of one another, as 
all fondly desired. 

Arthur Scorrier loved his mother dearly, 
and considered her on all occasions very much. 
But now he felt very angry with her as they 
drove back to Penzance. It would have been 
so easy for her to propose some scheme to offer 
them some little civility which would have kept 
them together all the evening, and enabled him 
to gain further speech with Cissy. From being 
angry with his mother, he grew angry with Mr. 
and Mrs. Vargrave . They, at least, might have 
invited him to stay an hour or two at their 
hotel. That would have been a very usual and 
proper finale to such a day. As it was, it was 
evident that the untoward constraint which had 
crept into his mother's manner had affected the 
Vargraves perniciously. 

However, as it transpired, it was only Mrs. 
Yargrave who was affected by that slight change 
in Mrs. Scorrier. Mr. Vargrave was absolutely 
unconscious of it, after the manner of men. 
But he was tired by his day of refreshing quiet 
and pleasure ; tired by the meal that was 
neither quite a luncheon nor quite a dinner; 



**ONLY YOURSELF TO BLAilE." 217 

and uncomfortably conscious that, in addition 
to its having tired him to-day, it would have 
a prejudicial effect on his constitution the next 
day. But he no sooner came in sight of the 
hotel that was his home for the present, and 
smelt the invigorating odours of divers dinners 
that were in a state of preparation about that 
hour, than his joy in life and general geniality 
returned, and he asked Arthur Scorrier to come 
back when he had seen his mother home, and 
have some dinner with them. 

When the wagonette stopped, several idlers, 
belonging to the visitors in the hotel, lounged 
nearer to look at the party. Amongst these 
was a face Arthur Scorrier recognized. 

" Why, there is one of the Glene servants . 
Mr. Hepburn's own man ! " he exclaimed ; and 
then he jumped out and asked, " Is your mis- 
tress here ?" 

** Master and mistress too, sir," the man 
replied. " Master does not feel very well, and 
has gone straight off to bed ; my mistress is 
going to dine presently, and while she is at 
dinner she wanted you to be sent for to see 
master." 



218 FALSE COLOURS. 

" Give my compliments, and tell them I 
shall be back in half an hour," Arthur said, 
quicldy. 

" Amelia here ! " Mrs. Vargrave exclaimed. 

''How nice !" Isabelle said, hopefully. 

" How very funny ! " Cissy added. 

" Then I shall make the acquaintance of 
Mr. Hepburn at last, and under most aus- 
picious circumstances," Mrs. Scorrier said, 
beamingly, forgetting her constraint and the 
cause of it in an instant. Then the Vargraves 
said good-bye to her, and got themselves into 
the hotel, and Mrs. Scorrier and her son drove 
on to The Crescent alone. 

"You won't stay with them late to-night, 
will you ?" she began, coaxingly. 

" I don't know what you call late, mother." 

" Well, not too late to see me before you go 
to bed. I have something to say to you." 

*' Put it off till the morning, there's a dear 
mother," he said; ** I shall be weary enough 
when I get back . not fit to listen to you." 

*' But I always think no time like the pre- 
sent, and you could take the night to consider 
whether my advice was worth following or not 



" ONLY YOURSELF TO BLAME." 219 

. and tell me what you make your mind u^d 
to in the morning," she persisted. 

"If it's advice, I will certainly not hear it 
to-night," he said, laughing. Then they were 
home, and he excused himself from hearing 
more by running away, first to dress himself, 
and then back to dinner at the hotel, leaving 
Mrs." Scorrier in a tumult of feeling, that was 
l^artly fluttering fear that her son might go 
beyond the point at which it would be honour- 
able to pause, . go beyond that point this night, 
and tell her in the morning that he stood 
pledged to marry Miss Vargrave, and partly 
fluttering pleasure that at length there was a 
chance of seeing the man who had been her 
husband's companion and her son's friend. 

"While this tumult of feeling was still fresh 
upon her, Arthur was hearing what had brought 
the Hepburns to Penzance. He had got him- 
self ushered straight to Mr. Hepburn's room, 
where he found that gentleman lying on his 
couch, though he was apparently in no less 
robust health than when Arthur had seen him 
last at Glene. 

" I heard you had gone out for a day's fool- 



220 FALSE COLOURS. 

ing at some pic-nic place," he said, in answer 
to Arthur's question about his arrival and 
seclusion, " and as I didn't want to be let in 
for meeting a lot of people whom I don't know, 
and don't care about, I gave out that I should 
go to bed, and came here to be quiet ; Mrs. 
Hepburn is with the Vargraves, I believe." 

"You altered your plans rather suddenly, 
didn't you, sir?" Arthur Scorrier asked; 
*'when I left Glene the day before yesterday, 
you had no intention of coming here." 

Mr. Hepburn seemed to be a little put out of 
temper by the reminder. 

*^ If it hadn't been for your professional 
humbug," he said, *' I shouldn't have been 
here now ; but Mrs. Hepburn insisted on your 
having recommended change of air, and set 
her heart on coming to Penzance ; there was 
nothing left for me to do, for I couldn't let her 
come alone." 

** No ; that would naturally have nullified 
the pleasure she might otherwise expect," 
Arthur Scorrier said, with an air of unUmited 
faith in the connubial felicity of his old 
friend. 



" ONLY YOURSELF TO BLAIIE." 221 

Mr. Hepburn reddened a little, and assented 
slowly to the proposition. 

** Not but what she was most kindly anxious 
that I should not sacrifice my own desire to 
stay at Glene, or to go somewhere else ; but 
the fact is, she has set her mind on Penzance 
. it's her old friends, the Vargraves, being here 
that made her wish to come . and I would 
never thwart a woman if I could avoid it ; so, 
though she would even have put up with the 
disagreeables of a journey, and stay here alone, 
I preferred coming with her." 

"I dine with the Vargraves, and it's their 
dinner-hour," Mr. Scorrier said, looking at his 
watch ; " you won't stay here all the even- 
ing?" 

** I don't want to see a number of strangers," 
Mr. Hepburn said, testily. ** Who have the 
Vargraves got with them ?" 

" They are alone." 

" I thought I heard they had gone to a 
pic-nic with some old ladies." 

"Only one old lady, my mother; and she 
has gone home." 

"I hope Mrs. Scorrier is quite well," Mr. 



222 FALSE COLOUES. 

Hepburn said, politely; *' don't be late, my 
boy; I shall go out and try the sea-breeze by- 
and-by, and then we'll meet again." 

Arthur left him with that, and went off 
quickly to the Vargraves' sitting-room, where 
he found dinner ready, and Mrs. Hepburn com- 
fortably seated. She held her hand out to him 
as he came into the room, but did not rise, or 
in any way disturb the jpose which she had 
practised beforehand, and heard from Olive 
looked a positively regal one. All traces of 
slovenliness had vanished. She was splendidly 
dressed, rather too splendidly, perhaps, for a 
quiet evening at a sea-side hotel. The two 
Misses Vargrave, in plain high white muslins, 
looked under-dressed by her side. 

*' If we had known that we should have the 
pleasure of your company, we would have made 
different toilettes," Mrs. Vargrave said, feeling 
compelled to apologize for her own foulade to 
the wearer of such a mauve satin and Maltese 
lace fichu. The lady of Glene smiled a smile 
of one who could afford in her plenitude of 
luxury to be tolerant to all those who were 
lacking. 



" ONLY YOURSELF TO BLAME." 223 

*' I am a matron now, and I think it would 
be bad taste of me to wear girlish dresses in 
preference to such matronly garments as these," 
she said, touching her satin and lace : "I 
always study suitability." 

" I'm afraid you'll distrust the suitability of 
that dress by-and-by, when we go down to the 
railings by the sea, and the spray comes dash- 
ing over you, Amelia," Cissy said, laughing. 
Then Amelia looked at Mr. Scorrier, and smiled 
and lifted her brows, as if she would give him 
to understand that she saw through this en- 
vious cavilling at her costume, but was too in- 
different to resent it. 

Mrs. Hepburn was not at all averse to the 
prospect of going down by moonlight, and 
walking along the esplanade, or leaning on the 
iron railings in company with Arthur Scorrier. 
She had several things to say to him, and she 
had quite made up her mind to say them this 
night. Not a doubt assailed her mind as to 
her power of carrying the important point of 
securing his sole companionship. They would 
all go out together ; and once outside the door, 
she would plead that delicacy of health which 



224 FALSE COLOURS. 

he had given as an excuse for ordering her 
change of air . she would i^lead this, and ask 
him for his arm. There would he nothing hut 
what was proper, safe, and reasonahle in such 
a request ; for was he not her medical adviser? 

But the judgment of the just is often very 
much in error. When at length the move for 
the moonlight promenade was made, Arthur 
Scorrier attached himself to Cissy Vargrave's 
side, in that unmistakeahle way which gives 
parents and guardians the preliminary shock. 
Accordingly, Mrs. Hepburn was condemned to 
take her exercise, supported by Mr. Vargrave 
alone, and Mr. Vargrave had never liked her 
much when he had known her a girl with his 
own girls ; and he disliked her excessively now 
that she was a married woman, well inclined 
to exert her prerogative, and tax his powers of 
politeness to the utmost. 

For awhile the four . Mr. Vargrave, with 
Mrs. Hepburn on his arm, Mrs. Vargrave and 
her daughter . kept near together, and the 
other pair sauntered on a few yards ahead of 
them in front. But after a turn or two, Mrs. 
Hepburn took to being tired, and to finding the 



"only yourself to blame." 225 

sea-breeze very strong. "Are there no other 
^alks in Penzance than this?" she asked, as 
plaintively as she could. *' I do feel the need 
of air so greatly, and yet I can hardly bear this 
breeze ; isn't there some walk with trees, that 
may remind me of my own Glene ?" 

Courtesy commanded that Mr. Yargrave 
should immediately think of all the places in 
Penzance wherein trees grew, and calculate 
whether they were within the vralking powers 
of the lady. As he hesitated, she helped him. 
*' I think I have heard of The Crescent, as a 
nice shady place. Mr. Scorrier's mother lives 
there. I have heard him speak of it." 

So they walked off in the direction of The 
Crescent, mentioning where they were going to 
the others as they passed them. 

" "What on earth are they going there for ? " 
Arthur Scorrier exclaimed, in undisguised an- 
noyance. " I think we had better go after 
them, for if my mother happens to be out for 
her airing they will meet, and my mother will 
grow ecstatic over that anomaly." 

"You don't like Mrs. Hepburn," Isabelle 
said. 

VOL. I. Q 



226 FALSE COLOURS. 

'' No, I can't say I do like her ; she's a 
treacherous woman . a woman who won't com- 
mit a fine, well- developed treachery, because she 
never has a well-developed end in view, but 
who will take you unawares about a host of 
minor matters ; she's engaged in doing some 
one now . though who it is I can't say." 

Mrs. Scorrier was walking along on the 
pavement in front of number nine, and pre- 
sently, in the natural order of things, she met 
the Vargraves and Mrs. Hepburn, and also 
(this to her annoyance) her son and Cissy. 
The sight of the two latter slightly acidulated 
her bearing, as it were, and rendered her less 
ecstatic than her son had feared she would be 
at this first sight of Mrs. Hepburn. 

" The name has been a household word with 
me for so many years that I am delighted at 
length to see one who bears it," she said, hold- 
ing out her hand to Mrs. Hepburn. And 
Amelia felt constrained not only to take the 
hand, but to infuse a certain amount of civility 
into her manner of taking it. For though the 
old lady was unconventional and unworldly, 
there was a certain sweet earnestness about her 



''only yourself to blame." 227 

that quelled Mrs. Hej)burn's desire to be kind 
in the grandly patronizing way she had 
sketched out, as the manner to be adopted to 
Mr. Scorrier's mother until it could be seen 
under whose banner the latter meant to enlist. 
" And how is Mr. Hepburn ? " Mrs. Scorrier 
asked, with that air of deep anxiety which is 
often displayed by old ladies when inquiring 
after the health of the most indifferent person. 
But in this case it was not an indifferent per- 
son for whom the inquiry was made. Mr. 
Hepburn had been a hero of romance . a 
guardian angel . a great unknown to Mrs. 
Scorrier during all the years of her widowhood 
. for it was a real heart-widowhood, that of 
hers, though the little ring of gold had been 
wanting to make good her claim to the name 
of wife. It seemed to bring her very near to 
him . very thrillingly near to him . this meet- 
ing with his wife. Still, when the first gla- 
mour had passed away, his wife looked so 
young and altogether so different from what 
she had expected of the wife of the great un- 
known, whom she had venerated vaguely for so 
many years, that he receded from her again ; 



228 FALSE COLOUBS. 

and she began to feel that he was too shadowy 
for her ever to derive real tangible comfort from 
him. 

But though Mrs. Hepburn would have re- 
garded Mrs. Scorrier very lowly as an end, she 
thought well of her as a means. Thereuj^on 
she interposed between the old lady and the 
dying hope . the hope that at last the guar- 
dian angel would be seen by her in the flesh. 

" We shall be here for several days, I think," 
Mrs. Hepburn said, as sweetly as it was in her 
to say anything. *.' Come and see us ; and 
then you will see how Mr. Hepburn is for 
yourself." 

Then, after a few words, more or less idle, 
they went their several ways ; and again the 
feeling of acidulation set in in Mrs. Scorrier' s 
breast. Again her son Arthur walked away in 
the unmistakeable manner that has been already 
commented on, by the side of the girl who 
would have been a delightful daughter-in-law 
if only it had all been clear about her mother. 

" We have both been very wrong in devoting 
ourselves to each other as we have done," 
Cissy said to Mr. Scorrier, as they walked 



''only yourself to blame." 229 

home. "But it's well to do wrong sometimes, 
and one can always pull up and be prudent ; 
which you must be pleased to be after to-night, 
for ' a chiel's among us taking notes.' " 

" After to-night there will be no need to be 
prudent," he said. 

*' That is as I may think," she said, quickly; 
" but there are others to be consulted besides 
ourselves." 

" Not in such a matter as this." 

** Yes ; even in such a matter as this . of a 
marriage between us," she said, coldly. ** It's 
not all conscientiousness this on my part . at 
least, some people would give it a harder name. 
But the fact is, I could not bear to be looked 
coldly upon by any one." 

" And who would dare to look coldly upon 
you now ? . and will you crush me by hinting 
that any one would do so the more for your 
being my wife ? " 

** Your mother looked coldly on me to-day, 
from the moment we met after luncheon," 
Cissy said, quietly. '' I can put cause and 
effect together. My dear good aunt opened 
her heart about me under the influence of the 



230 FALSE COLOURS. 

sun and the lunch to Mrs. Scorrier ; the result 
of this unburdening of her spirit was, that 
Mrs. Scorrier learnt a goodly portion of the 
tale I told you, told gently and kindly, as Aunt 
Vargrave would tell it ; but I saw the effect it 
had; and I didn't like it." 

*' And you could, for one moment, contem- 
plate giving me up, because of that nonsense?" 
he said, almost angrily. 

" I am not sure, on the one hand, that I do 
contemplate giving you up ; and I'm not sure, 
on the other, that I do regard it as nonsense. 
But just this I am sure of . that I won't go a 
step further till I know it won't hurt you in 
any way with any one ; and now you mustn't 
attempt to answer me, or the others will hear 
you." With that she stepped on quickly and 
joined the others, and they all went into the 
hotel together. 

A messenger met them, wishing them all to 
adjourn to Mr. Hepburn's room. He had en- 
gaged the first saloon on the first floor, and 
was sitting in it now in sombre splendour. He 
had refrained from going out, much as he 
longed for fresh air, on account of one or two 



" ONLY YOURSELF TO BLAilE." 231 

of his prejudices, as his wife called them. But 
though he had made up his mind to stay 
Tvithin, he had not at all contemplated spend- 
ing a solitary evening. Some thoughts had 
evidently heen galling him deeply, for he looked 
worn, almost haggard, when they went in, and 
Arthur Scorrier noticed that he replied almost 
coldly to Amelia's inquiries as to his welfare . 
inquiries which she made with an undue display 
of conjugal anxiety. 

"Well! how should I feel well ?" he said, 
querulously ; ** the soup they brought me, after* 
great delay, was cold, and the wine is boiling ; 
did you ever taste such fire-water ? " he con- 
tinued, pushing a bottle of sherry, which stood 
on a pier-table at his side, nearer to Mr. Var- 
grave. 

**It's the best philosophy to take things as 
they are when one is travelling," Amelia said, 
deprecatingly. 

*' You took a very different tone when we 
were at the Lakes," he said, quickly ; ''there 
nothing was good, and you never failed to men- 
tion the fact." 

" I didn't know then how perfect Glene was 



232 FALSE COLOURS. 

in its power of compensating for all little ills 
and vexations," she said, good-temperedly. 

But Mr. Hepburn would not accept the good- 
tempered explanation. For the first time since 
their marriage he was suffering himself to show 
displeasure towards his wife before people. And 
this first sign of such forgetfulness of others 
shows a forgetfulness of her which no wary 
wife would do well to disregard. But Amelia 
Hepburn was not a wary wife, though she was 
a very wary woman. The wifely wariness is 
born of love and a desire to please her husband, 
as much because so to please him is a pleasure 
to her, as because it is a duty. So now Amelia 
was unobservant of the sign, and proceeded to 
put him in an untoward rage by what looked 
very like obtuseness. In answer to the politely 
pretty little platitude which she brought herself 
to utter respecting Glene, because of the anxiety 
she felt to get well away from the discussion of 
Mr. Hepburn's present sufferings and inconve- 
niences at Penzance . in answer to this polite 
platitude he only said, " Judging from your 
manner while you were there, my dear, no one 
would have supposed Glene had been fortunate 



" ONLY YOURSELF TO BLAME." 233 

enough to gain your approbation," and it must 
be confessed that his tone as he said this ^as 
not a pleasant one. Amelia glanced toiivards 
Arthur Scorrier as if she would have claimed 
his sj^mpathy. But he would not return her 
glance, as in the first place he did not feel any 
sympathy for her ; and in the second place, had 
he done so, he would have been the last man 
in the world to show it under these circum- 
stances. Accordingly, Amelia was thrown back 
upon her own devices to make the best of it, 
and her own devices led her into another un- 
propitious path. 

" Mrs. Scorrier is not a bit like you," she 
said, addressing Arthur Scorrier; "I should 
never have supposed you were her son." 

Mr. Hepburn looked up quickly. 

" Have you made Mrs. Scorrier' s acquaint- 
ance already, my dear?" he said. 

" Yes ; and she is coming to make yours to- 
morrow," Amelia replied; and then, though 
the light in the room was not great, Arthm- saw 
that Mr. Hepburn's face blanched. 

**He is thinking of my father," the young 
man thought, compassionately, and ho was 



234 FALSE COLOURS. 

right. Mr. Hepburn was tliinldng very uncom- 
fortably of Arthur's father. The word "uncom- 
fortably" may sound hard and unsympathetic, 
but it is the only word that can at all express 
the varied sentiments that thronged Mr. Hep- 
burn's mind, as he thought of the one whom 
Mrs. Scorrier mourned daily as she looked out 
on the rolling vfaters of Mount's Bay that had 
been so evil to her. 

" Yes, and she is coming to make yours to- 
morrow," Amelia had said in reply to that 
question of his as to whether she had " already 
made the acquaintance of Mrs. Scorrier." 
After this reply a sufficiently awkward calm be- 
fell them ; each, evidently, had too much relied 
on one another as far as the gallantry required 
to make a fresh constitutional start was con- 
cerned. Happily, after a short time, Mr. Yar- 
grave recalled St. Michael's Mount to his mind, 
and proceeded to discourse fluently on the grand 
structure. Then, by the time the grandeur of 
the structure was exhausted, he called another 
fact to mind, namely, that they (the majority 
of them at least) had been indulging in the 
dubious delights of a pic-nic, and that, there- 



*^ONLY YOURSELF TO BLA^IE.'* 235 

fore, they might be permitted to feel fsiiguecl. 
When this point had been ceded to them ami- 
cably, they all rose to go, and Amelia stood up 
to take leave of them with a queer sense of 
prostration upon her. She had intended to 
say so much to Mr. Scorrier this night, and 
she had said nothing. Might it not be that 
this trip to Penzance, which had already been 
productive of domestic dissension, should be 
altogether a failure ? She would not pause now 
to consider what right she could have to think 
it a " failure," if the " sea-breezes strength- 
ened her," and " she saw a good deal" of the 
Yargraves . for it was by the power of these 
pleas that she was here at all. She would 
not pause to consider what right she had to 
consider it a failure ; she only felt *' that, after 
all, if things went on in this way," she should 
have reason so to think. 

As she shook hands with Mr. Scorrier she 
said, '' I had a return of my faintness to-day ; 
I should like to see you to-morrow, before 
twelve." 

"At any hour you please," he said, gravely, 
and then they parted. 



236 FALSE COLOURS. 

As soon as his guests were gone, Mr. Hepburn, 
who seemed strangely weary and feeble for so 
strong, and active, and hale a man, betook himself 
to rest. But while he was waiting for his man, 
he roused himself sufficiently to say a few 
words to his wife, words that made her burn 
with anger, and declare to herself that she was 
unjustly treated. 

" I feel very much annoyed at your having 
sought out Mrs. Scorrier in this way, Amelia ; 
it implies an eagerness to get more intimate 
with her son, of which I cannot approve." 

" You have only yourself to blame about 
him," she said. And her words cut deeper 
than she thought. 



MOTHER AND SOX. 237 



CHAPTEE XL 



MOTHER AND SON, 



There was an air of patient expectation, of 
quiet waiting, about both his mother and the 
room in which she was sitting, when Mr. Scor- 
rier reached home, that was infinitely irritating 
to him. He saw at a glance that it was in her 
mind to exert her maternal prerogative at last, 
and to call him to account for that which 
he had done, or that which he might be 
about to do. That he would bear this patiently 
was his firm resolve. He felt that it was due 
to her that he should be so patient . due to 
her, simply as a slight retm-n for the long 
unceasing indulgence of, and belief in him, 
which had made his home-life a hai)j)y one to 
look back upon. " She never found fault with 
me, or hinted that I might do better or other 



238 FALSE COLOURS. 

than I did," he reflected, ai^d the reflection 
softened him, and made him deal gently with 
the phase of feeling which dictated the course 
she was novv^ pursuing. 

Old as she was, there was something that 
was very attractive and pretty still in the eyes 
of men, in Mrs. Scorrier's colouring and ex- 
pression. She had the soft, bird-like hazel 
eyes, and the thin silky hair of the same 
colour, that always appear to be the outward 
sign of gentleness and tranquillity in woman. 
Her complexion was still fair, too ; her skin 
soft and unlined. Time had touched her very 
gently, perhaps out of compassion for her, and 
antagonism towards fate, which had been so 
rough to her. 

This night she looked a little oldei* than she 
had ever looked before ; a little older and a 
little sadder, and it went to his heart to see her 
look so, though he could not regard himself as 
the cause of the slight change blamingly. He 
determined to notice and attribute it to the 
pic-nic. 

"My dear mother," he said,.m.akinga small 
bustle Y/ith the neat little plated bedroom can- 



3I0TKEP. AND SON. 239 

dlesticks that were put out ready for use, '' not 
gone to bed yet after this tiring day ? I must 
talk shop to you, and advise instant retire- 
ment, or I shall be having you very poorly to- 
morrow." 

" Not before I have said a few words to you, 
Arthur," she said, pleadingly; ''I must, my 
dear . they lie so heavy on my heart, while 
they are unspoken . let me say them." 

" Yv^hy should you ask for my permission ? 
You will surely say what you like," he said, 
gently. 

" Not what I like, but what I ought to say. 
Arthur, I only think of you, and of how your 
happiness and honour may best be secured." 
And then, as she thought of the old, bitterly- 
repented of error which had wrecked her own 
honour, and tarnished her child's, she bent her 
head, and her tears fell fast. 

"Mother, whp.t causes this?" He went 
over and caressed her, putting his hand on her 
shoulder, and kissing her still unwrinkled 
brow. "You are exaggerating some little mis- 
take until it forms a misfortune before you ; I 
can have- done nothing to give 3^ou such grief." 



240 FALSE COLOURS. 

" I have looked forward to the time my son 
would marry as the time that should bring me 
the greatest joy I can ever hoi^e to know," 
she replied. " I have prayed for him to choose 
wisely, and to give me a daughter I could wel- 
come as such." 

" I have chosen wisely." His tone was very 
loving, but very firm. 

" Not if you have chosen Miss Yargrave," 
she said, impetuously. And now it seemed to 
him that the sweet old tone that had sung 
lullabies to him in his cradle, and told him 
fairy tales in his childhood, had lost much of 
its sweetness. " Not if you have chosen 
Miss Vargrave," she repeated, for he was 
dumb. 

*' I have chosen her, and I have chosen 
well," he said, decidedly, recovering himself, 
removing his hand from her shoulder, and 
gradually, so it seemed to her, withdrawing 
himself from her. 

" You cannot know what I do about her, 
about her parentage," she said, blushing 
freely, as she broached the topic before her 
own son. 



MOTHER AND SON. 241 

*' I know everything." 

'* And you will marry a wife with no name, 

or a stain on it ; and I can never, never " 

she stopped, sobbing over the broken dream . 
the dream of going back to the old eastern 
county homestead with her son, and some born 
gentlewoman as her son's wife. 

"I do not see that I am specially called 
upon to visit the sins of the fathers upon the 
children," he said, impatiently, at last ; and 
she shuddered at his speech, though she had 
forced it from him by her treatment of the 
subject. At last she raised her head. 

** Have you made your choice known ?" 

" Yes, I have. Come, mother, this must 
not breed misunderstanding and ill-feeling be- 
tween us. If you cannot welcome Cissy as a 
daughter, the woman does not live whom you 
will welcome as such ; whether you will ever 
be privileged to welcome her, is an open ques- 
tion. I could combat the prejudices and 
opinions of all the world for her ; but whether 
I shall be strong enough to combat hers suc- 
cessfully or not, I do not know yet." 

" Hasn't she accepted you ? " Mrs. Scorrier 

VOL. I. R 



242 FALSE COLOURS. 

asked, with quick, motherly pride, looking up 
and drying her tears. 

No . that is to say, she has accepted me 
conditionally; but an adverse word or look 
from any one wh^e right in me she allowed, 
would deter her from taking me ; I know it 
would. I feel that my. happiness and worldly 
welfare hangs on a hair," he continued, ex- 
citedly. 

"You would not further that welfare by a 
marriage with her," Mrs. Scorrier said, per- 
suasively; ** there is no idea of her having any 
fortune from her uncle. Mrs. Vargrave told 
me so plainly; but that would be nothing, 
nothing. But I have hoped all your life that 
your wife, when you had one, might add to 
your claims, not cause you to be looked down 
upon and perhaps slighted ; for the world is so 
hard, Arthur, so hard;" and then memory 
assailed her again, and she bent her head away 
to conceal the tears that were falling fast from 
her soft, sad, hazel eyes. 

" The world may be as hard as it likes . it 
can't affect my love." 

" That is the romantic view of it, but it 



MOTHER AND SON. 243 

does affect the love of the nearest and dearest 
. it makes a woman hide from her own for 
years, because she will not see them look re- 
provingly ; and it may make her live a lie, and 
be hard to her children." 

" Mother, you are speaking of what happens 
in the case of a woman who has erred herself, 
not of one who is blameless ; we are not 
responsible for the faults and follies of one's 
parents. 

" But we suffer for their sins," she said. 

" I will leave it for others to be judges and 
accusers, and self-constituted dispensers of 
divine wrath," he replied ; " what there is sad 
and painful about her mother will never affect 
Cissy's relations with the nearest and dearest. 
Those she lives with could not love her better 
if she had been born in the purple ; and my 
devotion, if I can win her, shall compensate 
her for what she may lose through the narrow- 
mindedness of others." 

" You will not hear me,'* Mrs. Scorrier said, 
weeping freely now, and wringing Ai'thur 
terribly by her tears ; "but you will listen to 
Mr. Hepburn . he, at least, knows the world, 



244 FALSE COLOURS. 

and you will believe him if he tells you that 
this will injure you.'* 

" Yes, I will hear what he says, but I can't 
promise that what he says will make the 
slightest difference in my intentions." 

" And do you think that you are justified in 
taking a wife who will necessarily add much to 
your expenses, and not bring you a penny 
towards them? You can't live upon love in 
these days, Arthur, and with your habits, and, 
perhaps, with a family about you very soon, 
you may get into debt, and then all comfort 
will be over.'* 

" If I get into debt, I'll work and get out of 
it ; but there is no reason with my present 
income, and an increasing practice, why I 
should get into debt." 

** If you do, you cannot look to her relations 
to help you. I feel sure of that . Mrs. Var- 
grave said as much to me. They are fond of 
their niece, but they will do nothing to hurt 
their own daughter's prospects, for the sake of a 
niece who has no legal claim to the relation- 
ship ; and where you are to look for help I'm 
sure I don't know. I would pinch and screw. 



MOTHER AND SON. 245 

but all the pinching and screwing in the world 
would not enable me to give you more than 
would be a drop in the ocean of your house- 
keeping." 

*' You are going very much out of your way 
to face evil for me, mother," he said, laughing. 

*' I take the common-place and practical 
view of the case, Arthur," she said, seriously. 
'' So much money was sunk in buying the 
practice, and furnishing the house, and I know 
your income cannot be very large. I suppose 
I must not ask what it is ? " 

''You may ask, and I will tell you, with all 
the pleasui'e in life ; I clear eight hundi'ed a 
year." 

" And with some wives you might live most 
comfortably on it," the old lady said, medita- 
tively. 

*' I shall be quite contented with one . Cissy 
Var grave." s 

"What can she know about housekeeping?" 
Mrs. Scorrier inquired; "men with only eight 
hundred a year, in these days, want a wife who 
can do more than sit gracefully at the head of 
the table, and dress beautifully. What can she 



246 FALSE COLOURS. 

know of housekeeping, or of how far money 
will go . brought up abroad, where there is no 
management at all, I should say ? The end is 
certain. You will have no home-comforts, and 
you will be in debt into the bargain, and all 
my hopes for you will be blighted." 

"Well, we will not say any more on the 
matter to-night, mother," Arthur said, jumping 
np. " We must never quarrel, whatever 
comes," he continued, putting his arm round 
her again, and leaning his head down on her 
shoulder, ''my own dear mother, we must 
never quarrel." 

*'No, never; never. but oh! Arthur," and 
then she drifted off into tearfulness again, and 
BO they parted for the night. 

Mrs. Scorrier went to bed and pondered deeply, 
asking herself seriously what would be the right 
thing for her to do in this crisis, and striving 
earnestly to make herself give a truthful answer 
to the question. It has been told that by her 
blameless, obscure life, she had obliterated the 
memory of her early sin and sorrow from the 
minds of those who had only heard vague men- 
tion made of it, and nearly obliterated it from 



MOTHER AND SON. 247 

her o-^;vn. But the memory of it came back freshly 
to her this night. She had stirred the fading 
embers of the fire of remembrance, and it 
blazed up and almost consumed her in the night. 
*' Perhaps I ought to tell him all, and throw 
myself for mercy on his judgment," she thought. 
Then even her feminine illogical mind warned 
her this would hardly be the right course to 
pursue, while her heart shrank from the thought 
of being lowered in the eyes of her son. She 
dared not even tell him her story as if it were 
the story of another ; she felt she dared not. 
By some trick, some tone, some trembling, or 
some allusion, she would surely betray herself 
if she attempted it. So at length she went to 
sleep, resolving to seek Mr. Hepburn to-morrow, 
and ask his aid. 

Her son lay awake too, but from a very 
different cause. The only point in his mother's 
argument against his marriage which had struck 
him as really strong, was that wherein she 
pointed out to him the exceeding probability 
of his getting into debt. Simultaneously with 
his vivid recollection of this point, he had an 
equally vivid recollection of what Cissy had 



248 FALSE COLOURS. 

told him relative to the nomad life her mother 
and herself had led abroad. Deeply in love as 
he was, reason told him that she had not been 
brought up in the best school for the education 
of a middle-class British matron. 



A STRUGGLE FOR FREEDOM. 249 



CHAPTEE XII. 

A STRUGGLE FOR FREEDOM. 

When the Vargraves had got themselves back 
to their own quarters, and Mr. Scorrier had 
taken his leave of them for the night, they still 
lingered about, unwilling, as it seemed, to quit 
the cool balconied room, through whose open 
windows the sea-breeze played so temptingly. 
Moreover, in addition to the tempting nature of 
the sea-breeze, there was another detaining 
cause that was felt, though not expressed as 
yet. They were a very united family, and a 
feeling was in their midst now that something 
was to be said by one or more of them to-night 
to the others. Presently this feeling was 
worded by Mr. Vargrave. 

" We seem to be sitting here for some pur- 
pose which does not come off ; don't you think 
we had better go to bed, all of us ? " 



250 . FALSE COLOURS. 

"Oh! no, uncle, not yet," Cissy said, 
quickly, and then she went over to him, and 
sat herself on the arm of his chair, and whis- 
pered, " I want to tell you something." 

He was a very considerate man ; one who 
would never enforce the hearing of a confidential 
communication upon any one whose presence 
had not been solicited by the confiding commu- 
nicant. So now he asked ij^ a low tone, . 

" To tell me something, or to tell your aunt 
and me something?" 

*' Aunt and you," and she turned round and 
held her hand out to Mrs. Vargrave, who sat 
near, *' that is, if she will stay up and be 
bothered with my troubles." 

*' Then I think Isabelle had better go to bed," 
Isabelle's father said, and Isabelle rose up 
yawning, and saying, 

" Yes, I can wait till by-and-by to be told 
what I guess already." Then she went out of 
the room, laying her hand lovingly on Cissy's 
shoulder as she passed, making the latter feel 
that they were all glad, because they thought 
that she had glad tidings to give them about 
herself. 



A STEUGGLE FOR FREEDOM. 251 

"Now, what is it, Cissy?" Mr. Vargrave 
said, looking at her with that mingled air of 
amusement and embarrassment which men are 
apt to assume, when a girl is about to read them 
another page from the old, old story. 

*' I sui)pose, properly speaking, I should have 
left it to Mr. Scorrier to tell you this. But I 
preferred doing it myself, in order that I might 
be quite sure that it was done in the way I 
wished. He has asked me to marry him, and 
I am not clear that I ought to do it." 

" Do you .h to do it ? " 

*'Yes," she said, emphatically. 

" Then why not ? " 

" Why not ? Would you ask that question if 
he were your son ? " 

Mr. Vargrave, not feeling quite sure of what 
he would have done under these unlooked for 
circumstances, held his peace. 

" You see," Cissy said, waxing very earnest, 
and forsaking that stronghold of calm in which 
she had taken refuge from herself during the 
term of her residence in her uncle's house, " I 
wish to say 'yes' so very much, that I'm afraid 
of doing it until I have made sure that 'no, 



252 FALSE COLOURS. 

never/ ought not to be my answer ; I know there 
is a good deal against such a marriage for him. 
I know his friends will feel that there is much." 

"He has only his mother," said Mr. Var- 
grave. 

"Ah ! uncle, don't speak in that way, and make 
me think you want me to go from you, whether 
I feel I am right in going or not. He has only 
his mother . I know that ; and I know that he 
is much to her, and she is much to him. If I 
marry him, I shall come between them. I can't 
help myself. She will think he ought to have 
done better, and I shall resent her thinking so; 
and that is not all." 

" My dear Cissy, you are making mountains 
of molehills," Mrs. Vargrave said, reproachfully. 

" And if I am, the molehill may be the 
greater obstacle of the two ; you can scale a 
mountain in time, whereas a molehill may trip 
you up, and kill you at once." 

"Let us hear all your objections against this 
marriage, which, you say, you wish," Mr. Var- 
grave said, quietly ; " you have not stated all, 
you say; go on." 

" The other relates to means." 



A STRUGGLE FOR FREEDOM. 253 

* He knows you have no fortune ? ' ' Mr. 
Vargrave said, quickly. 

" Quite understands . realizes it fully . knows 
that, not only I have no fortune, hut that I'm 
penniless, or, rather, farthingless." 

" Then the question of means rests with him; 
if he thinks himself in a fit position to marry a 
woman without money, he, doubtless, is justified 
in doing so. I would never countenance an 
improvident marriage, but, if he is situated as I 
believe him to be, no objection can be raised on 
that score." 

" But, uncle, consider. I can bring no grist 
to the mill; and let me be sparing as I will, I may 
be a log to keejD him from rising, because I do 
not know how to spare in the right place ; now, 
I will link my objections together, and ask you, 
as a man of the world, and a business man, 
and a man who knows the value of money, 
shall I be right in giving myself and my heritage 
of shame into his care and charge ? '* 

" I did not know that you had suffered your 
mind to dwell so strongly on that misfortune, 
Cissy," Mr. Vargrave said, sadly. 

" But I have, for years ; ever since I learnt 



254 FALSE COLOURS. 

why my father and mother did not live together, 
like other girls' fathers and mothers ; ever 
since I knew the meaning of her meek bearing 
whenever she met English peoj)le, and they 
were rude to her ; how could I help my mind 
dwelling on it ? hov^^ could I help feeling that 
the time would come when I should have to 
smart for it ? It has come now." 

" But, really," Mr. Vargrave said, fidgeting 
about in his chair, and wishing with all his 
heart that the time had not come on this 
special evening, when he was feeling very much 
worn out with the beauties of St. Michael's 
Mount ; " but, really, if you married him, you 
would not be so prominently before the world 
as to challenge your position being questioned; 
if Mr. Scorrier is fully aware of all the dis- 
advantages under which you believe yourself 
to be labouring, and, being aware of them, 
loves you well enough to disregard them and 
wants to marry you, I think " 

''Me Quixotic," Cissy interrupted. 

" Not exactly that ; but, perhaps, a little too 
keenly alive to the claims of noblesse oblige. 
If I say there is no objection to the man him- 



A STRUGGLE FOR FREEDOM. 255 

self, and his means are such as to justify 
him in taking a wife, and you like him well 
enough to do it, there will be nothing, in my 
opinion, against the marriage." 

"Well," Cissy said, "that is coolly trans- 
ferring the difficulty," and then she could not 
help laughing as she told her uncle that he 
appeared to have forgotten that it was of her- 
self, and of her own position, that she had ex- 
pressly stated herself to be dubious ; not of Mr. 
Scorrier at all." 

"The time will come when both Scorrier and 
you will thank me for telling you that, sensible 
girl as you are, you are talking like a little 
fool now," Mr. Vargrave said, good-temperedly, 
rising up as he spoke, and so showing them 
that he wished the conference ended. Then 
they went their several ways ; Mrs. Yargrave 
looking in upon Cissy in her room a little later, 
to kiss, bless, and advise her, and, presently, 
to take it for granted that the affair would 
arrange itself to the music of wedding-bells. 

" And your summer holiday never need be 
the slightest expense to you, my dear," Mrs. 
Yargrave said, solemnly, as if the doubtfulness 



256 FALSE COLOUKS. 

of a summer holiday being feasible was the 
one drawback to the match in Cissy's eyes. 
** Our house will be your home whenever you 
can come to it ; and as for dress, dress costs 
just nothing at all in the country; besides, you 
shall go to him with such a trousseau that he 
shall not have to pay for any of your clothes 
for some years." 

** You're so good, aunt; but I'm really not 
quite sure that I'm going to him at all ; but 
if I do, I don't think my self-respect will be 
wounded if he does supply my hob-nailed 
boots and the few other trifles I may want 
when I'm out of the world," Cecile said, in as 
serious a tone as that in which her aunt had 
spoken. 

" And, after a time, his mother will be as 
pleasant as possible to you ; take my word for 
it, she will," Mrs. Vargrave said, prophetically 
and reassuringly. 

'* She will nev^r have an opportunity of 
being anything but pleasant to me," Cissy said, 
drily. 

*' If you take my advice, dear, you will leave 
off telling of what you used to do abroad. 



A STRUGGLE FOR FREEDOM. 257 

Quiet English people think it strange when you 
tell them you had a pair of princes to tea with 
you, and that you went out and fetched some 
slices of ham for them to eat, yom'self." 

'' I dare say they do think it strange," Cissy 
said, laughing; "they try to jDicture the Prince 
of Wales and the Duke of Cambridge dropping 
in, in a friendly way, to tea with people who 
live in lodgings along the Brompton Road, and 
their fancy refuses to treat the subject real- 
istically. Well, aunt, I'll bury m}^ dead . I 
mean, omit to mention my princes ; but they 
were such little princes that I might be forgiven 
them." 

Then Mrs. Vargrave . feeling that now, as 
Cissy had taken this tone, nothing tangible 
could be arrived at between them this night . 
retired to rest, and Cecile was free to think 
about what she had done, and what she had 
better do. The result of her reflections will 
appear, illustrated by her conduct, during the 
course of the next few days. 

" You have only yourself to blame about 
him," Mrs. Hepburn had said, with reference 
to Arthur Scorrier, when her husband had re- 

VOL. I. s 



258 FALSE COLOUES. 

buked her about him, and Mr. Hepburn girded 
against the remark in his heart, feeling that it 
was only too true. 

Nevertheless, though he thoroughly accepted 
the truth of her saying, he was very angry 
with her for having said it. The weeks had 
not been many during which Amelia had been 
his own. But, few as they had been, it is a 
fact that he found her a very terrible posses- 
sion already. She was very quiet, and very 
self-contained, still, and subdued in voice and 
manner. But, for all these things, she was 
wanting in that gentleness which he began to 
think now was the characteristic he most 
prized in women. She was still, but she was 
not soft . indeed, it may be averred, on the 
contrary, that she was hard . hard as iron, 
and not so malleable as iron, since no amount 
of warmth would make her bend. He felt 
that she had it in her to be very harsh and 
bitter to him, if it ever seemed to her that he 
had done her wrong in any way. Paris and 
its pleasures must have got very much into 
his head, he told himself now, before he thought 
of taking that tall, unbending, cool young 



A STRUGGLE FOR FREEDOM. 259 

woman to be the light and glory of his heart 
and hearth. 

This question began to vex him sorely ; was 
he not one who deserved to be. punished, inas- 
much as he had disregarded nature, and lightly 
considered their respective ages when he first 
proposed a marriage between them ? " Crabbed 
age and youth cannot dwell together," he knew 
on good poetical authority. But then, again, 
his was not "crabbed age," or, at least, it 
would not be crabbed age, if it were given fair 
play, and not unjustly crossed, and lightly es- 
teemed. His reason told him that he had been 
an old fool in taking this girl, in the hope that 
she would irradiate his declining years. His 
declining years would be dim indeed, he felt 
now, if they were not irradiated by some light 
on which more reliance could be i^laced than 
he could bring himself to place on his Amelia. 
She puzzled him . perplexed him sorely by 
that quick variation of manner which she had 
displayed towards Arthur Scorrier. Mr. Hep 
burn had watched her small attempts at first 
to play grancle dame, and patronising lady- 
gracious to the young village surgeon . marked 



260 FALSE COLOURS. 

them with pain, and something which would 
have been contempt had not his wife called 
forth the feeling. Still, the change in her was 
unaccountable, and so perplexing and disagree- 
able. '* Hunting up his mother, and throwing 
herself into the arms of an intimacy that 
doesn't promise anything that she can care 
for!" he said, impatiently ; "the world will 
be less lenient in its judgment than I am." 

Meanwhile, lenient as he believed himself to 
be in his judgments respecting her conduct, he 
was very cross in his bearing towards herself 
this night. He made life wearisome to her by 
the bitterness of the complaints he made about 
the climate and cookery, the accommodation 
and air of Penzance. *' Besides," he added, 
"there is something infinitely distasteful to me 
in being dragged into these small sea-side ac- 
quaintances ; it's all very well for grocers, and 
the like, to come down to these places and 
grow hilarious over the bad hotel-wines at their 
customers' expense, but it is not my style to 
have people in to refresh themselves in my 
drawing-room after their horrible pic-nics." 

"You mean the Vargraves," she said; "I 



A STRUGGLE FOR FREEDOM. 261 

am sorry that my friends should be so ob- 
noxious to you." 

" All vulgar people and vulgar customs are 
obnoxious to me," he replied. 

'' Vulgar ! That word at least does not 
apply to the Vargraves." 

"I acknowledge that," he said, waving his 
head and his hand with lofty condescension ; 
still I have not been in the habit of people 
* dropping in,' as they call it, and I don't 
like it." 

'* Yet at one time " she paused abruptly. 

She had been on the point of reminding him, 
that at one time Mr. Scorrier had been in the 
habit of " dropping in " in the free and easy 
style, which he now found objectionable, at 
Glene. 

" At one time what ? " he asked. 

" Oh, nothing ; I was thinking it was almost 
a pity that we had not a fairer understanding 
before we married," she said, suddenly. 

'^ It was a pity, a great pity, if you feel the 
very slight obligations I would lay you under 
to be burdensome; we can never hope to lead 
liappy, comfortable lives together, while you 



265i FALSE COLOUES. 

bitterly resent as injuries my most moderate 
requests." 

**No, we cannot." She had turned half 
aside, and now stood with her shoulder towards 
him, and her head bent a little away. "We 
cannot, we cannot," she repeated, as it seemed 
mechanically, and then she faced round again, 
and said . 

" But cannot we live apart ? Assign any 
reason you like for the separation ; say it's my 
health, or temper, or anything you like. Can- 
not we live apart ? I will be contented with a 
very moderate allowance;" and then she began 
to speak fast and earnestly. " A very small 
certainty will suffice me . only make it certain, 
and me free." 

" Never ! You shall not make me ridicu- 
lous, and yourself conspicuous ; you have done 
me a great wrong, a great wrong," he repeated, 
querulously. " But I will not cast you off, or 
leave you to yourself." 

And then Amelia knew that, let what -would 
come, she must abide the issue. 



A REQUEST AND A EEFUSAL. 263 



CHAPTEE XIII. 

A REQUEST AND A EEFUSAL. 

There had never been the faintest shade of 
romance over either the anticipation of the 
marriage, or the marriage itself, in Amelia's 
mind. Nevertheless, she had believed that 
there would be something very tangibly good 
and satisfactory about it. Broadly she had 
asserted . when her parents had remonstrated 
with her upon the improvident spirit displayed 
in that offer she made of utter renunciation of 
all Mr. Hepburn's worldly goods, provided he 
died and she married again . broadly she had 
asserted that she " did not care for love, but 
that she did care for luxury." Now she had 
luxury . luxury of the most blameless and res- 
pectable order. But it was cut too carefully 
after a pattern she did not like for her to be 



264 FALSE COLOURS. 

satisfied with it, and when she tried to escape, 
it was shown her ruthlessly that there was no 
escape for her. 

One little sentence that her husband had 
uttered after she had made her ineffectual 
struggle for freedom, rang in her ears during 
all her waking hours that night. " We must 
make the best of each other, for I will not con- 
sent to be made ridiculous by your going 
away." This he had said, and this she felt 
quite sure he had meant. He would not let 
her go, even if she sacrificed all the coveted 
things for which she had married him. He 
would not let her go, and yet he would not love 
her the better for her remaining. But he 
would keep her with him, because it was his 
right so to do ; because her staying was more 
conducive to his dignity than her going would 
have been. 

She was not an impulsive woman. Indeed, 
judged by the whole course of her life, any one 
would have been justified in pronouncing her 
to be an entirely reasonable woman. Her end 
and aim, such as it had been, had always been 
kept steadily in view by her. She had achieved 



A REQUEST AND A REFUSAL. 265 

it in her youth ; achieved it without compro- 
mising one of the traditions ^\'hich she had 
been brought up to esteem; achieved it at an 
age when most girls are hazy in their minds 
as to what they want to do with themselves . 
far more how to set about doing it. But now 
something else had come to the hard-natured 
woman, who had never wasted one foolish hour 
in receiving or paying attentions that were not 
likely to tend to a good matrimonial climax. 
Something else had come, and all the gloss was 
brushed off her early triumph. 

'- He will worry me out of my life," she 
thought, turning about in her restlessness ; 
" and I have nothing to take off my attention 
from his worrying vrays." Then she grieved 
over the absence of some of those small do- 
mestic cares and annoyances, which are fre- 
quently serious crumples in the rose-leaves of 
happily-married women. She remembered how 
her own mother had often found a servants' 
quarrel, and the difficulty of adjusting the 
same, a counter-irritant when some serious sor- 
row was impending. But at Glene she was 
too far away from her servants for her ever to 



266 FALSE COLOURS. :. 

regard them as other than mere serving ma- 
chines. She did not tell herself so in so many 
words, but she felt strongly that for her, there 
was neither liberty, equality, nor fraternity. 

As for the poor old gentleman whom she 
had married, he stood for less than nothing in 
these calculations which she was making re- 
specting her own future comfort ; or, rather, her 
future power of enduring his existence. Her 
most earnest hope respecting him was, that he 
would keep away as much as possible from the 
apartments which were more especially her 
own. One method of passing away the time 
occurred to her, and her heart beat a little 
more quickly with delight at the happy thought. 
She would get Mr. Scorrier to direct her taste 
in refurnishing and ornamenting a room . a 
boudoir . and she would make that room and 
its decorations the basis on which to build up 
an artistic and refined friendship with him. 
In that room, and amidst the surroundings 
which he himself had suggested, he should 
teach her to appreciate good books, and good 
art, and she would make herself essential to 
him as a real friend, in whom he could rely, in 



A REQUEST AND A REFUSAL. 267 

whom he could confide. To him, at least, 
she resolved to try to seem to be . 

" A perfect woman, nobly planned, 
To warn, to suffer, and command." 

She felt that, given a sufficiently strong incen- 
tive, and she could become a very good woman 
. a patient, self-sacrificing, enduring woman. 
But even as she felt this, the thought smote 
her that the incentive could never be given 
now; would never be offered; might not be 
accepted by her, even if it was offered. She 
would never be permitted by fate and circum- 
stances to warn and command one whom she 
could care for. All that there was for her to 
do was to suffer . to suffer and be as strong 
as it was in her to be. 

They sat down to breakfast the following 
day, looking and feeling, to all appearances, 
very much as they had looked and felt every 
morning since their marriage. In reality, they 
were farther apart ; for her entreaty to leave 
him at any cost to herself, had pushed him 
away from her ; and, weak in his intense con- 
sciousness of the reason why she had married 
him, he could not summon up the requisite 



268 FALSE COLOUKS. 

strength for the struggle, and try to get into 
her heart. - 

He could not summon up the strength to 
make the effort, and perhaps it would have 
been a mere waste of material had he essayed 
to do so. No skill, no strength, would ever 
make him more to that hard young woman, 
whom he had so liberally endowed with what 
she valued most in the world, than a tedious 
old man, whom it would take very little to 
make repulsive to her. He recognized this 
truth, or half recognized it, in all its hideous 
nakedness, as he sat at breakfast with her this 
morning ; and though there had been no ro- 
mance in their union, he felt cut and sore, old 
and contemptible. For another love had been 
given to him, without the giver staying to 
count the cost, when both he and she were 
young. He remembered this fact vividly now, 
and as he contrasted it with Amelia's coldness 
and hardness, his heart was smitten with a 
sad memory of that which he had cast away. 

He was pleased for a few minutes to see that 
his wife had dressed herself with more care 
and taste for the . breakfast-table than she 



A REQUEST AND A REFUSAL. 269 

usually bestowed upon her appearance when 
his eyes alone were to be gladdened by it. 
During her unmarried life she had been un- 
wearied in presenting a fresh and fashionable 
front to the world. She had never permitted 
herself, in her hours of liability to others, to 
grow careless. But at Glene she had not had 
the incentive of strange or avowedly critical 
eyes upon her, to keep her up to the mark of 
being moderately careful in private, and her 
gorgeous toilettes . the toilettes that had been 
designed for the dinner-parties with which she 
had anticipated finding her career largely che- 
quered . these were still doomed to silver paper 
and disuse. Consequently, she had lapsed into 
slovenliness, not being kept therefrom by any 
real innate love of the beautiful. But this day 
she had evidently made little efforts to look well, 
had studied sundry details of costume which 
hitherto she had neglected, and had obtained, 
in consequence of these efforts and studies, a 
fairer result than she had ever heretofore 
thought it worth while to put before him so 
early in the morning. 

" Upon my word, you are very nicely dressed 



270 FALSE COLOURS. 

this morning . very nicely dressed, indeed ; 
that is quite my taste," Mr. Hepburn said, in 
a commendatory tone, glancing approvingly 
over Amelia's costume. Then he peered at it, 
and questioned her concerning the name of the 
shade . "was it what they called mauve or 
pale violet?" . and the material, "why Llama? 
when probably there was none of the wool of 
the genuine animal in it?" . and altogether 
succeeded in dashing her own pleasure in the 
dress. He talked in this way, not because his 
heart or even his taste was interested in the 
subject, but because he desired to make his 
own man and the waiters believe that the 
merest details connected with his young wife 
were of importance to him. 

The morning hours slipped by. It was just 
on the point of striking eleven, and eleven was 
the hour at which she had requested Arthur 
Scorrier to come and see her. She rose up 
from the breakfast-table and went away into 
the adjoining room, and then stood at the win- 
dow to watch the passers by and wait for Mr. 
Scorrier. Presently she saw him, not coming 
in, as in duty bound, to see what she had required 



A EEQUEST AND A EEFUSAL. 271 

of him, but going out with the two Misses Var- 
grave. At the same moment she felt her face 
flushing with a dark, angry red, and heard a 
footstep by her side. And she turned away, 
avowing to herself that she " was hunted and 
watched," as her husband said . 

" What are you looking at, my dear ? " 

"The sea, I suppose," she said; ''that is 
what every one comes to look at, or, at any 
rate, what every one says he or she comes to 
look at ; I am going out now, to walk by it." 

*' To join the Vargraves ?" he asked, glancing 
after the two girls and their escort, anxiously, 
as he spoke. 

'* No, indeed ; I had quite enough of them 
last night. I am going by myself." 

It was almost uttered, the offer he felt inclined 
to make of accompanying her. Almost uttered, 
but not quite. He remembered that he might 
stumble upon Mrs. Scorrier, and he could not 
bring himself to do so yet. So he suffered 
Amelia to go out by herself. And as soon as 
she left the hotel, she altered her avowed design 
of walking by the sea, and set off rapidly towards 
Mrs. Scorrier' s house. 



272 FALSE COLOURS. 

Mrs. Scorrier was at home, alone ; and she 
welcomed Mrs. Hepburn with a warmth that 
left no doubt as to the reality and truth of her 
words being sincere. It was a delightful varia- 
tion on the rather monotonous air of her life, 
this friendly, unfettered intercourse with a 
young worldly woman. For, unsophisticated 
and unworldly as Mrs. Scorrier was herself, 
she had a quick perceptive faculty, and this 
enabled her now to judge Amelia far more 
justly and completely than Amelia judged her. 

For a few moments after Amelia sat down in 
the shady, chintz-furnished room that was redo- 
lent of quiet, and dried lavender, and peace, 
she felt herself to be in a very false position. 
Instinctively, she understood that her visit 
would perplex Mrs. Scorrier, and she knew that 
when old ladies are perplexed about a motive, 
they are apt to try to worry it out, and arrive 
at a full comprehension of it. On the face of 
it there was something absurd in her having 
come here, and Mrs. Hepburn sighed at this 
reflection, for she v/as not a woman who often 
suffered herself to be hurried into the perform- 
ance of an absurd act. She felt that when it 



A REQUEST AND A REFUSAL. 273 

came to be known that she had made such a 
visit, her husband would find fault, and be 
disagreeably displeased, and the Vargraves 
would marvel, and Mr. Scorrier would laugh. 
As this last possibility occurred to her, she 
determined to waste no more time in useless 
repentance over a false step . if this coming 
here was a false step. So she quelled the kindly 
fuss which Mrs. Scorrier was making about 
the hot walk she must have had, and the um- 
brella she had carried to shade herself, and the 
superior advantages the lounge-chair jDossessed 
over the couch. She quelled all these amiable 
attempts to make her feel petted, and prized, 
and valued highly, and spoke abruptly 
about the thing that was uppermost in her 
mind. 

" I should have saved myself the hot walk, 
and waited quietly for you to come and see me 
to-day, as it was agreed you should do, only I 
belong to my husband later in the day . he 
likes to drive, and wishes me to go with him . 
so as I did not wish to miss you, I thought I 
would come here, and ask you to forgive me for 
being so early." 

VOL. I. T 



274 FALSE COLOURS. 

"Not a bit too early," the old lady said, 
heartily. "As to that, indeed, I call it late ; but 
I suit my hours to Arthur now, and we had 
only just done breakfast when he went out, half 
an hour before you came." 

" I saw him going out with Miss Vargrave," 
Amelia said, quietly ; " that is why I came. I 
knew you would be alone." 

Old Mrs. Scorrier's face had flushed a little 
at the mention of Miss Vargrave. Her voice 
was a little troubled now, as she said, . 

" Miss Vargrave and you are old friends, I 
think I have understood." 

*' Well, no," Amelia replied, with a great air 
of being perfectly frank at the cost of pain to 
herself. " I have known . no, I can't say I have 
* known' . her for four or five years ; but I have 
been in the habit of seeing her often during that 
time. Few people do know Cissy Vargrave ; she 
either likes to affect that there is a mystery 
about herself, or there is some little mystery 
concerning her. I think the less one has to do 
with people about whom something can come 
out the better, don't you ? " 

Mrs. Scorrier, with the memory of the secret 



A BEQUEST AND A REFUSAL. 275 

and the sorrow that had darkened her own life 
vividly before her, said "Yes," but said it falter- 
ingly. 

" So that is one reason," Amelia went on 
glibly, " why I don't get her to Glene to stay 
with me ; my own wish would be to invite her 
there, and do the best I could for her; you 
know what I mean by that, Mrs. Scorrier . 
every woman knows, of course . but I think of 
what the consequences might be, and I do 
shrink from any responsibility. Young men 
visit at a house, and are apt to estimate visi- 
tors by the house they are visiting in; you 
know what I mean." 

" Yes, I do," Mrs. Scorrier replied, lured into 
a confidence on the instant ; " and I think it 
wonderful, and admirable, that you should have 
such consideration and forethought at your age ; 
I feel and speak as a mother. Young men will 
be foolish where a pretty face is concerned ; no 
one knows that better than I do." And the old 
lady shook her head, and looked as though she 
had experienced a world of woe through her 
son's wrong-headedness with regard to i)retty 
faces. 



276 FALSE COLOUES. 

** And it is the worst form of folly of which 
they can be guilty," Amelia responded, saga- 
ciously, as if maternal cares connected with 
young men already weighed heavily upon her ; 
'' the very worst form of folly, for its effects may 
weight and hamper them through life. I often 
think," she went on, with suave maliciousness, 
" that poor Cissy is badly off indeed ; no man, 
whose position is not perfectly well secured, will 
dare to marry her, and no man whose position 
is perfectly well secured will care to marry 
her." 

** I really wish Mr. Hepburn would speak to 
him about it," Mrs. Scorrier said, excitedly, 
pursuing her own train of thought rather than 
answering Mrs. Hepburn's words. ** Mr. Hep- 
burn has such influence over Arthur, that even 
now, it's my firm conviction, he would pause if 
Mr. Hepburn asked him to, though he won't 
listen to me." 

"About what?" Mrs. Hepburn asked, in- 
nocently. 

"Why, about this young lady . this Miss 
Vargrave. I am sure I talked and talked last 
night till a stone would have been moved. I 



A REQUEST AND A REFUSAL. 277 

pointed out things to him that young people 
don't think of ; but no, he won't take my experi- 
ence, and will go on his own way ; and I have 
hoped such different things for him." 

"Do you mean that he is going to marry 
Miss Vargrave?" Amelia said, rising up, and 
feeling that she was very pale, and that she had 
better get home to her hotel as soon as pos- 
sible. 

" I mean that he will, if she will have him," 
the mother said, sadly; and then Mrs. Hepburn's 
tones trembled with rage which she could not 
master, and for which she could not account, 
as she said, . 

" If she will ! a nameless girl and a pauper 
is not likely to prove unwilling ; she is too much 
a woman of the world not to know that Mr. 
Scorrier is most exceptionally unexacting in his 
requirements in a wife." Then she shook hands, 
carelessly, with the one whom she had kindly 
condescended to make so much more doubtful 
and unhappy than there was any need for her to 
have been made, and went back to Mr. Hepburn* 
who was tired and cross, by reason of having 
maintained an uncomfortable attitude at the 



278 FALSE COLOURS. 

window, with a field-glass in his hand, ever since 
she had left him. 

" You said you were going to walk by the 
sea . and I have been watching for you," 
he said, testily, as she came into his ^Dre- 
sence. 

" I changed my mind, and went into the 
town," she said. 

"Where?" 

"To Mrs. Scorrier's; you expressed a dis- 
inclination to receive her here, therefore polite- 
ness commanded that I should go to her, after 
having made an appointment for her to come 
to me." 

" Since when have old women had such an 
attraction for you," he said, sneeringly, and 
there was something disagreeable, not to sa^y 
aggravating, in Mr. Hepburn's expression when 
he desired to express derision. 

" Since I have known how hard a thing it is 
to live always alone with an old man," she 
answered, in great exasperation ; and then she 
took herself away to her own bedroom, there to 
bemoan the non-fulfilment of all the futile hopes 
she had built upon this marriage. 



A REQUEST AND A REFUSAL. 279. 

Altogether, it may easily be conceiyecl that 
Mr. Hepburn was not in a fitting frame of mind 
to give a favourable reading to a letter which was 
put into his hands about two hours after this 
conversation with his wife. The letter was from 
Mrs. Scorrier, and was as follows : . 

" jSTine, Tlie Crescent, Penzance. 

" My dear Sir, . It is hard to address you 
directly, after so many years of indh-ect com- 
munication with, and checked interest in you. 
My excuse for breaking the bonds which have 
been imposed upon me, . 'how' I know not, 
'why,' I feel painfully, . is that I am bound to 
pursue any course that may possibly prove bene- 
ficial to my son, however unpleasant that course 
may be to me, and however greatly you may 
censure me for adopting it. You have always 
shown that you have Arthur's interest at heart 
. for his father's sake only, of that I am well 
aware. You have, also, always had great influ- 
ence over him; he relies upon and respects you, 
and your judgment would have great weight vdth 
him in a matter where mine is entirely dis- 
regarded; this matter is his marriage. The 
young lady to whom he has offered his hand, 



280 FALSE COLOUKS. 

and who has won his heart, might satisfy the 
aspirations of a mother who had some better 
heritage to leave her son than I have to leave 
Arthur. As it is, I am in painful doubt that 
the shadow which is over her birth may but 
deepen the shadow which is over his ; that 
shadow has clouded my life for more than thirty 
years. Is it any wonder that I would see all 
bright and clear about my son ? We are strangers 
personally, but I feel assured that you will help 
me, for the sake of one we both loved. Get my 
boy to pause while there is yet time. Arthur 
will be sure to tell you of his affection for Miss 
Cecile Yargrave. I have talked the subject over 
with Mrs. Hepburn, who has just done me the 
honour to call upon me, and I cannot but wish 
that her conscientious views about it were shared 
by Mr. and Mrs. Vargrave. They are injudi- 
cious, not to say very wrong, in presenting this 
young lady, who is, I acknowledge, both beauti- 
ful and charming, under false colours to the 
world. If we could meet, I could point out, 
more forcibly than I can in writing, why such 
a marriage would be fatal to Arthur. Therefore, 
J ask you to see me . to cease to treat me as if 



A REQUEST AND A REFUSAL. 281 

I had been the foe of your friend. Believe me 
to be, 

" My dear Sir, 

" Yours obediently, 

" Mabel Scorrier.'* 

Mr. Hepburn's hand shook as he read 
through this appeal. When he came to the 
signature he read it aloud, and his wife, who 
had come back to the room, fancied that there 
was a tremor in his voice. 

" Did you speak?" she asked, indifferently. 

"Eh! no; that is, here is a letter which I 
wish you would answer for me," he answered, 
tossing it over to her little table. *' !Mrs. 
Scorrier writes to ask me to see her about some 
woman's folly that she has ah'eady discussed 
with you, I find." 

She took the letter up and read it quickly ; 
then she said, . 

" I will answer it, if you tell me what I am 
to say. You will see her ? . when shall it 
be?" 

*' I will not see her," he said, raising his 
voice ; "1 will not be persecuted, when I come 



282 FALSE COLOUKS. 

out for my health, by any folly of this sort. 
Say to her . oh, say that I consider her son 
to be quite capable of managing his own affairs 
without any interference from me or from any- 
one else ; say what you like, in fact, only give 
her to understand that I won't be harassed 
about the matter, and that if I offer any counsel 
to Arthur, it will be to the effect that he acts 
as he deems best for himself." 

" That will be rather a rude letter to write 
to a mother who has paid you the compliment 
of asking your advice about her son," Amelia 
said, rising up and going to a writing-table ; 
" still, I am quite ready to write it ; it does 
not concern me ; I suppose the more concise I 
make it the better ? ' ' 

" Decidedly," he said, curtly, and then she 
proceeded to write as follows : . 

" Mr. Hepburn presents his compliments to 
Mrs. Scorrier, and, in answer to her two re- 
quests, begs to assure her that he sees no 
reason for an interview with her, and no im- 
pediment to her son's marriage with Miss 
Cecile Vargrave. Under this view of the 



A REQUEST AND A REFUSAL. 283 

case, therefore, Mr. Hepburn begs to decline 
the honourable offices of counsellor and ad- 
viser. 

" Queen's Hotel, Penzance." 

"What have you said, my dear?" said Mr. 
Hepburn, as he saw his wife lay down her pen 
and pick up an envelope. 

" Shall I read it to you ?" she replied, feel- 
ing tolerably sure that in his haste to have done 
with the business, he would not accept her 
offer. 

" Can't you tell me concisely what you have 
said?" he answered. 

" I have said just what you told me to say," 
she said, folding up the note, sealing and 
addressing it as she spoke. " I have told her 
(with great civility, of course), that you must 
decline the honour she offers you ; * thrusts upon 
you ' I might have said if I had not been polite ; 
and that you think there is no impediment to 
Mr. Scorrier's marriage with Miss Vargrave ; 
that's all you wanted said, isn't it ? " 

"Yes," he said, with a sigh of relief, "and 
I hope she will take it as a definite answer." 



284 FALSE COLOURS. 

" Not but that I think it perfectly reasonable 
on her part, stupid old woman as she is, that 
she should object to such a marriage for her 
son; all respectable people have a prejudice 
in favour of legitimacy," Amelia said, scorn- 
fully; and then she thought of the thousand 
and odd ways in which it would be within the 
compass of her ability to make Mr. Scorrier 
regret the rashness of the step he was about to 
take. 

" Cissy Vargrave will never smart under 
slights without making a sign," she thought, 
" and if she smarts, her husband will suffer 
for it." 

Then, unfortunately for her own peace of 
mind, she placed herself at the window just in 
time to see Mr. Scorrier drive away from the 
hotel with the Vargraves. *' He has been with 
them all day, and they would never allow that 
if it were not settled," she said to herself. It 
seemed to her now, that she might just as well 
go back to Glene, and establish herself in the 
neighbourhood as well as might be, before the 
bride came home. For that Cissy would soon 
be in Danebury as a bride she could not doubt. 



A REQUEST AND A REFUSAL. 285 

Meantime, Mrs. Scorrier received and read 
the reply to her appeal to Mr. Hepburn ; read 
it with tears in her eyes . tears which she was 
careful to wipe away before Arthur came home. 
*' He is very unforgiving," she thought, " but 
he must have been a good man all his days, 
and I am only thankful that my Arthur should 
have such a friend." 



END OF VOL. I. 
FALSE COLOUES, 

CHAPTEK I. 

BEYOND THE RETREATING POINT. 

It is one thing to oppose and refute, and ap- 
parently even to scorn and contemn, the repre- 
sentations of one who advocates some scheme 
/^ which is dear to the heart of the person who 
nevertheless feels bound to offer such opposi- 
tion. One thing to do all this at the time of 
such advocacy, and quite another thing to avoid 
being influenced by it in after moments of re- 
flection. Cissy Vargrave had advanced several 
objections in return for the evident favour with 
which her uncle was disposed to regard her 
marriage with the surgeon. She had advanced 
them, honestly believing them to be great and 
important, if not insurmountable, and she had 
told herself that she would attend to them. 

VOL. II. B 



Si FALSE COLOURS. 

This she had done at night, when she was 
tired, and over-excited, and above all, when 
Mr. Scorrier was not by to appeal against her 
decree. But in the morning light, in the fresh 
sea-air, while she seemed to be taking in health 
and strength, and the power of enjoying life at 
every step, she felt herself to be rapidly veering 
round to the wishes of the man who walked by 
her side, benefiting by the sea-air and viewing 
the same scenes. 

He had not spoken about the subject that 
was nearest to his heart until they had been 
more than an hour out walking. Then Isabelle 
met some one with whom she had just enough 
of an acquaintance to enable her to leave Cissy 
and Mr. Scorrier to themselves, in what ap- 
peared to be the order of things. The ac- 
quaintance was a young mother who was wear- 
ing herself and her nurse's patience out, in 
abortive attempts to amuse two exacting chil- 
dren, who each moment were seized with a wild 
and irrepressible desire to be where they were 
not, and to be doing other than they were. 

** Isabelle is so good-natured," Cissy said, 
looking back at her cousin. ** She takes half 



BEYOND THE EETEEATING POINT. 6 

the toil of those children off that little woman's 
hands whenever we meet them." 

" She is good-natured in that, and in giving 
me a chance of thanking you (not half as 
warmly as I wish though), for not having de- 
cided against me." 

They stayed by a long seat as he spoke, and 
Cissy sat dovm to recover her breath . and gain 
time . before she made answer. 

" I think my decision very much in your 
favour," she said at last. ''You'll think so 
too before many years . months I mean . are 
over ; circumstances decide for me, and imjDel 
me to say . it can't be." 

" Your icy little worldly wisdom will soon be 
melted," he said, sitting down by her. '' Seri- 
ously, Cissy, circumstances are very much in 
our favour, for we love each other, and there is 
no one to say us na3\" 

" But . now don't be afraid that I'm going 
over the old ground again, or at least the whole 
of the old ground . how can you calmly contem- 
plate paining your mother so, as you would 
pain her by marrying me ? " 

*' My mother! I love my mother verv 



4 FALSE COLOURS. 

much, but really I should consider my own 
happiness first, when it came to a question of 
marriage." 

"But I should always feel galled at the 
thought of her not liking me. I can't bear not 
to be liked by those with whom I have to do, 
especially when I can't help feeling that they 
have justice on their side ; now if I could '* 

" If you could what ? " he said, as she hesi- 
tated. 

** If I could carry out a sketchy dream I once 
dreamt during that time I told you of . that 
time when I was vagabondizing," she said, 
laughing softly, " we might then marry in time; 
but I don't see how it can be done." 

*' What was the dream ? " he asked. 

"A dazzling one; I'll tell you how it com- 
menced. Once, in the course of our wander- 
ings, mamma and I found ourselves stranded 
in London, at a boarding-house, and through a 
little art-student, a girl who was placed there 
while she was learning to paint at an atelier in 
Newman Street, we got to know a very charm- 
ing actress. I won't tell you who it was, be- 
cause we were friends then, and we are two 



BEYOND THE RETREATING POINT. 5 

now, through other people's interference ; but 
she was charming . an Englishwoman, I believe, 
but with a sweet, soft-sounding Italian name ; 
from her I heard a great deal about stage-life, 
and " 

"You got bitten with the usual foolish love 
for it, I suppose," Arthur Scorrier interrupted. 

*' I longed for it," she resumed, earnestly; 
" longed for it, thirsted for it. I quickly felt 
that if I could go on the stage, my life would 
have a great tangible joy in it that nothing 
could touch ; but I gave up my dream." 

She paused and looked out sadly over the 
sea. 

" Why did you do it ? " he asked. '' Well, 
you will hardly understand it, and yet I did, 
and respected it in some way, though I thought 
it silly. My mother set her face against it ; 
she drew the line between the blameless and 
the blemished according to her o'^n ideas . as 
every one does, in fact . and actresses did not 
rank amongst the former in her estimation. I 
gave it up." 

*' That being the case, why do you regret it ? " 

" I am dreaming it again," she said, quickly; 



6 FALSE COLOURS. 

*'. it would be a means as well as an end now^ 
Arthur. I will bind myself to marry you if 
for a few years you will let me try it. Will 
you ? . just long enough to taste its joys, and 
make a little money ? ' ' 

" If that is the only condition on which you 
will bind yourself to marry me, I must agree ; 
but, Cissy, you don't loye me if you can't accept 
at my hands what you will want of money." 

" I love you too well to like to let you feel 
my dependence ; I love you far too well to put 
your love to the test of married poverty." 

*' It would not be such poverty . I have told 
you I have not asked for a wife before I can 
manage to maintain her as I would wish to see 
my wife maintained." 

" Ah ! we are not judges of what would be 
ours to endure in the routine of every-day life> 
now, while we are here for a holiday ; at least 
I am not. I always feel ever so much richer 
at an hotel ; it all goes so easy . one gets ser- 
vice, and obsequiousness, and comfort, and 
good dinners, and all the other things that 
money can command at all times, but that are 
only my portion at an hotel." 



BEYOND THE RETREATING POINT. 7 

" Cissy, do you care so much for ail these 
things ?" he said, dei^recatingly. 

" Yes, I do. I do, and I can't help it ; I 
like them altogether ; not that I really need rich 
food and much waiting upon ; but it does me 
good to see myself well surrounded." 

*' You shall have no want of refinement in 
your new home, my darling," he said, gravely; 
'' but don't try to make me think that you con- 
sider that all in all." 

" No, I think more of your love," she said, 
frankly ; '' at least I think I do ; and if I hadn't 
experienced some of the stings of poverty, I 
should very likely tell you that I entirely dis- 
regarded the prospect of it ; but I have felt 
its stings, and they were sharp. Now let us go 
on," she continued, rising up. '' Thank you, 
Arthur, for saying I may gang my own gait. 
I shall make a better wife for the concession, 
when I am one." 

They were presently rejoined by Isabelle. 
*'You happy people," the girl began, "to 
have been sitting down calmly all this time 
instead of toiling about with children and peb- 
bles. I am worn out . shall we go in ?" 



8 FALSE COLOURS. 

"I wish Cissy to come on and see my 
mother," Mr. Scorrier said, introducing his 
wish to Cissy for the first time. 

Isabelle looked sharply round at them both, 
and then said . 

** Oh ! I understand. It is settled then ; and 
you are to be my cousin-in-law . that will be 
the relationship between us, won't it?" 

" Yes, I hope so," he said, '' and " 

" Yes, when I have passed a certain ordeal 
to which I have permission to subject myself," 
Cissy added ; and then she signified her willing- 
ness to go on at once to see his mother. 

" For the dear old lady is not pne with whoin 
you ought to stand on etiquette," Mr. Scorrier 
urged in behalf of the plan, and Cissy graciously 
acceded to it. 

They had been out strolling about for 
several hours . so long, in fact, that Mrs. 
Scorrier had been given time to receive Mr. 
Hepburn's reply, and to recover partially from 
the effects of it, before her son and future 
daughter made their appearance. 

Only partially. She was one of those fair- 
skinned, plump-faced women on whom tears 



BEYOND THE RETREATING POINT. U 

leave their traces for several hours after they 
have been dried. So now Arthur saw at a 
glance that something had occurred. Either 
his mother had been suffering her mind to 
dwell on something that was unpleasant, or 
she had been unexi^ectedly pained, or she was 
ill. 

Taking this last view of the case, he made 
his manner very tender to her as she rose up to 
meet them. 

" This hot weather is telling on you, 
mother," he said, kindly; '*I must get you out 
to-night for a drive along the coast;" and then 
he drew Cissy's hand on to his arm, and petted 
it, and told his mother by this action as well as 
in words, that this girl "was to be her daughter 
and his wife." 

The old lady struggled with herself, with her 
high hopes of long years now blighted, with the 
mortification of the morning, dealt home to her 
by the old friend of the father of her son. She 
struggled painfully, but unsuccessfully, to seem 
only fond and motherly, and pleased ! She 
could not be these things, and nothing more 
just yet. 



10 FALSE COLOURS. 

" I hope you will be happy ; I hope I shall 
live to see you happier than I have ever been," 
she said, with a little sob. And proud and 
sensitive as Cissy was, unconscious of all the 
causes of this emotion as she was, she treated 
the trying situation very tenderly and cleverly. 

''I do hope heartily, heartily that you will 
live to see it, and to share in it ; but it will not 
be to be seen just yet, Mrs. Scorrier. Arthur 
and I are prudent people ; we are going to wait 
a few years, and to try in those years to make 
ourselves sure of at least one form of happiness 
. comfort." 

"A few years before you marry!" Mrs. 
Scorrier exclaimed. She was not well-inclined 
towards the marriage, but this calm talk about 
deferring it for a few years seemed to her cold- 
blooded. 

"Cissy has mistaken me, that is all," 
Arthur Scorrier explained; "she accepted me 
on condition that I would allow her to carry 
out a plan that she thinks good. I agreed be- 
cause I could not help myself; but you must 
carry it out as my wife, dear, not as my be- 
trothed only." 



BEYOND THE RETREATING POINT. 11 

'' And you won't mind that ? though it's not 
a bit what I intended, and you know it," Cissy 
said, brightly. 

" No, I will not mind it ; I don't know how it 
will agree with a residence in Danebury though." 

"May I hear what you are planning?" Mrs. 
Scorrier asked, stiffly. 

''Oh yes," Cissy said. "lam a penniless 
lass, you know, and the law of compensation 
does not work in my case. I haven't the 
negative merit of a 'long pedigree;' so as I 
haven't either blood or money that has come 
by inheritance, to take to x\rthur, I want to 
make a little of the latter in the only v\'ay I 
can, and care to . on the stage." 

"Be an actress !" Mrs. Scorrier exclaimed. 
'* Arthur may be mad and infatuated, but not 
to the degree of permitting that, I hope." 

Cissy got up to go away. 

" I can well believe that our sentiments will 
not be the same on this subject," she said, 
carelessly; "arguing about it would be waste 
of time, besides I must go now and report my- 
self, and what I am going to do, to my uncle 
and aunt." 



12 FALSE COLOURS. 

" There, Arthur," she continued, as soon as 
she was out of the house, " I was right ; she 
looks upon me as a degradation." 

*' Don't try to make me miserable about 
other people's folly," he pleaded; "it is too 
hard on a man to make him responsible for his 
mother's prejudices. Now, Cissy, there must 
be no going back, no halting, on your part ; 
you have promised to be my wife if I will con- 
sent to your trying a stage career for a few 
years. I will limit their number to two." 

" That is really taking me out of my own 
hands," she said, laughing. "I had drawn 
out such a sweet scheme . there was even the 
element of the heroic in it. I was going away 
from you when this holiday comes to an end, 
to battle for a competency for an indefinite 
period, and finally to fall from the stage covered 
with glory, into matrimonial obscurity in Dane- 
bury." 

" What a girl you are for harping on that 
jarring string," he said, his face clouding a 
little as he spoke. " Money, and poverty, and a 
competency . I am tired of the phrases, dear, 
even from your pretty mouth. Look now, I will 



BEYOND THE RETREATING POINT. 13 

promise you something that I am really justijBed 
in promising. When you marry me, you shall 
never be bothered with any money details ; 
your expenditure shall never be questioned ; 
your life shall not be harassed with what I 
know you consider mere pettinesses ; are you 
satisfied, Cissy ?" 

**Why, no; such a course of proceeding 
would be rank folly," the girl said, sharply, as 
they turned in to the entrance to the hotel. 
But Arthur Scorrier, whose faith in her was so 
thorough that he felt certain her expenditure 
would never exceed her just needs, determined 
that such a " course of proceeding" should be 
his when he got her for his wife. " She shall 
not be made to feel there is any ignominy in 
her fate through any fault of mine," he said to 
himself, as he followed her into the midst of 
her circle of relations in the character of her 
accepted lover for the first time. 

'* Well, Uncle James, I have been wise or 
foolish, as different people may see it from 
their different points of view," Cissy said, in- 
troducing the real state of the case rather 
abruptly, as she walked into the room. 



14 . FALSE COLOURS. 

" Wise, I think," Mr. Yargrave said, going 
forward to shake hands with Arthur. 

''Wise, I am sure," her aunt echoed, softly; 
and as Cissy turned to kiss the kind, re-assuring 
lady, she said . 

" Thank you, aunt ; at any rate I have gone 
beyond the retreating point, and it's my nature 
to think the position I am compelled to occupy 
the best and pleasantest always." 

*'I have news to tell you," Isabelle inter- 
rupted ;" it is of a tame, every-day nature, 
considered after the interesting event just re- 
corded . still it is news ; the Hepburns have 
had enough of us and sea -air." 

''Not gone!" 

"Yes, gone; just driven to the station. 
Amelia left her love for you and a faintly ex- 
pressed hope that they might see you at Glene. 
She will see you there sooner than she ex- 
pected." 

"To be sure," Mrs. Yargrave said, hailing 
the prospect in the best faith. " Glene is close 
to your home, is it not, Mr. Scorrier? How 
delightful for Amelia and you to be settled near 
together, after all !" 



BEYOND THE EETREATING POINT. 15 

" Yes, I have no doubt I shall owe a great 
deal to Amelia," Cissy said, contemptuously; 
whereat Mr. Vargrave, who estimated Mrs. 
Hepburn very much as his niece did, said, in 
an affectedly reproving tone . 

*'For shame. Cissy; this ingratitude is 
painful to witness. I foresee Mrs. Hepburn 
will burden you with favours ; you will have all 
the superfluous fruit and vegetables, and she 
will drive you out in her pony-carriage when 
there is no one else to go with her." 

'' Cissy will have a pony-carriage of her 
own, I may mention," Mr. Scorrier said, rather 
stiffly. He did not like their all taking it for 
granted, even in fun, that his wife would be in 
a position to be patronised by the mistress of 
Glene. Accordingly he failed, through his 
annoyance to appreciate the spirit in which Mr. 
Yargrave spoke. Cissy, who was always im- 
patient of anything like a misapprehension, 
flashed her e3^es rather angrily round on him, 
as she said . 

*' You need not make any extraordinary 
efforts to enable me to hold my own with 
Amelia, thank you, Arthur ; it would be a pity 



16 FALSE COLOURS. 

to invest in a pony-carriage merely for the pur- 
pose of protecting me against the possibihty of 
Mrs. Hepburn making a convenience of me." 

*' He won't like your saying too much to 
him in that tone," Isabelle said, in reference to 
that last remark of Cissy's. Mr. Scorrier had 
been gone for some time, and the two girls were 
out alone on the Esplanade in the dying night, 
as the younger of the two cousins hazarded 
this suggestion. 

'' I am sure there was nothing in my tone for 
any man to object to," Cissy said, growing 
scarlet, as much at the thought of the cause of 
the half -reproof as at the half-reproof itself. 

" Well, it was giving yourself a little air of 
mental superiority, and more extensive social 
knowledge than he seemed . than some men, I 
mean, would have liked." 

The flush of vexation and mortification 
deepened on Cissy's face. *' And I wouldn't do 
that for anything ; I couldn't do it in common 
sense, where Arthur Scorrier is concerned, for I 
am as inferior to him mentally, morally, and 
socially, as . as . as . I feel myself to be. I 



BEYOND THE RETKEATING POINT. 17 

can't say anything stronger than that. Oh 
dear . dear . dear ! what am I fit for, Isabella ? 
not for the life I am going to lead, that is cer- 
tain." 

" You never thought yourself * fit ' for the 
life we led at Bayswater ; whether you think 
yourself too bad for it, or too good, I can't 
make out." 

'' Nor can I," Cissy said, her voice and man- 
ner both lapsing into carelessness ; *' Bays- 
water has its merits . so have I. Bayswater has 
its own private little sins and wickednesses, 
and its public faults and feeblenesses . so have 
I. On the whole, I'm inclined to think that we 
are more worthy of each other than Danebury 
and I shall ever be." 

" Some people would hint at discontent being 
at the bottom of these confessions," Isabelle 
said, laughing. " Come, Cissy, it's all non- 
sense ; you're not so ungirl-like as not to be 
very happy on this first day of your engage- 
ment with such a nice fellow as Mr. Scorrier." 
* I wonder if he wonders as much as I do 
wliat made him want to marry me, and what 
makes me want to marry him, because I do 

VOL. II. c 



18 FALSE COLOURS. 

want to marry him," Cissy said, gazing out 
absently over the sea. *' I wonder if he recog- 
nizes in me an undeveloped power of becoming 
a village gossip of the upper class ? They say 
the sculptor sees his statue in the rough block. 
What can he see in me ? " 

" Something very nice, and pleasant, and 
comfortable, to be prosaic," Isabelle said, turn- 
ing away from the sea-view, and shivering a 
little. ** And what he sees he will find, I feel 
quite sure ! when shall you be married, Cissy ? 
I want to come and stay with you, and help 
you to arrange your house prettily. A bachelor 
is sure to have everything hideous about him, 
whatever capabilities there may be in his 
house and furniture." 

" I shall not be in my own house much for 
some time," Cissy said, gravely. "I am going 
on the stage." 

"What!" her cousin said, springing in 
front, in order to look in Cissy's face ; *' going 
where ? . out of your mind, I should think ; 
what should you go on the stage for, and why 
now, when you're to be settled so soon ?" 

" Oh ! don't you understand ? No, you 



BEYOND THE RETREATING POINT. 19 

don't understand," Cissy said, impatiently; 
" I have nothing that's worth giving, not even 
a name, to the man I marry." 

"Well, my dear, whatever name you had, 
you could not kee^D it when once the man had 
married you," Isabelle said, sagaciously; "if 
you were only able to be contented, how sweet 
yon would be . even your discontent is nice in 
some way or other." 

"I hope Arthur Scorrier will share those 
sentiments with you, Isabelle," Cissy said, 
getting bright again. But still, as they walked 
home briskly, she went on expounding her 
views on the subject of the stage to Isabelle. 



20 FALSE COLOURS. 



CHAPTEK 11. 

MARRIED. 

It was an accomplished fact. Arthur Scorrier 
and Cecile were married, and coming home 
after a month's desultory wandering about to- 
gether . coming home to-night. I left them at 
Penzance, in the autumn, and in the first flush 
of their engagement. I rejoin them and recom- 
mence following their fortunes in the early 
spring, in the characteristic marriage month of 
smiles and tears, April. 

It has not been thought profitable to dwell 
on the intervening time. It is enough to say 
here that Cissy had, after many prayers and 
much solicitation from all around her, relin- 
quished her dream, and bidden a final farewell 
to the dramatic plan that had been so dear to 
her. With what sorrow she had done so cannot 
be told by a third person to unsympathetic and 



MARRIED. 21 

uninterested others. How, indeed, should 
strangers be other than unsympathetic and un- 
interested about such a thing, since even those 
who knew her best, and loved her best, deemed 
the desire but a girlish gush . an excited en- 
thusiasm . a folly . a dream . an impropriety. 
Whatever it had been, after pursuing it eagerly 
for a time, eagerly and earnestly and practically, 
Cecile gave it up . gave it up just when it pro- 
mised most fairly, after long weeks of hard 
labour, of incessant training and instruction, 
and talk on the subject. Gave it up when she 
had secured the promise of a remunerative en- 
gagement ; gave it up when it was dearest to 
her. The immediate cause of her thus giving 
up when so near the goal, was not the sorrow- 
ing of friends and the sermonising of acquaint- 
ances over her perverse inclination. It was a 
chance expression of Arthur Scorrier's that 
checked her in mid-career. " I wish I had 
thought twice before I pledged myself to let you 
do what won't be too consistent with the other 
half of your life . that of a professional man's 
wife ; besides, you'll never be all to me, or 
rather I shall never be all to you : you will 



22 FALSE COLOURS. 

have your art,'* he said one day, when she was 
launching out lavishly in praise of her possible 
future. She hesitated for a few moments ; it 
was a very brief battle between the artist and 
the woman, and the woman w^on. She thought 
of the possibility of other things besides glory 
and advancement on the boards. She thought 
of the namelessness, and the friendlessness, and 
the homelessness that might be hers, in case 
she was weaker or less lucky than she hoped to 
be. She thought of the weariness that had 
often been her portion, even when contemplating 
a triumph : and the contemplation of a future 
triumph is a more exhilarating thing than the 
triumph itself very often. She thought of the 
blissful, sober certainty that she would enjoy, 
when shielded by this man, who loved her for 
her own wayward self, regardless of what 
she had and what she lacked : and so she 
said, 

" It shall be, in all respects, as if you had 
not pledged yourself, Arthur; what will you 
tell me to do now?" 

*' Will you really give it up. Cissy, and be 
the wife of my home as well as of my heart, 



MARRIED. 23 

mthout feeling it to be a dreadful sacrifice?" 
lie asked, eagerly. 

" We won't talk of sacrifices . they sound so 
"big, that I feel crushed when they are men- 
tioned in connection with myself. Yes, I will 
give it up, and let you take me for richer, for 
poorer, without ever hinting another desire to 
make myself less of a dear bargain to you." 

So it was settled ; and now they were 
married ; and only Cecile herself knew whether 
this abnegation of her intention took rank in 
her mind as a sacrifice or not. 

" I only hope your circumstances justify you 
in taking a fine-lady wife, without a penny in 
her pocket," his mother had said to him, on 
the occasion of his farewell visit to her before 
his marriage ; " she'll neither save nor gain ; 
not but what that plan of going on the stage 
made my flesh creep." 

'' She has given it up ; so there need be no 
more said about it," he replied, rather coldly; 
*'and as to my circumstances, they will stand 
all the wear and tear Cissy will subject them 
to, I'm sure of that. Anyway, she shall never 
be worried about money, the darling." 



24 FALSE COLOURS. 

" If you had any real regard for her, you 
would know that it was for her ultimate good 
to give her as clear an understanding as you 
can about your money-matters as soon as pos- 
sible," his mother had rejoined ; and then the 
conversation had ended. But enough had been 
said to make Arthur determine that, let what 
would come to him, he would carefully keep 
that topic down in all after-confidences with 
his mother. " A very little of that sort of 
thing would be enough to make Cissy see 
things leaden -hued," he said to himself; 
"and, after all, there is no need for it; if 
there was, of course it would be different ; but 
we shall get on very well without my wife 
counting every penny that she spends." 

Cecile's trousseau was a very effective one. 
It had been admirably contrived and Carried 
out by Mrs. Vargrave, assisted by a Bond 
Street milliner and dressmaker, aided by per- 
suasive young men at Marshall and Snelgrove's, 
and a few subordinate beings in the shape of 
boot-makers, trunk-makers, hosiers, and glovers. 
'* A good first appearance in such a village as 
I fancy Danebury to be is everything . every- 



MARRIED. 25 

thing," Mrs. Vargrave had said. Accordingly, 
in order to accomplish this good first appear- 
ance, Mrs. Vargrave expended nearly the whole 
of the two hundred pounds which her husband 
had given to Cissy for her wedding outfit, in 
what would be seen . in silks and satins and 
laces, and exquisite dressing-table and travel- 
ling appointments. The kind-hearted lady 
looked at and longed for a Cashmere shawl for 
her niece, and relinquished the purchase of it 
unwillingly on hearing the i)rice . £*200. After 
this feat of practical economy, she launched 
out more freely than before into laces and 
other lovelinesses with which Cecile could have 
very well dispensed. The result of this 
management on her part was, that Cissy found 
the two hundred pounds was gone before she 
had secured a single useful or necessary 
article. 

" Who would have thought that it was slip- 
ping away so?" Mrs. Vargrave asked, in 
penitent bewilderment ; "we must ask your 
uncle for a little more, dear." 

"Not for another sou," Cissy said, firmly. 
" I must have my own way in this, as you have 



26 FALSE COLOUES. 

had yours about the trousseau, aunt. I will do 
without." 

"But you cannot." 

"But I must and will; more than this, Uncle 
James must nev-er know that we have misman- 
aged his liberality so terribly." She claimed 
a partnership in the mismanagement, though 
she had had nothing whatever to do with it. 
"You will promise me this, won't you, aunt? 
If you do not, I shall marry with a weight on 
my mind." 

Mrs. Vargrave gave the promise required of 
her, and Cissy rested satisfied. However, when 
she settled down in her Danebury home, and 
unpacked the Eussian leather travelling-trunks, 
she found a liberal supply of all the things she 
had declared she would go without. " Poor 
dear Aunt Vargrave ! she has deprived herself 
and Isabelle, in order to send me forth well- 
fitted," y6ung Mrs. Scorrier said to herself, 
with the tears springing to her eyes. She was 
so touched by this amende that Mrs. Vargrave 
had made for what had been only over-gene- 
rosity, that she told her husband the whole of 
the little incident . told it to him before she had 



MARRIED. 27 

regained composure, or the absolute command 
of her voice, thus confirming him in his previ- 
ous idea, that " Cissy was over-sensitive about 
such matters, and must be kept from all contact 
with and knowledge of them." . 

He felt himself to be very fully repaid for all 
the trouble he had taken to get her there, when 
he saw her j)leasure and delight in her new 
home. They had spoken about it a good deal 
and she had made him give her a ground-plan 
of the house, in order that she might think over 
the important subject of how she would have it 
fitted up. Then she had asked him something 
about the furniture that was already in the 
house, but in the same breath she had suggest- 
ed that *' probably that was only temporary;" 
he had answered her carelessly that " he had a 
table to dine at and chairs to sit upon," and 
Cissy had said, ''Oh ! yes . we will soon have 
things very dift'erent, at no great expense, won't 
we, Ai-thur? . taste, and chintz, and muslin, and 
flowers . and a few well-chosen and good orna- 
ments (I abhor cheap ones) work wonders." 

After saj^ng this, and his hearing her say 
it without attempting to correct her, it was like 



28 FALSE COLOURS. 

a delightful dream to come to the perfect home 
he had made for himself . and still to feel as 
she did, that exquisite as it was already, a few 
touches more would improve, not over-do. 
" There is one room that I have never touched, 
because I had no use for it," Mr. Scorrier said, 
taking his wife's hand, and drawing her hur- 
riedly along with him. " I had serious thoughts, 
at one time, of making it a smoking-room ; 
but then again I contemplated the possible con- 
tingency of a wife, and determined to leave it 
undefiled for that unknown she. This is the 
room : you can see what taste and chintz and 
muslin, to say nothing of the well-chosen 
ornaments, can do here." 

He opened the door of a western-fronted 
room as he spoke, and Cissy found herself in a 
place whose capabilities were worthy of her 
choicest effoits. It was not a very lofty room, 
but long and light, through the circumstance 
of the whole of the side which faced the west 
being given up to French windows. 

"A jolly room it will be, when you have 
cultivated it, to have your new institution 
kettledrum in. Eh, Cissy?" 



MARRIED. 29 

*'Yes," Cissy said, " sl lovely room, that 
shall be a marvel of economical ingenuity, 
Arthur ; but who is to come and kettledrum in 
it?" she added, with the look that he was 
beginning to know so well . the look that might 
so readily develop into one of discontent. 
*' Don't lead me to expect ever to see any one 
now that I have trained down to the calm con- 
templation of unbroken solitude," she continued, 
laughing. 

" You start in your sphere with bright hopes, 
I must say," he said, in rather a hurt tone. 

" My dear Arthur, I shall be quite as well 
pleased not to know and be known as I should 
be if the reverse were the case. I have had 
my day . my fling I was going to call it, but 
that expression is a part of the vagabondism 
of the past, with which I have quite done. 
Don't devise little tame junkettings for me, 
please, dear, because it will trouble you to do 
it, and I shall not appreciate it when it's done. 
I will take what comes quite in. my way, of 
what is called pleasure and social intercourse, 
but I will never go one inch out of my way 
to get it." 



30 FALSE COLOUBS. 

" Your life will not be as happy as it might 
be, then?" he said, sorrowfully. 

" Yes it will. I shall have you and myself, 
and all this." She waved her hand in a com- 
prehensive manner that indicated she was in- 
cluding the house and garden in her list of 
compensating things. *'Now, come on, Arthur; 
supper in that dining-room by candle-light, 
with the window open, will be quite a poetical 
thing. I saw a hypatica, as I drove up to 
the door, in full flower. I marked the spot, 
and now I will go and root it up, and put it 
in a vase on the supper-table, and look at it 
till it gives me dreams of the wealth of flowers 
we will have about us in the coming summer." 

*' I will get you something fairer and rarer 
than the hypatica, if you will come with me 
to the conservatory," he said. And Cecile 
laughed her acquiescence, and told him it was 
*'all grand in comparison with her expectations. 
A country surgeon's wife to be able to go to 
her conservatory and get a rare plant, and to 
be given carte blanche to fit up an oblong para- 
dise, may be excused for not falling into the 
ways of humility just directly, may she not. 



MARRIED. 31 

Arthiu' ? if Mrs. Hepburn does not crush nie 
by ignoring my existence here altogether, she 
will find that I shall be guilty of the gross im- 
pertinence of standing erect before her . perhaps 
of treating her as an equal." 

" You talk great nonsense about Mrs. Hep- 
burn," Arthur said, angrily. His heart had 
softened considerably towards Mrs. Hepburn of 
late. She had been very flatteringly judicious 
in her manner towards him just before his 
marriage ; softer, sadder, and more subdued 
altogether than there was any open cause for 
the mistress of Glene being. That the making 
Cissy his wife was a thing that was repug- 
nant to Cissy's old fi'iend, for some reason or 
other, was evident. But it did not disgust him 
with Amelia that it should be so. Someway 
or other, it never does disgust a man with one 
woman that she should be antagonistic to his 
marriage with another. He attributes it to 
ingenuous, even if mistaken, regard for his 
welfare . to a flattering love of ruling him 
herself . to anything, indeed, save the rank 
envy and jealousy which might with justice in 
most cases be applied to it. These strictures 



32 FALSE COLOURS. 

do not apply to such an exceptional event 
as an old genuine love burying his dead, 
and marrying some one else when " the 
object" has rendered herself unavailable. 
In this latter case, it is only fair, only 
womanly and natural, and well for the said 
object to feel that it would have been only 
what she had a right to expect of him, if 
he had sorrowed a little longer. And feeling 
this, she cannot think a woman's best of the 
woman who has succeeded her. She (the 
succeeded) cannot think the one who has 
caused her memory to pale, quite so capable 
or so clever, or so polished or amiable, or 
pretty, or to sum up in one comprehensive 
word, quite so "suitable," as she would have 
desired to see the woman whom the old love 
has wedded. We are human . consequently 
weak . and it is only human to question . 

"Is it well to wish, thee happy, having known me, to 
decline 
On a lower range of feelings and a narrower heart 
than mine?" 

And to answer, " No, it is not only not well, 
but it is utterly impossible, to do it." It is 



MARRIED. 83 

hard, painful to the last degree, after having 
been a man's ideal yourself, to see that man go 
down with glad contentment on to a lower plat- 
form, and arrange himself upon it for life with 
some piece of mediocrity of the very type at 
which he and you have laughed together in the 
brighter days that are gone by. Ay di rrie ! 
But these are they, out of which the good wives 
and mothers are fashioned. The beings who 
enriched the shining hours of the brighter past 
have had their day . and w^asted it. 

Which reflections do not, by any manner of 
means, apply to the case in point . the case of 
Arthur Scorrier and the woman who had loved 
and married, and the other woman who had 
scorned and then softened to him. There was 
no old romance between Mrs. Hepburn and the 
husband of her friend. No old romance to be 
bruised and mangled, and manipulated out of 
the fair shape it had hitherto worn by busy 
tongues and meddlesome hands. Still, though 
this was wanting, she gave him to understand, 
before she married him, that, when he did 
marry, a pleasant element would be gone out of 
her life. She also gave him to understand 

VOL. II. D 



34 FALSE COLOURS. 

that she was not a hapi^y woman in her own 
house, and with her own husband. And this 
she did without actually complaining of Mr. 
Hepburn, or of her life at Glene. Had she 
done so openly, Mr. Scorrier would have blamed 
her for an unwifely and unwomanly want of 
reticence and reserve. As it was, he pitied her. 

" Good-bye. And it is indeed good-bye ; 
for Cissy does not like ladies' society, so I shall 
see very little of you after she comes," Mrs. 
Hepburn said when Mr. Scorrier rose up to 
depart, on the occasion of his farewell visit. 

"Oh! doesn't she?" he said, dubiously, 
feeling uncertain as to whether he was being 
challenged to defend his future wife's taste in 
the matter of social intercourse, or not. 

Mrs. Hepburn shook her head, and smiled 
her clear, chilling smile. 

" No," she said ; " we were none of us 
brilliant enough, or well enough versed in the 
ways of the world that she was versed in, for 
Miss Cecile Vargrave ; and I don't suppose 
Mrs. Scorrier will be more tolerant." 

"Oh yes, she will," Arthur said; and then 



MARRIED. 35 

he hurriedl}' got himself away, feeling not in- 
disjnant with the woman who could he malifj- 

o o 

nant enough to hazard a douht ahout his 
almost bride, hut a little sorry, not to say 
annoyed, that Cissy should ever have been con- 
spicuous for such sentiments. It was some 
remembrance of what Amelia had said, and 
seemed to feel, on the occasion of his parting 
Tisit which caused him to tell his wife, on the 
night of their return, that she " talked great 
nonsense about Mrs. Hepburn." It vexed him 
to see that hi^ wife was ready to put herself 
into opposition to the wife of his kind old friend ; 
more especially since that kind old friend's wife 
had of late shown herself very well-inclined 
towards him. He had lived too long at Dane- 
bury not to be alive to the advantages of being 
on a perfectly good footing at Glene. How 
could they be this, he asked himself, if Cissy 
was going to be ready to resent slights, and 
rebuff patronage before either were offered to 
her ? This subject of intercourse with Glene 
had been looked at in a different light during 
those sunny autumn days at Penzance. Then 
he had assured Cissy that it was a matter of 



36 FALSE COLOUKS. 

no importance whatever whether Mrs. Hepburn 
saw lit to be agreeable on equal terms or not. 
Now he was bg.ck, and the atmosphere of the 
place was about him to the degree of making 
him feel that it was of importance. " It would 
be disgusting to live here as a married man, 
and not to be friendly with the people I have 
been most friendly with as a bachelor," he ex- 
plained to Cissy as they sat at supper. 

" I don't think that it altogether depends 
upon me," Cissy said, quietly. 

" Yes; it will pretty nearly altogether depend 
upon you; she's a very sensitive woman, and 
if you receive the first efforts at an intimacy 
coldly, she will cease to make them," he said, 
in a tone of thorough conviction. 

Cissy laughed. " As she was neither sensi- 
tive nor sensible in the days I knew her, I may 
be forgiven if the sudden development of these 
qualities in her throws me off my balance a 
little." 

" Well, all I can say is, that you may make 
it very pleasant to each other, if you like. I am 
the last man in the world to wish my wife to 
Beat herself below the salt; you know that 



MARRIED. 37 

Oissy; but old Hepburn has been like a father 
to me, and if you can hit it off with her, I shall 
be very much pleased." 

More for the sake of changing that subject 
than because she had any curiosity about the 
one she introduced, Ciss}^ asked . 

" What shall I do, Arthur, when you are 
away on your professional rounds . ^just at 
first, I mean . till I get the habit of a country 
life upon me . you're away hours, sometimes, 
are you not?" 

"Yes, I am," he answered, slowly. "My 
darling! don't think I haven't asked myself 
that same question: it will be hard for you, 
horribly dull, after the life you have led." 

"Can't I go with you?" 

" Sometimes, yes ; but I can't have you 
waiting about at cottage doors, while there is 
fever within, or something equally bad; besides, 
I generally ride long distances." 

" Can't I ride, too? have you a horse for 
me?" 

" I shall get one at once," he said; " I have 
nothing in my stable good enough for you, 
dear." 



38 FALSE COLOURS. 

"Oh dear, how lucky I am!" Cissy cried, 
starting up. " I'm staggered by the contem- 
plation of my own good fortune every now and 
then, Arthur; don't be too good to me, or I 
shall get to rank my deserts too highly." 

'' That is impossible," he said, catching her 
hands, and looking affectionately in her face. 
She shut her eyes, and bent her head away 
from his observation. " No searching regard, 
if you please, Arthur; I don't profess to be 
able to stand it; I lived a life, and knew many 
people, and did many things, before I knew 
you: I didn't begin on Amelia Foster's wed- 
ding-da^y; supposing I told you " 

She stopped, and he asked eagerly . "' Y/hat? 
supposing you told me what?" 

" On second thoughts, supposing I don't tell 
you?" she said, calmly facing him again; 
" you will be more comfortable, and my con- 
science isn't very heavily burdened, Arthur. 
I am longing for to-morrow morning, and the 
traditional interview Vvith the cook . fancy me 
at the head of a respectable English household, 
ordering dinner!" 

'* You'll order a household as you do every- 



M^VRRIED. 39 

thing else you like to do, magnificently," he 
said, admiringly. She was so very pretty . 
more than that . so very charming, with that 
inoffensive consciousness of being charming 
which presupposes other people being pleased, 
that his admiration was well justified. " I will 
make her happy at any cost," he said to him- 
self; and somehow he thought that it would 
cost a good deal to make her so. 



40 FALSE COLOURS. 



CHAPTEK III. 

THE BRIDE AT HOME. 

The news that Mr. Scorrier had brought home 
his wife, travelled round about Danebury very 
fast. People received the intelligence with 
little bursts of delighted surprise, as if they had 
not been expecting it daily and talking about 
it hourly for the last month. The sensation 
spread through every grade like a fever. Mrs. 
Hepburn heard of it, and was thrilled by it as 
she sat before her dressing-glass and suffered 
her maid to conduct her uninteresting toilet. 
*' Mr. and Mrs. Scorrier came home last night," 
that functionary observed, with undiplomatic 
abruptness ; " and they do say she was dressed 
beautiful . quite too grand for Danebury." 

" The people down in the village think any- 
thing grand that is cut after a newer pattern than 



THE BRIDE AT HOME. 41 

their grandmothers wore," Mrs. Hepburn said, 
tartly ; and the adroit maid, who was a time- 
server through the exigencies of her position, 
fell with celerity into that vein, and replied . 

'' Oh yes, ma'am, they do, indeed ; they have 
no notion of style. I'm sure when I come here 
first, I didn't know which was ladies and which 
was the other class." 

" That will do, Davis," Mrs. Hepburn said, 
coldly ; and Davis understood that silence was 
to reign in the place of loquacity. 

The poor people heard of that return and re- 
joiced ; for though Arthur Scorrier had insti- 
tuted a partner who had undertaken the full 
duties of the firm during the young surgeon's 
absence, he had been missed, and prayed for, 
and sighed and longed for, as clever, kind- 
hearted, untiring men in his profession are 
missed, and prayed, and sighed, and longed for 
by the sick and the suffering. And the gentle - 
people of the village, the class that took a 
lower stand than Glene and a higher one than 
Danebury, though they were compelled to live 
in it, heard of that return, and fluttered about 
ecstatically to call upon one another, and dis- 



42 FALSE COLOURS. 

CUSS the bride, since the time was too young to 
invade her yet. 

The partner who had been recently taken by 
Mr. Scorrier to share his labours and profits found 
himself warmly welcomed in many houses on 
this day. It was thought that he would have 
seen the bride ; that he would have been at the 
house in an excess of .good feeling to welcome 
the happy wanderers home. But Mr. Monsell 
had nothing to tell. He threw an expression 
of utter indifference about Mrs. Scorrier, and 
all concerning her, into his face, and the ex- 
pression diffused itself over his figure. By the 
whole of his fair, pink, slim, and prim phy- 
sique, it was expressed that he at least was dis- 
posed to combat any claims to consideration 
which Mrs. Scorrier might put forth. " Mrs. 
Monsell will call on her by-and-by, I suppose," 
he said ; " but I really have no time to take an 
interest in such things." 

Mrs. Monsell meanwhile was sitting glow- 
ering in her own house, aching to call and 
see how things really were at the Scorriers, and 
telling herself, and every one who came near 
her, that she really could not make up her mind 



THE BRIDE AT HOME. 43 

to take so much trouble yet. Mrs. Monsell ^-as 
a small, black-haired, black-browed woman, 
with a bad complexion, which she was wont to 
allude to as Southern in hue. In furtherance 
of this view of her skin, she adopted a manner 
which she believed to be a happy combination 
of languor and stateliness, which was, when 
looked at by impartial spectators, a lazity in- 
solent one. She was in reality keenly anxious 
for the time to arrive when she might, with due 
regard to her own ideas of etiquette, call on 
and find out the bride. But she would not 
have admitted being so on any account. She 
had an idea that people in society were never 
anxious about anything, and as she was very 
much bent on impressing it on Danebury that 
she had, previous to her advent there, been 
very much in society, she was always acting 
strictly in accordance with some canons of her 
own conception, and so wearying, or insulting, 
or disgusting, all such as were unlucky enough 
to come in contact with her. Mrs. Monsell 
was put out to no small degree now, for she 
had come to Danebury a stranger, only two 
months before, and the interest she excited had 



44 FALSE COLOUES. 

been flaccid and limp compared with that caused 
by Mrs. Scorrier. Glene, and greater than 
Glene, Castlenau and its compeers, had ignored 
her existence, though they employed her hus- 
band professionally, and she had accepted the 
being ignored, because to be other than ignored 
by such people had in truth never entered into 
her wildest imaginings. But now old Mrs. 
Pottinger and her daughters came to see her, 
and looked out of her window while they were 
sitting in comfort on her sofa, and wondered 
and speculated as to when Mrs. Hepburn would 
pass on her way to the Scorriers, and whether 
Mrs. Scorrier '' would ever go out to tea, or if 
she would move in the other set that only 
dined." That there should be a doubt on the 
subject was odious to Mrs. Monsell, since such 
a doubt had never been expressed about her, 
and yet she was not willing to degrade her 
order by declaring that another surgeon's wife 
would not be admitted to the other set. So she 
compromised matters between her temper and 
her esprit de corps by saying . 

" Perhaps she may like being noticed by that 
ill-bred Mrs. Hepburn, who gives herself such 



THE BRIDE AT HOME. 45 

airs," which was a sacrilegious way of speaking 
of Glene that made the Pottingers wince and 
feel like traitors, even though they admu*ed the 
daring of this outsider. 

" Mrs. Hepburn and Mrs. Scorrier are old 
friends, I think I have understood," Mrs. Pot- 
tinger said, apologetically ; "it would hardly be 
like Mrs. Hepburn ' noticing Mrs. Scorrier,' if 
they should continue the intimacy." 

" Ml ! I dare say they were friends formerly ; 
it's notorious that Mr. Hepburn married very 
much beneath him," Mrs. Monsell said, tossing 
her tight shining black head, and pulling her 
straight, hard-lipped mouth down at the corners, 
with an air of scorn she would not have en- 
deavoured to express, had her worthy merits 
received the recognition of neighbouring dinner- 
givers, instead of being only suffered to display 
themselves at those most detestable of all 
amalgamations, the Danebury high teas. Small 
wonder that, as the memory of all she endured 
at these festive gatherings smote her, the wasp- 
ish little woman should remember and relate 
how notorious the fact was that '' Mr. Hepburn 
had married beneath him." 



46 FALSE COLOURS. 

*' I think, as we are such old friends of Mr. 
Scorrier, we may be forgiven for looking in to- 
day, . don't you think so?" Mrs. Pottinger 
asked, when she had recovered from the shock 
Mrs. Monsell's energetically delivered words 
had caused her. 

''Oh! I have no doubt joii may," Mrs. 
Monsell replied, with an air that seemed to say 
that Mrs. Scorrier ought to be gladly grateful 
for the smallest favours. " Yery kind of you, 
I think . I hope I shall find time to go one day 
of the week." 

" There is not very much to take up one's 
time in Danebury, is there ? " Fanny Pottiiager 
said, timidly. And then Mrs. Monsell fell upon 
that inoffensive family, and crushed them with 
a recital of all she did, and all she read, until 
the Pottingers, who belonged to that class which 
never reads anything, and never does anything 
which leaves a trace behind, felt humbled, angry 
with her, and sorry for themselves . a frame of 
mind in which Mrs. Monsell frequently dis- 
missed her visitors. 

Meanwhile, Cissy was trying to get herself to 
feel that the beautiful little house, walled in so 



THE BRIDE AT HOME. 4r 

closely, to which she had been brought, was 
the goal itself . not merely a halting-place on 
her way to the goal. Hers had been such a 
nomad life that it was only natural she should 
find the idea of a permanent place a hard one 
to realize. "What have you been doing all 
the morning, Cissy ?" her husband asked, when 
he came home to luncheon ; and Cissy, who 
was now almost worn out by fatigue from doing 
it had to reply, 

" Nothing . absolutely nothing ; unless wan- 
dering up and down, and trying to feel sure 
that I shall not have to pack up and move on 
in a few days counts for anything." 

" The wish is not father to the thought 
that you may have to do it, I hope?" he 
said. 

She shuddered and shrugged her sjioulders. 
" Indeed, no ; the fascination of perpetual 
motion may overcome me again at some futm*e 
time, but at present I have had enough of it. 
There have been moments in m.j life when I 
have sympathised with the little men with their 
hats on the backs of their heads, who stand 
about in old-fashioned engravings of church- 



48 FALSE COLOURS. 

yards, looking longingly at tombs with ' Here 
is rest ' upon them ; but those moments 
have passed quickly. Now I have found a plea- 
santer rest than the tomb, and I mean to be 
content to dwell in it." 

He saw that she meant what she said. He 
saw, too, that she had been endeavouring to 
make the home-like feeling hers, by giving the 
few undefinable womanly touches to the rooms, 
which had already feminized their aspect. " I 
hope you won't weary of it . I hope to heaven 
you won't weary of it. Cissy ; what would be- 
come of us both if you did ?" he said, seriously. 
" I wish I knew your life better than I do, dear, 
that I might try to reproduce some of the plea- 
santest elements in it." 

" Never say that again." She had laid her 
head down on his shoulder when he commenced 
speaking, but when he spoke the last sentence 
she lifted herself up quickly, and spoke out her 
request sharply, " Never say that again, Ar- 
thur," she repeated; " the pleasantest element 
of my past life brought to bear upon me now 
might ruin me altogether. There, we have 
talked nonsense enough, let us go and sit down 



T3E BRIDE AT HOME. 49 

soberly, and eat our luncheon, or we shall be 
having indigestion from long fasting." 

'' I would drive you out this afternoon," Mr. 
Scorrier said, when they were presently out in 
the garden, Cecile searching for spring flowers 
in order that she might make her rooms look 
still more like a bower. 

''You would . and why won't you?" she 
asked. 

" Because I think the Hepburns will come ; 
and I should like you to be at home to see 
them ; he has not been well, poor old fellow, 
while I have been awa.y." 

"Have you been to Glene already?" Cissy 
asked. 

" Yes . I rode up this morning ; Monsell had 
told me that Mr. Hepburn was not well, so I 
just looked in : he is very much altered, looks 
haggard and worn . he has got old suddenly." 

'' Did you see Amelia ? " 

'*Yes." 

" Did she ask for me ? " 

*' Of course she did." 

" Ask for me as ' Cissy,' or as your wife ? " 

"I really forget . I think she spoke,. of you 

VOL. II. E 



50 FALSE COLOUHS. 

as my wife; and yet she mentioned your name. 
Why ? What do you deduce from her doing, 
or not doing it ? " 

"And she told you they were coming?" 
Cissy said, without answering his question. 

" Yes ; she said they intended coming. 
Here come some other friends of mine, the 
Pottingers," he added, going forward to meet 
the late rector's widow and her heavy brigade 
of daughters heartily. 

"I wonder how long they'll stay," was 
Cissy's thought, as she underwent the laborious 
ceremony of introduction to and hand-shakings 
with four women, who all looked like unrevised 
and unimproved editions of each other. She 
did not value the evident admiration for her 
which they were disposed to develop. She saw 
at a glance that they were weary, one-idea'd 
women, with as huge a capacity for boring as 
she had for being bored. " This is one of the 
trials I promised to undergo with patience in 
the marriage-service, I suppose," she thought ; 
'' I don't remember vowing to be calmly cheer- 
ful under the infliction of the Pottingers and 
others of that ilk ; but I must have done it, or 



THE BRIDE AT HO>IE. 51 

Arthur wouldn't look as if I was so flagrantly 
derelicting from my duty." 

" Danebury is a sweet spot, don't you think, 
Mrs. Scorrier ?" Mrs. Pottinger asked, as if she 
had invented Danebury. 

*' Oh ! a lovely place you will think when 
you have seen it," her daughters chorussed. 
" We always think there is no place in the 
world to be compared to it ! " As the Misses 
Pottinger had been born in Danebury, and had 
never moved themselves beyond its charmed 
precincts, their authority on this subject was 
indisiDutable. Cissy gave as much praise to 
Danebmy as she was allowed to give ; but this 
was a topic on which the Pottingers weue elo- 
quent, not to say diffuse. 

*' Some friends of ours, who have been up 
the Khine, find the scenery round Danebury 
infinitely preferable . infinitely," Mrs. Pottinger 
said, as earnestly as if she were touting for a 
tourist hotel. " They tell me that there ia 
a something about here . a something which 
they can't describe and which is wanting on the 
Ehine, that makes them regard this as vastly 
superior." 



52 FALSE COLOURS. 

"Perhaps it's the absence of the Ehine," 
Mrs. Scorrier said, gravely. 

*'I shouldn't wonder," Mrs. Pottinger said, 
grasping at the happy thought ; " they went 
there . their name was Filmer . perhaps you 
may know them as you have been living in 
Bayswater. Ah ! but, to be sure, they lived 
in Bermondsey . but as I was saying they 
went to Germany on account of their youngest 
daughter's health." Cecile took a glance at 
her husband when the narrative had reached 
this point, and he vainly tried to stem the 
tide. 

'' Had we not better get into the house out 
of the sun?" he said, walking towards the 
drawing-room French window. The visitors 
fluttered after him, and Cissy lingered a moment 
behind, wondering what the result would be if 
she didn't go in at all. But simultaneously 
the reflection that it was only a question of 
hearing a little more or less of the same sort 
of talk, and that she might as well attempt to 
get inured as soon as possible to what w^ould, 
henceforth, be so largely her portion, smote 
her, and she followed them into the room before 



THE BRIDE AT HOME. 53 

they had time to notice that she had lingered 
behind. The Pottingers had not got them- 
selves into seats yet ; they were fluttering 
about, ready to praise, and be reminded by 
what they saw of something similar or some- 
thing dissimilar. Eeady, in fact, to be agree- 
able after their lights, which were dim. 

" So, as I was saying," Mrs. Pottinger re- 
sumed, the instant she had caught her hearers 
again, " the Filmers being advised by one of 
the first physicians of the day to go some- 
where on account of their youngest daughter's 
health " 

" Susannah was the second daughter, mam- 
ma," Miss Pottinger interrupted. 

" So she was . no, she couldn't have been," 
Mrs. Pottinger argued, falling into most cruel 
anxiety on the subject at once, ''because I re- 
member a most touching letter Mrs. Filmer 
wrote to me from Baden, in which she spoke of 
the ' rose of health being restored to the cheeks 
of her youngest.' She had a gift for letter- 
writing. I always say it is quite a gift, and a 
most enviable one ; don't you think so, Mrs. 
Scorrier ? ' ' 



54 FALSE COLOURS. 

" I suppose it gives some people pleasure to 
write long letters," Cissy said. 

'* Ah ! but think of the pleasure it gives 
others to receive them ! " Mrs. Pottinger said, 
triumphantly ; to which Cissy replied that 
*' certainly, she had not thought of that." 

Then there was a pleasant talk, of the anec- 
dotal order, about the Filmers ; after which, 
Mrs. Pottinger, aided by her daughters, gave a 
lengthy, not to say a verbose, resume of the 
chief events in Danebury during the last forty 
years. Cissy listened to all of it with exem- 
plary fortitude. As a proof of how successful 
her manner v/as, it may be mentioned that when 
Mrs. Pottinger brought her visit to a close, she 
gave the bride a pressing invitation to " go and 
have a quiet tea with her very soon." 

When they were gone, and Arthur with them 
as far as the garden-gates. Cissy threw herself 
back in her chair, buried her face in her hands, 
and thought. Thought with a fierce irrepres- 
sible longing of some bygone days and plea- 
sures, when her life had been full ; when each 
moment had brought its triumph or danger, its 
disagreeables or success ; but when never a 



THE BRIDE AT HOME. 55 

moment had brought monotony. '' I don't 
regret it ; I don't want to go back to it ; but 
.why did that old woman talk about Baden to me 
here ?" she thought, pressing her fingers over 
her eyes, as if she would have j)ressed out some 
vision of the past that was either too dear or 
too hateful to be calmly contemplated. '' I 
can't endure these people ; they will be all like 
those who have just been here . all of that 
order and habit of mind and thought, and I 
feel like a wild cat amongst them. My husband 
has a work to do, and v/here there is work and 
thought, there is life ; but I shall only live in 
memories, and they will hurt me till I die." 

She sat on alone, seething in this mood for 
at least an hour. Mr. Scorrier had been 
called away to some accident, eight miles from 
Danebury, and he had sent a hasty message to 
his wife, saying it was uncertain whether he 
could get back to dinner at seven or not. 
Her home was very pretty ; so pretty that she 
could not help regretting that congenial people 
were never likely to come and see her in it ; so 
pretty that she could not bear to think of her 
life becoming gradually, unendurably monoto- 



56 FALSE COLOURS. 

nous in it. "I must take to doing something. 
I must have a speciality," she thought. " Oh, 
Arthur, poor Arthur !" 

It was easy enough to say that she "must 
take to doing something;" but what was there 
for her to do? She was not a finished per- 
former enough for her own playing and singing 
to give her the smallest pleasure ; her ears had 
been too long accustomed to professional efforts, 
made in private with zest, for that. She could 
not read all day. Voracious and insatiable 
reader as she was, there would be times when 
it would be essential that she should stop a bit, 
and think about what she had read. Needle- 
work was not engrossing enough : she wanted 
some one to talk to her, who could talk, when 
she was working. As for painting . yes, she 
could paint ; but she had had a master once, 
without whom she did not care to begin work 
afresh. 

'' It resolves itself into this," she said, aloud, 
raising her head up, and facing the situation, 
'' I must just get over the time. Some wise old 
lady, whom I knew somewhere or other, used 
to say to me, eternally, till I wearied of the in- 



THE BRIDE AT HOME. 57 

formation, ' We are all creatures of habit, my 
dear . all creatures of habit.' I "wonder ^hen 
this creature will get into the habits of Dane- 
bury !" 

Then she grew unjust, telling herself that if 
her husband did not so palpably dread weariness 
and vexation of spirit for her, she would not 
contemplate the possibility of their eventually 
invading and overcoming her. " But as it is," 
she thought, "I'm justified to myself in fearing, 
when he, knowing all about it, fears so much 
for me." 

Before the evil effects of this trying mood 
had passed away, the Hepburns came to see 
her ; the old husband and the young wife came 
together in what looked like amicable state, 
and, on the outside, it appeared as if Amelia's 
marriage had answered the most sanguine ex- 
pectations of herself and fi'iends. Mrs. Hepburn 
came to call on her old acquaintance, sur- 
rounded by all the insignia of her hardly-won 
and worn degree. She wore robes of state, and 
she came in an unimpeachable carriage, and 
her husband was in attendance on her, calling 
her '' my dear," whenever he had occasion to 



58 FALSE COLOURS. 

speak to lier. And withal she looked disap- 
pointed, beaten, and baffled in some way, when 
she met Arthur Scorrier's wife. 

" I have come before you can have had time 
to breathe or look round you," she began, 
sweeping up hurriedly to Cecile, who was feel- 
ing unequal to the encounter by reason of her 
late reflections ; " but Mr. Hepburn would 
come to-day, so ifc's his incoasideration, not 
mine, that you'll be taxed to forgive." 

'^ I can ahvays promise to forgive that," 
Cecile said, holding her hand out to the old 
gentleman, who was regarding her kindly, 
almost affectionately, over his wife's shoulder. 
Then he came and surprised them both . and 
seemed to take himself by storm in making the 
proposition . by asking . 

" Might he kiss her, like a father, for the sake 
of her husband, who was dear to him as a son ?" 

It was not altogether a pleasant proposition, 
indeed it was, on the contrary, a decidedly dis- 
comfiting one. Still, no young wife, loving her 
husband, could suggest impropriety by refusing 
a request so properly worded. 

**For Arthur's sake I will forget you are a 



THE BRIDE AT HOME. 59 

stranger," she said, lifting up lier brow to him. 
Then he touched it vrith his grizzled moustache, 
and blessed her, and turned away, trembling a 
little, and with tears in his eyes, praying that 
*' she would make Arthur happy." 

" Mr. Hepburn has been ill, and shaken, and 
is not quite himself yet," Amelia said, in a 
hard tone of plain explanation, as Cecile, a 
little thrown off her balance by this unexpected 
greeting, stood looking at him, with wide-open 
eyes and red cheeks. When his wife said that, 
Cecile looked at him with less thought of her- 
self, and more of him, and saw that he was 
looking shaken indeed. He had grown very 
old since she had seen him last . old and sad- 
looking. The rosy smoothness of his skin was 
gone, and he was less suave in manner and 
appearance than he had been. 

''You have been very ill, I fear," she said, 
gently. 

''Not ill, exactly; moped," Amelia said; 
*' moped ; as who would not be here ? You have 
been ver}^ brave in your ignorance. Cissy ; you 
couldn't have had an idea of what Danebury 
was." 



60 FALSE COLOURS. 

" Oh, I don't know," Cissy said, roused into 
opposition at once; ''I'm delighted with all 
I've seen." 

''Tiien I conclude you haven't seen much of 
either place or people, or Mr. Scorrier must 
possess a power of throwing a halo over things 
which isn't possessed by . everybody." 

" I have not succeeded in changing the town- 
mouse into the country-mouse yet, you see," 
Mr. Hepburn said, trying to smile in his old 
urbane way, as if he had not been at all upset 
by the little scene which has been described. 

" Some people can't help regretting what 
they have left, however much they like what 
they have come to," Cecile said, hoping that at 
least she was saying a civil thing to the firm, 
whether the partners in it were individually 
equally pleased or not. *' My husband," she 
continued, " has a dread that I may find some- 
thing wanting . I don't know what ; for as far 
as I have gone yet, it is all better than my 
deserts." 

' ' Ah ! but then you never did look forward 
to anything very brilliant . did you?" Mrs. 
Hepburn said. " Now I was silly enough to 



THE BRIDE AT HOME. 61 

paint my future so brightly in idea, that the 
reality can't well help falling short of it." 

" And why did you take a less sombre view 
of your future?" Mr. Hephm-n asked of Ce- 
cile, and she had to collect her faculties, and to 
remind herself that Amelia spoke in utter un- 
sympathetic ignorance and want of all power of 
appreciation in thus declaring that she (Cissy) 
*' never looked forward to anything bright;" 
she had to remind herself of this before she 
could say . 

"There's a Providence tliat shapes our ends 
Rough-hew them a3 "we wdll." 

*' I have every incentive now to aid Providence 

in shaping my ends." 

" Well ! you certainly have everything very 

nice about you," Mrs. Hepburn said, looking 

round in that offensively approving way which 

has the power for the moment of making a 

woman blush for and hate the things she has 

hitherto been satisfied with. '' Most bachelors' 

houses in the country are not fit to be entered 

by ladies . I mean new houses, of com'se, got 

lip by the bachelors themselves ; but Mr. 

Scorrier is an exception to the rule ; not that 



62 FALSE COLOUES. 

you care much for home-comforts and jDretty 
things, do you, Cissy?" 

" No," Cissy said. " I'm only fit for tents 
and cheap boarding-houses, am I?" Then 
Arthur came in, and there was constraint. 



EIGHT YE-iPtS AGO AT BADEN. 63 



CHAPTER IV. 

EIGHT YEARS AGO AT BADEN. 

A MAN must appear nuclei' a new aspect the first 
time he is seen with his wife hy those who 
have known him before he possessed that ap- 
pendage. He stands in a new light, and they 
can but be desirous of seeing how it becomes 
him ; and he is conscious that they are thus 
desirous, and consequently it does not (through 
his consciousness) become him at all, which is 
a state of things that the acquaintances of his 
unmarried days are not altogether displeased 
at. There fell a silence now, when he had 
greeted the Hepburns, that his wife felt vras 
harder to break and harder to bear than the 
spell of constraint which had been over the 

conversation before he came in. Mr. Hepburn 

* 

was agitated, Amelia seemed more stony and 



64 FALSE COLOURS. 

more stiff, and Cecile was occupied in wonder- 
ing why they were these things. As for Arthur 
he seemed absorbed by some painful reflections, 
for which his wife puzzled herself in a pained 
way to account. Presently, just as the Hep- 
burns rose to go av/ay, he said, explainingly . 

" Excuse me, I have hardly recovered the 
effects of a hard ride and a painful scene." 

*' The accident, Arthur?" his wife questioned, 
eagerly. 

-Yes." 

*' Oh ! what was it ? " she said. 

" No accident in Danebury, I hope," Mr. 
Hepburn said. 

" I thought doctors got hardened to such 
things," Mrs. Hepburn put in, carelessly. 

" Yes . the accident . it is not in Danebury ; 
and I have failed in hardening myself to any- 
thing so bad as this. A poor fellow crushed to 
pieces nearly, over at Cranwich ; I am going 
back to him directly." 

*' Is he one of the Cranwich servants or 
labourers . can we send anything ?" Amelia 
asked. 

"No . he's a visitor of Blayne's, it seems." 



EIGHT YEARS AGO AT BADEN. 65 

"A visitor of olio's?" Cecile asked, 
sharply. 

" Of Blayne's . the poor fellow was doing a 
little amateur steeple-chasing, and he has killed 
one of Blayne's best horses, and nearly killed 
himself." 

"I knew a Mr. Blayne once at Baden," 
Cecile said ; "he was a clergyman . is this 
one a clergyman ?" 

" Yes, he is the Eector of Cranwich . such a 
nice man," Mrs. Hepburn answered. 

" I should like to see Mr. Blayne, if it is the 
same I used to know," Cecile said, medi- 
tatively ; " could you drive me back with you, 
Ai-thur?" 

" Not to-day, dear ; they are in an awful 
state about the poor fellow who is hurt . such 
a handsome fellow he is, too, lately come into 
a tremendous property, Blayne tells me." 

** Y\^at is his name ? " Amelia asked. 

" Lister they were calling him ; but whether 
that's his Christian or surname I don't know. 
I must be off." 

'' Tell Mr. Blayne who I am, and that you 
have married me, and that I told you to tell 

VOL. II. F 



66 FALSE COLOUKS. 

him, will you, Arthur ? and say how much I 
should like to see him, will you, Arthur ? " 

" Yes, dear, yes," he said, hurriedly. And 
then he went away, forgetting his wife's mes- 
sage before he was out of the house, in the 
absorbing anxiety he felt concerning this new 
case. 

*' Mr. Blayne must be too old for Cissy ever 
to have had a love-affair with him," Mrs. Hep- 
burn thought as she drove home; " but how 
she blushed, and grew eager when his name 
was mentioned ! Arthur Scorrier was a mole 
not to see it." Then she addressed her hus- 
band. " That will not be a happy marriage." 
She could not avoid expressing the slightest 
possible flavour of satisfaction in the tone in 
which she said these words, and he answered 
the tone quite as much as the words when , he 
replied . 

" I disagree with you entirely : it is not 
perhaps quite a happy marriage at present, 
but it will be when they have adjusted their 
angles." 

*' He is acquiescent enough, I'm sure," 
Amelia said, scornfully ; " he over-rates her 



EIGHT YEARS AGO AT BADEN. 67 

claims absurdly. I, as a woman, can see tliat ; 
but she . ah, there must be something behind 
all that's unaccountable in Cecile, that won't 
make her husband the happier when it comes 
to light." 

" Then I hope to heaven it never will come 
to light," Mr. Hepbm-n said, with startling 
earnestness. " I hope to heaven that poor boy 
will never be called upon to expiate the sins of 
his father in such a way as you hint." 

" What a happy household it will be when 
Mrs. Scorrier senior relents, and comes to pay 
them an endless visit ! " Amelia said, laughing. 
'^ I could see at a glance what sort of woman 
she is, just one to make a great fuss and set 
her fat old face against things at first, and then 
to wheel round and declare it all deHghtful, and 
just what she could wish, after she has made 
herself disagreeable and other people uncom- 
fortable." 

"Arthm-'s good sense will keep his mother 
and his wife fi'om ever living in the same 
house," Mr. Hepburn said, with a lofty air of 
entire belief in that which he asserted. '' Old 
people and young may have lived together in 



68 FALSE COLOURS. 

the same tent in comfort under the patriarchal 
system, but I don't much fancy that they have 
ever done it since.'* 

" Nor do I," Amelia said, grimly ; and some- 
way or other her manner caused Mr. Hepburn 
to remember what he had forgotten while 
speaking himself on the subject, namely, his 
own age and her youth. 

" I am only referring to the cases of mothers 
and sons and daughters-in-law," he said. 

" Oh, I see ! I included other cases," she 
said, carelessly ; and there was no other word 
spoken between them until they reached home. 

Mrs. Hepburn was quite right in saying that 
Cissy " could never have had a love affair with 
Mr. Blayne," though perhaps the reason she 
adduced in support of her supposition was not 
quite the true one. But Mr. Blayne had 
known the girl at a very critical time in her 
life, and he had befriended her in a way that 
had hurt her, and had made her dislike him, 
and be unjust to him at the time, and recognize 
him fully as really a good man and true after- 
wards, when her judgment grew calmer. He 
had seemed to snatch a prize she had gained 



EIGHT YEARS AGO AT BADEN. 69 

and loved out of her grasp, and he had borne 
it away from her ruthlessly, though she had 
humbled herself very much to him. But she 
knew he had been right in what he did, right 
and wise, and she wanted to tell him so now, 
and to convince him that she believed it and 
forgave him. 

He had only been an actor of an ungrateful 
part in a very common drama. Eight years 
ago, when Cecile was in her brightest bloom, 
she had met an English gentleman, some ten 
years older than herself, travelling with his 
friend Mr. Blayne. The young people frater- 
nised in the free foreign fashion. They were 
out in the hotel gardens before breakfast to- 
gether. They were both fond of drawing, and 
the neighbourhood abounded with choice bits 
of scenery that Cecile knew by heart, and to 
which she introduced young Mr. Manners with 
pleasure. It was a very unequal game that 
they played during those bright days, eight 
years ago, at Baden. The man was only on 
a level with her in one respect, and that was 
his poverty. But he was a pauper member of 
a good house, and he w^as a pet of the same ; 



10 FALSE COLOUES. 

and he had great abilities and expectations. 
All these he laid at Cecile's feet one day, when 
the free foreign fashion had carried him a little 
further than he intended to go. Mr. Blayne was 
away ** off guard " for a time. And so the girl 
engaged herself, and let her engagement pro- 
claim itself, and was gloriously happy for a 
time. To be sure, there was the slight draw- 
back of the thought of how they were to live, 
and of what was to become of mamma. But it 
was only a slight drawback, and it was gene- 
rally unthought of in his presence. He had, 
as has been said, great abilities, and Cissy, re- 
lying more upon these, and valuing them far 
more than she did the loftiest expectations, 
saw a career before him, and plumed herself, 
already taking pride in the thought of how she 
would glory to watch him along it when she 
became his wife. But the dream and the en- 
gagement were shattered. The pride fell down, 
and was broken, before common-sense and 
necessity. There was no bad treatment ; there 
were no broken vows in the affair. Mr. Man- 
ners only did what thousands of men do, fell 
in love with a pretty girl, and made a fool of 



EIGHT YEARS AGO AT BADEN. 71 

himself and her for a time. "When Mr. Blayne 
came back, and Manners confessed his folly, 
and heard his friend's oj)inion concerning it, 
he was perhaps more to be pitied than Cissy. 

" You have pledged yourself to do what no 
man in his senses, in your situation, could 
do," Mr. Blayne said. 

*' Then I must act as one who is out of his 
senses ; for I am pledged," Manners replied, 
rather sadly. 

" Your whole family will cut you ; you'll 
deteriorate ; you'll lose energy, and be unable to 
win a living for the girl, who is a great deal 
too good for such a hard fate, and your chil- 
dren will be beggars." 

" I can't help it." 

" Then I will," Mr. Blayne said. 

" I tell you it has gone past all friendly 
interference," Mr. Manners said; "because 
she has only a mother, utterly unable to pro- 
tect her, I am not going to play fast and loose 
with her; besides, I'm fond of the girl." 

"Will you hear reason ?" his friend asked. 

" I would much rather not." 

" Will you permit me to ask Miss Vargrave 



72 FALSE COLOURS. 

to hear reason ? " Mr. Blayne persisted; and 
Mr. Manners, relying on that ardent manner 
of Cecile's, which seemed to promise persist- 
ence in any course she had once promised to 
follow, said " yes." Accordingly Mr. Blayne 
sought an interview with the fair rock on which 
his friend was well nigh wrecked. 

At the time of which this is written, Mr. 
Blayne was an easy-going, comfortably off, 
well-satisfied bachelor of forty-two or three . 
a man who had always conducted himself in 
an exemplary manner both publicly and pri- 
vately . a man who had never felt the sharp 
stings of genteel poverty, but who had been 
fortunate enough to have money put in his 
purse, both by his progenitors and by church 
preferment. A man who had, notwithstanding 
these things, always been prudent in his expen- 
diture, self-denying to a certain degree, but very 
careful not to involve others and himself in the 
meshes of compulsory and cramping economy. 
A man above all others ill fitted to sympathize, 
in the warm and emotional sense of the word, 
with a heart-difficulty that was aggravated by 
a monetary difficulty. Honestly and sincerely 



EIGHT YEAES AGO AT BADEN. 73 

he did hold Mr. Manners very much to blame 
for having sacrificed expediency to love in the 
case of Cecile Vargrave. Honestly and sin- 
cerely he did believe that it would be for the 
girl's weal, to the full as much as it would be 
to his friend's, that this unfortunate engage- 
ment should be nipped in the bud. So think- 
ing, he went forth armed for the interview with 
Cecile. 

On the face of it the office of a go-between 
is not an honourable one, or one that is much 
coveted. Mr. Blayne resolved to put this fact 
clearly before Cissy at once, as one that should 
win him a less hard judgment from her than 
he might otherwise expect. " She is candid, 
and she is clever," he said, telling himself two 
reassuring truths ; *' she will recognize impos- 
sibilities and acknowledge them." This he 
told himself while he was waiting in the small 
apartment in which it had been signified to 
him that he was to wait until Miss Vargrave 
could see him. When she did appear, his 
battle seemed a less easy one to fight. 

When she was first introduced into these 
pages it was told of her that she had the win- 



74 FALSE COLOUBS. 

ning charm to a rare degree, and that she held 
it greatly in check. But eight years before, 
at Baden, she had not learned the necessity of 
doing this yet. She had given it full play, 
prizing it as a good, true weapon that had won 
her much already, and showing that she prized 
it. Mr. Blayne felt as she came into the room 
that there would be greater difficulties than he 
had foreseen in the path of his pointing out to 
her that she would be the ruin of his friend. 

" You have come with a message to me," 
she said, holding her hand out to him. She 
had known him but slightly before, but now 
she took him as an accredited envoy from her 
king, and made him welcome. 

*' I can scarcely call it a message. Miss Yar- 
grave . I have come to tell you something 
painful for you to hear." 

*' Not that Ned is ill ! or that there is any- 
thing amiss with him ? " 

" There is nothing amiss with him, except 
that he is weak." 

He said the last word with so much meaning 

that the truth seemed to flash upon her at once. 

" About me you mean . about wanting to 



EIGHT YEARS AGO AT BADEN. 75 

marry me . did he tell you to come here and 
say this to me? that was weak, if you like." 

" No, he did not ; will you he patient, Miss 
Vargrave ? ' ' 

" I never was in my life yet ; but I will try 
to be," she said. And then she gave the first 
lesson in stilling herself, in calming down out- 
wardly, and being passive under strong excite- 
ment. 

" I have been away for a fortnight ; I only 
came back here last night," Mr. Blayne began. 

" Stop !" Cecile interrupted; " I don't want 
to hear a word more than I need hear. Where 
you have been, or what you think, or why you 
think it ; these things can't concern me. Tell 
me truthfully why Mr. Manners is ' weak ' in 
wanting to marry me, and you'll find I respect 
the reason." 

"He is a man who needs and does not 
make money ; an improvident marriage would 
alienate him from his family ; and with them 
his prospects and career would go. Forgive 

me " Mr. Blayne was finding the office 

of go-between a far harder one than he had 
imagined. " You will ask, what right I have 



76 FALSE COLOURS. 

to interest myself in, and interfere about 
him " 

"No, I won't," Cecile interrupted; '' I don't 
care to know why you do it ; all I do care to 
know is, are you telling me the truth about 
what his marriage with me would do for him ?' ' 

It was very sadly that he assured her that 
he was speaking the truth, only the truth. 

" Then you have done what you came to do, 
Mr. Blayne," she said; " go back and tell him 
so, in the way you think best. If what you 

have said is quite, quite the truth " She 

paused again, searching for the falsehood that 
was not to be found in his face. " As what 
you have said is quite the truth," she resumed, 
sadly, " I give him up, for his good, and no- 
thing shall turn me from the decision I have 
come to. Say good-bye to him for me, and 
give him this." *' This" was a little gold and 
black enamel ring, with '' Dieu vous garde ^^ 
on it. 

It had been a bright, pretty dream to him, 
and he was sorry to wake from it. Still, his 
lot was cast in London, and he had sorrowed 
over and sneered at many an old friend who 



EIGHT YEARS AGO AT BADEN. 77 

was condemned by the exigencies of his posi- 
tion, with a wife and children, to poverty and 
oblivion. '* I believe you're right ; a fellow can't 
marry without money in these days, and has 
no right to trust to that wretched chance of 
getting on which always slips away when he 
puts it to the test," he said, disconsolately, to 
his more discreet fiiend that night; '' but she's 
a glorious girl, and I shall never forget her." 

'' I cut but a poor figure before her, though 
I did it with the best intentions," Mr. Blayne 
said, discontentedly. 

" Oh, as for that, I don't suppose she 
gave you a thought." And somehow, when 
his younger, more debonnaire, better-looking, 
though now most unhappy friend said that, Mr. 
Blayne felt sorry that the young girl, whom he 
had hurt with the best intentions on his part, 
should pass him over in her mind so utterly. 

Mr. Manners went away from Baden. He 
did not go off in a high-minded huff, without 
an attempt to see Cissy, and explain matters. 

But on this point Cissy was inexorable. In 
reply to his written appeals to let him see and 
reason with her, she wrote . 



78 FALSE COLOURS. 

" Please don't ; if I saw you and heard you, 
I should be very weak and very silly, and 
should agree to things while you were present 
which my sense of right and truth would make 
me draw back from afterwards; and I can't 
get away from here . you know why . so you 
must go, and God bless you! Cissy." 

He did know why, and he knew how the 
reason must grate on the poor sensitive child 
whom he was forced to injure now, act as he 
would. 

For a time Mr. Blayne was rather disposed 
to blame the young girl for a certain want of 
delicacy in staying on in this public place, 
where her story was known. But, after a time, 
he understood some hard things concerning her 
better, and then he pitied her, and the pity 
grew. She had a great deal to do, and to 
endure, and to conceal. Her life with the 
mother, who would have been a better woman 
had she been better treated by the world, was 
a sad one. It came about in time that Mr. 
Blayne got into the habit of seeking Cissy's 
side when chance threw them together in public 



EIGHT YEARS AGO AT BADEN. 79 

places. Then there came a day when he 
sought her in private, and entreated her not to 
think that he had been j)laying his fi'iend false 
in dissolving that dream, but that he loved her 
now, and there was nothing to stand between 
them . nothing to prevent their marriage. But 
Cecile could not have it so; and they had 
parted. 



80 FALSE COLOURS. 



CHAPTEK V. 

CRANWICH RECTORY. 

A GOODLY portion of this story which has 
just been told flashed back upon Cecile's mind 
that day, when her guests had gone and her 
husband had started off again to see his 
patient. That portion which she thought of 
least was the after-part which Mr. Blayne had 
played. And this was natural enough, for she 
had not been nearly so much interested in his 
"brief madness . his summer romance," as 
she had been in her own. He had asked her 
to marry him, aj)ologizing almost both to her 
and to himself for his apparent inconsistency 
in doing so, after having seen so forcibly what 
fell obstacles there were to her marrying his 
friend. He had asked her to marry him, and 
she had refused carelessly enough, for her 



CRANWICH RECTORY. 81 

mind and her heart were still full of the other 
man who had gone away in bitterness. 

But now, after all these years, she thought 
of him very kindly. He had done nothing 
mean and underhand. She had never felt him 
to be contemptible throughout the transaction. 
He had done what his reason and hers both 
judged to be right about his friend. And if he 
had been less wise and self- controlled after- 
wards about himself, what woman could blame 
him for that ? "I really should like to see 
him again . I hope Arthur will tell him who I 
am," she thought. Then she went on to hope 
something else . namely, that his memories of 
her would be kindly enough to induce him to 
see a good deal of her down in this country 
solitude. '* He must be quite an old bachelor 
now, poor man ; Arthur and I will enliven 
him," she thought, graciously; ''seven or 
eight miles in the country is nothing when an 
agreeable man is at the end of them." 

The subject occupied her thoughts to the 
exclusion of that other one which had been 
paramount before. It was not until she had 
been alone several hours that she remembered 

VOL. II. G 



82 FALSE COLOURS. 

that she had forgotten to find Mrs. Hepburn's 
visit the trying thing she had always intended 
finding it. After all, to the best of us there is 
something soothing in the misfortunes of our 
friends. Cissy did not dislike Amelia Hepburn 
the more for being a little unhappy and dis- 
contented. 

It was late before Arthur Scorrier came 
home that night. When he did come, a new 
turn was given to the direction of his wife's 
thoughts. The seeds of a good wholesome 
ambition . of ambition for her husband to suc- 
ceed and to shine in his professional career . 
were sown in her. " How is the poor man 
who is hurt ? ' ' she asked ; and he answered . 

" Worse, dear . as bad as he can be ; I have 
telegraphed for Doctors and " (men- 
tioning two great physicians, whose opinions 
in surgical cases were regarded by the faculty 
as all but infallible), " and I must be over at 
Cranwich again by six in the morning to meet 
them." 

" Then get your rest now, Arthur," she said, 
her eyes sparkling with pleasure, though she 
was sorry too for the poor stranger's pain; 



CEANWICH RECTORY. 83 

'' won't it be a great thing for you to be in such 
a case with them ?" 

" I hope it may . I think we shall save 
him," he said, gravely. 

" And then your name will be made, and 
you will have a wider sphere and higher in- 
terests than you have down here, and I shall 
rejoice in it so for your sake." 

'' My dear, hopeful little wife," he said, 
fondly, *' thank you for the prophecy ; but if 
my work is to be here for years. Cissy, help me 
to do it heartily, will you ?" 

*' That I will ; but it will not be here for 
years ; you must soar ; now get your rest, 
Arthur. I want you to go to it fresh and 
strong in body and mind to-morrow morning." 

" Tell me how you have got over yom- first 
day in your new home. Cissy ; has it been long 
and hard?" 

"No, it hasn't," she answered, promptly, 
forgetting in the new excitement of high hope 
for her husband, how long and hard it had 
been ; *' it has been new, you know, and I like 
new things." 

" Only this morning you were singing paeans 



84 FALSE COLOURS. 

for the prospect of peace it opened to you," he 
said, laughing. 

" That was this morning, I am always more 
peacefully inclined in the morning ; now it's 
night, and I'm alive and tingling with the con- 
viction that there is an immense deal to be got 
out of the world, and that I am justified in 
wishing to get all I can. Oh, I forgot to tell 
you . Mr. Hepburn was so funnily sentimentally 
kind to me to-day. Asked to kiss me on my 
forehead for the affection he bore you. I 
believe he must have been in love with your 
mother when they were young, and so cherishes 
you for her memory's sake, instead of for your 
father's, as he pretends." 

"My mother and he never met in their 
lives," Arthur said. And then he told the 
story of the morbid fancy, and how it had 
been born. 

*' What will he do when your mother comes 
to pay us a visit ? for though she doesn't like 
me, she will come and visit us, I hope ; he 
can't be so silly as to shut himself inside the 
park walls." 

** He will go away x)robably for a while. It 



CEANWICH RECTORY. 85 

does strike me as incongruous that an old man 
should so prominently obtrude a back-thought 
of an old college friendship into every-day life 
in this way." 

" Or, your father must have been a wonder- 
fully fascinating man ; what was he like, 
Arthur ? have you any likeness of him ?" Cissy 
asked. 

" No ; photographs were not in those days, 
and I have heard my mother say that he 
would never have his portrait taken. Oddly 
enough, Mr. Hepburn shares that peculiarity. 
He wont't sit even for a photograph ; he never 
has done it " 

" And, of com'se, says he never will, with an 
air of there being something very meritorious 
in being consistently obstinate about trifles. 
I know that class of mind . and it is so 
small." 

All this time she had forgotten Mr. Blayne. 
But just as Arthur was going off in search of 
the rest she had so earnestly recommended to 
him, she exclaimed . 

" By-the-bye, Arthur, did Mr. Blayne re- 
member me ?" 



86 FALSE COLOURS. 

" Eeally, my darling, I forgot your message," 
Mr. Scorrier said, in some confusion ; and then 
Cecile's attention was diverted by the cook 
sending to ask if the mistress would like to see 
the house closed, and no more was said about 
the rector of Cranwich that night. For these 
small ceremonials connected with the new 
office of wife and mistress were novelties to 
Cecile, and so exercised a charm over her. 

The second day in her new home was a far 
more interesting and agreeable one to young 
Mrs. Scorrier than the first had been. She 
had that hope concerning what was to come 
from the conjunction of her husband with the 
two medical stars to buoy her up. Moreover, 
she had the real womanly interest in the 
suffering, and the possibility of that suffering 
ending in a sad death of the stranger who was 
at present absorbing all her husband's atten- 
tion. There was no news from Cranwich until 
mid-day. Then Mr. Scorrier came home, 
hopeful, but not exultingly so. "I must leave 
you, Cissy dear," he said. "I mean to sit up 
with the poor fellow to-night . to-morrov/ we 
shall have a trained nurse with him, but until 



CRANWICH RECTORY. 87 

she comes I won't leave him to amateur hand- 
ling ; the Blaynes are very kind and anxious 
to do everything they can, but she gets be- 
wildered." 

" Oh ! is there a Mrs. BlajTie ? " Cissy asked. 

" Yes ; she's coming to call on you, she told 
me, as soon as she can feel free." 

" And what did he say to my being here ? " 
Cecile said, laughing. 

" Say . nothing ; oh ! to be sure ! he and 
you know each other. I'll remind him of it 
to-day if I see him, and think of it. I wish I 
could stay at home with you. Cissy ; will you 
mind going out alone ?" 

"Not a bit," Cecile said, cheerfully. She 
was determined to make the best of things . 
to keep her husband's heart up about her as 
about everything else . to make success in his 
profession his great thought and incentive. " I 
will go out after luncheon and explore Dane- 
bury." 

"Drive over and see Mrs. Hepburn. Your 
ponies and carriage are home ; they came this 
morning." 

" Arthur ! ponies ! not a pair ? " 



88 FALSE COLOUES. 

" Yes, a pair ; rather cobbified, but very neat 
chestnuts." 

" I'll drive where you like, and see whom you 
like," she said, walking hastily after him to the 
stable-yard, to look at her new acquisition. 
"It's altogether perfect ; who is to occupy the 
perch?" 

" You shall have the neatest of Tiger Tims 
when I have time to look after one ; in the 
meantime, put up with John," he said, as Cecile 
came out from the two-stalled stable that had 
been appropriated to the ponies. 

"Where did you get them?" she asked;, 
" they are perfect." 

" They belonged to the Honourable Mrs. 
Walter Bracey, who found it convenient to part 
with them just as I wanted them for you ; she 
only had them to swell about the neighbourhood 
with during the election time . she could never 
manage them a bit ; what will you have on the. 
panels . your cipher ?'* 

" No, our crest," she said. 

" I have none." 

" No crest ! " she said, lifting up her brows.. 

"None that I know of; I might make tha 



CEAlJWICH KECTORY. 89 

fellows at the Heralds' Office hunt me one up if 
I liked to take the trouble ; but, as Mr. Hepburn 
says, a cipher looks better." 

" I don't agree with Mr. Hepburn," she said, 
proudly; " why should a cipher look better on 
your carriage than a crest any more than on his 
own ; I can't bear people to be humble for their 
friends, and haughty for themselves." 

" Well, we will see about it," Arthur said, 
and at the same moment he was told that the 
dog-cart was ready, and he had to drive off to 
Cranwich. When she had watched him to the 
turn of the road that ran out from the stable- 
yard to join the turnpike, she turned towards 
the house slowly. 

"What time will you have the carriage round, 
ma'am?" the groom asked. 

" Oh ! the ponies ? . not at all . yes I will, 
though . at four;" "but I won't go near 
Glene," she added to herself, as she went up- 
stairs to dress. 

Black-browed Mrs. Monsell, standing at her 
window some two hours after this, saw an un- 
wonted sight. A pair of ponies, capitally 
handled, driven rapidly through the streets by 



90 FALSE COLOURS. 

a young and pretty lady. " Quite distinguished- 
looking . must be some one from Castlenau,'* 
she said to one of the Misses Pottinger, who 
had called in to glorify the bride, in the good- 
ness of her heart. Then that young lady started 
forward, just in time to catch sight of Mrs. 
Scorrier's well-poised little head, and beautifully- 
rounded, flushed, dark cheek. 

". Why, it's Mrs. Scorrier herself," Miss Pot- 
tinger said, triumphantly; ''isn't she distin- 
guished-looking, quite out of the common, as 
I was telling you ; quite foreign-looking, I 
think." 

" My knowledge of what is foreign-looking 
isn't so large as yours, I suppose," Mrs. Monsell 
sneered. " I fail to see that she is, for in- 
stance ; dear me ! I only hope we shall not 
suffer for this . a park-phaeton and pair of 
ponies will run away with Mr. Scorrier's share 
of the business profits if he does not take care." 
And Mrs. Monsell almost convinced herself, 
during the silence that ensued for the next 
minute, that Arthur Scorrier must be guilty of 
nefarious dealings, or that her husband was a 
fool. Else, why could the wife of the former 



CRANWICH RECTORY. 91 

be given a luxury, vi'liich she, the mfe of the 
latter, might never ho^De to command. 

Cissy, meanwhile, had driven clear of the 
little town and the carping inhabitants thereof. 
She took the road that seemed best to her, on 
account of its being well shaded with overhang- 
ing branches from tall trees, that were still in all 
the light-green freshness of their first spring 
costume. This leafy archway was a pretty, 
picturesque entrance to the little town, and Cissy 
drove along under it, careless of Vv'here it might 
lead her. Suddenty, however, she remembered 
that there was one place to which she would 
rather not go this day, so she asked . 
" Is this the Vv^ay to Glene, John ?" 
" No, ma'am, it ain't," was that taciturn do- 
mestic's reply. He did not enter into further 
particulars, and Cissy, being perfectly satisfied, 
drove the frisky chestnuts on and on, careless 
of the time of day, the dista^nce from home, 
careless of everything, in fact, save managing 
her handsome cobs gracefully and dexterously. 
She was determined that there should be nothing 
" out of drawing " in her driving, . nothing 



92 FALSE COLOURS. 

that could mar the perfect beauty of the picture 
that park-phaeton and ponies made. 

There was something very seductive, too, to 
one whose life had been chiefly spent in cities, 
in this driving along in a beautiful solitude, that 
still bore ample traces of cultivation. The 
broad, turnpike road had green footpaths at the 
sides. Its well kept hedges were redeemed from 
stiffness by young ashes and oaks springing out 
of them at intervals. There were glimpses over 
nearly every five-barred gate she passed of sunny 
meadow-lands, sloping down-hill to the river ; 
of great, umbrageous groups of trees, under 
which cows had arranged themselves artistically. 
Over other gates she caught sight, here and 
there, of square, well-set farm-houses, flanked 
by barns and out-houses ; of long, wide apple- 
orchards, with the blossom just giving a tone 
of irresolute pink to them in these April days. 
Further off, in different directions, she could see 
spires and towers rising above the trees, telling 
of churches and populations whose habitations 
she could not see. A lovely, peaceful, quiet, 
typically EngHsh road. No wonder that she 



CRANWICH RECTORY. 93 

enjoyed rolling along it, careless of Tvhitlier it 
led her. 

By-and-by evidences that she was coming to 
a village were about her, and she accepted them 
with very little curiosity ; not even caring to 
question the taciturn one behind her as to its 
name. These evidences were not many, but to 
those who know anything of country -road nature, 
they were marked. To her right the hedge 
ran in and lost its identity in the stone wall 
that, on its side, seemed to strive to compro- 
mise matters by suffering itself to be the frame- 
work for a vast amount of luxuriant greenery. 
Masses of ivy, growing stiffly at the top of the 
wall, trailed down long roj^es of verdure on 
either side. Little ferns sprouted out through 
the crevices where the mortar fell away from 
the stones it was intended to bind together. 
Penny-pies, as the country people call the 
round, fat leaves which abound so in the south 
of England, and whose botanical name is as 
unknown to me as it is to those who have 
thus designated them, made brilliant patches 
of light green here and there, in vivid contrast 
to the grey wall which nurtured them. Alto- 



94 FALSE COLOUKS. 

gether it was a luxuriant wall. It chained 
Cissy's eyes for so long a time, that when she 
looked ahead of her again she was well into the 
entrance of a village. The wall she had been 
admiring ended abruptly, or rather turned 
round and ran up a road that branched off to 
the right. On the other side of this road there 
was an open green, with a pond in the centre 
of it ; while on her left hand a trim, high, 
red-bricked wall terminated in a handsome iron 
gate, through whose bars she saw a wide, well- 
kept carriage-drive, that went winding away 
between broad richly dight borders and tall 
evergreens. 

" That must be the Eectory," she thought ; 
and then she asked . 

" John, whose house is that ? the squire's or 
the clergyman's ?" 

'' The parson's, ma'am," John said, con- 
cisely ; and then he leant a little on one side, 
as his mistress slackened her pace, and added, 
" and here he comes, with his lady." 

Cecile glanced up carelessly under the shade 
of her whip-parasol, and in the coming man 
she recognized in a moment . though the years 



CRANWICH EECTORY. 95 

were many since they had parted . her old 
love's prudent friend, her own quondam lover, 
Mr. Blayne himself. 

She pulled her ponies up with a heavier 
hand than she had laid on them before ; and 
then she bent forward, quite regardless of the 
look of astonishment which spread over Mr. 
Blayne' s face, and quite indifferent to the 
bewilderment that was expressed in the face of 
the lady whose hand was on Mr. Blayne' s arm. 

" Have you forgotten me ? I am Cecile 
Yargrave, Mr. Blayne," she said, in a voice 
that was made tremulous by the surging up of 
some old emotions long laid to rest. Then, 
before he could do more than attempt to change 
his stick from his right hand to his left, and 
lift his hat, and shake free of the conjugal clasp 
on his arm, . before he could do more than 
attempt to do all these things simultaneously, 
Cecile staggered him still more by saying . 

" That is, I was Cecile Vargrave. I'm Mrs. 
Scorrier now. And oh ! how is your friend ? " 

" It's the most extraordinary coincidence 
that I ever met with in my life," Mr. Blajnie 
said, recovering his breath. " My dear Miss 



96 FALSE COLOURS. 

Vargrave . I mean, Mrs. Scorrier . let me in- 
troduce you to my wife. An old Baden friend 
of mine, my dear, if she will permit me to say 
so." And as Cecile did permit him to say so, 
the trio shook hands very heartily. 

" And now, since you are at our very gates, 
you must waive ceremony and come in," Mrs. 
Blayne said. " I have been meaning to call . 
indeed I have ; I told Mr. Scorrier so yesterday, 
so do come in." Mrs. Blayne said all this 
with a fussy air of firm belief in its being a 
matter of vital importance which stepped first 
over the threshold of the other. Cecile, who 
was not imbued with this very proper spirit 
in which to conduct visiting, agreed without 
demur. 

" I shall be delighted ; and how surprised 
my husband will be when he comes down from 
his poor patient. How is your friend, Mr. 
Blayne ?" she asked, earnestly. 

Mr. Blayne had been looking over the ponies 
while she spoke. When she ceased he looked 
up into her face, and his own flushed a little. 

"Is it possible that you don't know 
that ? " he paused, and tried another way. 



CTiANYVICH RECTOEY. 97 

*^ Perhaps you don't know what Lister's 
name Y>'as before he took it for the property," 
he said, in a tone of voice that his wife thought 
was unnecessarily low. And when Cissy, on 
whom a light was beginning to dawn, notwith- 
standing her negative, said . . 

'' No; I don't." 

He answered, " It was Edward Manners . 
take care of the corner of that bed : admirably 
coached indeed, Mrs. Scorrier." 

'' Poor fellow ; how earnestly I hope my 
husband will bring him round." 

So the announcement that the '* old love" 
was in her vicinity was made and received. 
With very great outward composure ; with cold- 
ness almost. But with a good deal of inward 
perturbation. 

That it should have turned out in this way 

. that she should have come undesignedly and 

indifferently into their midst in this way, was 

really enough to throw any woman off her 

balance for a short time. Mrs. Blayne would 

not give her time to recover herself either. 

That mention of Cissy as an old Baden friend 

of her husband's had excited all the excellent 
VOL. II. n 



98 FALSE COLOURS. 

lady's curiosity, and it would not be appeased 
until Cissy had told her how many times she 
(Cissy) had met Mr. Blayne, and what he was 
doing at Baden then, and how they came to 
know each other, and how they came to leave 
off knowing each other, and many other ques- 
tions of the like sort, which Cissy answered 
with more discretion than truthfulness. 

When she had collected herself a little, it 
was borne in upon her . how she scarcely knew 
. that Mr. Blayne had married a woman with 
money . for her money in a great measure, 
even if not entirely. Mrs. Blayne was a com- 
mon-place, sharp-featured, and mannered little 
middle-aged lady, who expressed in every look 
and every movement a full sense of ovmer- 
ship in all about her. As for Mr. Blayne, he 
was very silent. This wife whom he had 
married did not appear to advantage before the 
still beautiful, blooming, graceful woman whom 
he had wanted to marry many years ago. 

Cecile, too, was a little more constrained 
than it was quite in her nature to be. She 
had no fear respecting the disclosure and expla- 
nation which she must make to her husband 



cplAxwicii rectory. 99 

when he came down and found her there. 
Still, though she had no fear respecting it, the 
necessity of having to make it at all bored her 
very much. '^It will be so tedious to have to 
begin at the beginning, and to have to answer 
all the whys and wherefores," Cissy thought, 
pettishly. And then she wished that she had 
taken any other road than this one which had 
led her to Cranwich, at this time above all 
others. 

" Mr. Scorrier will be down directly ; he 
ordered his dog-cart at six," Mrs. Blayne said, 
when Cissy indicated that she thought she had 
better drive home again. " Do wait for him. 
I assure you," the good lady went on, " we are 
all at sixes and sevens ; everything about the 
house goes ^Tong, and all the servants seem 
upset by this unfortunate affair. If you'll 
believe it, Mrs. Scorrier, for two days we have 
been put off with an early dinner, in conse- 
quence of cook forgetting to provide for our late 
one." 

'' Yes," Mr. Blayne said, rather ill-temper- 
edly ; " if cook didn't take such a wild interest 
in what doesn't concern her, and would just 



100 FALSI;! CCLOUiJy. 

attend to her own business, she would stand a 
better chance of staying here." 

" Cook is an invakiable servant, and has lived 
in our family for years," Mrs. Blayne, said, 
promptly. 

'' That doesn't justify her in neglecting her 
work in my house," Mr. Blayne persisted ; but 
his wife ignored that remark, and continued her 
explanation to the uninterested visitor. 

" She came with me to Cranwich when I 
married, two years ago, Mrs. Scorrier ; both she 
and my own maid, who had lived with me ten 
years, came. What I should have done without 
them I don't know . I don't really ; they know 
how I like things done, and how I like my furni- 
ture kept." 

" That's a great comfort," Cissy said, not 
knowing what else to say. 

'' Oh ! a great comfort . a very great com- 
fort ; furniture that one has had for years, and 
learnt to look upon as old friends, one does get 
attached to, you know." From all of v.diich 
Cissy understood what Mrs. Blayne meant her 
to understand, namely, that the house was 
furnished with Mrs. Blayne' s furniture, and the 



CRANWICH RECTORY. 101 

services rendered by Mrs. Blayne's servants. 
"Married for money evidently," pretty Mrs. 
Scorrier thought, complacently. It is only na- 
tural to a TS'oman to feel more complacent 
towards a man Vviio has loved her, and who 
eventually marries for money, than if he buries 
his dead, and marries for love. In the one case 
self-love pleads successfully that it was only his 
need that brought him, 

*' . . . . Having known me, to decline, 
On a range of lower feelings and a narrower heart than 
mine." 

But in the other no such balm can be self- 
applied. There was no ''need" for him to go 
down and love some one else, and find happiness 
with some one else. "We are all selfish. To be 
human is to bo so, and it is hard to resign 
what in our selfishness we prized, 3'et could not 
prove, xicknowledge it is pleasanter to be able 
to say, " He would have linked his fate to mine, 
though I stood towards him in the relation of 
the beggar-maid to King Cophetua ; but in his 
marriage with her he has studied expediency." 



102 FALSE COLOURS. 



CHAPTEE YI. 



CISSY SEES GHOSTS. 



After a long time, as it seemed to Cecile, the 
wheels of Mr. Scorrier's dog-cart grated on the' 
gravel in front of the house, and Mrs. Biayne 
said, "Ah! now Mr. Scorrier will be down 
directly." Cecile rose ujd when she heard her 
husband's step outside the door, and the naughty- 
child sensations were about her strongly for a 
few moments. Looked at in the light in which 
she could not hel^D looking at the whole busi- 
ness, there was both a want of dignity and a 
want of purpose about her conduct. And yet 
what had she done that was worthy of reprehen- 
sion . her own reprehension, for no one else 
would dare to reprehend her ? She had taken 
a road that she did not know, and she had fallen 
in with the Blaynes, and learnt from them that 



CISSY SEES GHOSTS. 103 

an old love of hers was ill unto death here, close 
to her. That was the head and front of her 
offending. Still there "would be an awkwardness 
in setting these circumstances forth clearly he- 
fore her husband. 

He came in, looking harassed and absorbed. 
*' Cissy," he said . he was too tired to demon- 
strate much surprise . "'what brings you here?" 
And then Cissy did the best thing she could 
have done under the circumstances, namely, 
laughed, and said . 

" The ponies brought me, in the most delight- 
fully accidental way in the world, to a meeting 
with Mr. and Mrs. Blayne at their own gate." 

"And then," Mrs. Blayne hastened to ex- 
plain, "we persuaded Mrs. Scorrier to come in, 
for in the most curious way, my husband and 
Mrs. Scorrier turn out to be old acquaintances ; 
as I told Mrs. Scorrier, I should have called on 
her by this time, but really, this dreadful affair 
. hoic is Mr. Lister now? " 

"Worse," Ai'thur Scorrier said, concisely. 
*' I was coming to ask you to send a message to 
my wife, but as I find her here, I'll deliver it 
myself. Cissy, dear, I can't leave him." 



104 FALSE COLOURS. 

''So ill as that," Cissy said, soberly. This re- 
union with the old love bade fair to be very 
j)ainful. 

" So ill as that, very ill ; I shall be glad v^^hen 
the nurse arrives," he added to Mrs. Blayne, 
"for fever has set in, and he is delirious, and 
not too manageable." 

Cecile's lips parted to speak, but she checked 
herself as Mr. Blayne said . 

"Let me go and help you with the poor fel- 
low, Scorrier." 

"Indeed, I protest against that," Mrs. Blayne 
said, solemnly; "I am not cowardly, and I am 
not selfish, but proper precautions regarding 
one's own health, we are all justified in taking; 
I am not strong enough to risk contagion." 

" I wish I might help you, Arthur," Cissy 
said, humbly, "till the nurse comes. I would 
do my best, and . I knew Mr. Lister at ono 
time." 

"Knew him! but it's impossible you can help 
me, child. I must go back to him. knew him, 
what do you mean?" Arthur Scorrier said, hur- 
riedly. But Cissy had no time to explain her 
meaning, for just then the doctor was recalled 



CISSY SEES GHOSTS. 105 

to the sick-room by the frightened domestic 
whom he had left on guard there when he came 
down. 

" So as I can do no good I will go home," 
Cecile said, wearily, holding out her hand in 
farewell to Mrs. Blayne as she spoke. Then, 
after that lady had begged Mrs. Scorrier onco 
more to believe that she '' should call on her on 
the earliest opportunity," Mrs. Scorrier went 
out to her carriage, escorted by Mr. Blayne. 

*' How very strangely things come about!'* 
Cissy said, reflectively, as she stepped in and 
settled herself in the phaeton. She was think- 
ing of the one who had been Edward Manners, 
and of hsr own relations towards him, or at 
least of what her relations might have been. 

''Very strangely indeed!" Mr. Blayne said. 
He was thinking solely of himself, and of what 
might have been his relations vdth Cissy. "I 
am glad we are neighbom-s, Mrs. Scorrier," he 
added, heartily. 

" So am I, very glad indeed; it renews my 
youth to see you, and to see you just the same 
as you were at Baden," she said. 

''Oh; but I am altered . got terribly old . 



lOG FALSE COLOURS. 

I feel liow old, when I compare myself with the 
man I was when I saw you last ; quite a sober 
old country parson." He spoke as one might 
speak who would not object to being contradicted. 
But Cissy had not the animation at command 
to give a sprightly contradiction to his avowed 
estimate of himself just then. She was think- 
ing of the poor fellow who was dying upstairs, 
and of the strangeness of that circumstance 
which had made her husband his possible 
saviour. So she drove away with a farev\'ell 
nod, in silence . and in sadness. 

The road Avas not nearly so pretty as it had 
been just now, when she was outward bound ; 
it had been brilliant, bright green, true spring 
weather but an hour ago. But now the brilliancy 
of the day was gone . the sun was hidden be- 
hind a cloud that did worse than obscure the 
sun . it gave forth a damping, dispiriting, 
undetermined sort of rain. A mist hung over 
the lowlands that sloped to the river. The cows 
were gone home to be milked. The village 
spires and towers would not show through the 
coming darkness. It was all altered. 

Everything was altered. Her spirits had 



CISSY SEES GHOSTS. 107 

gone doTvn ^\ii]l the day, and vet she had really 
done nothing and suffered nothing ^-hich need 
have depressed her with a depression in which 
there was an element of remorse. That she 
should have felt grieved, even heart-sore, about 
the accident which had befallen the man who 
had so api^reciated her at Baden several years 
ago was only natural and good. But there was 
something beyond this which clouded Cissy 
Scorrier's face, and robbed her cheek of the 
colour which had reigned there when she drove 
out from Danebury. 

She had a solitary dinner, and a long soli- 
tary evening, which latter was enlivened by the 
local paper, which only reached Danebury late 
in the day from the town in which it was pub- 
lished, eight miles away. She had not opened 
her wool-cases and v\'orkboxes yet, and even if 
she had done so, work would have fared ill at 
her hands this night. Consequently, when the 
local intelligence had been perused with the 
languid interest with which those who are not 
to the manner born do peruse it, she sat idly 
and thought. 

Thought of a day long past . a bright morn- 



108 FALSE coLouns. 

ing hour in a terraced garden of a Baden 
hotel, where she had listened to a tale of love 
from the man who now was lying dying, if her 
husband could not save him, under a higher 
power. It had all turned out strangely. Not 
that she would have altered her fate if she had 
been given the power to do so. But though 
she would have kejDt her fate unchanged, the 
strangeness of it did not fail to strike her. 

He had come into the property then, which 
he ATould have forfeited had she married him. 
At least his friend had told her that the price 
of her love would be his prospects, and she had 
no reason to doubt that statement. " Is he 
happier without me witli that, I wonder? " she 
thought, and then a little throb of gratification 
passed through her as she remembered that she 
had heard of no wife of Mr. Lister's . he had 
not appointed a successor to her in his affec- 
tions. 

She speculated a good deal as to what he 
would think of her husband and her marriage 
altogether, if he did recover. In the old days 
she had been a dreamily ambitious girl, full of 
high hopes of making a mark or of having a 



CISSY SEES GHOSTS. 109 

marked j)lace made for her in the world. 
Would he think that she had lowered her flag 
very much indeed in marrying this country 
surgeon, who might never be heard of beyond 
the precincts of Danebury ? Or would he con- 
fess that she had done wisely and well in giving 
up delusive ideas for a good honourable reality ? 
Well ! at any rate it would be good to see him 
again, for she thought well enough of him to 
feel sure that he would be glad to see she was 
happy. She v/ondered, too, what Arthur would 
think about it when she had time to tell him 
the story from the beginning unto this end. 

Quite late in the evening there came a note 
from Glene. Mr. and Mrs. Hepburn vrere go- 
ing on the following day to Bedford, a place 
that had a two-fold interest for the inhabitants 
of Danebury, for it had a beautiful old ruined 
castle near it, and good shops in its midst. 
*' They would be charmed if Cissy would go 
with them," Mrs. Hei^burn said on behalf of 
them both. Then followed a private entreaty 
from Amelia, in a postscript . ''Do come, or 
the day will be too tedious to me." 

" Arthur is sure to wish me to try to please 



110 FALSE COLOURS. 

tliem," she thought. So she sent an accept- 
ance of their mvitation, although the promised 
pleasures of Eedford did not bloom very brightly 
before her. Then nothing else occurred until 
Arthur came home. 

The rain had ceased, and the night had 
cleared, so when she heard his dog-cart wheels 
she ran out into the garden to meet him. 

" I am so glad you've come," she said, 
warmly, as he jumped down by her side ; ^' how 
is Mr. Lister?" 

" Better ; did you only come out to hear of 
him, dear ? " 

" He's going to develop over-fond, half-exact- 
ing jealousy," Cissy thought, quickly; ^'how 
unworthy of him . derogatory to both of us," 
and she drew back from his outstretched hand 
in the unwise, huffy way in which brides are 
only too apt to behave before they are sure of 
their ground. 

" Cissy ! not savage, surely," he said, in a 
remonstrating tone. 

'' No ; not savage, only rather astonished at 
being rebuffed when I come out to ask a question 
concerning something you ought to feel an 



CISSY SEES GHOSTS. Ill 

interest in. I vdll be wiser in future ; I will 
not tread on the Tom Tiddler's ground of jour 
profession." 

She turned and w?Jked back into the house 
when she had finished speaking, and he did not 
follow her soon. Indeed, he seemed to loiter 
unnecessarily ; accompanying his horse to the 
stable, and irritating the fatigued mind of the 
groom by offering suggestions as to the way in 
which bean?^ and oat-straw should be adminis- 
tered, together with corn and hay, in the 
future. He was tired, very grievously tii-ed in 
body and mind, and it was hard for him to be 
questioned closely concerning the ill-being of a 
stranger, when his tiredness must have been 
patent to the wife of his bosom. 

Presently he went back to his house, and 
again appearances were unpropitious. By way 
of being considerate to her servants, Cissy 
showed lack of consideration towards her hus- 
band. She had sent the cook and the house- 
maid, and an anomalous being . partly page, 
partly boy, and partly under-gardener . to bed, 
leaving herself up alone with the keys and the 
responsibility of supplying her husband with 



112 FALSE COLOURS. 

meat and wine. Accordingly, when lie came 
in there was an unwonted ahsence of minis- 
tering angels and attention. There was only 
the thin light of a reading-lamp in the dining- 
room, and its rays fell upon an expectant and 
not too well pleased wife solely. 

" Where are the servants?" he asked, making 
a good deal more noise and confusion with his 
hoots and hat and coat than he need have 
done. 

" Where ! oh, gone to hed," she said yawn- 
ing as she spoke, and wondering that he had 
not thought of kissing her before he rid himself 
of his damp clothes. 

" I hope they have left some supper for 
me." 

'' Supper ! oh, but I thought you would dine 
at the Blaynes. I am so sorry, Arthur." She 
went to the table and looked at some biscuits 
and sherry, and felt them to be very insufficient 
for her husband's restoration. ^' Why didn't 
those wretches tell me he was in the habit of 
wanting supper when he came home after a 
late dinner" (and a long watch by a sick bed 
she might have added) ; " as it is I must do 



CISSY SEES GHOSTS. 113 

my best, and be must be satisfied," sbe tbougbt. 
And tben sbe moved slowly away in tbe direc- 
tion of tbe pantry, and Artbiir Scorrier tbougbt 
sbe was rendering bim tbis service not lov- 
ingly, but unwillingly. 

" Poor Cissy ! sbe did not bargain for tbis 
wben sbe married me," Mr. Scorrier tbougbt, 
balf-pityingly, balf-contemptuously, as tbe wife 
be bad so recently married came back witb bis 
supper on a tray. For a few moments be 
almost tbougbt of rousing bimself from bis 
fatigue, and telling ber tbat be sympatbised 
witb ber sense of tbe unfitness of present cir- 
cumstances, or arrangements ratber. But on 
furtber reflection it did not seem wortb wbile 
to say anytbing about it until tbe morning. So 
until tbe morning. Cissy was left witb tbe 
feeling tbat Artbur was annoyed witb ber on 
account of tbis resurrection of tbe old associa- 
tions of ber former foreign life ; left witb tbis 
feeling burning in upon ber, until sbe came to 
consider bim narrow-minded and unjust about 
a subject to wbicb be was not giving one 
tbougbt. 

"Well," be said, rising up at last, after be 

VOL. II. I 



114 FALSE COLOURS. 

had enjoyed the supper she had brought to him 
with her own hands, rising up and stretching 
his shoulders and arms as if he would free them 
from a load of weariness, '' Well, after this day, 
what a relief it will be to have a quiet time 
with you to-morrow. Cissy; I have been on 
the rack, as it were, since yesterday morn- 
ing." 

'' Oh ! but to-morrow; how unfortunate.'^ 
" Why is to-morrow unfortunate ? " 
'' Only because, thinking you would be fully 
engaged still, I have promised to go to Eedford 
with the Hepburns ; it seemed to me it would 
be as well to go as to stay at home, since they 
vashed it." 

" Certainly, as you wished it, too, dear," he 
said, carelessly. 

" No, Arthur ; there you are mistaken. I 
can hardly say I wished it, yet I seem to be 
drifting into an intimacy with the Hepburns 
that will not give pleasure to any one of us in 
the end, and I can't help myself." 

"It's always hard to decide in the earlier 
stages of an intimacy whether or not it will 
yield pleasure in the end," Mr. Scorrier said, 



CISSY SEES GHOSTS. 115 

thoughtfully ; " still, though I wanted you to- 
morrow, dear, I'm glad you are going with the 
Hepburns." 

" If I had known that you could stay at 
home with me I would not have agreed to go," 
she said, doubtfully, hoping that he would say 
a word or two more that Avould justify her in 
breaking the engagement ; " but I feared that 
you would not be able to leave Mr. Lister." 

" I have left him in good hands. We have 
got a nurse with him now, and I am able to 
breathe again." 

" Do you think he will live, Arthur ?" 

"Live! to be sure he will," Mr. Scorrier 
said, cheerfully. "What should he die for? 
he's lately come into a property that makes it 
well worth his while to live under anything less 
than a broken neck." 

"I am glad of that." 

" By the way, you knew him, too, didn't 
you, dear?" Arthur Scorrier said. The fact 
had slipped his memory, and Cissy had thought 
that it had been weighing on his mind. 

"Yes. I knew him years ago," she said, 
briefly. 



116 FALSE COLOURS. 

" From all Blayne tells me, he must be an 
uncommonly nice fellow, is he not ?" 

** Arthur, I can scarcely speak of him as an 
unprejudiced person now, when I am hearing of 
him again so unexpectedly, and he is so . so ill." 
She spoke with some emotion, and her husband 
paused in his occupation of lighting a bed-room 
candle to ask her . 

" What is the matter, my darling ? " 

"Oh ! it does seem so idiotic," she exclaim- 
ed, driving back her tears, *'to be upset, and 
nervous, and half tearful like any school-girl ;. 
I'm disgusted with myself." 

*' But why ? " he asked, wonderingly. 

" Only because, even to myself, it seems like 
affectation and false sentiment to be agitated 
on account of a man I haven't seen for years, 
simply because in our youth he and I thought 
w^e were very dear to each other." 

"Poor child, is that all," he said, kindly, 
taking her face between his hands, and pressing 
his lips to hers most tenderly. " Poor child," 
he repeated, " don't you think I have often felt 
that there must have been a good strong element 
of that sort of thing in your life, or did you 



CISSY SEES GHOSTS. 117 

ihink I had married you in the blind belief 
that I was the first to wake the echoes, Cissy?" 

'' No, I never imagined that you were so weak 
us to believe anything of the kind ; but that does 
mot do av/ay with my having a little natural 
feeling of dissatisfaction at this element of my 
past life being brought into my present ; don't 
you see that, Arthur . or can you only think of 
how it does strike you, and how it might have 
struck 3-0U if you hadn't been so capacious- 
minded as you are." 

She said this with the shadow of a sneer at 
the egotism which she thought she had detected 
in his speech. 

" I thought it might relieve you to knovr that 
I did not feel sorry or annoyed, Cissy." 

" So it does," she said, impatiently, " though 
I don't know why I should have been burdened 
in mind on the subject," she added, with a 
laugh ; '. but what makes me not wish to see 
liim now is no f ^ar of your being foolish, Arthur, 
but a sort of dread that, after all I shall tell 
you about him, you will think me a fool." 

" Perhaps you had befter not tell me about 
him." 



118 FALSE COLOURS. 

" That's very sage, but very impossible. 
When the interest and the excitement about 
him were long past and half-forgotten things, 
it was easy enough for me to keep my own 
counsel; but now he's the hero of the day down 
here, on account of his money and his bruises, 
and for the life of me I can't keep my share in 
him quiet. I feel as sure as I ever felt of any- 
thing, that I shall say to Mrs. Hepburn to- 
morrow, ' I was once engaged to Mr. Lister.' " 

" And in my own mind I always adorned 
you with the grace of reserve." 

"And so I am reserved to a certain point ; 
but that point passed, there are no bounds to 
my power of being confidential. I am ashamed 
(when I am half found out) of being thought 
ashamed of anything." 

" Let me hope that your fear of being 
thought ashamed won't make you portray too 
much pride in your former relations with Mr. 
Lister." Mr. Scorrier spoke rather coldly, 
and moved rather stiffly, as men are apt to 
speak and move when they are offended and 
tired. 

*'' So I hope to my heart I shall not meet 



CISSY SEES GHOSTS. 119 

him in these different clays, Arthur," his wife 
cried out, as Mr. Scorrier left the room. 

"I hope to my heart you won't," he an- 
swered, curtly, in a tone that made Cissy de- 
clare to herself that " he had forgotten all his 
promises of forbearance concerning her," in 
a tone that almost made her wish to remind 
him that she had warned him against marry- 
ing her. 

She had a very sad night. Intuitively she 
understood that the old story would get bruited 
abroad through the Blaynes. Mr. Blayne 
himself she did accredit with a certain power 
of silence ; but his wife . Cissy felt sure that 
his wife would hear much and say more 
respecting her ; and then these new people, in 
this neighbourhood into which she had but 
just come, would canvass her claims and her 
old disappointment, and her artfulness in having 
married Arthur Scorrier after all. 

Nor were these fears concerning the judg- 
ment of her peers the sole disturbing elements 
in Cissy's dreams that night. She fancied 
that her husband must be perplexed, even if he 
were not vexed, by this ghost rising up in his 



120 FALSE COLOURS. 

path. *' Perhaps he is tying awake, bothering 
himself with the thought that I am too glad, 
or too sorry, or too indifferent about it to be 
quite up to the mark of what his wife should 
be," she thought. " If I could only feel sure 
wdiat he would like me to do, I would do it. It 
will be so hard to make him quite understand 
all my ins and outs of feeling about it." Then 
she pitied herself and pitied her husband for 
this early misapprehension wdiich had arisen 
between them. Meanwhile, Mr. Scorrier was 
sleeping the sleep of the happily unconcerned. 

For all Cissy's qualms of conscience and 
affectionate self-reproaches respecting the light 
in which her husband w^ould look upon these 
things w^ere groundless. Mr. Scorrier either 
did not look upon them at all, or if he did 
glance at them, it was with the lenient eyes of 
practical common sense and happy assurance. 
Of course he had not married such a girl as 
Cissy either in the belief or the hope that she 
had been heart-free during all the years that 
had elapsed previous to his advent. Nor had 
he developed any strong feeling of dislike to the 
possible appearance of the probable men who 



CISSY SEES GHOSTS. 121 

liad loved and been loved by her. He bad bis 
buried dead, and bis witbered roses, and bis 
time-stained letters, and memories also, and 
tbougb be would wake none of tbem needlessly, 
still if they should chance to crop up he trusted 
that Cissy would stand the sight of them calmly, 
as he stood the thought of Lister now. 

His few reflections on this matter all tended 
to this end, on this night, vrhen Cissy believed 
him to be surrendering without discretion to 
the attack of the yellow-eyed demon. So while 
the woman worried herself about him, the man 
slept, after their respective habits. 

But this last patient of his was very much in 
Arthur Scorrier's thoughts . professionally. 
Accordingly^, it chanced that the first words he 
addi-essed to his wife in the morning bore 
reference to the theme of her thoughts during 
her vigil. 

'' I am more set than ever on turning Mr. 
Lister out perfectly cured in a week or two," 
Mr. Scorrier said, animatedly. He did not add 
the reason why he was more than ever set on 
doing so, consequently Cissy fancied that it vras 
generous enthusiasm for a distracted rival, 



122 FALSE COLOURS. 

instead of understanding the mean truth, which 
was simply this, that the eminent consulting 
surgeons had taken a desponding view, and left 
the case as almost a ho]peless one in Mr. 
Scorrier's hands. 

" If Arthur would only believe how infinitely 
superior I feel him to be to Mr. Lister," Cecile 
thought, a dozen times that day; " if he would 
only do himself that justice and believe it." 
She could not realize the truth in her anxiety. 
The simple truth, which was this, that Arthur 
was doing himself the far higher justice of not 
troubling his head about Mr. Lister at all as a 
man, but only as a subject on whom to exercise 
his skill and his steel. '' Dear Cissy's ambition 
that I may be famous in my profession may be 
realized sooner than I thought the other day," 
he said to himself, as he stood looking after the 
carriage which was taking the Hepburns and 
his wife to Eedford. And then he did give a 
thought to his patient in connection with Cissy. 

" I hope she won't confide that Baden busi- 
ness to the fair Amelia ; if she does " Mr. 

Scorrier finished his sentence with a shrill 
whistle. 



MPtS. elayxe's tkixgs." 123 



CHAPTEE YII. 



Long after what Mr. Seorrier had lightly termed 
" that Baden business " had ceased to be a 
stinging memory to Mr. Blayne's mind, that 
excellent and prudent man had pronounced 
himself to be a confirmed old bachelor. His 
hour of weakness for the jDretty face and the 
winsome grace of Cecile Yargrave over, he had 
got his head again, and resolved (in less im- 
passioned language though than that in which 
Kobert Browning sets forth the contrary inten- 
tion of the suicide) that '' woman should ' not ' 
be the toy for him." He had his own views of 
a priest's mission and parish work. What those 
views were I am not called upon to say, for in 
the course of this history it is only Mr. Blapie's 
social aspect which will be portrayed. He had 



12-1 FAL.iE C0L0Uil3. 

his own views of these things, and they were 
tolerably good strong views, and he had more 
than a moderately strong intention of carrying 
them out. Therefore he had no feeling of there 
heing that v/hich nature abhors, a vacuum in 
his life. He had enough to do, and he had the 
wish to do it and the i^ower. Monotony might 
reign in his career, but it would be the endurable 
monotony of duty, not the unbearable tedium 
which besets the man who has nothing to do, 
and who cannot even do that properly. A 
healthy, middle-aged man, with a good income 
and a good appetite, is not apt to linger in 
iove-sickness, or to hug the enfeebling fetters of 
the rejected long. Long before Mr. Edward 
Manners (the Lister of this story) had ceased to 
think despondently whenever he was not well, 
or well off, of the star of the German gambling 
Paradise, Mr. Blayne had left off hankering 
after one who had been to him a forbidden 
blessing. Long before Cissy had brought her- 
self to think without a good deal of blushing 
conceit of the mature victim to her charms, the 
charms had utterly vanished from the mind of 
the victim. When he came home to his Cran- 



*' MRS. blayxe's things." 125 

-wich rectory, after that little flight abroad, 
during which he had moulted a feather or two 
that were never missed, and whose destination 
was consequently never investigated by his 
Cranwich flock, he was a sound' man . sound 
in pocket, reputation, health, happiness, and 
heart. Aye ! sound in all these things, though 
evil report (if she had been listened to) would 
have averred that a plume or two wrested from 
him adorned the graceful head of an adventuress, 
who had plucked them from him, worn them, 
and left him. 

Still, life at Cranwich, sound though he was, 
lacked a something to him which had not been 
wanting before he had winged his flight abroad 
with Edward Manners. He had mixed more 
with women during that temporary insanity 
than fate had ever suffered him to mix before. 
And the result of this new experience was to 
render him disaffected towards the normal 
solitude of a mansion in which there was nothing 
more feminine than a brace of bucolic maid- 
servants. It was a staggering thing for him to 
have to acknowledge to himself, after long years 
of abstinence from the admission, but he had to 



126 FALSE COLOURS. 

acknowledge that lie liked women, that they 
made many men's lives brighter than his looked 
now, and that he was only a man, despite his 
being Mr. Edward Manners' s very sage coun- 
sellor. But whom could he get to brighten his 
life ? whom would it be wise and well for him to 
want to get to brighten his life ? Notwith- 
standing the poetical vaunt of Owen Meredith, 
"that beauty is easy enough to win," in what 
he is pleased to term " this world of folly and 
sin," Mr. Blayne had found it difficult. The 
beauty he had wanted had given him to under- 
stand in unmistakeable English that she was 
not for him, and, odd as it may appear on a 
first reading, he had not seen a pretty girl (at 
this juncture) since parting with Cissy Vargrave. 
I say " odd as it may appear on a first reading " 
advisedly, for a moment's reflection will serve 
to convince any one that pretty girls . scarce 
at all times . are doubly so after the sight of 
one who is to the seer a Venus. 

But Cranwich Bectory seemed strangely 
empty to him the nearer he got to the verge of 
that middle age which to be comely must be 
mated. Mr. Blayne was not a poor man in 



'^MKS. blayne's things." 127 

these bachelor days, but he was not a rich man. 
He was not a giver of frequent banquets to 
other men, nor a frequent guest at other men's 
banquets. He was not a hunter after hounds, 
or any other of the legitimate country excite- 
ments. He was a singularly relationless man, 
no brothers' or sisters' children preyed upon 
him. Cranwich was neither a jDopulous nor a 
poor place, so the priestly mission there was 
not one of those all-absorbing things that leave 
no room r.nd no time for the intrusion of 
other hopes and aspirations. Under these 
circumstances it was no vv^onder that Mr. 
Blayne, in looking forvrard to the evening of 
life, came to feel that it would be dull should 
its shades come on and find him still com- 
panionless. 

When " that Baden business," in which his 
own share had been so considerable, had been 
a fresh thing in his mind, he had given him- 
self to understand that Cissy Vargrave could 
have no successor in his heart, or mind, or 
head . whichever it was of these three that 
had been touched by her. It seemed to him 
then, and for long after, that other women, 



128 FALSE COLOUIlS. 

average women, were *' flat, stale, and unpro- 
fitable." And as they seemed then, so he 
thought they w^ould always seem. There had 
been more than mere gh'lish freshness in the 
freshness of the mere girl who had overthrovv^n 
him. There had been more than beauty's 
usual witchery in the bewitchment of her 
beauty. Judging of the fitness of things as 
people are too apt to judge them, namely, by 
their outside appearance, there would have 
been unfitness in' the union. Casual observers 
would have contrasted their ages, their habits, 
and the widely different traditions of their 
educations, and their antecedents. But he 
believed that let w^hat would have come, there 
w^ould have been the fitness of most perfect 
love and happiness in their marriage . if only 
she would have married him ! But she w^ould 
not marry him, and so he had come to Cran- 
wdch alone, and come to feel the being alone a 
dull and hard thing. 

Man that is born of w^oman is weak. Weak 
in resolve often where women are concerned, 
and in execution weak nearly always. The 
man who had never hoped (while his memories 



'' MRS. ];layxe*s thixctS.'* 129 

of her were keen) to find a wortliy successor 
in his love for Miss Yargrave gave up the quest 
and contented himself with some one stamped 
inferior, 'vvhen his memories of Cissy grew 
dimmed h}^ time. The vision of that com- 
jmnionless evening of his life proved a quelling 
one with a vengeance. Ahout two 3'ears before 
Cissy Vargrave made up her mind that "her 
love's young dream " (her euphemism for the 
Baden business) was not a ''mistake," but a 
misfortune to be remedied, Mr. Blayne strove 
to lighten the coming gloom by marrying a 
reputedly wealthy maiden lady. 

He brought her and her household gods 
home to adorn Cranwich Eectory . and then ! 
Well then, all his friends who thought about 
him at all, fell to wondering ''why he had done 
so." If he wondered more heavily and in 
greater heart-sickness than the rest, he did not 
confide the doing so to anybody. x\nd his 
life flowed on very calmly, and his wife's rela- 
tions were good enough to say that he had 
feathered his nest well. 

Why he had married Miss Arnold was one 
of those problems which must for ever remain 

VOL. IT. K 



130 FALSE COLOURS. 

unsolved. She was not young, she was not 
pretty, she was not clever, she was not 
agreeable. He did not believe her to be 
nearly as rich as people said, and his belief 
was verified when he felt himself justified 
in enquiring into the amount of her fortune. 
That he had felt himself to be so justified 
before the knot was tied, and that still having 
done so he sufi'ered the tying to be accom- 
plished, may be accepted as proofs of that tem- 
porary insanity under which many people had 
declared he must have been labouring, when he 
finally introduced his bride to his friends. 
Mrs. Blayne was essentially a mediocre woman, 
mediocre in mind, manners, and appearance. 
And this mediocrity of hers was unredeemed 
by w^ealth even. She had a little money, and 
a great deal of good furniture. And this good 
furniture of hers came to be considered one of 
the most grievous of his crosses by Mr. Blayne. 
It w^as, so to say, obtrusive furniture. It im- 
pressed itself upon people at once as being 
massive and well-kei3t, and of great account in 
its owner's eyes. Mr. Blayne had not dined at 
the table and sat upon the chairs many hours 



" MRS. blayne's things." 181 

l)efore he cordially loathed them and theii* 
polish, and the vrordiness with which their 
polish was maintained in verbal contests be- 
tween his wife and his housemaids. The old. 
dusty, ragged, luxuriously comfortable sofas 
and chairs, which had made his bachelor soli- 
tude cosy, were banished to disused lofts and 
garrets, and the Arnold heirlooms reigned in 
their stead. '. It's a foi*tunate thing for us," 
Mrs. Blayne would say, "that I have been 
provident, and not given to gadding about, 
otherwise my things would not have been lit 
to be seen, any more than Mr. Blayne' s were 
when I came here." Those two phrases were 
favourites of Mrs. Blayne' s, and were propor- 
tionably hated by her hus])and. If she would 
cmly have spoken of the tables and chairs, as 
tables and chairs, he could have endured it. 
But to hear of '' her things " humbled him to 
the ground, and made him grovel before himself 
for that she should be his wife. 

Why had he married her? Who can answer 
that question about him or herself, or about 
any one else ? He had married her because 
he thought it possible that she might conduce 



132 FALSE COLOURS. 

to his comfort in some way or other ; and when 
he found that she did quite the reverse, he knew 
that he had no right to he disappointed. 
Thousands of marriages are made weekly, in 
the same faint hope, and with the same result. 
Why should he hemoan himself, or be he- 
moaned, because that his was only the fate of 
the majority ? She made him live upon at 
least a third less as a married man than he had 
ever lived upon in his bachelor days. And for 
this feat of economy she took great credit to 
herself, and forced him to accord her much 
praise. She drove hard bargains, and prac- 
tised penurious thrift, until the Eector of Cran- 
wich was oftentimes ashamed to look his 
parishioners and servants in the face. She 
was great . vast . -boundless in her power of 
paring, and suppressing, and despoiling life 
of all that was pleasant. She knew to a 
potato-paring what was eaten in her house . 
to the extract of one grain of hop what beer 
was drawn from her barrels. She was alto- 
gether a difficult woman to defraud and rob, 
and yet she was defrauded and robbed whole- 
somely. 



" 3ms. blayne's things." 133 

Why had he married her ? This question 
can never be answered, but when and where 
he married her may be told. In some hours 
of idleness he had gone to stay with an old 
college friend who had married for love in his 
youth, and was, together with his ailing wife 
and six children, steeped in the direst poverty, 
as a reward for such romantic immolation of 
himself. Seen from the point of view which 
this household naturally afforded. Miss Ai-nold 
appeared of a golden hue. A maiden lady, 
living on a small freehold; with a small flock 
in her fields, and a small herd upon her lawn 
. and known to be the rightful and sole owner 
of these things '"was a woman not to be sneezed 
at," Mr. Blayne's poverty-stricken friend af- 
firmed. Mr. Blayne unconsciously listened 
to the voice of the charmer, who charmed with 
such practical wisdom. After a time given to 
a very hazy contemplation of the matter, he 
determined to propose to the lady, and suffered 
the conviction to come home to him without 
delay, that it would have been indeed well for 
him had he only sneezed at her. 

Yet she was very far from being a bad 



134 FALSE COLOURS. 

woman, quite as far from being a bad woman 
as she was from being a good one ; and this is 
perhaps as much as can be said with truth of the 
masses. The negative qualities were assembled 
largely in her. She was not hard-hearted, but 
she was slow to feel. She Avas not unjust, but 
she was not gifted with an aptness for judging 
justly. She was not desirous of uttering false- 
hoods, but she was cursed with a fatal facility 
for giving a wrong impression. She was not a 
fool, but the boundaries of her mind hedged 
what there was of the latter in with a most 
pernicious closeness. Above all she was not 
rich, but she had " things " of her own, and 
loved to talk about them, and of hovr she had 
all her life refrained from " gadding about." 

She had been bone of his bone and flesh of 
his flesh for two years, when her husband came 
suddenly upon that most important part of the 
"Baden business" . Mrs. Scorrier was driving 
her ponies to the very gates of his garden. 
And during those two years Mrs. Blayne had 
never so much as heard the name of Cecile 
Vargrave. That there had been something 
more than a mere taUc cVhotc acquaintance or 



" MRS. blayne's things." 135 

travelliug friendship between her husband and 
the pretty half-foreign-looking woman who 
claimed Mr. Bl ivne as her friend so promptly, 
Mrs. Blayne felt certain. But of what nature 
the former feeling had been, or to what extent 
it had grown, she could not even surmise. She 
^yas not a woman of quick imaginings . her 
very suspicions Y\'ere sluggish ; and so, though 
she had disliked the meeting and greeting, 
which had been made up of cordiality and 
embarrassment, she had still proffered a call 
in an apologetic tone to Mrs. Scorrier. 

Mrs. Scorrier had scarcely got ten yards 
from the door before Mr. Blayne found himself 
called to account for her. 

"Who was that young woman?" Mrs. 
Blayne asked ; and though there was nothing 
actually offensive in her words, there was a 
something in her tone, and in the look . it 
could not be called expression. of her small 
dull eyes that offended him deeply. 

"What young woman ?" he asked, feeling 
feebly that he was only deferring the evil mo- 
ment of his explanation, and his own burst of 
wrath about it. 



13(3 FALSE COLOURS. 

" Has there been more than one young- 
woman here this afternoon ? I think not ; I 
mean that young woman, Mrs. Scorrier." 

" She was a Miss Vargrave," Mr. Blayne 
said, making himself rigid. 

" Dear me ! and is that all you know of her, 
though she does make such a fuss about meeting 
you again?" Mrs. Blayne said, bustling about 
the sideboard with the key-basket. " I shall 
ask Mr. Scorrier more about her by-and-by, 
when I tell him I am going to call on his 
wife." 

'' If 3^ou are going to question about her in 
this way, Mrs. Scorrier will not care for your 
call, as you term it." 

"And what can I term a call but a call, 
Richard "? and if Mrs. Scorrier does not care to 
have such questions asked about her, I shall 
certainly not care to call on her." 

" At any rate, drop the subject to-night, 
before Scorrier," Mr. Blayne said, testily, ])ie- 
paring to get himself away to his study, which 
was free from the overpowering presence of 
Mrs. Blayne' s " things." 



HONESTY. 137 



CHAPTEE VIII. 

HONESTY. 

" One friend not quite a liypocrite, 
One woman not a liar." 

Mr. Blayne had saved himself from joining in 
a discussion he dreaded by a flight into his 
study. But he could not remain in that strong- 
hold for ever, and he knew that when he did 
come out he would be sorely set upon. Mrs. 
Blayne was not the woman to give up the quest 
of a secret when once she found herself fairly 
on the scent. And her instincts told her that 
she w^as fairly on the scent of a secret now, or 
at least, of something that her husband and 
Mr. Lister had concealed from her, even if that 
something were not worthy the name of a 
secret. She made up her mind to find it out 
. not that she imagined it to be anything of 
interest or consequence, but she " didn't like 
things kept from her," she said, and so, know- 



138 FALSE COLOURS. 

iug this attribute of hers, Mr. Blayne was very 
unwilling to come out from his stronghold in 
the stud}^ 

She refrained from the subject that night, 
even when she had got him well hemmed in by 
her own things in the drawing-room, where he 
felt a peculiarly powerless man. Indeed, she 
suffered it to rest undisturbed just long enough 
for him to take the full blessing and comfort of 
peace. But when, a few days after Cissy's 
visit, Mr. Lister was pronounced w^ell enough 
for his hostess to pa}^ him a visit, Mrs. Blayne 
cried " havoc, and let loose the dogs of war," 
upon Mr. Lister's unguarded forces. 

There had been considerable demur on the 
part of the guest before he accepted the visit of 
his hostess at all. He did not like his friend's 
wife, and he had never feigned to like her. She 
always gave him the impression of feeling that 
she had bought his friend with a price which 
she considered to be fully adequate to his 
merits. And this manner of hers was a galling 
thing to the younger man, who really regarded 
his former Mentor warmly. 

So whenever Mrs. Blayne volunteered to go 



HONESTY. 189 

up and see Lim, lie sent down to say lie was 
asleep, or too weak, or not feeling quite so well, 
until Mrs. Blayne fathomed his objection, and 
in her own stolid, motiveless way, determined 
to overrule it. " There is no reason wh}' he 
should not see me, Eichard," she said, in her 
fat tones, to her husband one morning. 

" No reason . unless you accept his dislike 
to doing so as one." 

'' That's no reason at all . absurdity ! As if 
a woman of my age might not go up into a 
young man's sick-room." 

'' I don't think it's the improi)riety of the 
thing that strikes him," Mr. Blayne said. 

*' What is it then? You know, evidently, 
and may just as well tell me." 

''Why, he doesn't want you," Mr. Blayne 
said, goaded into telling the unpleasant truth 
in an unpleasant way. " He doesn't want you ; 
isn't that enough ? " 

'' Not for a woman who has a sense of her 
duty as mistress of a house," Mrs. Blayne 
said. " I shall not have it said that I let that 
poor young man lie there, day after day, with- 
out going near him ; it has been a most disa- 



140 FALSE COLOURS. 

greeable thing, of course, having this ilhiess in 
my house ; hut I don't think I can he accused 
of having failed in my duty." 

These were very hard words for a man and a 
husband to hear. He, too, had suffered from 
his friend's illness ; but his sufferings had been 
on account of his friend ; he had given no 
thought to the necessary disorder which sick- 
ness always makes in a house. It was hard 
to be reminded of it by the woman he had 
married. 

" Since he was to be ill, I would rather that 
he should be ill in my house than anywhere 
else," Mr. Blayne said, speaking rather sternly. 

" That's very well, Pdchard ; or it Avould 
have been very well while you were a bachelor 
and didn't care how topsy-turvy your house 
was ; but if I talked till doomsday I could 
never make you understand how such irregu- 
larity upsets the mistress of a house . not that 
the poor young man can help it." 

Mrs. Blayne gathered up her keys as she 
spoke, and then went away out of the room. 
It was a habit of hers to lock up everything 
and take away the keys, leaving him barren in 



HONESTY. 141 

the midst of plenty, and he had grown accus- 
tomed to the habit, although he did not like it. 
But the practice of it this day aggravated him 
beyond endurance. 

'' How many times shall I want a glass of 
wine in my own house, and not be able to have 
it because you're away with the key in your 
pocket, Jane ? " he called, going to the dining- 
room door, and shouting after her. " I wish 
you wouldn't lock that side-board up," he con- 
tinued, impatiently, as she re-entered the room, 
and proceeded to unlock the wine-closet. 

" I never will agree to putting temptations 
and snares in the way of servants." 

" Temptations and snares ! you believe 
every one to be a thief then ; there . don't put 
the sherry away as if I were an allowanced 
child." 

"I do not think that it looks well to see 
wine about at one o'clock in the morning." . 

" It looks well to see wine about, whenever 
I choose that it shall be about on my own 
table." 

"These may have been your Baden habits, 
Mr. Blavne, but thev shall not be the habits of 



142 FALSE COLOUKS. 

my house." And then Mrs. Blayne ended the 
contest by catching up the sherry and locking 
it away again, and Mr. Blayne suffered her to 
do it, feeling too miserably worsted to fight 
further. Then the lady beat another orderly 
retreat, and this time she got herself up to her 
sick guest's chamber wdthout being recalled. 

The scene which has just been set forth is 
very paltry and puerile ; but, given the condi- 
tions, and is not something of the sort sure to 
ensue ? A man may battle wdth and beat down 
the foibles and follies of a lion-hearted woman, 
but he can never hope to come off conqueror in 
a contest with one of those feebly organized 
beings, who would calmly see all creation 
collapse provided their own furniture retained 
a high polish, and their own provisions lasted 
the proper time. 

Mr. Lister had reached that stage of con- 
valescence w^lien it is hard to endure oneself, 
and impossible to endure other people. Mrs. 
Blayne was a sad and severe trial to him when 
he was in the rudest health. In these hours 
of his prostration she was an awful affliction. 
She meant very well indeed towards Mr. Lister, 



HONESTY. 143 

too, at this time, and so she was more than 
usually oppressive. When she went in and 
seated herself at the head of the sofa on which 
he was lying, his taste revolted, and his heart 
hardened against her. 

" I hope you have not thought me negligent 
of you, but whenever my vocations would have 
permitted me to come you were asleep," Mrs. 
Blayne began. 

" I have only thought you very wise and kind 
to leave me so much to myself," he answered; 
'' I have never thought you negligent." 

''And you would think me even less so if 
you realized how mucli devolved upon the 
mistress of a house. As I often tell Mr. Blayne, 
he has no idea of the forethought and calcula- 
tion that is required to make things go on 
smoothly. Xow, while 3'ou have been ill, for 
instance, I have not had a moment that I 
could fairly call my own." 

''Delicate, that ! " Mr. Lister thought, im- 
patiently, and he did not bestow a mental bene- 
diction on the wife of his friend. 

" My illness has l^een tedious enough to 
test any friendship," he said, laughing un- 



144 FALSE COLOURS. 

comfortably. " I know Blayne can stand it 
though, and ' as the husband is the wife 
is,' you know, so I am easy in my mind about 
you." 

"Oh, I'm sure we would both do anything 
that lay in our power to make you comfortable," 
Mrs. Blayne said. She could not help being 
cruel in her common-place obtuseness, so she 
added, before he had time to thank her for that 
assurance, " but of course such an illness as 
yours puts an end to all comfort and regularity 
in a house ; there are few things more unplea- 
sant, I think, than a doctor continually coming 
and going. And in this case we haye had the 
doctor's wife as well." 

'^Oh, haye you?" 

"Yes. Is that all the interest you are going 
to express in one who takes a yery deep in- 
terest in you ? " Mrs. Blayne, as she said this, 
fluttered her forefinger at him, and waggled 
her head archty, and her arch playfulness was 
of a nature that was exquisitely unpleasant to 
the young man on the sofa. Accordingly, 
instead of responding to her speech at all, he 
turned wearily on his side, and stifled a groan 



HONESTY. 145 

with that high art which makes the stifling 
much more effective than the groan vronlcl have 
been. 

" Is that all the interest you take in her ? " 
Mrs. Blavne repeated, in a playful way ; she 
was not a woman on whom playfulness sat 
well at all . it was palpable that distrustful, 
suspicious back-thoughts were disturbing her 
the whole time. He remained doggedly silent; 
he could not be quite so courteous as was his 
wont, to this terrible woman. 

" Is that all the interest you take in her, 
after knowing her so well at Baden, years ago, 
when you were there with Mr. Blayne ?" Mrs. 
Blayne said, eagerly ; and then she had the 
satisfaction of seeing Mr. Lister rouse himself 
at last to listen to words of hers. 

" I knew many ladies when I was at Baden 
with your husband, but I only remember one 
with anything like interest." He had got 
himself up on his elbow to say this, and she 
felt as she noted a questioning look in his eyes 
that she was winning her way to the source of 
the secret. 

VOL. II. L 



146 FALSE COLOURS. 

"And that one was . ?" she said, interroga- 
tively. 

*' That one was a lady I shall never see or 
hear of again in all prohahility ; it would be 
too good fortune for me to do so." 

" Then you won't be glad to see Mrs. Scor- 
rier ?" 

" Why should I be ? " he said. 

"Ah ! I shall tell her that if she wanted to 
keep up anything like an interest in the fickle 
breast of man, she should not have married, 
but have stayed Miss Yargrave." 

"So she is married!" he muttered; and 
that was the only remark Mrs. Blayne could 
prevail on him to make. "There were nice 
goings-on with Eichard and her, I expect," the 
lady thought, as she wended her way from the 
sick-room; "else why should that young man 
have said so little about her? " 

So she is married ! Those words rang the 
knell of the few faint hopes he had been nurs- 
ing about her for so long a time. He had not 
given her up and forgotten all about Cecile 
TaroTave either so easilv or so soon as she 



HONESTY. 147 

believed lie had done. When the time came 
for his prosperity to be assm-ed, and the pros- 
pects for which he had sacrificed her were 
secured, he set himself the task of finding her. 
And now he told himself, that like many 
another task which he had set himself in life, 
he had accomplished it too late. 

Poor fellow ! He had never been the type 
of a brilliant, successful hero of romance, this 
old love of Cissy's. Now, looked at in this 
hour of suffering and disappointment, he was 
less hero-like than ever. His good prospects 
had been stumbling-blocks in his path from his 
boyhood. "What good can ever be got out of a 
yomig man who is waiting for somebody's death 
and ten thousand a year, and who, while he is 
waiting, has to live upon about two hundi-ed a 
year ! AYliile he was Edward Manners, he had 
made one or two more or less abortive efibrts 
to carve a place for himself in creation. But 
he always left off just when the idea of his 
possibly succeeding dawned upon his fiiends. 
The restlessness that was the result of that 
vision which had been flaunted before him from 



148 FALSE COLOURS. 

his infancy . that vision of gold galore which 
was to make him superior to all such sub- 
lunary things as work, ambition, or anxiety . 
always upset and broke to pieces any plan 
in which labour, study, and difficulty had a 
part. 

How many things he had tried his head and 
his hand at, before the vision became a reality, 
and he was held to be justified, by his acquaint- 
ances, in being useless and idle openly! He 
had commenced reading for the bar, and while 
doing that he had drifted into press-work, and 
supplied exuberant opinions to one Conservative 
and two small Eadical papers for a few months. 
Then his literary aspirations had been rejected 
by the editorial power which had supported 
him coming to an end. The rejection of three 
articles in succession caused him to decide that 
writing was not his vocation. Accordingly, he 
gave it up just as he had surmounted the first 
difficulties of composition, and learnt to put 
things coherently before his readers. Shortly 
after this discovery he made another, . namely, 
that the clerical garb was more to his taste 



HONESTY. 149 

than the legal one. It was while he was read- 
ing for the Church under Mr. Blavne's auspices, 
that the Baden episode took place, and again 
liis plans and his intentions were shattered. 
Then he turned to art, and strove to make her 
his mistress in earnest and in oils. He had 
only toyed with her as an amateur in water- 
colours. But now he tried to make himself 
helieve that he meant work. So he went 
back to London, and ensconced himself in a 
low-rented studio in Bloomsbury Square, and 
painted big pictures persistently, which big pic- 
tures were as persistently rejected by the Pioyal 
Academy for a series of years. 

But during all these years he had nourished 
the hope that the time would soon come when 
he should be rich, and free to find out and 
marry Cissy Yargrave. This love of his for the 
girl who had been so loving, brave, and honest, 
was the one thing to which he was constant. 
Unlike Mr. Blayne, the man of far deeper feel- 
ings, and truer judgment, and greater apprecia- 
tion, Mr. Manners, or Lister, had never given 
Cissy a successor in his heart. And as he had 



150 FALSE COLOURS. 

been true to her memory, in spite of the inter- 
vention of time and space, and in spite of the 
want of knowledge of her w^hereabouts, so he 
half-hoped, half-believed that she had been true 
to him. It came upon him as a bad blow% 
therefore, this unexpected statement which Mrs. 
Blayne had made. " Better we had married 
and gone to the dogs together," he thought, 
wearily. It seemed to him impossible, since 
he feh so disgusted at it, that Cissy could be 
anything but miserable in her marriage. 

It w^as a very hard truth to realize. Ciss}', 
the girl who had loved him with such unre- 
strained, unconventional ardour, and who had 
relinquished him with such unusual generosity 
that she stood out in his mind as the represen- 
tative type of all that is warmest and truest 
and most unselfish in woman ! That she 
should have married so tamely after all. 
" Scorrier is a capital fellow, but I could better 
have understood her marrying a billiard- 
marker," he said to Mr. Blayne, when speaking 
about Mrs. Scorrier late in the day. " Do 3'ou 
know, Dick, I have dravv^n a good many pictures 



HONESTY. 151 

of hearing of her again, but never one Uke 
this." 

" I'm only surprised that she didn't marry 
long ago," Mr. Blayne said, prosaically ; ''it is 
some years now since she and you thought 
yourselves all the world to one another for a 
few weeks." 

" By Jove ! yes . eight or nine years ; and if 
she had been like every other girl she would 
have married just after that vrrench apart, to 
shovr those whom it concerned, and those whom 
it didn't concern, that she had got over it. 
But she has held on to the idea like the girl 
she was, long enough to risk being called an 
old maid ' ' 

" And married after all in time to avoid bein.i^- 
(me. Make up your mind to it, Xed ; 3'our 
goddess is a woman ; she is a lovely woman 
still though, and a charming one too ; you will 
not feel ashamed of the old infatuation when 
you see Mrs. Scorrier." 

" Does she look happy ?" 
'' Very happy," Mr. Blayne said, firmly. 
He had loved Cissy every vrhit as well as his 



152 FALSE COLOUES. 

friend had loved lier. But lie had not cherished 
his love, and now he could speak of her as 
another man's wife may he spoken of. 

" I can't fancy that," Mr. Lister said, dis- 
contentedly. '^ You didn't understand her as 
well as I did, of course ; I can't fancy her find- 
ing a single element of happiness in such a life 
as hers must he." 

"You'll understand it hetter when you know 
more of Scorrier, if you stay long enough to 
know more of him." 

''He seems a nice fellow enough," Mr. Lis- 
ter acknowledged, magnanimously; ''but I don't 
think I shall try to cultivate his acquaintance 
just now. I'm due at Castlenau, you know ; I 
was due there before I smashed myself, in fact. 
Mrs. Blayne will be glad to have her house free 
again." 

"As to that, you know that the longer you 
stay with me the better I am pleased," Mr. 
Blayne said, heartily. But notwithstanding the 
heartiness, it was arranged between the two 
men that Mr. Lister should announce himself 
to his friend Walter Bracey as ready to move 



HONESTY. 153 

on to Castlenau in a clay or two, and Mr. 
Blavne felt well pleased that it should be so. 

"I congratulate you on being well out of 
my hands," Arthur Scorrier said, shaking hands 
warmly with his late patient, as the latter was 
preparing to get into the carriage that was to 
take him away. 

" I owe the being so to jon entirely. Good- 
hje, Mr. Scorrier ; we shall meet again, I hope." 
Mr. Lister was rather agitated, and his voice 
shook as he spoke. They said he " felt his 
weakness " now that he was out in the fresh 
air again. Poor fellow ! he had been " feeling 
his weakness " more or less every day since 
Mrs. Blavne had kindly gone in to see him. 

' . We shall meet again when I am in stronger 
care," he repeated, and then Arthur Scorrier 
said what he had been wishing to say for sev- 
eral days. 

" And I hope then to have the pleasm-e of 
seeing you at my house. My wife will be glad 
to renew her acquaintance with you ; you knew 
her as Miss Yargrave some years ago, I under 
stand. ' 



154 FALSE COLOURS. 

The fresh air was telling more and more 
upon Lister's weakness every moment. 

" Get in, rny good fellow; you ought not to 
he standing ahout in this wa}^" Mr. Blayne 
said, hurriedly. He saw what none of the 
others did . Cecile's pony carriage, driven h}^ 
herself, coming at a rapid pace up the drive. 
But he saw it too late to spare his friend the 
encounter. She was in their midst hefore any 
one of them could have avoided her without 
rudeness. The i^retty "half-foreign-looking 
woman " (as Mrs. Blayne called her), with the 
dark silky hair, and the deep violet eyes ; and a 
strange embarrassment fell upon them all. 

She got out of her shell-like sloping carriage, 
before her husband, quickly as he sought to 
render her service, could help her, and fought 
for a moment with the surprise she felt at 
iinding them all out there. While her little 
tight was going on, Mrs. Blayne from the 
background watched her, and wondered of what 
special iniquity she had been guilty, and who 
had been her co-partners in crime. But Cissy 
was not made of the stuff that struo-o]es under 



HONESTY. 155 

speechless embarrassment long. She briefly 
greeted the lady of the mansion, and then she 
tm-ned to the guest whose parting they were 
assembled to speed. 

.'I did not expect to see yon to-day. I came 
over, thinking you were still a prisoner in your 
room ; but now that we have met I will say I 
am very, very glad to see you." 

She spoke as if she meant it. His 
words in reply lacked the genuine ring of the 
metal. 

"xlnd I am very glad to see you, Mrs. 
Scorrier.'' 

''Hadn't you better come back into the 
house, and make the most of the opportunity," 
Mrs. Blayne said, somewhat spitefully. She 
always seemed to herself, poor woman, to be on 
the brink of discovering this secret vdiich con- 
nected Cissy with Mr. Blayne' s past. It must 
be acknowledged that it was trying never to get 
beyond the brink . to very few women is given 
the grace of hovering in such a position grace- 
fully. 

"I think ho had mneh better go for his 



156 FALSE COLOURS. 

drive," Cissj' answered, quickly; " at any rate 
this is not a favourable opportunity for renew- 
ing our acquaintance," and Cissy, as she said 
it, looked Mrs. Blayne very firmly in the face, 
and caused her husband to feel very proud of 
her. 

"Well! will you put yourself under Mrs. 
Scorrier's orders, and go ?" Mrs. Blayne said, 
addressing Mr. Lister in a sort of jaunty tone 
that made him writhe. 

" I will for once," he said, and then he mut- 
tered something about ''Bracey expecting him," 
and after a little general leave-taking he was 
driven off. 

" Odd that Mr. Lister and you should meet 
in such a way, isn't it ?" Mrs. Blayne said, in 
sprightly tones, as she ushered her guest into 
the house. 

"Yes," Cissy said, facing the lady calmly; 
" has not Mr. Blayne told you what makes it 
particularly odd that we should meet as 
strangers now. Mr. Lister and I were engaged, 
and Mr. Blayne very wisely stopped his friend 
marrying me. Oh! my husband knew it al- 



HONESTY. 157 

recady, Mrs. Blaj'iie . I only mention it this 
morning in order to do away ^yith at least one 
false impression that you have allowed yourself 
to receive about me." 

''And what was that, pray?" Mrs. Blayne 
asked. 

" That in former days I was in love with 
Mr. Blayne . I never was, I assure you," Cissy 
said, laughing. 



158 FALSE COLOURS. 



CHAPTEE X. 

THE AWKWARDNESS ABOUT GLENE. 

Before the events just recorded Cecile had 
made the proposed progress to Eedford, to- 
gether with Mr. and Mrs. Hepburn. They 
had driven there comfortably in one of the 
Glene carriages, and they had kmcheon while 
there comfortably at one of the best hotels. 
Moreover, the day had been fine, and the town 
comparatively full and gay. But the fulness 
and gaiety of an English country town seemed 
as so much gloom, and sadness, and vulgarity 
and pain to Cissy after her ex]3eriences of the 
bright, light, Continental life to which her heart 
still clung. The only thing she really api^re- 
ciated and liked was Mr. HeiDburn's kindness 
in striving to make all things pleasant to her. 



THE AWKWARDNESS ABOUT GLEXE. 159 

In gratitude, and out of a rapidly developing 
regard for the old gentleman who was so fond 
of her husband, Cissy trudged round the streets 
without suffering a sign of fatigue to appear in 
either gait or face. Not only did she stand in 
the streets and suffer herself to be made to 
look in at all the drapers' shop-windows, but 
she allowed herself to be borne in triumph to 
the reading-room, and the guildhall, and the 
parish church. All these places had a strong 
local interest for Mr. Hepburn, and he per- 
mitted himself to indulge in such a disquisition 
on their respective merits as only a person 
supported by an equally strong local interest 
can listen to calmly. But Cissy on this occa- 
sion suffered no outward manifestation of that 
which she must have been enduring to escape 
her. She looked, and listened, and lingered, 
just as long as Mr. Hepburn wished her to do 
so. " Prolonging my sufferings by your abom- 
inable suavity, instead of assuaging them,'' 
Amelia said, angrily, when they got out into 
the street again. "When Amelia said this Mr. 
Hej)burn had left them for a fevr minutes. He 



160 FALSE COLOURS. 

" had some trifling business to transact in at 
Martin's," lie said . Martin being the principal 
jeweller in Eedford. Amelia at once dreamed 
dreams of more bracelets and rings to put upon 
her person in the seclusion of Glene. 

"What is the use of his buying any more 
forme?" Mrs. Hepburn asked, pettishly ; "I 
never get what I consider a fair opportunity of 
displaying things that I have." 

'' I thought Castlenau was a haunt of any 
number of gorgeous swells." 

''So it is," Ameha replied, slowly, "but 
then " 

" You're not at Castlenau quite as often as 
you could wish, are you, Amelia?" Cissy in- 
terrupted, gaily. 

"Yes, I am," Amelia said, decidedly, "quite 
as often as I could wish. My first visit there 
was so horribly unpleasant that it's no wonder 
I don't care to go again." 

"You're first visit . was that the ball you 
wrote to me about when we were staying at 
Penzance ?" 

"Yes; first I had to fight with Mr. Hep- 



THE AV.'KW-iEDNESS ABOUT GLEXE. 161 

burn's senseless prejudices to get there. He's 
tired of balls, and lie would have me be tired 
of them too ; and when I was allowed to go I 
was encumbered with two of the Misses Pot- 
tinger. Fancy having a couple of old maids 
foisted upon one in that way on such an occa- 
sion !" 

" Poor things ! I can't see how they could 
interfere with your pleasure," Cissy said, with 
the forbearance one is apt to feel towards those 
who have only oppressed one's friends. 

" Can't you ? you would if you knew Castle- 
nau, that is all I can say," Mrs. Hej^burn 
said, gloomily. The remembrance of that ball- 
night was evidently too much for her even 
now. 

" But it seems to me that as the inhabitants 
of Castlenau . shall I say that as the most 
difficult demon in that aristocratic Inferno ? . 
must have asked them, that the onus of their 
appearance was not on you." 

'* Oh ! they would simper and be grateful," 
Amelia said, her wrath rising at the recollec- 
tion; ''and really. Cissy, it is not becoming of 

VOL. II. M 



162 FALSE COLOURS. 

you to speak of Lady Ellington as a ' difficult 
demon.' " 

" Why not ? She seems to be difficult 
socially down here, and I know she does not 
exactly bear the reputation of an angel in 
society," Cissy said, as Mr. Hepburn rejoined 
them ; ^' I wish I had asked you to take my 
-watch into Martin's, Mr. Hepburn," she added, 
'^ it is wrong, as usual." 

"I will take it back at once," Mr. Hepburn 
said, promptly. 

" No, no ; I will spare you that trouble . I 
will go myself, and overtake you before you get 
to the ' Castlenau Arms.'" Then she turned 
and walked back hurriedly to Martin's, and Mr. 
Hepburn went unwillingly with his wife. 

When Mrs. Scorrier went into Martin's shop 
she saw, lying on the counter, a little morocco 
case of a peculiar octagon shajoe, with a cipher 
in silver on the top of it. The aspect of this 
case was so familiar to her that she took it up, 
half unconsciously. 

" Mine at home is more worn than this," she 
ivas saying to herself, when the case fell open 



THE AWKWARDNESS ABOUT GLENE. 163 

and disclosed a beautifully painted miniature of 
a very lovely woman. Mrs. Scorrier's hand 
shook as she moved nearer to the light, to ex- 
amine the painting more closely. 

*' Where did you get this?" she asked, 
quickly, as she went back to the counter. The 
shopman glanced at the object enquired about, 
and said he didn't know. 

" I ask because it is the likeness of a friend 
who was very dear to me," Cissy went on ; "I 
should feel so much obliged to you if you could 
£nd out whose property it is." 

The man went away, saying he would en- 
quire of Mr. Martin ; and while he was absent 
.issy looked again keenly at the case, which 
was a duplicate of a case she had at home, 
containing the portrait of her mother. This 
likeness which she held in her hand was of 
that mother too . to this she could have sworn 
. a likeness, taken when her mother was in 
the full bloom and brightness of her beautiful 
youth. How could it have come here ? Her 
anxiety on that score was soon set at rest. Mr. 
Martin came suavely forward from the elegant 



164 FALSE COLOURS. 

seclusion of a lair in the background, from 
which he could keep his eye on the server and 
the served. 

"That," he said, politely, and slowly bend- 
ing forward to look at the beautiful face that 
gleamed young as ever on the ivory, '' that was 
left here just now by Mr. Hepburn . Mr. Hep- 
burn, of Glene, the representative of one of our 
oldest county families." 

" Oh ! thank you." Cissy was staggered now. 
A new element of perplexity was introduced into 
her life by this accidental discovery. What 
connection could there have been in former 
years, in the years when her mother was young, 
and beautiful, and happy, as she looked in this 
portrait, between her and Mr. Hepburn ? Cecile 
shivered as she walked slowly along to the 
" Castlenau Arms." Her mother's had been 
a life full of vicissitudes . she knew that well 
enough. Still it pained her to come across this 
fresh fact concerning her. " Perhaps he was 
her lover," she thought; " perhaps he doesn't 
even know that she is dead. I wonder if he 
knows that I am her daughter ? " Then a hope 



THE AWKWARDNESS ABOUT GLEXE. 165 

« 

flashed across her mind. She knew that her 
mother had, in their frequent seasons of 
povert}^ sold and pawned jewels and trinkets 
of value. Might she not have parted with 
the miniature in this wa}' ? Might not Mr. 
Hepburn have seen it in some shop, and 
been struck with its exceeding beauty as 
a w^ork of art ? This was a comforting reflec- 
tion. She nursed it until she reached the 
hotel. 

"How long you have been. Cissy," Mrs. 
Hepburn began, complainingly, as Cissy entered 
the room, where Mr. Hej)burn had caused a 
sumptuous luncheon to be spread. 

"Have I? . yes, I believe I have," Cissy 
said. 

" Did you go into Martin's shop ?" Mr. Hep- 
burn asked ; " can he get your watch ready for 
Tis to take with us to-day?" 

" Oh, my watch ! I forgot my watch," Cissy 
said, in some confusion. " I got looking at 
other things." 

"I never see anything worth looking at in 
Martin's shop," Amelia said, discontentedly: 



166 FALSE COLOURS. 

*'two minutes at Storr and Mortimer's is 
better than a life-time at Martin's." 

** A life-time at Martin's would be sad. But 
I saw something very well worth looking at to- 
day," Cissy said, and then she turned to Mr. 
Hepburn and addressed him eagerly . '' I saw 
that lovely miniature that you have just left to 
be re-set; what a beautiful painting it is, and 
what a lovely face." Her voice shook as she 
said this, but her embarrassment was covered 
by Mrs. Hepburn's curiosity. 

" What miniature . whose face is lovely?" 

"It is the likeness of a lady I saw when I 
was a mere boy," Mr. Hepburn said. 

" Who was she ?" Amelia asked, abruptly ; 
and though such questioning would have grated 
on Cissy's taste at any other time, she w^as glad 
that Mr. Hepburn w^as subjected to it now. 

There w^as a pause of a moment or two, and 
then Mr. Hepburn said quietly . 

" I do not know her name." 

" Not know her name, and yet you have trea- 
sured her portrait ? How very extraordinary! " 

Mr. Hepburn went on calmly cutting up a 



THE AWKWAEDNESS ABOUT GLENE. 167 

chicken, and made no reply. '' I will make 
him speak," Cissy thought, and then she said . 

*'Is she dead?" 

"The original of that miniature? . oh, 
yes, she died thirty years ago," Mr. Hepburn 
replied, so unhesitatingly, that Cecile Scorrier 
started. Could it be, after all, that she had 
been mistaken, and that the original of that 
lovely miniature had been some other than her 
mother ? "I will not tell him now who I 
thought it was," she said to herself; "it's no 
use to hawk her name about, and make Amelia 
ten times more suspicious than she is already." 
But still, though she determined to ask no more 
questions, the likeness troubled her, and she 
could not bring herself to believe that "the 
original of that miniature died thii'ty years 
ago." 

Before they left Bedford that day Mrs. Hep- 
burn managed to get to Martin's shop by 
herself. She was well known in that place ; 
accordingly they gave her the miniature with- 
out hesitation, when she asked " to look at it 
for a moment." 



168 FALSE COLOURS. 

On first glancing her eyes over the portrait, 
Mrs. Hephurn saw a visionary resemhlance in 
it to some familiar face. But whose the familiar 
face was that this one brought before her she 
could not tell. " Where have I seen some one 
with that look," she thought, " or is it only a 
picture she's like? I know the face well." 
Then she put the little case down again, and 
being less interested in its contents than Cissy 
had been, she did not, like that lady, immedi- 
ately walk out of the shop, to the bewilder- 
ment of the shopmen. She bought a thimble, 
and then made an exit that was above suspi- 
cion. On her way home she, by aid of her 
memory, got a clue to the likeness that 
existed between the miniature and some one 
else. She remembered what Arthur Scorrier 
had once said about Cissy Yargrave having the 
same look of power as was portrayed in one of 
the Dames Hepburn, who hung in the gallery 
at Glene. The same look precisely lived in 
the eyes, and sat upon the brow and firm 
mouth of the miniature on ivory. 

Mrs. Hepburn was able to verify the sha- 



THE A^VKWARDNESS ABOUT GLENE. 169 

doTvy resemblance sooner than she expected 
when it struck her first. On her way home, 
Mrs. Hepburn proposed that the party should 
not be broken up . that the trio should be 
tm'ned into a quartette ; in other ^Yords, that 
Mrs. Scorrier should go on to Glene with 
them, and a request sent to Arthur that he 
should join them at dinner. These things were 
done ; and so, quite accidentally, the state and 
stiffness from which she had prepared herself 
to suffer were avoided by Cissy on her intro- 
duction to Glene. 

After dinner, Amelia volunteered to show the 
house to her guest. " The picture gallery is 
the pride of Mr. Hepburn's heart," she said, 
pausing midway in the long room, before the 
portrait of the lady whose resemblance to his 
love Ai-thur Scorrier had discovered. ''Isn't 
that a pretty woman, Cissy '? " 

" Very," Cissy replied, earnestly, startled 
into brevity by a second strong chance likeness 
to her mother. 

"Mr. Scorrier thinks it like you about the 
forehead," Amelia said, carelesslv walkinc^ on ; 



170 FALSE COLOURS. 

" and I think it like the miniature Mr. Hep- 
burn left in that shop to-day, don't you?" 

"Yes, I do," Cissy answered. This was a 
revelation to her. She had only been struck 
by the resemblance the lady in the gallery bore 
to her mother, as her mother had been in the 
flesh. But it was like the painted ivory face 
too. 

'' I'll ask the housekeeper if she can tell us 
who that old lady was. Mr. Hei3burn would 
tell me to study the branches of the family 
tree, but that is such a tedious business," 
Amelia said, as they sauntered on. '' Suppos- 
ing, after all, Cissy, that it should turn out 
that we are connected." 

" The likeness is scarcely strong enough to 
warrant such a supposition as that," Cissy 
said, quietly. " I should like to see your 
family tree ' ' 

" And the big parchment-roll, on which it is 
written . when all the Hepburns were born, and 
married, and died?" So you shall when our 
husbands come out from the dining-room. Mr. 
Hepburn keeps these important particulars 



THE AWKWAKDNESS ABOUT GLENE. 171 

under lock and key; and the box where they 
are kept dwells in a hallowed spot, called the 
Muniment Eoom." 

Mrs. Hei)burn affected to speak lightly of 
this fact, but beneath this lightness of hers there 
was a strong under-current of pride and grati- 
fication in the glories of the race to which she 
now belonged. " When a son is born to this 
house, his name is enrolled on the scroll, with 
all the honours, I assure you," she continued: 
" that's the only real pleasure I have to look 
forward to in life. Cissy," she added, with a 
burst of perverted womanly feeling, "I do hope 
to live to see a son of my own ruling here." 

" You forget that your husband must be dead 
for yom- son to rule," Cissy said. 

*' No, I don't forget it . I remember it very 
well ; and I tell you that the only real pleasui'e 
I have to look forward to in life is that a son 
of my own may rule here. Don't look as if 
you thought me too wicked to be tolerated. 
Cissy," she continued, waxing angry; "it's 
easy enough for you to find the present all- 
sufficient ; you didn't throw yourself away 



172 FALSE COLOURS. 

when you were too young to know what was 
well . you were not buried alive at my age." 

As Mrs. Hepburn spoke, she shed a few 
tears, and the shedding them did not improve 
her appearance. She had been wrought upon 
this day in divers ways. For one thing, Cissy 
was looking prettier than Mrs. Hepburn had 
ever seen her look before. For another, that 
little mystery about the miniature, and the 
greater mystery of the likeness it bore both to 
Dame Hepburn and to Cissy, vexed her. More- 
over, she could not rid herself of the notion 
that Arthur Scorrier had thought less highly of 
her since she had suffered that brief lapse into 
tenderness for him before his marriage, which 
was faintly portrayed in these pages. She 
was not, and it has been shown that she 
was not, a light-minded or readily impressed 
woman. But it is a fact that for a short time 
she did wish to make the young surgeon take a 
warmer interest than mere friendship in her. 
And it is also a fact that, pending the failure 
of this dangerous suit of hers, she did feel a 
warmer interest than was wifely in him. She 



THE AWKWARDNESS ABOUT GLEXE. 17o 

had outgrown that weakness now, but she had 
not outgrown the memory of it. There were 
moments when she felt that she blushed before 
Arthm- Scorrier . when she actually feared that 
he would think that she was feigning a friend- 
ship for his wife for the furtherance of that 
foolish romance of hers, which he had killed 
in the birth. There were other moments when, 
for all her practical common-sense, she felt 
as if she had been wronged by both her hus- 
band and Cissy, in that they had been present 
v/hen she (Amelia) met Mr. Scorrier for the 
first time. At such moments as these she told 
herself (naturally) that she would have been 
happier as the wife of the village sui'geon 
than she was as the wife of the master of 
Glene. After such moments . and she had in- 
deed some of them this day . it was but natural 
that she should affect a craving for good things, 
which hung high above Cissy, in Cissy's pre- 
sence. She said more than she intended saying 
in letting slip those words relative to her pre- 
sent unhappiness, or dolorousness, for it did not 
amount to unhappiness. But she felt that the 



174 FALSE COLOURS. 

balance of power was regained when she spoke of 
the probability of a child of hers ruling at Glene. 

They paid their visit to the muniment room, 
carrying Mr. Hepburn and Arthur along with 
them, and looked out the circumstances under 
which the Dame Hepburn under notice had 
been grafted on the family tree. Then Cissy's 
eyes wandered down to a later period, and she 
read the date of her host's birth and marriage. 
" See the blank space left for the insertion of 
the date of my death," he said, laying his hand 
on the parchment, and Cissy felt that he was 
striving to hide something from her sight. A 
burning curiosity to read the entry which he 
was covering up possessed her. While she 
was making up her mind as to how she could 
most cautiously carry her point, Mrs. Hepburn 
unconsciously came to her aid by pulling the 
parchment roll towards herself. " Dear me, 
Mr. Hepburn, I didn't know you had had a 
sister," she exclaimed, and then Cissy leant 
forward and read : 

''Also Cecilia, born 18 . , died 18 . aged 
23." 



THE AWKWARDNESS ABOUT GLEXE. 175 

" The circumstances under which she died 
were very sad . we will never mention her 
again, if you please," Mr. Hepburn said, de- 
cidedly. And then they felt themselves con- 
strained to go back to the drawing-room, where 
Cecile sat all the evening, hungering after 
further particulars of that Cecilia who had 
died, aged 23. 

As the young people walked back to their 
home in Danebury that night. Cissy told her 
husband of the miniature, and the portrait, 
and her own vague half -fears and doubts on 
the subject of the resemblance which she had 
detected between both of them to her mother 
and herself. " Isn't it funny and puzzling 
altogether, Arthur?" she wound up by saying; 
^' I never knew my mother's name, you know ; 
frank and free, daring and Idnd as she was 
about most things, I never dared question her 
when she didn't care to be questioned." 

" Those are exactly the terms I am on with 
3'Ou, Cissy," he said, laughing. 

" Have I ever refused you a direct answer 
to a direct question . indeed have I not told 



176 FALSE COLOUES. 

you many more things than yoii wished to 
hear ? I might have been more reserved than 
I have been, even with regard to Mr. Lister." 

" But I want you to tell me more about him 
now, dear." 

" I can tell you nothing more than I have 
told you already . I loved him desperately, and 
I had to give him up ; now, remembering 
that desperate love, I would rather not see him." 

" But you would not refuse to see him if he 
wished to see you ; you would not be pained 
if you should meet accidentally?" 

" I can't tell, Arthur, what I might feel if I 
met him accidentally ; if he wished to see me, 
don't fear that I would run the risk of being 
suspected of something, by refusing to gratify 
his wish. I shall go over to Mrs. Blayne as 
soon as I can, and tell her that it was Mr. 
Lister who was the cause of my emotion the 
other day ; if I don't, she will fancy that it 
was her husband . I saw^ that she planted some 
such fancy the moment he mentioned our for- 
mer acquaintance, and in the soil of her mind 
such fancies would soon attain terrific growth.'* 



THE AWKWARDNESS ABOL'T GLENE. 177 

^' Why tell her about Lister at all?" 

" Because her husband would in a half-and- 
half way, that wouldn't assuage her if I didn't ; 
besides, I can bear to be despised by Mrs. 
Blayne on account of Mr. Lister, but I could 
not live here in peace and know that I was the 
cause of the Eev. Eichard Blayne drinking 
daily the bitter cup ; there is no fear of an 
encounter between Mr. Lister and me if I go 
over to Cranwich, is there ?" 

" Not the least ; he can't leave his rooms ; 
by the wa}", Mrs. Blayne threatens to invade 
him, and we all lie freely to her, in order that 
he may remain unmolested." 

'' 'Tis hard to imagine that he ever knew 
any nice woman, now that he has chosen such 
a wife as that, isn't it '?" Cissy said. 

" She chose him ; there's Mrs. Pottinger 
looking out at the window at us ; call out to 
her, and cover the dear old lady with confu- 
sion." 

So Cissy stopped, in obedience to her hus- 
band's request, and called out " Good night " 
to Mrs. Pottinger. Then Mrs. Pottinger, 

VOL. II. N 



178 FALSE COLOURS. 

feeling herself dragged to it, came to the front 
gallantly, and opened the window two inches in 
order to ask after their health. Then, as 
was her wont, she went on to enquire after the 
health of all their absent relatives. *' And 
how is your dear mamma, Mr. Scorrier, and 
when shall we see her here again ? ' ' 

"Soon, I hope," Cissy answered; "and 
really, Arthur," she continued, when they got 
inside their own garden, " it ought to be soon, 
if I am not to be regarded as a wedge to divide 
you." 

" She'll come fast enough as far as you're 
concerned, my darling," Arthur replied, " but 
there's the awkwardness about Glene." 



WHO KNOWS WHAT MAY COME OF IT?" 179 



CHAPTER XI. 

"who KNOWS WHAT MAY COME OF IT?'* 

Since her son's marriage, there had come to be 
a great want felt in old Mrs. Scorrier's life, 
whether reasonably or unreasonably can scarcely 
be determined by any one to w^hom the inner- 
most workings of Mrs. Scorrier's heart were 
unknown. And as the innermost workings of 
an}^ one human being's heart must of necessity 
be unknown to every other human being, the 
reasonableness or unreasonableness of her re 
sentment cannot be gauged. 

For it was a feeling of resentment under 
which Mrs. Scorrier smarted, though she 
phrased it differently to herself. When the 
poor loving old lady told herself and others. 
complainingly that, since Arthur's marriage 



180 FALSE COLOURS. 

she had felt there was a great want in her Hfe 
which would never be satisfied, she knew, and 
others knew, that she conceived herself to be 
ill-used, and that she was angry with those 
whom she judged had used her ill. None could 
say if she was right in this concej)tion and 
judgment, at least none could say with certainty, 
though many hazarded guesses on the sub- 
ject. 

On one special morning she was feeling 
specially neglected and bereft. Arthur's last 
letter had been full of high hopes of the happi- 
ness that would be his with the bride he had 
so lately brought home. That letter had been 
received at least three weeks ago, and during 
these three weeks it had been read and pondered 
over many times. Once or twice it had been 
misinterpreted, but the mother's heart helped 
the mother's eyes and understanding to a right 
reading at last, and this day Mrs. Scorrier felt 
assured that her son would always love her 
and always welcome her warmly to his house. 

But still, in spite of this conviction, sorrow 
and herself were familiar friends this morning. 



''who knows what may come of it?" 181 

'' It is very well for Arthur to wish me to visit 
them," she thought, " but Cissy will never for- 
get that I mutely oi^posed the marriage." And 
then the j)oor disappointed woman shook her 
head as she reflected on the futility of those 
long nourished hopes and wishes of hers . that 
she might be permitted to be a mother to 
Arthur's wife. " She'll wean Arthur's whole 
heart from me in time, she'll grudge him to 
kiss me as I grudged him to her, and perhaps 
I am rightly punished in its being so." Then, 
though she spoke wdth resignation of the just- 
ness of the punishment which had followed her 
most motherly offence, she did gird at Mr. 
Hepburn in her memory. "If he had only 
thrown his influence into the other scale with 
mine, that w^ould never have been," she said, 
thinking of the union w^hich Arthur had de- 
scribed as likely to be so happy and blest ; 
" but he can't forget that I was w^eak and 
wanting in judgment." So she said to herself, 
reflecting on his hard excellence, and she felt 
humbled as she reflected. " A good man him- 
self, one who has never tripped, (never been 



182 FALSE COLOUES. 

tempted perhaps) but cold and stern to me 
always." 

These thoughts had been in her mind very 
much during the whole of that little round of 
marketing and shopping, which was one of her 
chief occupations. She was sore, almost sad 
in spirit, when she got back to number nine. 
The pleasant little excitement of hearing from 
Arthur that he had made new, unexceptionable 
acquaintances, and of straightway building up 
high hopes as to his falling in love with, and 
marrying one of them, was over. His letters 
to her were as full of details as ever, but they 
were details which she cared less to enter into. 
In fact, she had taught herself to believe that 
a different woman from Cissy could have rein- 
stated her in the Wilmot estimation ; and that 
she should die and no such reinstating be 
achieved was a hard thing to contemplate. 

She went in wearily to the softly coloured 
little room where Mrs. Hepburn had sat and 
sympathized with her as to the unadvisability 
of the marriage that had come off since. A 
letter was lying on the table . she had been 



"who knows what may come of it?" 183 

out on lier marketing expedition before the 
postal arrangements of Penzance permitted the 
distribution of letters . and she took it up with 
a prayer almost that it might be from her son. 
It was only from her son's wife ! The hope- 
fulness went out of her heart and eyes as she 
opened it. 

" Only a duty letter," she said ; " why does 
she trouble herself to wTite them ? ' ' 

However, whether it was a duty letter or the 
offspring of a dawning inclination towards a 
closer intimacy with xirthur's mother. Cissy's 
letter was very pleasant. A kind, hearty, short 
letter, wTitten in haste evidently, but as evidently 
written because the desire to do so was upon 
the writer. Cissy ignored all that was less 
agreeable than their present relations, and 
urged her mother-in-law strongly and warmly to 
come and pay them a visit at Danebury. " In- 
vitations of an elastic kind are disagreeable 
both to the giver and receiver of them," young 
Mrs. Scorrier wrote . '' we want you to come 
and stay with us for a fortnight, if you will 
come. I hope during that fortnight we shall 



184 FALSE COLOURS. 

get to know and like each other better than we 
do now, for the sake of Arthur, who is so dear 
to us both." At first, when old Mrs. Scorrier 
read this passage she w^as well-inclined to be 
offended at it. But after a time the perfect 
honesty with which it was worded won upon 
her. There was wisdom she felt both in Cissy's 
decision as to the duration of her (Mrs. Scorrier' s) 
stay at Danebury, and in her recognition of 
their chilliness of feeling towards one another. 
Old Mrs. Scorrier knew that the ill that is borne 
for a definite time is borne more easily and 
patiently than that which may go on for ever. 
" It certainly will be more pleasant to go there 
and know that she expects me to stay a fort- 
night, than to fancy at the end of a week she 
was wondering when I was going to make a 
move." Then she went on to aggravate her 
spirit by repeating the old distich relative to 
your son being your son till he takes him a wife, 
and to tell herself that there would be a great 
difference between this and her last visit ta 
Danebury. But somehow the honesty that was; 
in every sentence of Cissy's letter would make 



''who knows what may come of it?" 185 

itself felt reassuringly, and Mrs. Scorrier failed 
in getting up any very strong feeling of aggra- 
vation. She wrote an acceptance of Cissy's 
invitation by return of j)0st, and as she sealed 
her letter she sighed and thought of Glene, and 
hoped " he would not be angry with Arthur for 
having her there." 

Later in the day she walked to get a sight of 
Mount's Bay. " How he could be cold and harsh 
to me down here, in sight of those waters, is 
more than I can tell," she thought, and a flush 
passed over her face, that was partly wounded 
pride, and partly wounded love. " If Arthur's 
father had lived, Arthur's friend would have 
treated me differently, very differently. "Who 
knows what may come of it if I do go and stay 
with them ? it would be a pity to make a cool- 
ness between them, for he has been a great 
friend to Ai'thur." 

Who knows what may come of it ? She 
could hardly have said, had she been called 
upon to do so, what she hoped might come of 
it. But she had a vague idea that it would be 
soothing and comfortinor to her to effect a 



186 FALSE COLOURS. 

reconciliation with one with whom she had 
never quarrelled . to make peace with one with 
whom she had never broken it. Old Mrs. 
Scorrier could not have explained to herself, 
much less to any one else, the various slight 
touches which combined to make her regard 
Mr. Hepburn so highly, as a good, though a 
hard man. She did unconsciously believe him 
to be the most perfect type of lofty moralists. 
Why she did so it would be difficult to say ; 
perhaps it was because there had always been 
an air of mystery about him. Arthur's father 
had talked freely to her about Glene, but he 
had rarely spoken of his friend, the owner of 
it. She had never been able to get hold of 
Mr. Hepburn's personal appearance from de- 
scription. His character had only been shown 
to her in two phases, namely, his kindness to 
Arthur, and his repugnance to herself. Still, 
for all this want of knowledge of his character 
as a whole, she was patient enough to respect 
and esteem the unpleasant portion of it from 
which she had suffered. Few women could 
have been so enduring under the judgment of a 



"who knows what may come of it?" 187 

fellow-creature as Mrs. Scorrier showed herself 
under what she imagined to be Mr. Hepburn's 
long-lasting disapproval. " A hard man, one 
who has never tripped himself . perhaps, be- 
cause he has never been tempted." This was 
the harshest thing she could bring herself to 
say of Arthur's friend. 

Very much to her own surprise, and a little 
to her own chagrin, Mrs. Scorrier was in a 
flutter of happiness at the thought of this visit 
which she was about to pay to her son and his 
wife. She made the most elaborate little pre- 
parations in the way of caps, and combinations 
of lace and net, which she called '' pelerines," 
and intended to wear at tea-parties. " My 
son's wife dresses very elegantly. I must 
make the best appearance I can," she ex- 
plained, in extenuation of the small acts of 
extravagance into which she was launching ; 
and she told herself proudly that Arthur 
" always had been proud of her," and j^rayed 
to God humbly that he might always continue 
to be so while she lived. For she had a 
feeling that it behoved her to take measures 



188 FALSE COLOURS. 

that he should know the truth about her 
bkirred hfe, when she was dead. He would be 
more likely to pity and judge her leniently 
then, she thought ; at any rate she would never 
know that her idolized son blamed and de- 
spised her, if he were unable to avoid doing 
these things. There had been moments in her 
life when she had longed to confess to him. 
But she had stifled the longings by conjuring 
up a vision of Arthur overwhelmed at finding 
himself to be a child of shame. So, for his 
sake, she lived her lie, and kept her secret, 
hard and heavy as it was, alone and unsup- 
ported. 

The peaceful, pretty little home at Penzance 
never looked prettier or more peaceful than on 
the day she quitted it. Some of her quiet old 
friends had dropped in to bid her farewell. 
She had settled with her servants what they 
were to eat, drink, and avoid during her 
absence, and they were well satisfied. She 
had even given invitations to a little party 
which she meant to have in honour of herself 
on her return from Danebury, a fortnight 



*'WHO KNOWS WHAT MAY COME OF IT ? " 189 

lience. " Perhaps I may be able to persuade 
my son and his wife to come back ^Yith me, 
and stay a few days. Mrs. Arthur likes Pen- 
zance," she said, cheerfully. 

Her preparations had been made with regard 
to others besides herself. Her charities were 
not conspicuous, even in the quiet region in 
w4iich she dwelt, but they were of an order 
that surely stored uj) blessings for her. The 
kindly old lady gave more than good words to 
some men-abandoned ones, who had, before 
she came amongst them, learnt to regard 
themselves as God-abandoned. Xow that she 
was going away to be held in high esteem, and 
to take her place amongst the well-reputed 
ones of the Danebury neighbourhood, she felt 
especially soft-hearted towards the unfortunates 
who would miss her frequent presence and 
purse. And so she left a little store for some 
who were held to be contaminating by her 
servants, and ordained that they should receive 
the saving bounty through a purifying medium 
with whom her household did not dread to 
come in contact. '' Not but what we are all 



190 FALSE COLOUES. 

sinners," she would say, half -tearfully, feeling 
guiltily assured the while that she was re- 
garded as wholly saint by those who dwelt in 
the tent with her. 

She had done one other thing also towards 
enabling herself to depart in a peaceful frame 
of mind. She had made a little extra pil- 
grimage (she made it weekly, without fail, but 
this was an extra one) to the grave of the man 
whose name she bore. This one bit of devoted 
semi-religious romance she had observed during 
the whole term of her residence at Penzance. 
One hour in every week she spent by the grave 
where the man who had loved her and blighted 
her, and been drowned before he could recom- 
pense her, lay buried. And she never stood 
by his grave without declaring truly that she 
not only forgave him freely for the ill that had 
been wrought, but also that she would bear 
and do the ill again. As she would have 
bravely borne all the suffering the sin had 
caused, so she would have bravely sinned the 
sin that had caused the suffering. Standing 
there by his grave, or smarting under the con- 



''who knows what may C03IE OF IT?" 191 

tumely of his friend, Mr. Hepburn, she always 
had the same tender feeling of belief in the 
dead man's conduct towards her having been 
darker than his intentions. Whatever anger 
there had been in her heart against him while 
he lived and disappointed her, there had never 
been the most fleeting spasm of it, from the 
moment she heard of his death. She was one 
of those generous -hearted, illogical -minded 
women who find it impossible to take an im- 
partial view of any action if the actor no 
longer lives to take his o^ti part. Death 
wiped out all shortcomings, all debts and dis- 
honoui-s. Death dropped a veil between the 
vision of those w4io were left, and all that was 
unsightly in the one who was gone. It surely 
went to the account kept of him above, that for 
nearly thirty years she had never let one bitter 
thought cross her mind about the man who 
had betrayed her. Her little boy had said his 
prayers many a time, kneeling by this grave, 
at the head of which a stone stared her in the 
face, marked with that name of " Scorrier," 
which he who rested beneath, had striven to 



192 FALSE COLOURS. 

prevent her bearing with him. As she turned 
away from the grave on this, the last occasion 
of her ever visiting it, she felt with satisfaction 
that she had never ached with that worst 
anguish of all, the anguish of anger against 
the one she had loved. It was common-j^lace 
of her perhaps to remind herself of this, or 
rather it is common-place perhaps of me to 
relate that she did it. But after all, it is 
the^e common-place touches which tell in the 
picture of an heroic life. 

I like the picture which I have conjured up 
of this quiet lady, who had been weak but 
never wicked, going on her little round of 
duties and farewells, this last day, before she 
went to her son's house. Eeminding and re- 
penting herself of the past sometimes, but 
rejoicing always in the power that was hers of 
doing a little good in the present, and rejoicing 
also in the loving tact which had enabled her 
to teach Arthur to honour his father. I like 
the picture so well, I see so much tender pathos 
in it, that I am sorry to turn away from the 
contemplation of it . and more sorry still to 



"who knows what may come of it?" 193 

think how soon it will be defaced and destroyed. 
" Who knows w^hat may come of it?" She said 
the words almost blithely to herself when she 
was off fairly on her journey. " I feel some- 
how as if a change was coming ; I have been 
dreaming lately, miiddled-iip dreams, and when- 
ever my di-eams are muddled something hai)- 
pens." Then she remembered that the last 
time her dreams had been specially muddled, 
her bedroom chimney had caught fire, and 
other people attributed the muddling of her 
slumbering imagination to the smoke, which 
had nearly choked her. " I hope I was care- 
ful to lock away all the spoons and forks I 
generally have out," she thought, anxiously. 
Common-place, and essentially common-place, 
but so are the elements of man}- a 
tragedy. 

Her son was at the station to meet her, in 
a close, w^arm, comfortable carriage. " Cissy 
thought we would rather drive home alone, 
mother," he said, as he handed her in; ''3'ou 
won't see a want of attention in her not com- 
ing, will you?" 

VOL. II. o 



194 FALSE COLOURS. 

"No, indeed, I will not; but, Arthur, how 
many carriages have you?" she asked. 

" Only this, and Cissy's phaeton, and my 
own trap." 

" My dear boy, the whole world need be ill 
for you to live in this style." 

Arthur shook his head impatiently. 

" For Heaven's sake don't raise the ques- 
tion of expense at once, mother; it's just the 
one thing Cissy bears badly, and I do want 
things to go smoothly between you." 

And Mrs. Scorrier promised that she would 
not raise the question of expense. 



PEAELS BEFORE SWINE. 195 



CHAPTER XII. 

PEARLS BEFORE S^VINE. 

There are few things in real life more painful 
than the dispelling of an illusion. A woman 
suffers a good deal when she is wakened from 
a long dream of the loved one fa dream in 
which he seemed to her slight and apparently 
well-off as when last she saw him), by a sight 
of him as he is now, perhaps, poor and fat. 
Cissy Scorrier was not called upon to endure 
this special sort of the agony attendant on all 
disillusionings. The brief view she had of Mr. 
Lister before he was carried avv^ay to Castlenau 
showed him to her well-proportioned and i^ros- 
perous-looking as ever. Still she acknowledged 
to herself, with a good deal of pain, that he 
was not worth those long, bitter, restless, wasted 



196 FALSE COLOURS. 

years of hers. The glamour wliicli had been 
over her at Baden had cleared itself away, as 
far as love goes, when she agreed to marry 
Arthur Scorrier. But the glamour of romantic 
belief in his superiority to other men had hung 
about her until this day. He was good-look- 
ing, and he had an agreeable manner, and a 
certain expression of intelligent apprehension 
in his face showed him to be moderately well 
gifted mentally. And this was all; and it 
was not enough to repay her for those years 
which she had given to her hopeless love and 
faith. 

Was she glad or sorry that she had seen 
him as he was and " always had been"? She 
was honest enough to admit that he had not 
deteriorated. She did not seek to excuse her 
long infatuation by meanly avowing, even to 
herself, that in the days when she had known 
him he had been superior to his present self. 
" Beauty is in the eye of the beholder" is a 
truism that does not apply solely to physical 
beauty. In the days gone by. Cissy Var grave 
had seen all things gloriously . what wonder 



PEARLS BEFORE SWINE. 197 

then that she greatly glorified the man she 
loved? 

Her sacrifice had seemed so great a thing to 
her during all these years. It was hard to 
have to regard it as a trifling one now, when 
her youth had nearly gone in her efforts to 
render it complete. She had nearly lost Arthur 
Scorrier in perfecting this idea. It was a hack- 
thought of this man, she knew now, which had 
made her hesitate and halt hefore, and see 
great danger in Mr. Scorrier' s offer. She did 
not tell herself that he was not worth the hack- 
thought, hut she did tell herself truly that, 
worthy or not, he would not have won it from 
her had she seen him with older eyes than 
were hers when they parted. In short, she 
was bitterly disappointed in her ideal. 

As soon as she was alone with her husband 
she went straight to the subject, and proceeded 
to handle it fearlessly. 

" Do you remember what I said the other 
day about not wishing to see Mr. Lister, 
Arthur?" 

*' Yes, I do; I was heartily sorry that it 



198 FALSE COLOUES. 

happened as it did to-day; but after all, now, 
the pinch is past, isn't it, little woman?" 

She laughed, and shook her head. 

'' Not quite i^ast. I feel sore, from the effects 
of it ; I was utterly disappointed in him, 
utterl}'. Not ashamed, but surprised to find 
that he was the man I made my hero, and wor- 
shipped for so many years." 

" You were very young, and he is a very 
nice fellow, I dare say, when one knows him," 
Arthur Scorrier said, tolerantly. '' I shouldn't 
go into a state of hero-worship for him myself, 
I acknowledge ; there's a taint of insincerity in 
his character, I should think." 

" That is what flashed across me in a moment 
when I saw him to-day," Cissy cried, eagerly; 
'' he likes me still, I can see that, but the sight 
of that doesn't blind me to the fact of his being 
a bit of a humbug. I felt sure of it as we 
spoke together to-day, and feeling so sure of it 
now makes me marvel that I never suspected 
it before. What a goose I was, to be sure!" 

"Oh! young girls are not apt to be too 
keen-sighted," Arthur said, carelessly. 



PEARLS BEFORE SWINE. 199 

" I should have loved him just the same, 
even if I had susi)ected what you call insin- 
cerity and I call humbug, but I shouldn't have 
had to suffer this fall which has been given me 
to-day. Another illusion gone ! I could never 
have believed Edward Manners capable of 
doing a little thing, but I can believe Mr. 
Lister capable of doing many httle things. I 
wonder if I was a shock to him to-day?" 

" You were rather, judging from his looks. 
He is not a man to bear well seeing himself 
supplanted; he has had no fall in his own esti- 
mation. Cissy. He is just as much of a hero to 
himself as when he dazzled you at Baden." 

'' I don't quite like a suspicion of absurdity 
attaching to him yet," she said, gravely; " if 
he develops, as I think he will, I shall laugh 
at him myself by-and-by, but please don't you 
do it yet, Arthur." 

*'A11 right; now tell me what made you 
attack and utterly rout poor Mrs. Blayne in 
the way you did this morning?" 

*' Because I saw the spirit of research was 
upon her; she has been thinking that she has 



200 FALSE COLOURS. 

been finding out so much since the day we first 
met, and I don't wish to be put into one of 
the condemned cells of her mind with her poor 
husband; Mr. Lister would slay me, I feel 
sure, if he knew I had spoken out, but I wanted 
to restore the balance of power which seems to 
be tottering in this Blayne household." 

*' Lister slay you ! Lister may feel very 
proud of your ever having been connected with 
him in such a way," Arthur Scorrier said, 
rather imperiously. 

" Look here, Arthur," Cecile began, putting 
her arms round his neck in a way that would 
have averted any man's wrath, " don't be angry,. 
and don't be hurt, but Mr. Lister would not 
feel so well-inclined to slay me for having be- 
trayed the unpleasing facts if I had married a 
marquis or a millionnaire . but " 

" He won't like to have it laiown that a 
country surgeon married the woman he once 
thought of marrying," Arthur interrupted. 
*' Confound his insolence ! but it won't hurt 
me, or make me angry either, dear." 

'' I didn't think him insolent," Cissy re- 



PEAELS BEFORE SWINE. 201 

monstrated ; " that is not the adjective I should 
use in describing him." 

'* I don't care for close definitions," Arthur 
said, carelessly ; "in my own mind, I should 
call any fellow insolent who thought himself 
degraded by my succeeding him ; shouldn't 
you?" 

" That is not exactly a fair way of putting 
it." 

" You obliged me to put it in that vray." 

" No, no, Arthur ; can't you imagine the 
whole course of his life tending to this, end . . 
that he should overrate his own i^osition . that 
position for the securing of which he and his 
friends held that no sacrifice could be too great ? 
I will be just to him, though I think if I saw 
much of him now he would try my sense of 
justice hardly." 

" He might try your feelings and vround your 
pride by affecting to look down on the lot you 
have chosen. As to your sense of justice, the 
less you say about that the better ; no woman 
has the slightest idea of what it would be simply 
**just " to do when her feelings are in question. 



202 FALSE COLOURS. 

If you saw much of liim, you would either alto- 
gether quarrel with him for looking down on 
me, or you would teach yourself to believe that, 
poor fellow, he had received great provocation : 
it isn't given to women to 'nothing extenuate,' 
and yet ' set down aught in malice.' " 

" You think that ? . you really believe what 
you are saying, Arthur ? ' ' 

" I do, indeed ; you're a dear, generous- 
hearted creature, but you have a possibility of 
injustice about you. Now a man can be 
tolerant even when he has cause for some 
annoyance ; for instance now, it is not a 
pleasant thing to be told by my wife that there 
is every excuse for another fellow looking down 
on her husband." 

" It must make you remember all the un- 
happy truths your wife told you about herself, 
and also that you have been an active agency 
in saving his life," Cissy said, quickly. '' Arthur, 
you have misconstrued what I said . it is you 
who are unjust now ; I am more rejoiced than 
ever that Mr. Lister has moved out of our 
orbit." 



PEAELS BEFORE SWINE. 203 

" ^yhy ? I should not elevate him into a 
cause of dissension." 

" No, you might be as antagonistically indif- 
ferent to him as you pleased . that would not 
mend matters ; I should always have the feeling 
that you were disposed to cavil at all his claims, 
and my taste (if you won't allow me to have 
any sense of justice) would revolt at that ; but 
he's gone, and there's an end of him." 

So she said in her short-sightedness, believing 
that that which she said was true. However, 
it was not destined that there should be such 
a safe and speedy end of him, as far as they 
were concerned. The presiding deity of Castle- 
nau was a lady who suffered very much from 
herself. Lady Ellington was anj'thing but a 
pleasant or a popular woman, but no one more 
heartily disliked passing a quiet hour alone 
with her than her ladyship herself did. In 
these days life at Castlenau was very dull indeed. 
The hereditary estates were out to nurse, and 
the income arising from them was watched over 
and made the most of by a band of creditors 
who rated and ministered to the wants of her 



204 FALSE COLOURS. 

ladyship in a way the parsimony of which made 
her hate plebeians with her full coimtess-power 
of hatred. 

Just at this juncture life at Castlenau was 
very dull indeed. The lord of the castle was 
away, but that trifling circumstance made no 
manner of difference to the other occupants of 
the cradle of the race of Ellington. The 
esteemed nobleman was one of those amiable 
creatures who, though not witty themselves, are 
the cause of wit in others. It had been said 
of him, when the question arose as to whether 
or not the Order of the Thistle should be 
bestowed upon him, that the only thing he 
would do with it would be to eat it. This may 
have been a calumny. 

At any rate he was away, and his wife was 
compelled by the exigencies arising from her 
own extravagance to sojourn at Castlenau for a 
few weeks. His second son, Walter Bracey, 
and his wife, were making out the time there 
until it was convenient for those in authority 
to place funds at their disposal to "begin the 
summer campaign in town. The electioneering 



PEAPiLS BEFORE SWIXE. 205 

exjDenses had been heavY, and the whole scheme 
a faihire. Walter Bracey was not the man for 
that division of the county, and that division 
of the county ruthlessly disregarding the 
claims of high descent, refused to return him. 
Consequently, he was disappointed, and as a 
natural sequence, sulky : and his wife and 
mother had an evil time of it when they were 
alone with him. 

It became unendurable to this trio, after a 
few days, this compulsorily quiet existence which 
they were leading. The tedium they wearied 
under forced them into devising charitable and 
beneficial plans for the propagation of big cab- 
bages, cleanliness, long servitude, and pigs. It 
was essential to Lady Ellington's well-being 
that she should have some sort of excitement. 
Accordingly, in default of something more con- 
genial to do, she began benefiting the poor 
vigorously, and arranged a cottage garden-fete 
on a picturesque and pleasing pattern that she 
had observed work well in another place. 

Her son and daughter-in-law threw them- 
selves into the work animatedlv for a few davs. 



206 FALSE COLOURS. 

Then Mrs. Walter Bracey's spirits began to 
flag. "At Efford," she said, mentioning the 
place where the pattern scheme had worked 
well . " At Efford it was a fete-day for us as 
well as for the people. Who are you going 
to ask to luncheon ? " 

Lady Ellington thought for a moment ; and 
in that moment had the truth that all her com- 
peers had gone up to town for the season borne 
in heavily upon her. " I suppose we must ask 
some of the clergy," she said. 

'^ Oh, the clergy, of course . they can cut uj) 
the meat and make themselves useful, as they 
vow to do, don't they, when they take orders ; 
but who else ? " Mrs. Walter Bracey asked, 
with a despairing accent. 

" Their wives, I suppose," Lady Ellington 
said, with a bright air of having solved the 
difficulty. She was fleshing her maiden sword 
in the matter of giving cottage garden-fetes. 
For several years her husband had been in the 
habit of giving prizes to the cottagers on his 
estate for sundry merits and successes, which 
need not be enumerated here ; but they had 



PEARLS BEFORE SWINE. 207 

never assembled these successes, and arrayed 
these merits on the lawn at Castlenau. Ac- 
cordingly, Lady Ellington moved as one in the 
dark when it came to the question of who should 
be commanded and Avho should be invited. 

"Their wives, I suppose," she said, hope- 
fully, to her daughter-in-law, and Mrs. Walter 
Bracey (who had been a trade plum, swallowed 
by the Ellington family once when the tender 
mercies of the nurses of the hereditary estates 
had been very oppressive) objected plainly with 
her shoulders and her eyebrows. 

" Their wives ! that would be very rash, I 
think. don't you, Walter?" 

" I don't think about it ; I only know that 
between you there will be a precious mess 
made. Why not keep to the first programme 
. the people and their pigs, and a family pro- 
gress in procession round the tables?" The 
Honoui-able Walter agreed Avith his wife as to 
the rashness of extending the invitations so 
low, so far I mean as the wives of the unknown 
clergy. But not for all he possessed, and that 
was very little, would he have told her so. 



208 FALSE COLOURS. 

'' But we can't go in a procession of three 
round tlie tables and tents . that would be 
absurd!" Mrs. Walter i)ersisted, j^ertina- 
ciously. 

" Tell us how you managed such matters as 
these on your paternal estates, my dear," her 
husband said, sneeringly. Mrs. Walter's father 
had been one of those peculiar people who be- 
gin life with half a crown and determination to 
win affluence and consideration. He had won 
these things by means of a digestive powder 
for adults, which had gone down the throats of 
the populace at a most remunerative rate. 
This powder had not been popularized under 
the family patronymic, but had been known 
as '-'Old Joe's Corrective." Naturally, Mrs. 
Walter resented any disparaging allusions to it. 

" If you like to devote yourself to a lot of 
dowdy women . they all are dowdy . Walter, I 
have nothing to say against their being asked ; 
but when are they to come in?" 

'' It has always been a great comfort to me 
that Mr. Forrester is unmarried," Lady Elling- 
ton said, languidly. Mr. Forrester was the 



PEARLS BEFORE SWIXE. 209 

vicar of the parish in which Castlenau was 
situated. "But there's his curate . he has a 
wife." 

"And there's Mrs. Blayne," Walter Bracey 
said, half maliciously. " Lister is coming from 
them to us. How do you propose to get rid of 
that difficulty?" 

" The Blaynes must he asked to he with us, 
of course ; as to Mrs. Winter, I should say, in 
a note to her husband, ' that the grounds will 
be open to the public, and that we shall be glad 
if she will come ; ' won't that do, mamma ?" 

Lady Ellington disliked being called mamma 
by the scion of the corrective powder house, 
therefore she answered tartly that it " wouldn't 
do at all;" and after a discussion, in which 
Mr. Walter Bracey refused to think either his 
parent or his spouse right in their views, or in 
their way of carrying out the same, it was de- 
cided that if the superfluous wife of Mr. Winter 
was to be asked to come at all, it must be done 
in some other way than that suggested by Mrs. 
Walter. 

"It's just possible, you know, that she may 

VOL. II. p 



210 FALSE COLOUKS. 

not. feel herself honoured by and gratefully 
accept your invitation," he said, scoffingly ; 
** pearls before swine, and that sort of thing, 
you know. She ought to feel it a foretaste of 
paradise, of course, to have an opportunity of 
passing a couple of hours with two such women 
as my mother and yourself." This he said to 
his wife in the seclusion of their own room, 
where he was wont to utter his hardest truths, 
being free from the restraining influence of his 
mother's presence. " It is your dignity, and 
the dignity of your family that I am desirous 
of upholding, after all," Mrs. Walter said, in an 
injured tone, in reply to this ; and then her 
husband told her that her attempts were awk- 
ward and abortive, and calculated to do quite 
the opx30site of upholding the Ellington dig- 
nity; and Mrs. Walter sighed, as she had often 
sighed since her marriage, for the presence of 
some one else. " Thank goodness, Mr. Lister 
will be here soon," she said to herself; "he is 
always kind and polite to me." 

So it happened that when Mr. Lister came 
to CastlenaUj the question of who should be 



PEAPtLS BEFORE SWINE. 211 

asked to Castlenau to see the Ellington family 
reward virtue and integrity was raised again. 

" There is scarcely a woman about here 
worth speaking to, and certainly not worth 
looking at," Walter Bracey said, complainingly, 
to his friend ; " however, my mother has made 
up her mind to be crushingly condescending, 
and asked everybody within a radius of ten 
miles." 

" I have seen one woman worth looking at 
and speaking to since I have been here," Mr. 
Lister said, half absently. He was thinking of 
Cissy, and feeling glad that she did not live 
within a radius of ten miles of Castlenau. 

"Yes! who is that?" 

" The wife of the man who has put me to- 
gether again . Mr. Scorrier, of Danebury." 

" She drives the ponies my wife couldn't 
manage . she's by way of being a Becky Sharp, 
isn't she?" 

*' What do you mean ?" 

^' An adventuress ; she has had other views 
than Danebury and Scorrier in her day." 

**I dare say she has," Mr. Lister said, 



212 FALSE COLOUKS. 

hesitatingly ; " but you're wrong in suspecting 
them to have been lower or worse than her 
present ones. I knew her years ago in Baden ; 
she was there staying with her mother ; and if 
I had been my own master then, she should 
never have had the chance of marrying a 
country surgeon." 

"You would have married her yourself?'* 
the other man asked, in some surprise. 

.'That I would," Lister answered; "she 
was a glorious girl then, capable of splendid 
nobility of thought and action, and I don't 
think her intercourse with me deteriorated her 
in any way," he added, with the vanity that 
was inherent in him. 

" And now you have seen her again, and 
you find that she has deteriorated?" Walter 
Bracey asked. 

"I saw her for two minutes, and the sight 
of me naturally restored her for the time to 
what she had been when I knew her; what 
she may be when not under the influence of 
such associations and memories as I should 
awake in her, I can't say," 



PEAELS BEFOKE SWINE. 213 

*' Would you like to see her again ?" Walter 
Bracey said. 

" Very much, if I could befriend her in any 
way." Mr. Lister, as he spoke, felt that it 
would be pleasant to elevate Cissy's mind out 
of the possibility of its ever sympathising with 
her husband again, or to do some other equally 
good work. *' Very much indeed, if I could 
make her life happier or higher, but I don't 
care to make a stud}^ of her common-place 
happiness, if she is happ}^" 

''We will get her here." 

"No, no," Lister said, hastily; "you can't 
have her invited in the off-hand way in which 
you say your mother is going to ask people; 
she wouldn't come if you did." 

" We will have her here before you leave, for 
all that," Walter Bracey said, decidedly ; "a 
prett}^ woman, and one who can talk about 
something outside this part of the world is not 
to be neglected. I'll get my mother to call on 
Mrs. Scorrier, and I'll send my wife over to-day." 

" I have no right to express an opinion as to 
the wisdom of what you're about," Mr. Lister 



214 FALSE COLOUBS. 

said, shrugging his shoulders ; " she might liot 
thank me for saying anything that would 
hinder her from coming here. As women's 
minds age and narrow, they long for these 
social triumphs ; when she was measuring her 
mind with mine daily she would have scorned 
them;" and as he said this, Mr. Lister felt 
himself to be a very noble fellow indeed for 
not saying more contemptuous words than he 
had said about the husband of the woman he 
had loved. 

Acting under her husband's orders, Mrs. 
Walter Bracey went to Danebury that same 
day, and took the card of the Countess of 
Ellington with her, to do honour to Mrs. 
Scorrier. As Mrs. Scorrier did not show a 
quick appreciation of this honour in the way 
of returning the call, the august mistress of 
Castlenau, urged to the act by her son, went 
over in person, and soon after this Mr. and 
Mrs. Scorrier were asked to spend a week at 
Castlenau. 

" I would rather not go, Arthur," she said> 
handing him the note. 



PEARLS BEFORE SYVINE. 215 

" Why not ? is it on account of that man, 
Cissy?" 

"It is not on account of Mr. Lister, in the 
^vay you mean, Arthur," she said, blushing a 
Httle about it, much to her own annoyance ; 
"but he is not a man to let one forget anything 
about himself that he wishes to have remem- 
bered. I love you with all my heart, you 
know that I do so well ; still, I shall remember 
that I did love him very dearly once, the whole 
time I am over there." 

" And if we don't go, he will think that I 
am afi'aid for you to meet him, and that you 
shrink from comparing him with me," Arthur 
vScorrier said, in rather an offended tone. 

" Now you are hasty, and a little unjust in 
the last clause, Arthur ; as to the first, i^erhaps 
you are right. We will go : I would rather go 
and feed his vanity even, than let him think I 
feared to meet him ; but Isabelle is coming, and 
I must be back to receive her . we must only 
stay three days." 

" My mother can entertain Isabelle, surely ; 
let us have the week out there." 



216 FALSE COLOUKS. 

So they talked of it, and went. And when 
Mrs. Hepburn heard of their going, she nearly 
warped her brain in bending it earnestly to the 
task of discovering how they got there. 



VESY AWKWARD. 217 



CHAPTEE XII I. 

VERY AWKWARD. 

It was not all pure pleasure for Cissy while the 
Castlenau visit was still a thing of the future. 
Old Mrs. Scorrier had arrived by this time, and 
in the pride of her heart she spoke more than 
was agreeable to her daughter-in-law of the 
honour that was in store for them. ''Mrs. 
Scorrier is engaged making some little prepara- 
tions for her stay with Lady Ellington," the 
old lady would insist on saying to many of the 
Danebury ladies w^ho called on her. " I wish 
3"0ur mother would not feel so very much 
obliged for us," Cissy said, half laughing, half 
in earnest ; " she gives every one the impres- 
sion that I am upstairs ill with my sense of 
this ' honour unto which I was not born ; ' how 
can she think so much of it?" 



218 FALSE COLOURS. 

" The habit of her life teaches her to over- 
estimate local consideration," Arthur said, care- 
lessly. " What does she mean by preparations, 
though? what preparations are you making?" 

" Oh !" Cissy blushed furiously as she com- 
menced her exj)lanation, " poor dear unprac- 
tical Aunt Yargrave lavished money upon my 
fit-out, but she didn't lavish it v/isely. I am 
so sorry, Arthur, but I am obliged to supply 
deficiencies already." 

" My dear girl ! pray don't speak to me in 
that way . you should be robed like a queen if 
I had my will." Then he went away, wrought 
upon by the fear that she was missing what 
she might have had if he had not made her 
marry him ; and very much to her regret, he 
went to a shop in Bedford and bought her a 
lot of beautiful things that she did not want . 

" A violet velvet, enough for a dress and 
jacket !" she exclaimed, when he came home to 
dinner and told her what he had done. " You 
extravagant boy ; but how I shall like it !" 

" A violet velvet, if it is good, ought to last 
your life-time," old Mrs. Scorrier said, eagerly. 



VERY AWKWARD. 219 

'' I have a mantle now that I had new the year 
Arthur was horn." 

" Then how I shall hate it !" Cissy said, 
laughingly; ''but there's no fear of such a 
catastrophe. I have a wonderful power of 
wearing out clothes. If they don't ask us to 
go there again quickly, I shall have shabbied 
my violet, and have to go shorn of the s^Dlen- 
dour of velvet." 

" With care, it would be a lovely dinner-dress 
for you for years," Mrs. Scorrier said, gravely. 

" But it's not to be a dinner-dress. Didn't 
you hear Arthur say it's for a dress and jacket 
. morning costume ?" 

" A morning costume of velvet ! why, what 
are your evening dresses, Cissy?" 

" Oh, as various as I could contrive them to 
be. There's one coming home to-night that 
would be a delight to any one v/ith an eye for 
colour; you will be staggered by it at first, but 
it will grow upon you." 

"I am staggered by many things," Mrs. 
Scorrier said, sententiously. ''What, is this 
other dress velvet too?" 



220 FALSE COLOURS. 

*' Oh, no ; it's a dry moss-coloured silk, 
trimmed with the most delicate pink I ever saw. 
Amelia has been here to-day, Arthur ; they will 
dine at Castlenau while we are there." 

" I suppose Mr. Hepburn can afford to visit 
at such a place with his wife," Mrs. Scorrier 
said, shaking her head; ''but," she added, as 
Cissy went out of the room, " how you will 
manage to make both ends meet in a few years, 
if you go on at this rate now, I can't think." 

" My income will increase, without doubt," 
Arthur said, hastily. " Don't worry yourself, 
and don't talk about it, my dear mother ; Cissy 
ought to have society, and there's none in 
Danebury." 

" But such society as this involves such 
expenses." 

"So it does . that can't be avoided. Now I 
will confess to you, mother, that I shall be glad 
when I am in a position to be superior to such 
considerations ; but at present it's just as well 
that we should be thought to be independent of 
my practice ; it's policy to be extravagant, as 
you call it." 



VERY AWKWARD. 221 

"It is bad policy, false policy," the old lady 
said, energetically, " indeed it is, my dear 
Arthur." Still, though she said this, and 
thought this, the old lady could not help feeling 
pleased that her son and his wife should be 
invited guests to the court of the county. As 
she could not help feeling this pride, so, being 
what she was, she could not help showing it to 
those of Danebury whom she chanced to meet. 
" They are to meet a number of grand people 
. titled people," she said to Mrs. Pottinger ; 
"but I don't think Cissy will be cast into the 
shade in any way ; Arthur would dress her in 
gold if he could," and then Mrs. Pottinger 
heard about the dresses. 

" I shall wish myself at home the whole 
time I am there," Cecile said to her husband 
as they were nearing Castlenau ; there was no 
palpable reason why we should have been 
invited ; no one knows better than I do that we 
shall be in a false position there." 

" I should have thought you were the last 
woman in the world to think so lowly of your- 
self, to say nothing of your husband," he said. 



222 FALSE COLOURS. 

*'It's just because I do not think and feel 
humbly of myself and you. Why should Yv^e 
be said to think lowly of ourselves when we say 
openly what we all feel, that we are asked with 
an effort, and that we are accepting with an 
effort ? If we felt ourselves to be their equals 
socially, there would be no effort." 

"We can't all be lords and ladies," Arthur 
said, laughing. 

*' If we were artists of any kind," Cissy 
said, pursuing her own train of thought, " art 
is a realm where all is royal ; but as it is, I 
wish we had stayed at home." And when his 
wife said that, Arthur S corner told himself, 
with some bitterness, that Cissy was ashamed 
either of him or of his profession. Perhaps of 
both. 

There was a large party at Castlenau by this 
time. The cottagers' fete had been a failure, 
and when it was over the trio who had arranged 
it had found themselves more terrible than 
before. " I have tried Walter's wife alone, and 
I find her awful," Lady Ellington wrote to one 
of her daughters ; now I am going to try her 



\^B.Y AWKV/-ARD. 223 

with a houseful." Accordingly there -was a 
houseful by the time the Scorriers came, and 
Cissy found the herd more agreeable than the 
stately solitude she had dreaded. 

Mr. Lister had met her with much more com- 
posure than he had shown in the Blaynes' gar- 
den. He had quite made up his mind about 
her now, and made it up very much to his own 
satisfaction. She had only married, he told 
himself, because she believed that he had either 
forgotten or grown careless of her. Further, 
he told himself that in justice to the man 
whose claims to anything he never disregarded 
. Edward Lister . he must undeceive her on 
this point. 

The morning after the Scorriers came, seven 
or eight ladies were scattered over a large 
drawing-room, making the hours pass to the 
best of their several abilities, while the men 
were plaj^'ing billiards and looking at the 
horses. They were none of them remarkable 
women, and they have nothing whatever to do 
with the Scorriers' fortunes ; therefore, nothing 
need be said about them. One or two of them 



224 FALSE COLOURS. 

were pretty ; just sufficiently so to make it 
obvious to every one that Mrs. Scorrier was a 
beauty. 

Cissy wore her violet velvet this day, and 
tried to hate it because it had cost so much, 
and because it was beginning to dawn upon her 
that her husband was less well off than in his 
solicitude for her he would have her believe him 
to be. But it was a difficult task for a woman 
who saw colour and looked at hues to feel other 
than well-disposed towards that dress. It had 
the same tone that we see sometimes in old 
Venetian pictures, and it fell around her in 
royal folds. Mr. Lister coming into the room 
and marking her at once in the glory of it, 
cursed his fate and Arthur Scorrier' s fortune 
afresh. 

She was sitting rather apart from the rest in 
a low chair, trying to do some talking, and 
twisting her pretty small hands and slender 
fingers about a good deal as she did it. Lady 
Ellington had done her duty by the wife of the 
country surgeon, whom she had commanded to 
Castlenau at her son's request. The whole 



VERY AWKWARD. 225 

duty of hostess had been j)erformed. Mrs. 
Scorrier acknowledged to herself that she had 
not felt in a false position yet, and with a quick 
appreciation of where credit was due, she attri- 
buted this entirely to Lady Ellington's tact. 
'' If such people stab you at all, they do it 
w^ith clean knives, at any rate," she was saying 
to herself when Mr. Lister came in. 

She was not an atom in love with him. As 
he stood before her, she was not even in love 
with his memory ; yet for all this obliteration 
of sentiment concerning him, her heart throb- 
bed more quickly as he drew a chair nearer to 
her and sat down. Quickly she met and strove 
to m.aster the feeling. 

" My husband is charmed to find his patient 
so far recovered . so almost entirely recovered," 
she began. 

" I am very much obliged for his professional 
interest in me," he ansvv'ered. 

" I share it," Mrs. Scorrier said, promptly, 
looking her old lover straight in the face. 
They had been so fond of one another once, long 
ago, these two. But now a thousand reasons 

VOL. II. Q 



226 FALSE COLOURS. 

forbade any recollection of the old fondness 
entering into the mind or the manner of either. 

" I can't tell you how surprised I was to 
meet you . to hear of you down here," he said, 
trying to speak conventionally. 

" And I can't tell you whether I was sur- 
prised or only stultified at hearing of you," she 
answered, trying to speak naturally. 

*' I had never accustomed myself to think 
of you as married," he said, ' dropping his 
voice, and mentally recurring to his grievance. 

" No ; I suppose not ; one thinks of old 
friends as one saw them last ; and I " 

" Yon were not a sage British matron when 
we met and parted last," he interrupted, 
quickly. '^For heaven's sake don't speak to 
me as if I had been a casual acquaintance, to 
be dropped and picked up at pleasure." 

" I should not be a sage British matron if I 
allowed you to regard yourself as anything but 
a casual acquaintance of mine," Cissy said, 
speaking in a low voice, but withal very dis- 
tinctly. " You have given me to understand 
that you accept no other interest, sympathy . 



VERY AWKWARD. 227 

what shall I call it ? . from my hushand than 
the ' professional ' one. I stand on his ground; 
I offer you no other." 

" I can no more identify you with him than 
you can yourself," he said, decidedly ; and then 
he remembered the warm words in which she 
had vowed to be his and his only the last time 
he had seen her before prudence separated 
them. As he remembered this, he hated Mr. 
Scorrier, and said hard and horrible words 
about Mr. Blayne. " You cannot expect me to 
portray saintly resignation respecting you. I 
have been hardly dealt with ; for years I have 
resolutely turned away from every temptation 
that can be offered to a man for your sake, and 
suddenly I come upon you married ! " 

''And happy," she said, quietly. "As for 
what you said just now . what you implied too 
strongly for good taste . I can say so little in 
reply to it. You will not believe me when I 
tell you that I do identify myself with my hus- 
band heartily and entirely." 

'' I have won my right to heaven by forgiving 
Blayne for separating us," he said, uttering 



228 FALSE COLOURS. 

each word with a force of meaning that struck 
her very much. 

'' And you will lose that right if you force 
me to discuss this question with you," she 
said, quietly. 

'' Let me tell you that I was not to hlame ; 
let me remind you of what you have forgotten 
. that yours was the severing hand." 

"And in turn let me remind you that a 
wife's ring is on that hand now," she said, 
looking at him again with her most fearless 
look. "Mr. Lister, what is the use of our 
raking over hurnt-out ashes ; we may not re- 
light that fire, and we shall only create smoke 
that may dim the brilliance of the light of the 
present. Blame ! why do you talk about 
blaming any one ? there was no blame attached 
to any actor in that old drama . it was all for 
the best ; don't degrade the part you played 
then, by burlesquing it now." 

By the time Mrs. Scorrier had said this, seve- 
ral of the ladies who had been sitting there 
with her all the morning, had dropped out of the 
room. The pretty representative of the middle 



VERY AWEWARD. 229 

classes vv'as not looked upon with kind eyes 
by those of her own sex then congregated at 
Castlenau. Her beauty was not that beauty 
which finds favour in the eyes of other women. 
She was too ready of retort to be attacked 
with innuendo with im2)unity. She was too well 
assured as to what she was individually, to 
be slighted or routed out of her self-possession. 
Additionally she was too well dressed to be 
-crushed by the toilettes that were designed to 
be crushing. Consequently she was at a dis- 
count v/ith her sister-women before she had 
been twelve hours in the house. 

They had glided out of the room, one by 
one, w^hile she was talking to Mr. Lister, and 
yet there had been no combination apparently 
of either purpose or action. Only Mrs. Walter 
Bracey remained, and Mrs. Ynilter Bracey 
hated Cissy as only a woman who loves her 
husband, and whose husband does not love 
her, can hate the woman he admires most in 
the world. There was an extra sting, too, in 
the fact that Mrs. Scorrier had been driving 
the ponies which she (Mrs. Walter Bracey) had 



230 FALSE COLOURS. 

found unmanageable. The wife of the second 
son of the house very much disliked the pre- 
sence of this the fair guest of it. Appearances 
were a little against the latter now . she was 
looking so lovely, and Mr. Lister v^as looking 
so devoted. If by a well-worded report to the 
Countess (who was rigid about other women's 
morals), she could oust Mrs. Scorrier from 
Castlenau, life would be brighter to her for a 
time. So thinking, she gathered up her work 
and her book and prepared to slide from the 
room. But Gecile was vvatching her. She 
suffered the lady to carry her small gear and 
amiable intentions to the door, and then she 
arrested Mrs. Walter's flight. 

" How do you propose amusing me this 
morning, Mrs. Bracey ?" she said ; ''I heard 
you promise your husband that you would see 
that I did not suffer from the desolation of 
being left to my own devices." 

" I thought you seemed to be amusing your- 
self very well," Mrs. 'Bracey said, suavely. 
She had given to her husband the promise of 
which she was nov/ reminded, and she felt 



VERY AWKWARD. 231 

sorry (for herself) for having been caught out 
in the attempt to jolace the one about whom 
she had promised in a false position. So 
though she said, " I thought you seemed to be 
amusing yourself very Avell/' she spoke in a 
tone of civility which robbed the words of the 
sting she would like to have given. 

" I was amusing myself very well with talk- 
ing to Mr. Lister, but I saw a weary expression 
in his eyes which he did not mean me to catch ; 
it crept into them just now when we heard the 
rattle of the billiard balls." 

"Well, shall we go in there and see what 
they are doing?" Mrs. Walter Bracey said, in- 
dicating the billiard-room with a glance. Then 
the three went into the room, where several 
idlers had collected, and Cecile was soon sur- 
rounded by other men who desh-ed to teach 
her to mark and to play. Mr. Lister felt that 
his chance of the quiet re-establishing word 
which he was longing to utter to her was over 
for that morning. 

A quiet re-establishing word, that was all he 
wanted to say to her, and it was hard not to 



232 FALSE COLOURS. 

have the opportunity. Hard, very hard, and 
disgusting to see her standing about in ''beauty 
such as never woman wore," and to know that 
she was ignorant of, and indifferent to, that 
long faithfully-kept love of his. Not that he 
wanted to make her forget her marriage vows 
and regret her choice and lot in life. But he 
did want to make her understand that a higher 
choice and a brighter lot might have been hers. 
He did wish to make her feel and acknow- 
ledge that a woman cannot forget, and ought 
not to forget, such passages in her life as he 
had known Cissy to have passed. His heart, 
and his taste, and his vanity were all in revolt 
at finding himself so entirely superseded. That 
she should have married was bad enough, but 
that she should be satisfied with her marriage 
was almost worse. 

Yet, for all this fond, foolish fretting, he was 
no would-be Don Juan. Only he hardly knew 
where to draw the line between those esthetic 
rights which he thought he had established 
over her, and the real rights which were vested 
in Mr. Scorrier now. The girl who had been 



VERY AVrKWARD. 233 

capable of any amount of mad devotion was 
such a cool, collected woman now, tluit lie 
found himself wrestling with two spirits. Not 
only was she absolutely charming to him as he 
remembered her at Baden, but she was abso- 
lutely charming to him now. He was in love 
wdtli her still as she had been, and he was 
getting even more in love with her as she was. 
It had been a fatal whim of Walter Bracey's 
this getting the local beauty to Castlenau. 

The morning dragged itself on, and ended 
by-and-by in luncheon; and at luncheon plans 
for the peaceable passing of the afternoon were 
made and discussed. In an evil moment Mrs. 
Scorrier had packed up her habit, and her 
husband guilelessh^ reminded her that she had 
done so now when she was invited to ride. 

" Then you must ride with me," she said to 
him, aside. 

"Not a bit of it. Cissy; it's settled that I 
go with Bracey in his trap-tandem," he said. 
"You'll be all right; I have seen the horse 
-they offer you, and he is a horse after your own 
heart." 



234 FALSE COLOURS. 

" And I am to drift about in a riding-party 
composed of ^Deople who don't know me and 
don't like me ; thank you, I would rather stay 
at home." 

"Now, Cissy, what do 3^ou shrink from? Mr. 
Lister has offered to be your special escort. 
I can't help wishing you to show that you 
dare to meet him again freely in a friendly 
spirit." 

" Can't you understand that the doing so is 
not too pleasant ? ' ' Cissy said, earnestly : ' ' dare ! 
there is no question of ' daring ' about it, but 
I do feel sometimes that I would rather hide my 
face than look at him when he speaks to me." 

"I don't see why it should be so painful to 
meet a fellow to whom you once happened to 
be engaged, now that you've both got over it, 
and you at least have appointed a successor to 
the old love," Arthur said. He was not called 
upon just then to meet any person to whom 
he had ever proffered vows or pledged faith, 
therefore he could be sensible and hard about 
another feeling it to be an awkward thing to 
do so. 



VERY AWKWARD. 235 

''It's not exactly painful, but it is avdvward," 
Cissy urged. " I told you I should feel it to 
be awkward, and I do horribly ; how can I 
help remembering that he has kissed me . and 
now I have to talk to him as if none of that 
had been." 

All this Cissy said between the hour of 
luncheon and the hour of riding . a very short 
hour be it understood. She said it as if she 
meant it too, and yet for all that, when the 
riding-party started from Castlenau, Mrs. Scor- 
rier Yvas in the fi'ont of it, and by her side 
rode Mr. Lister. 

Of course there were unkind remarks made 
about them, and not about them only, but 
about the absent husband who " permitted 
it." Mrs. "\Yalter Bracey gave brief accounts 
of the three to enquiring friends, graphic 
bits of description that can only emanate 
from parliamentary reporters and ill-natured 
women. 

"He ! oh, he is a Mr. Lister; he had some 
I)lebeian name, but he has changed it for a 
fortune of boundless wealth, I believe ; she i^ 



236 FALSE COLOURS. 

just the sort of woman lie would attach him- 
self to, the sort of woman he can attach 
himself to with impunity ; a sort of person 
who can never he spoken ahout in the world, 
and who yet ma}^ save him from an unwise 
marriage in the country ; as for Mr. Scorrier, 
I can say nothing ahout him . he attends the 
Castlenau servants, and is really very nice 
altogether in his way, I believe." 

Arthur Scorrier was ""very nice altogether," 
hut he was only human, and he was likely to 
make mistakes. Consequently, though he had 
urged his wife. to go out and ride, and had al- 
most forced her to accept Mr. Lister's escort, 
he was aggrieved at her doing so . or rather he 
w^as aggrieved with her for having any reason, 
however remote, for not doing so. Gracefully 
and willingly as he had accepted Cissy and her 
antecedents at Penzance he could not do so this 
day when they came before him in the flesh. 
Yet he would not be actively unjust. He 
obliged himself to recollect that he had com- 
pelled Cissy to put herself into this light, in 
which things looked so very unpleasant to him. 



VERY AWKWARD. 237 

He would not be actively unjust, but he felt 
very ill-tempered. 

" The whole business of our coming here is a, 
beastly expensive mistake," he said to himself, 
as he saw his wife trotting home, with Mr. 
Lister by her side. And as he said it he 
entirely forgot that Cissy had stood out stoutly 
against the coming, and against the ride, and 
indeed against all that was hateful to him. 
He forgot all this, and only remembered 
that Cissy had loved and been loved by this 
man who was here now, and whose kisses she 
remembered. 

Those three days at Castlenau were days of 
dire distress to Mrs. Scorrier. In the first 
place she had no maid with her ; and though 
it is an easy thing to do without a maid in the 
unpretentious walks of life which have never 
been adorned by one, it is not an easy thing to 
do it in a big house, where every other woman 
has one. Consequent^, Cissy was often late 
and always hurried, and it went against her 
very much to be late and hurried under the 
observation of Mrs. AValter Brace v and others of 



238 FALSE COLOUKS. 

that ilk. Further, her husband tried to be too 
generous and confiding in his manner, and 
was, she felt convinced, too distrustful in his 
mind. And last of all, and worst of all, the 
old love was visibly at her feet again. 

" I am not going to enact Othello for the 
amusement of these people," Arthur . Scorrier 
said to his wife, on the morning of their de- 
parture, " that fellow has asked me if he may 
call, and I have said yes." 

" And why in the world didn't you say no ?" 
Cissy said, with a sigh. She had hoped that 
her troubles were over, but if Mr. Lister came 
to Danebury they would begin afresh. 

'' Because I am not going to make myself 
ridiculous," he said. 

" Then will you promise not to be unhappy?" 
she pleaded. 

''That will depend on you, my darling," he 
said, passionately. *'I love you so well. Cissy, 
that you must be careful." And Cissy promised 
to be careful, and did not know how it would 
avail her to be so. 



MISS VARGRATE NEARLY LANDS A FISH. 239 



CHAPTEE XIV. 

MISS YARGRAVE NEARLY LANDS A FISH. 

The day of the Scorriers' return liome after 
that unsatisfactory visit at Castlenau, Isabelle 
came to tli(jm and davaied upon them freshly 
as a greater beauty than she had been before. 
** I have come down determined to make con- 
quests; who is there to be conquered, Arthur ? " 
she said, in reply to his complimentary re- 
markson her appearance. 

" The Pottingers will lay down their arms at 
once," Cissy said ; ''I can't promise you any 
other prey." 

" Then I will be satisfied with the Pottin- 
gers ; but who have you had at this grand 
place where you have been staying ? didn't you 
strike up any safe, useful-to-your-relations, 
married woman's friendship with any one?" 



240 FALSE COLOURS. 

Isabelle asked, with that uniutentionally un- 
erring stroke which we do deal one another in 
ignorance sometimes. Isabelle was not ac- 
quainted with that Baden episode. The name 
of Mr. Lister, and the nature of his former 
relations with Cissy, were sealed books to her. 

*' No, I did not get up what you call a mar- 
ried woman's friendship with any one," Cissy 
answered, as unconcernedly as she could. It 
was hard to be unconcerned with the knowledge 
that her husband's eyes were scanning her face, 
oppressing her. Nevertheless, she managed to 
depict the expression tolerably well . well 
enough at any rate to win a sentence or two of 
approbation from old Mrs. Scorrier. 

" And quite right, too, my dear . married 
women often have cause to regret it if they do 
form such friendships as Miss Vargrave means." 
And then the old lady went on to word the 
novel reflection, " that a woman's reputation is 
as brittle as glass, and should never be im- 
perilled by vanity or sophistry," " For the 
sake of others more than for her own sake,'* 
she v\^ound up with, earnestly and sadly. 



MISS VARGRAYE NEARLY LANDS A FISH. 241 

*' HoYv^ have you been amusing yourself 
^^hile we have been out?" Cissy asked, eager 
for a change of topic. " I hope you have not 
found it dulL" 

''Dull ! my dear, remember the quiet life I 
lead at home," the old lady said, affectionately. 

''Yes . but you lead it at home, and there is 
much in that; dulness anywhere is bad enough, 
but it's worse in unfamiliar than in familiar 
piaces. I'll revenge myself on Danebury if it 
has not been pleasant to you," and Cissy, as 
she spoke, smiled very sweetly and tenderly on 
her husband's mother. 

" But it has been pleasant to me, I assure 
you, my dear ; the Pottingers' kindness has 
been incessant, incessant ; and Mrs. Hepburn 
came to see me the day after she had dined with 
you at Castlenau. Eeally, do you know I 
think she improves very much on acquaintance? 
we got quite confidential, and 1 couldn't help 
telling her how^ much I wished to see Glene and 
Mr. Hepburn; she quite understands that 
desire . thinks it most perfectly natural, and is 
going to gratify it, if she can." 

VOL. II. R 



242 FALSE COLOURS. 

" You won't think of going there, will you, 
mother ? " 

" Why not, Arthur '? I can go with her as 
well as possible, she says, one clay when Mr. 
Hephurn is out, and he will never know that I 
have been in the house." 

" Dear mother ! I don't like your going to 
any man's house when you are not openly wel- 
comed." 

"But it's such a beautiful feeling on his 
part which kee^DS him from openly welcoming 
me," the old lady urged, trying to deceive her 
dwn heart as to the cause of Mr. Hepburn's 
repugnance to her, even as she v\^as deceiving 
her son; "it is such a beautiful feeling that I 
must not quarrel with it, must I ? " she said, 
nervously. 

" No . still I wouldn't go there ; who knows 
what may come of it ? some unpleasant fate 
may bring him into your midst when you are 
viewing his house surreptitiously." 

'* Who knows what may come of it ! " She 
had used these very same words to herself when 
she had decided on accepting Cissy's invitation. 



MISS YAEGEAVE NEARLY LANDS A FISH. 243 

They sounded almost prophetic now as they 
fell from Arthur's lips, and though she said no 
more, she inwardly determined that she would 
go and " see what would come of it." 

"What is the mystery about old Mrs. Scor- 
rier, that Mr. Hej)burn and she have to be kept 
apart, like the Montagues and Capulets ? " Isa- 
belle asked, when she was alone with her cousin. 

" There's no mystery ; she recalls mournful 
reminiscences to Mr. Hepburn, and he dislikes 
mournful reminiscences," Cissy said. 

"Oh! that's all, is it? I was in hope it 
was something more diverting. Now what are 
you going to do to amuse me, Cissy ? the Pot- 
tingers won't satisfy me, I'm afraid ; and I 
don't care for gathering ferns and mosses, or, 
indeed, for any of the purely rural i)leasures. 
I do hope you won't fade from the memories of 
your Castlenau fiiends while I am here." 

This hope Miss Vargrave expressed before she 
had been at Danebury twenty-four hours, and 
Cissy began to feel that she had been rash in 
asking her cousin to stay with her for a month. 
The winter season had been an unusually 



244 FALSE COLOURS. 

brisk one in Bayswater, and Miss Yargrave had 
gone into the thick of the battle more bravely 
since Cissy's marriage. She had flirted with a 
great many men, in such rapid succession, that 
not one of them had time to wound her. Con- 
S3quently she came down to Danebury heart- 
whole, but with a strong craving for the same 
intoxicating draughts of flattery and excitement, 
and she could not bear the thought of these 
being denied to her. 

The peaceful home, and the quiet, love- 
adorned life were all-sufiicient to herself. Cissy 
was finding out. But on the face of it it was 
absurd to suppose that they were all-sufficient 
for Isabelle. If people are bent upon pursuing 
the even tenour of their way, they should not 
invite other people to come and see them pur- 
suing it, if it happens to be a very dull one. 
Cissy recognized this truth, and began to feel 
almost glad that Mr. Lister was coming to break 
the charmed quiet of their domestic hearth. 

He came so much sooner than she expected 
him that she allowed him to find her alone, 
unprotected by her cousin's presence. Isabelle 



MISS VARGRAVE NEARLY LANDS A FISH. 245 

was out driving with x\rtlinr, and old Mrs. 
Scorrier was walking in the road that led to 
Glene. As he came into the room she could 
not help feeling glad that the anticipated break 
in the monotony which Isabelle disliked had 
come prematurely, and at the same time she 
could not repress a strange sensation of dread 
as to the result of this break. If he did 
transfer his love from her and offer it to her 
cousin, openly, and if Isabelle accepted it and 
became his wife, liov; about that sensation of 
awkwardness wdiicli alwa^'s oppressed her in 
his presence ? ''It shall not deepen," she told 
herself, resolutely, but even as she told herself 
this, she read in his face that he had a good 
memory still, for all that had been honourable 
to her then, and that seemed shameful to her 
now. And the blood burnt on her brow. 

He began again speaking to her in that same 
strain that had been so distressing to her at 
Castlenau. He was not a bad man, nor a base 
man, this early lover of hers, then, for he did 
not make love to her, nor had he the most 
remote intention of even attemx)ting to shake 



246 FALSE COLOURS. 

her wifely allegiance. But he was a man of 
insatiable vanity, and so, almost without design, 
he rendered it quite impossible for her to forget 
that he had been her early lover. He was a 
man of insatiable vanity and of mixed motives ; 
and none of these motives were bad in them- 
selves, but they worked together and did mis- 
chief. It was a noble ambition of his to love 
and be loved most faithfully. Yet, now that 
the ambition had failed in effect, he ought, for 
honour's sake, to have forgotten it before the 
one who had caused the failure. And this he 
could not do. This was a height of generosity to 
which the man who talked exalted sentiment 
by the j^ard could not attain. 

" I must always feel the first and highest 
interest in you," he said, when an angry light 
in her eyes warned him that he had gone a bit 
too far in his questionings concerning her pre- 
sent pursuits and happiness; *'you have such 
a noble nature that you will not deny me that." 
Cissy liked being accredited with the possession 
of a noble nature. But she liked Arthur 
Scorrier better, so she said. 



MISS VAllGEAYE NEAELY LANDS A FISH. 247 

" Yes, I will ; my liusLancl lias the first and 
highest interest in me." 

''But yon will concede something to our old 
and dear friendship, " he pleaded. 

" I will not concede aiijihing now, not a 
word, not a memory, not a falsety tender allu- 
sion to the past that I would not concede in 
the face of a full congregation. I shall always 
he glad to hear of your welfare ; I shall always 
wish you well." 

"' And I shall always watch over you, and 
he ready to aid you, if you require aid." 

'' How can I require ' aid ' from another 
human being while my husband lives ? and when 
he dies, God help me, I hope I shall die too." 

" You know that I do not make the offer in 
a falsety tender spirit," he said, in a sort of 
imploring tone that he did not imagine to be 
anything but genuine himself even. " Heaven 
knows that I respect you and myself too highly 
for that ; but there is a time when you must 
feel that the present does not bind ail your 
highest aspirations, when you must remember 
that you lived before vou came here." 



248 FALSE COLOURS. 

" Yes, but my life was not so pleasant that I 
need to be constantly striving to re-live it ; no^ 
' let the dead past bury its dead,' Mr. Lister, 
the ' living present ' may be a much finer thing: 
for both of us." 

" I always forget that you must have formed 
a new ideal of happiness since I knew you . 
since the old days v\^hen you could have soared. 
to any height, through any difficulties." 

She gave an impatient exclamation, and an 
impatient gesture. 

''You suffer yourself to talk transcendental 
twaddle. What heights did I dream of attain- 
ing then that were higher than those I may 
dream of attaining now ? Because I am a 
Y/ife, happy and satisfied, must I of necessity 
be a meaner-minded, smaller-souled woman ? " 

She did not wait for an answer to this tem- 
pestuously put question. She felt at once that 
she had been unwary in putting it at all, there- 
fore she resolved upon making instant diver- 
sion. " Come out into the garden and meet my 
cousin, Miss Vargrave," she continued, hastily. 
''I see her coming home, looking very dull and 



MISS YAEGRAYE NEARLY LANDS A FISH. 249 

tired, and I look to you to enliYen iier." Then 
she went out into the garden and met Isabelle, 
and forced Mr. Lister to be introduced to a Yery 
weary Miss YargraYe, whom he at once diYined 
to be c[uite incapable of blotting out the memory 
of that other Miss YargraYe whose wraith still 
haunted him. 

But still he was only a man, and this girl, 
this health}^, well-grown possessor of the fawn- 
coloured hair and eyes, was Yery attractiYe 
when she desired to be so. She was attractiYe 
in the storming and bombarding more than in 
the endearing and winning Yvay. She stood up 
close to Mr. Lister for instance, and coerced 
him into listening to her, while she made 
merry in her glittering best Bayswater style 
OYer the air of disuse that hung oYer Dane- 
bury. Before he had been in her society half 
an hour Mr. Lister liked that society for its 
own sake . and liked it still better as a means 
of still enjoying that of Mrs. Scorrier. " x\nd 
it amuses her and may possibly bring about a 
match, Arthur," Cissy said to her husband, in 
extenuation of that long Yisit of Mr. Lister's, 



250 FALSE COLOURS. 

wliicli set all Danebury whispering and con- 
jecturing for a week. 

" If he comes in search of Isabelle I shall 
be very glad to see him ; but I won't have any 
fellow, old friend of yours or not, coming and 
sitting here for hours in this way without a 
definite aim." 

"I do assure you his presence gives me no 
pleasure," Cissy said, hopelessly. 

^' That's a pleasant thing for me to hear ; 
am I to infer, then, that it gives you 
pain?" 

'' No, not pain," Cissy said, in some confu- 
sion; " but I am not hardened to humiliations 
yet, and I do feel humiliated whenever I see 
him." And as soon as she had said it, Cissy 
was conscious that she had perpetrated another 
mistake. Arthur Scorrier, honest, frank, and 
true as he was himself, could neither quite 
understand nor quite aj)preciate that fme 
frankness of Cissy's, which made her confess 
to a feeling of humiliation and aw^kwardness in 
the presence of a man who had once been 
everything to her, and now w^as nothing. 



MISS VAEGRAYE NEARLY LANDS A FISH. 251 

What Mr. Scorrier told himself that he could 
neither understand nor appreciate was this, 
that Mr. Lister liked to come, and that Cissy 
could not be indifferent to his presence. 

They were all not exactly sailing under false 
colours, but deceiving themselves as to theii- 
motives . and one another, to a lesser degree, 
by their actions. Mr. Lister half succeeded in 
convincing himself that his existing regard for 
Cissy was the result more of mental than of 
heart interest in her. No other woman could 
have been to him what this one . who had 
snapped the chain, the broken links of which 
he still clung to . had been. No other woman 
could ever please him so much, or pain him so 
much, as she still had the power of doing. 
She would always be the fairest and dearest ; 
fairest in his eyes, dearest to his heart ; yet 
for all this tenacity of admiration and affec- 
tion, another might come to have the second 
place, and be fair and dear to him in a lesser 
degree. So he told himself, and so he told 
Mr. Blayne when he discussed the point with 
that gentleman. And, somehow, the thoughts 



252 FALSE COLOUIIS. 

of all who knew the story, turned to Isabelle, 
and she was regarded as very lucky. 

In the free easiness of that life in the 
country village it was no difficult thing for a 
healthy affection, hovv^ever slightly rooted, to 
grow and flourish. No one dared, in that 
household, to hint at the possibility of the 
mistress of it being the load-star which drew 
Mr. Lister into the midst of it so often. His 
manner to her w^as invariably the same . he 
was always grave in his way of addressing her, 
interested in wha^t she said, and sedulously 
attentive to her slightest wishes or w^ants. 
" And that's exactly what he ought to be ; 
what then is to cause you any feeling of 
awkwardness I can't imagine," Mr. Scorrier 
would say to his wife ; and he would add to 
himself that he hoped it was not a daAvning 
jealousy of her cousin ultimately winning 
Lister's love, which sometimes confused his 
wife. 

No one dared to hint at the possibility of the 
mistress of the house being the load-star which 
drew the lover there. They thought that it 



MISS VARGRAYE NEARLY LANDS A FISH. 253 

Yras the fair guest of it, rather, and Cissy 
dared not sa}- that she feared they T\-ere all 
mistaken. Mr. Lister was one of those men 
whose habit it is to be very devoted super- 
ficially to all women and girls who are 
jDleasant. He was a kind-hearted man, and 
not only kind-hearted, but kind-mannered. 
He had a trick of enthusiasm and of flattery, 
a way of seeming to think the one he was 
addressing understood him better than the rest 
of the world. He had also a habit of enforcing 
his views and arguments by administering 
gentle pressures to hands that were young and 
pretty. Somehow or other, women who liked 
him (and all women liked him) instead of 
resenting this last habit as a liberty, permitted 
it from Mr. Lister, described it to one another 
as " only his way," and still hoped that his 
way was more tender, and meant more to 
themselves than it did to any other. 

Given certain conditions, and certain results 
are sure to ensue. In this case the conditions 
were very favourable, if what the household 
thought was correct. A girl of a bright, 



254 FALSE COLOUES. 

sanguine temperament was brought away sud- 
denly from a round of constant and flattering 
excitement, and, with her heart unburdened, 
was thrown into frequent intercourse with one 
man, and one only. This man was well cal- 
culated to supply her with excitement of an 
even deeper and more flattering nature. There 
was none other by to counterbalance his charm 
in any vfay. It was made evident to her that 
the few who surrounded her believed him to be 
falling in love with her. What wonder that 
soon she was conscious, with a very happy 
consciousness, that she was in love with him ! 
What wonder that she believed that in being so 
she was doing well ! 

He had left Castlenau and come back to the 
Blaynes in these days of which I am writing, 
and he fastened and cemented a strong inti- 
macy between these two houses, which resulted 
in that sort of social festivity which does go on» 
with families in the country very often. They 
. . the Blaynes and Scorriers . made parties to 
see every place that was to be seen in the 
neighbourhood, and on these occasions, as 



MISS VARGEAVE NEARLY LANDS A FISH. 255 

Cissy resolutely kept with her husband Yrhen 
he was with them, and with Mrs. Blayne when 
he was not, Mr. Lister had little choice hut to 
devote himself to Isabelle. 

They were all on the bank of a lovely stream 
one afternoon, nominally trout-fishing, really 
enjoying existence in idleness. After the 
manner of loungers with the line, they had 
sauntered apart, solitary and silent, for some 
time. But at length a bend in the river, and 
a desire to divert his mind from Mrs. Scorrier, 
brought Mr. Lister close to Isabelle. As he 
came to the brink and sat dovrn by her, he saw 
her colour and look glad ; and he knew that 
she had no cause to be so, and he lacked the 
courage to go away out of the sight of the 
gladness that was so flattering to him. 

" Champagne in the open air has made Mrs. 
Blayne very sleepy," he said, as he seated 
himself. " I have been making myself delight- 
ful to her, and she refuses to be delighted ; 
poor Blayne is sitting by her to keep the wasps 
off while she slumbers ; it was a hideous spec- 
tacle to me, so I left them." 



256 FALSE COLOURS. 

"Why hideous to you, Mr. Lister? She 
isn't a pretty woman, asleep or awake, but it's 
kind of her husband to keep things from sting- 
ing her when he can." 

" He was a grand fellow once," Mr. Lister 
said, meditatively ; " but this marriage has 
contracted his mind most fearfully ; he has 
grown feeble, limp, everything that he would 
most have shrunk from growing when he made 
his mistake ; these uncongenial marriages re 
too degrading." 

He spoke quickly and warmly. Isabelle, Y»^ho 
was not keenly interested about the Blaynes, 
looked at him and wondered, but did not 
speak. 

"When I see a man make one of such a 
sort," he went on, "I feel that in a worldly 
point of view he is done for altogether; he can 
never, with that inner degradation working in 
him, imagine or achieve anything really true 
and good. But when I see a woman make 

it " he stopped, and his eyes went over 

the river where Cissy sat by her husband, 
reading. 



MISS YARGRAVE NEARLY LANDS A FISH. 257 

''When you see a woman make it, what 
then?" Isabelle asked, following the direction 
of his glance with an uncomfortable sensation 
of there being something which she could not 
fathom. 

''What then?" she repeated, as the Scor- 
riers rose and moved out of sight, and her 
companion's eyes travelled slowly back to her. 

They travelled slowly, but they rested long 
on her face. She Avas very pretty, with that 
fair one-coloured tone of beauty over hair and 
eyes and comj)lexion, which only the cultivated 
eye can appreciate. She was very pretty, and 
his manner grew so much warmer than his 
heart towards her. 

"Why then I do not curse her, but my con- 
tempt in such a case would be worse; don't 
you think so?" Then he recollected that she 
knew nothing of the Baden business and his 
long pursuit of it; and he added, "I suppose 
we may accept your cousin as an example of 
the other side . the congenial marriage . may 
we not?" This he said although he thought it 
must be anything but a congenial marriage. 

VOL. II. s 



258 FALSE COLOURS. 

Eut in such matters the most honourable men 
will put leading questions that they would de- 
nounce another as mean and false for asking. 

*'0h, I suppose so," Isahelie said, with care- 
less impatience. She was expecting other 
words from Mr. Lister just then. Those which 
he might utter respecting her cousin she would 
pass over as j)reliminary idle ones. 

''What brought it about . that marriage? 
I mean, I should have thought that Mr. Scor- 
rier's ways of life would not have brought him 
into collision with your cousin in such a way 
as to make her think of marrying him." He 
could hardly restrain his eagerness as he put 
this suggestive question. 

"The sad sea-waves as seen from St. Michael's 
Mount brought it about, I believe," Isabelle 
said, in the careless way in which people are 
:apt to dash in the outline of an effective de- 
scriptive x>icture of the motives and means 
which have actuated their friends ; " she re- 
fused him two or three times, I think, but he 
persevered; he was not afflicted with a faint 
heart, so he won his fair lady." 



MISS VARGRA^-E NEARLY LANDS A FISH. 259 

" i\.nd now she makes the best of it,"' Mr. 
Lister said. 

*' Makes the best of it ! she's as happy as 
a woman can be," Isabelle answered, quickl}-. 
His tone had roused her to a sense of the 
imprudence of which she had been guilty in 
trying to be witty on the subject of Cissy and 
Cissy's choice. "What makes you say such 
things, Mr. Lister?" she asked. "Arthur 
Scorrier is not a man to be just tolerated and 
made the best of ! " 

"Certainly he is not . with such a wife as 
he has got." 

"But I meant independently of Cissy . by 
his wife herself, in fact. Are j'ou like the rest 
of the world, Mr. Lister, going to fall down 
before Mrs. Scorrier?" 

The girl asked it in a half coquettish . con- 
scious of her own beauty . way, that called 
forth what it was designed to call forth, a com- 
l^liment to herself, namely, . 

"I am not going to fall down before any one 
else while I can do so before you," he said. 

"Look, I have got a bite," Isabelle said. 



260 FALSE COLOUES. 

blushing . and she thought at this juncture 
that she had got a very large bite indeed. 

'' I will help you to land your fish." He was 
looking tender and interested, and she did not 
know that it was all about Cissy. As he 
spoke he put his hand over hers on the rod, and 
held it there while he played a trout, about the 
size of a sprat, cleverly for a minute. At the end 
of that minute, and as they stood thus, Arthur 
Scorrier and Cissy came sauntering towards 
them. "Just a moment too soon," Isabelle 
thought. 



OLD WOUNDS RE-OPENED. 261 



CHAPTEE XV. 



OLD WOUNDS EE-OPENED. 



""He shall not come here hanging about after 
her, and holding her hand, and humbugging 
her any longer. I'm her temporary guardian, 
and whether he means anything or nothing, I 
will know what he does mean soon." 

Arthur Seorrier said this on the evening of 
the day they had spent by the trout-stream, 
when Isabelle had so nearly, as she thought, 
landed her big fish. He was standing in his 
dressing-room, waiting for his wife to finish 
off the lace and trinket details to a very 
pretty costume, and go down to dinner with 
him. He spoke impatiently, for he fancied he 
detected in Cissv an unwillingness to have Mr. 



262 FALSE COLOURS. 

Lister's intentions with regard to Isabelle forced 
into the light. 

'^ Don't you think I'm right, Cissy?" 

"Quite right in theory, but I fear the prac- 
tice of it ; and, indeed, Arthur, I think you 
may safely leave Isabelle in her own hands in 
this case. Besides, how can you tell him he 
ought to marry her just because he happened 
to be heliDing her with that trout?" 

"Isabelle had no business to let him go so 
far." 

"Now that's unjust to Isabelle: a girl can't 
help herself very often. Men don't say ' Will 
you marry me ' all at once, and if they get a 
check at starting, it may send them off alto- 
gether." 

"I wish he would go off altogether : asking 
him here again to-night was a mistake." 

"Isabelle begged me to do it, and I can't 
bear to throw any obstacle in her path; she 
likes him very much." 

"And you think he likes her?" 

"I hope he likes her," Cissy said, coming 
from her own room, perfectly well-dressed, and 



OLD WOUNDS RE-OPENED. 26'S 

perfectly composed, ready to meet her hus- 
band's eyes miflinchingly as she answered what 
she foresaw would be his next question. 

.'You hope he likes her . but what do you 
think, dear?" 

.'I think he likes me best still," she said, 
l)ravely. ""I can't help it, Arthur." 

''But you should not have invited him to- 
day, my darling." 

"I was in a cleft stick: Isabelle was in a 
great state of agitation about that untimely 
interruption of ours, as she persisted in think- 
ing it; and when I told her that I didn't be- 
lieve our staying away would have made any 
difference, she said she sometimes thought I 
should not like to see her married to Mr. 
Lister; and she Avas right. I would never 
hold up a finger or move an inch to stop his 
doing so . but I should not like to see him 
married to my cousin." 

'' Then you care for him still," Arthur Scor- 
rier said, bitterly. 

" No, I don't ; this is one of the things I 
forewarned you that you would have to endure 



264 FALSE COLOURS. 

if you married me. I am an exacting woman, 
a vain, weak woman perhaps, and I could not 
bear to see what was wholly mine for so long, 
given wholly to another woman in my pre- 
sence; and as I love Isabelle, I shouldn't 
be happy to see her not wholly loved. I 
want him to go away out of my life again, 
Arthur." 

*' And yet you foster his apparent pursuit of 
Isabelle ! you're as inconsistent as you can be, 
Cissy." 

'^No, I'm not, if you look at my conduct 
properly. I want that to be quite honest . it 
shall be quite honest towards them both. If 
to marry her he wants help from me, he shall 
have help from me : if to win him she needs 
my aid, she shall have my aid ; all the same I 
don't like giving it to either, for the reasons I 
have just given you." 

As the husband and wife crossed the landing 
on their way down stairs, Isabelle opened her 
bedroom door. 

" Cissy, come here ; I want you." 

" Not ready yet ! " Mrs. Scorrier went back 



OLD WOUNDS RE-OPENED. 265 

at ouce and portrayed hurry in order to avoid a 
tete-a-tete with her cousin. 

" No, not quite ; how's my hair ?" 

"Lovely." 

" Is it clouded enough over the forehead ? " 

" To look well, or to please Mr. Lister, w^hicli 
do you mean ?" Cissy said, coldl3\ 

" Well, to please Mr. Lister . if it pleases 
him it is sure to look well. Don't look 
scornful. Cissy ; I'm caught at last, really 
and truly." 

"But how if he is not caught?" 

" Cissy, I'm afraid the wish is father to that 
suggestion. I think he is ; I hope he is. You 
won't stand in my way, will you?" 

"I stand in your way!" Mrs. Scorrier said, 
proudly. " Did I ever do that when I was free 
to do it ? and if I were free to do it now, I 
would not stand in j^om- way with Mr. Lister." 

" Have you ever known him before, Cissy ?" 
the girl asked, suddenly. Some words that he 
had said while sitting by the river that day 
flashed back upon her mind, and threw a pain- 
ful light there as Cissy spoke. 



266 FALSE COLOURS. 

"Yes, I have known him before; but that 
has nothing to do with now. Come down to 
dinner. Arthur is cross enough ah-eady at my 
having asked Mr. Lister ; I won't have him put 
out more by being kept waiting." 

"You will be very nice to-night, won't you, 
Cissy?" the girl said, coaxingly, as they went 
down stairs together. '' I'm in earnest now, 
I'm not flirting ; make up for your inopportune 
appearance by the river." 

'' Take care that he is not flirting," Cissy 
said, warningly. Then she blamed herself for 
saying it, " for how," she asked herself, " can 
a girl take care in such cases?" And she 
pitied her cousin and herself too as she reflected 
that, do what she would in this matter, it could 
not end well. 

The clouds seemed to be gathering about her. 
When she went into the drawing-room she found 
Arthur eagerly protesting against something, 
and his mother as eagerly combating his pro- 
testations. " Here, Cissy," he said, calling his 
wife to his aid, '' my mother declares she must 
leave us to-morrow." 



OLD WOUNDS RE-OPEXED. 267 

'^ No," Cissy said, going ui3 and leaning over 
the back of Mrs. Scorrier's chair, " she must 
not do that, or I shall half think what every 
one else will wholly think, that I haven't behaved 
weU to her." 

The old lady touched the bright, beaming 
face held down towards her with one hand, and 
with the other she took Arthur's. 

" My children, you must not ask me to stay," 
she said, in a trembling voice ; '' an old wound 
has been re-opened to-day." 

" Stay here, and we will heal it," Cissy said, 
promptly. '" Those snobs at Glene have morti- 
lied you in some way." 

"It can never be healed, and for Heaven's 
sake don't call him a snob," Mrs. Scorrier said. 
She was fairly crying now, and quite oblivious 
of the entrance into the room of Mr. Lister. 

'' They are snobs if they have mortified you," 
Cissy went on, boldly. 

" Mr. Hepburn did not even see me," old Mrs. 
Scorrier whispered. 

" Did you see him *?" 

An expression that was half pain, half sor- 



268 FALSE COLOUHS. 

row, flashed across his mother's face as Arthur 
asked this. It passed in a moment, and she 
answered still in a whisper, 

" Yes ; but jon will never let him know that 
I saw him, Arthur, will you ? I have a reason 
for asking this." Then dinner was announced, 
and Arthur had no time either to give the 
promise, or to ask why it was required of 
him. 

True to her intentions as sketched out and 
announced by herself upstairs. Cissy Scorrier 
managed to secure an opportunity equal to the 
one she had innocently interrupted for Mr. Lis- 
ter. As often happened, Arthur was called out 
to see a patient. But as did not often happen, 
that patient was no less a person than the 
" Squire's lady," as Mrs. Hepburn was called in 
Danebury. " Mrs. Hepburn is taken suddenly 
and dangerousl}' ill; come without delay." 
These were the words, in Mr. Hepburn's writing, 
which summoned him to Glene. While he was 
away his mother went wp to i)ack, and Cissy 
declared that she " must go and help her." So 
Isabelle and Mr. Lister were alone again. The 



OLD WOUNDS EE-OPENED. 269 

opportunity was his, and lie seemed in no liiuTy 
to use it. 

Still the scene and the situation were far 
from being disagreeable to him. The girl was 
very pretty and very taking, and though he did 
not want her for his wife, and though he very 
much wanted another woman for his wife, her 
prettiness and her taking manner were very pa- 
tent to him. As she sat in a beautifully soft 
subdued light, in a warm amber-coloured di'ess, 
that harmonized wonderfully with her hair and 
eyes, he felt that he would like to talk aesthetics 
with her. 

But Isabelle would not talk aesthetics with 
him. She insisted on being lucid and 2^1'osaic 
in her remarks and answers, for Cissy's sugges- 
tion that " he might be flu*ting, whatever she 
(Isabelle) was," had startled her. ''Enough 
for any true, grand-minded woman to be loved 
nobly, wherever the nobly-loving may be, and 
however long he may stay away from her ! No ; 
I don't think it anything like enough ; it wouldn't 
be for me, I know that ; but then, I haven't a 
grand mind." 



270 FALSE COLOURS. 

He did not think for one moment that she 
had a grand mind, or any mind at all, for the 
matter of that. Still, he had to pass the even- 
ing with her. So he impulsively pressed her 
hand again, this time over the tatting-needle, 
instead of over the fishing-rod, and told her that 
few people would discover "what she was," and 
gave her to understand that he had discovered, 
and liked the discovery. All this went on for 
some time, and was agreeahle enough. But 
dissertations on her character and nature could 
not he construed into an offer of marriage. 
Then Cissy came hack, and Isabelle blushed as 
she felt that the opportunity had been given 
and was gone. 

Helping old Mrs. Scorrier to pack had not 
been a pleasant pastime to the harassed wife. 
The poor old lady had cried quietly the whole 
time, cried in that sad soft way for which there 
is no cure and no comfort. In answer to all 
Cissy's entreaties to be told what had occurred, 
she made but one answer . "An old wound has 
been re-opened, and it is bleeding cruelly, my 
dear." 



OLD WOUNDS RE-OPENED. 271 

''Can't I staimcli it?" Ciss}^ asked. And 
her mother-in-law shook her head. 

'' Who can? '' 

''God only." And then the tears flowed 
on quietly as before. 

Late that night they flowed more freely 
still. Arthur came hack from Glene at twelve, 
with the tidings that there was a son and 
heir horn prematurely. 

" Will the child live?" his mother asked, 
in a low voice ; and he said, hopefully, 

" Yes ; I think so ; he is crying his heart 
out now, poor old fellow, and has confessed 
to me that he feels it to be his own fault ; he 
rowed his wife this afternoon about something, 
and she got ill directly." 

" Moral . never row your wife," Cissy said, 
laughing. " Well, I hope the baby will live. 
Poor Amelia ! her child will be the one bright 
speck in the life of the mistress of Glene : 
don't you hope it will live, mother dear ?" 

But Mrs. Scorrier had gone away quietly 
while Cissy was speaking, and by this time 
was kneeling down, praying fervently for the 



272 FALSE COLOURS. 

tender child-life that was hanging by a hair. 
" Spare him, and make him a comfort and a 
joy to them, as mine has been to me ; but the 
son of the bondwoman may not be heir with 
the son of the free . the son of the bond- 
woman may not be heir with the son of the 
free." So she cried, and prayed, and quoted 
through the long hours of the night. 

And up at Glene, in a room whose locked 
door screened him from intrusion, Mr. Hep- 
burn sat sorrowing as no father should sorrow 
on the birthday of his child, especially of his 
first-born. 

He was neither praying nor weeping ; he 
was only enduring such poignant misery as he 
had not endured for years. ^' My sin has 
found me out, and Arthur will turn from 
me," he moaned to himself at intervals. 



END OF VOL. II. 
FALSE COLOURS, 



CHAPTER I. 

SON AND HEIR. 

Mrs. Hepburn was the mother of as weak and 
wailing a son and heir as hopes were ever 
huilt upon. His advent into the world had 
been heralded by as heavy a domestic storm as 
had ever burst over Glene. On the day before 
his birth, Amelia had been feeling especially be- 
neficent, and had, in the brimming over of her 
kindness, lured old Mrs. Scorrier within her 
border. The master of the house was safelj^ 
away at Bedford for an indefinite period, that 
would, she felt sure, extend until evening. On 
her repeatedly assuring old Mrs. Scorrier that 
this conviction as to Mr. Hepburn's absence 
was a true one, that lady got into the carriage, 
from which she had been seen on the high road 

VOL. III. B 



2 FALSE COLOURS. 

by Mrs. Hepburn, and was conveyed safely to 
Glene. 

It was not a pleasant thing, Mrs. Scorrier 
found, as soon as she got there, to be in that 
house secretly. In imagination she had often 
been at Glene, revelling in its beauties, inter- 
ested in everything with which she could iden- 
tify its "noble owner," as she called him in her 
mind. But in the flesh she could neither revel 
nor be interested. She could only feel vaguely 
cowed and regretful, vaguely frightened and 
nervous, as she followed through the house in 
the wake of Amelia. 

" There is no portrait of Mr. Hepburn ? " she 
said, inquiringly, as she wandered through the 
picture gallery. 

"No, none," said Amelia; "it's one of his 
prejudices not to have his likeness taken in any 
way." 

Mrs. Scorrier sighed. She remembered that 
it had been one of Mr. Scorrier' s prejudices. 

"It's a pity rather, that he should not have 
it taken, to be hung up here with the other 
owners of Glene," Mrs. Hepburn said. "His 
son, if he ever has one, wiU be robbed of the 



SON AND HEIR. 8 

pleasure of pointing out his' father on these 
walls ; and it would be a pleasure, for my hus- 
band is a very fine-looking man." 

" Is he like an}' of these gentlemen ?" Mrs. 
Scorrier asked. 

"No . yes, he is though," Amelia said, 
hesitatingly. " I get an idea of him sometimes 
when I look at this one ;" and she pointed to a 
gentleman in a doublet and ruff, with an egg- 
shaped face and oval beard. " That is Archi- 
bald Hepburn ; he was a great friend of James 
the Second's, and " 

** Is he like the present Mr. Hepburn?" Mrs. 
Scorrier asked, with the vague fear strengthen- 
ing within her. 

*'Yes," Amelia said, laughing. "Mr. Hep- 
burn does not like to hear me say it ; but he is. 
Archibald Hepburn was not the most respectable 
of his ancestors. Here, at Glene, he lived more 
like a Grand Turk than a Christian gentleman. 
There's a drop of Hepburn blood in a good 
many of the Danebmy village families up to this 
day, and it shocks my husband's high sense of 
morahty, and makes him dislike the resem- 
blance. 



4 FALSE COLOURS. 

"He has a high sense of morality," Mrs. 
Scorrier said, softly. " I always think of him, 
though I never saw him, as one of the best of 
men." 

" So he is one of the best of men," Mrs. 
Hepburn said, indifferently ; " rather hard with 
his goodness, as the best of men are apt to be. 
I shock him sometimes by mentioning dreadful 
things carelessly. Bayswater is not the place 
where unconscious innocence can be cultivated 
successfully ; he himself is such a knight of 
purity that he can't deal gently with the erring." 

Amelia said all this with a good deal of wifely 
pride. Glene was dull, and Mr. Hepburn was 
often very wearisome ; but his unimpeachable 
morality put him on a pedestal before other 
people, and gave him a decided stand-point 
which he would otherwise have lacked. 

** He can't deal gently with the erring," she 
repeated, as if she was mentioning some most 
commendable trait in his character. 

'* He should . they deal so hardly with them- 
selves sometimes," Mrs. Scorrier said, plain- 
tively ; and then she glanced again at Archibald 
Hepburn, and wondered whether her brain was 



SON AND HEIR. 

distraught, or whether there really was any 
resemblance between that painted face and the 
dead one she had loved so well. Speculating on 
this, she got warm and tearful, and as warmth 
and tearfulness do not improve the feminine 
face, even in youth, it may easily be conceived 
that Mrs. Scorrier in distress could scarcely be 
the object of admiring commiseration. 

" Now, come into my room, and have a cup 
of tea," Mrs. Hepburn said, anxious to termi- 
nate the tearful progress through the picture 
gallery. *' Is Glene as j)retty a place as you 
fancied it ? I hope some day to see you here 
more pleasantly, when Mr. Hepburn " 

She stopped abruptly, paralyzed almost as 
Bluebeard's wife must have been when she felt 
that the moment of her detection was at hand. 
As she named him the door opened, and Mr. 
Hepburn himself stood in the space. 

" I have transacted my business at Eedford 
in a less fatiguing way ; I have written a note 
instead of going there," he said, pleasantly. 

Then he came a step or two into the gallery, 
and bowed to Mrs. Scorrier, not knowing in the 
least who she was ; and then, before an intro- 



6 FALSE COLOURS. 

duction could be effected, he remembered an 
important admonition he had to give a person, 
and turned back out of the gallery to give it, 
leaving his wife perplexed, and Mrs. Scorrier 
brain-struck, mind-struck, heart-struck. 

" I am sorry Mr. Hepburn should have come 
back in such a way; I hate surprises," Amelia 
said, in an annoyed tone, not noticing Mrs. 
Scorrier in her wrath. ^' I knew you didn't 
wish to meet him, or he didn't wish to meet 
you, or something of the sort, and now I have 
meddled and got myself into a scrape." 

In spite of her height and her fine well 
developed figure, Mrs. Hepburn looked so small 
as she spoke, so fractious, and jpowerless ! She 
turned querulously towards that door of the 
gallery through which Mr. Hepburn had vanish- 
ed, and so the expression of Mrs. Scorrier's face 
was freed from observation. 

Such an agonized, distracted expression it 
was that flashed up and took possession of that 
usually placid face when the master came in and 
gave his little conventional explanation of his 
premature appearance on the home boards ; such 
a bewildered, half-maddened, hunted, deceived 



SON AND HEIR. 7 

look stamped itself on the patient features that 
had been trained to bear and forbear so long ! 
For a moment or two, vrhile the young wife was 
lamenting that her old husband should have 
returned in this way, to her discomfiture, the 
guest, who was there without his leave and 
against his will, stared at him as though she 
had been, and felt herself to be, both his con- 
queror and his slave. For in the master of 
Glene, before whose high morality her head had 
been bowed in abasement for so many years ; 
in the husband of this lady by her side, who 
had been lamenting that the son she might bear 
him would have no portrait of his father to 
point to with pride, . in this chamjoion of untar- 
nished integrity, she recognized the lover of her 
youth, the father of poor Arthur ! 

The thought of him saved her from betraying 
herself. With a strong effort she recovered her 
voice, and collected her faculties, and made the 
" dread of Mr. Hepburn's annoyance" the screen 
to hide the want of that composure of manner 
which she could not recover. 

** I will go at once," she said, with such a 
one of decision that Amelia was almost startled. 



8 FALSE COLOUES. 

" I am rightly punished for haying come here 
without my son's knowledge." 

" But why? how? " Amelia asked. " If you 
go out at the little side-door from his room, Mr. 
Hepburn won't meet you again ; or shall I send 
you home in my carriage ? ' ' 

She made the offer in a tone that said as 
plainly as possible, *' Pray don't put me to 
inconvenience by accepting it;" so Mrs. Scor- 
rier relieved her by rejecting it at once. 

" Let me get away through your little side- 
door ; yes, any way . that will do." 

Mrs. Scorrier found herself saying these 
words, which sounded in her ears as if they had 
not proceeded from her own mouth ; found her- 
self going out at the side-door and down some 
steps ; found herself walking, now rapidly, now 
slowly, along the ground that belonged to Ar- 
thur's father, and on which she was an alien 
and an intruder. 

It is not an easy task to describe what this 
woman felt as she staggered along under the 
weight of this newly-adjusted burden, under 
the smarting, cruel pain of this lately-given 
blow. It is, indeed, a task so difficult that I 



SON AND HEIR. 9 

will only state the circumstances, and leave 
those who can feel to imagine how they must 
have affected her. 

The two ideals of her life had heen destroyed. 
The faith which had heen hers for thirty years 
had heen violently uprooted in a moment. As 
she tottered along, longing to hide herself from 
the light of day, her injuries and her credulities 
formed a long array, and paraded themselves 
hefore her. And viewing her life with scorn 
and sad hopelessness, she could but review it 
with bitter clear-sightedness. She saw herself 
once more a girl, as she was in her innocence, 
in the days of her happy unconscious innocence 
in her father's house. Peace and goodwill pre- 
sided there, and if vulgarity was enthroned 
with them, at least it was virtuous vulgarity, 
which never caused a blush. Then came the 
quick change, the love, the fear, and the final 
flight with the man who called himself Scorrier. 
Then the year of love and happiness flashed 
before her eyes. That year went by so rapidly 
that (in spite of often-recurring disappointments 
connected with the marriage he always promised 
her) she could not be unhappy. Once more she 



10 FALSE COLOURS. 

woke to the morning of his departure to consult 
his lawyers ; once more she lived through the 
dull monotony of the days during which no 
tidings of him reached her ; once more her heart 
died within her in a sorrowful agony of love and 
despair as she recalled the words in which she 
read that he was drowned. 

She was old and stout now. All remains of 
beauty had vanished from her face and form. 
But there was something almost grandly tragic 
in the way in which she presently stood motion- 
less, wrestling with a demon of revenge. He 
should be punished for the bitter mockery of 
those mourning years ; he should feel the heart- 
sickening silence which she had been made to 
feel ; he should bear his portion of the grief and 
remorse as she had borne hers ; he should be 
shown in his true colours as seducer, liar, cow- 
ard ; he should be . spared if it was in her 
power to spare him. 

The gentler spirit had prevailed, and the 
demon of revenge had been worsted. But the 
woman in whom the struggle had taken place 
walked back to her son's house with a heart as 
heavy and broken as her step. 



SON AND HEIR. 11 

The bitter mockery of those many mourning 
years ! How the wraiths of them kept on coming 
before her, showing her all she had done in 
them, reminding her of how faithfully she had 
loved and grieved. Those hours spent by his 
grave, praying for his soul, praying that he 
might be forgiven for all eternity the wrong he 
had done her through all time. Those wreaths 
of immortelles, those sad sounds she had heard 
from the sea, those weary, hoj)eless weepings. 
All these had been won from her . forced upon 
her, given by her to a lie, and to a myth. 

It was such double treachery, such foul deceit, 
which she now was compelled to recognize. At 
one fell blow her two ideals were smashed to 
pieces . the lover who had died young, and 
whom she had invested in her own mind with 
the intention of repairing the evil he had done 
her, and the lofty-minded fi-iend who had shrunk 
from all contact with her, because she had been 
the cause and the partner of his friend's frailty. 
These images of love and rectitude were utterly 
overthrown, and in these first moments of their 
overthrow there seemed to be nothing left to her 
in the world to which she could cling. 



12 FALSE COLOURS. 

Those long years of quiet endurance of guilt- 
lessness and patient endeavour to live out the 
memory of her lost reputation ! How the wraiths 
of them mocked her now and again, as she 
stumbled along on her homeward path. She 
had been a credulous fool, instead of a fond, 
faithful mourner. She had respected a sham, 
and she had lamented a sham ; and this day 
the man who had tricked her into doing both 
things had stood revealed before her, pros- 
perous and happy, the husband of another 
woman. 

The husband of another woman, and in the 
sight of heaven she was his wife ! She, and 
not that other woman who bore his name, and 
lived honoured in his house, had the first right 
to him. Her heart went back to the old days 
when it had been given to him, to the one 
happy year during which he had seemed to 
prize the gift, to the time when he had it in his 
power to make reparation to her. He had been 
young and handsome, gallant -looking, "such a 
man as any woman might love," she had often 
told herself proudly then. How he was de- 
graded now by his false pretensions, by his 



SON AND HEIR. 13 

criminal concealment, by his cowardliness gene- 
rally. 

Had be recognized her ? Tbis question sbe 
asked herself over and over again during that 
terrible walk. Had be recognized her and 
feared her, that be bad turned away so quickly ? 
Sbe could give herself no satisfactory answer; 
sbe could only hope and conjecture, and she 
did, after the manner of women, bojDe and 
conjecture such irreconcilable things. 

She trusted that he bad known her ; that he 
had felt bumbled, and conscience-stricken, and 
terribly afi'aid before her. It was only good 
and well that he should quake in spirit, in dread 
of the disclosures she might make. He de- 
served to suffer any suffering which she could 
inflict upon him. Had he not wronged her to 
such a degree as woman was never wronged 
before by one whom sbe trusted ? Had he not 
tricked her into tears that need never have been 
shed, into a mourning that need never have 
been made ? Had he not woven about her such 
a web of delusions that she could never hope 
to break through it, and live and move fairly 
and clearly again ? Had be not done all this. 



14 FALSE COLOURS. 

and could she, remembering it all, spare him ? 
It was a painfully difficult question for her to 
answer. A terribly difficult question to con- 
sider impartially in this early hour of her 
anger. She would try to do what was best. 
She would forego every selfish consideration, 
and only think of what would be well for 
Arthur . the son whom she had trained to love 
the ideal father, and who must, if the truth 
were known, despise the real one. 

When she reached her son's house, she got 
herseK away to her own room vdthout delay or 
interruption from any one. Then she sat down 
and thought still more about it . thought more 
coherently and connectedly than she had been 
able to do while she was walking home. 

For thirty years she had worn widow's 
weeds for this man who still lived. For thirty 
years she had esteemed a person who had 
never existed. It was a queer complication. 
The grave, the mourning, the esteem, the 
sense of her own unworthiness before Mr. 
Hepburn, none of these things had any foun- 
dation in fact. 

The poor old lady, without knowing it, must 



SON AND HEIR. 15 

have been in much the same frame of mind in 
which that dark luminary was, when he wrote : 

"All that we see or seem, 
Is a dream within a dream." 

It was so hard for her to gi-asp facts which 
combined to upset all the credulity and all the 
teaching of her life. 

Meanwhile, at Glene, a terrible domestic 
storm gathered and burst. Mr. Hepburn had 
not recognized in the plump, rosy old lady, 
standing by the side of his young wife, the love 
of his youth . the woman he had been hiding 
from so long. He had turned away really and 
truly because he had a reason for turning away, 
not because he desired to avoid her. No qualm 
bf fear or conscience assailed him. There was 
no trace left of the loving, lovely girl he had 
left, in the old lady before him. 

But when he met his wife an hour after, it 
did occur to him to ask her the meaning of 
the appearance of this stranger. 

"It was Mrs. Scorrier," she said, boldly. 
" I thought you were going to be out till even- 
ing, and that it w^ould be a good opportunity 
of showing her the house without offending 



16 FALSE COLOURS. 

you with the sight of her . though why you 
disliked meeting that poor harmless " 

"You have dared to disobey me!" He 
almost roared these words at her, forgetting all 
his usual courtesy of manner, and approaching 
her with a fierceness that made her fear for 
one terrible moment that he was going to strike 
her. " You have dared to disobey me ! you 
have done what will cause you grief to your 
life's end." 

" What have I done ? oh, Mr. Hepburn, 
don't look at me so ; you are so fond of her 
son that I thought, I thought " 

She stopped, unable to tell him what she 
had thought. Unable to check a trembling 
which had seized her. Unable to prevent most 
painful suspicions entering her mind. 

He did not tell her what she had done. He 
did not tell her who that woman was. He did 
not notice her terrors and agitation. What he 
did do was to walk about the room, foreboding ^ 
evil in broken sentences, and sometimes watch- 
ing Amelia as if she had been a disobedient 
child. By-and-by she retorted, roused herself 
to reply to and sting him by a series of sharp 



SON AND HEIR. 17 

Burmises, the bare possibility of which being 
true made her fee] very heart-sore and ill. 
" I love my reputation, even if I don't love 
you, as you hint," she said at last ; *' and now 
I believe that to be in danger. I believe this 
Mrs. Scorrier knows something about you . 
that you have a first wife living perhaps.'* 

When his wife said that, Mr. Hepburn felt 
that it would be a better thing to be a biga- 
mist even, than to be what he felt himself. 

They had a miserable evening ; for, in their 
wrath, and fear, and dread, they had said many 
sharp and cruel things to each other. But a 
stop was put to their wrangling when Amelia 
was taken very ill, and Arthur Scorrier was 
sent for. 

It bowed the father's heart with grief, and 
his head with shame, when, after a short 
interval of agony and solitude, his eldest son 
came and announced to him the j)remature 
birth of an heir to Glene. 

He had been very false, very base and mean, 
very cowardly and unmanly, in planning and 
carrying out that system of deception which 
had for thirty years been practised success- 

VOL. III. 



18 FALSE COLOURS. 

fully. But he was punished for it now, with 
as heavy a punishment as one human being 
even can desire to see inflicted upon another. 
When once he had made himself dead to the 
woman who had known him as Scorrier, it had 
seemed to him that there was no going back, 
that no repentance and attempted amend- 
ment of the false step could be of any avail. 
And for several years he did not very earnestly 
desire to alter what he considered unalterable. 
But when he made himself known to Arthur in 
the guise of his father's friend, his punish- 
ment commenced. For he soon learnt to 
love the boy, and the boy loved him, and his 
heart yearned towards his son, and throbbed 
with renewed tenderness towards that son's 
mother. But he had made her mourn for 
him as dead by means of a lie too long for 
him to go back and show himself to her in 
his true colours. Moreover, he had built up 
for himself such a character for honourable 
aversion to the follies of young men, . such a 
rej)utation for high-minded morality, and Chris- 
tian virtue, that he did not like to raze it to 
the ground by unveiling the peccadiloes of his 



SON AND HEIK. 19 

earlier manhood. So the evil had gro^vn day 
hy day, year by year, until it had assumed 
proportions that threatened to crush him^ 
should it ever be discovered. 

And it was threatened with discovery now, 
It was not in the heart of any woman to 
endure such a wrong as he had inflicted in 
silence. She would denounce him, and he 
would go down to the grave dishonoured among 
men, and despised by Arthur. And looking 
at his acts, and not seeing any remorse, no 
man would believe in his repentance. 

" The son of the bond-woman may not be 
heir with the son of the free." He quoted the 
same words which fell from her lips in shame 
later that night, when she heard the tidings. 
" But Arthur, my son ! my son ! dearer to me 
than this child of my old age will ever be, I 
will repair the wrong to you." In the confu- 
sion of his mind he thought that money could 
do it. 



20 FALSE COLOURS. 



CHAPTEE II. 

IN PERIL. 

The next day old Mrs. Scorrier, as I must 
still call her in this history, went back to 
Penzance, and Mr. Hepburn knew that she 
had done so without making a sign when he 
met Arthur. For Arthur was the same as 
ever, the well-reputed impostor told himself, 
with a sigh of such intense relief as proved to 
himself even that he had passed a night of 
mortal dread. 

If he had passed a night of mortal dread, poor 
old Mrs. Scorrier had passed a night in which 
the cruelty of the case had forced itself upon 
her consideration crushingly. When once she 
had made up her mind that, apart from all 
other motives, she must spare Arthur's father 
for Arthur's sake, she quickly resolved upon a 
line of action. She would spare him, she 
would remove herself from his vicinity, she 



IN PERIL. 21 

would never stab him through this younger 
woman, who had the legal right to him and 
to his name. But she could not live any- 
longer on his bounty ; on this she was re- 
solved. It would be better to go back and ask 
for a roof to cover her and for bread to eat 
from the family who had cast her off, if 
Arthur could not sujDport her, than go on 
accepting this silence-money as she would feel 
it to be now. 

Her money was vested in a west of England 
bank, and Arthur knew her business better 
than she did herself. It would be necessary 
therefore to offer some explanation to Arthur 
about her Quixotic intention of refusing to 
take the interest as usual. This explanation 
she attemj)ted to give in her farewell interview 
with her son. He introduced the subject 
almost by saying . 

** I shall have to come upon you for a 
hundred pounds in a few days, mother; my 
expenses have got ahead of my receipts lately, 
and I'm stumped for ready money." 

** Oh, Arthur ! " she gasped. 

'* Don't look so shocked about it ; Cissy and 



22 FALSE COLOURS. 

I are going to retrench and do all sorts of 
economical things presently, and we shall be 
as right as possible next year ; but just in the 
meantime we shall find it tight work." 

** But I don't understand how you can so 
soon have got into difficulties ; you know that 
I have I would give you, but " 

He looked vexed, but he tried to speak and 
laugh carelessly as he answered : 

*' Don't preach, mother dear ; I acknow- 
ledge I've been going on a wrong plan . sail- 
ing under falsely prosperous colours for the 
sake of increasing the practice ; the wedding- 
trip dipped into a good round sum, and those 
Florentine mosaics " 

" You ought to have been a millionnaire to 
be justified in getting such things," Mrs. Scor- 
rier said, with as near an approach to severity 
as she was capable of. Then she remembered 
that the first-born son of the owner of Glene 
ought to be in a position to gratify such tastes, 
and she softened and humbled herself before 
him. 

" My poor dear boy, don't think I blame 
you, but do be a little careful, and don't hide 



IN PERIL. 23 

. 

your money -troubles from your wife; as for the 
hundred pounds, you shall have it at once.*' 
During this brief talk with Arthur she had 
banished the resolve in which she had taken 
comfort . the resolve to return with scorn the 
price-money her false lover had paid to her. 
To do so would have been soothing to the out- 
raged heart and pride. But both her heart 
and pride were in subjection to her son. For 
his sake she could continue to accept what 
would have debased her in her own estimation 
had Arthur's well-being not been in question. 
For his sake she could continue to take silently 
what Mr. Hepburn had deemed a fair equiva- 
lent to that which he had cost her. 

It can easily be understood how hateful 
Penzance and all the associations of Penzance 
were to her mind now. There would no longer 
be a solemn solace in the roaring of the sea. 
There would no longer be comfort in that 
weekly visit to the grave. " That weekly 
visit." What was she thinking about? A 
stranger slept in it, and she would never visit 
it again. Above all, there would no longer be 
the purely feminine pleasure in talking about 



24 FALSE COLOURS. 

the dear deceased which she had taken when 
discussing things past and jDresent with her 
quiet respectable old friends. 

Still for all this she determined that she 
would stay on and endure at Penzance. She 
would not give rise to wonder and doubt in the 
minds of the few who would wonder and doubt 
about her, by removing from a place to which 
she had always declared herself rooted. Besides, 
where could she go to improve the position ? 
She could not have a home near her son while 
her son had a home near his father. She 
could not go back to the Wilmots now that she 
knew herself in truth to be nothing more than 
a cast-off pensioned mistress. And she could 
not pitch her tent in a strange place without 
assigning a reason for desiring to do so. So, 
strong in her sense of what was due to Arthur, 
she practised another piece of self-abnegation. 
She went back to Penzance with every memory 
and every feeling rebelling against her doing 
so. And if she was ''infirm of purpose," 
there was surely something heroic in her 
being it. 

In addition to the romantic wrong of her 



IN PERIL. 25 

youth, in addition to the sorrowful strain which 
had been upon her for long years, in addition 
to the humiliating and astounding revelation 
which had just been so unwittingly made to 
her, the poor old lady had another anxiety. 
Things were not going well with Arthur. He 
would never have come to her and drawn upon 
her willing heart and slender means if he had 
not been sorely j)ressed. She could not bear 
to be hard upon Arthur's wife, but in her 
innermost mind she did charge that innocent 
one with all manner of extravagances. 

Poor Cissy ! Inconveniences and unplea- 
santnesses thickened about her at this junc- 
ture. Just at a time when, by reason of the 
pressure of financial anxiety, her husband con- 
trasted less favourably with his former self and 
with other men than he might have done, she 
was subjected to the continual presence of Mr. 
Lister, the old love, who was free from all such 
anxieties. Just w^hen, by reason of Ai'thur's 
absorption in other and weightier matters, her 
own interest for him seemed to be on the wane, 
she was shown the picture of that old love 
feeling an intense interest in another woman. 



26 FALSE COLOURS. 

For Mr. Lister was quite human enough to 
like to have his vanity fed by the sight of a 
pretty woman obviously expectant of an offer of 
marriage from him, and gratefully intent upon 
showing herself to him in her fairest phase 
until it pleased him to make her such an offer. 

It must be acknowledged that this was the 
position of affairs at Danebury at this time. 
Isabelle was not pursuing him, and not making 
love to him, and not doing many of the other 
things which women are generally ready to 
charge one another with doing ; but she was 
just what has been said, obviously expectant of 
an offer of marriage from, and intent upon 
showing herself in her fairest phase to, Mr. 
Lister. 

It is a very difficult thing to draw the line 
between the means that are justifiable and 
those that are unjustifiable in such a case as 
this, when the actors are a young man and 
woman, and the possible end marriage. It is 
very hard to say what allurements are in good 
taste, and what are in bad taste. It might, 
perhaps, in a more tolerant-spirited world, be 
laid down as a rule that those that answer 



IN PERIL. 27 

might be considered justifiable and in good 
taste. But until this world we live in is 
more tolerant-spirited, girls on promotion must 
pass under a heavy fire from the guns of their 
enemies, and cannot expect always to escape 
stray shots from their allies. 

The blonde Bayswater belle, with the fawn- 
coloured hair and eyes, fought her battle 
quite in the open, under the observation of 
all such as took the trouble to observe her. 
She blushed with bright, happy, undisguised 
emotional pleasure whenever she heard he was 
coming or caught sight of him after an 
absence. She always took the tone in con- 
versation which she had learnt from experience 
was the tone he best liked to hear. She made 
his views her own, she bore with Mrs. Blayne 
in the blandest manner, because Mrs. Blayne 
was a means of approaching him. And he 
took pleasure in the transparent flattery while 
he seemed to ignore it, and gave Cissy to 
understand that, kind and gracious, fair and 
frank as Miss Vargrave was, his taste re- 
volted against such extremely kind gracious- 
ness in a wife. 



28 FALSE COLOURS. 

" If she would only weary of him and of our 
village -life and go home, what a relief it would 
be to me," she would say both to herself and 
to her husband after some meeting with Mr. 
Lister, when Isabelle had been more than 
ordinarily hopeful of the handkerchief being 
thrown. 

" Why don't you hint to her that he's only 
humbugging ?" Arthur would say. 

"It's not a pleasant office that of hinting to 
a girl that she is being humbugged, as you call 
it; besides " 

" Besides what ?" he asked, as Cissy paused. 

" I can't be really sm-e that he is ; I have 
no reason, only an instinct, against her very 
warm reception of his attentions." 

"You could hardly, as you say, speak on the 
strength of that alone," Arthur said, thought- 
fully ; " your interference would perhaps be 
attributed to jealousy." 

" Not by him, and surely never by you, 
Arthur," she said, quickly. " I declare all 
the steps I take to put distance between myself 
and such a possibility seem to bring the sus- 
picion of it nearer. I'm fond of Isabelle, but 



IN PERIL. 29 

I'll see her sacrificed to his vanity rather 
than feed it hy the sacrifice of my own self- 
respect.'* 

" I only wish he would have done phi- 
landering, and ask her to have him, since she 
is so eager to do it," Arthur said, carelessly. 
*' He's a fine fellow, and I can't dislike him ; 
still I am getting tired of his shaking hands 
with me in a way that says * Am I not a noble- 
minded fellow to shake hands with you at 
all ? ' '* 

" And I am tired of seeing him shake hands 
with you, I can assure you, though I don't see 
what you fancy you see in his manner. I 
shall he glad when he is gone . heartily, 
heartily glad of it." 

Then Arthur Scorrier made a mistake. 
The old love was not a love to her any more : 
all the romance with which she had invested 
him personally was brushed off him by this 
reunion. All the romance was brushed off 
him personally, but not off the period which 
he had illuminated. It jarred upon her that 
her husband should say he "quite understood 
it ; Lister was not at all the sort of man who 



30 FALSE COLOURS. 

would have suited or made her happy even if 
they had married." This unconscious attempt 
to put Lister down into the common-place 
reacted painfully. 

Soon after this, as his wife refused to give 
the aid of her intervention to that young and 
struggling power Isabelle, Arthur Scorrier 
himself undertook the task. He performed it 
in the way in which people do generally per- 
form works of supererogation . that is to say, 
he rebuked and exhorted the wrong person. 

** As you're away from your father's house, 
and under my care, in a measure, I may as 
well tell you that I don't like this sort of thing, 
Belle," he began. 

*' Neither do I," Isabelle answered, promptly. 
They were driving through a monotonously 
straight level lane at the time, Isabelle having 
consented to accompany him on one of his 
professional rounds. ** I don't like it at all. 
Good as your springs are, these rucks disagree 
with my London bones." 

*' I mean . and you know it very well . 
that I don't like this flirting with Mr Lister." 

*' I am not flirting with him ; if I was 



IN PERIL. 81 

going to marry him to-morrow, I couldn't 
behave differently," she said; and, to say truth, 
her graciousness and kindness could scarcely 
have been improved upon, even by a bride-elect. 

*'But as you are not going to marry him 
to-morrow," he urged. 

" That's not my fault, is it ?" she said, half 
in fun, half in earnest. 

" Why in the world can't he say what he 
wants, and have done with it !" Arthur went 
on. " He's always at om- heels . at yours or at 
Cissy's . and you like him, and there's nothing 
to prevent his marrying a wife, or a dozen wives, 
for the matter of that." 

" Perhaps he will say what he wants before 
long. Meantime, I can't help it, can I ? I 
don't affect indifference, or any folly of that 
sort." 

And as she spoke she thought of a number 
of impressionable young beings whom even her 
indifference had not kept at bay for so long a 
time as Mr. Lister had kept himself back; and 
she felt sorry for herself, and, as was natural, 
rather annoyed with the one who caused her to 
feel these things. 



32 FALSE COLOURS. 

The girl, in consequence of Arthur Scorrier*s 
ill-advised interference, felt on her honour now 
to compass Mr. Lister's conquest by fair means 
or foul. 

On the one hand, as far as she could see, 
there was every inducement for her to strive to 
win. Mr. Lister was well-off, well-looking, 
well-placed. Once married to him, she could 
with impunity indulge several of those tastes of 
hers which had been checked at home lately 
for want of means. On the other hand, if she 
failed, there would be the smarting sense of 
signal defeat to endure before those who were 
well aware of how she had been striving ; those 
who had prognosticated possible failure and 
preached prudence to her. Additionally, there 
would be the obligation upon her of going away 
from them and the scenes of her lost battle; 
going away back to the home that was in the 
throes of attempted retrenchment. Moreover 
. and this settled the question as to which line 
she should take . she had coquetted herself 
into a tolerably warm feeling of attachment 
for Mr. Lister. 

" I hope I have not hurt your feelings," 



IN PERIL. 83 

Mr. Scorrier said, kindly looking down at tho 
fair flushed face by his side . the face that, in 
spite of its owner's foretaste of humiliation, 
was still upraised very haughtily and self- 
confidently. 

"No, not at all," she answered, with a 
quick, decided shake of the head; *'my feelings 
are not so delicate . so unhealthy, rather . as 
to be hurt by every adverse wind that ruffles 
them." 

" You can't think that I have any other 
motive than your welfare in speaking as I have 
spoken. Belle ?" Arthur Scorrier said, in some 
surprise at the tone she was taking. 

*^ That is what people always say when 
they administer black draughts, bitter cups, 
and good advice," Isabelle replied, carelessly. 
"Pray don't say anymore about it, Arthur; or, 
if you must say more about it, regulate your 
speech by the remembrance that if I had the 
will, I haven't the power to answer you 
satisfactorily, and that, to tell the truth, I 
haven't the will." 

It was a pettish, girlish, inconsequent cul- 
mination of the grandiloquently commenced 

VOL. III. D 



34 FALSE COLOURS. 

speech. After she had uttered it, Isabelle felt 
that it would be an immense relief to them 
both when their enforced companionship was 
over. If she had been In town, she could have 
lounged back in the comfortable wagonnette, 
and have looked as if she were interested in 
the shop-windows and the passers-by. But 
in these country roads, where there were no 
passers-by, much less any shop-windows, it 
would have had the air of being sulky had she 
lounged back and adverted her gaze. Accord- 
ingly, as to be sulky, in her creed of polite 
faith, was to be ill-bred, and to be silent was to 
be sulky, she tried a few commonplace remarks 
concerning the hedges and ditches, and de- 
livered them in a hard, dry way, that was 
eminently aggravating to the man who had 
been led by his anxiety that she should make 
no mistake, into giving her wholesome but 
unpalatable advice. Meanwhile, parallel with 
the train of thought that produced the common- 
place remarks there ran a strictly private train, 
freighted with the following intention ; . 

*' They shall all find themselves mistaken, 
even if I have to stoop to conquer !" 



IN PEBIL. 85 

The spring went by. The days lengthened 
themselves into summer, and the dramatis 
2)erson(e of this drama of life were still placed 
where they had been when the young May 
moon was beaming, and the Glene baby was 
born. That frail atom of humanity had deve- 
loped some trifling degree of strength by the 
time the year had grown "lush in juicy stalks." 
And when Autumn bold, " with universal tint of 
sober gold," was over the land, the little heir 
of the Hepburns had been heard to crow, and 
had even hazarded a smile. 

The advent of the infant did not tend to 
greatly increase the happiness and harmony of 
the inhabitants of the great house. His mother 
could not forget the row, and the half revela- 
tion vrhich preceded his birth. And she was 
by nature a woman who harped much verbally 
upon anything that had once jarred in her 
mind, so now she perplexed Mr. Hepburn with 
many adroitly put leading questions, placed 
pit-falls for his memory, and caught him in 
them continually, until Mr. Hepburn smarted 
under an unceasing sensation of fear of being 
found out. 



36 FALSE COLOURS. 

That there were secrets in this man's life, 
the wife of his bosom could not doubt. 
Secrets of sorrow and secrets of shame. She 
did not seek to lure him into confidences 
concerning them for the sake of comforting 
him. She tried to trip him up, that he might 
fall prone before her, and that she might then 
trample upon and express some of her real 
feelings about him. But though his feet were 
often in perilous places he had not quite fallen 
up to the present date, and Amelia was still on 
the watch. 

His feet were very often in perilous places 
Ithough a great and most comforting assur- 
ance had reached him. Back in the spring, soon 
after Mrs. Scorrier's return to Penzance, he had 
received a letter in a handwriting that was 
unfamiliar to him, and yet about which, at the 
same time, there was an association as of some- 
thing he had once known. It was to this effect : 

" For Arthur's sake I will be dumb and 
blind. Dumb about these past thirty-one 
years, blind as to what I saw in the gallery of 
Glene." 

This letter was unsigned. Mr. Hepburn 



IN PERIL. 87 

burnt it, with a blessing on the head of the 
writer, and a muttered thanksgiving for his 
brisk deliverance from fear. 

His feet were very often in perilous places 
still, though this letter had been received, and 
its fullest meaning taken in. They threatened 
to lead him into danger, especially when some 
trouble came upon Arthur, which he would 
not confide to the father who was yearning to 
help him. ** It's something beyond the reach 
of friendship, sir," Arthur would say, with a 
forced laugh, when he was too closely pressed 
as to the cause of his moodiness. In the 
first pangs of his outraged sensitive pride the 
young man did not like to acknowledge that he 
had, to all outward seeming, verified the truth 
of the old adage which declares that a fool and 
his money are soon parted. He did not like 
to confess, in fact, that he had got deeply into 
debt, and had not a weU-founded hope of get- 
ting out of it soon. So he tiu-ned tender 
questionings aside with careless answers, and 
Mr. Hepburn was often nearly tottering out of 
his secrets to an unguarded place, out of sym- 
pathy for his son. 



38 FALSE COLOURS. 

Amelia, too, was sympathetic to Ai'thur . 
hideously sympathetic, he thought . as he did 
not like her; horribly sympathetic her husband 
fancied, who had a secret thought. The cool- 
headed young woman, who had been so wise 
and so good in the days of her maidenhood, 
was rather less true to herself now in her 
matronhood. She was no heart-strong, head- 
strong creature, who would be willing to burst 
all bonds, and fling out over the traces, between 
which she was compelled to amble by Mr. Hep- 
burn. But still in her own frigid fashion she 
was moved to unseemly demonstrations in fa- 
vour of Arthur Scorrier. He was the one crea- 
ture on earth that she did like and admire, and 
sometimes her admiration and liking passed 
those bounds which she had made it her cus- 
tom to observe. Not that she was ever really 
indiscreet or undutiful in action. But all 
things are relative, and her coolest manner to 
Arthur was sultry compared with her manner 
to others. Arthur's wife saw it and laughed 
at it to herself and to her cousin ; secure at 
least, in so far that she could hold her own 
against any Amelia-power that might . be 



IN PERIL. 39 

brought to bear upon her husband. And 
Mr. Hepburn saw it, and accepted it as part 
of his punishment, not fearing much, it must 
be admitted, since he was secure in Amelia's 
coldness and Arthur's integrity. As for Isa- 
belle, she did not see it. All the rest of the 
world might have coveted their neighbours' 
wives, provided only Mr. Lister was left free 
and untrammelled to marry her in the good 
time coming. 



40 FALSE COLOURS. 



CHAPTEE III. 

" I FELT SURE OF IT." 

There is an expression that we often use, 
" Playing her (or their) cards very well," 
with respect to girls and their farailies, when 
the former are in the matrimonial mart, and 
often use erroneously as a reproach. If the 
cards are theirs to play, small blame to them, 
in common sense and Christian charity, if they 
play them well. There are some of us who 
have held them in early days, and who have 
still lost the trick, and never one by honours ; 
and who have to feed upon our own hearts 
during the remainder of our lives in silence 
and sadness in consequence of our mistakes. 
Some have missed a lead, and others have 
revoked, and others have finessed far too finely. 
At all events, the cards that were dealt were 
not played well, and all have retired at the end 
of the game losers of more or less. 



** I FELT SURE OP IT.** 41 

It must be conceded to Isabelle Vargrave 
that she did i)lay the cards that were dealt to 
her very "well indeed. These cards were pro- 
pinquity, opportunity, youth, beauty, fine 
weather, lovely scenery, and a strong determi- 
nation to win. If Mr. Hepburn's feet were 
often in perilous places, so were Mr. Lister's 
as he came week after week to the Scorriers' 
house, and still found Isabelle there. 

For Mrs. Scorrier, sensible Cissy, would not 
be the Platonic friend, fraught with memories 
of the past, which he desired to make her. 
She would not discuss vague prospects which 
he was fond of chalking out, nor would she 
vaguely regret and dismally remember. Or if 
she did these latter things she would not do 
them aloud, which comes to the same thing. 
Still he hankered after her, still he loved to 
linger near her, still he strove, half uncon- 
sciously, to try and make her miserable, since 
he had not been permitted to make her happy. 

And very well he succeeded in doing that 
which he strove to do. She saw that his 
presence was distasteful to her husband, yet 
she refrained from banishing that presence out 



42 FALSE COLOURS. 

of gratitude to the Vargraves, who might be 
relieved of the expensive luxury of a daughter 
by his means. For Isabelle declared herself to 
be most perfectly satisfied with the march of 
events, and Cissy tried to hope that her cousin 
had good ground for being so. Still instinct 
and not vanity, told her that she herself was 
the magnet to which that needle turned most 
truly. 

He had taken a shooting-box in the neigh- 
bourhood now, and had settled himself in it 
avowedly for a year, and he had instituted a 
series of festivities, from which the Scorriers 
found themselves unable to shake free, by 
reason of the very intensity of their desire 
to do so. 

" The Den," his place was called . an 
incongruous little pile of building that stood in 
strict seclusion in the triangular space that was 
left between three large woods, which stretched 
away to some distance in their several direc- 
tions, rendering him secure fi'om all untoward 
and chance observation. 

Mr. Lister established himself here very 
comfortably. Made it like a home to himself 



" I FELT SURE OF IT." 43 

by getting about him the inanimate surround- 
ings that he loved. And he asked the Danebury 
trio to dine with him here constantly during 
the bright summer and autumn weather, and 
the Scorriers went . because Isabelle looked 
poutingly injured if they refused to go. 

It was but a bachelor's establishment, this 
Den, but it was beautifully appointed, and 
would be a pleasant place to come and play 
the grande dame to Cissy in, in the days to 
come, Isabelle thought. 

There were only two rooms on the ground- 
floor, besides the kitchen, from which the very 
successful little dinners emanated, and these 
two rooms were very small and low, were but 
models in miniature, in fact, of those to which 
her taste inclined. Still Isabelle spent some 
of her most excitedly happy hours in them. 
For her host was always more gallant and 
attentive, more devoted to, and regardful of, 
her apparently, in his own house than out of 
it. 

One evening they were dining with him, and 
the Blaynes were to meet them. It had been 
felt as a slight relief, both by Arthur and 



44 FALSE COLOURS. 

Cissy, this coming there this night, for they 
had passed a most doleful day in Danebury. 
The morning's post had brought Cissy a mise- 
rable effusion from her aunt Vargrave, begging 
Mrs. Scorrier to pay some of the bills which 
had been incurred in procuring her trousseau, 
as she (Mrs. Vargrave) had not a penny where- 
with to defray them, and the unconscionable 
tradespeople were getting clamorous. *'Idare 
not ask your uncle for further supplies," the 
unhappy bewildered lady wrote, "as I can give 
no account of the money he gave me for the 
purpose ; it seemed to go before I could count 
it, so most likely I have been terribly cheated 
somewhere. Indeed, it would be no use my 
asking your uncle, even if I had put down 
things . for business seems to be going badly, 
and we are anything but well off. I shall be 
very glad to hear of our dear Isabelle settling 
well, and I hope that as she is staying so long 
with you, that there is a prospect." When 
Cecile read that, she made up her mind to two 
things. First, that her uncle should never be 
called upon to pay another penny for her ; and 
secondly, that neither Arthur nor herself would 



** I FELT SURE OF IT." 45 

interpose the smallest obstacle to the fulfil- 
ment of Isabelle's designs, and Mrs. Vargrave's 
hopes. 

Hesitatingly, with a feeling of embarrass- 
ment . that she was quick to feel and denounce 
as pitiful . she took her aunt's letter, and 
showed it to her husband, and asked him 
''What she had better do about those bills?" 

"Pay them . when you can, dear," he said, 
flushing up a little. 

"But," . she began, and then checked her- 
self. He knew as well as she did that she had 
come to him without a penny, and jthat no 
penny had come to her since. Yet here was 
he now recommending her to pay away large 
sums of money and not saying a word as to 
where the large sums of money were to come 
from. 

"What is it. Cissy dear?" he asked. 

"You forget," she said, trying to rally her 
spirits, and look up, . 

' Barefooted stood the beggar-maid 
Before the King Cophetua ?' 

" King Cophetua himself must pay for my 

boots. I ought to have stood barefooted before 



46 FALSE COLOUKS. 

you, Arthur, until I knew whether you could 
pay for me or not." And then she gave up 
the attempt to rally her spirits, and to speak as 
if she did not feel deeply, and let her face 
droop into her hands. 

How he cursed his own folly and his extra- 
vagance, and, ahove all, his want of ready 
money, as he bent over her, tenderly caressing 
her, and beseeching her to be his bright-hearted, 
bright-faced wife again. How he lamented his 
want of professional success, and hated that 
X)artner of his who seemed to be gradually 
superseding him. How he longed to apply to 
Mr. Hepburn, his rich generous friend, and at 
once relieve himself and Cissy from this igno- 
minious suffering. " And I will do it to- 
morrow, too," he said to himself at last. *' A 
big sum owed to him won't harass me as these 
perpetual annoyances about small debts 
do." 

He did not confide his intention to Cissy, 
but he bade her be hapj)y and of good cheer, 
for that without fail he would shortly have it in 
his power to gild her path again. "Meanwhile, 
. yes, meanwhile, you had better write to your 



^' I FELT SURE OF IT." 47 

aunt, and set her mind at ease about both 
affairs," Cissy, he said. 

"But I can't set her mind at ease about 
Isabelle," Cissy said, getting scarlet. 

" Why not ? I think he means her now. 
Until lately, I have thought that it was only 
she meant him, and that would be no good ; 
but she's quite pretty enough, and nice enough, 
to do for any fellow whose heart is free, you 
know. Cissy." 

"Yes." Cissy assented to this proposition, 
but she thought at the same time that pretty 
and nice as Isabella was, it was not by such 
a woman that she (Cissy) should have been 
superseded. 

However, she went with Arthur and Isabelle 
to the Den that aftfernoon, and found relief in 
the change, and in the actual presence of the 
possibility for which they were all watching. 
Found relief in the beauty of the woods and 
the crispness of the October air; in the swirling 
sound which the pheasants made as they were 
startled from the tree. Found relief in Mr. 
Blayne's still admiring regard for her, which 
was always shattered before it could be pro- 



48 FALSE COLOURS. 

perly demonstrated by the keen observation 
of his wife. Found relief from the pressure 
of anxiety even in Mrs. Blayne's aimless 
twaddle, since she was not compelled to 
reply to it. Above all, found relief in the 
conviction that if Lister married her pretty 
fawn-coloured cousin, at least the pair would 
remove themselves and their happiness out of 
her orbit. 

They had come to the Den early this after- 
noon by the especial desire of their host, in 
order to see brown October in all his glory in 
the adjacent covers. That host came saun- 
tering forward from the door to meet them, as 
Arthur drove into the triangular space of 
ground between the trees, and as in courtesy 
bound, help the married woman to the ground 
first. It must be stated here that clear-sighted 
as women generally are on this point, Isabelle 
had hitherto never once seen, nor had she 
fancied, anything antagonistic to her own de- 
signs in Mr. Lister's manner towards her 
cousin. It had not, in fact, occurred to her 
to be jealous. But this afternoon she caught 
the expression of his face as he turned to her 



*' I FELT SURE OF IT." 49 

from welcoming Mrs. Scorrier, and she saw a 
light that she had never kindled there, fade 
from it. 

The girl's heart ached heavily for a moment 
as she thought of how all the good things 
seemed to he given to Cissy. " The love of her 
husband ought to be enough for her ; she shall 
not even be tempted to prize his," Isabelle 
thought as she sprang down, and her mind 
revolved in an instant round sundry incidents 
to which she had never before condescended to 
give a thought. He was admiring Cissy . 
almost loving her, and he had for some time 
been admiring and almost loving her . Isabelle ! 
Miss Vargrave nearly choked with wrath and in- 
dignation that this should have happened when 
she was by, free. But she calmed herself with 
the reflection that it was probably only the idle 
natural depravity of his heart, leading him 
not exactly to covet his neighbour's wife, but 
to find her the fairest ! By the time she had 
satisfactorily settled this point with her own 
wounded self-love, Mr. Lister, feeling painfully 
conscious that he had half betrayed himself to 
this girl, was by her side again, and Arthur 

VOL. III. E 



50 FALSE COLOURS. 

and Cissy had gone on into the house in search 
of the Blaynes. 

The pair stood alone in the glow of an Octo- 
ber afternoon. They were both handsome . 
and one of them was sufficiently young for the 
future to be everything to her. She had good 
cards in her hands, and she began playing 
them well. The others had left her in this 
place, but it would be her own fault if she did 
not make the most of it. 

" Those woods are too tempting," she said, 
turning away and sniffing the breeze that came 
rustling through the red-gold leaves that were 
fast dropping. 

*' Why too tempting ?" he asked ; and as he 
asked it, he did most heartily wish that Miss 
Vargrave had not developed an enthusiasm for 
the beauties of nature just then. 

'* Because they make me want to go into 
them, and I can't," she said, in a tone of 
plaintive ill-usage. 

"Why not?" he said. 

'* I dare not go by myself, and Cissy would 
not thank me for dragging her through that 
undergrowth." 



*' I FELT SURE OF IT." 51 

" Then let me be your cicerone," he said, 
fervently hoping that she would remember his 
whole duty as host was not towards herself 
alone. 

But Isabelle had certain cards to play, and 
she played them without any compunction. 

" If you ^ill come with me, of course I 
shall not be afraid . and you'll be ever so 
much better than Cissy, because you can take 
care of me," she said, looking up into his face 
with that elaborate simplicity which seems to 
be a specialty of the plump, wide-eyed, broad- 
browed, ''one-coloured" English girl. 

" There are neither satyrs nor gnomes to 
protect you from," he said, rather sulkily, 
plunging into the forest path after her. *' Keep 
to the open ground as far as you can. Miss Var- 
grave . stick to the path, the broadest path, for 
the others twist and turn about bewilderingly." 

For a short time Isabelle obeyed his injunc- 
tions. She kept to the broadest path, and 
contented herself with running no greater 
risks than catching her foot in ivy trails, and 
her hair against overhanging boughs. But 
this grew tame after a time, and she glided 



LIBRARY 

UNIYERSnY OF ULUNQi; 



52 FALSE COLOURS. 

almost imperceptibly into a less well-marked 
way. 

Presently she looked round over her shoul- 
der at him, and said . 

** Do you know? no, jon don't know . ^but 
I will tell you, I was very heavy-hearted when 
I came over here ; this wind through the trees 
will blow away cobwebs." 

''What made you heavy-hearted?" he 
asked, with the affable contempt that is irri- 
tating to a person who happens to be in 

earnest. 

" * It was only the sorrow of others, 
Cast its shadows over me,' " 

the girl sang out, laughingly; ''Cissy had the 
blues, and I followed suit." 

"Was she heavy-hearted?" he asked, 
eagerly. 

" She ! Who ? Mrs. Scorrier ? Yes ; a 
friend of former days," the girl went on, half 
undesignedly, " was in trouble, and wrote to 
Cissy about it, and Cissy got the letter this 
morning, and on the receipt of it had the blues." 

The young lady was not telling wilful false- 
hoods, but she was most assuredly painting 



" I FELT SURE OF IT." 53 

the lily of truth in making this statement as 
to the cause of Cissy's dejection. She cer- 
tainly was not called upon to confess that it 
was her own mother who was the old friend of 
Cissy's in trouble, nor did the exigencies of 
the situation demand that she should declare 
aloud the nature of that trouble in which her 
mother was. But she certainly was not com- 
pelled to state part of the truth and withhold 
the explanatory part . the extenuating part, I 
had almost written, until I recalled to my 
mind this fact, that Cissy was not called upon 
to ** extenuate aught " to Mr. Lister. 

He walked on by the politic young lady's 
side, wondering how much she would confide to 
him in the ardour and unsophistication of 
youth; wondering what other ''old friend" it 
could be who had the power to submerge 
bright Cissy in melancholy by the mere recital 
of his misfortunes, wondering, above all, what 
motive this girl by his side had in hinting 
these things. 

Theoretically this man was the very soul of 
honour. He had the loftiest ideas as to what 
it behoved human beings to do under madden- 



54 FALSE COLOURS. 

ing circumstances. And if he fell short some- 
times of that excellent exaltedness which he 
demanded of others, he never grew lax in word 
on the subject, or in thought either, to do him 
justice. The worst he was planning with re- 
gard to Cissy now was a Platonic friendship, 
which he would have laughed to scorn as a 
burlesque of the real thing had any one else 
attempted it. And as it was just now dawning 
upon him that the attempt was going to be a 
failure, he desired to lay it quietly to rest 
without more ado. 

She played the cards that fate had dealt to 
her very well indeed. Let him go on thinking 
in silence, and with an absorbed manner, just 
long enough for him to feel that he had been 
guilty of an awkward breach of manners since 
he was on escort duty. As he roused himself, 
obedient to some reminder from her, Isabelle 
roused herself to the task before her, and nerved 
herself to the performance of it by the reflection 
that it was now or never with her. 

She had thought a good deal, and she had 
hesitated a good deal, about what she was 
going to do. But all the immediately pre- 



"l FELT SURE OF IT." 55 

ceding circumstances were against her refrain- 
ing from availing herself of this opportunity of 
doing. Cissy and herself were not quite in 
unison any more, and she shrank from going 
home unwon, after those hints, of being very 
violently wooed, which she had sent to her 
mother. Moreover, be it remembered, she 
loved the man she meant to marry, so she was 
not wholly inexcusable. 

As he roused himself, he saw her beautifully 
rounded shoulders heaving, and her J&nely 
moulded face glowing quite close to him. She 
had that indescribable trick of bearing down 
upon people which some men find it so hard 
to combat. If she had been emotional a 
couple of yards off, he would have felt safe. 
But as she had elected to be emotional close to 
his side, he did wish for the protecting presence 
of a third person. 

He was a great fool ; any man is a fool who 
suffers himself to be trapped into speech by 
these means, when he feels that in silence is 
his only safety. 

" Are not the cobwebs all blown away yet ?" 
he asked, as she lowered her head and sighed. 



56 FALSE COLOURS. 

" No ; they cling to me to-day," she said. 
*' I regret leaving places, and feel leaving 
people very much indeed." 

*'A11 places and all people?" Mr. Lister 
asked, breaking a twig off, and heartily wishing 
himself out of the wood. 

** No ; but places where I have been happy, 
and people who have been kind to me." 

"Every one would of necessity be kind to 

you, Miss Vargrave . 

* Friends in all the old you'll find, 
And lovers in the young.' " 

*'I don't want indiscriminate friendship " 

"Nor yet miscellaneous love?" he inter- 
rupted. " I thought all young ladies liked to 
be monopolists of affection." 

" Then I am unlike all young ladies. I am 
sorry to have seemed such a commonplace 
creature to you all this time that I have been 
thinking you understood me better than any 
body else has ever done." 

He understood her perfectly well now. He 
believed her to be unsophisticated, and very 
fond of him, and utterly incapable of conceal- 
ing the fact. 



" I FELT SURE OF IT." 57 

** Understood you ! A man would be a brute 
who did not understand you," he said, warmly. 
He was telling himself what a much more 
transparent nature this girl had than that 
woman possessed who still held him in her 
chains. On the whole it must be admitted 
that if he had been gifted with the perspicuity 
with which he accredited himself in this in- 
stance, the girl would not have contrasted so 
favourably with the woman. 

Once more, as he assured her that a man who 
did not understand her must be a brute, did 
Isabelle visibly incline towards him, in that 
pleading, relying way which was so difficult to 
deal with. She played a stronger card indeed 
this time ; she held out her hand, and he was 
obliged to take it, and listen to her exj^ressions 
of thankfulness for liaving found one apprecia- 
tive friend. 

"It is such a great thing in life to have one 
true heart to turn to, isn't it, Mr. Lister?" she 
said, simply, as if she had suffered much from 
having been buffetted about on the stormy 
ocean of circumstances, instead of, as was the 
case, having lived a life of most perfect com- 



58 FALSE COLOURS. 

fort and securit}^ in a prosperous suburban 
locality, bereft of all romance. 

" My heart will always be true to you." He 
spoke earnestly, for he was entangled both in 
thought and in the brambles that were trailing 
about from side to side of the path into which 
they had strayed. " My heart will always be 
true to you. How could a man be other than 
true to you ?" 

" And you will be ! Oh, I never thought 
you cared for me so much," Isabelle stuttered 
out, playing her last card hurriedly, in the fear 
she had of missing the chance of playing it at 
all ; " and I will be true to you . true unto 
death." 

He lacked the moral courage to look into 
her golden-brown eyes, and tell this girl that 
she was plighting her troth to him before he 
had asked her to do it. He did not want her, 
but he could not refuse her. The honour was 
thrust upon him, in fact ; but he was too 
courteous by nature and habit to let it be so in 
seeming. So he took her hand, and pressed it, 
tenderly almost, and made her lean against 
him, while he kissed her brow, and promised to 



" I FELT SURE OF IT." 59 

be "true to her as she deserved . true as her 
own pure heart and single mind could desire." 

They were some time before they could fight 
their way through the undergrowth back into 
the path that led them out of the wood. The 
young lady went back feeling very happy and 
triumphant, and the man by her side felt 
harassed, hampered, and fettered in a way that 
filled him with remorse. There was something 
in the air of both of them that told the tale as 
soon as they made their appearance. 

*' I will show you the room I have left my 
hat in," Cissy said, following her cousin rapidly 
upstairs. As soon as they got safely inside the 
door of this room, Cecile closed it firmly, and 
asked, as she leaned her back against it, clasp- 
ing its ebonj^ knob firmly in her hand the while, 
** You have something to tell me, Isabelle ? " 

** I am engaged to Mr. Lister," Isabelle said, 
her whole face radiant with the triumph at her 
heart. 

*' I felt sure of it. May God make you love 
each other better than all the world beside." 



60 FALSE COLOURS. 



CHAPTEE IV. 

MISTAKEN JUDGMENTS. 

" The rigid righteous is a fool, 
The uncou' good another.'* 

The day after Isabelle had partially accom- 
plished her destiny in the highly satisfactory 
manner, to herself, which has been recorded, 
Cissy went over to Glene in the morning. Her 
own house was not the most pleasant place in 
the world to her this day ; its whole atmo- 
sphere seemed charged with the electric fluid of 
authorized love. The breakfast hour had been 
a hard one, for Isabelle and Arthur had talked 
the whole time of what the former would do, 
and where she would go, when she was Mrs. 
Lister. The young lady had altered her de- 
meanour already in that extraordinary way in 
which newly engaged and soon-to-be-married 
girls do alter their demeanour sometimes. She 
took things for granted especially in a way that 
half amused and half annoyed Cissy. ''Ed- 



MISTAKEN JUDGMENTS. 61 

"Ward has been looked upon as invulnerable, lie 
tells me," Miss Vargrave said, spicing fact "with 
fiction. 

" Have you the comfortable conviction that 
you are the only one his heart has thought of 
for a minute ? " Cissy said, trying hard not to 
think her cousin an insolent pretender. 

"Well ! the first since his boyhood, I believe," 
Isabelle said, with happy confidence. " I'm 
almost glad it is settled, do you know. Cissy . 
though that stage of certain uncertainty was 
very nice." 

*' I should think you are glad it is settled," 
Cissy said, indignantly ; " don't pretend to be 
only 'almost' glad; it was the infinite relief in 
your face that told me the truth when you 
came in from that ramble in the woods." 

*' Belief ! happiness, if you like ; but it was 
not relief, because I have never had any doubt 
about how it would end. I told Arthur long 
ago, didn't I, Arthur?" 

** For all that, I had a good many doubts 
myself," Arthur said, laughing; " but you have 
managed very well, Isabelle." 

"There was not much management required. 



62 FALSE COLOURS. 

fortunately for me, for I should have been sure 
to have blundered," Isabelle replied. " Come, 
Arthur, I should have thought that you at 
least would have known from experience that it 
isn't the woman who has to manage these little 
matters ; ours isn't managed yet, by the way. 
I have said yes, but there is Papa to ask." 

" Uncle James is likely to say no to Mr. 
Lister, of course," Cissy said, in reply. 

" No, my dear Cissy, I don't say that ; but 
I like the proper forms to be gone through. 
Think of my prudence and propriety ; Edward 
wanted me to ride with him this morning, but 
I said *No, not till Papa's answer comes.'" 

" Very prudent, indeed ; Papa's answer can 
only be given to the definite question that 
clinches the nail," Ai'thur Scorrier said ; 
" really though. Belle, I don't think you have 
any cause of anxiety," he added, in a most 
comforting strain. " I don't think Lister will 
love and ride away. What are you going to do 
this morning, girls ?" 

*'I am going to sketch this house from the 
summer-house at the bottom of the garden," 
Isabelle said, demurely ; " and Mr. Lister is 



MISTAKEN JUDGMENTS. G3 

going to put in a few of liis best touches, 
so as to make it worthy of Cissy's accep- 
tance.'* 

"And I am going to see Amelia," Cissy said, 
jumping up, impatiently. This j)rojccted draw- 
ing-lesson seemed such a mockery of those 
which a young ardent man had given a young 
ardent girl ten years ago at Baden Baden. 

" How savage Mrs. Hepburn will be when 
she hears of my good fortune," Isabelle said, 
laughing; "she has lived in hopes, all these 
months, of seeing me deserted, I know ; tell 
her it's settled. Cissy, will you ?" 

Mrs. Scorrier took her departure for Glene 
before Mr. Lister arrived that morning. She 
had done all that was right the day before, on 
going down stairs after the brief confidence 
with Isabelle. She had gone swiftly and 
steadily up to him, and swiftly and steadily she 
had uttered some conventional words of con- 
gratulation. But through his own embarrass- 
ment he saw hers, and he read that she did 
not like the engagement into which he had 
drifted. 

" I shall never forget that you were the first 



64 FALSE COLOUKS. 

to offer me good wishes," he had said, in reply; 
and Isabelle had wondered why his memory 
was eternally to be charged with such a trifling 
and natural circumstance. 

But though Mrs. Scorrier had said all that 
was conventional and kind, proper and polite, 
the day before, she did not feel inclined to be 
called upon to repeat herself this morning. 
So she went over, and invited herself to lun- 
cheon with Amelia, and won her welcome from 
that lady by giving her the earliest news of the 
engagement. 

" So she really has caught him ; well, she 
has played her cards well," Amelia exclaimed, 
when the fact was announced to her. After 
the manner of women she took it for granted 
that the girl had been the active agent in 
bringing the affair to a happy conclusion. 
"Do tell me how she managed, Cissy. I 
suppose you have all been helping it on ? " 

"Indeed I have not," Cissy said, tartly. 

" Oh ! I thought 3'OU had, being so happy 
yourself," Amelia said, with a small sneer, 
that would have had a more telling effect on 
her hearer if the latter had happened to be 



MISTAKEN JUDGMENTS. 6 

looking at her. '' Now as for me," the mis- 
tress of Glene continued, with a harsh laugh, 
** I have not had such a pleasant experience of 
the holy state of matrimony myself, as to make 
me wish to lead any unfortunate fi-iend into it." 

She began saying this with much bitterness 
in her tone, and Cissy's taste revolted against 
the woman who could bare her wound need- 
lessly . against the wife in whom there was no 
pride of wifehood left. But before she had 
finished speaking, the bitterness fled from her 
voice, and some of the hardness vanished from 
her face, and evidently there reigned a softer 
feeling within her. Her little child, the little 
weakly heir of Glene, had been carried in his 
nurse's arms along the path before the window, 
and the mother was reigning for a few moments. 

"Poor Amelia ! " Cissy said, with a sort of 
scornful pity, all the meaning of which Mrs. 
Hepburn was very quick to feel ; "how wrong 
we all are about everything ; we thought yours 
such a brilliant prospect, that we expected 
miracles about it . it never could be dimmed, 
we all seemed to feel." 

" And now I seem to feel that it never 

VOL. III. F 



66 FALSE COLOURS. 

can be brightened,'* Amelia said, in a sudden 
burst of confidence. " Even my child is a 
failure . yes, he is . don't think me quite a 
wretch for saying so, but he is. I can't con- 
centrate all my interests and all my hopes on 
that poor little weakly boy ; and as for Mr. 
Hepburn, he positively writhes under his know- 
ledge of the child's weakliness ; it's painful to 
see him when he is looking at it, he seems to 
be eaten up with remorse." 

" But why should he be remorseful about an 
accident ?" Cissy asked. 

Amelia shook her head, impatiently, as she 
repeated, " An accident ! yes, an accident that 
made him shake in his shoes . your mother- 
in-law's presence.*' 

** My mother-in-law's presence ! '* Cissy re- 
iterated, in wonderment. 

"Yes, Mrs. Scorrier's coming here surrep- 
titiously was the cause of all the mischief; 
my husband, saint as he is, has had close 
connection with sinners, I can't help thinking, 
and perhaps Mrs. Scorrier holds the key to 
Bome mystery which he has made ; that's my 
reading of his repugnance to see her." 



MISTAKEN JUDGMENTS. 67 

Cissy listened eagerly, and remembered the 
miniature of her own mother, which she had 
traced into Mr. Hepburn's possession. She 
threw her mind back to the events of the 
past, and failed to find any clue to that pos- 
session. Then she said, . " What mystery do 
you think he has made, Amelia ? No, that is 
not a fair question to ask an angry wife," she 
added, hurriedly. 

** Yes, it is a fair question, now that you 
have forced me to take time about answering 
it ; his mystery is not about himself, but about 
his sister.'* 

" His sister ! Cecilia ? the one whose death 
we read . " Cissy said. 

" Yes, the one who was made dead in the 
family records, but whom I believe to be alive 
to this day." 

" Amelia, what do you mean ? " 

"I have found out something," Mrs. Hep- 
bum said, triumphantly ; "I hold a fact or 
two in the hollow of my hand now, that gives 
me a good deal of power over Mr. Hepburn, if 
ever I like to use it. Do you remember that 
day we were at Bedford, having a talk at lun- 



68 FALSE COLOURS. 

cheon about a miniature he had left at a 
jeweller's ? " 

" Yes." Cissy remembered, and tingled at 
the remembrance. 

*' Well, I went back there, and looked at it. 
I mean, that I had to go back there, and I 
happened to see it ; it was a remarkably 
lovely face, wasn't it ?" 

"Yes," Cissy said, trembling a little, *' a 
remarkably lovely face . a face that once seen, 
either in the flesh or in painting, can never be 
forgotten." 

" I felt sure she was a Hepburn directly I 
saw her. I knew . " 

''Felt sure she was a Hepburn !" Cissy cried. 

" Yes, there could be no doubt of that : the 
only question was in how close a degree. I 
made up my mind to get an answer to that 
question . and I have got it." 

Cissy could not ask " how " or " what the 
answer was ; " she could only remember that 
her mother . her own mother . was the original 
of that fair painting on ivory which had bo 
stimulated Mrs. Hepburn's curiosity. 

** I found out, and made friends with, the 



MISTAKEN JUDGMENTS. 69 

oldest woman on the Glene estate," Mrs. Hep- 
burn went on ; *' an old Mrs. Porter, the 
grandmother of Porter, at the Danebury side 
lodge ; she has known the family for nearly 
seventy years. She remembers Miss Cecilia 
Hepburn quite well, and she has let me screw 
the truth out of her. Cecilia Hepburn, my 
husband's immaculate sister, ran away with 
her riding-master ; she is supposed to have 
died at Brighton, but old Nanny Porter knows 
the whole story, and has told it to me." 

"Ean away with her riding-master!" 
Cissy stuttered. *'Does she know . can you 
tell his name ? ' ' 

" No, she has forgotten his name ; her bro- 
ther. Miss Hepburn's brother, my husband, 
was her guardian, and it seems that he was o£f 
duty for a year or two in some unaccountable 
way, and he had always been very rigid and 
strict with his sister. If he's nothing else, he 
is moral, you know ; so when she disgraced 
herself, he called her dead, and treated her as 
dead. Now this is under the seal of strictest 
secresy, remember, Cissy. I confide in you ; 
don't betray me ever." Mrs. Hepburn gave 



70 FALSE COLOURS. 

this injunction with a degree of earnestness and 
anxiety that proved her to be somewhat in awe 
of the man whose secret she had surprised and 
betrayed. 

" And you are sure that his sister was the 
original of that miniature?" Cissy asked, 
disregarding Mrs. Hepburn's appeal. " How 
very strange !" 

*' Now that I really can't consider strange at 
all," Mrs. Hepburn replied; ''that he should 
keep a beautiful painting of a beautiful face is 
only natural. Besides, he had been dearly fond 
of Miss Cissy, old Mrs. Porter tells me. He 
can't quite cut her out of his heart, I suj^pose ; 
but he is stern and unrelenting about her dere- 
liction from moral duty. I wonder if she is 
alive still?" 

*''No, she is dead," Cissy said, quickly; and 
then she remembered herself, recalled partly 
to the remembrance by Amelia's look of 
intense surprise, and she added, " I mean she 
most likely is dead, poor thing." 

*' Cissy, how seriously you take up things. 
Now, of course, dead or alive, she is my sister- 
in-law, but, honestly, I feel perfectly indifferent 



MISTAKEN JUDGMENTS. 71 

as to whether she is dead or alive," Mrs. 
Hepburn said, scornfully. *' I mean to tell 
Mr. Hepburn one day, when he tries me too far, 
that I know all about it." 

" I should like to see that miniature again," 
Cissy said, eagerly. '* Do show it to me, 
Amelia; it's such a romance, such a cruel 
romance, that I should like to have one more 
look at the heroine of it." 

" I think it is in one of the writing-table 
drawers," Mrs. Hepburn said, rising as she 
spoke, and leading the way to Mr. Hepburn's 
own room . the library. " At least he always 
shuts that drawer in a hurry, if I go in and find 
it open." 

" Probably it is locked," Cissy suggested, as 
they entered the room. For answer Mrs. 
Hepburn gave a vigorous tug at the brass 
handles, and found the suggestion verified. 

A large bunch of keys was lying on the 
table, half concealed by some loose papers. 

"It's odd if one of these don't open it," the 
lady of the house said ; and Cissy's intense 
desire to see and assure herself about that 
painted face, overpowered her sense of honour 



72 FALSE COLOURS. 

to the extent of causing her to offer no re- 
monstrance. But before the right key could be 
found, the fear-sharpened ears of the wife 
heard the sound of her husband's footsteps, 
and, with a rapidly given hint to Cissy to 
"seem to be occupied with a book," Mrs. 
Hepburn herself walked out through the open 
French window on to the terrace, where her 
child was taking the air. 

But Cissy could not "seem to be occupied 
with a book," or with anything else, in fact, 
than the subject which was uppermost in her 
mind. If this suave, courteous, rich old man 
were indeed her uncle, the only brother of that 
harassed, sorrow -beaten woman, whose life of 
lingering shame and pain had surely not been 
" penance vain" for the fault of her youth . 
she . Cissy, his niece, . would reveal herself, 
and make him reproach himself for his want of 
charity as he deserved to reproach himself. 
So she simply waited, standing by the table, 
looking strangely agitated and expectant, until 
he came in, and had got over his surprise at 
seeing her there. 

There was pain and sorrow, confusion and 



MISTAKEN JUDGMENTS. 73 

excitement, on her bright expressive face, and 
his first fear was that something had befallen 
that unowned son of his, to whom the tenderest 
part of his heart was given. 

" Is anything amiss with Arthur, my dear ?" 
he asked, eagerly, remembering only that she 
was his son's wife, and forgetting that the 
familiar address was not warranted by appear- 
ances and acknowledgement. 

" Arthur is quite well. But there is some- 
thing oppressing me, Mr. Hepburn, . something 
I have found out, which threatens me with 
great unhappiness." 

"Found out!" His thoughts and fears were 
all bent towards that long criminal concealment 
of his own. Mabel, in spite of that letter, had 
betrayed him ! " Found out," he repeated, 
sitting down in his own throne-like chair, 
and feeling inexpressibly small, and mean, and 
degraded by that concealment. 

" Well, I haven't found it out, because it 
has been told to me," Cissy said, impatiently. 
" Do you recognize this ?" and, as she spoke, 
she took from her pocket the duplicate of that 
miniature on ivory which he had taken to the 



74 FALSE COLOURS. 

jeweller's to be repaired. He took it from her 
hand, opened it, and, at the first glance, his 
face grew dark-red with annoyance. 

*' Will you tell me what you mean by offering 
me a sight of this in such a way ?" he asked, 
Btiffly; and Cissy, feeling her legs shaking 
under her, sat down before she answered. 

" Yes, I will tell you. I want you to look 
at my mother's face while you are listening to 
my story of how hardly she lived, and how 
sadly she died." And as she said that, poor 
Cissy's hardly-sustained heroism gave way, 
and she let her head bend down, and suffered 
the big sobs to be heard. 

There was a long pause, during which 
neither of these two looked at one another. 
The old man's face had blanched a little, and 
his lips had trembled when Cissy gave him her 
reason for showing that likeness. But Cissy 
did not see those signs of emotion, and she 
simply thought him hard, deceitful, and stern, 
when he said, at last, . 

" And why do you tell me this ?" 

"Why, indeed!" she cried, jumping up, and 
holding out her hand for the painting. "Why, 



MISTAICEN JUDGMENTS. 76 

indeed ! give it back to me, Mr. Hepburn ; she 
was too good to be looked at lightly . too warm- 
hearted to be looked at coldly . too dear to me 
to be subjected to your scrutiny." 

"Does Arthur know what you know?" he 
asked, hesitatingly. 

" That you are her brother ? No. And as 
I am not proud of the relationship, neither my 
husband nor I will make any use of it . you 
may rest assured of that," she said, scornfully. 

" You simply assume that she was my sister 
from the fact of my having her likeness in my 
possession, Mrs. Scorrier ?" 

"I do nothing of the kind," Cissy said, 
hotly, utterly forgetting, in her wrath, the evil 
place Amelia would be in when her part in this 
discovery was brought to light. " You should 
have murdered old Mrs. Porter, when you 
murdered all your natural feelings, because 
your sister eloped with a riding-master." 

Mr. Hepburn started. " Shall I tell you more 
now you know so much?" he asked, in a low 
voice. "In my anger, my grievous sorrow at the 
disgrace she had brought on our family, I would 
never hear the name of the man she married." 



76 FALSE COLOURS. 

"Married?" Cissy interrupted. "You 
believed her to have married, and yet you 
were so cruel?" 

" I know her to have married," he said, 
proudly. " She sent me her marriage certifi- 
cate, and I sealed it up and put it in a drawer 
with some other papers that are not to be 
opened till after my death." 

** But you will give it to me now, Mr. 
Hepburn?" Cissy said, imploringly. Then 
she changed her tone, and said, "It is my right 
. I insist on having it ; how could you do it ; 
never to look at it . never to return it to 
her . to leave her without the means of 
proving herself a wife . to wound her pride, 
which was as great and blind as your own, to 
the extent of causing her to live under a 
cloud, . you are a hard, uncharitable man, 
Mr. Hepburn, and you make me loathe that 
morality for which you have sacrificed all 
natural feeling. Morality ! it was not even 
morality that made you leave your sister to 
privation and humiliation. My father's wife 
was an honourable woman, . how dared you 
behave as if she had been otherwise ?" 



MISTAKEN JUDGMENTS. 77 

*'I had ruled my own life severely enough," 
he began ; and then he remembered that the 
secret of the folly and sin of his youth was not 
quite his own any more. Mabel might confide 
it to her son, and then that son's wife would 
trample upon him, and tell him truths even 
more harshly than she w^as telling them now. 
So he halted in his statement, and tried another 
form of words. 

" I had tried to rule my life according to my 
position and responsibilities. These latter are 
heavy. We are looked up to as examples ; if we 
BO much as look leniently upon an evil course, 
many take it." (For a few moments he forgot 
the possibility of being found out, and talked 
in the strain that had always been his.) " I 
demanded no more of others than I conceded 
to those claims and responsibilities myself. I 
was her guardian ; I was rigorous in setting 
her a good example. I could forgive her now, 
were she alive ; but then, when I was conquer- 
ing inclination with duty myself, I could not 
do it. Let the dead past be buried still, as it 
has been for all these years, and try to think 
gently of me." 



78 FALSE COLOURS. 

But Cissy could not think gently of him . 
could not tolerate his expressions of regard for 
herself . could not feel that his conduct was to 
be extenuated in any way. She took that 
certificate of her mother's marriage, which he 
had never opened, from his hand, and went her 
way with it to her husband, for " the dead past 
may be buried to others, as far as I am con- 
cerned, but it must be resuscitated for Arthur,'* 
she said. " I will tell you, though, that 
Amelia knows about your sister, though she 
doesn't know that my mother and your sister 
were one person. Your policy has been a 
cruel and false one . I think you will find it a 
futile one, too, after all." When she had 
said, she went away to her own home, and 
there was no peace for her there. 



WHAT WILL CISSY THINK?" 79 



CHAPTEK V. 

** WHAT WILL CISSY THINK?" 

Meanwhile affairs had been progressing in a 
well-authenticated manner at the Scorriers' 
house . which was the stage on which the first 
part of Isabelle's drama of love was enacted. 
Miss Vargrave had chalked out a pleasant and 
blameless programme for the morning's enter- 
tainment of herself and her lover. The day 
was in her favour . at least it was favourable 
for the carrying out of her maidenly designs. 
It was a clear, crisp, October day. There was 
a ruddy golden hue in the atmosphere ; on the 
trees, and over the Virginian creeper-covered 
walls of Arthur Scorrier's. Eich purple 
shadows hung over the distant hills. The 
air was so light and clear that the rush and 
murmur of distant rivers fell upon the ear 
soothingly. The body was braced, and the 



80 FALSE COLOURS. 

blood brightened to a quicker flow involun- 
tarily. Isabelle could not help feeling triumph- 
ant and buoyant on this day, that was as 
bright as her prospects. There had been no 
time since the arrangement had been come to 
between them for her to reflect that Mr. Lister 
had certainly not entered into it enthusias- 
tically. All her thoughs centered on the 
happy truth that he had entered into it at 
all. 

She put on her hat as soon as Cissy had 
started for Glene, and sauntered about in the 
garden, making a very pretty pictm-e of 
" Waiting," if any one had been there to paint 
her. As it was, she painted herself in imagina- 
tion, and felt confident that Mr. Lister could 
not be anything but charmed with the portrait. 
In her bright blue serge costume, the salient 
points of which were picked out with dead- 
white braid, with her golden fluffy hair wrapped 
in loose coils high upon her head, with a 
Watteau shepherdess hat i)oised just over her 
eyebrows, and her fawn-coloured eyes fraught 
with] a feeling of happy success, beaming out 
from under the brim, Isabelle Var grave was, 



"what will cissy think?" 81 

physically, at a powerful advantage this morn- 
ing. 

Her brain, for the first time in her life, was 
teeming with thought. She knew that this 
marriage which she was going to make, was a 
better one in every way than either she or her 
friends had ever, in their most hopeful mo- 
ments, anticipated her making; she had always 
meant to marry money, but now, in addition 
to money, she had secured a man of good 
birth and position, of great cultivation, and 
considerable personal beauty. Miss Vargrave's 
heart swelled as she thought of how well she 
should look when she should be standing, 
covered with Honiton lace, at the altar of that 
church in the square, by the side of the tall, 
straight-limbed, stately man, whose attractions 
were of that speedily-recognized order that 
caused him to be called *' a glorious fellow " by 
gentlepeople, and a ''beautiful gentleman" by 
maid-servants. Her heart swelled a little more, 
even, as she reflected on what a much better 
match she was going to make than that which 
Cissy had made. " Not but what Arthur is a 
dear fellow," she thought; **but his manner 

VOL. III. G 



82 FALSE COLOURS. 

will get professional, and that I never conld 
endure." Then she thought of how delight- 
fully independent Mr. Lister was of all degrad- 
ing professional or social considerations, and 
acknowledged to herself that she was a very 
lucky girl. 

He came just as her thoughts had culmi- 
nated in this decision concerning herself, and 
she was in her best mood to meet him. He 
got off his horse, and threw the reins to a 
groom, and came forward on the path she was 
walking in to meet her, and her heart ceased 
to swell with happiness at once. Not a shade 
of the triumphant joy which had been render- 
ing her radiant all the morning was reflected 
in his face. He looked, on the contrary, pale, 
harassed, and humbled ; and she quickly 
caught the contagion, and moved in the fetters 
of embarrassment. 

Mr. Lister was very polite, very courteous, 
very kind even, in his manner to this girl, 
whom only the day before it had been settled 
should be his wife. But she would have dis- 
pensed with a little of the kindness, and with 
a great deal of the courtesy, if only he would 



** WHAT WILL CISSY SAY?" 83 

have made love to her. Miss Vargrave was 
well versed in the questionable art of flirting. 
She knew to a hair's-breadth how far to go, 
and when to stop, with a man in the ordinary 
way. But with this man, whom she was en- 
gaged to marry, she felt awkward, uncertain, 
and less graceful than was her wont. She was 
longing, little schemer as she was, for some 
sign of genuine, unconsidered love from him . 
for a touch from his hand, that should tell her 
in its tenderness that she was dear and pre- 
cious to him . for a glance from his eyes, that 
should delude her into the belief that never 
before had he so glanced at a woman . for a 
word from his tongue, that might justify her 
in whispering passionate nothings to him in 
return. 

And none of these encouragements were 
offered. Even when they had gained the se- 
clusion and concealment of the summer-house 
at the end of the garden, he neglected his pri- 
vileges to the extent of suffering her to work 
away at that sketch of Cissy's house, which 
was the avowed cause of their being at the 
extreme end of the garden. She was only a 



84 FALSE COLOURS. 

woman, and she had never before had a legiti- 
mate object on which to expend some of the 
warmth of her passionate little heart. She 
had gone through life so gaily and merrily, on 
the give-and-take principle, always looking 
forward to the day when the reign of idle fri- 
volity should be over, and the real monarch of 
her soul come to take possession of his king- 
dom. Now he had announced himself, and 
come to the gates, and she had gladly given up 
the key of her citadel, and still he would not 
enter in. 

He had embraced her on the previous day, 
just after they had come to that arrangement 
which had seemed so highly satisfactory in its 
binding power to her then, . he had embraced 
her, taken her graceful, yielding form into his 
arms, and pressed his lips to hers ; but now it 
flashed back upon her that he had done it in a 
measured way that did not betoken an irresis- 
tible inclination to do it. Now, this morning, 
ignominious as some people may deem such a 
confession concerning her, she was longing for 
him to kiss her again, and she was conscious of 
her heart's throbbing more quickly every mo- 



"what will cissy say?" 85 

ment as he delayed doing so. After all, there 
was nothing really ignominious in a girl who 
had promised to be a man's wife, wishing that 
man to give her that thrilling assurance that 
she was more to him than another. She felt 
that if his cool restraint continued much 
longer, she should quickly come down from 
her pedestal of triumph and success, and be a 
very heartsore, mortified girl. 

She was well versed in all the arts that 
women use to please and win. No one knew 
better than herself the value of a tender inflec- 
tion in the voice, of a tremble in the lips, of a 
softened light in the eyes. No one was more 
alive to the power that is temporarily vested in 
a woman's slender hand when she lays it con- 
fidingly on a man's strong arm. No one was 
more awake to the truth that love, freely dis- 
played towards themselves, makes strong men 
very weak sometimes. But she could not use 
her arts and her knowledge now as she sat by 
the side of the man to whom she was affianced, 
and longed for him to kiss her. 

A horrible feeling possessed her presently, 
as she strove to seem absorbed in her drawing, 



86 FALSE COLOURS. 

that he might be cold by nature, that he would 
go on, always giving her well-regulated affection, 
and never give her love. Then an even more 
horrible feeling smote her. Supposing some 
other had the power of winning him to warmth ; 
supposing he should let himself marry her, and 
let himself love somebody else ! and supposing 
she (Isabelle) should ever discover this fatal 
truth, and be compelled to live out her life 
uncaressed by the only one whose caresses she 
might receive in honour. 

Her hand trembled, and she threw her brush 
down, and leant back on the wooden bench on 
which she was sitting. As she leant back her 
shoulder touched his, and she started and 
blushed and trembled at the contact. But he 
only bent forward a little, and looked at 
the water-coloured attempt at reproducing 
the home of the old love . the still-loved . 
the married woman whom to dream of was 
dishonour. 

" I wonder if she will spend her life here ? '* 
he said, absently. 

" Spend her life here ; do you mean Cissy?'* 
Isabelle asked, nervously. 



"what will cissy say?" 87 

" Yes." He hesitated a moment, and then 
he went on, '*I can't imagine her doing it." 

" Oh, she does many things that you wouldn't 
imagine her doing," Isabelle said, impatiently. 
And he acknowledged the truth that she had 
hit unconsciously, and sorrowed that it was so 
. sorrowed that Cissy should have done the 
one thing which he could '* never have ima- 
gined her doing," namely, married another man. 

" Will you give me this little sketch when 
you have finished it?" he asked; and Isabelle, 
feeling a little flushed and pleased, asked him 
coquettishly, why he wanted it. His answer 
was given at once, and was what she had 
hoped and expected it to be. 

"I want it as a memento of this morning," 
he said, and in his anxiety to get it, he threw 
some of the tenderness he was feeling for her, 
who was the mistress of that house into the 
tones he addressed to his betrothed bride, and 
his betrothed bride was thoroughly satisfied 
that she had evoked the tenderness. 

" Of course I would give you that, or any- 
thing else you asked me to give you, Edward," 
she said, inclining towards him again ; and 



88 FALSE COLOURS. 

this time he did give her that for which she 
was longing . a kiss ! 

" Don't you think I ought to go in and pay 
my respects to Mrs. Scorrier ?" he said, after 
a pause ; and Isabelle's heart gave a jealous 
throb as she replied, 

" No, no, no ; why should you ? besides, 
. Cissy is gone to Glene." 

" Then shall I not have the pleasure of 
seeing her at all?" he said, in a voice from 
which he could not banish every tone of dis- 
appointment. He had been feverishly desirous 
of seeing Cissy this day . feverishly impatient 
to read in her face what she thought of him for 
forsaking first vows, though she herself had 
rendered those vows futile. 

" I dare say, if Cissy had thought you cared 
so much about seeing her, that she would have 
stayed at home, and sent me to Glene ; but, 
oddly enough, such a plan never occurred to 
either of us." All this Isabelle said poutingly, 
and Mr. Lister had a profound objection to 
being pouted at, therefore he made no reply, 
and Isabelle had another interval of chill, and 
chagrin, and disappointment. 



"what will cissy say?" 89 

After a brief pause, even at the risk of 
awakening the suspicions of his promised 
bride, Mr. Lister piade another effort to 
gratify the greatest interest he had in life. 

*' Will Mrs. Scorrier be at Glene all day?" 
he asked. 

" No ; I heard Arthur promise to ride with 
her this afternoon. She will hardly disappoint 
him," Isabelle answered. 

" No ; she will hardly disappoint one she 
loves so much," he said, feeling ashamed of 
himself for so hungering as he did to hear that 
Cissy did not love her husband so devotedly 
after all. 

"As for that," Isabelle said, feeling cross 
with Cissy, without well knov/ing why ; "as 
for that, Cissy is not too apt to consider other 
people ; if she amuses herself at Glene, Arthur 
may wait till another day for his ride." 

" Do you think she isn't very deeply attached 
to her husband?" he said, and as he said 
it, the evil passion for Cecile was upon him 
strongly. 

*' Eeally, I don't care to discuss the dejDth 
of her attachment to her husband," Isabelle 



90 FALSE COLOURS. 

said, rising up ; " she's rather hard about 
most things, a sort of woman who suffices to 
herself, and thinks occupation a panacea for 
most sorrows, and would have liked nothing 
better than to have gone on the stage, and all 
that sort of thing, that I can't bear. I have 
no doubt she does think herself very much 
thrown away on Arthur, and Danebury, 
and " 

" I thought you loved your cousin," he in- 
terrupted. 

" So I do," she said, blushing; "but," and 
then she paused, and stole a soft, loving look 
at him, and seemed embarrassed, until he 
asked her, 

"But what, Isabelle?" 

*' But I love some one else better now, and 
I would rather talk of him and think of him, 
alone. Can you forgive me the folly?" she 
said, in her softest voice. And he responded 
in the only way he could respond ; and her 
heart swelled with love and pride again, and 
she gave back his mute and spoken assurances 
as warmly, if not as sweetly, as Cissy had done 
of old. 



"what will cissy say?" 91 

But it was so strongly marked; the difference 
that existed between the two women was 
marked so very strongly. In this fawn-coloured 
girl, whose beauty was so massive and firm, 
and whose nature was so thin and fluctuating, 
he felt with painful force that he should never 
find a panacea for his life's disappointment 
about Cecile. The one, once having, would 
have the power to hold for ever. The other 
might bring him into bondage, but would never 
be the conqueror of his heart. 

Yet this other one had much about her that 
was pleasant to the taste and heart of a man. 
If only she would have been content with a 
semi-sincere liking and adulation ; if only she 
had lost him as lightly as she loved him ; if 
only, in fact, she had not led his feet into 
slippery places, and made him seem untrue to 
the ruling passions of his life. 

This, at least, must be conceded to him . he 
was not a narrow-minded, not a small-natured 
man. He was not a bit ashamed of himself 
for loving Cissy still, though she had got over 
her love for him so entirely. He had no sense 
of degradation in being constant to one who 



92 FALSE COLOURS. 

had been inconstant to him. It never occurred 
to him that he was inflicting the tortures of 
mortification on Cissy by remaining near to 
her now. He never felt stabbed in the way 
she did at the recollection of the time they had 
passed together, and of the incidents which had 
stamped the memory of that time in burning 
colours on her brain. He was absorbed in a 
great regret that she should have passed away 
from him as entirely as that time, . at least, he 
had been absorbed in this until now that an- 
other keener, fresher regret mingled with it ; 
and this was that he should have let himself 
fall into the folly of an engagement with Isa- 
belle Var grave. 

He liked the girl . the cousin of his own old 
love . too well to wish to hurt her in any way. 
But he did not love her nearly well enough to 
feel other than a loathing to the prospect she 
had forced him to contemplate. Yet there was 
no way out of the difficulty. He was not 
qualified by nature and practice to play the 
part of that despicable creature the jilt. ' He 
could not propose and carry out a plan for 
** throwing her over," and proceeding on his 



** WHAT WILL CISSY SAY?" 93 

path as if nothing had happened. He ac- 
knowledged to himself that there was nothing 
for him now hut a marriage with her, and he 
acknowledged it with a foreboding heart. 

In consequence of the restraint she could 
not fling off in his presence, and a little by 
reason of those financial difificulties which 
were beginning to make themselves felt in their 
establishment. Cissy had not been in good 
spirits lately ; and so, arguing from what he 
knew, as was natural, and utterly leaving out 
of consideration the countless circumstances 
he did not know, Mr. Lister believed her to be 
less happy than she was in her marriage, and 
less satisfied than she was with her fate. He 
deceived himself far more effectually than he 
had ever sought to deceive any one else, in 
Bpite of that taint of insincerity which Cissy 
fancied she had discovered in him. He attri- 
buted her depression to a re-awakened love for 
him, and his heart ached almost as much for 
her as for himself, as he projected himself into 
the future, and thought of all Cissy would have 
to endure in his marriage and in the hearing 
it discussed. 



94 FALSE COLOUES. 

These thoughts kept trooping through his 
brain as he sat silent and self-absorbed by Isa- 
belle's side ; and she fell into a flutter as she 
sat spoiling her sketch through nervousness 
and excitement . fell into a flutter that would 
have been flattering to him had he loved her, 
but that simply seemed a tedious claim on his 
attention in his present phase of feeling. 
And the sun obscured himself behind a cloud 
after the manner of the sun in autumn, and 
the rich crimsons and purples on the trees and 
in the distance paled and faded, and desolation 
reigned. 

She threw down her brush impatiently. 

** There ! " she said, '' the whole look of the 
thing has altered, and I can do nothing more 
to it ; this horrible changeable climate." 

"It is getting cold ; see how bleak every- 
thing is looking ; shall we go in ? " 

" I like the open air when I can be in it," 
Isabelle said, with sudden perversity ; "be- 
sides, it is no use our going in, there is no one 
at home I feel sure." 

"I see you look chilled," he persisted, feel- 
ing that there was a possibility of seeing Cissy 



"what will cissy say?" 95 

in the house, and that he could not stay away 
from that possibility any longer. " Come, I 
must take care of you," he added, smiling, 
and, for the sake of carrying his point, he put 
his arm round her exceedingly unresisting 
form. 

** When can you get Papa's answer . not till 
the day after to-morrow?" she said, in a low 
voice; and Mr. Lister tried to shuffle off the 
subject, for he had not yet written the question 
to Papa. 

" I dare say Mr. Vargrave will be in no 
hurry to tell me I may have you, if he does 
give his consent to my having you at all," he 
said, as gallantly as his feelings would permit. 

" I liope he will be in a hurry; my suspense 
will be awful until I hear it is settled," Isa- 
belle said, plaintively. *' I have written to 
Mamma, telling her that . no, I won't tell you 
what I have said." 

" You have written ! When does the post 
go out from Danebury ?" he asked. 

" It's gone by this time. At least I should 
think it is past two, is it not ? Oh yes, then 
the post is gone. Why do you ask?" 



96 FALSE COLOURS. 

" Because I didn't post my letter to your 
father this morning," he said, in some confu- 
sion. " I relied on the mail leaving Danebury 
later." 

"You have let a post go, after all," she said, 
her fair face crimsoning with a feeling that 
strongly resembled resentment. " What will 
they say ? What will Cissy think ?" 

" I would give my life to know that," he 
thought, but he only said, " What does it mat- 
ter ! the thing must be done, and will be 
done. Don't be indignant with me, Isabelle, I 
can't stand it. Let us go in." 

So Isabelle smoothed her ruffled plumes, 
and they went in together, just as Cissy came 
back from Glene. 



ONLY A KISS." '97 



CHAPTER VI. 

** ONLY A KISS." 

*' Arthur shall never borrow nor accept a penny 
from Mr. Hepburn. Never ! never ! whatever 
comes." This had been Cissy's resolve, the 
instant she heard that Mr. Hepburn was her 
mother's brother, and had dealt harshly by her 
mother. She had repeated the sentence to her- 
self a dozen times as she had been driving 
home, and she was now crouching on a sofa, 
with her face bent down on a pillow, repeating 
it as Mr. Lister and Isabelle came in. 

She had suffered a good deal this day. There 
had been much to harass her, and she could not 
offer a calm front to the happy pair who now 
came into the room. " Why won't they keep 
themselves and their raptures out of my sight?" 
she thought, bitterly, and a distorted feeling of 

VOL. III. H 



98 FALSE COLOURS. 

their not having acted uprightly towards her- 
self flashed across her mind. 

There had heen much to harass her. Every 
post brought a bevy of bills and urgent insolent 
demands for money, and the Scorriers had no 
money wherewith to satisfy those demands. It 
seemed to her that there had been no improvi- 
dence in the household management, and yet 
now that she came to inquire into it, thousands 
had been spent when only hundreds would have 
been justifiable. The horses could have cost 
little more than they had done during this past 
year if they had fed upon golden oats. Those 
ponies which were the pride of her heart had 
required new silver-plated harness, and their 
beauty had demanded a new park-phaeton. But 
after all, a hundred and eighty pounds covered 
that expense, so it could not be said that it was 
her extravagance which had ruined her husband. 
To be sure, there were those oppressive bills for 
her trousseau ; but as they had not been paid 
yet, Arthur's money had not gone for them. Her 
twenty-guinea saddle- and her hundred-guinea 
piano, the diamond star which Arthur was so 
proud of seeing sparkle on her brow, the rings 



" ONLY A KISS." 99 

with which he loved to adorn her lovely little 
hands, . all these things had cost money truly, 
but they ought not to have ruined a man in 
good practice, in such a practice as had been 
Arthur's when she married him. 

Spasms of self-reproach assailed her ! She 
had not been thinking much about his practice, 
or whether it was widening or decreasing lately. 
In the early days of her marriage she had de- 
termined to be very ambitious for her husband, 
had resolved to incite him to gain professional 
distinction, had vowed to be proud of his pro- 
fessional success. She remembered how elated 
she had been at Arthur's being called to that 
consultation which had taken place over Mr. 
Lister's bruised form. She remembered what 
glories she had prognosticated would ensue from 
that cui'e and its consequences. Above all, she 
remembered that when she had found Lister to 
be the lover of her youth, she had ceased from 
that earnest personal interest in her husband's 
pursuits and success which every wife who would 
be a true help-meet should feel. 

And now she was punished. Her mind was 
quite alive and awake now, and she was pun- 



100 FALSE COLOURS. 

ished. Things had gone wrong . must have 
been going wrong for a long time . and they 
were in a mesh of troubles, from which a little 
foresight would have saved them. 

She wondered she had not thought of it 
and spoken about it before. That partner of 
Arthur's . he whom Arthur had helped and put 
forward . had been undermining, and gradually 
superseding her husband. There had been 
little intercourse between the two families all 
along ; for Cissy had detected, and scornfully 
shown that she had detected, the rancorous 
envy and petty feeling with which Mrs. Monsell 
regarded her . Cissy. The little black-browed, 
sallow-faced woman had been unable to conceal 
the virulence of the hatred she felt for the 
bright, fascinating stranger who had come and 
apparently carried all things before her in the 
neighbourhood. Even in that little matter of 
going to Castlenau, Mrs. Monsell conceived that 
she had been worsted and injured by Cissy. 

" I never can be obsequious to people whom 
I can't recognize as my superiors in any real 
way, and I can't grovel," Mrs. Monsell would 
observe, tossing her tight, shining, black-haired 



'* ONLY A KISS.'* 101 

head. " Mrs. Scorrier has a much more 
humble opinion of herself and her husband's 
position than I have, thank goodness ! But 
there, the j)oor thing has never been noticed in 
society before, I should say; so it's a small 
wonder if her head is turned." 

And then Mrs. Monsell would go on to tell 
how she had been courted, and sought, and 
generally made much of in Bath; and how she 
had escaped the whirlpool of fashion and dissi- 
pation in order to become the admirable wife 
and mother she now was ; and other things to 
the same effect, to the delectation of her single- 
minded Danebury hearers. 

On the afternoon of this day, which had let 
Cissy into the secret of her mother's life, and 
Edward Lister into the truth that he would be 
very hard held to his bargain, Mrs. Monsell came 
to make one of her state calls on the senior 
partner's wife. Her visits to Mrs. Scorrier 
were very few, and made at very long intervals, 
for she was gradually building up a wall be- 
tween Mrs. Scorrier and the more severely 
respectable portion of the female inhabitants 
of Danebury. She had never said anything 



102 FALSE COLOURS. 

decidedly against Cissy, but she liad looked 
both suspicious and pitying, and both these 
looks are powerful weapons in the hands of ill- 
natured women. She had also openly avowed 
an intention of "being kind to Mrs. Scorrier," 
which avowal does more damage to the one 
about whom it is made than any other form of 
innuendo. 

How had it come about ? It is very hard to 
say decidedly, but it had come about that a 
certain portion of the old Baden-Baden story 
had got known in the neighbourhood. Whether 
Mr. Blayne had been harassed into confiding it 
to his wife, in the vain hope that she would 
cease all investigations into his share in the 
" Cissy" cause . or whether one of those mira- 
culous voices from afar (which are heard in 
real life very often), had been heard on the sub- 
ject . is not known. All that is known is that 
Mrs. Scorrier found herself looked at and lis- 
tened to as women who are supposed to have 
specs about them are looked at and listened 
to. 

She had been supreme in her indifference to 
all until now. Even when Amelia had said 



"only a kiss." 103 

to her, " Even your intimacy at Castlenau 
doesn't save you from evil report, Cissy," 
Cissy had not condescended to ask what the 
evil reports were, or to disclaim the " intimacy" 
at Castlenau, which no one knew better than 
Amelia, did not exist. She had been only too 
happy to accept the neighbourhood's estimate 
of herself, since it left her in peace. But now 
her faculties were all aroused, and the truth 
came home to her that she had been made a 
stumbling-block in her husband's path. 

She was thinking of this, and of many other 
perplexing things, when Lister and Isabella 
came in from the garden, and found her leaning 
on the sofa. " Luncheon is on the table still," 
she said, getting up, and giving him her hand, 
without looking at him. " I am not well this 
morning ; take my cousin in, and excuse me, 
will you not?" So he found himself forced 
into a further tcte-a-Ute with Isabelle, even 
while his mind was distraught with anxiety as 
to what caused Cissy's grief. 

By-and-by Isabelle left him to write a letter, 
which she might not have time to write to- 
morrow before post-time . an explanatory letter 



104 FALSE COLOURS. 

to her mother, relative to the delay in Mr. 
Lister's prayer for her hand. And while she 
was writing her letter, Mr. Lister went back to 
the drawing-room . and Cissy. 

She had got over all sentiment concerning 
him, but she had not got over all sentiment 
concerning that time of which he was the hero. 
He could not, therefore, have come before her 
at a more inauspicious moment than this. 

She sat up, and made an effort to look un- 
conscious, and free from embarrassment. 
But the effort was a failure, as all such efforts 
must be when they are made by a woman whose 
eyes are red, and whose face is swollen with 
crying. He did not like to say, " I fear I in- 
terrupt you," and retire, as would have been 
the more merciful course. So he paused by a 
small table, and played with a paper-knife, and 
a new volume of poems. 

** Where is Isabelle,Mr. Lister?" Cissy asked, 
presently. 

" Gone to write a letter, I believe," he said, 
slowly, and then he put the volume of poems 
down, and looked at her with a look that was 
fraught with apology, affection, and sympathy. 



" ONLY A KISS." 105 

He was longing to state some of the extenuating 
circumstances which had let him into this en- 
gagement, and he did not know how to begin. 

" I am afraid you are not very well this 
morning, Mrs. Scorrier." 

**Yes, I am quite well." 

" I thought I knew the expression of your 
face too well ever to give a wrong reading, and 
I read suffering in it now. For the sake of our 
old and dear friendship, have confidence in me 
now." 

*' Our old and dear fi-iendship was of a 
natm'e that will not bear to be spoken about 
between us now that I am married, and you 
are going to be married soon," she said, boldly. 
"As to having confidence in you, I have it to 
a great degree, still I shouldn't be justified in 
confiding my troubles to you. My husband is 
the privileged being who must bear the burden 
of them." She tried to smile, and speak cheer- 
fully, but her voice failed her. It is hard for 
a woman to point the path out to a man in 
such a case as this. Her heart and her judg- 
ment must be at issue, the one declaring for 
leniency, and the other for rigour. 



106 FALSE ' COLOURS. 

" I wish, to speak to you of my possible 
marriage." She gave him a sharp glance of 
interrogation as he said the word " possible;" 
and he corrected himself. " Of my contem- 
plated marriage, I should say ; will you give 
me leave to do it ?" 

**To do what?" 

" To speak to you about it." 

'' Certainly, Mr. Lister ; I am Isabelle's 
cousin. I love her as dearly as if she were my 
sister ; I owe her parents such a deep debt of 
gratitude for the home and the love they gave 
me, that I have a heartfelt interest in all that 
concerns their daughter ; of course you may 
speak to me about your marriage." 

" Will you allow me to speak of my own 
feelings ? ' ' 

" I rely on you not to say anything that I 
may not hear," she said, firmly. 

" I will not utter a word a saint might not 
listen to," he said, eagerly. " I will not pain 
you by dwelling on my long hopeless quest, 
on my ever-recurring disappointment, on the 
protracted agony of baffled love ." 

** You are like a woman. Dwelling on the 



''only a kiss." 107 

very things you start with avowing you will 
not dwell on ; the best example I know of that 
form of weakness is May's mother in ' The 
Cricket on the Hearth.' Do you remember 
what I mean ?" 

"I don't want to talk about May's mother," 
he said, stiffly. 

" But I do ; she's a delightful study of huf- 
finess and selfishness ; she would bring herself 
and her own feelings to the fore on every occa- 
sion, at any cost to other people." 

" You imply that I am doing the same. 
Cissy. Let me speak once before I'm con- 
demned by every consideration of honoui* to 
keep silence for ever." 

" Are you not already so condemned ?" 

" No, I think not ; I have a right to justify 
myself to you." 

" No such justification is needed, do believe 
that," she said, earnestly. "There has been 
suffering and unhappiness in our lives, through 
no fault of our own ; but that is all past, and 
the clouds have dispersed." 

" From your life, maybe, not from mine," he 
said, bitterly. 



108 FALSE COLOURS. 

** Don't force me to think less well of you 
than I love to think," she said, sadly. 

"Mrs. Scorrier, even at the risk of offend- 
ing you for a time I must speak ; my heart 
is not in this marriage I am going to make." 

" Then why are you going to make it at all ? 
Poor Isabelle," she said, passionately. 

" Why ! why, indeed ! and yet you would be 
the one to blame me most severely if I did not 
make it now." 

"Yes, now . now that you have given her 
the right to show her feelings." 

"Mrs. Scorrier, she showed her feelings 
before." 

" I did not think I should ever hear such 
ungenerous w^ords about a woman from your 
lips." 

" You are like the rest of the world ; because 
I think Miss Yargrave a beautiful girl, and an 
attractive girl, and because I have shown that 
I do consider her these things, I stand com- 
mitted in your mind to marry her, since she 
wills it." 

" Not because of that alone, but because you 
have asked her to marry you, Mr. Lister." 



*' OMLY A KISS." 109 

Cecile spoke coldly, reprovingly ; and still 
aggrieved as she was on Isabelle's account, 
she could not restrain a certain thrill of 
pleasure when she heard fi'om his own lips 
that she was not dethroned in his heart yet. 
She was only a woman, and it is so hard for a 
woman to be superseded. 

"If I told you why I asked, and how I 
asked, her to marry me, you would think me a 
coxcomb, and I can't be thought ill of by you, 
Cissy. I had condemned myself to a solitary 
life. I will not tell you why ; you know the 
reason as well as I do. I am not thankful to 
your cousin for making that self-condemnation 
null, but I will try to make her happy. Love 
is over for me . or at least the hope of grati- 
fying it went out some months ago, when I 
woke from the stupor consequent on an 
accident, and heard that all was marred to 
me in life, because one was married." 

He had drawn nearer to her as he was 
speaking, and now, as she sat motionless, with 
downcast head, he was close to her, so close to 
her that she could see he was trembling. She 
was blaming him bitterly for speaking, and 



110 FALSE COLOURS. 

blaming herself still more bitterly for listening 
to him . she whom Arthur trusted so fully and 
entirely . she ! a married woman, and he the 
plighted husband of her own cousin, whom she 
had declared to be dear as a sister. Sinless 
as she was in the matter, she felt a very 
sinner, as she roused herself at last, and rose 
from the sofa, saying, " I have heard you too 
long, Mr. Lister;" and he muttered in reply, 

" Forgive me, let me kiss your hand once," 
and was pressing his lips to it as Mrs. Monsell, 
taking in the whole scene, and all its possible 
meanings, sailed along the room. 

Cissy, flushed, agitated, unhappy, distrustful 
of her approaching guest, miserably conscious 
that she had been wanting, not in rectitude of 
purpose, but in rigour of demeanour, looked the 
very picture of guilt. There was a look of 
satisfied vindictiveness on Mrs. Monsell' s sallow 
face that frightened Cissy, brave as Cissy was 
in the ordinary exigencies of life. A vague 
dread assailed her that some lie, which was 
part a truth, might get abroad, and damage, 
not only herself, but Arthur. Hitherto secure 
in the consciousness of the perfect integrity of 



"only a kiss." Ill 

her conduct and thoughts, she had been rash 
in making reckless defiant assei-tions respecting 
herself and her proclivities. What if these 
should be brought against her now, and fitted 
ingeniously, by spite and malice, to circum- 
stances. That kiss on the hand would be 
wafted all over the country, and she would 
have to expiate it in poverty, obloquy, and 
isolation. 

Stammering and blushing, unable to control 
her voice or her colour, she introduced Mr. Lis- 
ter to Mrs. Monsell, and had the satisfaction of 
seeing that lady acknowledge the introduction 
as warmly and courteously as a Capulet would 
have welcomed a Montague in the period an- 
terior to Juliet's indiscretion. Then Cissy tried 
the weather, and that failed her. And then, in 
despair, she questioned concerning the Dane- 
bury people. 

"Had Mrs. Monsell seen the Pottingers 
lately?" 

Mrs. Monsell had; they were nice, quiet, 
thoroughly good people, who could be known 
without fear or reproach. 

"Yes," Cissy said, desperately, "they are 



112 FALSE COLOURS. 

as good, and simple, and refreshing, as the cow- 
slips in the meadow, to me." 

*' I do not like to turn such truly excellent 
people into ridicule hy comparing them to 
flowers which they do not in the least resem- 
ble," Mrs. Monsell said, with almost insolent 
coolness. Then she rose up to go away, having 
stayed exactly five minutes, and Cissy felt her 
cheeks glowing with the fury only an unjustly 
assailed woman can feel. 

Mrs. Monsell departed, and called at the 
Pottingers ''in passing," and . ^but it is need- 
less to follow "the trail of the serpent" . suffice 
it to say that before nightfall nearly all Dane- 
bury knew of Mrs. Scorrier's dereliction from 
wifely duty, and pitied Mrs. Monsell for being 
placed in the painful position of being com- 
pelled to mark her sense of shock concerning it. 

As for Cissy, her odious little visitor had no 
sooner got outside the drawing-room door than 
she turned to Mr. Lister, with interlaced fin- 
gers, strongly clenched together. 

"It's absurd for us to attempt to ignore this 
to each other . most unwittingly you have done 
me an injury . that woman will make more of 



" ONLY A KISS." 113 

what she saw than ever has been made of a 
kiss before." 

** I would give my life to serve you," he 
said. 

" That's one of the things men say kindly, 
without knowing how utterly futile the saying 
is. You can't serve me. If I had a jealous, 
weak-minded husband, you might vow and swear 
to him, but m}^ simple statement will be enough 
for Arthur. I shall tell him all that has hap- 
pened, Mr. Lister, and leave him to deal with 
the world. You cannot serve me." And then 
she went away from him, looking so brave and 
gentle, so womanly, and refined, and strong, 
that he loved her more dearly than ever. 



VOL. III. 



114 FALSE COLOURS. 



CHAPTEE VII. 

MISJUDGED. 

" But, Arthur, all my feelings are in revolt at 
the idea of asking him for aid." 

*' I don't see what else I am to do." 
" Don't do that, at any rate ; let us struggle, 
suffer, do anything, rather than i3ut oui'selves 
under obligations to him." 

"He is your uncle, after all. Cissy." 
*' My uncle ! Oh ! dear me, the reproach of 
that relationship should not be brought against 
me. Amelia has been to see me this morning, 
giving me her husband's high moral and social 
sentiments at second-hand ; preaching his 
excellence to me until I loathe excellence ; I 
don't want him to make poor amends to my 
mother now, by being kind to me in a half-and- 
half way." 

*' After all, your mother was a little to 
blame, Cissy." 



MISJUDGED. 115 

"I don't see that at aU." 

" Oh, yes she was ; she was most obstinately 
reserved about her marriage, for instance. She 
cut off her own nose to sj)ite her face, because 
she was savage with her brother." 

" Her want of judgment does not make his 
conduct less detestable." 

" Then, my dear child, you must take into 
consideration that he is a man who has a right 
to judge others sternly, if ever a human being 
had ; placed in such a position, and subjected 
to great temptations, to have lived as he has 
lived is something." 

" His goodness is of the cold, chilling order, 
Arthur ; I should be able to love him, perhaps, 
if he had sinned and suffered ; but he has never 
done either, and I wish to cut our bond of 
union utterly ! utterly ! I don't want to have 
anything to do with him any more ; I hate 
favours at his hands ; I want you to leave 
Danebury." 

*' I cannot. Cissy." 

"Why not? Why stay here where I am 
miserable ; where I am looked coldly upon by 
some ; where we are under a most undeserved 



116 FALSE COLOURS. 

cloud ? You know as well as I do what is 
said, and thought, and looked, about me. Why 
do you stay and suffer it, loving me as you 
do?'* 

*' Because I can't afford to leave the place, 
because I haven't the money to carry us away. 
Cissy, don't torture me . don't ask me to do 
what I can't do, don't break my heart by being 
miserable here where your lot is cast, my 
darling." 

She had broken down, as he told her that he 
could not go, and why he could not go. Broken 
down, and burst into a bitter lamentation that 
pierced her husband's heart. It was such a 
cruel truth that came home to her as she 
listened to his words. They seemed to con- 
demn her to an existence here amongst people 
who looked upon her doubtingly ; and in spite 
of that often openly avowed Bohemianism of 
hers, it was so much to her to be in good 
repute, now that her good name and fair fame 
were matters of vital importance to her 
husband. 

" Don't break my heart by being miserable 
here, where your lot is cast," he repeated ; and 



MISJUDGED. 117 

she flung her arms round his neck and asked 
him, . 

"Is it cast here for long, Arthur ? Tell me 
that we shall get away in time . limit my 
period of agony ; you don't know what I suffer 
daily, hourly, in the way of downright slights 
and half-civilities. Amelia has dealt me a 
cruel hlow to-day. They have a dinner at 
Glene on Tuesday, and she explained to me why 
they couldn't ask us. Mrs. Walter Bracey is 
very particular, and while certain rumours are 
fresh, &c." 

"My poor girl !" 

" Don't sj)eak in that tone . don't look in 
that way at me," she sohbed, vehemently. 
" Heaven help me ! these people call them- 
selves Christians, and profess a creed which 
professes charity ; yet they are doing all in 
their puerile powers to make me as bad as they 
think me." 

" My own darling, those whose judgment 
we regard will always think well of you," he 
said, soothingly. 

" That's nonsense, such nonsense ; we regard 
the judgment of those who are more imme- 



118 FALSE COLOURS. 

diately about us . we can't help doing so ; it's 
all very well being high-minded and loftily 
indifferent about evil repute in the abstract ; 
but high-mindedness and lofty indifference 
doesn't spare us a single pang when evil repute 
causes us to be snubbed, and looked down upon 
by our inferiors. The kindest thing I get now 
is good-natured contumely, and I can't go on 
living here." 

" What are we to do ?" he said, despairingly, 
'* you won't let me ask him for money to take 
us away, and he has been so kind to me, j)oor 
old fellow . so sympathetic and . ." 

"Sympathetic!" Cissy cried, ''he believes 
everything horrid of me, I know, and elects to 
be sympathetic with you on the subject." 

"How you do exaggerate," Arthur said, 
deprecatingly. "After all, there has never been 
a definite accusation brought against you . if 
they did, they should ache for it. A lot of old 
women have got hold of a mare's nest; you 
needn't mind them." 

"Don't you see that my path is infested 
with old women?" she said. "If we were in 
the world, their opinion of me wouldn't matter, 



MISJUDGED. 119 

but here they make up one's life ; they are 
round me on every side. My only alternative, 
if I would not be a tolerated woman, is to be an 
involuntary recluse. I have no vocation for 
such a career.'* 

**Bear it, for my sake, a little longer," he 
said, imploringly. *' Strengthen yom'self with 
the consideration of this truth, that my only 
care in the matter is for you . the only annoy- 
ance I feel is on jour account ; as for what 
Mrs. Hepbm*n has said to-day, I can't realize 
your being annoyed at it. Mrs. Walter Bracey 
bored you, at her best, when you were at Castle- 
nau ; here, at Glene, where she'll feel herself a 
Triton among minnows, she would be unen- 
durable to you." 

"Arthur, you know as well as I do that it is 
the motive of the omission, not the omission 
itself, that grates upon me ; but I won't vex. 
you with my feeble struggles to break through 
the web of my difficulties any more." And as 
Cissy said this, she looked the look which is of 
all others the hardest for a man to endure . 
resigned. 

This conversation had taken place between 



120 FALSE COLOURS. 

them one dull November day, about a month 
after that lapse from judgment on Mr. Lister's 
part which had fallen under the notice of Mrs. 
Monsell. During that month much had been 
done and undone. The Scorriers had put down 
their carriage and horses, and had been put 
down in their turn by the great majority in 
and around Danebury. Isabelle Vargrave had 
gone home to prepare gorgeous raiment for 
her marriage, which, it was understood, was 
to take place in one of the early spring 
months. But Mr. Lister was still resident 
at the Den. 

During this month Cissy Scorrier had been 
given many opportunities of studying the stu- 
pendous power which is vested in the hands of 
every woman, no matter how weak she may be, 
when once she is enabled to take her stand as 
a scorner of one of her own sex. Mediocrity 
was rampant in the town village in which 
Cissy's lot was cast . the mediocrity of narrow 
education and small experience, and isolation 
from central interests, and the enlarging in- 
fluences of art and art topics. The ladies who 
represented the softer and more refined elements 



MISJUDGED. 121 

of life in Danebury were for the most part 
daughters of the land, who knew all about 
themselves and each other, and concluded that 
outside that full knowledge of themselves and 
each other was little worth knowing. The 
views that were held by their acquaintances 
were right or wrong in proportion to the near- 
ness of relationship that existed between them- 
selves and those who held them. Their 
judgment reeled and tottered under shocks 
from speculative works that had been com- 
batted and refuted, or accepted because found 
true long enough ago for the authors to have 
ceased to be the heroes of the day. They had 
their own little code of manners and standard 
of breeding, grounded upon the traditions of 
their equally enlightened ancestresses, and the 
instructions of some country-town preceptress. 
They kept a firm grasp of nothing in particular, 
which imparted an air of solidity to their set. 
Above all, they were strong in their power of 
feeling and expressing suspicion of the unknown. 
Now this is a society into which a happy 
prosperous stranger can adventure with safety, 
if not with pleasure. These women, who are 



122 FALSE COLOURS. 

founded on a rock, may form themselves into 
battle-array against her, but they have no 
opportunity of striking a blow for the virtue 
and respectability which she does not outra'ge, 
but just takes in the order of things. It is 
only when the stranger in their borders seems 
at a disadvantage through depression . or want 
of the funds which are never actually wanting 
in their well-regulated exchequer, or by reason 
of being breathed upon by that light but fatal 
breath of scandal which destroys as surely as 
the vapours under the upas-tree. It is only 
when the stranger is circumstanced thus that 
local worth does its best to crush erratic 
worthlessness. 

Cissy was so circumstanced now, and all 
Danebury was true to itself, and to the habits of 
its order. They were one for all, and all for 
one, in their forays upon her. Disregarding 
the fact that she about whom '' they had never 
heard anything before Mr. Scorrier brought her 
there as his wife," might have a private sorrov/ 
which was not disgraceful, they pronounced her 
guilty in their own minds at the first whisper 
that she might be so. Even old Mrs. Pottinger 



MISJUDGED. 123 

grew tearful when she saw Cissy, and imparted 
it to that sufferer as a grand, though terrible, 
truth that " if you once get wrong in Dane- 
bury, you never get right there again." In 
corroboration of which assertion she proceeded 
to quote a variety of cases of feminine iniquity, 
which she seemed to take it for granted bore 
some degree of comparison to Cissy's. 

And x\rthur was away from her so much at 
this juncture. Striving vainly by extreme 
attention to individual cases to reinstate him- 
self in that general esteem and confidence 
which had gone over to Mr. Monsell. Nothing 
fails so fast as a failing cause. Even the poor 
people whom he mended and drenched for 
nothing gave time-serving preference to the 
florid kindness of the junior partner. 

Cissy made one or two efforts to re-establish 
herself. She despised herself for making them, 
knowing that the necessity for doing so was 
laid upon her undeservedly. Still she reminded 
herself of the social duty concerning Arthur, 
and bent her neck in the performance of it. 

Her first effort was a painful one. She 
arranged a party, and asked the people who 



124 FALSE COLOURS. 

had been holding themselves aloof from her 
awkwardly, to her house. The answers to 
her invitations were either excuses or con- 
ditional acceptances, and when the evening 
came Mrs. and the Miss Pottingers were the 
only ladies present. Then she made a still 
harder effort. Braced herself up to the dis- 
agreeable task of telling a man that for her 
honour's sake he must not show her common 
civility. " You must not even call on me, Mr. 
Lister," she said, sorrowfully, to him the first 
time he came to see her after Isabelle's 
departure. 

'' That will be acting, indeed, as if the past 
intimacy had been reprehensible . that will be 
the falsest move that we can make," he said, 
vehemently. 

" Nevertheless, we must make it, if j^ou 
please," she said, a little more decidedly than 
he liked to hear Cissy sj)eak, in opposition to 
him. 

This last effort of hers was rendered null and 
void by Arthur when he heard of it. 

*' I agree with Lister, it would be condemning 
yourself out of your own mouth to forbid his 



MISJUDGED. 125 

presence in your house, Cissy ; he's my friend, 
and he's going to marry your cousin ; what 
reason could be given for banishing him ? 
Besides, he relieves the monotony a little." 

"Most painfully," Cissy said. ''However, 
it's inevitable." 

"What is inevitable?" her husband asked. 

" That I am to be in constant communica- 
tion with him . that I am to seem dependent 
on him for all the variety in my life." 

" Yes, why not ; I am sure it is better to 
show these people, who have misunderstood 
things, that I am quite satisfied. Observe a 
happy medium in your manner with him, and 
all will be well again in a few months." 

" By all being well, you mean that I shall 
be readmitted into the society which has 
bent its poor mind to the task of proving me 
unworthy. No, Arthur ; no, no ! I would 
rather live and die in a desert, barely tolerated 
by wild beasts, than submit myself to the 
tender mercies of the inhabitants of this dis- 
mal swamp any more." 

Mr. Scorrier had offered his wife admirable 
advice in counselling her to observe the happy 



126 FALSE COLOURS. 

medium in her manner towards Mr. Lister. 
But Cissy was not one of that order of women 
who can observe a happy medium on compul- 
sion. Now that an unfortunate combination 
of events had forced her into a greater inti- 
macy with her old lover than was wise or well, 
at the same time that an equally untoward and 
unfortunate combination of events had forced 
her out of all authorized intimacy with the 
British matronhood about her, Cissy leant 
upon, and got the most that she could out of it. 
The old feeling of humiliation and embarrass- 
ment, which had been her dominant sensation 
when their reunion was new, had been dead- 
ened by habit. She suffered herself now to 
depart back to an older phase of feeling ; and, 
secure in the integrity of her heart and con- 
duct, seemed to the Danebury world to be 
skating on very thin ice. 

Given the foregoing circumstances, and the 
result could easily be prognosticated. He was 
idle, and she was unhappy, restless, weary of, 
and offended by, those who were around. So 
they read together, as of old. Once more he 
guided her pencil and her taste. They rode 



MISJUDGED. 127 

together ; she on a horse of his, since she had 
none of her own ; and gradually the happy 
light came hack to her eyes, and the healthy 
colour to her cheeks, and she hrightened hack 
outwardly into the Cissy of old. 

It was easy enough of explanation, this 
apj)arently immoral miracle. With the total 
cessation of all intercourse between herself 
and the Danebury world, all strain to please 
them, and to satisfy their minute and tedious 
claims, w^as over. She was the incessant 
object of attention to two men, who were de- 
voted to her, and who made her feel that how- 
ever lowly she might rank in the estimation of 
others, she was still a queen regnant to them. 
There was a lazy luxuriousness about the life 
that pleased her for a while. She was never 
called upon to make petty social sacrifices ; 
never compelled to interrupt the train of beau- 
tiful or lofty thought engendered by the reading 
of some book, by little talks and walks, and 
tea-parties. Her life was ordered very solitarily, 
it is true ; but in such refined solitariness it is 
possible enough to live for a time very plea- 
santly. People passed her now with almost 



128 FALSE COLOURS. 

imperceptible bows, as she walked out over the 
crisp winter roads, escorted frequently by her 
husband, and invariably by Mr. Lister ; and 
she had reached the stage of not desiring that 
it should be otherwise, when the Yargraves 
began to sound notes of preparation about the 
wedding. 

Mr. Lister had been through the ordeal of 
an interview with the father and mother of the 
lady to wdiom he had made an offer . or, 
rather, who had honoured him by accepting an 
offer before it was made. He had been through 
the ordeal, and had deported himself in a way 
that was extremely satisfactory to Mr. and 
Mrs. Yargrave, who were gratified with the 
largeness of his views on such subjects as set- 
tlements. But he had not deported himself in 
a way that was satisfactory to Isabelle. He 
had been obviously impatient of the ordeal, 
and had passed through it with more celerity 
than grace, according to her judgment. Yet 
she would not for the world have let the others 
know that she did deem him wanting in that 
observance which she had been accustomed to 
consider due from the lover to the loved. He 



MISJUDGED. 129 

bad diued -^ith tlie Yargraves one Sunday 
night, and had gone to church at the corner of 
the square, with Isabelle, in the evening ; and 
he had done both these things with an air that 
was unmistakable to the girl, of not liking 
to do them. The amplitude of the settle- 
ments gave promise of a bright future, other- 
wise she could hardly have endured the 
present. 

Perhaps Mr. Lister had never passed an even- 
ing in his life that was more opposed to his 
notions of how an evening in his life should be 
passed, than this Sunday evening in Ladbroke 
Square. He had been ushered into the house 
with a suppressed smirk from the footman, 
and he had been welcomed into the drawing- 
room with a blush from Isabelle, and both 
these things were eminently distasteful to him. 
Then he had been asked to form one of a 
" family party," and he found the family party 
included Isabelle' s godfather, and that god- 
father's daughter, a giggling school-girl, who 
grew preternaturally serious whenever his eyes 
accidently roamed her way. His bonds were 
heavy upon him, and Isabelle saw that they 

VOL. III. K 



130 FALSE COLOURS. 

were so, and pitied him . and pitied herself 
more. 

His bonds were very heavy upon him ! Mr, 
Vargrave gave him port wine after dinner, and 
advice about the investment of idle cash. And 
when he had tided his temper through these 
difficulties, the school-girl friend accompanied 
Isabelle and himself to church, and would walk 
behind them, and before them, and in the 
gutter at their side, and in other awful places, 
in order to be out of their way. And when he 
came back from his religious exercise, the 
"family feeling" prevailed again, and Mrs. 
Vargrave treated him to a soft sleep and a 
snore or two in her arm-chair by the fire. 

The burden of it all became intolerable to 
him before the evening was over, and he re- 
solved that, let what would come, he would not 
take out portions of his punishment before they 
were legally due. In the days to come it would 
be his duty to go to church with Isabelle, be- 
cause she would be his wife. Also in the order 
of things, the obligation to drink her father's 
port, and sit and watch the sleep and hear the 
snores of her mother, might be laid upon him. 



MISJUDGED. 131 

But he had not taken these duties and obliga- 
tions upon himself legally yet, and he could 
not practise them for pleasure. 

So he went back to the Den to relieve the 
monotony of Cissy's life, leaving Isabelle with 
the sore conviction that, though she was going 
to be avowedly everything in the world to him, 
she was nothing at all now. A conviction 
that she fought against daily, and that daily 
gathered strength, as she went on the round of 
frivolous shopping that is the preliminary path 
along which most young women pass to matri- 
mony. 

As for him, he was not an advocate of fre- 
quent letter-writing, or of engaged people being 
absorbed in one another, of an}i;hing that might 
conduce to the furtherance of the folly to 
which Isabelle was inclined. So he strengthened 
her convictions after his return to the Den, and 
by-and-by Cissy noticed with sadness, a de- 
crease in the warmth of Isabelle' s letters to 
herself. 

That Mrs. Scorrier did not suffer more under 
the coolness than Isabelle did in displajdng it, 
cannot be denied. Hard things had been heard 



132 FALSE COLOURS. 

from Glene by the Fosters relative to Cissy and 
Mr. Lister. For a little time Isabelle affected 
a blithe indifference when they told her " how 
sorry Amelia was to be obliged to tell them 
that Mrs. Scorrier was cut by everybody." But 
when they grew bolder, and added that Amelia 
was grieved to relate that *' it was on account 
of Mr. Lister that Cissy was cut," the assumed 
indifference broke down, and the poor girl was 
heartily miserable, and entirely to be pitied, 
although her misery made her unjust to her 
cousin. She dared not confide her doubts and 
fears to her father and mother, for fear her 
father and mother should insist on inquiring 
and investigating into things, and she felt sure 
that no amount of inquiry and investigation 
would improve the position of affairs. So in 
the family circle she pooh-poohed the reports 
that had reached them, via Amelia and the 
Fosters, and debated with her mother as to the 
advisability of having admission tickets to see 
her trousseau printed. But though she did 
these things, her letters to Cissy grew sensibly 
cooler, and Cissy fathomed the reason why, and 
shrank from touching upon it in her answers. 



MISJUDGED. 133 

*' It will be well when they are reamed," she 
thought, and then an indignant feeling caused 
her heart to throb. When they were married, 
he would be made to condemn her by ceasing 
to be her friend to all outward appearances, 
until they were all too old for Isabelle to feel 
jealousy, or for Lister to cause it. 

Until they were all too old for these things, 
and until that time, could it be that fate was 
to fasten her down here, where she was com- 
pletely unappreciated, and comparatively use- 
less ? The answer to this question was given 
in time. 



134 FALSE COLOURS. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

A LIVING GRIEF. 

" All ! dearest, if our tears were shed, 
Only for our beloved dead." 

Outwardly Mrs. Scorrier's life was so very much 
the same, but inwardly it was so horribly altered. 
Nursing her grief and her memories had been 
a panacea to her woe for so many years, that 
now when her grief was i)i'oved causeless, and 
her memories false, she seemed to herself to be 
like a helmless bark upon the ocean of life. 

Just at first after her return to Penzance, 
after the discovery she had made, old Mrs. Scor- 
rier allowed herself to be what her servants 
termed, in answer to kind inquiries, " very low." 
She abstained from going to the shops where 
she was expected as confidently as the postman. 
She hurried home from church in order to 
avoid the kindly salutations which had been 
wont to be offered to her by her fellow- worship- 



A LIVING GRIEF. 135 

pers of ever so many years standing. She 
refused all the little stiffly worded but genially 
meant invitations to tea which were sent to her. 
She left off taking the local journal which had 
enabled her to revel in all the local gossip, and 
improved time, opportunity, and her mind by 
the perusal of books whose dulness and good- 
ness was of the ghastly order. But after a 
time she freed herself from the trammels of 
these false heroics, and partially resumed some 
of the occupations of her daily life. 

Some of them, but not all. Not the tenderest, 
the most sacred, the dearest of them. That 
daily prayer for the soul of the dearly loved 
who had died (as she had thought) with all his 
follies fresh upon his young head. That weekly 
visit to his tomb . that trembling, loving, half- 
pitiful, wholly-forgiving adorning of his grave 
with flowers . those long psalms of praise 
which she had sung to him . all these things 
were dropped, given over, utterly ceased from, 
as though they had been sins. 

For the daily prayers would have had no 
object, and the weekly visit no honest goal ; 
and the flowers would only have served to deck 



136 FALSE COLOURS. 

a lie, and the paeans of praise would have heen 
sung to an exploded deception., For he lived, 
hoary and prosperous, happy and old, whom 
she had mourned for with heartfelt mourning 
for thirty years, as pitiable, unfortunate, dead ! 

At last a change came ; but a day shall be 
daguerreotyped at Penzance in order to portray 
this change properly. 

A fat-looking, amber-coloured mist hung over 
Penzance in the morning, it was only at nine 
o'clock that the waters broke through it, and 
asserted themselves as clear and comparatively 
blue. The town woke up lazily to the fact, 
and the landlords of the various hotels caused 
bustle to reign in their habitations in order to 
induce a belief in the hearts of those who were 
sojourning with them that " fellow creatures " 
were going sight-seeing, and that there was a 
great deal to be done. Mrs. Scorrier, sitting 
at her quiet breakfast-table, felt thankfully that 
this was a good day for the tourists, and for 
the hotel keepers, and for a vast portion of the 
big human family in fact. Thinking this, she 
got up and stood at her window, and the 
winter sun stole in and rested on one cheek 



A LIVING GRIEF. 137 

and shoulder lovingly, and she thought of how 
its slanting beams were lying on the graves, 
and of how they were dancing on the waters 
of "Mount's Bay," and she fell to wondering, 
as she had wondered every day since she had 
seen Mr. Hepburn in the gallery at Glene, who 
that man was who had lost his life in those 
waters, and whose corpse had been rescued and 
buried in that grave. 

"Who was he, and what had he been like ; 
and had his death made as real a gap in some 
other woman's life, as it had falsely seemed to 
make in hers ? Had his name really been that 
which she still bore, Scorrier ; or was the 
lettering on the tombstone as false as the rest ? 
Her faith in all concerning him had been so 
utterly shaken by the revelation that had been 
most unwillingly made to her, that she almost 
believed that there was nothing under that 
tombstone save an empty coffin. The one w^hom 
she had imagined filling it for thirty years had 
suddenly stood before her in the flesh. Why 
should not the grave be as void of all things 
save deceit and fraud as all else ? 

This was a frequent phase of feeling with 



138 FALSE COLOURS. 

her . a feeling that grew upon her and deepened 
within her and made her life more and more 
desolate each day. Since her return from 
Danebury, in the spring, she had never so much 
as glanced at that grave which had been the 
object of her tenderest care for so many 3^ears 
. that grave which had defrauded her out of 
so much lamentation and mourning. It seemed 
almost as if she nourished anger and resent- 
ment against it, like as though it had been a 
living enemy w^ho had mocked her. On such 
days as these . these sunny winter days . the 
sore feeling always predominated. For on 
them she had been wont to go and j)lace pretty 
little devices in vividly coloured immortelles on 
the grave, and so she felt now that her occupa- 
tion was indeed gone . felt it angrily, bitterly, 
miserably. 

She stood at the vandow for a long time, the 
sunbeams still gently kissing her soft cheek, 
and burnishing her silver hair. She blushed 
occasionally, a hot indignant blush, as it 
occurred to her that some genuine, rightful 
mourners for the man who slept beneath, might 
have seen and marvelled at her tributes, often. 



A LIVING GRIEF. 139 

If they had clone so what conclusion could they 
have come to ahout her. That she was half- 
witted i)erhaps ? or . she tried to pause in her 
thoughts even, and shuddered to find that she 
could not bear to be considered what she was. 
And then she thought of her son, and of how 
dearly she had loved his father, and of how that 
love had been abused, subjected to such indig- 
nities as made the passion seem a crime, a 
folly, and a degradation ; and presently the 
sunbeams glistened and glittered upon fast 
falling tears. 

Ai-thur's difficulties were very much in her 
mind this day, for that he was in painful 
difficulties she knew full w^ell. She had re- 
organized and reduced her establishment in 
order to be able to help him a little. But as 
she had once said prox)lietically, the little 
money she could give him was but as a drop in 
the ocean of his debts, and she thought harder 
things than ever of Mr. Hepburn for suffering 
such a state of things to exist. 

" I have made a promise to him to keep 
silent about my great wrong," she said to her- 
self, " but I will break it without compunction 



140 FALSE COLOURS. 

if needs be, to serve my son." She did not 
know that Mr. Hepburn had offered aid to 
Arthur, and that Arthur's wife had spurned it. 
She only felt jealously that a little child was 
living at Glene, pampered and honoured, who 
was destined, if he lived, to a career of afflu- 
ence, of good repute, and great consideration ; 
while her own boy, the eldest son of that 
child's father, was left to struggle and to 
suffer. She forgave Arthur all his improvi- 
dence and extravagance. They were qualities 
which had been fostered by fate and that false 
friend and falser father who was now leaving 
him to bear all the brunt of their ill-effects. The 
solitude of her own house grew unbearable to 
the poor old lady as she reflected on these 
things, so she went out and wandered about 
vaguely. Eealizing that sad truth which Tom 
Hood the younger has sung so sweetly : 

" Ah ! dearest, if our tears were shed, 
Only for our beloved dead, 
Life would not be so bitter-sweet 

As now." 

Later in the day she went to visit some sick 

and sorrowful women of the class who cannot 

be legislated for, some members of that saddest 



A LIVING GRIEF. 141 

of all sisterhoods, which by the grossest satire 
is termed '' Gay." And she relieved some 
cruel wants, and heard some cruel facts, and 
listened to some piteous truths, and came out 
from the contact with them, feeling more tender 
towards human error in every form, than she 
had been in the morning. 

The light was dying out of the sky when she 
reached her own house, but she did not remain 
in it many minutes. She took something out 
of a box, and, with this something in her hand, 
she wended her way through a dusky square and 
a narrow dark lane, until she came to an enclo- 
sure. She passed through the gate and pre- 
sently knelt down by, and laid a cross of ever- 
lastings upon, the grave where the unkno^vii 
man slept, and said her prayers there, not for 
the repose of the dead, but for forgiveness for 
the living. When she rose up there was 
neither desolation in her life, nor revenge in 
her heart. 



142 FALSE COLOURS. 



CHAPTEK IX. 

A HARD-HEADED WOMAN. 

As nothing succeeds like success, so nothing 
fails faster than failure when once it has set 
in. Proverhially " Death rides fast," but still 
faster rides ruin when it has once fairly set off 
in pursuit of a man. Arthur Scorrier went 
along the downward path with a velocity that 
caused people's pity to be merged in surprise. 
He had so relied on the luck that had always 
stood his friend hitherto, for replenishing his 
purse whenever it pleased him to emj)ty it, 
that he had made no provision for the unmis- 
takably rainy day which had now overtaken 
him. The final blow was dealt to him by his 
whilom partner Mr. Monsell ; that gentleman 
withdrew from the firm in an apparently un- 
premeditated manner, and then availed himself 



A HARD-HEADED WOMAN. 143 

of the liberty of the subject to commence a 
rival practice in and about Danebury. 

The decided retrenchments which the Scor- 
riers had made when the first note of the 
necessity for doing so was struck, had been on 
a broad grand scale. They had sold their 
horses, and put down their carriages, and dis- 
charged their gardener and their groom. But 
at this epoch of which I am treating now, the 
retrenchments were on anything but a grand 
scale. On the contrary, they were on a petty 
scale, that was infinitely wearing and painful 
to those who had to make them ; Arthur was 
at the end of his resources, and his incomings 
were of the most paltry order now. Conse- 
quently common sense told them that they 
could not keep a boy, however small and useless 
that being might be, or a cook, however incom- 
petent she was to deal with the raw material 
entrusted to her. And when they had obeyed 
common sense in that detail, it went on to as- 
sure them that hard cash was a better posses- 
sion than the rarest bronzes, and the most 
exquisite copies from the antique. 

It was a hard matter for them to make up 



144 FALSE COLOURS. 

their minds to do this . to sell the art objects 
which had been the dearest comi^anions to them 
both, down in this Danebury solitude. At the 
first hint of their intentions, Mr. Lister offered 
to relieve them of their superfluities by private 
purchase. But Arthur Scorrier did not care to 
feel that another man's unsubdued affection for 
his (Arthur's) wife, was the means of his being 
relieved from his difficulties. So he spoke 
sketchily of " getting some London fellow 
down to look at them." And when the " Lon- 
don fellow" came, he sojourned for a night at 
the " Castlenau Arms," and spoke of the mo- 
tive of his mission, and sundry Danebury 
tradesmen got scent of it, and the next morn- 
ing there was an execution in Arthur Scor- 
rier' s house. 

In the midst of the sorrow, the agitation, and 
distress, that this occasioned, there came a 
message from Mrs. Hepburn asking Mr. Scor- 
rier to go to her professionally without delay. 
He was bound to go, though all his feelings 
were in revolt at being compelled to do so, for 
Mrs. Hepburn had been very hard to endure of 
late. She had publicly slighted Cissy, and 



A HARD-HEADED WOMAN. 145 

passed her old friend with a cold scorn that the 
rest of Danebury was quick to see and to imi- 
tate ; and she had been rigid and frigid in her 
demeanour to Arthur, never giving him the 
opportunity he was sighing to seize, of rebuking 
her for the meanness with which she was 
smiting an already smitten friend. 

He was summoned professionally, and he did 
not dare to refuse the summons, though to 
obey it went sorely against his sense of what 
was due to himself and his wife. He was 
sitting with Cissy in the beautiful artistic room 
that was so soon to be denuded of all that 
made it beautiful and artistic when he received 
the message, and he rose up unwillingly, and 
sighed a sigh that smote her to the heart. 

"I'd almost rather walk over a precipice 
than go through the village this morning," he 
said, in that low dejected tone from which the 
possibility of brightness seems gone. 

" My dear Arthur;" she rose up and stood 
by him, brave, erect, and uncrushed, now the 
crash had come; "What a blessing that this 
has come at the beginning of our lives instead 
of at the end of them ; we're young enough 

VOL. III. L 



146 FALSE COLOURS. 

and strong enough to recover ourselves, we 
have got our experience in good time ; shall I 
put on my hat and walk through the village 
with you, for you must go at once, dear." 

** That I may have the additional comfort of 
seeing you flouted and looked shyly at. Cissy ; 
my poor child, I don't want that to put me 
down lower still." 

" You were not put down hy it when they 
first began to flout and look shy," she said. 

" Other things were not at such a low ebb 
with us," Arthur said, vehemently, and Cissy 
could not help feeling that money was a very 
potent power . it had deadened Arthur to her 
sufferings. However, it was no use attempting 
to put things in a i^roper light to a man over 
whom there hung a heavy black cloud, so she 
gave up the point of walking through the vil- 
lage with him, but did not give u^d that of 
urging him to action at once. 

** Since you are going, had you not better 
go up and see what Amelia wants, without any 
delay, Arthur." 

*' I wish you would give up calling her 
Amelia, now that she has given up all recog- 



A HARD-HEADED WOMAN. 147 

nition of your existence," be said, peevishly; 
" I suppose she wants to tell me that her brat 
has a cold, and to impress upon me how all 
important to the world at large it is, that the 
cold should be cured without an instant's loss 
of time. It's just like Mrs. Hepburn to do 
that now." 

" Just like a mother to do it at any time," 
Cissy said, quietly; "her baby's sufferings may 
be unimportant to the world, but they're all 
the world to her, poor thing." 

" I like that . the affectation of you attempt- 
ing to pity Mrs. Hepburn," he said ; and as he 
said it, he was so unlike the man who had 
courted her to become his wife " for better and 
worse," that bright sunny day on St. Michael's 
Mount. How brave he had been then, and 
how hopeful, and how determined ! And now 
at the first blast of an adverse wind, all hia 
bravery and hopefulness had fled, and his de- 
termination was all bent to the wrong purpose 
of seeing things concerning her in a wrong 
light. 

But though she remembered this, and re- 
flected on it bitterly, she only suffered herself 



148 FALSE COLOURS. 

to SO remember and reflect for a moment or 
two. Then she called to mind all the sore 
provocation to which he was being subjected, 
and the thought rekindled all the warmth in 
her heart. 

** Dear Arthur," she said, " at least I can 
pity her for this, that in any trouble she can 
never have the comfort of loving her husband 
as I love mine." 

He called her " Poor little thing," and 
caressed her, and made her feel by his manner 
of doing so, that he derived no tangible comfort 
from loving her, and therefore took leave to 
doubt that she derived any from loving him. 
But she decided to let that question pass un- 
disputed now, it was more essential that he 
should go out manfully to the performance of 
an actual duty, than he should remain passive 
to hear an exposition of an aesthetic one. 

Presently he put on his hat and went out on 
his way to Glene. It was sad, it was pitiful 
indeed, this compulsory going out to the per- 
formance of an ungrateful task, with the know- 
ledge that he had of what he left behind him 
in his own home. The men who were executing 



A HARD-HEADED WOMAN. 149 

justice in his house, were about as delicate- 
minded as bailiffs usually are. They had ac- 
quired, through some misajjprehension on Cissy's 
part of what their_ claims really were, the 
command of the larder and the freedom of the 
cellar. And some of the wine of the south 
had got into their heads, and there being no 
physical force at hand to restrain them, they 
gave themselves that license of tongue and 
demeanour which the god of the period, the 
w^orking man, is apt to give himself under the 
like favourable circumstances. 

It stung him to the heart that he should be 
thus compelled to leave her to fight this portion 
of her hard battle alone and unprotected. He 
did not know how utterly void of fear, how 
capable of enforcing respect from others this 
woman was, though she had been his wife well 
on to a year now. In the early days of their 
marriage, when he had been nervously afraid of 
her finding anything connected with him, less 
bright and agreeable than he had portrayed it, 
she had let him lap her in indolent luxury, she 
had suffered herself to seem inert, helpless, 
dependent on him, and unable to bear the 



150 FALSE COLOURS. 

ruffling of the wind of antagonism and ill-fortune. 
But since the dawning of the day of their need, 
she had seemed to develop) a light-hearted re- 
liance on herself that was partly pleasant and 
partly painful to him. It was pleasant inasmuch 
as it proved that she would be able to take care 
of herself, should he perforce fall short of his 
vows and fail to take care of her. It was 
painful inasmuch as should such need never 
arise, she might still feel that she had the 
power to meet it ; which feeling might make her 
less soft a woman, less subservient a spouse, 
than it is well the wife of prosperity should be, 
and in some vague and undefined way he felt 
assured that prosperity would be his portion 
again at some time or other. 

But on this special morning he could not 
regret at all, he could only rejoice in that power 
of holding her own, which Cissy certainly had. 
On his way to Glene . a way that he perversely 
felt to be degraded and desolate, because he had 
to walk it instead of as of old, traversing it on 
horseback or in a well-appointed mail-phaeton 
or dog-cart. On this sad way to Glene he did 
little else than ruminate on the state of things 



A HARD-HEADED WOMAN. 151 

at home. As he had come out at the hall-door 
he had heard somids of revelry and mirth pro- 
ceeding from his kitchen, and the sounds had 
been hideous to him. But Cissy had gently 
urged him forward. " You may be very much 
wanted, Arthur," and he had left her to deal 
with the worst case. 

There had come a great coolness between the 
two families lately. There is not space left in these 
chronicles to tell how it had taken root, grown, 
and thriven. Suffice it to say, that now it had 
attained considerable dimensions, and Arthur 
felt sore about crossing the threshold where 
once he had been so entirely at home. " Mrs. 
Hepburn had marked her sense of Mrs. Scor- 
rier's conduct," that was the way lookers-on 
spoke of it. " Amelia has with sorrow felt 
compelled to show her husband and other 
people, that even old friendship will not make 
her countenance unwifely behaviour," Mrs. 
Foster said to the bewildered Vargraves ; and 
" Amelia is overbearing past all forbearance on 
my part, Arthur," was Cissy's account of it, 
and this last statement was the true one. 

Mr. Hepburn had broached the subject once 



152 FALSE COLOURS. 

to Arthur, but he had broached it without skill 
or tact. " Your wife gave herself tragedy- 
queen airs to me the other day, Arthur," he 
said, *' but I'll look over that if she likes to 
forget the subject of our dispute, and be on the 
same terms we were on before." 

" My wife is incapable of making a fool of 
herself in the way you say," Arthur had re- 
plied, " and she has a good memory ; anyway 
I can't undertake to say what she will forget 
and what she will remember." After that there 
had been nothing said between the two men 
relative to Arthur's wife, and gradually Mr. 
Scorrier came to accept the fact that Cissy was 
looked upon as a great offender. 

There was a constraint about the very ser- 
vants at Glene this morning, Mr. Scorrier felt 
as he passed hastily through the hall and up 
the stairs to Mrs. Hepburn's private room. 
She rose and half held her hand out to him, 
but he put on so much of his purely profes- 
sional manner, that she turned the gesture 
into a detaining one to the servant. 

*' Ask nurse if Master Gerald is awake," 
.she said ; " Mr. Scorrier is come, tell her, and I 



A HARD-HEADED WOMAN. 153 

am anxious for his opinion." Then, as Arthur 
stood grim and silent hy her, she went on, 

" I am very anxious ahout Gerald, Mr. 
Scorrier ; he is feverish, restless and weak ; 
what can it be ? " 

It struck him that the woman's anxiety was 
not genuine, and he hated her for her conduct 
towards his own maligned wife, so he answered 
coldly, 

'' It is impossible for me to give an opinion 
till I have seen the child." 

" Mr. Hej)burn thinks it trifling, and didn't 
wish me to send for you," she went on, disre- 
garding his coldness; "but I have such re- 
liance on 3'our judgment, I think so highly of 
your talent . " she paused abruj)tly, and it 
seemed to him that she was blushing at the 
warmth of her own words. 

" You do me much honour, Mrs. Hepburn," 
he said, half sneeringly, " I regret that I 
haven't time to make my judgment and talent 
wait on the pleasure of your nursemaid now. 
Can I see your child at once ? " 

"Yes," she said; and then she led him to 
the nursery, where the small heir of Glene 



154 FALSE COLOURS. 

was found to be in worse case than when he 
was born . which is equivalent to saying that 
he was in a very bad case indeed. 

The baby ailments did not detain him long, 
and he was taking his leave with as much 
speed as was decorous, when Amelia interposed. 

" I Tyrant to consult you about my own 
health, if you can spare me a few minutes this 
morning," she said, leading the way back to 
her own room. 

" My time is at the disposal of those who 
demand it, Mrs. Hepburn," he said, gravelj^; 
and then Amelia sat doY\'n, and rested her brow 
in her hand, and cogitated for a few moments. 
When she looked up he Vv^as looking at her 
fixedly, and the blush lighted up in her face 
again. 

" Are you going to tell me your symptoms," 
he asked. 

" Mr. Scorrier, I am wretched." 

" I am afraid my skill will be powerless in 
such a case," he said, and the colour mounted 
from her cheek to her brow as he said it. 

" Perhaps when you hear why I am wretched 
you will not say so," she said, in a dignified 



A HAKD-HEA-^ED WOMAN. 155 

tone, that made hiin think he had mistaken 
her, and that she was going to confide some 
secret suffering to him; " have you time to 
listen to me ? " 

** My time is yours, Mrs. Hephurn," he said, 
friofidlv. 

'* Then I will speak . hard as it is to speak 
to you when you are so distant to me. My 
wretchedness is not selfish ; I know about all 
this trouble that has come upon you, and I 
would be your friend if you would only let me 
be." 

" You do me too much honour to interest 
yourself so much in my affairs ; I am afraid, 
though, that even you would be powerless to 
stem the tide of ill-fortune which has set in 
against me." 

" I have felt so much for you, and for Mrs. 
Scorrier." 

" We will keep my wife's name out of this 
discussion, if you please," he said, haughtily; 
'' she has suffered enough undeservedly already. 
I owe it to her to spare her that which she 
loathes most . the offer of pity which is not 
pity pure and simple." 



156 FALSE COLOURS. 

" But mine is pity pure and sim2)le, Arthur," 
she said, hurriedly, and in her hurry she 
seemed to use his Christian name without pre- 
meditation. *' You at least shall hear me, and 
judge me fairly ; if I have seemed to stand 
aloof from you lately, it has only been because 
I thought that such seeming might serve you 
in more ways than one, more than actual par- 
tizanship." 

" You thought so lightly of yourself as to 
believe that if you insulted m}^ wife, other 
people were likely to think the more highly of 
her ; do you not degrade yourself unnecessarily, 
Mrs. Hepburn." 

" Has she so misrepresented things as to 
make you even think that I have offered her 
insult?" she said, sadly; "Oh! Arthur, it is 
hard to find oneself made to appear so entirely 
wrong; it is hard, very very, hard." 

'' At least if you have been so entirely right 
in your line of conduct, you have the consola- 
tion of self-approval," he sa,id. 

" That is not enough for me while you are 
displeased with me . vrhile I feel that your 
friendship is withdrawn," she said; "from the 



A HARD-HEADED WOMAN. 157 

moment I knew what relation your wife was to 
my husband, I knew that between them a feud 
would be made between us ; they reviled each 
other so (Cissy was so violent) that I have not 
dared to betray any interest in her since . and 
this reserve on my part has wounded you . 
you love her so." 

She said the last four words in a half- 
enquiring, half-deprecating tone. His reply 
made her start in her chair, it was given with 
so much vehemence. 

*' 1 do love her. God bless her, I do love 
her with all my heart, and soul, and strength ; 
I have no thought to give, no admiration to 
bestow on any other woman ; I would see 
myself shunned by every human being, rather 
than seem to passively accept a slight to my 
wife." 

It chilled her heart, and fired her vanity to 
hear him speak thus, though she knew that she 
could never be nearer or dearer to him in 
honour than she was now. Still she longed to 
gain some power, to assume some influence 
over him. She would gain it over his heart 
(in a safe way) if she could. Over his mind 



158 FALSE COLOURS. 

and the habits of his life, if his heart with- 
stood her. At present she longed to dislodge 
and depreciate Cissy. She would trust to the 
future to adjust her own position with regard 
to him. 

" Yes, it must be agony to you to live on as 
you are living now," she said slowly, " her 
staying on too, instead of getting away for a 
time, does look so unfortunately very much like 
Mrs. Scorrier having no friends ; it must be 
very painful to you all, especially as Mr. Lister, 
the cause of it all, won't go from the Den." 

** We shall leave scandal free to walk over the 
course . we shall leave Danebury before long, I 
have no doubt." 

" What madness!" she said, and her face 
blanched as she mentally contemplated the 
possibiHty ; " leave Dponebury, when you can 
carry all before you if you like ; it would be 
throwing away a fortune to leave Danebury ; to 
be sure it would not do for you, as a married 
man, to re-commence housekeeping in a small 
v\'ay, but if Cissy went to stay with the Var- 
graves for a while, and you lived on in bache- 
lor quarters . or here at Glene, why not ? . 



A HARD-HEADED WOMAN. 159 

things would soon right themselves ; do hear 
me and helieve me to he what I am . an 
ardent friend of yours." 

He did not at all like the tui'n her ardent 
friendship was taking, and yet he could not 
convince himself thoroughly that it was his 
duty to scout and repudiate it. Whatever he 
might think of Mrs. Hei)hurn, and of the 
nature of her disinterested advice, she was a 
woman who stood well in the estimation of the 
world. He had no actual right to condemn 
her, or to think she meant more than she said. 
Moreover it was flattering to him to have this 
ardent fiiendship professed for him just when 
he was so terrihly down in the world. 

" Do believe that I have only your interest 
at heart, and that if it should he settled that 
you come and stay with us, understand that 
you will be as welcome here as if you were my 
own brother ; the separation between you and 
your wife would be only tem-poYHiy, . and I am 
sure it will be a great gain to you." When she 
said that, Arthur went away, thinking that 
there was much in what she had said, and 
that she was " a hard-headed woman." 



160 FALSE COLOURS. 



CHAPTEE X. 

CISSY HUMBLES HERSELF AND MR. LISTER. 

Mr. Scorrier went back through the village, 
feeling many degrees less desolate and degraded 
than he had felt when running the gauntlet of 
its inhabitants' observation on his way to 
Glene. If Amelia had done nothing else, and 
she sincerely hoped that she had done much 
more, she had pointed out a pathway to a pos- 
sibly brighter future. He re-entered his house, 
hoping fervently that Cissy would be amenable 
to reason, and would not object to the very 
sensible plan Mrs. Hepburn had proposed, 
simply because it was Mrs. Hepburn who had 
proposed it. To do him justice, he was well 
inclined towards that lady now, for no other 
reason than because she had propounded a 
scheme which promised '* well," he thought . 
comfort certainly. 



CISSY HUMBLES HERSELF AND MR. LISTER. 161 

** Nothing very much amiss with the bahy, 
I hope, as you're back so soon, Arthur," Cissy 
said, cheerily, as she came to meet him. Cissy, 
though she spoke cheerily, looked wan, and 
worn, and haggard ; and it is a fact, that the 
beauty of a woman's heart is less perceptible, 
even to the eyes that love her most under 
such circumstances, than when she is in good 
plumage. Arthur Scorrier felt strongly, as he 
took in the fact that Cissy was less pretty 
than usual, that he could not start afresh in 
Danebury as a married, man without a great 
sacrifice of taste and of pride. Amelia was 
right . quite right . he could not do it. And 
as Amelia had kindly pointed out to him, he 
need not do it. 

" The baby . oh ! the baby is all right . at 
least, it will get round again ; how have you 
got on, dear . no further annoyance, I hope ? " 

"I have made those men be quiet," Cissy 
said, " and I have written to Aunt Vargrave to 
tell her that we can't go to Isabelle's wedding, 
so I have got on very well, I think." 

" Now, Cissy, I think this sheer folly . not 
go to Isabelle's wedding ! why not ? " 

VOL. III. M 



162 FALSE COLOURS. 

** Because we mustn't sail under false colours 
any longer, Arthur . that is where our whole 
mistake has been ; that is why we are in 
" misfortunate circumstances," as my excellent 
laundress calls it. I can't afford a new dress, 
and a new mantle, and a new bonnet, and the 
dozen or two other things that new dresses 
and bonnets involve ; I have already learnt 
what to avoid. I shall know how to eat and 
drink on the most economical principles by- 
and-by." 

"Don't you know, my darling," he said, 
seriously, " I don't think our small economies, 
however well-intentioned they may be, will 
serve us at all ; we must make a great and a 
painful effort. Cissy . we must part for a time." 

"What do you mean?" she spoke very 
quietly. 

" Just this : I wish you had not written to 
your people to say you wouldn't go to Belle's 
wedding, because then you could have stayed 
on with your aunt without any definite arrange- 
ment . it would have been a visit, in fact. As 
it is, I wish you to go. You will be happy and 
safe there, and I'll battle on alone here and 



CISSY HUMBLES HERSELF AND SIR. LISTER. 163 

get my practice back, and soon have a suitable 
home for my darling again." 

He looked bright and hopeful, loving, and 
devoted, as he said this ; and she looked up at 
him with all her heart in her eyes, and gave 
him back a warm kiss of j)romise and en- 
couragement. 

" And do you think that I can meekly . no, 
not ' meekly,' but abjectly . go back to my 
uncle's house, and.be, as you say, ' comfortable 
and cared for,' safe and sumptuous, while you 
are plodding on in a solitude that will be ten 
times harder than your solitude was before I 
came to break it ; I can't do it, Arthur . I have 
had the smooth with you, I'll bear the rough, 
too; besides," she smiled as she said this, 
" don't you think I would rather stay here in 
the dignity of a useful spouse, than go back 
to my uncle's house as a rejected, useless 
wife." 

*' The fact is," he said, in his most sanguine 
tone, " The fact is, my darling, I shall not hke 
you to rough it in the way I am going to . for 
our common weal I am going to put present 
prejudices aside, and remember only Mr. 



164 FALSE COLOURS. 

Hepburn's past kindness to me, and his affec- 
tion for me. I shall stay at Glene while I am 
trying to win back my practice, and with it a 
home and comforts for my wife." 

" Oh ! at Glene," she said, and then she 
offered no further opposition to the plan as he 
had unfolded it, but just went and did some 
trifling duty that presented itself for imme- 
diate fulfilment, and pleased Arthur greatly by 
the promptitude with which she had acquiesced 
in his scheme of separation for the sake of 
success. 

Those daily duties were irksome now that 
this prospect of soon parting with him was 
opened before her. She wrote at once and 
recanted her refusal to attend Isabelle's 
wedding, putting her reasons for doing so 
in the best light before them . in the best 
light for her husband, that is. But, do 
what she would, she could not put her hus- 
band's reasons for forcing her to the perfor- 
mance of this task, in a good light to her- 
self. 

She was sorely aggrieved at his determina- 
tion to go to Glene ; and this, not because of 



CISSY HUMBLES HERSELF AND MR. LISTER. 1G5 

any small and petty feeling of jealousy of 
Amelia, as Amelia would have imagined her 
(Cissy) suffering from, on the subject, but 
because it seemed to her that Arthur was 
wanting in that chivalrous sensitiveness which 
a man should feel about his wife, in thus 
accepting what would be regarded as a great 
favour fi'om the hands of those who were 
standing aloof fi'om her, and wronging her, 
and misjudging her. And just as she finished 
her letter of recantation regarding his wedding, 
Mr. Lister was announced to her by the soli- 
tary domestic who was now left to dispense 
service to the Scorriers. 

" Mr. Lister ! oh, is it you ?" She spoke so 
wearily, and she gave him such a flaccid hand, 
that he felt thrown back, thrust aside from all 
the friendly interest which he had been re- 
cently taking in the misfortunes of the 
Scorriers. It came home to him at once that 
though he might be accepted as a summer 
friend, and an agreeable means of passing the 
time in bright weather, by this woman, that 
after all her dearest interests were quite aj^art 
from him. Her highest joys, and her deex)est 



166 FALSE COLOURS. 

sorrows, were alike far removed from the region 
into which his soul might still soar in com- 
panionship with hers. 

** It's very foolish of me to say ' is it you ?* 
when I see that it is," she went on, kindly 
helping him through the maze into which his 
discovery had led him ; '' but the fact is, I can 
only talk mere commonplaces as opposed to 
common sense, to-day. I have so much to 
think about just now." 

As she spoke she turned her face towards 
him appealingly, and the face thus presented 
to his vision was so different in its earnest, 
womanly sorrowfulness, to the bright beauty of 
that one which had won his heart years ago 
at Baden Baden. Yet, for all the difference 
that was so strongly marked, this care-worn 
countenance, worn with care for his rival, was 
the best loved of the two. 

** You must, for the sake of our old and 
dear friendship, talk common sense to me, and 
think of something besides your own troubles, 
Mrs. Scorrier. That they are heavy, I feel 
more bitterly than you do yourself perhaps, 
for to me is added this bitter reflection . 



CISSY HUMBLES HERSELF AND MR. LISTER. 1G7 

that you will not let me help you out of 
them." 

Her face got scarlet, and her eyes flashed, 
as with a graceful gesture of her small well- 
bred hand, she seemed to put aside the very 
idea of the assistance from him, at which he 
had hinted. Then she said quickly . 

*' I am quite ready to talk common sense 
about your approaching marriage. I have just 
been writing to Isabelle to tell her that after 
all, and in spite of all, I shall be at it." 

'* It is just of that I want to speak . I must 
speak . to you." 

" Don't lay such a defiant stress on the 
word ' must,' you shall have no difficulty in 
doing so ; can't you settle in your own mind 
how many priests shall be employed in riveting 
the links." 

" I can't settle in my own mind whether the 
links shall be riveted at all, or not ; just hear 
me," he continued, as she made an impatient 
movement. "You would not be indignant with, 
or refuse your counsel to, a man who hesitated, 
and asked for re-assurance, as to any other 
important step in life ; why should you be 



168 FALSE COLOUES. 

less tolerant about this step of my mar- 
riage?" 

" Because to all intents and purposes you 
have taken it," she said, slowly. "You know 
better than I can tell you all that you have 
claimed, and all that has been conceded to you 
as my cousin's future husband ; if you decline 
to fill that character now, you will have deceived 
me." 

She said it in such a simple way. It was so 
evidently the earnest thought of her mind that 
he could do nothing in life more despicable and 
culpable than deceive her ! And yet she was 
not striving to assert any undue influence over 
his heart in letting him perceive that she felt 
this. It was only one of those unconscious, 
subtle, dangerous flatteries, which women do 
deal out to the men they like. 

" Cissy ! I would rather deceive every man 
and woman I know, than be even suspected of 
deceiving you." 

"It's very kind of you to say that. But you 
will have deceived me egregiously, if you begin 
now to advertise j^our doubts and fears about 
marrying." 



CISSY HUMBLES HERSELF AND MR. LISTER. 169 

" Will you let me tell you how it all came 
about ?" be asked, earnestly. 

*' No, I tbink I bad better not," Cissy said, 
sbaldng ber bead. '^I tbink I bad ever so 
mucb better not, Mr. Lister ; go to the foun- 
tain-bead bas always been my motto. I quote 
it to you now . if you bave anything to sa}', 
say it to Isabelle, or to ber father." 
: "I most probably shall do so, but I should 
like to say it to you first." 

" To what good end ? Depend upon it they 
would be idle words, and you would be ready to 
eat them in a few months." 

" Mrs. Scorrier, I can never marry your 
cousin." 

" But you must," she said, rising up and 
coming nearer to him in her earnestness. 
** How can you say such things, terrifying me ? 
bow can you bave done what you bave done, 
bave said w^bat you bave said, bave let things 
go so far with such a thought in your mind T ' 
Then she paused and a feeling swept over ber that 
in some way or other, to some person or other, 
she would be made accountable for bis short- 
comings, that she was accountable for them. 



170 FALSE COLOURS. 

or if not " accountable " at least very much 
to blame. "Why do you make my path more 
thorny than it is akeady ?" she cried. *' Why 
do you ? Why do you ?' ' 

*' Cecile . for heaven's sake hear me and be 
reasonable ; you are not to blame because I 
cannot love the woman who wants to be my 
wife well enough to do her the wrong of mak- 
ing her my wife at all ; for it would be doing 
her a wrong, a great wrong." 

""Why did you let her suppose that you 
would marry her and would deem it no wrong ? 
Oh ! how weak you have been, how vacillating 
and infirm of purpose." 

"I acknowledge all that," he interrupted. 
"And still I am not so altogether wrong as I 
should be if I went on and suffered a false 
sense of honour to induce me to offer vows and 
make promises that I feel I could not keep. A 
man is not fairly treated when he is made 
seriously responsible for a lot of idle words that 
he would never have uttered if he had not been 
dared and defied into uttering them." 

" Don't attempt to improve your own position 
by insinuating that you were so dared and defied." 



CISSY HUMBLES HERSELF AND MR. LISTER. 171 

''Mrs. Scorrier, even at the risk of offending 
your family feeling for your cousin, I will clear 
myself from the imputation of having been a 
willing agent in this most unhappy affair I do 
not misjudge Isabelle's motives, she did me the 
honour to love me, and to want to marry me, 
and she was not to blame in trying to turn my 
idle attentions into serious ones. A less pure- 
minded woman than herself would have shrunk 
fi'om going the lengths she did in the secm-ity of 
innocence. I do not blame her, but I cannot 
love her . a black cloud will be over my very 
life if I am com^Delled to marry her." 

"My uncle will not thrust his daughter 
upon you," Cissy said, proudly; and then in 
her anger that he should add this complication 
to the others that were bewildering her now, 
she added, " You did not find one of her blood 
difficult to shake off years ago, did you ? " 

" That is not a fair thrust. I was shaken 
off by one of her blood, and I have never re- 
covered the shock," he muttered. 

"What do you propose doing; or, ra thcr 
how do you propose doing it?" she asked, 
sharply. 



172 FALSE COLOURS. 

" I shall go up to town, and tell the truth to 
Miss Vargrave, and leave it to her sense of 
what is due to herself to do the rest." 

" You have a talent for making girls play 
the part of their own executioners," she said, 
bitterly. " Well, for her sake, for her pride and 
honour's sake, I hope she will make your path 
very easy, Mr. Lister." Then she rose up, and 
after a moment added, " We can have nothing 
more to say to or to hear from each other now. 
You have brought misery and remorse upon me 
in this our second meeting. I trust to heaven 
our j)aths will branch so widely asunder here 
that they may never cross again." 

" Brought misery and remorse upon jon ! 
How have I done that ? I would spare jou a 
moment's sorrow, an instant's doubt or pain, if 
I could, Mrs. Scorrier." 

*' I will tell you how you have done it," she 
said, excitedly. '' There can be nothing gained 
or improved now by small concealments. The 
sight of 3^ou after so man}^ long years of separa- 
tion from you, woke up all that was weak, and 
vain, and selfish in me. Understand me at 
once. I had no love for you ; every bit of my 



CISSY HUMBLES HERSELF AND MR. LISTER. 173 

heart was given to my husband ; but I sighed 
to have some of the influence over your con- 
duct and feelings that I once had the chance of 
exercising honourably. My love was my hus- 
band's ; but I wanted to be not your idol, but 
sufficiently much to you to keep you from caring 
for any other woman. My wishes were not 
wifely, not womanly. I deserved to be pun- 
ished for them, and I am j)unished." She 
paused to wipe her eyes, and clear her throat, 
and struggle to regain her composure, and 
fail to do so, and altogether to feel abject. 

" You are j)unished ! how ? " he interrupted. 

"How! Can you ask me how? I was pun- 
ished, first pettily, in seeing you flirting, as I 
thought it, with Isabelle ; that you could even 
look at my lovely cousin when I was by was a 
mortification to me, and when I thought it 
genuine, when I heard you were engaged, I 
smarted first to hear that, and then I smarted 
more under the consciousness that all this 
phase of feeling, though it might leave me 
harmless in heart, was deteriorating in thought. 
I was lowered in my own eyes by the reflection 
that my vain selfishness had subjected me 



174 FALSE COLOURS. 

to a sting; and having told you all this, can't 
you understand why remorse is my portion 
now?" 

" God bless you, Cissy, and spare you all 
remorse," he said, earnestly. 

"I don't deserve to be spared it; I shall 
always feel keenly whatever misery ensues from 
this broken engagement, that I once wished it 
broken ; you can never add to my happiness 
or decrease any sorrow of mine one jot or one 
tittle ; yet I wished you to. stay from making 
another woman's ha]3piness. Is it not enough 
to crush me with remorse ? " 

** I can never blame you for what was so 
flattering to me," he said, warmly. 

*' I must undeceive you," she said, eagerl}^ 
" It was not you but my nature that led me 
astray. If a dog has belonged to me once, and 
I have been obliged to part with him, it would 
give me pain to see him fond of and faithful to 
another." 

" At least you have this comfort, my allegi- 
ance to you has never been shaken." 

" Have I spoken so for nothing that j^ou can 
think I value your allegiance now ? ' ' she cried. 



CISSY HOII3LES HERSELF AND MR. LISTER. 175 

"Oh, Mr. Lister, I am in real trouble now, my 
home is broken uj). My husband is being 
taught to feel that I am not essential to him, 
and I am rendered powerless by circumstances 
to make him feel that such teaching is false ; 
yet for all this, no praise from you, no amount 
of sympathy for me, no extent of unbounded 
influence over you, would give me one moment's 
comfort or gratification. Honestly I only think 
of you now as an acquaintance who has been 
the means of bringing some of my worst quali- 
ties to light. I can never pander to j^our 
vanity again, Mr. Lister." 

She sat before him as she said it, looking 
so sad, so solemn, and withal so entirely con- 
vinced of the truth of that which she was as- 
serting, that he realised instantaneously that 
in truth he had outlived all power over her 
mind, her heart, or her taste. She was in 
great grief, and he could not assuage it. She 
was mortified, but he had no skill to soothe her. 
She was in sore doubt and distress, but he could 
never have her to come to him for any sort of 
panacea. " Gone, was gone for aye," as fur as 
she was concerned, and so, what of his future ? 



176 FALSE COLOURS. 

" If we ever meet again," he began, as be 
stood up bat in band about to depart, and still 
longing to linger. 

" We never can meet again ; I am altering 
fast from my former self, even as I sit here 
and talk to you, and to me bencefortb you will 
not be tbe man I once loved (I will not deny 
tbat trutb), but a poor creature wbo lias given 
up glorious chance after glorious chance . a 
man who has lost all claim to my good opinion, 
and I shall rather pity you for that." 

" If this is to be our last good-bj^e, don't 
make it so bitter." 

" It has not even the piquancy of being 
bitter, Mr. Lister," she said, calmly; *' it's 
ignominious, if you will, to be forced to say 
good-bye because we have been such fools, but 
the bitterness will depart with you." 

" Will you not give me an idea of what your 
plans (yours and your husband's, I mean) are," 
he pleaded. 

*' No ; there is no need ; all our interest will 
be absorbed in ourselves ; we shall have none 
to give you ; and we will not take what we 
cannot give. And now to be very prosaic I have 



CISSY HUMBLES HERSELF AND MR. LISTER. 177 

no more time to bestow upon you ; we have no 
cook now, I brush off all the soft down of 
romance you see, and I must go and look to my 
husband's dinner. Good-bye, Heaven bless 
you, and make you a better and a braver man, 
as it is making me a better and a braver 
woman." 

He made no answer to her. Mutely he ac- 
cepted her hand in final farewell, mutel}" he 
listened to her i^arting words, mutely he passed 
away from her presence, and from the story. 

She gave no sad thoughtful moments to the 
consideration of the destruction of this long- 
encouraged false romance. She had neglected 
opportunity too long already she told herself, 
and so she set about repairing the omission as 
soon and as earnestly as possible now. 

When Arthur came home he found every- 
thing served as well as when there had been 
no lack of servants, and Cissy dressed as care- 
fully as in the first bright days of their mar- 
riage. 

" What have you been doing, Arthur dear?" 
she said to him, as they seated themselves at 
the table. 

VOL. III. N 



178 FALSE COLOURS. 

*' Oh ! mooning about," lie said, dejectedly; 
and then he helped Cissy to some fish, and 
sighed. 

" What have you been doing, my poor girl?" 
he asked, when he had finished his soup. He 
felt better after it, better able to inquire into 
and to combat difficulties. 

" I have not been mooning about," she said 
cheerfully ; "I have had my hands and my 
head full since you left me in the morning, 
Arthur." 

Again he sighed. 

" I will tell you what I have done when Ann 
has given us our cutlets," and then when the 
servant left the room, and Arthur unwillingly 
suffered his appetite to lead him on to the 
demolition of a cutlet prepared by the hands 
of his wife, she told him of Lister's visit, and 
her interview with him. 

" Then he won't marry Isabelle after all ; 
'pon my honour the whole family pros^Dects are 
bright," he said. 

" I am not sure that it will be a thing to 
grieve about if he does not man-y her," Cissy 
said, calmly ; "his not doing so will be a bad 



CISSY HUMBLES HERSELF AND MR. LISTER. 179 

thing for himself, hut whether his doing so 
would he a good thing for her is an open 
question." 

" I thought he was humbugging all along," 
Arthur said ; ''I told her so, and she wouldn't 
believe me ; if the engagement is smashed, 
Isabelle won't care to have you there, will 
she?" 

" Do you still think that it would be well 
for me to go, dear Arthur?" 

"Beggars can't be choosers, and I am a 
beggar," he said, sadly. 

" Then I will go, in firm reliance on your 
love and judgment," she said, quietly; "but 
we shall be better, braver, safer, and haiDjoier 
together than apart ; think that I said so to you 
when you are at Glene, will you ? Stay there 
while you are happy, while you believe that it is 
better for your prospects that you stay there ; 
but call me back to share the cheapest cottage 
in Danebury with you the moment that belief 
fails you." And as Cissy said this she prayed 
fervently that the belief might fail him 
soon. 

The next day, large bills posted in all the 



180 FALSE COLOURS. 

prominent parts of Danebury announced that 
the *' choice household furniture, works of art, 
and other effects of Arthur Scorrier, Esq., were 
for sale " on that day week. 



HOMELESS. 181 



CHAPTEK XI. 



HOMELESS. 



Cissy had bowed her head and her heart in 
acquiescence with her husband's decree that 
they should part for a time for their common 
weal. She had done this in no half-offended 
spii'it . there had been nothing huffy after the 
few first moments of bitter pain in the prospect 
. in her manner of agreeing to it. She did 
most sincerely and heartily hope that the plan 
would prove itself . a faulty one in practice, a 
false one in theory. She did most earnestly 
desire, that he should soon of his own accord 
show himself openly willing to recommence life 
with her in a humble, honest way under the 
only flag they could fairly fly now . the flag of 
poverty. 

They parted the day before the sale. They 



182 FALSE COLOURS. 

had no superfluous cash to waste now in tra- 
velling, so Cissy went up alone, while Arthur, 
after watching the train off, walked over 
miserably to Glene. If he had kno^n his 
wife's intentions as she journeyed, and could 
have witnessed her proceedings when her jour- 
ney was over, he would have been more 
miserable still. 

Instead of going straight to her uncle's house, 
as her husband believed she would do, Cissy 
got into an omnibus when she had installed her 
luggage safely in the waiting-room, and after 
what seemed a very long and weary drive which 
involved one change of conveyance to her, found 
herself deposited at the ''Bell and Horns," 
Brompton. There she got out and looked 
about her with the half-familiar, half- wondering 
gaze one is aj)t to bestow on a busy locality 
which was once well known, but whose memory 
has faded in the scorching heats of later 
trials. 

The Boilers were still in their proper place, 
and a few people were going into the Oratory. 
It was all very much as it ha,d looked when she 
last looked upon it nearly two years ago, before 



HOMELESS. 183 

she had heen married to Arthur Scorrier. She 
had worn a flowered muslin on that occasion, 
and had just come from a flower fete in the 
conservatory that stands where Gore House 
once stood. She turned away with a hright 
smile as the contrast between the past and the 
present struck her. Tired, weary, travel- 
stained, and anxious she was now, certainly. 
But she was also now a loving wife . a woman 
with a well-ascertained purpose in the world, 
while then she had been nothing more than a 
waif and stray in a home in which she had no 
right, and on the outskirts of a fashionable 
world for which she had no liking. 

" Retrospect is for people who have done 
their day's work," she said to herself, still 
smiling. Then she turned away from the con- 
templation of the Boilers, and began a slow 
progress along one of the rows which are now 
merged into and numbered as Brompton Eoad. 
After a time she paused in front of a high 
dingy house whose windows were decorated 
with sage-green curtains, and whose area was 
pervaded with an odour of baked meats. Half 
hesitatingly she knocked at the door, for a 



184 FALSE COLOURS. 

difficulty was besetting her. The house and its 
appearance were familiar to her., as a house in 
which we have once lived must be to any one 
of us, but she had forgotten the name of its 
mistress. 

A harassed-looking maid-servant opened the 
door, and in reply to her vacant stare. Cissy 
asked, *' Is your mistress at home ; can I see 
her ; will you give her my card ?" 

She had pencilled her maiden name under her 
married one, hoping that it would strike some 
chord in the memory of the mistress of the 
house, if the mistress of the house was the 
same who had dispensed hospitality at so much 
a head to her mother and herself in days gone 
by. The harassed-looking maid-servant glanced 
rapidly over Cissy, threw a look out into the 
road, and gathered in the fact for the guidance 
of her o^Ti conduct that the lady had not even 
come in a cab, and then leisurely scanning 
Mrs. Scorrier from head to foot, asked, " What 
her business might be?" On being assured 
that it was with her mistress, and could not be 
discussed with herself, the serving-machine 
ushered the visitor into a darksome den at the 



HOMELESS. 185 

end of the passage, and retired in search of 
the lady of the house. 

It was seven or eight years since Cissy had 
stood in this same room, fraught with the same 
danger as that which had brought her here 
this day . the design merely of boarding in 
this house until such time as circumstances 
enabled her to go to some more congenial place. 
It was seven or eight years since ! and all things 
were unaltered save her own nature and pro- 
spects, a^Dparently. She had been a girl, then, 
a girl on whom was laid the terrible onus of 
fighting a hard, hand-to-hand fight with a world 
that seemed bent upon being specially severe 
on her mother and herself. She was a woman, 
now, condemned to fight an equally hard 
battle, but with this thought to brighten the 
field on which she fought it . namely, that 
every successful stroke was winning a way by 
which she might pass back to her husband's 
side. 

She was not left long to her own medita- 
tions in the dreary den at the end of the 
passage. The door opened presently, and the 
mistress of the boarding-house came into the 



186 FALSE COLOURS. 

room. Then, slight as had been Cissy's ac- 
quaintance with the presiding deity of the 
establishment seven years ago, her heart sank 
a little lower now, as she saw that this woman 
was a stranger. 

"Perhaps I am mistaken," Mrs. Scorrier 
said in clear, high-bred tones, that formed a 
marked contrast to the drawling, muddled, 
turgid accents of the other, " I remembered 
this house as a boarding-house, in which I was 
very comfortable," she added, throwing a sop 
to the feminine Cerberus, '' it may be a private 
house now; if so, I beg 3^our pardon." 

'' It might almost as well be if you want 
accommodation," the landlady said, drawing 
herself up and wagging some limp sage-green 
ribbons that waved like dejected flags upon 
her head, " I am full, now, besides having 
promised man}- parties that would be most 
desirable." 

" Oh, dear ! " Cissy said, wearily, *' I must 
go somewhere else, then," and she was moving 
towards the door, when the mistress of the 
house made a feint of something having flashed 
across her memory suddenly. 



HOMELESS. 187 

'* Well, I have just remembered, and it is 
most remarkable that it should be so, that 
there was a lady coming to take her place at 
my table to-night for the first time, that I have 
had to refuse at the last moment." 

" Then there will be room for me," Cissy 
said, thankfull}^, " I am very glad of it. I 
want to get settled without delay, and I knew 
this house once. " 

" This lady as I was speaking of," the land- 
lady said, slowly, still seeming to be engaged 
in a tough tussle with her memory, " was all 
that was desirable in the way of payment. 
Gold untold she offered me to let her come, but 
I had my reasons, and I said, no ; money may 
be an object to me, with my family, and con- 
sidering the way in which I was brought up, 
never to put m}^ hand to a thing, I don't d*eny 
that it is much, but it is not everything 
references, I says, they is what I' looks at." 
Here the landlady paused, and shook her head 
until the sage-green ribbons waggled again with 
sympathetic virtuous resolve. 

" I can give you references," Cissy said, 
** tell me your terms, please, as you have room." 



188 FALSE COLOURS. 

The landlady looked at Mrs. Scorrier, and 
estimated her pretty accurately. ** More 
brains than money," the excellent woman 
thought, " she'd find out before she slept if 
I asked her more than I do the others." 

" Five-and-twenty shillings a-week for a 
most comfortable bedroom and such a table 
as I keep, you will not object to," she sug- 
gested. And as Cissy said " she did not object 
to it," the harassed-looking servant was once 
more summoned to show the bedroom, and 
the landlady descended into the gloomy and 
cavernous depths of her kitchen to make some 
small but necessary addition to the forthcom- 
ing dinner. Mrs. Scorrier assuaged a doubt 
which she saw arising as to her solvency, by 
sending a cab to the Great Western Terminus 
for her trunks. By the time they arrived, a 
cracked clanging warned her that it was time 
to prepare for dinner, and presently she des- 
cended, just in time to join a procession of 
some dozen of her fellow creatures who were 
striving to infuse an air of being there by 
preference, into their walk and manner. It 
was a poor, harmless piece of deception which 



HOMELESS. 189 

deceived no one, not even themselves ; severe 
censure would be thrown away upon it. It is 
pitiable, though, that human nature can de- 
scend so low in the scale of folly as to try and 
seem to like uncomfortable rooms and bad 
cooking at five-and-twenty shillings a-week in 
place of the ease and affluence and excellent 
cuisine which they sought to convey the im- 
pression might be theirs at any moment. 

It was very hard to find herself stranded in 
such an unhomelike home as this for an indefi- 
nite period. How bitterly she bemoaned the folly 
which had blinded her to the great peacefulness 
and joy which had been her portion in the 
quiet, beautiful country home to which Arthur 
had taken her when she first married. That 
home was desolate now . but not more desolate 
than she herself was, she felt miserably as she 
sat on one end of an uncongenial sofa that 
evening, trying to think out a plan of action 
that should be at once proper and profitable. 

They were not a nice set of people truly, 
these among whom she was thrown. That 
they would have been different under different 
circumstances was very i)ossible, but, as it was. 



190 FALSE COLOURS. 

they were not nice. They were not natural, 
each one strove to be thought" something supe- 
rior to his or. her j)resent situation in the eyes 
of the others. And their affectation was not of 
the gay, graceful order that gets forgiven. It 
was laborious, it was hard, it lacked the adven- 
titious aids of good dress, and good light. One 
or two ladies exhibited a repellent reserve, that 
was only one degree less distasteful than the 
forced familiarity of one or two others. It 
was hard for the refined, home-sick woman to 
find herself among them, condemned to listen 
to them, and in a measure to respond to them, 
and to seem one of them in fact. It was hard, 
but she told herself in the keenness of her agony 
of remorse, that she had merited even harder 
things than this, for she had undervalued the 
blessings of her happy home, and her loving 
husband, while they were hers to enjoy and be 
thankful for. And now she was here in this 
wilderness, regarded suspiciously by some of 
her fellow pilgrims, and very dubious about to- 
morrow. 

Perhaps, on the whole, Arthur's lines were 
cast in even less pleasant places than his 



HOMELESS. 191 

wife's. Her first resting-place was a weariful 
and a desolate one, but she was not hedged in 
by some of the horrible restrictions that were 
about him at this period at Glene. He had 
walked over to the HeiDburns, as has been said, 
immediately after seeing the train start which 
bore his wife away, as he thought, to be happy 
and at rest in her uncle's house. He had walked 
over, and all the way he had been steeped in such 
misery and gloom as through all things he had 
never felt until Cissy's bright face had been 
borne from him. His luggage had preceded 
him, and he was shown to his room by a 
servant, whose manner said as j)lainly as 
could have been said by any words " you're a 
poor, unfortunate beggar, but I don't mind being 
civil to you," and then he had been left in this 
room to do the best that he could with his 
morning. 

There was a note lying on the table, ad- 
dressed to him in Mrs. Hepburn's handwriting. 
It told him that when he was tired of his own 
room, and his own society, he would find her 
in the drawing-room ; she would give up her 
customary drive in order to stay in and strive 



19.2 FALSE COLOURS. 

to make Glene pleasant to him on this first day 
of his sojourn there. 

Pleasant to him ! He threw the note down 
on the table and repeated the words " Pleasant 
to me," in harsh, angry accents. How could 
anything be pleasant to him, bereft, as he was, 
of home and wife, and indejiendence. He 
scouted the idea of anything being pleasant to 
him as the vision of all he loved, and all he 
had lately lost rose freshly in his mind. 

Nevertheless he owed her some thanks, some 
gratitude for her unfailing friendship for, and 
interest in him. She had not behaved well to 
Cissy . a smarting, choking, horrible sensation 
came over him as he thought of and acknow- 
ledged that. But she was proving herself a 
friend in need to him, and all women had 
their little foibles about one another. At any rate 
she was his hostess now, and so deserving of a 
certain meed of attention. Accordingly he 
went down into the drawing-room and there 
found Mrs. HexDburn. 

She was not at all a dangerous woman. In 
her tenderest moments she never looked soft or 
seductive. She had a long jaw, and a habit 



HOMELESS. 193 

of moving herself in an angular way that never 
illustrated the poetry of motion. The beauty 
and gracefulness of his ovrn v^dfe was vividly 
before him now, as his hostess rose to greet 
him with extended hand, and exclaimed, 

*' So she really has left you ; how one envies 
Cissy, her practical character, and power of 
adapting herself to the merely expedient." 

** She went at my request, and very much 
against her own will, poor girl," he said, 
warmly. 

" Oh ! I dare say ; the Vargraves thought 
they fulfilled all Cissy's claims on them when 
they gave her her wedding outfit j people are 
so selfish . ^they will none of them take into 
consideration that any other arrangement than 
this would have been painful and humiliating 
to you." 

He began to think that there was pain and 
humiliation enough in this arrangement. How- 
ever, he refrained from offering an opinion 
about it yet awhile. 

"How is the young shaver," he asked 
instead. " Oh, poorly, very poorly," she said 
fretfully ; "if he would only get well and 

VOL. III. 



194 FALSE COLOURS. 

strong I should not care for anything ; as it is 
I can hardly bear being buried alive here with 
Mr. Hepburn's fidgets." 

"He will get well and strong by-and-by," 
Arthur said, hopefully. 

" I don't believe it," she said, warming to 
the only good interest in her life, "he is such 
a frail little thing ; I look at him day after 
day, and see him growing more and more sha- 
dowy." She paused for a moment or two, and 
then she resumed, with a sob in her voice, " do 
try what you can do for him . and me." 

" With all my heart, and with all the know- 
ledge I have," he said, warmly, as the thought 
struck him that it was the anxious mother, not 
the envious woman who had constrained him to 
come here. And then they fell to the discussion 
of the best ways and means of strengthening that 
slender thread by which Amelia held on to 
hopefulness . and hap^Diness. 

Late in the afternoon, when Mrs. Hepburn 
had started for that daily drive about the 
country for the purpose of leaving cards at the 
different houses that were admitted to an 
equality with Glene, Arthur and Mr. Hepburn 



HOMELESS. 195 

had a long, painful conversation, in the course 
of which the old man laid bare his wounds with 
no hopes of having them healed. " My wife 
regards me as a log and an incumbrance, and 
the only light in my life . my little child . is 
such a feeble, flickering one, that I feel it may 
go out at any moment ; yet your wife, whom I 
would love as a daughter, knowing all this, 
strikes an ah'eady stricken man by refusing the 
olive-branch that I held out to her ; it is hard 
on me." 

*' Cissy has had much to trouble her lately,'* 
Arthur said, feeling vague as to the form in 
which the olive-branch had been extended, 
*' she did not know how kindly you feel to- 
wards her." 

" But when she got that message from me 
she must have known," the old gentleman 
urged, earnestly ; "my sister's child ought not 
to have hardened her heart against me to the 
point even of refusing to send an answer to my 
request that she should let by-gones be by-gones, 
and come here with her husband." 

And when Mr. Hepburn said that, Arthur 
had no answer to make, for he fathomed at 



196 FALSE COLOURS. 

once that the message had been entrusted to 
Amelia, and that Amelia had violated the trust. 
"It's useless to disgust him more with her," 
the young man thought, "he's disgusted 
enough already, and they will have trouble 
enough by-and-by about that poor child ; 
besides, after all, it's best ; Cissy will be 
happier and more at ease for a time with her 
own people than she would be here." Still, 
though he said this, he did feel, when the even- 
ing came, and he had to sit in sad and solitary 
state with that subdued husband, and that 
silent wife, that his own bright Cissy's presence 
would have materially improved the aspect of 
things, and thinking this made him less con- 
versational and agreeable than Mrs. Hepburn 
had told herself Arthur Scorrier would be 
" when she got him alone at Glene.'* 

That this scheme of amicable separation for 
their common weal was a faulty one he began 
to feel strongly, and to admit honestly to him- 
self during the next few days. He had very 
much to combat, poor fellow. The prestige of 
his former position was all gone, and the local 
mind refused to take in the fact that his foibles 



HOMELESS. 197 

of extravagance, and the consequent loss of his 
property, did not necessarily involve the loss of 
all his knowledge and skill as a medical man. 
Moreover, they took him upon moral ground, 
and when they got him there, they judged him 
harshly and unjustly. His wife had left him, 
gone away fi-om him, nobody knew where (at 
least they didn't know where, and for all their 
intents and i)urposes this was sufficient). 
Therefore, of course, she was to blame, and if 
she was to blame depend upon it he was even 
more to blame, for " as the husband is the 
wife," and vice versa. Old Mrs. Pottinger and 
her daughters were the only people in the 
village who bravely took up arms in his cause, 
and they did it in the most practical and kind- 
hearted way. They, one and all, caught cold, 
and then fell to worrying themselves about the 
" poor Scorriers," until they developed feverish 
symptoms. And then, in face of Mrs. Mon- 
sell's having invited them to what she termed 
a the dansant, they called in Mr. Scorrier, and 
cried aloud to all their friends and neighbours, 
about the comfort it was to have him still 
to call in. Mrs. Monsell strove to counter- 



198 FALSE COLOURS. 

balance this stroke of fortune by getting it 
noised abroad that ^' Mrs. Scorrier had pro- 
fessed the greatest intimacy with the Castlenau 
people, and that it was in trying to live up to 
them that she had ruined her husband." This 
painful report she contrived to make resound 
in the ears of the Countess herself, but some- 
how or other the enormity of it failed to strike 
her ladyship in the way Mrs. Monsell desii'ed. 
*' If it was true," the placid peeress observed, 
" Mrs. Scorrier must have been a little fool . 
which she certainly ivas not, therefore it couldn't 
be true." Lady Ellington even went so far 
out of her usual way as to determine on 
making a demonstration similar to that already 
made by the Pottingers on behalf of the failing 
cause. But as this determination owed its 
birth principally to her desire to annoy her 
daughter-in-law, Mrs. Walter Bracey, who had 
declared in favour of the usurper, Monsell, it 
cannot be regarded as a tribute, pure and 
simple, to Arthur's worthy merits alone. 

Meanwhile, the Glene baby grew worse ra- 
pidly, and Arthur Scorrier realized more 
strongly than he had ever imagined possible 



HOMELESS. 199 

the truth contained in those words, " There is 
no place like home." And Cissy went on de- 
ceiving him as to her place of abode and her 
occupation. And a bitter disappointment fell 
upon Isabelle Vargrave. 



200 FALSE COLOURS. 



CHAPTEK XII. 

ONE EXPLANATION. 

The morning after her arrival there, young 
Mrs. Scorrier left the boarding-house in the 
Brompton Eoad directly after the late scram- 
bling breakfast which inaugurated daily life there. 
Cissy was anxious to get over to her uncle's 
house before any of Isabelle's confidential young 
lady friends looked in with the ease of intimacy 
before luncheon, in order to watch how the bride- 
elect and the trousseau were getting on. 

For in Cissy's mind, in spite of that conver- 
sation which has been recorded between Mr. 
Lister and herself, Isabelle still occupied the 
position of a bride-elect. No note had been re- 
ceived from the Vargraves which could lead her 
to suppose that he had acted as he had declared 
himself about to act. " It was idle bombast, and 



ONE EXPLANATION. 20 1 

when he found it didn't please me, he would go 
on as if he had never spoken," she said, so re- 
assuringly, as she walked quietly through Ken- 
sington Gardens and out into Palace Gardens on 
her way to Bayswater. 

The sight of the way that had once been so 
familiar to her, brought back all her family 
feeling for the household in which she had a 
part when she had learnt that way first. She 
did sincerely hope that it was all going smoothly 
with Isabelle . though at the same time her 
feminine instincts were upon her so strongly 
that she could not help allowing herself to 
remember that Isabelle had stooped to conquer. 
However, Isabelle's gain was no loss to her, so 
she looked leniently upon the dereliction from 
dignity which had compassed it. 

Her uncle had gone off to the city to his 
duties when she reached his house, and her 
aunt and Isabelle were sitting in a purposeless 
dejected way in a little room that they never 
used when they were cheerful, behind the din- 
ing-room. The remains of a late breakfast 
were still upon the table, and both mother and 
daughter were hanging sadly over their cups. 



202 FALSE COLOUKS. 

as if they hoped to find some comfort in 
them. 

As Cissy was announced, and simultaneously 
with the announcement walked into the room, 
Mrs. Vargrave rose up with a feeble cry of 
satisfaction and flung her arms round her 
niece's neck. *' Now we shall have some com- 
fort, now we shall know what to do," she ex- 
claimed, as Cissy warmly responded to her 
caresses. But Isabelle only rose up stifiiy, 
and gave her hand with the air of one who 
deemed herself wronged. Instinctively Cecile 
felt that she had been wise in going to the 
boarding-house. This house, that had been 
her home once, could never be a home to her 
again. 

" But what is the matter, and why do you 
both seem so dull?" Cissy asked presently, and 
then Mrs. Vargrave shook her head and began 
to cry, and Isabelle turned away with a spasm 
on her fair face, and a gesture as of pain . 
tm-ned away and stood looking into the fire, 
and grasping her own hands, in order as it 
seemed, to keep herself from expressing all she 
felt. 



ONE EXPLANATION. 203 

"Oh! my clear," Mrs. Vargrave said, after 
a few moments' pause. *' We have bitter cause 
to be and to seem dull. We have sad reason 
indeed for rueing Isabelle's visit to see you." 

*' Kueing her visit to me ! Why ?" 

" Oh ! it*s no use going back to first causes, 
and rueing this, that, and the other," Isabelle 
said, wearily. *' My engagement is broken, and 
my heart is broken. Cissy, that's all." 

Cissy's heart gave a great throb as she 
listened. ** Not really and altogether?" she 
said. 

" Yes, really and altogether ; Mamma may 
take a pleasure in talking about it . I don't." 
And with that Miss Yargrave left the room. 

*' Why, you see," Mrs. Yargrave commenced, 
falling upon the task of telling with ardour not 
to say voracity. " You see we had our reasons 
for thinking Mr. Lister very dilatory in for- 
warding his preparations for the marriage, and 
at last, on my advice. Papa wrote to him, and 
his answer was unsatisfactory, eminently un- 
satisfactory. He proposed coming up and be- 
ing perfectly frank, and honest, and candid 
with us, and that didn't look well you know." 



204 FALSE COLOURS. 

Cissy could only be dumb. 

" I saw at once that it didn't look well, and 
I said so to your uncle, but I never breathed a 
word to Isabelle . time enough, poor child, 
when she must know it, I said. So we waited 
and waited, and the day before yesterday he 
came." 

Again Mrs. Vargrave paused, and again Cissy 
filled the pause with her silence, which was as 
eloquent as the most emphatic speech could 
have been. 

" He came," Mrs. Yargrave resumed, " and 
it was to be seen at once in his manner 
that he had something to say that would be 
hard for him to say and for us to hear. We 
were all sitting together when he came in, and 
though I saw Isabelle trembling like a leaf, I 
must say she behaved beautifully ; she got 
up and held her hand out to him as j)olitely 
as if she had nothing to think of but polite- 
ness." 

" Poor Isabelle! " Cissy cried, heartily. 
"Ah ! you feel what's coming; you always 
were so quick," Mrs. Vargrave said, admiringly. 
*' Well, he began speaking, and I must say he 



ONE EXPLANATION. 205 

spoke handsomely . very handsomely, indeed," 
Mrs. Vargrave repeated, with that sort of marked 
appreciation of well-conditioned words, well- 
ordered, which is a speciality of the deluded . 
*' he spoke very handsomely about how he 
admired and esteemed Isabelle, and how she 
might make any man happy, and how he felt 
himself to be unworthy of her . w^hich, as I 
told him at once, was absurd, we being quite 
satisfied as to his worth . and when he had 
said that, and seemed at a loss, your uncle 
spoke out like a man and a father, and said 
how he would be the last to hold any man 
to an engagement that was distasteful to him. 
And so we sat there . I and my poor girl . 
and couldn't speak a word while her happiness 
was being taken away from her." 

**Aunt, dear aunt, what dare I say to 
you?" Cissy said, as Mrs. Vargrave stopped 
and sobbed. '' Will you be angry with me if 
I say that Isabelle is ha^^pier so than she 
would be as an unloved wife ? ' ' 

" Oh, yes, my dear, you may say that or any- 
thing else ; but, you see, we can't help feeling 
that if he had only married her, he ju'ight have 



206 FALSE COLOURS. 

loved her, while, as it is, Tve knoio she's un- 
happy." 

" Did Mr. Lister explain his change of sen- 
timents ?" Cissy asked, nervously. 

" Why, yes. That reminds me," Mrs. Var- 
grave said, with a burst of sudden memory, 
" he did say that for many years his heart 
had been given to another woman, and that 
though that other woman had put herself 
beyond the reach of his hopes quite, and of 
his thoughts almost, by marrying . that he 
felt it would be doing Isabelle, or any other 
woman, an injustice, to give her such a dead 
heart as his in return for her young, warm, 
living one. He spoke most handsomely, I 
must say, though he made me miserable by 
his determination." 

" And how has Isabelle borne it . my poor 
darling?" Cissy asked, feelingly. 

" To tell the truth," Mrs. Vargrave said, 
with an embarrassed air, "not at all well ; 
she has taken a most perverted notion in her 
head that you are the cause of it ; that he 
liked you better than a man ought to like 
another man's wife." 



ONE EXPLANATION. 207 

"It is a notion that I pity any woman for 
taking into her head about a man she loved 
and thought of marrying," Cissy said, quietly. 
"And such an utterly absui'd one," Mrs. 
Yargrave said, Tvith an air of blind, maternal 
pride. "As I say to Isabelle, it would have 
been different if he had got in love with you 
before he saw her ; but as it is, even if he saw 
you before Isabelle went to your house . which 
I'm sure I forget about . why, you were mar- 
ried, and not to be thought of. But Isabelle is 
obstinate, and persists in an opinion which, I 
must say, is complimentary neither to you nor 
your husband." 

" I am deeply grieved at it," Cissy said, 
sorrowfully. "Evil is wrought by want of 
thought, as well as want of heart, " very 
often, in sober truth. Isabelle should have 
spared me such reflections as these . indeed 
she should." 

"I told her I had never used to consider 
you a flu't." 

" A flirt ! No, Aunt Vargrave, whatever I 
may be, at least I am not that . that smallest 
thing. I have follies enough, of one kind and 



208 FALSE COLOURS. 

another, to answer for, but flirtation is not 
one of them." 

Then there was silence between them for a 
few moments, and Mrs. Var grave occupied it by 
thinking that she had not yet asked what 
brought her there, unexpectedly. Accordingly 
she roused herself and asked that question, and 
Cissy answered . 

" Arthur thinks I am staying with you, and 
you must let him think so for awhile, please, 
and receive letters for me." 

" You have not come away from him. Cissy?" 
poor Mrs. Vargrave moaned. 

*' Come away from him ? . to be sure I 
have," Cissy said, cheerfully; ''the truth is, 
we have been improvident people, and just at 
present we are without a home of our own ; 
but my dear Arthur is so plucky and so clever, 
that he will be fairly placed before the world 
again ; and, in the meantime, I don't want to 
cost him anything, so I have come up " 

" To stay with us," Mrs. Vargrave interrupted. 

" No, indeed, aunt," Cissy said, shaking her 
head, decidedly, " that is what Arthur thinks I 
am going to do, and what I want you to let 



ONE EXPLANATION. 209 

him think I am doing ; the poor boy would be 
wretched if he thought I was on my ovm re- 
sources; he has an idea that all women are 
defenceless creatures, ready to fall victims to 
the mildest social monsters; but I am very 
well able to take care of myself . still, I want 
your help.' 

** What are you going to do ? " Poor Mrs. 
Vargrave was longing to jDress and entreat, and 
almost command Cissy to stay in that house, 
and be safe and happy, and comfortable. But 
she thought of her own daughter, and of that 
daughter's recently developed antagonism to 
Cissy, and she paused. 

" I am going to give lessons in drawing and 
French," Cissy said, promptly. " You must 
help to find me pupils." 

*'0h! what will people think?" Mrs. Var- 
grave cried, in her agony ; " you so lately 
married, to be back here alone, supporting 
yourself." 

** It's much better that I should be back 
here alone than back here with anybody else, 
since my husband can't be with me," Cissy 
said, philosophically. **And it's much more 

VOL. III. p 



210 FALSE COLOURS. 

honest of me to mean to support myself than 
to let any one else do it." 

" But what will people think ? " 

"Think me a good instructress for a few 
months, I hope. " Cissy said, blithely ; 
*' don't infuse doubt and dejection into my 
system. Aunt Vargrave ; it will be a hard 
battle, however hopefully I fight it . if I take 
up arms nervously I shall surely get worsted." 

*' How will you begin ? . I always wonder 
how people begin doing anything of that sort," 
Mrs. Vargrave said, vaguely. 

" I shall begin by making you canvass your 
friends, and if that fails, why, I must adver- 
tise," Cissy said, coolly. 

** I couldn't . so soon after your marriage," 
Mrs. Vargrave said, looking aghast. " Canvass- 
ing my friends to send pupils to you will be 
nearly as bad as telling them about poor Isa- 
belle," and then Mrs. Vargrave fell freshly 
back upon that subject, and bemoaned it, and 
lamented its rise and fall, just as though 
Cissy's tangible troubles had never been 
mentioned. 

The morning wore on, and Cissy began to 



ONE EXPLANATION. 211 

feel that if she did not make a move none 
would be made by her aunt. Isabelle had not 
come down again . stricken deer are apt to 
incline towards solitude, under the circum- 
stances from which she was suffering. On the 
whole, this avoidance of her (Cissy) by her 
cousin was well-timed. Anger and distrust 
were both young and strong in the heart of the 
girl, and that being the case, her symjmthy 
would be frigidly withheld, or, worse still, 
fi'igidly given to the wife who was beginning to 
feel the need of all the sympathetic support 
that could be given to her. 

But excellent Mrs. Vargrave was one of that 
large class of people who never can let well 
alone. As soon as Cissy suggested quietly that 
she was going away, because her time was of 
value to herself, Mrs. Vargrave begged that 
she would not go without seeing Isabelle ; and 
when Cissy remarked practically that if Isa- 
belle had cared to see her she would not have 
gone away, Mrs. Vargrave cavilled amiably 
at the natural conclusion, and avowed that it 
was not like Cissy to " take offence," and to 
" make mistakes," and generally do what was 



212 FALSE COLOURS. 

more just than merciful. '' Go u^) to her room 
and speak to her as if nothing had happened, 
and it will be all right," Mrs. Yargrave 
advised, hopefully, and Cissy obeyed the well- 
intentioned injunction, as far as going up to 
Isabelle's room was concerned. But when she 
got there she found it very hard to carry out 
the letter of the law that had been laid down 
to her . that is to say, she stumbled over the 
obstructions that were in the way of her speak- 
ing ** as if nothing had happened" to the 
embittered, blighted betrothed. 

" Isabelle ! you won't think I am forcing 
myself upon you," she began, hesitating just 
inside the door, and yearningly wishing that 
she could re-live the x^ast six months . or, at 
least ''revise," if she could not re-live them. 
Then (in that desirable case) all should " have 
had their own," so fairly and satisfactorily. But 
as it was ! oh ! as it was, nothing remained for 
her but to make the best of it . for everybody. 
" I won't think you're forcing yourself upon 
me, as you call it. Cissy, if you will just let me 
be alone here," Isabelle said, in a miserable 
monotone. ** My head aches. Why can't 



ONE EXPLANATION. 213 

you go out shopping with mamma, or calHng 
on some of the kind friends (who'll be delighted 
to see you, and hear all about me), and leave 
me to have the ache in peace." 

Cissy's brow contracted a little. When a 
woman is bent upon earnest hard w^ork . or 
rather, shall I say, when the necessity for 
earnest, hard work is forced upon her . she is 
apt to feel resentfully towards those who, in 
mere idleness, point out that there is a path of 
roses to be taken . if only she has time (and 
conscience) to take it. "I can't afford to go 
shopping," she said, a little sternly, '* any more 
than I can afford to w^aste good time in calling 
on our good friends of an enquiring turn of 
mind." 

" Oh ! to be sure," Isabelle said, shrugging 
her shoulders unsympathetically. *' I forgot 
the conjugal claims : Arthur wants you, I 
suppose, and his mildest wdsh is your law ; it's 
a pretty poem to you, no doubt ; but, excuse 
me, for only seeing the comic side of it," and 
Isabelle laughed harshly. 

A moment's hesitation or doubt as to the 
course to be pursued, and neither woman could 



214 FALSE COLOURS. 

ever have bent before the other, and still re- 
tained her own respect. Cissy would not 
permit this moment's hesitation or doubt to 
intervene. " There is no comic side to it, or 
tragic side either, thank heaven," she said, 
seriously, advancing and putting her hands on 
Isabelle's shoulder, " only a serious side, dear. 
Arthur's mildest wish would be my law if I 
dared consult a wish of his now ; as it is, we 
are parted for a time, by pounds, shillings, and 
pence, or rather, by the want of the same ; 
and . don't you be hard on me, Isabelle," and 
Cissy, as she spoke, bent her head down on 
Isabelle's shoulder, and recovered her breath 
by means of a sob or two. 

"You have not quarrelled with Arthur?" 
Isabelle asked, anxiously. 

" Quarrelled with Arthur, what will you 
think next ? don't I tell you that it's money, 
or the want of it, that has put us apart for a 
time. I am going to live in a boarding-house, 
and teach all sorts of things for a time, until 
my husband can have me home again." 

" What a life ! " Isabelle said, shuddering ; 
* how wrong of any man to marry without he 



ONE EXPLANATION. 215 

has money enough to keep a wife pro- 
perly." 

'* That's a social xDlatitude," Cissy said, in 
the vastness of her experience ; *' he had 
money enough when he married, but it failed 
him," she added, sketchily ; and Isabelle 
nodded assent to the vaguely-put proposition, 
and wondered whether or not Edward Lister's 
money would have 'failed him if she had 
married him, according as she had intended, 
and then recalled herself to the present, and 
prepared to do battle against Cissy's assertion. 

*' It may be a mere platitude; but j'ou 
must feel the truth of it," she said, senten- 
tiously. 

" Isabelle, don't try to carry on a chain of 
argument ; you're much nicer when you're 
feelingly discursive," Cissy said, laughing. 
" Come out, now, and witness my efforts, and 
laugh at my failures, if you will." 

She tried to be affectionate and intimate, 
friendly and familiar, as of old, with Isabelle ; 
but Isabelle rendered herself stonily inacces- 
sible, after the manner of one who thought 
herself wronged. 



216 FALSE COLOURS. 

*' I have no time to go out to-day, Cissy, 
thank you," she said, coldly, " and no inclina- 
tion (to tell the truth) to see you make a fresh 
start in life . my own is ended." 

And then Isabelle bent down her pretty 
head, and wept, not bitterly, but plaintively. 

" Will you speak to me about it. Belle ? " 
Cissy whispered. 

" I would much rather not ; and yet why do 
I say that? It's painful enough, and mortify- 
ing enough, but perhaps I had better have it 
out with you." 

"Isabelle, don't grieve for him," Cissy said, 
gulping down her own emotion with a big 
effort. " There is much about him that is 
lovable and charming, I know that ; but he 
would have been hard to live with. He is 
masterful " 

" I would have been his mistress," Isabelle 
interrupted. 

" He would have lorded it over you," Cissy 
went on, eagerly. 

"I would have been his slave," Isabelle 
said, slowly. 

" He would have gone back, even in word 



ONE EXPLANATION. 217 

and outward seeming, to some older love that 
he chooses to believe the real and right one," 
Cissy continued. 

And then Isabelle moved herself away 
from Cissy, as if she had been hurt, and 
said . 

" I would have won him from that older 
love. I would have banished its memory. I 
would have had him for quite my own, if it 
hadn't been for you." 

And as she said that, she gave up wrestling 
with constraint, and broke down utterly, sob- 
bing and crying over that bright, broken dream 
as if she had no hoj^e. 

'' Isabelle, dare I tell you ?" Cissy muttered. 
And then, as she perceived that Isabelle had 
not taken in the full meaning of her words, 
she added, hastily, " Do you think his transient 
admiration for me . a married woman . his 
friend's wife, banished some older, better, purer 
dream, Isabelle ? " 

/' Yes," Isabelle replied, " I do. I can't 
help your being offended, or virtuously indig- 
nant, but I do. Your lures won him away 
from some healthy love that he could have 



218 FALSE COLOUES. 

forgotten for me. I can understand it all. He 
loved some Wordsworth's ' Lucy' kind of girl in 
his youth, and she died, probahly, and he went 
on worshipping her memory, as men do when 
nothing more attractive comes to supersede it, 
until he met us, and then he gave up ghosts 
and longed for flesh and blood . and you con- 
trasted strongly with the old love, and so he 
went into bondage to you, and . Cissy, Cissy, 
your vanity might have spared me, for I did 
love him." 

"Shall I tell her?" Two or three times 
Cissy Scorrier asked herself this question, be- 
fore she could decide as to what would be 
best, wisest, kindest. Then she remembered 
that, at least, no rebound from the truth 
could take her unawares. Moreover, she did 
so long to hoist a flag about which there could 
be no mistake. So presently she came out of 
her stronghold of reserve, and said, " It would 
have been better to tell you all this before, 
Isabelle ; but I was cowardly, I suppose. You 
have formed a wrong notion of the old love 
with whom you thought I contrasted so fa- 
vourably in his eyes. That old love was no 



ONE EXPLANATION. 219 

gentle Wordsworth's 'Lucy;' she was m}^ best 
self. It was I, as I was ten years ago, un- 
tamed, with what men call beauty and fasci- 
nation, and women some harsher names. He 
was my lover once, Isabelle ; and he offered 
fresher, fonder vows to me than he has the 
power to offer now to any one. Don't lament 
him, dear ; and remember what I suffered in 
the rivalry before you refuse to forgive my 
share in it." 



220 FALSE COLOURS. 



CHAPTEE XIII. 

IN DANGER ! 

Young Mrs. Scorrier had with some difficulty 
and reluctance nerved herself to the task of 
being candid. She had come out of her 
stronghold of dignified reserve on the subject 
of that old, speedily dissolved dream of bliss, 
and joy and love which she had dreamt ten 
years ago. And now she was fain to confess 
to herself as she looked into Isabelle's gloomy, 
unforgiving face, that she had done this for no 
good end. ''Will you not remember what I 
suffered in the rivalry before you refuse to for- 
give me?" she said, pleadingly, at the end of 
her confession, and Isabelle answered, *' Will 
you remember that you were not in a j)osition 
in which there could be any honourable rivalry 
between us?" 



IN danger! 221 

It \vas very hard to bo told this by a girl 
"whose sense of honour was normally less keen 
and clear than her own. In asking to have her 
" sufferings remembered," Cissy had referred 
solely to the sufferings of the past, to the 
pangs of memory. And Isabelle had per- 
versely chosen to assume that she (Cissy) had 
meant that she suffered in seeing Mr. Lister's 
present allegiance given to another. Now 
though she had not meant Isabelle to think 
this . though in truth she had meant Isabelle 
to think something utterly different . her own 
conscience was not quite clear. She had in 
very truth, just at first, felt ill at ease, not in 
her heart, but in her vanity. She had asked 
herself . 

"Is it well to wish thee happy, having known me 

to decline, 
On a lower range of feelings, and a narrower heart 

than mine." 

Over and over again she had told herself 
that though as his friend she could desire to 
see the lover of her youth happy with another 
woman, she could not desire to see him happy 
with that precise woman whom he had selected 
. or rather who had selected him. Yet now 



222 FALSE COLOURS. 

she felt injured and misjudged because Isabella 
seemed to have fathomed that feeling. 

" When I said that I never for an instant 
imagined that you could distort my meaning 
and your own judgment so cruelly as to think 
I was jealous for myself in the present. I was 
jealous for my past, outlived self, that was all. 
I did not like the idea of the girl I had been, 
being superseded ; about my present self I had 
no feeling." 

"Eeally, I cannot understand such subtle 
distinctions," Isabelle said, coldly, '' all I hioiv 
is that I have not been too kindly or honour- 
ably treated; but I think that some adverse 
influence was used against me after I left 
your house." 

" Isabelle, you are doing me a shameful in- 
justice," Cissy said, warmly. Mrs. Scorrier 
forgot that Isabelle could only judge from re- 
sults, and that she was in entire ignorance of 
that conversation which had been held between 
Lister and Cissy on the subject of his aversion 
to the marriage. 

'* You are misjudging me so unkindly now, 
when I need your tenderest thoughts," Cissy 



IN DANGER ! 223 

went on, trying by gentle tones, and gentler 
caresses, to win one loving word or look from 
her cousin. She felt that it would be labour 
lost to tell Isabelle how she had argued and 
pleaded with, and rebuked the recalcitrant lover. 
In Miss Vargrave's present state of mind, she 
would sm-ely regard the recital as a piece of 
pure romance, the ojBfspring of Cissy's endless 
fancy, " Will you hear why I am here now," 
she went on. 

" Yes, if you Hke to tell me," Isabelle said, 
languidly, "the truth is I don't take a very 
violent interest in you, or any one else just 
now ; all the pity I have to bestow is given to 
myself." And then she sat down, with her 
arms resting on the dressing-table, and her 
face pressed down upon her arms, and told 
with many tears how public the indignity that 
had been offered her would be *' after having 
sent dozens of people to see my trousseau, to be 
left in this way, because he couldn't love me ; 
Cissy, it is hard ! whatever you may say, it is 
cruelly hard . I could bear it better if it had 
been broken off for any fault of his. I wish 
papa had discovered him to be a something 



224 FALSE COLOURS. 

bad ; I wish it had come to an end in any way 
but this . because he couldn't love me." The 
girl repeated the words in a desolate cadence, 
and Cissy felt helpless. 

" Will you not say good-bye to me, Isabelle," 
she whispered presently. 

" Good-bye ; oh ! are you going ?" the other 
returned, wearily. ^' You came for my wedding, 
I suppose ; and now, finding the house will 
be less gay than you expected to find it, 
you are going away to some pleasanter 
place." 

"Yes, to some pleasanter place," Cissy said, 
trying not to speak scornfully as she felt at the 
moment. " I am going to a dull boarding- 
house in Brompton when I have been to an 
agency office and a girl's school or two. I am 
going to lead the gay and festive life of a 
governess for a time, Isabelle, until my husband 
has a home of his own to take me to again. I 
have some troubles too, dear . I am not al- 
together unfitted by prosperity to sympathize 
with you." Then she went on and told the 
tale of their decline and final fall at Danebury, 
and, when she had told it, she saw that Isabelle 



IN DANGER ! 225 

looked at their troubles as through a diminish- 
ing glass. 

'' You'll enjoy going back when you can go, 
and you'll enjoy the freedom and novelty of the 
Hfe up here," Miss Vargrave said carelessly. 
** I wish I could go out as a governess or as 
anything, but I can't ; I must just plod along 
at home. I envy you more than I pity you. 
Cissy ; you will be a greater heroine than ever 
in Arthur's eyes after this . and, after all, you 
needn't do it unless you liked, for of course you 
could have a home here." 

" It would be a happy home, with you dis- 
posed as you are towards me," Cissy said, 
di'ily." 

'' Oh ! as for that, I don't bear malice, and 
I am bound to believe what you tell me, so of 
course I shall never think of blaming you 
again," Isabelle replied. '* The same stum- 
bling block will never be put in our paths 
again ; I can never love any one as I loved 
him, and I shall never think of marriage. 
I'm condemned to be an old maid, Cissy." 

** Self-condemned," Cissy began. 

" No, no, condemned by Edward Lister and 

VOL. III. Q 



226 FALSE COLOURS. 

. and fate," the girl interposed, sobbing bitterly 
now. "Condemned by every atom of womanly 
feeling and self-respect in me ; oh ! my blighted 
life . and I'm so young still." 

" I was younger, more passionate than you, 
when I had to bow to the inevitable and give up 
this same man," Cissy said, earnestly. " In 
those days I would have given my soul for him 
. but I gave him up because I would not be 
the cause of his losing in the eyes of the world; 
but I am a very happy wife now." 

" Ah ! your nature is less constant than 
mine," Isabelle said, in a decided tone. " It's 
all over for me . it's no use arguing it, it's all 
over for me . and you helped to unsettle him. 
I don't blame you for it, but you did. Cissy, he 
was devoted to me." 

" And I have not shattered his devotion," 
Mrs. Scorrier said, getting up. " I will not 
condescend to defend myself, Isabelle . he was 
free as air and you failed to chain him ; be- 
cause you failed I am not to blame. When yon 
can think more kindly of me, I will come to you ; 
until then we only pain each other." 

Then they parted, and Cissy went away feel- 



IN DANGER ! 227 

ing very much alone . very much as if she were 
left to herself to perish. For a drizzling rain 
had set in, and she by reason of her purse not 
being well filled felt bound to travel in omni- 
busses, and the stra"^v over the floors of these 
unpleasant means of locomotion was wet, and 
the passengers in them steamed, and by the 
time she reached her goal, an agency office in 
the Strand, a fat fog had settled oppressively 
over the city, and the suburbs came in for the 
edges of it, and all was dreary and dispiriting. 
However, she bent all her energies to the task 
of finding something to do, and when a man or 
a woman with a will does that, he or she rarely 
fails. At nightfall when she retraced her steps 
to the boarding-house in the Brompton Eoad, 
she had entered into an engagement to teach 
French and music to the two daughters of a 
widow in Sloane Street, who was conducting a 
prosperous establishment for the sale of braids 
and buttons. Her letter to Ai'thur that evening 
was very hopeful. 

"Week by week her connection increased. 
Her time was fully occupied, and she began 
to contemplate the expediency of hiring a 



228 FALSE COLOURS. 

piano, and taking a private sitting-room at the 
boarding-house. The harder she worked, the 
happier she was in those days. At length she 
resolved on making a bold stroke, and storm- 
ing fortune, if fortune would be stormed by her. 
She put herself under the tutelage of one of 
the first pianists of the day. She won his 
heart by her beauty, her love of art, her per- 
severance, and her honest admiration of his 
style. And when she had done that, she 
mooted her desire that he should bring her 
out as a public performer, and he agreed to 
jhe proposition. " Not that you do anything 
extraordinary," he said ; *' in these days it is 
wisest to despau' of success even if your play- 
ing is perfect, unless you can do something 
that no one else can do. If you could play 
with the top of your head, for instance, you 
would take: nothing short of that will shake 
the established favourites." 

*' But I don't want to shake the established 
favourites," Cissy pleaded. 

'' Don't you ? ah ! that is well, you shall 
come out, my child, and eat the bread of 
bitterness, and read the denunciations of dis- 



IN DANGER ! 229 

appointment ; you are ambitious, you have the 
artist-nature. Ach Himmel I so had I once ; 
but see me now, I would not give that for their 
praise," and he snapped his fingers airily. 

" But you would give a great deal more than 
that for the money which their praise brings 
you," Cissy said, " and it's money I want 
now. I can bear the adverse criticisms, and 
the denunciation of disappointment ; only try 
me." 

This she said on the eve of her venture, 
when she was feeling " very bold to take " 
what she felt she deserved . namely, a good 
place in the ranks of second-rate pianoforte 
players. 

And this class of second-rate players is by 
no means so utterly degraded and altogether 
undeserving of honourable mention as the great 
mass of people who know nothing whatever of 
professional life may imagine. To the unini- 
tiated and ignorant it is just as easy to be 
first as last, seeing that they never can be 
anything. The masses offer up adulation, and 
pour out paeans of praise upon some new 
performer or artist, if only that fifth-rate per- 



230 FALSE COLOURS. 

former has the wit to demand instead of 
soliciting their suffrages. But these same 
masses are intolerant to, and have a contempt 
for the humble-hearted, thoroughly proficient 
genius who has never won the smiles of 
either the coy dame, success, or the wanton 
popularity. That " many -headed monster 
thing," the public, has but one guiding star, 
and that is, mention . open, printed mention. 
But Cissy did not realize this truth, and so 
hoped to take a place in the second ranks 
without the aid of the press. 

She corresponded very regularly with her 
husband in these days, never betraying any of 
the excitement or fatigue under which she was 
alternately labouring. But writing to him in 
a cheerful, equable way that strengthened his 
belief in her being perfectly happy and con- 
tented in her uncle's house. The motive of 
the deception was good, but the manner of it 
might be productive of evil results ; this possi- 
bility was always before Cissy Scorrier, caus- 
ing her to order her life more soberly and 
discreetly, perhaps, than she would otherwise 
have done. But still she was sufficiently car- 



IN DANGER ! 231 

ried out of her usual direction by a certain 
ecstacy of hope concerning what might come of 
it if only she was successful, that she left a 
point or two unguarded. 

She had very little personal intercourse with 
her relations, in Ladhroke Square, in those 
days. The Vargi-aves were interested in her, 
and sorry for her, and anxious that her pros- 
pects should be bright once more. But they 
did not like her current occupation, and they 
did wish her safely back with her husband, and 
quite out of their orbit. They were equally 
afraid of her failing in her scheme, and be- 
coming poorer than she was already, and of her 
succeeding and attaining a popularity that 
would mark her, and lay bare her life, and the 
need she had to lead it, before their little world. 
The Yargraves were very nice people, excellent 
people, in their way . people who always did 
right things and never made social mistakes. 
But they had no gentle blood in their veins, 
and so they were fearful of their dignity being 
derogated from, if one of their stock was known 
to make her talent remunerative. Accordingly 
Cissy received but a sparse meed of sympathy, 



232 FALSE COLOURS. 

'when she did go there, from the old people, 
attached as they were to her. While as for 
Isabelle, she still regarded herself as unfairly 
worsted by Cissy, as a married woman, and so 
was a degree more chilling than an open enemy 
could have been. On the whole it can easily 
be understood that the atmosphere lacked all 
geniality, and so Cissy kept out of it as much 
as she could, and strove to absorb herself in 
attention to her master's instructions, and to 
her art generally. 

This master was a German, a composer of 
some repute, and an admirable performer on 
the instrument he loved better than he loved 
anything else in the world . the piano. He 
had married a promising pupil of his own, six 
years before Mrs. Scorrier knew him, but she 
(his wife) fell into ill-health, and the delicacy 
and strength of her touch deserted her, and 
altogether she loomed before him as a being to 
whom he was linked for life, and a failure. 
The eminent German Maestro was an intensely 
selfish man. He lapsed rapidly through all 
the stages of indifference, and, by the time 
Mrs. Scorrier was introduced to him. he had 



IN danger! 233 

freed himself from the conjugal incubus, and 
was living in luxurious bachelor solitude in 
apartments, in Bond Street. 

At the piano he was grand, inspired ; but 
apart from that . his really better half . he was 
a poor, effete creature, of infinitely small design, 
and even smaller execution. He would be a 
gallant, and he would have loves to relate, in 
spite of the difficulty he experienced in getting 
even the least scrupulous and fastidious women 
to listen to his gallantries. Such as he was, 
however, he insisted on wearing Mrs. Scorrier's 
chains most publicly, when she was not by to 
check the display. On wearing her chains, 
and prognosticating a future for her, and making 
her his theme, his object, his shrine, on which 
to lay his waste and withered flowers of love 
and flattery. 

It was decided that she was to make her 
first appearance before an enlightened audience 
in the evening. " People are always harder to 
please by daylight . before they have dined," 
he said, so Cissy had the encouragement of 
much light, and a gaily dressed house, when 
she came forward and bowed her acknowledg- 



234 FALSE COLOURS. 

ments, for the first burst of applause tl:r.t 
greeted lier because she was very fair to see. 
The press was well represented . her master 
had felt its pulse and pronounced it healthy 
and good. Her master was wild with excite- 
ment too, and was so encouraging that Cissy 
began to wish heartily that she could do with- 
out him. Not even professional feeling, she 
thought, justified the length and warmth of the 
grasp he had just given her hand. She was 
thinking this as he led her forward to the piano 
when her first trial came. And then she looked 
ujp and tried to face those who were to be her 
hearers and judges, and as she did so her eyes 
met, and were fascinated by the eyes of her 
husband. 

Things had not been going smoothly at 
Glene. One morning, when Arthur had been 
there about six weeks, there had passed a 
tremor through the whole house early one 
morning, and he had been called to Mrs. Hep- 
burn's room, where he found her mom-ning in 
the bitterness of a grief that could not be com- 
forted. Her little boy was dying, and there 
was no help for the child, and no comfort for 



IN DANGER ! 235 

the mother. Before the sun set that day there 
Tvas no heir to Glene, and then a sore task was 
set before Mr. Scorrier. The husband was 
seized with paralysis, and the wife, sullen in 
the midst of her woe, would not go near him. 
The one bond that had held them together . 
the little child's life . was broken. "Nothing 
could renew it," she said. She loathed her 
lot as his wife, at any price she prayed for her 
freedom. 

There were two or three sad, degrading 
scenes in that stately house during the ensuing 
days. A woman, rich in youth and health, 
and strength, shuddering away from the task 
that was appointed her of nursing and com- 
forting the stricken old man, who pleaded so 
earnestly, so abjectly, for her love ! her pity ! 
her presence, even. Shuddering away from 
her husband and her duty, and turning more 
and more ai^XDealingly to the man who could 
not even give her friendship now without feel- 
ing that he was being false to the bereft old 
man who trusted him. Even her servants 
revolted at the callousness which kept her 
away from the sick room, and the craving 



236 FALSE COLOURS. 

.which caused her to haunt every spot where it 
was likely she would find Arthur. And at last 
the sick man seemed to have a vision of what 
was about in the air. And he made a resolve, 
which it bent his pride and nearly broke his 
heart to make, and then the piteousness of all 
the scenes that had been enacted at Glene 
culminated in the following one. 

One day he insisted on his wife's presence, 
in what he believed to be the chamber of 
death, and when she went, unwillingl}^, awk- 
wardly, to his bed-side, she found his lawyer 
was standing there already, with Arthur 
Scorrier. Her heart leapt lightly at the sight. 
She thought she saw in it signs of his agree- 
ing to a separation . and a separation, on any 
terms, she told herself would be better than 
the disappointed life she had led at Glene. 

But it was not to hear her articles of free- 
dom read that she was summoned. It was 
simply to listen to a statement which he had 
dictated to his lawyer that morning, and which 
that lawyer now read aloud. It was very brief, 
but it was very crushing. From it she learnt 
that, let death strike all out of her path whom 



IX DANGER ! 2 37 

she now deemed in her way, and still her 
hopes would be no nearer fulfilment. From it 
she learnt that Ai'thur was her husband's son, 
and when she had learnt that lesson something 
moved her to go out from the room, vowing 
never to look upon his face again. The one 
firm, fervent prayer of her life had been that 
Arthur might, in honour some day, be more 
to her than another. Now her prayer was 
granted in a way that broke her heart. An 
hour after her dying husband had made that 
statement to her, she was in the train on her 
way to her father's house. Then a great pity 
for his erring, faulty, false, deserted father 
filled the son's heart, and he wrote a gentle 
letter to his mother, telling her that the end 
was very near now, and that, without sin or 
shame, she might come and forgive. 



238 FALSE COLOURS. 



CHAPTEE THE LAST. 

IN WHICH LOVE IS VICTORIOUS. 

" The world is full of folly and sin, 

And love must cling where it can, I say ; 
For beanty is easy enough to win. 
But one isn't loved every day." 

In the gray quiet of an unbroken monotony, 
old Mrs. Scorrier had lived on all these months 
at Penzance. The great woe of her life, now, 
was that there was nothing left to her to 
mourn for honestly. While it had been left to 
her to bewail " her beloved dead," she had 
been, comparatively speaking, happy. There 
had been a certain romance in her dull life, 
void of all romance as it seemed to those who 
only saw the outside of it. But now that 
romance was reft from her, even her dead was 
taken from her, and her living was in a strait 
in which she could be no aid to him. 



LOVE IS VICTORIOUS. 239 

She heard of the changes that were taking 
place at Danehury, truly, hut she heard of them 
in a vague uncertain way that made her heart 
ache for her inability to help them at all 
through their inability to trust her fully. 
They had even told her of Cissy's relationship 
to Mr. Hepburn, and of how Cissy's mother 
had, after all, been sealed with the seal of 
honourable matronhood. But she could not 
take the pleasure she once could have taken 
in the hearing. She felt herself condemned 
through her participation in the deception 
which had been practised on herself, to stand 
aloof entirely outside all these exciting family 
interests. 

The active sorrow of her life just at present 
was that Cissy should be parted from her hus- 
band, even though it was for their common 
weal, as Arthur asserted that it was. " They 
took each other for better and for worse," she 
would say to herself, and then she would go 
on to feel that if she had ever been allowed to 
offer those vows herself, how sacredly, how 
tenderly, how bravely she would have kept 
them. 



240 FALSE COLOURS. 

In the wealth of her great power of self- 
abnegation, she went heavily in genuine mourn- 
ing of heart when the tidings were told her 
that the little heir of Glene was dead. She 
blushed and thought herself presuming in her 
perfect humility of heart, when she put on 
deeper black for the baby ; but still she put it 
on, saying to herself that though " the son of 
the bondwoman might not be heir with the son 
of the free," that the same blood flowed in the 
veins of both, and that the little child had been 
her own Arthur's brother. Moreover her spirit 
sorrowed in unison with the sorrow of the be- 
reaved father. And she told herself that if he 
had sinned, so also he had suffered, and she 
pitied him with all the pity of her wrung, 
desolated heart. But in spite of this sombre, 
depressing sadness of hers, she never, from 
the day on which she had taken it up again, 
as has been seen, omitted the duty which had 
once been her pleasure, of decking the grave 
she had learnt to love so well, with flowers. 
The poor inhabitant below might have been 
chargeable with all the crimes in the calendar 
for aught she knew or cared. All she did 



LOVE IS VICTORIOUS. 241 

know or care about was this . that she had 
learnt to watch and pray and to forgive, over 
the turf that covered. So whatever else he 
had been, he had been to her unconscious 
monitor and friend. 

If he, Mr. Hejpburn, her ''great unknown" 
of so many }. ears' standing, if he had only 
never married, she might now, in these days, 
go to him as a loving friend, a woman out of 
whose mind and life and heart all thoughts of 
passion had been pressed. She might go to 
him and offer him such sympathy as old age 
finds sweet from old age, now that he was ill, 
dying perhaps ! for Arthur had written to tell 
her of his old friend's paralytic stroke. But 
he had a wife, a wife whose place was by his 
side, who would resent any such intrusion con- 
temptuously if she knew nothing, with virtuous 
indignation if the miserable old story were 
made known to her. The new tenom' of the 
miserable monotony of her way was upset by 
these reflections, which she could never bring 
to the touch-stone of action, to prove them true 
or wanting. 

The only balm she could apply to her 

VOL. III. R 



242 FALSE COLOURS. 

wounded spirit was this, to write long, tender, 
crossed effusions to Arthur, bidding him be all 
that was kind and good, fond and true, to the 
possibly dying man. And these letters being 
crossed poor Arthur never had time to read 
them when they arrived, so their pathos 
was poured away as it were, and they did not 
bear the fruit they were intended to bear. 
Perhaps had Arthur perused them in their en^ 
tirety a light would have dawned in upon him 
which their writer had never designed to shed. As 
it was he read the uncrossed bits in the letters 
and put the reading of the crossed bits by, in 
the manly manner, and was never illuminated 
in the least by reason of them. 

And while these letters were being poured in 
upon him, his father, as Mr. Hepburn was in 
reality, his dear old friend as he was in seem- 
ing, grew weaker and weaker, and at last he 
pleaded for a kind womanly hand . and there 
was none held out to him. His wife was gone ! 
She needed recruiting both in health and spirits, 
she wrote to Arthur to say, and as she could do 
no actual good at Glene, it seemed to her that, 
she might as well stay away. 



LOVE IS VICTORIOUS. 243 

At this stage Arthur bethought himself of his 
wife. Mr. Hepburn's prejudices were very few, 
and just now he hailed, with a touching grati- 
tude, the prospect of this gentler presence that 
was held out to him. He turned to the thought 
of her possible coming as to a place of rest. 
He yearned for^her presence partly [because she 
was a gentle-handed, gentle-minded woman, 
and partly because she was of his own race ; 
blood is ever so [much thicker and stronger 
than water in its binding power when it 
has flowed on] from generation to generation 
for centuries. And so [as the wish [and the 
yearning for her deepened, Arthur resolved to go 
up to town and bring his wife back with him to 
Glene. 

He longed to see her himself, and he did re- 
joice in this fau% honourable, manly opportunity 
of going to her. It had hurt him a little that 
she should be so resigned to staying away from 
him, though he himself had counselled her to 
go. And the hurt feeling quarrelled with tho 
satisfied feeling that she was safe. He hoped 
ardently all the way up to town that she would 
not be out walking when he reached her uncle's 



244 FALSE COLOURS. 

house, that she would not be planning some 
little evening party with Isabelle, that she would 
not seem to be enjoying herself too much, in 
fact, while she was necessarily apart from him. 

The little demonstrations which had been 
made in his professional favour had been rich 
in results. He had been selected in the teeth of 
Mr. Monsell to attend two bad cases which that 
gentleman was treating with all the human 
kindness and medical skill that was in him. 
It began to be looked upon as quite in the order 
of things that Mr. Scorrier should resume his 
former fair proportions in their midst. 

That he should tend their sick and afflicted, 
and gently content their fretful and fanciful. 
The more enterprising and sanguine spirits among 
them began mentally to cast about for a fitting 
house in which he could dwell when his term as 
a visitor at Glene expired, and his wife retm-ned 
to him. People began to speak of her in a 
sort of forgiving patronizing way that would 
have been gall and bitterness to her had she 
known. Those who were indigenous to the 
soil, and who had never gone out and faced 
danger or conquered difiiculties out of the 



LOVE IS VICTORIOUS. 245 

ordinary way, said that ''really now if she only 
came back and would be careful and quiet, all 
would be looked over, and she would be re- 
ceived." There was a ghastly satire in those 
saying it who did say it, for they belonged to 
the big class whom Cissy deemed it the heaviest 
portion of her cross in her early married days 
to know. They were mostly retired relicts of 
respectable members of the industrial classes, 
comfortably off squire -farmers whose whole talk 
was of guns and dogs, and whose wives' talk 
was of things even less definitely satisfactory. 
But for all their shortcomings socially, for all 
their trying' and hardly -to-be-borne sins against 
tact and refinement, they were in a position to 
sit in the seat of the morally scornful about Cissy, 
and they sat in it. 

It was at this juncture, when the supporters 
of his cause were rallying round him again, that 
Ai-thur Scorrier went up to town for his wife. 
All the way up to town he had been contrasting 
her unfailing gentleness, and candour, and 
warmth, with the chilly dreariness, which it 
must be confessed was Mrs. Hepburn's predom- 
inant characteristic. He pictured to himself as he 



246 FALSE COLOUES. 

travelled, two or three pretty little meeting scenes. 
He knew Cissy's eager, kindly disposition so well 
that he kept the hansom at Mr. Var grave's door 
while he went in. " She will want to start at 
once," he said to himself, " and I won't have 
the bother of sending for another cab." Then 
he went in to find Mrs. Vargrave and Isabelle 
alone with blank dismay. 

" Why didn't you write to say you v^ere com- 
ing?" was Mrs. Vargrave' s rej)ly to his eager 
question of " "Where's my wife ? " 

" I had no time . how are you, Isabelle? . let 
me see Cissy at once, I want her to go back to 
Glene with me, this minute if she can." 

The mother and daughter looked at each 
other and trembled. This was a complication 
that they had never foreseen . this that her 
husband should arrive in their midst and seem 
to think them responsible for his missing wife. 
*' The fact is. Cissy is not in just now, Ar- 
thur," the younger lady said", recovering her 
head first, " but I think I know where she is, 
and I'll send for her," and then Isabelle went 
to despatch a messenger to the boarding-house, 
and to feel very good and magnanimous for not 



LOVE IS VICTORIOUS. 247 

betraying the deceiving wife to the deceived 
husband. 

Little by little, ray by ray, hair's-breadth by 
hair's-breadth, a light came into Ai-thur's mind 
as he sat with them waiting impatiently. He 
knew from the constraint, which they could 
not put away from their manner, that they 
were ill at ease. And as soon as he felt sure of 
this, he set himself the task of discovering the 
reason. Isabelle was more altered even than 
a jilted girl . than a betrayed betrothed has any 
right to be altered. And Mrs. Yargrave was 
frightened out of the semblance even of the few 
wits that were hers. 

By-and-by Miss Vargrave was mysteriously 
summoned from the room, and when she came 
back, Arthur felt sure that her messenger had 
returned, and that Cissy was not forthcoming. 
The reply to her verbal message sent to the 
boarding-house was indeed as unsatisfactory as 
anything well could be under the circumstances. 
" Mrs. Scorrier was gone up to practise at her 
master's, but the mistress of the boarding-house 
didn't know his address." 

" \Yhen do you think it likely Cissy will be 



248 FALSE COLOURS. 

in ?" Arthur asked, discontentedly, " she will 
be back to dinner, I suppose ? " 

"Well, I am not sure," Mrs. Vargrave said, 
dubiously ; " you see, in London one never 
knows." Then she remembered that this was 
not exactly the sort of apology or excuse to 
offer for a lady, and she grew more confused 
than she had been before, and felt ill-used both 
by Cissy and Arthur. 

It was useless to keep it waiting, so he went 
out and dismissed the cab, and while he was 
doing so, Mrs. Yargrave and Isabelle held a 
whispered colloquy, and discussed the desirabi- 
lity of '' telling him the truth." *'If we do. 
Cissy may blame us ; she is so uncomfortable 
about everything now," Miss Vargrave said, 
pettishly. " I will write a note to her at the 
boarding-house, telling her to come here the 
instant she comes home . she must come home 
to dress for her concert to-night, you know." 

They took comfort in this conclusion, and so 
assured Arthur when he came back, after send- 
ing off his cab, that she must be back in the 
afternoon sometime. And Arthur was fain to 
accept their assurance. 



LOVE IS VICTORIOUS. 249 

still it was very possible some time might 
intervene before she returned, they said, so as 
they evidently did not want him, he went up 
and strolled into the gardens, and then along 
to the Marble Arch. Unluckily, as he came out 
from the gatewaj^ an omnibus, whose course 
was Piccadilly, pulled up opposite, and he got 
on the top of it and was driven along, un- 
decided as to where he should get off and what 
he should do. 

" There's always something going on here," 
he thought, getting down at the end of Swan 
and Edgar's shop. Then he sauntered up 
Piccadilly a little way, and looked in at the 
Eg3^ptian Hall, and found one room occupied 
by a gentleman who made mince-meat of a 
lady in pink, in a clothes-basket, one moment, 
and introduced her whole and hearty to the 
affrighted audience the next. While the other 
room was resounding with clamorous a^Dplauso 
an appreciative public were bestowing upon a 
wan-looking young man who took it upon his 
own weak head and falling shoulders to jiortray 
the manners and habits of '' Good Society . 
illustrated by sketches and songs." 



250 FALSE COLOURS. 

This place was dull, duller than in his own 
old student-days, when he had come there and 
derived inexpressible amusement from the per- 
formance of poor Albert Smith. Arthur Scor- 
rier turned awa^y disconsolately, and, crossing 
over to the other pavement, soon found himself 
carelessly perusing the bill of the concert that 
was coming off that night in St. James's Hall. 

As fate would have it. Cissy's name was 
printed in this bill, though she had sedulously 
adhered to her determination of not letting it 
creep into the papers. As he read that Mrs. 
Scorrier was to make her debiit to-night, he 
laughed, with a certain feeling of its being odd 
that such a name should be there. He never 
once contemplated the possibility of its being 
his own Yviie who was advertised. 

The programme was a very seductive one. 
As he read it over again, and saw the names 
of two or three great singers, whom it was 
rarely any one's fortune to hear out of oi)era, 
he felt as if it would be throwing away a 
chance if he did not stay and hear them this 
night. The concert would be over by ten . 
there would not be time for Cissy to feel very 



LO^-E IS VICTORIOUS. 251 

anxious about him, even if she did go back to 
her uncle's house sooner than those vague 
relations of hers seemed to expect her. So 
thinking, he went in and took a ticket, and 
then went into the coffee-room, and dined. 

So it came to pass that, when Cissy was led 
towards the piano to make her oj)ening sen- 
sation by her proud and admiring master, 
her husband's eyes met hers. For a moment 
the room seemed to rise at her, and the boards 
fell away under her feet, and the foot-lights 
flared out, " shame " and '* bravas" that were 
meant for greeting, sounded like cries of con- 
fusion, and thick darkness spread itself before 
her vision . and . she found herself still stand- 
ing erect, able to return her husband's gaze, 
able even to walk on to the i^iano as if nothing 
had occurred. It required a stout effort to so 
control and manage herself, but she made it, 
and Arthur admired her pluck, even in the 
midst of his anger. 

She played as if she were inspired, several 
enthusiastic people remarked to one another. 
And so she was, inspired by a horrible fear of 
blundering, and being pronounced foolish, as 



252 FALSE COLOURS. 

well as faulty. She played far better than she 
had ever played before . with more feeling, 
more fervour, more brilliancy . she seemed to 
herself to be under penalty of sudden death if 
she v/ere not correct, beyond all possibility of 
blame. When she had finished, the plaudits 
set in, and her master proudly accepted the 
tributes to his power of imparting instruction, 
and assured her of her great success . and she 
only looked at Arthur, and longed to implore 
him, even then before them all, to forgive her 
the indiscretion, because she had meant so 
well. 

She got herself away back to the per- 
formers' private room, and hastily scribbled a 
line, entreating him to come over ; and 
presently he came, and the two stood about 
awkwardly, and half hoped, half feared, there 
was going to be a scene. She had been quietly 
accepted as a widow before this by the people ' 
who had heard of her, not on her own state- 
ment nor at her own suggestion even, but just 
because there was no visible Mr. Scorrier to 
the fore. But now she was at once judged 
and condemned as a frisky matron, whose 



LOVE IS VICTORIOUS. 253 

husband had returned, from India probably, 
and caught in the commission of an esca- 
pade. 

The few words they exchanged sounded so 
coldly to the ears and hearts of both. " I did 
everything for the best, Arthur," she muttered, 
not daring to offer to imt her hand in his, for 
fear he should refuse it. 

'* No doubt of it . we won't discuss the 
wisdom of what you have done here. I have 
come to take you back to Glene . Mr. Hep- 
burn is very ill." 

*' Has Amelia sent you for me ? " she asked, 
quickly. 

"Mrs. Hepburn has deserted her husband 
now that he is dying," he said, and then Cissy 
hurried on her cloak and hood, and was pre- 
paring to depart, when her master came back 
from the concert-room. 

" You are promised to me to suj^per," he 
said eagerly, taking both Cissy's hands in his 
in a burst of that free foreign fashion which 
Arthur had once promised not to mind, and 
which he now found to be unbearable. 

"I cannot keep that promise. My husband 



254 FALSE COLOURS. 

has come to take me to a sick relation," she 
said, smiling. 

*' Sick relations are inadmissible in the 
realms of art. Lady Brugher has been im- 
ploring me to get you to her concert to-morrow 
night ; she wants you to give her two daughters 
lessons. The field is won, my pupil." 

Arthur Scorrier could hardly restrain him- 
self from knocking down the animated and 
admiring Teuton as he said those words ** my 
pupil." " Come, Cissy," he said, impatiently, 
" Mr. Hepburn's time on earth is not long 
enough for us to waste any of it in listening to 
idle compliments," and then he scowled at 
Cissy's art-adorer in a way that that gentleman 
imitated with great effect at a miscellaneous 
supper-party at his own house two hours after- 
wards. 

When Mr. and Mrs. Scorrier got into a cab 
Arthur gave the Yargraves' address in Ladbroke 
Square, and then Cissy had to explain that 
even in this he was mistaken. 

"Not there, Arthur; I am living at a board- 
ing-house in Brompton." 

" You are living in an atmosphere of decep- 



LOVE IS VICTORIOUS. 255 

tion," he cried, intemperately, as he flung 
himself into the cah, while she gave the number 
of the house in the Brompton Eoad, and for a 
few minutes Cissy was silent, seeking to disen- 
tangle right from wrong. She was trying, too, 
not to feel too sorry for being snatched away 
into oblivion before she had realized the full 
flavour of that public success which it was in 
her to win and command. "When she did speak, 
it was to say, 

''I'll defer the explanation of my motives 
until I have time to tell you all of them, Ar- 
thur. I must pack up now, for I suppose you 
will start to-night ? " 

"Don't you go near the Vargraves ?" he 
asked. 

"No! I will not now." And then she told 
him briefly how Isabelle had attributed her 
sorrow to her (Cissy), and had turned against 
her in it. 

They went back by a night train, and when 
Mr. Hepburn opened his eyes the next morning 
he found them standing by his side. Even the 
few hours of Arthur's absence had wrought a 
change in the dying man. He was palpably 



256 FALSE COLOURS. 

weaker in the Jflesli ; but his first words proved 
him to be stronger in the spirit. 

" Do you think there can be forgiveness for 
a man who has lived a lie for more than thirty 
years, Arthur?" he asked; and before Arthur 
could generalize in a consolatory way, Mr. Hep- 
burn added, 

"Send for your mother to come at once; she 
will tell you that I am such a man. I will run 
the risk of losing all the love and respect you 
now feel for me, rather than die with the truth 
untold." 

But though he said this, and said it many 
times with the weary love of repetition which 
marks physical decay, they neither of them an- 
ticipated much of a revelation when old Mrs. 
Scorrier should come. " He's magnifying 
trifles, poor old fellow," Arthur said to Cissy ; 
" He looks upon it as a lie and a sin now that 
he should have called that aversion to seeing 
my mother feeling for my father ; I am almost 
sorry he should insist on her being sent for." 

" It's best to please him, though it can do 
no good," Cissy said, in the blindness of ig- 
norance. 



LOVE IS VICTORIOUS. 257 

So at last she was summoned. At last she 
had the reward her patience and her lasting 
love and tenderness deserved. 

It was a contrast, indeed, to her last visit to 
Glene, when she had heen introduced surrep- 
titiously, as if she had heen contraband goods. 
She was met and welcomed now, and courteously 
entreated, and conveyed at once by Arthur and 
Cissy to the dying man's side. Then as he 
stretched his hands out to her and called her 
"Mabel," and imj^lored her "to forgive him," 
and Ai'thur and his wife looked with wondering 
inquiry as " to what it all meant," she, kneel- 
ing by his bed, told her story and his own to 
their children. 

Six weeks after this, advertisements in all 
the county papers told that Glene was to be let. 
It was quite a romance, everybody said. The 
old gentleman had died childless after all, but 
he had found a sister's child in his favourite, 
Arthur Scorrier's wife, and he had left all his 
landed property to her, only charging the estate 
with a splendid jointure to his own wife. There 
was another secondary romance, too, connected 
with the late owner of Glene. Mrs. Scorrier, 

VOL. III. s 



258 FALSE COLOURS. 

the widow of an old friend of his, had died 
two days after him, and was huried in the 
Hepburn family vault. The first intruder in 
that sacred spot. The only remnant of mor- 
tality there who w^as neither a Hepburn by 
name or birth. But it was the will of the 
young mistress of Glene that it should be so, 
and the neighbourhood was careful now how 
they canvassed her actions. 

It was the will of the young mistress of Glene, 
also, that Arthur and herself should keep the 
secret of the sorrow of his mother's life, and 
the sin and subterfuge of his father's, still. 
"Leave the dead alone, love," she said, ap- 
plying the refrain of the ballad of Lenora to 
the circumstances of their case, " let them rest 
together, undisturbed by gossip." 

Additionally, and perhaps this was not the 
least wise of her resolutions, it was her will 
that Glene should be let for three years, during 
which three years Ai'thur and herself went to 
many of her old haunts, with no fear now, on 
her part, of meeting any of the old haunters 
of them. They have assumed the name of 
Hepburn, according to Mr. Hepburn's desire. 



LOVE IS VICTORIOUS. 259 

but they keep the fact of their children being so 
closely of his 1)lood to themselves. 

For, according to their own judgment, they 
have disentangled right from wrong, and they 
have done it in this wise. 

" You were wrong to live beyond your means, 
and to try and seem to be richer than you were, 
even though your object was to j^i'eserve my 
peace of mind, Arthur ; and I was wrong to 
feed false sentiment, and flatter a man by 
seeming to be unable to bear his defalcation 
when it didn't hurt me in reality. Your dupli- 
city brought us to poverty, and mine has brought 
us into ill-odour with my relations. But I was 
not wrong to keep the fact of my honourable 
work from you, when you had tried to force me 
to live in dishonourable idleness. And you 
will be so right, dear, to keep your parents* 
names unspotted before the world, since no 
one will be injured by yom' reticence." 

In answer to a long self-accusing, thoroughly 
explanatory letter which Cissy wrote to her 
cousin Isabelle, on the eve of her (Cissy's) 
departure for some of those old haunts for 



260 FALSE COLOURS. 

which her spirit yearned, she received a full 
acquittal from that young lady. 

" I felt all along that Mr. Lister was not 
w^orthy of me," Isabelle wrote (it is astonishing 
how ready a woman is to declare in word that 
a man " is not worthy of her," if he has shown 
in act that he does not think her worthy of 
him), . " and so I struggled to do what was right 
for papa and mamma." Then she went on to 
tell how her struggles had carried her very 
much into society, and how, while love and 
marriage had been furthest from her thoughts, 
a most exemplary, accomplished, clever, rich, 
and altogether worthy brewer, ' ' with a splendid 
place in Kent," had proved to her that she had 
" made a mistake about Mr. Lister" ; and, to 
cut the story short, had given her an oppor- 
tunity of rectifying that mistake. In extenua- 
tion of her own change of sentiment, she went 
on to quote Cissy against herself. " You know 
you proi)hesied this," she said ; " your own 
experience taught you that first love is a de- 
lusion. We shall be able to sympathize with 
each other, dear Cissy, though you were only 



LOVE IS VICTORIOUS. 261 

the object of his boyhood's dream, while I was 
the choice of his sober manhood." 

" Tell her that a great impediment to your 
perfect sj-mpathy lies in the fact that you re- 
jected him, while he rejected her," Arthur said, 
when he heard that passage in Isabelle's letter. 

" What is the use of telling a woman what 
she knows already?" Cissy said, good-tem- 
peredly, " rather let us go and choose her a 
charming wedding present, and send it to her, 
with a letter hailing her as very victorious." 



THE END.
