
THE   VICAE'S    COURTSHIP. 


CHAPTER  I. 

BREAKFAST   AT   THE   VICARAGE. 

It  was  a  pleasant  morning  early  in  October,  and 
the  Reverend  Edward  Beaufiower  and  his  mother 
and  sister  were  seated  round  the.  breakfast  table. 

The  little  village  of  Summerleas,  nestling 
unpretendingly  at  the  foot  of  the  great  range  of 
breezy  downs  that  runs  like  a  backbone  through 
the  whole  south  of  Wiltshire,  looked  modestly 
pretty  in  the  cool  autumn  sunshine.  The  little 
shell-like  leaves  of  the  tall  box-hedge  that  partly 
shut  out  the  Vicarage  from  the  road,  wet  with  the 
last  night's  rain,  shone  in  the  sun  as  if  they  had 
been  gilt.  Some  tall  spindly  alders  that  bordered 
a  trout  brook .  that  ran  on  the  other  side  of  the 
box-hedge  in  Farmer  Brown's  ever  green  water 
meadow,  shook  their  many-coloured  leaves,  and 


2  THE    VICARS    COURTSHIP. 

looked  for  all  the  world  like  huge  nosegays.  High 
in  the  branch  of  a  huge  oak  that  rose  over  the  tall, 
mossy  paling  of  the  al3bey  grounds  a  squirrel  was 
gambolling  with  all  the  faultless  grace  and  capri- 
ciousness  of  his  race,  while  above  him  a  wood 
pigeon  murmured  its  brooding  note.  The  wet 
berries  of  a  tall  mountain  ash  that  grew  near  the 
Vicarage  windows  were  bright  as  sealing-wax. 
The  lawn,  still  grey  with  dew,  was  patterned 
here  and  there  by  such  huge  footmarks  as  once 
terrified  Eobinson  Crusoe  on  the  shore  of  his 
lonely  island.  A  big  speckled  thrush,  curious  in 
the  matter  of  worms,  was  busy  searching  for  his 
retiring  friends,  while  a  water-wagtail  from  the 
brook  side — most  graceful  and  piquant  of  birds — 
equally  attentive  in  his  study  of  flies,  was  con- 
gratulating himself  on  every  fresh  mouthful  by  a 
flirt  of  the  tail  and  a  coquettish  toss  of  the  head. 
The  martins,  soon  about  to  leave  their  summer- 
residence,  were  skimming  backwards  and  forwards 
between  the  brook  and  the  eaves  of  the  old 
thatched  vicarage.  Altogether,  it  was  a  pretty, 
idyllic  scene. 

By  the  dial  over  the  Vicarage  door  the  hour 
was  half-past  eight  o'clock.  A  slant  line  of 
shadow  from  the  gnomon  just  crossed  the  motto, 
"  Man's  life  is  but  a  shadow,"  at  the  word  "  life." 
It  was  not  cold  enough  yet  for  fires,  and  the  urn 


BREAKFAST   AT   THE   VICARAGE.  3 

fumed  on  the  breakfast  table.  The  toast  had 
just  come  in  ;  the  tea  was  pouring  out.  Nothing- 
could  be  whiter  than  the  country  bread,  or  more 
golden  than  the  butter.  Pleasant  gleams  of  sun- 
light glancing  from  one  hardly  knew  what  point 
glistened  on  the  silver,  brightened  the  snowy 
table-cloth — glimmered  on  the  ceiling — lit  the 
covers  of  the  books  in  the  book-cases  on  either 
side  of  the  fireplace,  glanced  on  the  picture-frames, 
and  freshened  the  colours  of  the  flowers  in  the 
vases  by  the  side  window. 

]\Irs.    Beauflower,    the    mother   of    the   young 
vicar,    was    a   meek,    placid    old   lady   of   about 
seventy,    with    good   features,    from   which   age 
had   not   altogether   removed   the   beauty.      An 
old-fashioned    cap,    with    a   pleated   border   and 
Quakerly  lavender  satin  ribbons,  shut  in  a  face 
not   altogether   unlike   that    of    Hannah    More, 
though  the  benevolence  was  here  retained  some- 
what at  the  expense  of  the  intellect.     A  thrifty 
housekeeper,  accustomed  all  her  life  to  severe  and 
necessary  economy    (for  her   husband  had  been 
a  worthy,  good-natured   man  of   exjDcnsive  and 
luxurious  tastes,  and  not  much  money),  old  Mrs. 
Beauflower  had  otowu  in  old  aoje  into  one  of  those 
well-intentioned    persecutors    of   servants,    those 
worshippers  of  cleanhness  and  exhorters  to  saving, 
who,  if  more  common,  would  soon  drive  half  the 


4  THE   VICAR  S   COURTSHIP. 

world  to  live  in  tents.  But  lier  despotism  and 
vexatious  over-anxiety  were  tempered  by  the 
milder  and  more  genial  rule  of  her  daughter, 
Julia  Beauflower,  a  handsome,  hearty,  shrewd, 
rather  sarcastic,  clever  girl,  who  took  life  in  a 
much  easier  way,  and  enjoyed  it  none  the  less  ; 
who  looked  upon  cleaning  as  a  necessary  misfor- 
tune, and  who  regarded  servants  as  fellow-beings 
who  were  none  the  better  for  incessant  scolding, 
and  whose  loss  of  freedom  required '  mitigation 
by  kindness  and  consideration, — as  beings,  in 
fact,  who,  like  other  women,  wished  to  be  loved, 
and  in  time  to  have  homes  of  their  own. 

The  vicar,  a  young  man  of  tAventy-seven,  was 
an  Englishman  of  the  best  type — not  the  worn- 
out  Norman,  with  hatchet  nose,  long  face,  and 
huge  thin  whisker,  nor  the  stolid  Saxon,  with  beef 
in  every  feature.  He  was  not  one  of  those  effemi- 
nate, mincing  young  clerg}Tiien  who  lisp  out  the 
words  of  Heaven,  and  are  no  more  fit  to  grapple 
with  the  powers  of  evil  than  a  spaniel  is  to  grip 
a  tiger.  No  ;  he  was  a  frank,  bright-eyed  fellow, 
strong  and  lithe  of  limb,  with  healthy  blood  beat- 
ing in  every  vein,  and  sympathising  with  all  the 
hopes  and  fears  of  humanity.  No  one  could  see 
Beauflower  without  envying  him  or  liking  him, 
his  bearing  was  so  frank,  the  expression  of  his 
face,  though  not  handsome,  was  so  straightfor- 


BREAKFAST    AT    THE    VICARAGE.  5 

ward,  lionest,  and  singie-liearted.  His  liair,  of 
an  almost  jetty  brown  (there  is  really  hardly  ever 
jet-black  hair),  was  not  crisp  and  curly,  but  rather 
hair  that  grew  in  a  universal  dark  wave,  undula- 
ting over  a  high,  full,  square  forehead.  His  well- 
shaped  head  was  well  set  on  his  shoulder,  and 
that  is  of  as  great  importance  as  the  setting  of  a 
jewel.  The  irides  of  his  grey  eyes  had  that  clear 
lustre  and  sparkle  that  only  perfect  bodily  and 
mental  health  can  bestow,  giving  those  outlooks  of 
the  soul  the  beauty  of  precious  stones  with  an  inner 
^^.tality  that  no  gems  of  Golconda  could  ever  yet 
boast.  A  broad-chested,  strong-armed  man  was 
Edward  Beauflower  ;  real  pure  heart's  blood  was 
evidently  moving  in  his  veins,  and  his  complexion 
was  neither  puckered  nor  sallowed  by  late  hours 
and  London  dissipation.  There  was  freedom, 
generous  independence,  and  originality  in  every 
gesture  ;  his  movements  were  vigorous  and  some- 
what impetuous  ;  he  could  be  choleric  if  his  j)ride 
were  roused,  and  his  eye  had  a  way  of  kindling 
under  irritation  that,  even  remembering  his  pro- 
fession, was,  no  doubt,  alarming  to  bullies  and 
indolent  pretenders  of  all  kinds. 

Julia  Beauflower,  turned  towards  the  window, 
was  intent  on  making  Wasp,  a  httle  blind-looking 
Skye  terrier,  beg  for  a  bit  of  toast,  when  her  quick 
eye  discerned  a  man  with  a  leather  post-bag  over 


6  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

liis  shoulder  coming  briskly  across  tlie  little  grey 
bridge  that  spanned  the  road  to  Fontford. 

"  Ned  !  Ned  !  "  she  cried  ;  "  here's  the  post- 
man.     Oh,  I  hope  there'll  be  a  letter  from  Amy." 

The  prosaic  and  unconscious  man,  "  Hope's 
messenger  and  Love's,"  a  moment  after  rang  the 
bell  at  the  back  gate,  and  a  pretty,  neat  maid- 
servant quickly  apj)eared  with  the  bag.  Mr. 
Beauflower  unlocked  it ;  there  were  three  letters 
— one  for  Julia,  and  two  for  the  Yicar. 

"  Oh,  it  is  from  Amy,  and  she's  coming  back 
to-night.  Ain't  you  glad,  mamma  ? "  Julia 
clapped  her  hands. 

Mrs.  Beauflower  expressed  a  quiet  and  unde- 
monstrative pleasure  at  the  news.  Amy  Avas  the 
governess  at  the  Abbey. 

"You  have  only  seen  Amy  once  or  twice  since 
she  came,  Ned,"  said  Julia.  "  You  were  away 
last  half  on  your  walking  tour  in  the  Highlands. 
Oh,  you  have  no  idea  what  a  darling  she  is.  You 
can't  help  falling  in  love  with  her." 

"Don't  talk  nonsense,"  said  Mrs.  Beauflower, 
gravely,  as  she  buttered  a  piece  of  toast  in  an 
austere  manner,  "  Ned  looks  higher  than  that." 

"  My  dear  Ju,  I  never  find  that  men  fall  in 
love  with  the  people  they  are  expected  to  fall  in 
love  with.  We  are  obstinate,  selfish  creatures, 
and  we  choose  for  ourselves." 


BREAKFAST    AT    THE    VICARAGE.  7 

"  You  never  like  my  friends,"  said  Julia. 

"  Oh,  yes,  I  do.  I  like  them,  but  I  don't  marry 
them.  You  see  our  ideals  differ.  You  like  a  manly 
kind  of  girl,  like  yom^self,  full  of  scraps  of  the 
sciences' — small  Boadiceas.  I  like  womanly 
women.  I  can  t  bear  manly  women ;  I  hate  them.'' 

"  And  whom  have  you  heard  from,  Ned  ?  Whose 
is  that  old-fashioned  letter  with  the  seal — folded, 
too,  as  big  as  a  Government  despatch  ? " 

"  This  document,  Ju,"  said  Beauflower,  "  is  a 
letter  from  my  old  correspondent,  Mr.  Goodrick, 
the  old  West  Indian  gentleman  I  met  at  my 
cousin  the  lawyer's.  He  was  a  friend  of  that 
son  of  Mr.  Staunton,  who  was  renounced  by  his 
father,  and  was  drowned  at  sea.  He  has  a  great 
desire  to  see  this  part  of  Wiltshire.  He  is  a 
great  collector  of  pictures,  china,  and  gems,  and 
is  enormously  rich.  Ju,  you  shall  marry  him ; 
he's  only  sixty." 

"  Thank  you,"  said  Julia,  with  a  superb  toss  of 
her  head;  "keep  him  for  old  Miss  Chi  vers." 

"When  does  this  gentleman  come,  my  dear 
Ned?"  said  Mrs.  Beauflower,  nervously,  as  she 
began  to  pour  out  the  second  cups.  "  Julia,  your 
cup,  please,  or  it'll  not  be  worth  drinking." 

"  To-night,  mother." 

*'  To-night ! "  said  ]\Irs.  Beauflower,  with  a 
start.      "  Good  gracious,  how  thoughtless  of  you  ! 


8  THE  VICAR  S   COURTSHIP. 

Why,  liow  can  we  get  the  room  ready?  There 
are  the  sheets  to  air,  and  the  carpet  to  lay  down, 
and  there  must  be  a  fire  in  the  room,  and  there 
are  the  preserves  to  move.  Ned,  you  mtcst  write 
and  tell  him  Friday." 

"  Oh,  mamma,"  cried  Julia  ;  "  you  can't  put  off 
people  in  that  way;  it'll  be  all  ready." 

''My  dear  mother,"  said  Beauflower,  "you 
are  like  Martha,  you  cumber  yourself  with  much 
ser\dng.  You  talk  as  if  I  had  asked  two  regi- 
ments of  the  line  do^Ti  to  Summerleas.  The 
servants  can  air  the  sheets  in  two  hours,  and  do 
the  room  in  one  more." 

"  Just  Avhat  all  you  men  say.  It's  alvrays  done 
in  a  moment.  Everything's  done  in  a  moment! 
Why,  it  will  take  hours  to  do  that  room.  Gentle- 
men never  take  any  trouble  about  these  things, 
and  then  talk  as  if  it  were  all  done  by  blowing 
upon.' — Set  of  lazy  creatures!" 

"My  dear  mother,  there's  other  work  in  the 
world  besides  giving  out  tea  and  choosing  joints, 
useful  as  those  occupations  are.  I  am  sure  you 
would  be  soon  tii^d  if  I  kept  bragging  of  every 
time  I  dipped  my  pen  in  ink,  or  paid  a  cottage 
visit." 

"Where  does  this  old  gentleman  of  yours 
Kve?"  said  Julia. 

''I  forget,  Ju,  if  I  ever  knew;  he  always  writes 


BREAKFAST    AT    THE    VICARAGE.  « 

from  the  Travellers'.  You'll  like  him,  I  think, 
because  he  is  prepared  to  like  Wiltshire.  I  want 
to  hear  of  the  Stauntons,  whom  you  have  -a 
respect  for;  why,  I  don  t  know,  for  the  father  was 
fool  enough  to  leave  all  his  money  to  his  steward, 
and  the  result  is  this  unpleasant  New  Money, 
whose  despotism  we  now  groan  under." 

"  Mrs.  Harker  is  a  woman  of  very  high  man- 
ners,'' said  Mrs.  Beauflower,  authoritatively;  "and 
I  ought  to  know,  for  I  once  went  to  see  George 
the  Third  at  We}Tiiouth,  and  old  Queen  Charlotte 
kissed  me.     I  was  only  ten  years  old  then." 

"  Oh,  but  mamma,  she  is  so  cold  and  proud,  and 
self-conscious;  so  different  from  the  Duchess  of 
Downshire,  you  remember,  that  day  when  there 
was  the  consecration  at  Shaftesbury." 

''  Well,  my  dear,  ever}i:hing  is  altered.  Every- 
thing is  upside  down,  so  perhaps,  manners  are 
too ;  but  Mrs.  Harker's  are  what  we  used  to  call 
high-class  manners  when  I  was  young." 

"  Ethel  is  a  dear  girl,"  said  Julia,  by  way  of 
diversion,  "  but  that  Miss  Harker  is  my  abomina- 
tion; proud,  ugly  thing,  and  putting  on,  too,  all 
the  airs  of  a  queen  of  beauty.  Do  you  think  it 
possible  Mr.  Cantelupe  is  going  to  marry  her? 
'Why,  she's  much  older  than  he  is." 

"  That's  evidently  what  the  Barkers  are  driv- 
ing at.     There's  the  title,  you  see,  Ju,  and  they 


10  THE   vicar's    COUETSHIP. 

say  the  young  fellow  is  deep  in  debt  to 
Harker,  and  is  getting  every  day  worse.  It 
serves  him  right,  and  yet  Tm  sorry  for  the 
scatterbrained  felloAv,  for  he's  got  good  impulses, 
and  I  think  his  heart  is  in  the  proper  place;  but 
he's  going  to  the  dogs,  Fm  afraid." 

"Tm  so  sorry,"  said  Julia;  ''there  is  something 
nice  about  him,  only  he's  flighty." 

"  He's  a  very  gentlemanlike  person,"  said  Mrs. 
Beauflower;  "he  saw  me  the  other  day  in  the 
garden  as  he  was  passing,  and  he  took  off  his  hat 
with  such  an  air — it  reminded  me  of  young  Lord 
Harcourt,  when  the  court  used  to  be  at  Wey- 
mouth." 

"  There's  the  head  keeper  j)assing,  Ju,"  said  the 
Vicar.  "  Did  you  ever  see  such  a  perfect  speci- 
men of  the  small  tyrant?  A  fellow  a  few  years 
ago,  perhaps,  not  worth  a  shilling.  I  suppose  he's 
been  ferreting  in  the  woods — the  beggar  !  " 

The  head  keeper,  Travers,  was  passing  over  the 
bridge — a  tall,  bony  man,  with  long,  sinewy  limbs 
— he  had  a  double-barrelled  gun  over  his  shoulder, 
and  two  men  carrying  rabbits,  and  some  terriers 
at  his  heels.  They  had  scarcely  turned  the  corner 
of  the  road  leading  to  the  great  gateway  of  the 
Park  before  there  trotted  by  eight  hunters  in 
their  body  clothes,  a  groom  to  every  two  horses, 
and  Paddy  Blake,  a  ragged  fellow  in  dirty  scarlet 


BREAKFAST   AT    THE    YICAEAGE.  11 

coat  and  bare  feet — a  hanger-on  of  the  Cantelupe 
kennel — ran  by  the  side  of  the  first  groom,  ex- 
changing banter,  and  patting  the  groom's  horse 
with  parasitical  admiration. 

Beanflower  was  standing  at  the  window  with 
one  arm  round  his  sister  s  neck  when  a  heavy  foot 
sounded  in  the  hall,  and  a  rough,  gaunt,  red-haired 
fellow,  of  about  five-and-thirty,  with  an  alarmed 
expression,  looked  in  at  the  open  door.  It  was 
George  Dewer,  the  Vicars  gardener  and  fac- 
totum. 

''  If  you  please,  sir,"  he  said,  in  the  broadest 
Wiltshire,  "  Mrs.  Fowler,  the  keeper  s  mother,  is 
taken  worse,  Dr.  Briscoe  says  it'll  go  bad  with 
her;  and  if  you  please,  sir,  I  want  a  new  broom." 

"Ill  go  there  after  lunch,  -George;  you  can 
get  a  broom  at  the  shop.  Ju,  dear,  wiU  you  go 
presently  and  see  if  she  wants  anything  ?  " 

"  And  I,"  said  Mrs.  Beaufiower,  solemnly, 
"  have  my  work  pretty  well  cut  out,  for  those 
servants  do  nothing  when  I  turn  my  back,  and 
that  best  room,  whatever  you  may  say,  will  take 
hours." 

"  Where  are  those  photographs  of  the  Barkers, 
Ju,  that  Ethel  brought  yesterday  ? "  said  Beau- 
flower,  as  he  strolled  into  the  drawing-room, 
where  Julia  was  now  practising  a  weird  waltz  by 
Chopin. 


12  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

"  There  they  are,  Ned,  beside  that  '  Wandering 
Jew '  of  Dore's." 

"  Come  and  let's  discuss  them,  Ju,  before  I  go 
off  to  my  sermon." 

Julia  waltzed  round  the  room ;  then  taking  out 
the  four  photographs,  she  put  them  up  in  a  row 
ao^ainst  the  great  French  bronze  clock  on  the 
white  marble  mantlepiece.  They  were  not  very 
inviting  people.  Mr.  Harker,  a  self-made  man, 
imperiously  conscious  of  the  power  of  new 
money,  had  a  hea^y-jowled,  plebeian  face,  with 
small  suspicious  eyes,  bony  troubled  brow,  and 
thin,  severe  compressed  mouth.  His  wife,  a 
handsome  woman,  with  coarse,  hard,  arrogant 
features,  had  a  false  smile,  which  in  the  thin 
2:)assee  daughter  changed  into  a  stereotyped 
simper,  indicating  a  somewhat  hopeless  aspira- 
tion to  the  married  state. 

''I  must  own  I  don't  like  them,  Ju.  There's 
none  of  the  old  frank  courtesy  and  quiet  dignity 
of  the  old  families.  They  are  so  horribly  con- 
scious of  their  money.  They  have  no  sympathy 
with  the  poor,  and  they  detest  the  class  from 
which  they  sprang." 

''  Oh,  I  abhor  them,"  said  Julia.  "  I'm  quite 
afraid  of  that  Mr.  Harker,  he  looks  so  cruel. 
Mrs.  Harker  cares  about  no  one  who  does  not 
advance  her  plans.     As  for  Caroline  Harker,  oh, 


BREAKFAST   AT   THE   VICARAGE.  13 

she's  very  horrid !  but  Ethel's  a  pet  Here's 
Ethel.  I'll  put  her  in  my  album — she's  a^^^fuUy 
nice." 

"  Yes,  Ethel's  nice." 

Ethel's  photograph  showed  a  pleasant,  handsome 
girl  of  fourteen,  full  of  the  budding  beauty  of  a 
girl  of  that  age — happy,  high-spirited,  with  large 
clear  eyes,  and  a  cascade  of  lavish  hair. 

*'  One  can  hardly  fancy  her  of  the  same  race," 
said  the  young  Vicar. 

"  But  Amy — Amy  cro^ms  them  all,"  said  Julia, 
opening  another  page  of  the  album,  and  showing 
a  sweet,  gentle  face,  with  more  of  the  tenderness 
of  Imogene  than  the  sparkle  of  Eosalind ;  a  face 
in  which  the  glory  and  hope  of  youth  was  just 
passing  into  womanhood,  and  a  womauhood  not 
unclouded  by  early  care. 

Mr.  Beauflower  looked  long  and  earnestly,  but 
said  nothing. 

'■'  Oh,  you  don't  half  appreciate  Amy's  beauty," 
said  his  sister,  half  angrily.  "  I'm  sure  she's  the 
prettiest  girl  in  this  part  of  Wiltshire,  except 
Miss  Dysart,  and  she's  falling  off.  Amy  is  so 
quietly  clever,  too,  and  so  unselfish  ;  she  ought 
to  have  been  a  Duke's  daughter,  not  the  gover- 
ness of  those  horrid  rich  people.  She  always 
reminds  me  of  the  little  Princess  who  was  made 
a  slave  of." 


14  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

*'You  want  so  mucli  enthusiasm,  Ju — you  im- 
petuous girl.  Oil,  I  do  think  lier  a  very  nice 
girl — for  a  governess." 

"For  a  governess?  Ah!  that's  your  pride. 
She's  a  nice  girl  for  anything.  She's  a  true  lady 
whatever  her  parents  are.  Besides,  isn't  an 
artist  a  gentleman  1 " 

"  He  may  be." 

"  Wasn't  Michael  Angelo  a  gentleman  ?" 

"Michael  Angelos  are  perhaps  rather  scarce, 
now,  Ju." 

"  Ah  1  the  days  are  gone  when  knights  married 
Griseldas — you'll  never  marry  ;  you  want  such  a 
paragon — such  a  rich  paragon,  too." 

"  That's  not  fair,  Ju.  I  want  a  paragon,  but 
not  necessarily  a  rich  paragon.  If  she  were  rich, 
I  should  not  like  her  less,  but  I  must  have  a  lady. 
I  don't  believe  in  Griseldas,  or  Cinderellas  either. 
An  old  Q.  C,  one  of  Fairfield's  friends,  married 
his  cook,  but  I  believe  she  drank,  and  I  know  he 
used  to  beat  her." 

"  The  brute,  he  ought  to  have  been  whipped. 
Oh,  Ned,  Ethel  told  us  yesterday  the  archery 
meeting  is  really  to  take  place  on  the  18th,  we're 
to  be  asked,  and  the  Duke  of  Downshire  is  to  be 
there." 

"Oh,  indeed,  we  are  really  to  be  honoured 
with  an  invitation  to  the  Abbey.     How  very  kind 


BREAKFAST   AT    THE    VICAEAGE.  15 

of  them.     They  might  have  asked  us  to  the  swell 
soiree  to-niglit/' 

"  There's  yom-  wicked  pride  again,  Ned.'"' 
The  Vicar  laughed,  kissed  away  Julia's  re- 
proaches, and  went  ofi'  up-stairs  to  his  sermon.  A 
letter  directed  in  a  bold  commercial  hand  fell  out 
of  his  pocket  as  he  pulled  out  his  handkerchief. 
It  was  the  letter  received  that  morning,  which  he 
had  thrust  into  his  pocket  and  forgotten.  He 
opened  it  half  angrily.  It  was  a  reminder  of  an 
old  half-forgotten  debt  from  an  Oxford  livery 
stable-keeper,  £37  IO5.  6d.  It  came  at  a  very 
inconvenient  moment,  for  there  was  the  premium 
on  his  insurance  to  pay,  and  the  summer  bills 
were  not  yet  nearly  wiped  off. 

Youthful  follies  are  the  drao-on's  teeth  that  in 
after-Hfe  rise  up  armed  to  confront  us.  The 
Pieuvre  was  upon  him. 


16  THE   VICAE's    courtship. 


CHAPTEE   11. 

THE  SECOND  FLOOR  IN  BUCKINGHAM  STREET. 

London  perhaps  never  wears  a  brigliter,  more 
smiling,  quietly  attractive  face  than  on  a  fine 
morning  in  the  early  autumn.  The  sun,  that 
worthy  and  venerable  orb,  not  the  least  caring 
for  the  season  being  over  (and  it  being  really  no 
matter  whether  there  is  sunshine  in  AVhitechapel 
or  anywhere  else,  when  Belgravia  is  out  of  town), 
does  its  best  at  such  times  to  quicken  and  vivify 
the  almost  sublime  monotony  and  dulness  of  the 
great  city.  First  it  slowly  rises  a  globe  of  keen 
purple  fire  that  difiuses  red  and  opaline  gleams 
through  the  haze,  and  the  murky  roll  of  grey 
neutral  cloud.  By-and-by  it  launches  out  threat- 
eningly over  St.  Paul's,  like  a  red-hot  shot  in 
a  bombardment,  and  luckily  missing  the  dome, 
it  glows  in  a  threatening  way  over  the  fair 
tall  steeple  of  Bow  Church.  The  church  towers 
blush  rosy  in  the  cheery  light ;  lastly,  the  fire- 
ball   expands    its  golden    petals,    blossoms   into 


THE    SECOKD    FLOOR   IX   BUCKINGHAM   STREET.    17 

a  full  and  more  conquering  effulgence,  and  it  is 
day. 

Pleasant  then  in  the  fuller  lustre  shines  out 
every  burnished  door-plate  and  shop  fitting, 
everything,  indeed,  that  can  reflect  light  outside 
London's  three  hundred  and  seventy  thousand 
houses,  from  the  golden  gallery  that  coronets  St. 
Paul's,  to  the  brass-bindino;  of  the  humblest  cab 
in  a  Pentonville  mews ;  across  the  clear  dry  brown 
pavement  spread  broad  bars  of  sunshine — sun- 
light wavers  or  flickers  across  the  walls  and  stair- 
cases of  many  dingy,  forbidding  chambers,  and 
glimmers  on  even  the  most  repulsive  looking 
doors  in  the  humblest  streets.  The  eternal  hope, 
joy,  and  gratitude  of  day-break  comes  to  the  old 
city,  in  season  or  out  of  season.  The  wakeful  stir- 
ring light  creeps  between  the  satin  bed-curtains 
of  May  Fair,  and  it  also  wakes  the  poor  half- 
starved  cress  girl  cowering  in  a  Spitalfields  door- 
way. It  cannot  be  bought  or  sold,  or  taxed,  or 
restricted ;  it  is  omnipresent  as  love,  it  is  the  same 
for  all— thank  God  for  that.  The  poor  have  few 
birthrights,  but  sunshine  is  one  of  them,  and  even 
Lazarus  has  this  heirloom,  for  it  is  inalienable. 

On  such  a  morning,  to  be  more  exact,  on  an 
October  morning,  1860,  but  later,  Mr.  Godfrey 
Goodrick,  an  old  gentleman  inhabiting  a  second 
floor  at  No.  30,  Buckingham-street,  the  right-hand 


7 


18  THE   VICARS    COURTSHIP. 

side,  and  almost  at  the  end  as  you  descend  the 
street  from  the  Strand,  opened  his  bed-room  door, 
and  stepping  out  in  his  dressing-gown  and  slippers, 
threw  open  the  French  window  of  the  front  room, 
and  looked  out  cynically  towards  the  broad  glis- 
tening river.  Here  and  there  the  umbery  brown 
or  yellow  sail  of  a  hay  barge  presented  pleasant 
touches  of  passing  colour  ;  now  and  then  a  bright 
green  boat  darted  by  quick  as  a  dragon  fly. 

From  the  Strand  came  the  cheerful  voices  of 
the  awakening  city  not  yet  roused  to  the  full 
feverish  madness  and  restlessness  of  its  noon-day 
toil.  It  was  at  once  the  play  time  and  the  child- 
hood of  the  day ;  the  hearty  ringing  laughter  of 
children  chasing  each  other  round  the  corner  of 
the  street  sounded,  too,  pleasantly  enough,  blend- 
ing with  the  gay  chatter  of  the  servants  as  they 
gossiped  from  door-step  to  door-step.  The  pot- 
boy, whistling,  strung  his  pewter  pots  on  his  strap 
with  a  reckless  clatter.  The  newspaper-boy  jerked 
and  rang  area  bells  with  a  mischievous  and  dis- 
locatino^  violence.  Drudg;es  beat  dust  mats  with 
their  brooms,  secretly  wishing  they  were  their 
mistresses.  Two  suspicious-looking  "vailgarly 
smart  young  men  ogled  them  all  as  they  passed 
up  to  the  Strand,  running  their  sticks  along  the 
railings  as  they  strolled  along,  singing  "  Yillikins 
and  his  Dinah."      That  gay  militaire,  the  post- 


THE   SECOXD    FLOOE   IX   BUCKINGHAM   STREET.    19 

man,  was  practising  chromatic  scales  at  the 
further  end  of  the  street,  executing  brilliant 
roulades,  with  the  gayest  professional  self-satisfac- 
tion as  he  thrust  in  the  messages  of  Fate  into  the 
respective  letter-boxes ;  a  distant  organ  outside 
"  the  Apple  Tree  "  in  Duke-street  was  playing  an 
air  from  Verdi's  last  new  opera  ;  a  cab  was  rattling 
merrily  down  the  street ;  with  all  these  motley 
sounds  there  mingled  the  shrill,  half-plaintive 
notes  of,  "  any  ornament  for  your  fire-stoves,"  by 
no  means  the  least  quaint  of  London  street  cries ; 
the  woman  who  chanted  it  waved  as  she  passed 
her  cascades  of  coloured  paper  at  the  window 
of  No.  30,  till  the  old  gentleman  growled  and 
shook  his  head.  As  if  to  add  a  last  touch  of 
gaiety  and  hope  to  that  pleasant  fresh  autumn 
morning,  there  just  then  came  careering  through 
the  bright  river-side  air,  level  with  the  second- 
floor  windows,  a  large  white  butterfly,  where  from, 
and  whither  bound,  who  could  discern  ?  Gray, 
light-hearted  vagrant,  as  uncertain  of  a  break- 
fast as  many  an  early  riser  that  day  in  London, 
this  fickle  exile  from  the  lavender  and  rose  fields 
of  SmTcy,  hovered  a  moment  to  take  a  raj^id  and 
imsubstantial  breakfast  on  the  bloom  of  a  scarlet 
geranium,  that  had  all  the  summer  through 
fought  for  life  against  the  smoke,  and  alighted  on 
the  window-sill  of  a  neat  but  humble  lodging- 

0  2 


20  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

Louse,  exactly  opposite  the  old  gentleman's  cham- 
bers. Presently  a  window  sash  close  to  which  the 
flower  stood  flew  up,  and  there  looked  out  one  of 
the  prettiest  and  gentlest  little  faces  in  the  world, 
while  a  little  white  hand,  unconsciously  frighten- 
ing ofi"  the  vagrant  butterfly,  removed  a  prema- 
turely yellow  geranium  leaf  with  the  tenderest 
care,  and  let  it  fall  into  the  street  like  an  omen  of 
winter.  It  was  the  simplest  action  in  the  world, 
and  yet  there  was  such  an  artless  grace  in  the  way 
it  was  done,  that  it  would  have  won  the  sourest  of 
cynics.  It  certainly  won  the  old  virtuoso  at  No.  30. 
A  moment  after,  the  window  was  pulled  down, 
and  the  face  disappeared  as  visions  do  disappear. 

That  momentary  apparition  seemed  to  have 
the  most  remarkable  efi'ect  upon  Mr.  Goodrick. 
His  cold  grey  eyes  remained  fixed  like  those  of  a 
somnambulist  on  the  closed  window  of  No.  22, 
his  thin  bony  hands  clutched  the  back  of  a  chair, 
his  lips  grew  bluer,  his  circulation  seemed  almost 
suspended. 

The  impatient,  careless  rap-tap  of  a  postman 
at  his  outer  door  aroused  him,  as  a  letter  slided 
through  the  aperture  of  the  letter-box,  and  fell 
with  a  dull  flap  into  the  box  below. 

"  Ugh  !  "  he  said  aloud,  ''  old  fool  that  I  am  ; 
— why  doesn't  that  rascal  Tony  bring  my  cofi'ee  ? 
Yes  ;  she  is  like  her — ^very  like  her — same  look, 


THE   SECOND   FLOOR   IN   BUCKINGHAM   STREET.    21 

same  hair,  only  ligliter,  same  mamier,  same  eyes  ; 
let's  compare  it — dear  Josephine,  my  own  wife, 
my  heart's  delight,  forty  years  ago  ;  yes,  I  was 
happy  then — I  was  happy  then.  Ugh  ! — well,  I 
suppose  everyone  is  happy  once  or  twice  in  his  life. 
Kevenge  is  my  happiness  now ;  that  is  all  that  is 
left  to  me.  Perhaps,  some  day,  I  shall  have  a  feast 
of  that.  Hang  that  rascal  Tony,  what  a  time  he  is." 
He  rang  violently  at  the  bell  for  the  laundress, 
]\Irs.  Harvey,  and  then  opening  a  small  round 
shagreen  case  that  stood  on  the  mantlepiece,  Mr. 
Goodrick  took  out  a  miniature  of  a  young, 
beautiful  woman,  and  regarded  it  with  a  tender- 
ness and  absorption  that  seemed  irreconcilable 
with  such  a  soured,  crabbed  nature.  The  minia- 
ture was  that  of  an  exquisitely  beautiful  girl  of 
about  nineteen,  with  a  blonde  complexion  of 
extreme  purity,  eyes  of  a  sunny  brown,  and  fair 
hair,  worn  in  profuse  ringlets  of  the  fashion  of 
some  forty  years  before.  A  necklace  of  oriental 
pearls  encircling  a  slender  white  throat  con- 
trasted admirably  with  a  low  dress  of  pale  sea 
green  silk,  fastened  by  a  superb  opal.  It  was  a 
chef-d'oeuvre  of  miniature  painting,  but  for  a  single 
flaw  in  the  left  hand  corner  where  the  dull 
background  had  cracked  and  scaled  with  the  heat 
of  the  tropical  climate  to  which  it  had  been  sub- 
jected. 


22  THE   vicar's    COURTSHIP. 

"  I  must  get  Thorndyke  to  repair  that — I 
would  not  have  that  injured  for  ten  thousand 
sovereigns."  That  miniature  of  a  Avife,  long  since 
dead,  was  the  old  mans  treasured  relic,  his 
amulet,  his  Lares  and  his  Penates  in  one.  Is 
there  even  an  old  bachelor  living  who  has  not  his 
own  dream  of  some  face  that  he  prays  may  be  the 
first  to  greet  him  at  the  gates  of  Paradise  ? 

"  There  are  no  women  now,"  he  muttered ; 
for  like  many  solitary  men  he  was  a  great  talker 
to  himself ;  "  only  hard,  bold,  defiant,  half  men, 
Bah  !  Ugh  !  "  There  was  a  bitter  intensity  in 
the  old  cynic's  "  Ugh's ! "  worthy  of  the  most 
irritable  father  in  old  comedy,  and  not  discredit- 
able even  to  the  most  reserved  and  taciturn  of 
Indian  braves;  "now  and  then  you  see  a  face  like 
that  girl's  just  now  at  the  window  ;  talk  to 
her,  and  you  would  find  her  a  shrill-voiced, 
designing,  artful,  silly  minx,  j)erhaps  going  to 
marry  that  big,  vulgar,  giant  of  an  Irishman  I 
see  go  in  there,  or  that  little  vain  old  wretch 
who  comes  strutting  down  the  street  with  a  port- 
folio under  his  arm.     Pshaw  !" 

While  Mr.  Godfrey  Goodrick  of  No.  30, 
Buckingham  Street,  remains  there,  bending  over 
the  miniature  of  his  dead  wife,  let  us  take  a 
hasty  sketch  of  him.  He  was  a  somewhat  tall 
wiry    old   man,  with  a  lean,  rather  wizen   face, 


THE   SECOND   FLOOR   IN   BUCKINGHAM   STREET.    23 

deeply  nankeened  by  years  spent  in  the  West 
Indies.  His  keen,  suspicious  eyes  were  of  a  cold 
bluish-grey  that  glistened  like  ice  when  their 
owner  felt  malicious.  His  short,  stiff,  stubby 
white  hair  looked  dooro;ed  and  obstinate ;  he  had 
grey  terrier-like  eyebrows  that  were  wild  and 
bushy,  and  overhanging  his  eyes,  kept  them  in 
perpetual  ambush,  while  a  projecting  lower  lip  ex- 
pressed a  sour  distrust  and  contempt  for  almost  all 
Mr.  Goodrick  heard  or  saw.  One's  first  impres- 
sion would  be  that  he  was  a  shrewd,  cynical  old 
hunks  ;  miserly,  eccentric,  rough,  dogmatic,  rich, 
and  arbitrary.  Not  Lavater  or  even  George  Eliot 
herself  could  have  discovered  in  a  single  crow's- 
foot  or  ^rankle,  latent  traces  of  the  kindliness 
and  generosity  of  a  nature  that  misfortune  had  so 
gnarled,  and  disappointment  so  distorted. 

"If  you  please,  sir,  shall  I  bring  up  the 
heggs  ? " 

Mr.  Goodrick  looked  round  testily,  and  slam- 
ming the  miniature  case,  locked  it,  and  thrust  the 
key  in  his  pocket,  as  if  angry  at  being  intruded 
upon  at  such  a  moment.  It  was  Mrs.  Harvey, 
the  laundress,  a  tall,  stout  woman,  with  a  pasty 
anxious  looking,  good-natured  lazy  face. 

"  Well,  woman,  what  do  you  want  ?  No 
cleaning  here — won't  allow  it,  so  there — get 
along." 


24  THE  VICAK's   courtship. 

*'If  you  please,  sir,  you  rang,  and  if  you 
please,  sir,  here's  a  letter  in  the  box." 

"Give  it  here.  But  I  don't  please — don't 
please  at  all ;  why  do  you  bother  me  ?  Where's 
that  rascal  Tony  ?  " 

"  Gone  to  Mr.  Thorndyke's,  sir,  to  return  the 
snuff-boxes — told  me  to  answer  the  bell  if  you 
rang.    Shall  I  please  to  bring  up  the  coffee,  sir  ? " 

''  Bring  it,  yes — wish  people  would  not  write 
to  me ;  don't  want  to  hear  from  anyone.  Wine 
circulars,  I  suppose,  as  if  I  didn't  know  where  to 
buy  wine,  and  whom  to  avoid  if  1  wanted  to  buy; 
and  circulars  about  building  churches,  as  if  there 
were  not  churches  enough  already."  (Here  he 
crushed  the  letter  into  his  pocket.) 

Mrs.  Harvey,  a  good  sort  of  woman,  but  fussy, 
obtrusive,  slovenly,  talkative,  and  slightly  in- 
clined to  strong;  drink,  was  retreatins:  from  the 
room  when  the  firm,  sharp  voice  called  her  back. 

"  Mrs.  Harvey,  what  sort  of  people  are  those  at 
No.  22  ? — old  landlady  woman  and  daughter,  I 
take  it." 

*'  Oh,  you  mean  Mrs.  Eobinson  opposite  ?  quite 
a  lady,  sir — reduced — known  her  these  twelve 
years — takes  lodgers — husband  artist,  sir ;  clever 
man,  sir ;  repairs  pictures — young  lady  is  their 
daughter,  governess  somewhere  down  in  Somer- 
setshire, or  thereabouts — nicest  little  thing,  sir — at 


THE    SECOND   FLOOR   IN   BUCKINGHAM   STREET.    25 

home  now  for  a  holiday — ^just  come  from  Brixton, 
I  think — hard  struggle  to  make  both  ends  meet." 

"  That'll  do ;  I  only  wanted  a  single  question 
answered,  Mrs.  Harvey,  and  then  you  launch 
out ;  wish  you  wouldn't  talk  so  much.     Ugh  !  " 

"  I  always  try  to  do  my  duty  and  to  please,  sir," 
bewailed  Mrs.  Harvey  ;  "  but  there's  some  people 
nobody  can't  please,  do  what  you  will.  It  is  not 
my  fault,  sir,  if  Tony  ain't  as  reg'lar  as  he  should 
be." 

"  There,  don't  bandy  words  —  get  away. 
What's  Harvey  doing  ? — idling,  I  suppose  at  the 
Apple-Tree,  eh  ? "  The  Apple-Tree  was  a  neigh- 
bouring public-house. 

"  Got  a  job,  sir,  this  morning — carpet-beating, 
sir,  for  Mr.  Bassevi,  the  picture  dealer,  in  Char- 
lotte Street,  but  he's  that  rheumatic " 

"  Stuff — drinks  too  much  ale — met  him  on  the 
stairs  last  night  fuddled,  singing,  and  making  a 
noise." 

"  Oh,  that's  only  the  way  he's  took  ;  he  get's 
light-headed  when  the  rheumatics  — — " 

"  Stuff  and  nonsense — the  man  was  tipsy;  tell 
him  I  said  so  ;  nonsense  about  rheumatism." 

The  aggrieved  woman  shut  the  door  behind 
her  with  a  groan  and  uplifted  hand  at  the  hard- 
ness of  heart  prevalent  that  morning  (she  had 
already  had  an  altercation  with  the  baker  about 


26  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

defective  weiglit),  and  determined  to  put  on  her 
bonnet,  go  to  her  great  anthority  and  crony, 
Mrs.  Bisset,  the  gTcengrocer's  wife  np  the  street, 
discuss  with  her  a  small  and  strictly  medicinal 
morning  glass  of  peppermint,  and  lament  the  per- 
versity and  oppression  of  masters  in  general  and 
gentlemen  in  chambers  in  particular. 

The  moment  the  laundress  left  the  room, 
Mr.  Goodrick  went  to  the  mantlepiece,  again 
deliberately  unlocked  the  shagreen  case,  and 
looked  long  and  wistfully  at  the  miniature,  upon 
which  the  sunshine  now  fell,  and  as  it  glanced 
across  it  giving  it  an  almost  supernatural  appear- 
ance of  life. 

"  Yes,  Thorndyke  was  right,"  he  said ;  "  that 
girl  is  like  her.  Eyes  the  same  expression — but 
what  of  that  ?  Look  closer.  There'd  be  no  like- 
ness.    Another  of  the  old  illusions.     Bah  ! " 

With  a  salvo  of  such  exclamations,  Mr.  Goodrick 
generally  relieved  his  spleen  at  the  end  of  a  sen- 
tence, and  he  uttered  them  as  if  he  was  going  to 
snap  at  you.  Indeed,  nervous  people  often  drew 
aside  their  nose  as  if  really  dreading  a  bite. 

The  old  virtuoso  was  one  of  those  connoisseurs 
who  are  to  be  met  with  any  morning  during  the 
London  season  in  the  Print  Eoom  of  the  British 
Museum,  at  Sotheby  and  Wilkinson  s  book  sales, 
or  in  the  show-room  of  Messrs.  Christie  and  Man- 


THE    SECOXD    FLOOR    IX   BUCKINGHAM    STREET.    27 

son.  Tlieir  forenoon  occupation  is,  with  chuckling 
dehght  or  revived  suspicion,  to  examine  Eem- 
brandt  etchings  through  huge  magnifying  glasses, 
to  open  and  shut  with  half  admiration,  half  sus- 
picion, all  remarkable  china  snuff-boxes  ;  to  walk 
backwards  from  doubtful  Eaphaels ;  to  slide  out 
or  close  the  secret  drawers  of  inlaid  cabinets ;  to 
look  with  cmiosity  for  the  maker's  name  on 
lustrous  majolica  plates.  They  chat  with  the 
auctioneer,  they  discuss  dates  with  rival  ama- 
teurs ;  they  smile  knowingly  at  each  other  ;  they 
lectm-e,  they  squabble ;  they  know  the  exact 
date  of  every  pictiu^e  that  is  to  be  sold,  where  it 
was  painted,  who  helped  in  it,  where  the  real 
original  is,  and  what  the  replicas  fetch.  They  are 
fanatics;  and  fall  into  raptures  over  even  Turner's 
most  senile  dreams  of  colour ;  they  remember 
every  alteration  Hogarth  ever  made  in  an  engrav- 
ing; they  glory  in  marqueterie,  and  exult  in 
buhl ;  Venice  glass  is  to  them  beyond  jewels,  and 
Petitot  and  Bordier  enamels  beyond  fine  gold. 
They  eye  the  auctioneer  with  a  sidelong  magpie 
look  of  expectancy  and  knowing  cunning ;  they 
doze  while  vulgar  emptinesses  are  being  sold,  but 
wake  up  to  life  when  a  rare  ivory  or  an  Italian 
medal  apj^ears.  They  are  generally  men  of  taste 
and  wealth,  who  hoard  and  accumulate  with  the 
craft  of  ravens  and  the  industry  of  ants,  enjoying 


28  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

tlie  pleasant  reflection  that  will  still  hover  across 
their  minds  that  when  they  die  the  sale  of  their 
own  effects  will  be  held  in  the  very  rooms  in 
which  they  have  spent  so  much  time,  and  will 
give  extreme  delight  to  many  collectors  like  them- 
selves. The  only  pang  is  to  think  how  young 
Bassevi  will  sneer  down  the  choicest  lot,  and  that 
"  envious  mean  rascal,"  old  Elderton,  depreciate 
the  very  tapestry  he  once  fought  so  hard  to  get. 
Chelsea  China,  Flemish  missals,  Louis  Quatorze 
snuff-boxes,  Palissy  ware,  patinated  Bronzes, 
Golden  Darics — they  Avill  all  go  to  wreck  here, 
and  be  fished  ashore  by  different  VTcckers.  Some- 
times they  think,  perhaps — Oh,  that  these  things 
could  be  buried  with  us,  and  rot  together  in  rusty 
splendour ;  would  that  cabinets  would  split,  and 
timepieces  refuse  to  strike  for  new  purchasers ; 
would  that,  like  Eob  Eoy's  purse,  the  great  missal 
of  1490  would  fire  a  pistol  when  opened  and  kill 
the  hook-nosed  Jew  broker  as  he  gloated  over  it, 
proud  of  his  prize,  but  ignorant  of  its  intellectual 
value. 

Such  at  least  were  often  the  bitter  thouo-hts  of 
Mr.  Goodrick  at  such  times,  when  he  reflected 
over  the  future  triumph  of  survivors,  and  the 
mutability  of  human  things.  After  all  it  is 
wholesome  for  almost  omnipotent  wealth  to  know 
that  the  finest  collection  in  the  world  is  only  like 


THE   SECOND   FLOOR   IN   BUCKINGHAM    STREET.    29 

a  heap  of  autumn  leiives  collected  under  a  hedge 
side — sooner  or  later  it  nuist  be  blown  apart  and 
scattered  to  the  four  Avinds,  never  to  come 
together  again.  Childless  men  like  Mr.  Goodrick, 
indeed,  feel  this  bitterly ;  it  is  the  amari  aliquid 
that  spoils  their  pleasure ;  to  heads  of  families 
there  comes,  moreover,  the  mortification  of  feeling 
that  their  sons  may  be  indifferent  to  the  old  fur- 
niture that  has  been  the  joy  of  their  lives,  or  the 
Carlo  Maratti  that  has  been  the  special  shrine  of 
their  devotion. 

Still,  in  spite  of  these  occasional  nightmares 
(everything  has  its  alloy),  there  is  no  doubt  an 
exquisite  delight  in  amassing  objects  of  taste  and 
vertu,  and  there  will  be  collectors  like  Mr.  Good- 
rick while  the  world  lasts. 

The  old  virtuoso  had  by  this  time  dressed  him- 
self, with  many  grumbles  at  the  delay  of  his 
servant,  Tony.  His  costume  was  always  the 
same — long;  blue  tail  coat  and  brass  buttons,  a  buff 
marsala  waistcoat,  with  a  scarlet  one  beneath,  the 
edge  of  which  was  alone  visible  in  a  border  of 
bright  warm  colour ;  a  frilled  shirt  front,  nankeen 
trowsers,  and  drab  gaiters ;  sharp,  large,  upright 
collars,  and  a  bunch  of  heavy  valuable  seals  just 
showing  underneath  the  right-hand  side  of  his 
waistcoat,  completed  his  old-fashioned  and  un- 
changeable adornments. 


30  THE   VICAE's    courtship. 

The  rooms  at  No.  30  were  a  strange  mixture  of 
luxury  and  neglect,  dirt  and  taste.  Abortive 
hopes  and  uncompleted  intentions  were  strewn  in 
every  corner  in  the  shape  of  dusty  buhl  cabinets, 
stacks  of  pictures,  piles  of  portfolios,  heaps  of 
books,  and  chests  of  drawers;  busts  of  Eoman  em- 
perors, and  Etruscan  vases  were  spread  along  the 
top  of  a  long  dingy  book-case  that  stood  against 
the  southern  wall.  Three  curious  Louis  Quinze 
clocks  of  great  value  stood  on  the  mantel-piece 
near  the  treasured  miniature.  Intermingled  with 
these  things  were  rough  anomalous  bundles  of 
waistcoat  stuffs  bought  at  bankrupts'  sales ;  par- 
cels of  woollen  gloves  from  which  the  fingers  of 
one  or  two  protruded ;  rolls  of  engravings  (proofs 
before  letters)  lay  tumbled  on  side  tables  between 
dusty  lamps  and  goblets  of  Venetian  glass,  within 
whose  tall  stems  white  opaque  threads  twined  and 
circled.  These  things  had  been  gathered  together 
in  odd  lots  from  the  mere  love  of  hoarding,  by 
eccentric  luxury  almost  akin  to  avarice.  They 
had  been  bargains,  too,  every  one  of  them. 

There,  too,  on  the  top  of  the  book-case,  between 
busts  of  the  Csesars ;  wolfish  and  eagiish,  Caracalla 
with  his  savage  Satanic  frown,  and  Nero  with  his 
cruel  and  loathsome  viciousness,  stood  tall  glasses, 
within  which  coiled  venomous  West  Indian  snakes, 
spotted,  barred,  and  striped  by  impartial  Natm^e, 


THE   SECOND   FLOOR   IN   BUCKINGHAM   STREET.    31 

now  liarmless  as  murderers  in  the  condemned  cell, 
and  gleaming  yellow  through  the  enveloping  spirit. 
Immediately  over  the  fire-place  there  hung  a  large 
convex  mirror  in  a  plain  black  frame,  whose 
clear  glittering  surface  Avatched  one  like  the  eye 
of  a  guardian  spirit,  or  rather  resembled  a  port- 
hole in  the  side  of  a  vessel  with  an  out-look  of  clear 
but  colourless  sky.  On  its  pure  crystal  surface  the 
buhl  cabinets,  the  head  by  Titian,  the  studies  by 
Etty,  the  busts  of  the  Caesars,  the  glasses  full  of 
snakes,  were  all  repeated  with  the  keen  outline 
and  delicate  finish  of  photographs.  Capable  of 
being  seen  in  a  thousand  points  of  perspective, 
that  little  microcosm  in  glass  was  always  pleasant 
to  observe. 

As  j\Ir.  Goodrick  sat  down  to  his  solitary 
breakfast,  with  a  pictm^e  catalogue  lying  open 
beside  his  toast,  the  dusty  ormolu  clock  on  the 
chimney-piece,  where  the  cupids  were  binding 
Time  with  flowers,  chirped  out  ten  times  in  its 
jDlayful  bird-like  way,  as  if  the  little  singing  soul 
of  some  Parisian  girl  were  imjDrisoned  in  it,  con- 
demned by  magic  arts  to  this  gay  record  of  the 
passing  hours.  Then,  instantly,  as  if  all  the 
clocks  in  the  city  had  caught  the  alarm  from  that, 
out  struck,  clashed,  and  boomed  all  the  clock 
towers  fi-om  Westminster  to  Peter  in  Chains, 
from  Whitechapel  to  Brompton. 


32  THE   VICAES    COURTSHIP. 

Just  then  there  was  a  bustling  at  the  lock  of 
the  door,  which  opened,  and  in  slid  with  the  quiet 
assurance  of  an  old  servant,  a  black  footman,  a 
man  of  about  fifty,  short,  rather  bow-legged,  and 
slightly  bent  in  the  back,  with  a  good-humoured 
droll  smile  on  his  flat  thorough  negro  features, 
and  a  look  of  droll  self-importance  that  no  snubs 
from  his  master  could  ever  remove.  The  intrinsic 
good  nature  and  honliomie  of  his  race  had  no  bad 
representative  in  Tony.  Pure  Ashantee  blood 
blended  in  Tony's  veins,  glowed  blackly  on  his 
ebony  forehead  and  shone  upon  his  cheek  bones 
and  flat  droll  nose ;  there  was  a  pleasant,  honest 
look  about  the  man,  and  the  bearing  of  a  rather 
spoiled  old  servant.  By  his  side  trotted  a  large 
Newfoundland  dog,  that,  as  soon  as  he  saw  Mr. 
Goodrick,  came  thrusting  his  nose  into  his  wel- 
coming hand  with  a  grave  and  dignified  pleasure. 

Mr.  Goodrick  looked  up  with  no  especial  ex- 
pression of  pleasure  as  Tony  with  a  bow  began  to 
take  down  a  claret-coloured  spenser  that  hung  on 
a  nail  and  brush  it  in  the  dark  outer  passage. 

''  Told  you  not  to  take  out  Leo,"  growled  Mr. 
Goodrick,  as  he  crunched  his  toast  quite  spite- 
fully, "when  you  go  messages — you'll  lose  him 
next — remember  that,  Tony.  I  will  be  obeyed — 
if  you  Avant  to  be  master,  you  must  go  elsewhere." 
(Tony  having  heard  this  threat  some  thousands 


THE    SECOND   FLOOR   IX   BUCKIXGHAM    STREET.    33 

of  times,  it  had  lost  some  of  its  terrors.)  I 
won  t  be  a  slave  to  my  own  servant,  mind  tliat. 
AYTiy  do  you  keep  me  here  waiting  for  breakfast '? 
Servants  all  want  to  be  masters  now.  Come,  sir, 
no  lying  apologies." 

"  No  'pologies,  mas'r,  and  no  lies,"  said  Tony, 
stoutly.  "  Waited  till  Mas  r  Thorndyke's  young 
man  come  in,  didn't  like  to  leave  the  snuff-boxes 
with  the  housekeeper  no  'count.  Hope  you  go  out, 
mas'r,  for  walk  this  fine  morning.  To-day  'minds 
me  of  Fair  Hope.  Wish  I  was  there  now,  cutting 
pine-apples  for  breakfast,  and  old  Uncle  Plato 
picking  oranges,  or  dose  fresh  little  green  limes 
for  de  sangaree.  Mas'r,  give  me  word,  sometimes 
when  I'm  passing  de  barracks  in  James's  Park, 
and  hear  de  bugle,  I  fancy  it'scle  conch  shell 
blowing  in  our  cane  patches  round  Fairlands,  just 
by  de  book-keeper's  house.  That,  oh,  that  was 
good  times,  mas'r,  then." 

The  old  master's  eyes  kindled  and  seemed  to 
expand ;  then  in  a  moment  the  old  gloom  came 
over  them,  and  the  thick,  bristly  eyebrows  bent 
down  closer. 

"  Ugh !"  he  said ;  ''  nonsense,  Tony ;  you  were 
younger  then,  that's  all.  Don't  you  talk  so  much. 
Every  place  looks  pleasant  when  we've  left  it. 
Never  had  a  good  night's  sleep  in  the  "West  Indies ; 
might  as  well  live  inside  a  furnace.     Don't  talk 


34  THE   vicar's    COUETSHIP. 

any  more ;  go  and  dust  those  books.  Never  want 
to  see  Fair  Hope  again.  I  shall  never  go  back 
there,  mind  that ;  so  if  you  want  to  return,  Tony, 
you'd  better  give  me  warning.  You  can  go  and 
see  Jupiter  to-day,  if  you  like,  and  take  him  some 
tea  and  some  snuff.  Here,  give  me  my  spenser, 
and  my  hat  and  gloves,  and  my  bamboo  stick. 
Ill  go  and  see  Thorndyke.     Come  along,  Leo." 


THE    CURIOSITY   DEALER.  35 


CHAPTER  III. 

THE    CURIOSITY   DEALER. 

Mr.  Thorndyke's  shop,  or  rather  place  of  busi- 
ness, half  warehouse,  half  office.  No.  16,  Darnley 
Street,  St.  James's  Square,  was  a  favourite  lounge 
of  Mr.  Goodrick's.  There  he  could  examine  at 
his  leisure  the  medals  of  Galeotti  or  II  Padovano, 
and  could  pore  over  Majolica  and  the  iridescent 
work  of  Master  Georo-e  of  Gubbio  to  his  heart's 
content.  Cmiosity  buying  is  not  a  hasty  busi- 
ness ;  it  requires  time,  patience,  and  the  bite  is 
often  a  long  time  after  the  nibble.  Buying  a  picture 
is  not  like  bupng  a  peach  :  it  is  a  matter  of  days, 
or  perhaps  weeks,  till  the  mere  wish  becomes  an 
irresistible  craving,  and  the  admker  grows  into 
the  purchaser. 

When  Mr.  Goodrick  was  shown  in,  Mr.  Thorn- 
dyke  was  standing  at  the  window  with  his  hat 
still  on,  for  he  had  not  long  come  in,  and  holding 
to  the  light  a  large  oval  dish  of  Palissy  ware,  a 
chef-d! (Buv7^e  of  the  potter  of  Saintes,  which  he 

D   2 


36  THE   VICAe's   COUETSHIP. 

kept  turning  to  different  angles  as  if  it  was 
a  prism. 

The  curiosity  dealer  was  a  short,  neat  little 
man,  of  about  five-and-forty,  formal  in  dress,  with 
crisp,  iron-grey  hair,  a  rather  pale  but  acute  face, 
and  small  dark  eyes,  that  when  they  concentrated 
themselves  were  remarkably  keen  and  penetrating. 
His  manner,  though  easy,  was  slightly  obsequious. 
He  welcomed  his  eccentric  patron  with  a  pleasant 
momentary  smile  and  a  shake  of  the  hand.  The 
smile  he  gave  was  the  smile  of  a  quiet,  dry 
humourist,  whose  memory  is  full  of  odd  recol- 
lections of  trade  tactics,  subtleties,  and  secrets. 
He  had  evidently  got  something  which  he  ex- 
pected would  surprise  his  customer. 

"  There,"  said  he,  with  emotion,  handing  the 
oval  Palissy  dish  into  Mr.  Goodrich's  hands  as 
carefully  as  if  it  had  been  a  baby.  "There's 
1560  work!  Did  you  ever  see  such  rich  choco- 
late broAvns — such  sharp  relievi — such  a  brilliant 
deep  blue  glaze  ?  That's  the  style,  sir.  Look  at 
that  trout  and  those  cray-fish.  There's  a  fern 
leaf!  Ask  Minton  to  copy  that.  I  should  only 
like  to  see  him.'' 

It  was  a  great  central  dish,  such  as  Hemi 
Quatre  may  have  had  set  before  him  the  very 
night  of  the  battle  of  Ivry.  About  twenty 
inches  long,  it  was  bossed  with  enamelled  resem- 


THE    CURIOSITY   DEALER.  37 

blances  of  fish,  pebbles,  lizards,  snakes,  frogs, 
shells,  oak  leaves,  and  acorns.  Although  a  mas- 
terpiece of  ingenious  industry,  and  a  fine  example 
of  a  grotesque  taste,  it  was  perhaps  more  curious 
than  beautiful. 

Goodrick  eyed  it  as  a  raven  eyes  a  very  bare 
bone — turning  it  upside  down  with  spiteful  curi- 
osity. 

*'  Like  one  in  the  Soulages  collection,"  he  said. 
"  Don't  like  'em — ugh  !  hate  reptiles,  had  enough 
of  snakes  in  the  West  Indies — detestable  taste  ! 
Got  that  Turner  drawing  yet '? " 

"  Yes.  Well,  I  suppose  it  is  no  use  trying  to 
tempt  you ;  you  seem  proof  against  the  enchant- 
ment of  Palissy.  For  my  own  part,  I  should  like 
to  buy  acres  of  it — all  his  pieces,  in  short,  between 
1560  and  1589  ;  and  as  for  lustre  ware,  I  would 
take  all  that  Maestro  Giorgio  ever  drew  out  of  his 
furnaces,  particularly  the  gadrooned." 

'^  Every  one  to  his  taste ;  but  I  would  not  pave 
my  garden  walk  with  it.  Ugh  !  nasty  silly  stufi". 
Let  that  rascal  Bassevi  buy  it." 

There  was  as  much  cynical  intensity  about  the 
old  connoisseur  as  there  was  dainty  preciseness 
and  unction,  sometimes  even  a  certain  honest 
enthusiasm,  about  the  professional  collector. 

The  room  was  a  snug,  square,  dingy  little  room, 
with  two  or  three  good  pictures — Vandycks,  Hoi- 


3S  THE   VICAE's    COUETSHIP. 

beins,  and  a  Terbiirg,  on  the  Avails — two  small 
carved  ivory  coffers  stood  on  tlie  mantle-piece, 
wliile  a  Diptjc  and  a  bronze,  some  fine  dama- 
scened armour,  and  a  partisan  cliased  in  the 
Cellini's  manner  were  placed  on  the  window-seat. 
Over  the  fire-place  hung  a  small  medallion, 
carved  in  box-wood,  and  representing  the  head  of 
one  of  the  early  Eeformers  ;  every  fold  of  the  fur 
cap,  every  pleat  of  the  cambric  ruff,  and  every 
curl  of  the  moustachio,  exquisitely  carved,  even 
to  bear  a  magnifying  glass.  A  worn  and  faded 
Turkey  carpet  covered  the  floor,  and  at  one 
corner  of  the  room  there  rose  a  huge  stork  of 
Dresden  china  w^aiting  ruefully  for  a  purchaser. 

"  We  have  to  meet  every  taste,  you  know,  Mr. 
Goodrick,"  said  the  curiosity  dealer  ;  "  we  poor 
men  cannot  afford  to  have  hobbies  of  our  own. 
Oh,  yes,  the  Turner — here  it  is." 

Mr.  Thorndyke  sat  down  at  his  knee-desk,  and 
opened  the  second  drawer  to  the  right.  It  con- 
tained four  splendid  snuff-boxes,  one  lapislazuK 
and  gold,  a  second  aerate,  a  third  Se^Tres,  and  a 
fourth  amber.  Mr.  Thorndyke  waved  his  hand 
approvingly  at  the  group. 

"  Will  not  one  of  those  wdn  you,  Mr.  Goodrick?" 
he  said.  "  Why,  they  were  the  gems  of  the  Peter- 
sham collection.  This  Sevres  is  a  summer  box ;  this 
glorious  amber  one  ^is  more  appropriate  for  w^inter." 


THE   CURIOSITY   DEALEE.  39 

"Pack  of  nonsense ;  I  don't  take  snuff  1  Wliere's 
the  Turner  drawing  ?  Got  snuff-boxes  enough — 
more  after  Pisanelli  medals,  quatro-cento  bronzes 
and  jewels  now — can  t  afford  much/' 

Thorndyke  shut  and  locked  the  drawer  vnth. 
a  shrug  of  his  shoulders  that  implied  utter  hope- 
lessness, and  from  a  small  portfolio  produced  the 
Turner  drawing — a  noble  first  sketch  in  miniature 
of  'the  old  Temeraire  being  towed  to  her  last 
berth,' — a  sketch  full  of  Turner's  finest  and  most 
truthful  poetry.  The  subject  was  suggested  to 
him  by  Stansfield  during  a  water  party  at  Green- 
wich at  which  the  two  painters  were  present. 
Everyone  knows  the  picture — the  little  ferry  tug 
is  carelessly  dragging  the  old  phantom  of  the  war 
ship  to  her  last  anchorage;  the. spars  of  the  Teme- 
raire stand  out  pale  against  the  sky,  while  below 
the  last  crimson  radiance  of  autumn  sunset,  the 
thin  blue  mist  steals  up  the  river  and  shrouds  the 
distant  forest  of  masts. 

The  sketch  was  full  of  the  most  noble  grada- 
tions of  colour,  from  the  faintest  tinge  of  moon- 
light to  the  last  glare  of  the  sinking  ball  of  fire. 
"Where  the  common  painter  struck  one  coarse 
octave  Turner  gave  a  Avhole  gamut  of  notes. 
From  blood  red  crimson  to  the  palest  gleam  of 
the  opal  the  countless  tones  of  colour  blended, 
developed,  and  interchanged. 


40  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

Goodrick  gloated  over  it ;  he  turned  it  from 
right  to  left,  he  traced  every  gradation  with  his  eye, 
from  the  clear  sharp  crescent  of  the  ncAV  moon 
on  the  left,  to  the  j)^^re  core  of  flame  low  down 
on  the  right.  Thorndyke  stood  watching  him  as 
a  man  would  watch  a  clever  piece  of  by-play  on 
the  stage.  There  was  a  droll  meditative  heed- 
fulness  about  his  manner. 

The  amateur  looked  up,  elevated  his  chin, 
raised  his  eyes,  and  shook  his  head  backwards, 
in  expression  of  profound  enjoyment  and  admira- 
tion. Then  he  drew  from  a  side  pocket  of  his 
spenser  a  large  convex  glass  with  an  ivory  handle 
and  pored  over  the  work  again.  At  last  he  looked 
up  and  patted  Leo,  who  had  come  to  see  what  his 
master  was  about. 

''  And  yet,''  he  said,  at  last,  ''  there  are  actually 
people — fools,  who  go  grubbing  about  all  their 
lives  at  Christie's  for  Burgomaster  Sixt's  The 
Three  Trees,  and  Marc  Antonio's  Bras  Nii; 
pedantic  asses  who  would  actually  sneer  at  and 
refuse  this  if  it  was  ofi'ered  them.  Ugh  !  If 
collectors  bought  only  Avhat  they  could  appreciate 
there  wouldn't  be  three  pictures  a-year  purchased 
ofl"  the  Academy  walls." 

"  Ah  !  yes,  I  remember  you're  like  Mr.  Euskin, 
you  admire  Turner,"  said  the  dealer,  drily,  with 
an  impertm'bable  coolness  and  quietude,  and  the 


THE    CUPtlOSITY    DEALER.  41 

catholicity  of  one  who  has  no  power  of  limiting 
his  tastes.  "  Well,  so  do  I  in  his  best  time,  but 
when  he  gives  us  only  omelettes  of  colours, 
dabs  of  whitewash,  explosions  of  fire-works — no. 
When  he  produces  the  Liher — yes,  certainly. 
His  figures  are  sometimes  lank  and  shapeless  as 
dolls ;  he  alters  places ;  he  shoots  them  up  and 
lowers  them  do\A'n ;  queer  sort  of  person,  I  be- 
lieve, in  private  life,  but  still  a  remarkable  man, 
no  doubt — very  remarkable  man,  and  rather  a 
miser.     Mr.  Munro  is  going  to  have  that." 

"  Pooh  !  you  don't  understand  Turner,"  pouted 
Thorndvke's  strang;e  customer;  "you've  too  many 
sorts  of  tastes  to  spend  much  time  on  Turner  or 
anyone  else — it  wouldn't  pay  you.  Turner  is  per- 
fect in  his  o^^^l  way — make  his  steamer  harder 
and  blacker,  as  a  young  man  would  have  done,  draw 
all  the  rio'o'ino;  of  the  Temeraire  hard  as  wire, 
where  would  the  water  and  the  w^onderful  haze  be 
then  ?  Nowhere.  All  spoiled  and  out  of  tone. 
Now  it  is  a  dream,  and  a  dream  by  twilight. 
That  sketch,  sir,  is  worth  a  whole  sideboard  of 
gold  plate." 

Mr.  Thorndyke  smiled  in  an  unconvinced  but 
still  comteous  way.  So,  in  the  old  cincpie-cento 
jousts,  a  knight  un\^dlling  to  unhorse  an  adversary 
would  sometimes  receive  the  l>low  staunchly,  then 
toss  up  his  spear,  and  turn  and  ride  courteously 


42  THE  vicar's   COURTSHIP. 

and  silently  past  witliout  rebuff  or  retaliation. 
The  dealer  still  reserved  liis  opinion  that  Turner  s 
poetry  might  be  clearer,  Turner  s  painting  more 
solid,  and  yet  equally  imaginative.  He  preferred 
the  golden  gloom  and  sublime  glory  of  Titian  to 
even  the  blaze  of  Turner's  sunsets.  With  the  fine 
tact  of  one  whose  business  it  is  to  please,  and  who 
has  grown  smoothed  and  rounded  by  collision 
with  various  tempers,  he,  however,  turned  the 
conversation  by  a  single  touch  of  the  tiller. 

"  And  how  is  my  good  friend  Tony  ?  I  hadn't 
come  when  he  called  with  the  snuff-boxes." 

'*  Almost  my  master  now.  Comes  when  he 
likes,  goes  when  he  likes.  Oh,  he's  gone  to- 
day to  Spencer's  Alms-houses,  to  see  his  crony, 
Jupiter." 

''  AVhat,  the  old  Trumpeter  '? " 

"  Yes — old  sot,  I'm  afraid  ;  but  he  comes  from 
the  same  island,  and  he's  a  cousin  of  a  young 
Creole  girl  Tony  was  once  engaged  to." 

"  Tony  and  romance  —  gracious — well — and 
married  ? " 

"  No — she  died  of  yellow-fever — better  for  him, 
perhaps — wife  expensive  luxury — by-the-bye, 
how  are  Mrs.  Thorndyke  and  your  children  ? 
"What  is  that  medal  you  have  there,  by  the 
inkstand — Pisanelli  ? " 

"  Yes  ;  we're  all  well  at  Shepperton,  thank  you. 


THE    CURIOSITY    DEALER.  43 

George  lias  had  a  slight  influenza,  but  that's 
nothing.     We  all  like  the  place. ^' 

"  Influenza, — modern  name  for  cold  in  the 
head — contagious — cold  requires  nitre — nitre, 
sixpence  —  influenza  requires  a  draught  —  one 
shilling — ugh — humbug  !  " 

If  there  Avas  anything  more  crushing  than  ^Ir. 
Goodrick's  "ugh,''  it  was  his  growl  and  snap; 
and  nothing  but  his  "humbug"  could  go  be- 
yond those. 

"  This  medal  of  Savonarola  is  a  fine  one — bold, 
sound  work — old  Eobinson  says  it  is  'first-class.''' 

"  Bother  Eobinson  !  I  want  no  one  to  tell  me 
what  pleases  me.  I  don't  want  first-class,  but 
the  class  that  I  like.  Don't  care  for  it — long- 
nosed  Methodist — coarse  caricature.  Do  as  well 
myself.  Give  me  the  ]\Ialatesta  medallions — 
Eoman  strength — Italian  subtlety." 

"  Yes,  they  are  fine  ;  but  some  people  like  the 
earlier  work.  There's  Mr.  Bandinel — wouldn't 
look  at  a  PisaneUi." 

"  Who  cares  about  Bandinel — who  made  him  a 
ruler  and  a  judge  over  us  ?  Let  him  buy  what- 
ever rubbish  he  likes.  But  come,  Thorndyke, — 
there's  no  fooling  me — what  is  this  wonderful 
thing  you've  got  for  me  1  Come,  out  with  it. 
I  shan't  give  you  more  for  it  because  you  produce 
it  with  this  flourish." 


44  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

Mr.  Thorndyke,  like  many  honourable  men, 
wlio,  knoAving  themselves  to  be  honest,  have  to 
bear  unjust  suspicions,  was  touchy;  self-interest 
alone  kept  the  spark  from  catching  the  viiole 
magazine.  Patches  of  hot  crimson,  however,  ap- 
peared on  his  cheek-bones;  he  moved  abruptly 
to  the  window  to  look  out  at  nothing;  and  then 
went  to  the  bell-pull  to  pull  at  nothing.  By  this 
time,  it  was  sunshine  again,  for  he  was  an  equable, 
well-balanced  man.  He  smiled,  and,  going  into 
an  inner  room,  opened  a  large  iron  safe  of  great 
strength.  He  turned,  as  he  opened  it,  and  said, 
smilino', — 

"  Ah,  you  are  really  too  hard  on  me,  Mr. 
Goodrich — really  too  hard.  I  never  resort  to 
tricks,  especially  with  good  things,  that  need  no 
praise.     Your  *  good  wine  needs  no  bush.'" 

When  he  turned  there  was  a  small,  square, 
silver  box  in  his  rioiit  hand. 

*' Oh,  a  jewel — that  sapphire,  I  suppose,  from 
the  Kussian  collection  sold  the  other  day.  Don't 
care  for  sapphires — got  a  drawer  full  of  them  ;  or 
it's  the  great  pink  diamond  from  the  Grouchy 
lot — poor  stone.  I  heard  you  and  that  rogue 
Bassevi  were  dabblins: " 

"  You  are  wrong,"  said  the  dealer,  his  little  eyes 
compressing,  as  if  to  keep  in  the  secret ;  ''wrong 
scent  this  time." 


THE    CURIOSITY    DEALER.  45 

"  Then  it's  that  pigeon  s-blood  ruby  that  was  at 
Turner  s  in  Bond  Street — quiet,  Leo — can't  afford 
it — must  draw  in." 

"  You  draw  in  !  You'll  have  to  buy  this — you 
can't  help  buying  it ;  I  have  only  to  show  it." 

"  It  must  be  a  marvel — not  the  Pitt  Diamond, 
eh  ?  or  one  of  those  famous  emeralds,  three  inches 
long,  from  the  Kremlin  ?" 

Mr.  Thorndyke  said  nothing;  but,  opening  the 
silver  box,  he  took  something  from  it  and  held  it 
in  his  hand  a  moment  to  warm  it.  Then  he  raised 
it  rapturously  to  the  light. 

"  There's  a  beauty,"  he  said,  holding  it  up 
between  his  finger  and  thumb. 

It  was  a  Mexican  opal,  as  large  as  a  small  cob- 
nut, and  of  much  the  same  oval  shape.  Of  the 
species  called  the  "  noble  "  or  "fire-opal,"  it  was  not 
cut,  en  cabochon  (boss),  but  simply  polished  and 
slightly  rounded.  It  had  less  of  the  milky  cloudy 
red  and  blue  colour  than  the  Hungarian  opals  dis- 
play. Its  partial  opaqueness  was  traversed  by 
gleams  of  internal  flame  of  the  true  sunrise  tinge. 
It  was  of  a  fine  glistening  orange-colour,  dimmed 
here  and  there  to  a  white  opaqueness,  its  semi- 
transparence  glowing,  w^hen  the  stone  was  turned, 
with  flakes,  flashes,  gleams,  and  specks  of  fire.  It 
veered  into  every  hue  of  the  rainbow ;  the  glis- 
tening green  of  the  rose-beetle's  scales  shifting 


46  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

rapidly  into  the  richest  violet  or  the  purest  golden 
and  topaz  lustres.  It  was  a  chef-d'oeuvre  of  Nature 
— a  miracle  which  science  could  analyse,  but  for 
which  it  could  not  account.  It  seemed  to  possess 
life,  and  to  have  shut  up  within  its  veins  that 
quenchless  light  for  which  the  alchemist  vainly 
sought;  for  whimsical  Nature  had  endowed  the 
stone  with  the  radiance  and  colour  of  the  unfading 
flowers  of  Paradise. 

It  seemed  to  almost  take  the  eccentric  connois- 
seur's breath  away.  He  remained  silent,  watch- 
ing the  play  of  light  in  the  jewel,  and  walking 
round  it,  in  which  occupation  he  was  gravely 
imitated  by  Leo,  who,  nearly  tired  of  curiosity- 
shops,  had  been  watching  himself  suspiciously, 
rather  than  approvingly,  in  a  large  square  Vene- 
tian mirror,  with  a  Limoges  enamel  frame,  that 
stood  against  the  wall. 

"  Yes,"  said  Goodrick,  nodding  his  head,  "  it  is 
a  fine  stone — a  splendid  stone — a  royal  stone. 
Thorndyke,  I  have  seen  this  stone  before.'' 

"  I  think  not,"  said  the  still  smiling  dealer. 
"  This  is  from  the  Cantelupe  family  jewels — 
Honourable  Mr.  Fitzegbert  Cantelupe,  of  Swal- 
lowcliff  Castle,  down  somewhere  in  Wiltshire. 
Young  man  running  through  everything.  Mr. 
Bassevi  is  going  to  look  at  some  pictures  of  his 
at  Fairfield's  this  morning." 


THE    CURIOSITY   DEALER.  47 

"  My  memory  is  pretty  strong  in  these  matters. 
I  remember  its  shape,  and  I  know  all  the  fine 
opals  in  Europe,  from  the  Czerwenitza  at  Vienna 
downwards.  I  ought,  too  ;  I've  tramped  enough 
about  the  Continent  since  I  left  the  West  Indies. 
Ah !  I  see  you  know  something  about  opals,  or 
you  would  not  warm  it  in  your  hand  so  care- 
fully to  bring  out  the  lustre." 

Mr.  Thorndyke  smiled  with  good-humoured 
astuteness,  and,  handing  him  the  stone,  said, — 

"  On  a  warmer  day  it  would  have  showed 
up  better.'' 

Mr.  Goodrick  glanced  up  through  his  thicket 
of  grey  eyebrows  at  the  dealer. 

"There  are  other  secrets  about  the  opal  that 
you  may  not  be  so  well  acquainted  with — eh  ? '' 

"  I  don  t  know  of  any  other.  Jewels  are  not 
my  forte.  Bassevi  is  the  man  for  jewels.  I  am 
only  selling  this  on  agency.  Perhaps  you  like 
Harlequin  opals  better,  with  the  smaller  flakes  of 
fire  more  equally  scattered.  For  my  own  part,  I 
prefer  this  rich  mother-of-pearl  iridescence  :  the 
partial  transparency  is  exquisite.  It  looks  better 
since  I  removed  the  setting^." 

CD 

Buying  and  selling  is  like  fencing;  it  is  an  art 
with  its  regular  gradations,  its  feints,  its  parries, 
and  its  thrusts.  Only  the  merest  novice  begins 
at  once  with  the  coiq:^  de   grace.     It  is  always 


48  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

prudent  to  presume  some  capability  and  spirit  in 
your  adversary.  Tliorndyke  Avas  still  flourishing 
liis  foil  in  the  salutes  and  such  diplomatic  pre- 
liminaries. He  was  sometimes  weeks  with  such 
amateurs  as  Goodrick  before  he  could  thoroughly 
arouse  their  greed  of  acquisitiveness.  In  such 
cases  he  had  all  the  patience  of  an  angler.  He 
could  bait  the  deeps  and  wait  till  the  fish  had 
grown  accustomed  to  the  place  where  the  hook 
was  to  be  dropped.  Bargaining  is  like  deer-stalk- 
ing— a  moment's  hurry  or  impatience  is  fatal. 

Mr.  Goodrick  held  the  opal  close  in  his  hand 
till  the  little  chambers  of  air,  or  those  little  semi- 
fractured  laminae  that  gave  it.  radiancy,  glowed 
with  the  delicious  rainbow  colours  of  dew-drops 
in  the  sun ;  a  brazen  golden-red  being  especially 
brilliant,  on  the  one  side,  and  pale  pure  emerald 
on  the  other. 

"  Show  me  the  setting,"  he  said,  abruptly. 
"  Stop — to  prove  to  you  I  know  the  stone — I'll  tell 
you  what  it  is  like.  It  is  Spanish  gold  work  in 
imitation  of  Genoese  filigree,  and  below  is  a 
cipher  —  two  letters  intertwined — H  and  E. 
Pooh  !  my  memory  is  not  quite  gone  yet,  Mr. 
Thorndyke." 

The  dealer's  eyebrows  rose  with  surprise. 

"  Well,"  he  said,  "  you  have  certainly  described 
the  thing  exactly.     It  is  evidently  the  one  you 


THE    CURIOSITY   DEALER.  49 

mean.  The  settino;  I  have  left  at  home.  You 
know  its  value  then  ?  " 

"  I  have  reason  to  remember  this  opal.  Give 
me  jDen  and  ink.  Lie  down,  Leo — don't  whine, 
dog." 

Mr.  Thorndyke  placed  a  blotting  pad,  drew  a 
china  inkstand  close  to  it,  and  surrendered  his 
arm-chair. 

"  Do  you  want  an  envelope  ? " 

"No.  AVhat  price  do  you  ask  for  this 
stone  ? " 

''  Eight  hundred  and  fifty  pounds." 

Thorndyke  named  the  sum  with  a  certain 
solemnity. 

"  No  less  ? — that  is  an  enormous  price.  It's 
only  an  opal,  after  all." 

"  No  less.  It's  quite  worth  that.  That  is  my 
first  and  last  price." 

"  And  you  expect  me  to  give  that  ?  " 

"  No — no.     I  am  sure  you  won't." 

Mr.  Goodrick  made  no  answer,  but  took  from 
the  pad  a  long  piece  of  lilac-veined  paper, 
which  he  had  been  signing,  and  handed  it  to  the 
dealer. 

It  was  a  cheque  for  the  eight  hundred  and  fifty 
pounds. 

Thorndyke  was  as  much  astonished  as  Le 
Bourgeois   Gentilliommc   when   Nicole   actually 


50  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

lunged  at  liim  before  lie  liad  prepared  liis 
parry.  He  had  never  known  a  first  price  given 
before.  He  could  hardly  believe  his  eyes.  He 
was  pleased,  yet  an  amari  aliquid  arose  in  the 
cup  ;  he  almost  wished  he  had  asked  more. 

Mr.  Goodrich,  with  a  dry  smile,  took  the  gem 
from  the  box,  folded  it  in  wool  and  silver  paper, 
and  placed  it  carefully  in  his  right  hand  waist- 
coat pocket. 

Mr.  Thorndyke  smiled  drily. 

"  You  remind  me,  Mr.  Goodrick,"  he  said, 
"  of  Peter  the  Great,  who,  when  he  took  leave 
of  King  William,  drew  from  his  pocket  a  rough 
ruby,  valued  at  £10,000,  screwed  up  in  brown 
paper,  and  handed  it  to  William  as  a  parting 
present.  You  rich  men  treat  jew^els  as  if  they 
grew  on  every  bush.'' 

The  dealer  was  a  little  piqued  at  the  treatment 
of  so  glorious  a  stone. 

"It  is  not  its  value  made  me  buy  it ;  it  was 
an  old  association  I  have  with  it.  You've  heard 
me  talk  of  my  old  West  Indian  friend,  Herbert 
Staunton — the  man  w^io  left  me  all  my  money  ? " 

"  Of  course  I  have." 

"  Well,  his  father  lived  down  in  Wiltshire  at 
a  place  called  Summerleas ;  he  was  a  millionaire 
— grandfather  had  been  a  rich  alderman — Levant 
merchant — friend  of  Beckford's.  That  opal  was  in 


THE   CURIOSITY   DEALER.  51 

Hs  cabinet.  I  remember  seeing  it  when  I  was  a 
boy  visiting  there — shown  it  as  a  treat.'' 

"  Staunton  was  a  great  collector.  Fve  heard  of 
him.  The  last  Mr.  Staunton,  I  believe,  left  all  his 
English  property  to  his  steward  and  man  of  busi- 
ness, who  broke  up  the  collection  and  sold  most  of 
it.  I  suppose  Lord  Mazagan  bought  the  opal;  and 
that's  how  Cantelupe  got  it.  I  declare,  by-the-bye, 
you're  not  unlike  one  of  the  Stauntons,  by  Rey- 
nolds (such  a  Reynolds  !),  that  passed  through  my 
hands  a  few  months  ago.    It  just  then  struck  me." 

"There  were  some  intermarriages,  I  believe, 
between  the  families  in  old  times.  Family  like- 
nesses, like  family  vices,  are  often  hereditary  heir- 
looms— uo'h  !  But  I  must  be  off.  I've  to  oo  to 
Furnival's  Inn  to  see  Fairfield  about  some  law 
business.  I've  got  him  to  take  an  interest  in 
curiosities,  and  he's  been  making  some  inquiries 
for  me  in  Paris  about  early  French  bronzes,  I 
liear — look  in  at  the  Oriental  first,  and  see  the 
papers.  I  like  to  tease  the  fools  who  pretended 
to  go  out  of  town,  and  whom  I'm  sure  to  find 
skulking  there. — Humbugs  ! " 

Goodrick  took  his  gold-mounted  bamboo  and  his 
stick,  and  turned  to  go ;  then  he  held  down  his 
stubborn  old  head,  as  if  to  remember  something — 
did  remember  it,  and  looked  up,  pleased. 

**  Ha !  knew  it  was  something — yes,  I've  got 


E   2 


LIBRARY 

UNIVERSITY  OF  ILUNOfS 


52  THE   vicar's   COUETSHIP. 

a  very  precious  miniature  I  want  repaired — back- 
ground cracked." 

"  Well,  tliere's  a  very  good  man  Bassevi 
em^Dloys — very  careful.  Ill  get  it  done  for 
you." 

"  Bassevi  is  no  recommendation — I  detest  that 
man.  I  hate  all  Jews — sell  their  own  mothers, 
as  some  one  said  to  Tattersall ;  but  if  you  know 
his  work,  that'll  do.  Good  morning.  Come, 
Leo,  old  boy ;  now,  you  lazy  beast. — Send  me 
the  setting." 

Mr.  Thorndyke  opened  the  door  with  a  civi- 
lity, grateful  but  by  no  means  servile,  and  stood 
on  the  door-step  and  watched  Goodrick  turn  into 
the  square. 

"  "Well,"  he  thought  to  himseK,  ''  only  to  think 
of  that  old  fellow  giving  a  big  sum  like  that 
straight  off.  I  think  Bassevi  will  be  pleased  this 
time.  People  call  that  man  a  miser.  I  only 
wish  there  were  more  such  misers.  As  they 
used  to  say  of  Johnson,  he's  only  a  bear  in  the 
coat — his  heart  is  all  rio^ht.  There  are  worse  men 
than  Goodrick,  depend  on  it.  By  Jove!  how  he 
did  snap  at  the  opal." 

Mr.  Goodrick  entered  the  Oriental,  his  favourite 
club  (if  he  had  a  favourite  anything),  with  the 
sly  malice  of  a  man  bent  on  rook-shooting.  He 
was  watching  for  a  shot.     A  page-boy,  conceal- 


THE    CURIOSITY    DEALER.  53 

ing  a  grill,  ran  to  help  Mm  off  with  his  spencer, 
but  met  with  no  excessive  gratitude. 

"  Gently,  boy ;  don  t  pull  it  in  two.  Here, 
take  my  hat.  Mr.  Hargrave  been  yet,  Davis  ? — 
]\rr.  Kobartes  ? — Mr.  Willis  away — yes,  I  know. 
There,  that'll  do — ask  for  my  letters,  and  bring 
them  upstairs.     Make  haste,  boy!'' 

Mr.  Goodrick  went  upstairs  with  the  me- 
thodical composure  of  an  habitue.  In  the  j&rst 
room  he  entered  he  took  up  "The  Armada,"  a 
new  mag^azine,  and  read  half  aloud  and  with 
indescribable  contempt,  the  page  at  which  it 
opened. 

"  Poetry — of  course,  lots  of  it — verses — rhymes 
— nonsense  measured  off  into  lengths.  'Autumn, 
by  Eobert  Gordon ' — nice  stuff.  I  remember  that 
fellow's  name — like  to  set  him  down  to  copy 
Pope  twenty  times  through — let's  see  the  rubbish. 

'  Xo  sound  but  the  beech-nuts  falling 
Through  the  green  and  the  yeUow  leaves  ; ' 

Kemarkable  leaves — ug-h  ! — two  colours  at  once. 

o 

'  And  the  lonely  west-wind  calling 
The  swallows  from  the  eaves. ' 

"  Yes,  yes, — tol-de-rol-de-ray^pshaw  I  No 
humanity  —  no  point  —  bad  market-gardeners' 
rhymes.  Who  cares  about  leaves  and  swallows — 
cartload  of  them  not  worth  a  peck  of  potatoes." 


54  THE  vtcae's  courtship. 

"  Don't  see  Hargrave/'  he  went  on.     "  D 

that  boy,  Davis, — of  all  pests ;  careless  young 
dogs — for  perfect  ineptitude,  commend  me  to  club 
servants.  Gh,  yes,  there  is  Hargrave,  in  his  old 
place  at  the  window." 

Yes,  there  he  was,  in  a  snug  nook  between  a 
sofa  and  the  window,  looking  out  on  the  sunny 
side  of  Pall  Mall.  Mr.  Goodrick's  crony,  a  re- 
tired medical  man,  sat  in  a  precise,  punctilious 
attitude,  with  his  head  on  one  side,  his  palpable 
wig  beautifully  arranged,  reading  the  "Times" 
through  a  double  gold  eye-glass,  which  he  held 
at  an  enormous  distance  from  his  eyes.  He 
looked  up  faintly  surprised  when  Goodrick  touched 
him  on  the  shoulder,  and  greeted  him  with  the 
formality  of  the  old  school,  a  formality  never 
laid  aside  even  between  father  and  son,  rather 
repelling  to  us,  attractive  probably  to  the  belles 
of  1820,  and  certainly  not  without  its  use  in 
fending  off  bores,  fools,  impertinents  or  vul- 
garians. Old-fashioned  as  Hargrave  was,  he  had 
the  easy,  quick,  ready,  adaptive  manner  of  the 
true  London  man  of  the  world,  astonished  at 
nothing,  yet  tired  of  nothing,  which  is  the  great 
distinction  between  the  man  of  the  world  and  the 
mere  fribble  or  fop. 

"  God  bless  my  soul,  is  that  you  ? "  said  Har- 
grave, with  the   most  calm  surprise ;    ''  why,    I 


THE    CURIOSITY   DEALER.  55 

thought  you  Tvere  in  Paris,  at  the  Latouche  sale. 
Eobartes  told  me  you  ^vere  determined  to  have 
the  fine  Carlo  Maratti." 

"  All  he  knows — hate  Maratti — insipid  as 
stewed  veal.'' 

"  Have  you  read  this  wonderful  leader  on  the 
Swinefield  election  ?  Really,  these  Radical  fel- 
lows  " 

"  No — hm — where's  Willis  ? — in  Scotland,  I 
suppose — artful  dog  that  is.  We  must  have 
another  quartette  party  when  we  all  meet  again. 
Heard  from  "WiUis  ?  " 

"  Yes,  heard  from  him  yesterday — glorious 
sport.  Six  salmon  one  day — smallest,  eighteen 
pounds." 

"  Ugh  !  rheumatic  work — dangerous — it'll  kill 
Willis  some  day,  you  mark  my  words.  I  have 
got  something  to  show  you,  Hargrave.  There's 
Harefoot  and  Huskyson  coming  in.  Here,  come 
to  the  window." 

The  two  cronies  drew  close  to  the  club  window, 
and  Goodrick  exhibited  the  opal.  It  shone  now, 
after  the  heat  of  the  pocket,  like  an  emerald  seen 
by  sunset.  They  looked  like  two  magpies  who 
had  dug  up  a  buried  ring  and  were  discussing 
its  value  as  an  edible. 

There  is  an  ideality  about  all  perfection, 
whether   it   be  a  beautiful  girl  rejoicing  in  her 


56  THE   YICAe's   courtship. 

beauty,  a  prize-fighter  stripped  for  the  battle,  a 
flower  just  open  to  the  sun,  or  a  fine  jewel  glow- 
ing in  the  sunshine,  and  at  once  absorbing  and 
yielding  light. 

Huskyson,  a  barrister-at-law,  and  a  distinguished 
writer  on  that  eminent  Tory  paper,  the  "  Penny 
Cyclops,^'  eyed  the  two  connoisseurs  askance,  play- 
ing with  a  j)aper-cutter  as  he  summed  them  up. 

"  Old  beggars — both  money  lenders,  bet  a 
guinea.  Goodrick  is  a  miser,  they  say.  By  Jove, 
sir !  those  Kadical  dogs  would  have  the  clubs 
full  of  this  sort  of  men  if  we  did  not  blackball 
them  by  the  dozen/' 

Another  moment  and  the  great  partisan  writer 
was  absorbed  in  the  tremendous  question  then 
convulsing  Europe  as  to  the  boundaries  of  the 
Duchy  of  Schwartzpotztausend-Ej:anz  and  Ober- 
kopfundohrendet. 

"  How  d'ye  clo  ?  "  said  Goodrick,  as  he  passed 
the  historical  student,  Hargrave  ha^dng  now 
swathed  himself  in  the  expanded  "Times,"  and 
with  some  difficulty  raised  one  foot  upon  the  seat 
of  a  chair.  ''  Thought  you  were  off*  to  Spain 
weeks  ago.     Just  the  time  for  Spain  now." 

Huskyson  was  one  of  those  precise  prigs,  with 
pale  sharp-cut  features,  a  rather  Plantagenet  nose, 
thin  cheeks,  and  thin  black  whiskers,  that  seem 
the  ideal  of  our  modern  book  illustrators,  but  who 


THE    CURIOSITY    DEALER.  57 

in  modern  life  are  as  supercilious  as  they  are  de- 
testable ;  feeble  replicas  of  some  good  old  country 
stock,  fools  ashamed  of  tlie  intellectual  work  that 
is  their  only  claim  to  notice,  and  affecting  a 
mental  superiority  ^vhich  could  only  be  guessed 
at  from  its  assumption. 

The  great  journalist  evidently  did  not  like  the 
sly  sarcasm  of  the  question.  He  pulled  his  thin 
whiskers  to  give  himself  time  for  an  impromptu 
(how  many  people  would  make  one  if  they  had 
only  a  clear  day  or  two),  and  raised  his  eyes  to 
the  gaselier  as  if  it  was  an  exertion. 

"  Yas,"  he  said,  languidly,  for  even  this  crea- 
ture was  of  the  swell  species,  and  occasionally 
invaded  the  park.  "  Yas  ;  but  this  a^^ul  busi- 
ness at  Oberkopfundohrendet  has  kept  all  our 
staff  in  town.  Get  away  next  week  perhaps  to 
Lord  Walkover  s — hope  to.  I  say,  you  boy,  wish 
you  wouldn't  split  all  the  paper-cutters  in  this 
place." 

"  Puppy — worst  sort — impertinent — he  an  in- 
structor of  mankind — ugh!''  muttered  Goodrich,  as 
he  descended  the  stairs.      ''  But  I  winoed  him  !  " 

As  he  put  on  his  spencer,  and  stood  on  the 
steps,  calling  Leo,  who  was  waiting  in  the  street 
— he  was  not  at  all  a  dog  to  be  lured  away — the 
dreadful  boy,  Davis,  darted  through  the  heavy 
swing  doors,  holding  a  letter. 


58  THE   vicar's   COURTSHIP. 

'^  Beg  pardon,  sir — hall-porter  picked  it  up. 
You  pulled  it  out  with  your  handkerchief." 

"  Give  it  here,  sir,"  said  the  irascible  virtuoso, 
flipping  it  at  the  same  moment  open  with  his 
finger  and  thumb;  "why,  it's  the  letter  that 
came  this  morning." 

He  tore  off"  the  envelope  angrily,  rolled  it  into 
a  pill,  and  sent  it  flying  down  the  street ;  then 
he  turned  back  into  the  hall  of  the  Oriental,  and 
read  the  letter,  which  seemed  to  interest  him 
deeply,  for  he  read  it  three  times  over. 

"  Oh,  he's  a  reg'lar  temper,"  was  the  remark  of 
the  boy  Davis  to  the  hall-porter,  as  Mr.  Goodrick 
at  last  crammed  the  letter  into  his  pocket  and 
walked  thoughtfully  in  the  direction  of  Holborn. 


AMY    ROBINSON 


CHAPTER  lY. 

AMY   EOBINSON. 

With  most  mistresses  tlie  ideal  of  a  perfect  ser- 
vant is  a  strong  girl  who  will  wear  ugly  caps,  never 
go  out,  never  wish  to  get  married  and  independ- 
ent, never  stop  working,  live  underground,  and 
be  perpetually  willing  and  cheerful  for  eight 
pounds  a-year,  without  tea  or  sugar.  Such  being 
the  ideal,  and  cheerful  hermits  mid  light-hearted 
nuns  not  being  often  obtainable  for  such  remune- 
ration, there  naturally  results  much  disappoint- 
ment, and  hence  arose  many  such  exclamations  as 
that  "  there  are  no  servants  now-a-days,"  ''  a  parcel 
of  fine,  stuck  up,  impertinent,"  &c. ;  nor,  indeed, 
is  it  any  wonder  that  sanguine  people  have  antici- 
pated beatified  times  when  we  shall  be  waited  upon 
by  steam-engines  or  automaton  electro-galvanic 
dumb  waiters.  Perhaps,  however,  till  that  golden 
age  comes,  and  while  the  age  of  pinchbeck  con- 
tinues, it  would  be  as  well  for  mistresses  to  try 
a  little  forbearance,  sympathy,  and  consideration 


60  THE   VICAPJs    COURTSHIP. 

for  young  women  exiled  from  home,  sold  into 
temporary  slavery,  subjected  to  a  thousand  ca- 
prices, and  to  a  life  of  monotonous  labour  and 
much  temptation,  with  certainly  the  lowest  mini- 
mum of  enjoyment,  and  little  chance  of  saving 
enough  for  an  honest  independence  at  the  close. 

A  humble  approach  to  the  grand  ideal,  in  other 
words  a  neat  little  maid-of-all-work,  stood,  on  the 
October  morning  we  have  already  described,  an 
hour  before  Mr.  Goodrich's  appearance  in  his  front 
room,  beating  a  door-mat  vigorously  with  the  end 
of  a  long  broom.  She  was  flushed  with  cleaning 
the  door-step  opposite  No.  30,  and  really  looked 
very  pretty  with  her  fresh  country  colour  and  her 
glossy  trimly  arranged  hair.  The  audacious  milk- 
man rattling  his  nest  of  cans  at  No.  10,  as  if  really 
he  had  never  even  heard  of  the  existence  of 
water  as  a  diluter  of  the  almost  dangerous  rich- 
ness of  London  milk,  nodded  to  her  in  a  most 
gallant  way,  but  she  would  hardly  even  toss  him 
a  smile. 

This  perhaps  arose  not  so  much  from  pride  as 
from  the  approach  of  a  certain  blushing  young 
man  in  the  bluest  of  ties,  who  just  then  came  sus- 
piciously strolling  down  the  street,  with  a  square 
parcel  under  his  arm,  and  talking  to  the  baker 
who  had  slung  down  his  basket  of  smoking  bread 
at  the  door  of  No.  8. 


AMY   ROBIXSOX.  61 

He  ^^\ls  a  loosely  built,  spindly  young  man, 
reminding  one  somehow  of  tliin  overgrown  aspa- 
ragus, with  a  good-natured,  not  over  wise  look, 
large  eyes,  rather  a  fat,  high-coloured  face,  and  a 
considerable  downy  promise  of  whiskers. 

Susan  was  evidently  conscious  of  the  approach 
of  this  young  Eomeo,  but  she  chose  coquettishly 
not  to  see  him,  and  looking  steadily  at  Inigo 
Jones's  gateway  at  the  west  end  of  the  street,  beat 
still  faster  on  the  unoffending  mat.  Thinking  it, 
however,  cruel  to  let  him  remain  there  any  longer 
colouring  up  to  the  roots  of  his  hair,  and  holding 
out  a  copy  of  the  "  London  Journal,"  she  turned 
round  with  a  pretty  start,  remarkably  natural, 
considerino'. 

"  Oh  !  dear  me,  why  it  is  ]\Ir.  Willoughby." 

"  Call  me  Bob,  Susan  ;  you  know  you  promised 
last  Sunday  to  always  call  me  Bob." 

"  Oh,  you  wicked  story  !  " 

The  pa^^mbroker  and  picture  dealer's  young 
man,  emboldened  by  this  appellation,  smiled  pro- 
fusely, and  said,  pathetically, — 

"  Susan,  may  I  call  you  dear  ?  " 

"  No,  I  don't  think  I  shall  let  you  ;  you  don't 
deserve  it." 

*'  Oh,  do  ! — and,  I  say,  Susan,  I've  got  a  little 
lavender-water  for  you — you  won't  be  angry  with 
me  for  bring-ing;  it.    I  wish  it  was  somethino-  better. 


62  THE   VICAe's   courtship. 

I  wish  I  was  as  ricli  as  master,  Susan,  and  I'd  buy 
you  sucb.  a  stunning  brooch  I've  been  looking  at 
round  the  corner." 

"Don't  be  silly,  Bob,  talking  of  such  things. 
You  know  I  saw  you  talking  to  that  ugly  dark 
girl  at  No.  4,  on  Tuesday  night  when  I  went  to 
the  ^  Apple  Tree '  for  beer." 

The  tall  young  man  was  eager  in  his  explana- 
tions and  assurances.  Of  all  the  girls  he  had 
ever  seen,  he  had  apparently  never  disHked  any 
one  so  much  as  the  girl  at  No.  4. 

""  Oh,  yes,  I  dare  say,"  said  Susan,  with  ex- 
treme hauteur,  as  they  say  in  fashionable  novels. 
"Oh  1  yes,  I'm  to  believe  everything,  of  course ; 
and  what's  that  '  London  Journal '  you've  got 
there  ?  I  dare  say  that's  for  some  minx  or  other. 
Oh!  don't  tell  me." 

There  was  the  making  of  a  coquette  about 
Susan,  but  indeed  it  required  no  great  strategy 
to  out-general  young  Mr.  Willoughby.  Still,  love 
is  not  a  question  of  intellect,  and  com'tship  is  a 
pretty  thing  even  when  a  shambling  pawnbroker's 
assistant  is  the  Eomeo  and  a  little  maid-of-all- 
work  the  Juliet. 

Bob  then  produced  the  latest  number  of  the 
"  London  Journal,"  and  glowingly  eulogised  the 
thriUing  story  of  the  "  Eed  Diamond,  or  the 
Skeleton  in  the  Closet,"  especially  where  (as  he 


AMY    EOBINSON.  63 

eloquently  pointed  out)  Sir  Algernon  Fitzlierbert 
Goswald  confronts  the  wicked  Duke  of  Mount- 
garret  Cliesney,  and  accuses  kim  before  his  proud 
minions  and  pampered  menials  of  bigamy,  arson, 
poisoning,  felony,  treason,  bad  language,  and 
strong  drinks. 

Could  it  be  wondered  at,  owing  to  the  interest  of 
the  story,  the  cheek  of  Eomeo  and  the  cheek  of 
Juliet  almost  touched  each  other,  or  that,  perhaps 
just  to  steady  himself.  Bob  tried  ineffectually  to 
slip  one  hand  for  an  instant  round  the  little  trim 
waist  of  the  pole  star  of  his  young  affections? 

"  How  can  you  ? ''  was  Susan's  remark  at  this 
audacity.  "  There's  Mrs.  Harvey,  at  No.  30,  look- 
ing at  us." 

Bob  asserted  that  no  human  being,  from  the 
Lord  Chancellor  downwards,  could  have  resisted 
such  a  temptation. 

Just  then  a  bell  upstairs  rang,  rather  sharply, 
twice. 

"Oh,  good  gracious,  Mr.  Willoughby!"  said 
Susan,  dropping  her  broom  in  her  consternation ; 
"there's  missus,  or  Miss  Amy.  Give  me  the 
messages.     Is  that  picture  for  master  ? " 

Bob,  ^^ith  several  surreptitious  compliments  to 
Susan,  hurriedly  explained  that  it  was  a  Yandyck 
from  Mr.  Bassevi — there  was  some  foliage  in  the 
background  to  paint  in. 


64  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

"  It's  such  a  stunner,"  was  Bob's  critical  com- 
ment. 

The  door  closing  on  Bob  after  a  hurried  and 
rather  unceremonious  adieu,  Bob  strolled  in  a 
melancholy,  banished  way  to  his  prison  behind 
the  counter  of  the  tyrant  in  Charlotte  Street. 

Almost  the  moment  the  door  closed,  a  burly, 
roughly  dressed  giant  of  a  man  in  a  wide-awake 
— Leviathan  as  to  chest,  Behemoth  as  to  head — 
strode  up  and  beat  on  the  knocker  with  a  self- 
important  devil-may-care  air  that  all  but  indi- 
cated his  nationality.  There  was  a  redundant 
strength  about  the  man  (his  very  sneeze  was  an 
earthc|uake),  and  he  stood  there  like  a  tamed  Her- 
cules in  modern  dress. 

The  door  opened  and  Susan's  smiling  face  ap- 
peared incjuiringiy  and  greetingiy,  for  she  re- 
cognised a  friend  of  her  master's  and  an  ami  de 
la  maison. 

"  Why,  it's  Major  Donovan  !" 

"  Susan,  mavourneen,"  said  the  by  no  means 
diffident  visitor,  with  a  vulgar  gallantry,  and  in 
a  slight  brogue  evidently  a  long  time  alienated 
from  Ireland.  "  Is  your  masther  in  ?  Where  is 
the  old  boy  ?  I  must  see  him,"  and  the  enormous 
being  flomished  a  small  black  thorn-tree,  which 
he  called  a  stick,  as  if  he  had  been  the  champion 
of  a  thousand  faction  fioiits. 

o 


AMY   ROBINSON.  65 

''  He's  upstairs,  sir,  in  liis  room,  painting,  till 
breakfast  is  ready  ;  you  can  go  up." 

The  invitation  was  wasted,  for  the  broad-shoul- 
dered man  was  already  shouting  Eobinson,  and 
striding  up  two  steps  at  a  time. 

"  Well,  he  do  take  liberties,"  said  Susan, 
saucily ;  "  one  would  think  the  house  was  his 
own ;  but  there,  he  brings  master  work,  and  he's 
no  pride  about  him." 

Major  Donovan,  or,  as  he  called  himself,  "  the 
real  O'Donovan,"  if  he  had  his  rights,  and  the 
family  property  in  Gal  way,  was  one  of  those  mys- 
terious adventurers  only  found  in  great  cities  ; 
he  had  dabbled  in  several  professions,  he  was  a 
good  practical  though  ungrammatical  linguist,  a 
man  who  had  travelled,  a  projector,  a  go- 
between  for  patrons  and  artists,  and  a  hanger-on 
and  sort  of  odd  man  at  Government  offices,  for  he 
had  mysterious  claims  on  the  Ministry.  The 
major  was  as  well  kno^\Ti  at  artists'  taverns  as  in 
Whitehall  ante-chambers.  Eeckless,  impulsive, 
clever,  rather  too  fond  of  the  bottle,  generous 
when  he  had  it,  a  lively  sponge,  he  was  ready  at 
a  moment's  notice  to  go  either  and  establish  an 
agency  in  Samarcand,  or  to  sell  a  picture  for  a 
poor  artist.  There  was  no  knowing  what  he  had 
not  been,  certainly  a  private  in  the  Artillery,  then 
a  police  inspector  at  Bombay,  then  the  head  of  the 


Ob  THE   VICARS    COURTSHrP. 

detectives  at  Alexandria,  next  a  pamphleteer  on 
scientific  questions,  then  a  commission  agent  at 
Beyrout,  lastly  sub- consul  at  Smyrna,  everywhere 
bragging,  fighting,  trading,  Avith  great  self-satis- 
faction, but  no  very  remunerative  results.  He  was 
cunning  under  the  garb  of  chivabous  impetuosity, 
brave  although  a  boaster,  inventive  and  clever 
although  ignorant,  a  man,  in  fact,  not  fit  for  our 
tame  modern  civilisation,  a  Berseker  in  broad- 
cloth, a  backwoodsman  in  a  chimney-pot  hat.  It 
was  a  shame  to  trammel  such  a  man  in  the  subtle 
cobwebs  of  later  civilisation,  and  with  the  mean 
complications  of  neediness.  He  should  have  been 
at  one  of  the  outposts  of  the  world,  a  picket 
against  the  Comanchees,  a  sentinel  against  New 
Zealand  rebels.  He  was  one  of  those  robust, 
fiery,  untiring  natures,  that  is  only  really  alive 
when  at  work  and  in  danger.  Poverty  only  made 
him  shifty  and  insincere.  Under  Cortez  he  might 
have  won  victories  and  founded  settlements. 

Add  to  this  mental  character  a  broad,  coarse 
red  face,  with  prominent  cheekbones,  good  but 
rather  squat  featm^es,  a  broad  bumpy  brow,  keen 
restless  lion's  eyes,  and  crisp  full  red  whiskers, 
and  you  see  the  major. 

He  beat  at  a  back-room  door  on  the  third 
floor  till  it  opened,  and  a  little  trim  old-fashioned 
man  with  a  square  gilt  eye-glass  hanging  by  a 


AMY   ROBIXSOX.  67 

broad  iDlack  ribbon  round  bis  neck,  put  bis  bead 
out  witb  a  sort  of  dreamy  inquiry. 

"  Robinson,  my  boy,  bow  are  ye?'' — tbe  majors 
manner  was  Irisb,  and  so  was  bis  accent,  but  be 
used  bardly  any  Irisbisms,  for,  to  express  it  in 
bis  eccentric  way,  "  be  bad  only  been  to  Ireland 
to  be  born," — "Robinson,  my  boy,  bow  are  ye  ? 
How  goes  on  tbe  great  work  ?  Nearly  ready  to 
astonisb  tbe  Academy,  eb  ?  I  bave  got  a  mes- 
sage for  you  from  Basse^d.  AYonderful  bead  tbat 
Bassevi — conducts  a  gigantic  business  as  if  be  was 
playing  an  organ — be  wants  tbat  Yandyck,  Lady 
Dorotby  Xe^-ille,  I  tbink  be  called  it,  done  soon, 
and  tbe  copy  from  [Moreland  pusbed  on,  for  tbe 
Mancbester  man.  And  bow's  tbe  wife,  and 
Amy  too,  tbe  Httle  Blusb  Rose,  as  I  call  ber,  bow 
is  sbe,  eb  ?  May  tbe  sunsbine  follow  ber  all  ber 
days,  for  sbe  deserves  it,  tbe  little  beauty !  " 

Tbere  was  a  love  of  Irisb  b}^erbole  about  tbis 
giant,  and  a  kind  of  rougb  poetry,  witb  a  sbgbt 
imdercurrent  of  Celtic  insincerity,  for  tbis  fine 
generous  fervour  cannot  be  perpetually  kept  on 
band  witbout  some  sacrifice  of  reality,  and  tbe 
Irisbman  and  tbe  Frencbman  l)otb  sufi'er  occasion- 
ally from  tbis  drawback. 

Mr.  Robinson  was  a  dapper  little,  seedily  neat, 
elderly  man,  sbort,  vain  and  exacting,  witb  good 
but  smaU  and  ratber  pincbed  features,  and  some 

V  2 


68  THE   YICAE's    courtship. 

of  tlie  obsequiousness  and  meclianical  politeness 
of  the  quondam  fashionable  drawing-master  about 
him ;  he  was  a  wearer  at  all  times  of  a  tail  coat 
and  shoes.  His  thin,  soft  brown  hair,  now 
rather  scanty,  was  drawn  in  careful  threads 
over  his  bald  head  in  a  way  that  showed  the 
man  who  had  been  a  dandy  in  his  youth. 
He  had  the  quiet  low^  voice  of  a  self-absorbed 
enthusiast  accustomed  to  dream  away  hours  by 
himself,  and  the  cold  punctilious  formal  manner 
of  the  second  class  old  school  which  aimed  at  a 
polite  equability,  and  did  not  by  any  means  pre- 
tend to  any  great  sincerity.  When  he  spoke 
Mr.  Eobinson  had  a  Avay  of  sliding  out  one  leg 
and  waving  his  eye-glass  with  his  right  hand, 
and  while  he  was  speaking  he  was  in  the  habit 
also  of  drawing  himself  up  and  straightening  his 
back  in  a  youthful  way  as  if  age  was  really  a 
mere  assumption  of  his,  and  a  thing  to  which  he 
could  no  longer  by  any  means  submit.  On  the 
point  of  his  great  picture  his  fixed  idea  was  almost 
a  monomania.  Mr.  Eobinson  was  a  little  selfish, 
vain  to  the  extent  of  disease,  a  tuft  hunter  if 
he  had  had  the  ojiportunity,  but  industrious, 
simple-hearted,  attached  to  but  rather  afraid  of 
his  wife,  and  devotedly  fond  of  his  daughter. 

"  Major  Donovan,"  he  said,  floridly  waving  the 
coloured  easel  on  his  left  thumb,  and  slipping  the 


AMY   EOBIXSOX.  69 

brush  dexterously  into  liis  left  hand  in  order  to 
get  his  right  free  for  shaking,  "  I  am  delighted  to 
see  you  ;  take  a  chair.  I  hope  my  people  did  not 
keep  you  waiting,  as  they  are  sometimes  in  the 
habit  of  doinor  ^^ith  ^dsitors," — Mr.  Kobinson 
always  called  Susan  "my  people," — "and  my 
wife  and  Amy  are,  I  believe,  not  down  yet.''  He 
always  "  believed"  when  he  really  knew  all  about 
it,  but  it  sounded  grander,  and  was  a  flourish  of  the 
old  school.  "Here  is  the  picture  the  boy  brought 
this  morning,  and  a  very  charming  thing  it  is. 
How  I  wish  my  old  master  Etty  could  see  it." 

It  was  certainly  a  beautiful  picture  of  woman- 
hood— golden  curls  clustering  round  a  pure  young 
face,  a  graceful  pride  and  a  proud  grace  was  giow- 
inor  in  the  candid  brow,  and  shinino;  from  the  rich 
broA^Ti  eyes ;  the  girl  in  the  yellow  and  black  dress 
was  one  of  Vandyck's  happiest  efibrts.  Lady 
Dorothy  was  a  true  Cavalier  lady ;  a  Gainsborough 
beside  it  would  have  looked  fluid  and  flimsy,  a 
Lawrence  painty,  afi"ected,  and  meretricious,  most 
modern  portraits  like  mere  ^oilgar  sign-boards. 

Eobinson  was  enthusiastic,  but  also  patronising, 
which  took  away  the  charm  from  his  enthusiasm, 
and  rendered  it  ridiculous.  He  walked  up  to 
the  picture  menacingly  ;  he  receded  from  it 
scientifically.  He  waved  his  eye-glass  at  distant 
doubtful  parts,  he  waved  his  hand  across  dubious 


70  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

shadows,  lie  touched  strangely-placed  lights  with 
his  wet  finger ;  he  did,  in  fact,  all  he  could  to 
scientifically  explain  away  and  destroy  his  own 
intuitive  pleasure. 

The  Major  followed  these  gestures  as  provin- 
cial Eosencrantzes  follow  with  awe  those  of  a 
popular  '^  star ''  Hamlet.  Donovan  did  not  un- 
derstand all  the  manoeuvres  of  the  critic,  but  he 
respected  his  science,  he  felt  that  he  saw  more 
in  the  picture  than  he  (the  major)  could  or 
ever  w^ould;  and,  having  some  reverence,  he 
reverenced  him,  therefore,  as  the  savage  with  the 
bow  respects  the  man  with  the  rifle, — as  an  ant 
probably  respects  the  acrobatic  accomplishments 
of  the  grasshopper. 

''Painted  with  a  charmingly  light  hand,  but 
not  pearly  enough  in  the  shadows,  not  so  fresh  as 
Etty — oh,  no,  no,  no.  Very  charming,  though  ; 
very  charming,  indeed,  and  in  a  fine  manner. 
There's  a  young  lady,  sir !  " 

So  saying,  the  old  gentleman  threw  out  his  foot, 
waved  his  eye-glass,  and  bowed  to  Lady  Dorothy 
as  if  she  had  been  a  living  duchess  queening  it  in 
Belgravia,  and  had  daughters  old  enough  to  want 
lessons  in  sketching. 

"  I  suppose  I  mustn't  see  the  great  work,"  said 
Donovan,  longingly,  pointing  to  an  easel  covered 
with  green  baize. 


AMY   ROBINSON.  71 

Mr.  Eobinson  sliook  liis  head  gravely  and 
solemnly. 

"  That  picture,"  he  said,  "  is  the  work  of  twenty 
years.  It  shall  never  be  seen  by  eye  of  man  till  it 
is  seen  by  the  Hanging  Committee  of  the  Eoyal 
Academy.  I  refused  even  to  let  Mr.  Bassevi  see  it. 
They,  sir,  shall  be  the  first  to  hft  the  veil.  That 
work  will  revolutionise  modern  art.  I  would  not 
let  my  own  wife  see  it,  major — no,  not  if  she  went 
on  her  knees — no,  nor  Amy.'' 

Mr.  Eobinson's  faded  blue  eyes  grew  quite 
inflamed  at  the  very  sound  of  a  footfall  approach- 
inor  the  veiled  imao^e — the  dream  of  his  life. 
After  all,  it  was  only  what  schoolboys  call  "  a 
try  on "  of  Donovan  s  ;  he  never  expected  to  be 
allowed  to  see  it.  Why,  even  the  great  Mr. 
Bodger,  E.A.,  who  employed  the  little  man  to 
paint  the  replicas  of  his  great  historical  pictures, 
had  never  seen  it. 

"  Fm  expecting  an  appointment  at  Pernam- 
buco  every  day  now,"  said  the  major — who  was 
always  starting  somewhere,  but  never  went,  and 
backing  out  of  his  misguided  request — "  saw 
Bariug  yesterday  morning — promises  the  thing 
shall  be  done  for  me,  but  the  de\dl  of  it  is  that  I 
shall  have  to  abandon  the  scheme  of  the  steam- 
battery  that  I'm  now  laying  before  the  War  Office. 
Only  imagine,  my  boy,  in  ten  minutes  pouring  in 


72  THE   VICARS   COURTSHIP. 

on  the  head  of  an  advancing  column  eight  tons  of 
grape,  three  tons  of  canister,  four  casks  of  shrapnel, 
six  hundred  and  seventeen  round  shot,  and  nine- 
teen congreve  rockets." 

"  Good  gracious ! ''  said  Eobinson,  drawing 
back  as  if  he  was  in  full  view  of  the  steam- 
battery,  and  it  was  getting  the  steam  up;  "why, 
I  should  really  think  no  body  of  men  could  bear 
up  against  such  a  fire." 

"  Sir,  I  don't  want  'em  to  do  so  ;  I  won't  have 
'em  do  it,"  roared  the  exulting  major.  "  It  is  just 
my  plan  that  they  shouldn't.  The  nation  possessing 
my  patent  will  rule  the  world  at  high  pressure, 
— will  rule  the  world  at  high  pressm-e." 

Eepeating  a  sentence,  the  major  had  long  ago 
found,  made  it  go  fm^ther,  and  gave  it  a  tone  of 
sincerity. 

"  The  question  now  is,"  he  continued,  "whether 
I  should  accept  three  hundred  a  year  at  Pernam- 
buco,  or  restore  England  to  the  rank  of  the  first 
military  power  in  Europe." 

*'  I  never  knew  you  had  devoted  so  much  time 
to  the  study  of  artillery.  How  did  you  find  time 
with  your  great  commercial  transactions  in  Alex- 
andria ^ " 

"  Find  time  !  Time,  is  it  1  Ha  !  get  out  of 
that,  Eobinson.  Didn't  I  superintend  the  Sultan's 
gun-foundry  at  Samarcand  for  ten  years  ?  "     (The 


AMY   EOBTNSON.  73 

0 'Donovan  had  spent  so  many  ten  years  in  dif- 
ferent branches  of  study  that,  by  the  lowest 
calculation,  he  ouHit  to  have  been  at  least  a  hun- 
dred  years  old.)  The  major  became  Irish  directly 
he  was  irritated,  and  he  was  rather  easily  irritated. 
*'  ^  Donovan,  my  boy,'  the  Pasha  of  Egypt  used  to 
say,  'you'll  build  a  cannon  some  day  that  will 
help  me  to  blow  all  the  Arabs  in  Arabia  into 
smithereens.  Mashallah ! '  "  (It  was  a  remarkable 
fact,  Mr.  Donovan's  Arabs  always  talked  like 
Anglo-Irishmen.)  "  'I  will,  your  Highness,'  said 
I,  *  if  I  can  only  chase  out  those  sacred  pigs  of 
Frenchmen  that  interfere  with  what  they  don't, 
and  never  will,  understand.'  '  And  bedad,'  says 
the  Pasha  then  and  there,  '  That,  Mr.  Donovan,  is 
jist  what  the  Frenchmen  say  of  you  Irishmen.' 
Well,  I  was  going  down  the  steps  of  Shoobra  just 
after,  when  who  should  I  come  across  but  one  of 
Lesseps'  gang,  so  I  up  with  my  stick,  and  says  to 
him,  '  You  sacred  pig,  if  you  talk  of  me  to  the 
Pasha  disrespectful,'  I  said,  '  I'll  go  bail  I'll  knock 
the  head  off  ye,  big  as  it  is  ; '  and  with  that  I  u]d 
with  my  foot  and  kicked  him  down  from  the  steps 
of  the  Palace.  Well,  when  I  met  the  Pasha  the 
same  evening,  says  he  to  me,  '  Donovan,  you 
blackgyard,'  says  he,  'what  the  divil  is  this  you've 
been  doing  to  the  Frenchman  ? '  says  he,  and  then 
he  laughed,  the  old  craytur,  till  he  showed  every 


74-  THE   VICAe's   courtship. 

one  of  liis  false  teeth.  I  lieard  all  the  harem  laugh- 
ing, too,  behind  the  lattices  as  we  took  our  coffee, 
and  that  same  night  he  gave  me  his  favourite 
chibouk,  set  in  diamonds,  and  worth,  at  the  lowest 
figure  of  computation,  eight  hundred  and  thirteen 
pounds  English  money.  Bassevi  has  it  now.  You' 
can  see  it,  man  alive.  Bless  ye,  I  would  not  tell 
you  a  lie." 

Eobinson  Avas  a  good  listener,  and  in  the 
greatest  good  faith  continued  touching  the  flank 
of  a  white  horse  in  a  copy  he  was  making  of  a 
Moreland,  "  Interior  of  a  Stable,"  heightening 
the  light  on  the  flank  with  minute  specks  of  pure 
flake- white  from  a  little  snow-heap  on  his  palette. 
Moreland  was  only  fit  to  wallow  with  the  swine, 
but  he  painted  a  white  horse  as  gloriously  as 
"Wouvermans,  and  he  could  steep  his  pigs  when 
he  chose  in  the  fluid  gold  of  Cuyp. 

"Coming  nicely  together,  isn't  it?"  he  said, 
circling  his  hand  over  his  copy  as  if  he  was  wind- 
ing up  a  clock.  '  "  But  I  grudge  the  time,  for  I 
ought  to  be  at  my  great  picture." 

The  major  thought  the  work  admirable,  much 
better  than  the  original.  (He  was,  indeed,  just 
then  intent  on  an  ultimate  loan  of  five  shillings, 
and  wished  to  lubricate  the  whole  world  and 
Fortune's  wheel  in  particular.) 

All  at  once  he  broke  into  a  violent  exclamation. 


AMY    ROBINSON.  75 

He  had,  in  fact,  almost  forgotten  to  tell  Eobinson 
that  Mr.  Basse^i  wanted  him  to  go  Tvith  him  at 
twelve  to  a  lawyer's  in  Fm-nivars  Inn,  and  there 
report  on  some  pictm^es,  chiefly  Eubens'  and  Jor- 
daens,  upon  which  some  young  man  of  fortune 
down  in  Wiltshire  wished  to  have  a  considerable 
sum  of  money  advanced.  Bassevi  would  call  for 
him.  Pictures  had  once  belonged  to  Bassevi 
himself,  he  believed. 

The  poor  little  drudge  of  the  great  curiosity 
dealer  sighed.  The  year  was  wearing,  and  there 
was  another  day  lost  from  the  great  picture  that 
was  to  convulse  the  art  world.  He  dashed  his 
brushes  together  in  a  vexed  way,  drew  in  a  white 
hair  with  a  light  rapid  dexterous  touch,  and  then 
twirled  his  eye-glass  with  one.  finger  as  if  it 
was  a  joint  roasting.  Some  great  diplomatist 
decided  that  Louis  XVL  was  an  "  imbecille"  from 
the  way  he  used  at  levees  to  keep  changing  from 
one  foot  to  another.  Such  inconsequential  muta- 
tions show  nervous  indecision  as  much  as  speech 
can  do.  That  twirl  of  the  eye-glass  would  have 
ruined  Robinson  for  ever  in  the  opinion  of  Lavater. 

Kobinson  had  had  his  share  of  independence  and 
of  better  days.  In  early  life  he  had  been  a  suc- 
cessful drawing-master  in  a  certainAnglo-French 
circle  in  Paris,  and  he  had  then  been  extravagant 
and  a  dabbler  in  rouo:e-et-noii\     Now  he  was  the 


76  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

slave  of  a  London  picture-dealer,  a  pawnbroker, 
and  a  money-lender — one  of  those  devil-fish  of 
civilisation  who  float  about  in  dark  corners, 
waiting  to  twine  their  poisonous  antennae  round 
their  unsuspecting  victims,  eager  to  drag  them 
down  and  prey  upon  them. 

Struggle  with  Bassevi  ?  why,  Eobinson  could  no 
more  struggle  with  such  "a  pieuvre''  than  a 
squirrel  could  struggle  with  a  rattlesnake,  a  linnet 
with  a  kestrel,  or  a  gudgeon  with  a  fisherman ! 
He  could  not  live  without  Bassevi.  The  great 
work  was  not  saleable  yet.  That  done,  then — 
then — he  might  respectfully  decline  to  perform 
any  more  drudgery  degrading  to  his  talent. 

"It  is  rather  inconvenient,  really  very  incon- 
venient— very,"  he  said,  "but  I  suppose  I'd  better 
go.  I  know  Bassevi  values  my  opinion.  If  I'd 
time  I'd  go  round  to  Mr.  Bodger ;  but  he'll  be  busy, 
and  so " 

All  these  struggles  of  irresolution  were  sum- 
marily put  an  end  to  by  the  sudden  appearance 
of  a  pretty  little  face  through  the  door  that  just 
then  darted  softly  open,  pressed  by  a  little  Avhite 
hand  that  lingered  on  it.  It  was  the  young  lady 
whose  face  at  the  first-floor  window  had  that 
morning  so  attracted  Mr.  Godfrey  Goodrick. 

She  w^as,  indeed,  not  unworthy  of  contempla- 
tion, for  all  the  purity  and  grace  of  English  girl- 


AMY    PtOBINSON.  77 

hood  adorned  her  every  look  and  word.  She  was 
taller  than  Scott's  Amy  Eobsart  could  have  been, 
yet  not  so  tall  as  to  be  masculine. 

"  In  her  larg-e  eyes  the  thoughts  lay  clear 
As  pebbles  in  a  brook, " 

There  was  that  glow  about  her  soft  hair  that 
seems  as  if  it  is  lit  by  internal  sunshine — fairy  sun- 
shine, that  never  fades,  or  chills,  or  dims,  but  is 
always  as  a  coronet  and  aureole  around  the  brow 
that  boasts  such  a  garniture.  For  proud  Cleopatras 
the  dark  majesty  of  raven-black  hair,  but  for 
such  a  pure,  loving  face  as  Amy  Eobinson's, 
golden-brown  locks  were  the  fittest  diadem,  and 
they  seenaed  that  morning  to  adorn  her  like  so 
much  royal  gold  and  jewels.  Her  plain,  white 
morning  striped  cbess — striped  lengthways  with 
thin  purple  stripes — was  simple  almost  to  excess 
in  its  spotless  neatness :  but  then  it  had  been  put 
on  and  it  was  worn  with  an  instinct  of  grace  that 
is,  with  some  women,  an  innate  faculty,  their 
birthright — and  with  such  women  the  simplest 
ribbon  becomes  a  mag-ical  cestus  of  Venus  with 
resistless  spells  of  its  own  to  attract  and  to  detain. 

There  was  about  Amy  Eobinson  all  the  elastic 
joyousness  of  early  youth,  and  the  serenity  of  in- 
nocence ;  a  lightheartedness  as  of  the  bird,  the 
squirrel,  the  fawn ;  the  song  of  one,  the  happy 
restlessness  of  the  second,  the  buoyant  playful- 


78  THE   VICAk's    COURTSHTP. 


ness  of  tlie  tliircl.  She  was  mercurial  from  excess 
of  life  ;  as  incapable  of  receiving  a  sliadow  of  sor- 
row as  a  sunbeam.  Time  shook  his  hour-glass  in 
vain  at  her.  You  might  as  well  have  thought  to 
hear  a  flower  preach  to  you  on  death  as  have 
expected  Amy  to  utter  a  cynical  thought,  treat- 
ing the  world  as  an  unhappy  place,  or  nature  as 
a  theatre  the  scenery  of  which  has  grown  stale 
and  wearisome,  and  the  actors  of  which  are  all — 
according  to  some  disagreeably  wise  men — either 
contemptible  or  despicable.  She  moved  through 
the  dream-world  of  her  youth  like  a  summer  cloud. 
She  enjoyed  mere  living  as  the  woods  and  flowers 
do  life.  She  never  brooded  over  the  past  or  the 
future.  She  sailed  down  the  great  swift  stream  of 
time  bright  and  gay  as  a  bubble,  whatever  dead 
men,  broken  wrecks,  or  buried  treasure  there  might 
be  hidden  below  the  waves. 

She  was  quite  unconscious  of  her  beauty  and 
her  grace,  or,  if  conscious  of  either  fairy  gift,  she 
only  delighted  in  them  because  they  made  others 
happy,  and  herself  welcome.  They  were,  in  fact, 
to  her  only  a  part  of  the  atmosphere  of  general 
happiness  that  surrounded  her. 

"  Papa!"  she  said,  in  a  soft,  rich,  rather  low,  yet 
bright  and  merry  voice ;  so  perfectly  harmonious, 
yet  neither  metallic  nor  forced,  that  it  irresistibly 
reminded  one  of  the  blackbird's  best  notes,  and  by 


AMY   ROBINSOX.  79 

no  means  of  the  public  singer  s  strained  falsetto. 
It  was  a  voice  tliat  poured  forth  softly,  freely, 
without  any  inflection  being  given  to  it  by 
affectation ;  it  rose  full,  pure  and  clear  from  the 
heart,  and  was  delightful  to  the  ear.  "  Papa," 
she  said,  "  mamma  has  made  the  tea." 

The  major  was  exuberant  in  his  gallantry; 
his  Tsideawake  flapped  about,  he  doubled  and  re- 
doubled his  enormous  body,  he  kissed  his  hand. 
His  redundant  Celtic  nature  overflowed  into, 
metaphor. 

"  May  I  die  with  my  shoes  on,''  he  said,  laugh- 
ing, ''  if  I  didn't  think  it  was  just  a  dancing  sun- 
bame  coming  gliding  into  the  room,  and  now  I 
see — see  it  is  Miss  Amy  Eobinson.  I  wish  I  had 
any  everlasting  flowers  to  strew  at  her — her  feet ! 
Bedad !  poor  devil  that  I  am,  I  only  wish  it  was 
all  Covent  Garden  I  had  to  strew,  and  she  was 
Duchess  of  Bedford." 

"  'Pon  my  word,  major,  you'll  make  Amy  quite 
vain.  But  you  Irishmen  are  always  so  gallant  I 
There  was  Lord  Portrush,  when  I  was  in  Paris, 
he  and  old  Lord  Mazagan  drove  the  best  horses 
in  Paris " 

"Percy!"  It  was  somebody  speaking  rather 
beseechingly  from  below. 

It  was  Mrs.  Eobinson  calling  supplicatingly 
for  breakfast. 


80  THE    VICARS    COURTSHIP. 

"Now,  dear  papa,  come,"  said  Amy,  Avitli  a 
pretty  t}Tanny,  "  take  my  arm ;  or  the  tea  will 
get  quite  cold.  Oh,  you  naughty  papa,  you 
know  you  promised  mamma  not  to  paint  again 
before  breakfast." 

"  Only  putting  in  a  high  light,  dear," — stooping 
to  kiss  her  white  forehead.  "Major,  of  course 
you'll  breakfast  with  us  ;  pray  precede  us." 

If  old  Eobinson  had  been  in  the  workhouse  he 
would  have  haggled  over  the  forms  of  etiquette 
with  the  beadle ;  this  formality  was  the  chief 
ornament  of  his  shallow^  impulsive  little  mind. 

"  Bedad,  I've  had  breakfast  an  hour  ago,"  said 
the  major,  "but  I  don't  mind  just  joining  your 
circle  over  a  cup  of  tea;  then  you'll  go  to  Fau'- 
field's  about  those  pictures  of  Basse\d's." 

Do^vnstairs  they  went.  Amy  laughing,  the  old 
artist  chatting  in  his  chirpy,  abstracted  sort  of 
way,  the  major  superbly  polite. 

"  It's  a  matter  of  day  and  night  work.  Major, 
to  get  my  picture  done,"  said  Eobinson  ;  "  works 
like  that  requii'e  many  changes  before  they  reach 
their  perfection.  The  ideal  moment  comes  only 
now  and  then,  and  this  picture  restoring  eats  into 
one's  time  sadly." 

"  Take  comfort,  Eobinson  ;  take  comfort,  man," 
said  the  major,  stopping  on  the  last  step,  and 
wavino;  his  laro-e  red  hand.     "  Look  at  me  !  here 


AMY   ROBINSON.  81 

am  I  with  a  system  of  artillery  that  would  make 
England  the  mistress  of  the  whole  visible  universe, 
and  yet  I  have  to  go  begging  about — like  an  odd 
man  that  runs  errands  at  a  club — for  Bassevi  I 
Oh,  Donovan !  Donovan !  Providence  doesn't  do 
the  handsome  thing  by  you  at  all.  And  here's 
the  missus,  'pon  my  sowl,  looking  as  much  like  a 
duchess  as  ever,  and  presiding  at  the  taj'pot  like 
the  Empress  of  China." 

]\Irs.  K.  had  by  no  means  the  mean  servile  air 
that  might  have  been  expected  of  a  keeper  of 
humble  lodo;ino;s  in  a  small  street  out  of  the 
Strand.  There  was  a  cahn  self-possession  about 
her  words  and  movements  that  indicated  an  in- 
delible recollection  of  better  days.  There  was 
about  her  pleasant  face  that  introspective  and 
abstracted  expression  that  in  gentle  natures 
betrays  the  existence  of  some  calmly  borne  but 
indelible  sorrow.  There  is  nothino^  so  touchinof 
as  this  calm  hopelessness  of  the  future.  No  mean 
greediness  or  suspicion  had  given  the  hungry, 
restless  expression  of  those  vices  to  her  gentle, 
rather  sorrow-stricken  features.  With  a  larger 
mind  than  her  vain  little  husband's,  she  had  learned 
the  necessity  of  directing  him  without  acquiring 
a  love  of  power  or  the  wish  to  be  a  capricious  dic- 
tator that  women  sometimes  acquire  in  such  cases 
of  inverted  rule.     She  bore  her  somewhat  sordid 


82:  THE  vicar's  courtship. 

life  without  fretful  regrets.  The  self-sacrifice  of  her 
patience  was  not  less  great  because  it  was  inces- 
sant. She  had  discovered  long  ago  that  the  inso- 
lence of  lodgers,  the  imprudence  of  her  husband, 
the  anxieties  of  a  small  uncertain  income,  were  the 
spectres  with  which  she  had  had  ever  to  battle;  and 
a  sense  of  duty  and  a  love  for  her  daughter  were 
the  talismans  of  her  daily  life.  Sorrow  had  refined 
her  character,  and  she  concealed  all  traces  of  grief 
under  the  equability  and  cheerfulness  of  her 
tranquil,  sered,  but  by  no  means  phlegmatic 
nature. 

"  Oh,  the  major  is  so  poetical  this  morning, 
mamma,"  said  Amy,  running  into  the  room,  and 
stroking  down  the  silver  grey  hair  on  her  mother  s 
forehead ;  "he  has  been  talking  such  charming 
nonsense." 

"  He's  a  wicked  flatterer.  Amy ;  don't  you 
believe  him.  Percy,  my  dear,  you  know  you  pro- 
mised me  you  wouldn't  paint  before  breakfast." 

"  Major  Donovan,"  said  the  artist,  "  will  you 
take  some  toast.  I  suppose  you  know  Amy  goes 
back  to  Wiltshire  to-night.  Amy,  dear,  please 
ring  for  Susan,  we  want  some  more  toast." 

The  major  plunged  violently  and  aggressively 
at  the  bell.  "  She  mustn't  go,"  he  said,  still, 
holding  the  bell.  "  My  dear  Mrs.  Eobinson,  we 
really  can't  spare  her — it's  as  bad  as  it  would  be 


AMY    ROBINSON.  8S' 

if  any  spalpeen  cut  off  London  s  supply  of  gas, 
but  there  is  one  consolation " 

The  major  uttered  these  last  words  with  an 
oily  and  artful  languor.  "And  what  isthaf?" 
asked  Mrs.  Eobinson,  laughing  at  Amy. 

"  A^Hiy,  that  she  is  sure  to  marry  some  mil- 
lionaire;  oh,  musha,  sure  shell  have  all  the 
millionaires  in  Wiltshu^e  at  her  feet." 

''  How  can  you  talk  so,  Major  Donovan,"  said 
Amy,  mth  a  slight  blush,  beautiful  as  the  first 
tinge  of  day-break.  "  I  Avish  you  wouldn't  teaze 
me  so.  Oh,  dear  me,  how  sorry  I  am  to  leave 
dear  Buckingham  Street,  and  go  back  to  that 
grand  house  and  the  stiff  horrible  life." 

''  But  you  like  ]\Iiss  Chivers,  dear  ? "  said  the 
mother,  bending  fondly  towards  her  daughter. 

^'  Oh,  yes  ;  then  there  are  those  nice  kind  people, 
the  Beauflowers,  and  I  love  them." 

"  ]\Ir.  Beauflower  is  the  clerg'}TiLan,"  explained 
Mrs.  Eobinson. 

"  Dont  like  clerg}Tiien,  sly  lot,"  said  the  intole- 
rant major.  "  When  I  was  in  Alexandria  and 
head  of  the  police,  there  was  a  missionary  there 
who  used  to  smuggle  gunpowder.  Well,  one  day 
one  of  the  men  comes  to  me  and  tells  me  the 
missionary  had  offered  him  so  many  sovereigns 
to  let  this  powder  pass.  Now,  no  one  ever  bribed 
my  men,  because  I  always  offered  them  twice  as 

o  2 


84  THE   vicar's  courtship. 

much  as  the  bribe  to  tell  me,  so  I  says  to  my 
man;  'Ibrahim,  you  take  the  money  and  pass  the 
powder ;  the  night  it  is  to  pass  tell  me/  Well, 
when  the  night  came,  what  did  I  do  but  sur- 
round the  house  and  stop  all  the  powder  ;  so  I  got 
the  powder,  you  see,  Mrs.  Eobinson,  and  the  rascal's 
money  too.  I  never  saw  a  man  draw  so  long  a 
face  as  that  man  did  when  I  told  him  what  I'd 
done  and  what  a  fool  Fd  made  of  him.  That's 
the  way  I  used  to  treat  'em,  Miss  Eobinson." 

"  You  must  have  had  a  tremendous  life  of  it 
there,"  said  Mr.  Eobinson,  quietly  spreading  his 
toast.  "Alexandria  is  full  of  refugees  and  bad 
fellows  from  Italy,  and  everywhere." 

"What  did  I  care  for  divil  a  one  of  'em. 
Hadn't  I  my  revolver  and  my  big  stick  ?  I  did 
'em  a  good  turn,  too,  for  before  I  took  up  the  affair, 
the  Pasha  used  to  make  a  sweep  now  and  then 
and  clap  a  dozen  or  so  into  sacks  and  throw  them 
into  the  bay — lots  of  ground  sharks  in  the  bay, 
— no  joke." 

"  Oh,  how  horrible — how  very  horrible  !  "  cried 
Mrs.  Eobinson  and  Amy,  both  together.  "  Oh, 
don't  talk  of  such  dreadful  things,  major." 

"  Stay  as  you  are  just  one  moment.  Amy,  don't 
move  your  hand,"  said  the  old  artist  suddenly, 
as  a  little  fleck  of  sunshine  glanced  across  the  room 
and  flickered  across  his  daughter's  cheek  and  her 


AMY   ROBINSON.  85 

uplifted  hand.  "  That's  a  lovely  effect,  observe 
that,  Jinny.  Major,  isn't  that  like  Gainsborough's 
Lady  Lyndoch.     Ill  make  a  note  of  it." 

"I  can't  really  hold  the  cup  like  this  any  longer, 
papa,"  said  Amy  piteously,  after  some  minutes. 
"  It  tires  me  so.  There  is  that  strange  old  gentle- 
man opposite  going  out  "with  his  beautiful  dog. 
I  wonder  who  he  is  ?  Susan  says  he's  a  miser, 
and  has  whole  rooms  full  of  jeAvels  and  books,  and 
pictures,  and  things  he  never  uses." 

"  Money-lender,  for  a  thousand,  old  rogue," 
said  the  major,  who  had  been  looking  out  surrep- 
titiously from  behind  the  window  curtains,  "  or  a 
receiver  of  stolen  goods — perhaps  in  with  the  swell 
mob,  just  the  sort  of  man.  Sure,  I  know  all  their 
tricks.     Divil  doubt  me." 

*'  Oh  !  but  he's  such  a  nice  respectable  old  gen- 
tleman," said  Amy,  "  only  rather  cross  looking 
sometimes  ;  and  I've  seen  him  at  the  door  scold- 
ing the  poor  laundress.  He's  got  an  old  black 
footman,  hasn't  he,  mamma  1  such  an  oddity." 

"By-the-bye,  major,  have  you  had  any  more 
adventures  with  the  swell-mob  ?  "  said  Eobinson, 
with  the  air  of  a  sharp  man  who  is  drawing  out 
a  humorous  companion. 

"  I  have  too,  bedad,"  said  the  major,  who  was 
devouring  his  second  breakfast  with  infinite  com- 
placency.    ''  A  party  of  them  got  hold  of  me  the 


i'86  THE   VICAE's   courtship. 

other  day  near  London  Bridge.     I  was  in  a  rough 
pea  coat,  and  they  took  roe  for  a  returned  digger, 
or  something  of  that  kind.     First  one  came  up 
and  asked   me   the   way  to   the  Borough,   then 
another  joined  us  quite  unexpectedly.     Nothing 
-would  do  but  they  must  treat  me.     Said  I,  '  Of 
course  let  every  one  pay  for  himself.'     '  Stuff  and 
nonsense,'  says  they  ;   so  I  let  them  order  and 
they  gave  me  a  first-class  dinner  and  plenty  of 
wine,  and  then  they  proposed  skittles,  and  wanted 
'to  go  to  an  alley.      '  No,  no,'  says  the  first  man, 
'we're  very  comfortable  here,  let  us  stop  here 
quietly,  and  have  a  game  of  cards.'    Then  they  be- 
gan rapping  out  telegraph  signals  on  the  table  with 
their  knuckles  in  the  thieves'  way.     Eat,  tat,  tat- 
a-tat  tat — '  He's  a  green  horn,  pluck  him  at  once,' 
-'All  right,'  and  so  ou.    I  could  hear  it  all.     When 
they'd  done,   out    came    the  cards,   I  refused  to 
play — didn't  seem  to  see  it.     Then  they  began  to 
bully  and  hustle  and  talk  big,  and  ask  who  was 
going  to  pay  for  the  grub  and  the  drink.     '  Those 
who  ordered  it,  I  suppose,'  said  I,  and  began  to 
feel  in  my  waistcoat  pocket.     'Hit  him  in  the 
eye,'  said  one  ;  '  Knock  his  head  off,'  said  another. 
I  didn't  say  anything,  but  I  just  pulled  out  this 
little  revolver  that  I  always  carry  about  with  me, 
and  laid  it  on  the  table  before  me.     '  That's  the 
friend  who  pays  for  me,'  said  I,  and  in  a  moment 


AMY   ROBINSON.  87 

(you  should  have  seen  them)  out  came  tlieir  money, 
and  off  they  trotted  like  so  many  rabbits.  Bedad, 
it  was  the  best  joke/' 

"  Served  the  wicked  creatm^es  quite  right/'  said 
Mrs.  Eobinson  and  Amy  both  together,  as  Mr. 
Eobinson  rose  and  prepared  to  start. 

''  Oh,  what  a  clever  man  Major  Donovan  is, 
mamma;  wbat  a  wonderful  traveller  he  has 
been ;  and  what  odd  things  he  has  seen  ! "  said 
Amy,  laughing,  and  clapping  her  hands  from 
sheer  joy  of  life,  as  the  major,  convoying  little 
.Mr.  Eobinson,  emerged  from  the  front  door  and 
bore  up  the  street  towards  Bassevi's. 

"  He  is  a  verif  extraordinary  man,"  said  Mrs. 
Eobinson,  drawing  the  cm^tain  back  to  watch 
them.  "  I  hope  he  will  get  the  grand  govern- 
ment appointment  he  seems  so  sanguine  about ; 
for  be  has  been  such  a  good  friend  to  your  father. 
Amy.  Dear  me,  how  I  wish  he  had  even  half 
the  major's  energy." 


88  THE   vicar's   courtship. 


CHAPTER  y. 

NO.  5,  furnival's  inn. 

Furnival's  Inn  fifty  years  ago  was  a  very 
diiFerent  place  from  what  it  is  now.  There  was 
no  intensely  respectable  clerical  hotel  there  then. 
The  Yorkshire  interest  had  not  then  been  enlisted 
for  the  present  grand  but  rather  sombre  caravan- 
serai, nor  had  it  sought  dangerous  refuge  among 
London  lawyers  ;  no  gilt-figured  clock  emblazoned 
the  north  side  of  the  parallelogram  of  the  en- 
closure ;  no  aerial  gilt  weather-cock  arrow  then 
hovered  between  four  letters  and  coquetted  with 
them  all  by  turns,  fickle  lord  of  that  little  alpha- 
betic harem;  no  formal  houses  with  sham  Greek 
pilasters,  and  heavy  cornice  supjDorting  nothing  but 
itself,  then  existed  ;  but  in  their  stead  there  were 
old  gable  ends  and  red  tiled  humpy,  shaky  roofs, 
and  queer  tumble-down  dens  aj)proached  by 
rat- eaten,  dingy  stairs,  with  dirty  balustrades; 
and  smoke-stained,  ink-splashed  landings  ;  lit  by 
dark  lantern   windows,   crusted  black  with  the 


NO.    5,    FURNIVALS    INN.  89 

filth  of  centuries.  Spiders'  nests  of  places  those 
old  London  chambers  were,  fit  only  for  suicidal 
Chancery  maniacs  to  inhabit,  and  chosen  lairs 
for  low  chicanery  and  subtle  roguery.  Hidden 
in  them  that  worthy  and  inseparable  couple, 
John  Doe  and  Eichard  Roe,  employed  themselves 
in  bleeding  to  death  the  spendthrift  gull,  in 
tortm'ing  .  the  widow  and  stripping  the  orphan. 
Honesty,  however,  sometimes  found  its  way  to 
these  scarecrow  places,  and  planned,  and  ^^Touglit 
to  countermine  Messrs.  Doe  and  Roe,  by  sound 
logic,  searching  truth,  and  keen  analysis,  and  so 
within  the  little  space  the  old  battle  of  Good 
and  E\dl,  Light  and  Darkness  went  on,  as  there 
still  goes  on  that  great  campaign  that  began  at 
the  Creation,  and  will  end  only -with  the  Judg- 
ment. 

The  old  inn,  in  a  word,  like  the  new,  had  its 
good  and  its  bad  tenants,  Avho  paid  their  rent  with 
more  or  less  punctuality ;  but  it  had  not  that 
flock  of  eleemosynary  vagabond  pigeons  that  at 
present  frequent  the  little  enclosure,  and  return 
to  Guildhall  nightly  to  sleep  under  the  Lord 
Mayor's  protection.  The  old  residence  of  that 
good  knight.  Sir  Richard  Furnival,  boasted  a 
quaint  old  chapel  not  unlike  a  barn  that  had 
tried  to  turn  itself  into  a  greenhouse ;  and  to 
crown  all,  possessed  a   real  mulberry  tree — yes, 


90  THE   vicar's    COUKTSHIP. 

a  real  tree,  with  the  big  purple  fruit  and  the 
flapping  generous  leaves  of  its  class.  This  tree 
might  have  been,  and  probably  was,  one  of  those 
trees  that  lawyers  and  gentlemen  of  James  the 
First's  time  planted  here  and  there  in  London  to 
humour  the  whim  of  that  fussy,  pedantic,  and  dis- 
reputable monarch  to  encourage  silk-worms  in 
England.  The  great  mulberry  garden,  planted 
on  what  is  now  the  site  of  Buckindiam  Palace, 
was  probably  only  a  more  courtly  way  of  paying 
the  same  flattery  that  the  solitary  tree  did  its 
best  to  express  amid  the  discouraging  gloom  of 
that  strictly  legal  and  more  eastern  atmosphere. 

Mr.  Peto,  forty  years  ago  or  so,  ruthlessly 
swept  away  with  the  besom  of  improvement  all 
these  picturesque  materials ;  introduced  an  hotel, 
with  great  stucco  pillars  and  green  blinded 
windows  ;  and  built  the  present  large  and 
spacious  chambers  that  now  face  each  other  with 
defiant  dulness  and  formal  respectability.  The 
inn  is  now  as  unromantic  and  straightforward  as 
the  fourth  proposition  of  the  second  book  of 
Euclid.  The  involved  passages,  the  rat- haunted 
lofts,  the  bill-discounters'  dens  and  pitfalls,  are 
all  gone.  Thriving  lawyers  and  wealthy  city  men 
now  live  where  sordid  pettifoggers  once  wove 
their  poisoned  nets,  their  parchment  strait  waist- 
coats, and  their  foolscap  and  red  tape  handcufis. 


NO.  5,  fueniyal's  inx.  91 

So  in  that  great  shifting  dream  which  is  called 
London  the  dissohdng  views  come  and  go. 

It  was  through  the  rounded  archway  opening 
from  Holborn  into  this  inn,  that  exactly  as  St. 
Andrew's  clock  struck  on  the  October  morning 
abeady  so  favourably  mentioned,  Mr.  Godfrey 
Goodrick  passed.  There  was  a  character  about 
his  walk,  which  was  unhurried,  yet  testy, 
decisive,  and  rather  defiant.  His  low-crowned 
regency  hat,  his  claret-coloured  spencer,  his  watch 
seals,  even  his  drab  gaiters  and  gold-headed 
bamboo  were  all  worn  or  carried  with  a  choleric 
contempt  for  juvenile  remark  or  street  criticism 
that  betrayed  a  wealthy,  eccentric,  travelled  man, 
to  whom  even  London  prejudices  were  pro- 
vincialisms to  be  philosophically  despised  and 
disregarded  as  far  as  temper  would  allow. 

The  taU  thin,  sour  beadle  in  the  gold-laced  hat 
and  Noah's  ark  greatcoat,  who  was  stooping  to  pat 
a  dog,  rose  and  bowed  in  a  quick  professional  Avay 
as  Goodrick  passed.  He  was  evidently  an  habitue 
of  the  inn.  A  flock  of  rather  dingy  pigeons, 
whose  breasts,  however,  glimmered  with  mother  of 
pearl  colours,  emerald,  and  rose,  in  the  sunshine, 
was  feeding  just  beyond  the  shadow  of  the  east  side, 
round  a  hansom  cab,  the  one-eyed  driver  of  which 
was  flinging  them  a  generous  handful  of  oats 
from  the  nose-bag  that  hung  below  liis  airy  seat. 


92  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

The  birds  flew  up  with  a  rush  and  a  flacking  noise 
when  the  old  West  Indian  approached,  and  bore 
off  with  a  circling  sweep  towards  the  hotel  door, 
as  if  it  were  merely  some  enormous  dovecot,  then 
suddenly  changing  their  minds  they  wheeled  to 
the  north-east,  and  rose  to  the  great  cornice 
ledge,  which  is  their  favourite  perch,  till  it  was 
safe  to  return  again  and  hover  round  the  philan- 
thropic cabman,  who  had  his  one  artful  eye  steadily 
fixed  on  his  volatile  pensioners,  who  were,  indeed, 
admirers  of  cabmen,  a  class,  perhaps,  not  suffi- 
ciently appreciated  by  the  world. 

'•'If  I  were  Peto,  Fd  poison  sll  those  birds," 
thought  Goodrick,  amiably,  to  himself ;  "  they're 
enough  to  frighten  a  spirited  horse." 

He  looked  round  just  when  the  cabman,  tired 
of  the  public  dinner  at  which  he  had  been  re- 
quested to  preside,  flacked  his  long  whip  A\dth  a 
dexterous  and  winding  curve,  and  the  crack  of  a 
double-barrelled  pistol.  The  frightened  birds, 
rising  with  a  sound  of  wings,  tore  away  a  second 
time  up  the  inn  towards  the  statue,  almost 
knocking  off  the  hat  of  the  irritable  old  virtuoso. 

It  seriously  put  him  out,  for  he  struck  at 
the  last  bird  spitefully  with  his  stick,  but  not 
successfully.  The  cabman  swung  his  leg  over  his 
perch,  and  winked  at  the  beadle,  as  much  as  to 
say,  "  I  say,  there  s  a  temper  ! "     An  errand  boy. 


NO.  5,  furxival's  inn.  93 

waiting  for  a  brief  at  Xo.  6,  began  to  whistle 
pigeon  calls,  and  impro\ise  in  a  loud  voice  the 
following  beautiful  distich  from  the  London  street 
boys'  Antliologia — 

"  Oh  my, 
I  wish.  I  had  'em  in  a  pie !  " 

This,  after  the  fourteenth  time  of  singing,  grow- 
ing rather  monotonous,  the  minstrel  boy  was 
advised  by  the  gay  cabman  to  "  shut  up  "  which, 
however,  he  refused  to  do,  and  finally  being  sent 
away,  departed  to  disseminate  his  poetry  through 
Holborn,  Chancery  Lane,  and  the  Temple. 

Mr.  Goodrick  never  hurried,  he  despised  the 
fuss  of  the  age,  associating  it  with  reckless  greedi- 
ness, and  an  insane  thirst  for  sudden  wealth. 
He  exulted  almost  arrogantly  in.  being  slow  and 
equable — a  formalist,  as  old  men  generally  be- 
come. Mr.  Goodrick  had  his  regular  system  of 
procedure  at  every  house  he  was  in  the  habit  of 
visitingr.  At  the  doorless  entrance  to  No.  5  he 
therefore  drew  out  a  large  bulky  gold  hunter's 
watch,  with  a  brown  face,  and  compared  it  with 
the  clock  at  "Wood's  Hotel.  He  then  delibe- 
rately scraped  his  shoes,  rubbed  them  on  the 
mat,  took  off  his  right  doeskin  glove,  ascended 
the  stairs,  and  knocked  a  formal,  particular 
knock — as  studied  as  if  it  had  been  part  of  an 
overture. 


94  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

Almost  immediately  the  door  started  open,  and 
a  pert,  fresli-coloured,  good-looking  boy,  neatly 
dressed,  presented  himself.  He  was  one  of  those 
alarmingly  smart  and  acute  lads,  peculiar  to  the 
offices  of  London  law}^ers,  whose  sauciness  is 
only  kept  down  by  the  fear  of  instant  punish- 
ment, and  who  find  a  vent  for  their  restrained 
spirits  in  surreptitious  fights,  pitch  and  toss,  and 
performance  on  tin  flageolets.  This  was  a  new 
boy,  and  he  did  not  know  Mr.  Goodrick. 

"  Mr.  Fairfield  at  home,  eh  V 

"  Nyo,  sir.'' 

"  Well,  then,  I'll  come  in  and  wait.  Mr. 
Hill  in?" 

"  Yessur,  but  busy,  sir  ;  what  name,  sir  ?  " 

"  Hang  the  name  ;  I'll  come  in  and  sit  down 
tiU  he  can  see  me." 

"  Beg  your  pardon,  sir,  what  name  ?  no  one 
without  name,  sir." 

"You  impertinent  scoundrel,  don't  keep  me 
here  aU  day  ;  let  me  in." 

*'  Beg  pardon,  sir — Mr.  Fairfield's  orders." 

"  My  name's  Goodrick." 

"  Let  in  Mr.  Goodrick  directly,  you  sir,"  said  a 
Httle  neat  old  clerk,  who  just  then  came  bustling 
from  an  inner  room.  "How  dare  you  make 
aU  this  commotion,  Willoughby,  and  behave  im- 
pertinent  to    a   gentleman,    and   a   client   too  ? 


furxival's  inn.  9S 


How  dare  you,  sir  ?  Do  that  again,  and  off 
you  go  this  very  day.  Go  back  to  your  work, 
sir,  get  on  with  that  agreement.  This  way,  Mr. 
Goodrick.  ]\Ir.  Fairfield  will  be  out  directly. 
He's  just  now  engaged  about  some  valuable  pic- 
tures and  rarities.  Get  a  chair  directly,  Wil- 
loughby.'' 

You  may  generally  know  by  the  servants  of  a 
house  what  the  master  is.  Shopmen  and  clerks 
are  true  weathercocks  to  show  how  the  trades- 
man is  conducting  his  business,  or  the  professional 
man  his  profession.  Impudence  is  the  servant  of 
Arrogance,  and  Insolence  of  Pride.  ]\Ir.  HiU, 
or  "  Old  HiU,"  as  he  was  generally  called  in 
Chancery  Lane  and  its  vicinity,  was  a  little 
grey  neat  man,  with  a  nankeen-colom-ed  face,  and 
a  pleasant,  quiet,  formal,  precise  manner,  neither 
servile  nor  obtrusive.  He  had  two  jokes,  two 
amusements,  and  one  idea.  The  two  jokes 
related  to  sayings  of  Adolphus  and  Bell,  two 
counsel  celebrated  in  his  younger  days ;  his  two 
amusements  were  his  daily  paper  over  his  daily 
chop  at  the  "  Cheshire  Cheese,''  and  a  game  of 
chess  once  a  week  with  a  brother  clerk  at  a 
coffee-house  in  Catherine  Street,  near  Drmy 
Lane ;  his  one  idea  was  business.  His  two  fa- 
vourite books  were  Chitty  and  Tidd.  He  passed 
through  the  archway  from  Holborn  every  morn- 


96  THE   VICARS   COURTSHIP. 

ing  at  nine  to  the  moment,  and  had  done  so  for 
twenty  years,  except  once,  when  his  only  brother 
died.  As  for  leaving  business,  he  was  not  parti- 
cular about  that,  and  when  he  did  so,  he  generally 
took  home  a  deed  or  a  lease  to  beguile  the  time. 
The  country  he  despised,  finding  trees  absurdly 
like  each  other,  and  fields  painfully  monotonous. 
His  rare  holidays  he  had  been  known  to  spend  at 
Westminster,  where  he  once  heard  a  third  very 
good  thing,  but  somehow  or  other  it  shpped  out 
of  his  memory.  A  narrow-minded,  good,  faith- 
ful old  soul  was  old  Hill,  as  ever  put  pen  to 
parchment,  and  even  Law  had  not  one  whit 
spoiled  his  honesty  or  hardened  his  heart.  He 
was  like  one  of  those  large  old-fashioned  silver 
watches,  not  showy,  but  still  lasting,  to  be 
trusted,  and,  although  somewhat  ungainly,  keep- 
ing uncommonly  good  time  for  all  that. 

Mr.  Goodrick,  appeased  by  a  person  so  con- 
genial to  him,  took  the  profiered  chair,  and 
inquired  about  Fairfield  and  his  recent  trip  to 
France. 

Old  Hill,  perched  on  that  "  coign  of  vantage," 
his  hard,  lofty,  and  shiny  stool,  turned,  with 
his  pen  behind  his  ear,  from  a  policy  of  in- 
surance that  he  was  reading  through,  to  glance 
with  benignant  shrewdness  through  the  inky  rails 
of  his  enclosure  at  the  illustrious  visitor,  every 


NO.  5,  furxival's  inn.  97 

moment  or  so,  according  to  his  liabit,  putting  up 
the  middle  finger  of  both  hands  to  slightly  re- 
adjust his  large  silver  spectacles.  They  did  not 
always  want  adjusting,  but  old  Judge  Park,  a 
friend  of  old  Mr.  Fairfield's  years  before,  had  been 
accustomed  to  do  it,  and  it  had  struck  old  Hill  as 
an  agreeable  diversion  to  conversation,  and  as  a 
mark  of  buckling  to  the  matter  in  hand  in  an 
honest  and  determined  way.  It  was  to  him  exactly 
what  adjusting  the  visor  used  to  be  to  the  knights 
of  old. 

He  spoke  in  a  low  voice,  and  was  mysterious 
and  confidential  :  "  Most  clever,  energetic  man, 
Mr.  Fairfield,  to  be  sure.  Went  to  Paris  about 
a  factory :  the  title  was  doubtful,  and  Messrs. 
Fox  and  Shekall  were  giving  us  a  good  deal  of 
trouble  about  it,  as  they  always  do  about  every- 
thino[.  We  Avorked  on  behalf  of  Bird  and  An- 
derson,  who  wanted  to  buy  the  place.  Will  you 
believe  me,  sir,  in  three  weeks  Mr.  Fairfield 
disentangled  the  whole  affair,  drew  up  the  re- 
cjuisite  papers,  in  the  French  language,  for  the 
transfer,  and  established  a  sound  title.  Sir,  Mr. 
Fairfield,  mark  me,  wdll  become  a  great  parHa- 
mentary  la^^^^er  ;  he  has  the  true  head  for  it.  Sir, 
you  could  trust  him  with  anything.  I  know  what 
men  of  business  are,  and  I  say  it  boldly,  he's  A  1 
among  them." 


98  THE   VICARS    COURTSHIP. 

Old  Hill  was  not  usually  talkative,  but  lie  had 
so  warmed  over  this  eulogy  of  Mr.  Fairfield  that 
he  got  quite  hot,  and  his  spectacles  becoming 
vapoured,  he  took  them  off  and  wiped  them 
carefully  with  a  bright  yellow  handkerchief,  with 
his  side  eye  steady  on  Master  Willoughby,  who 
was  watching  a  sly  opportunity  to  get  a  Negro 
song-book  from  under  the  enormous  scarlet 
mountain  of  a  London  Directory. 

Goodrich  listened  with  evident  approval,  for 
his  wiry  brows  moved  in  a  pleased  way,  but  he 
would  not  show  it,  and  he  griped  his  mouth  to  keep 
the  smile  down. 

"  All  very  well,  Hill,"  he  said  ;  "  he's  working 
hard  perhaps  now,  but  how  will  it  end  ?  The 
ship  is  in  the  builder's  yard  still — how  will  it 
sail  ?  I've  seen  so  many  men  of  promise  in  my 
day — two-thirds  turned  out  addled  at  last. 
Don't  believe  in  human  nature  any  longer — bad 
lot — all  promise,  no  performance.  The  only  man 
I  ever  praise  is  my  old  friend  Hargrave,  because 
I  can  look  back  thirty  years  and  never  remember 
a  bad  thing  of  him.  Knew  him  at  Jamaica.  But 
then.  Lord,  I  never  tried  his  friendship  much, 
never  put  any  tension  on  it — it  mightn't  bear 
it.  He  is  useful  to  me  and  I  to  him,  that's  all. 
Ugh !  self-interest,  that's  the  only  bower-anchor 
of  friendship — don't  tell  me.     Bah  !  " 


KO.    5,    FUEXIYAL's   inn.  99 

Old  Hill  was  no  metaphysician  :  he  was  satis- 
fied with  his  own  study  of  life.  He  drew  back 
his  forces,  therefore,  wouldn't  fight  it  out 
(clients  don't  like  contradiction),  and  kept  one 
eye  on  the  incorrigible  Willoughby  and  another 
on  the  red  label  at  the  back  of  "  Fearne  on  Contin- 
gent Eemainders,^  that  lay  between  the  pouncet 
and  the  wafer  box» 

The  office  was  not  an  apartment  peculiarly 
gratifying  to  the  senses,  and  old  Hill  now  re- 
lapsing into  perusal  of  an  indenture  on  half  an 
acre  of  innocent-looking  parchment,  with  great 
twisty  Gothic  letters  and  a  bit  of  tinsel,  gay  as  a 
salmon-fly,  in  the  left-hand  top  corner,  Mr.  Good- 
rich had  time  to  discover  how  little  food  there  was 
for  his  artistic  and  cultivated  eye.  An  uneven 
ceiling  cracked  into  giant  profiles,  and  smoked 
brown  with  the  flare  of  gas ;  wainscoted  walls 
of  a  uniform  dingy  drab,  here  and  there  splashed 
with  ink,  as  if  some  lawyer  had  once  blo^^ii  out 
his  brains,  and  had  left  an  ineradicable  stain  ; 
tiers  of  black  square  tin  boxes,  labelled  in 
gilt,  "  In  re  Dodswell,"  "  Li  re  Shepherd,"  &c., 
as  so  many  family  vaults  of  extinct  fortunes 
and  decayed  happiness  ;  rows  of  bill-files,  covered 
with  thick  dust,  horrible  from  its  loathsome 
palpabiHty  ;  on  the  mantelpiece  a  broken  pewter 
inkstand  without  a  lid,  three  rusty  pens,  a  Post 


100  THE   VICARS    COURTSHIP. 

Office  Directory,  a  faded  Clergy  List,  a  letter- 
weigher  that  would  not  weigh,  and  an  almanac 
with  days  for  certain  trials  ticked  off  in  red  ink. 

Altogether  a  repulsive  scarecrow  place,  suffi- 
cient to  frighten  away  persons  venturing  for  the 
first  time  on  the  edge  of  that  terrific  whirlpool, 
Law  ! — that  all-swallowing  vortex  hard  by,  men 
say,  to  the  Eapids  of  Beggary  and  the  terrible 
Niagara  of  Death  and  Euin !  Why  are  not 
lawyers'  offices  painted  with  Pompeian  frescoes 
and  made  gay  and  sparkling,  like  the  hells  of 
Baden  1  Whoever  sets  a  cruel  iron  trap  without 
strewing  at  least  a  few  fresh  green  leaves  over 
the  greedy  teeth  ?  Is  it  not  because  the  litigious 
gull  is  so  foolish  a  creature  that  it  requires  no  art 
to  attract  him.  Attract,  indeed !  Why,  not  all 
the  bayonets  in  the  world  could  keep  Hatred  and 
Avarice  from  gaining  access  to  the  Inns  of  Court, 
for  have  not  Avarice  and  Hatred  been  the  lawyers' 
clients  ever  since  there  were  lawyers  ? 

Such  were  some  of  the  old  cynic's  thoughts,  as 
his  eye  glanced  over  the  various  objects  in  the 
room,  the  red  wafers  like  cbops  of  clients'  blood, 
parchment — the  skin  of  calves  that  have  been 
flayed,  the  red  tape  like  red  surgeon's  bandages. 
These  bitter  thoughts  (and  perhaps  a  sufferer  at 
cards  has  a  right  to  be  bitter  when  he  hears  dice 
rattle)  were  suddenly  interrupted  by  the    glass 


NO.  5,  furxital's  ixx.  101 

door  of  Mr.  FairfielcVs  back  room  being;  fluno; 
open,  and  a  fresh,  vigorous  voice,  pleasant  in  its 
inflexions,  shouting : 

''  Mind,  Hill,  the  assignees  In  re  Halftide  v. 
Joslin  cannot  sell  the  house  T\ithout  permission 
from  the  Court  of  Chancery;  and,  Hill,  send 
Willoughby  directly  to  Fox  and  Shekall's  for 
that  marriage  settlement." 

"  One  moment,  if  you  please,  sir — ^just  one 
moment,  Mr.  Fairfield,"  said  old  Hill,  waging 
his  pen  over  the  rails  of  the  enclosure  ;  "  here's 
some  one  wants  to  see  you,  sir." 

Old  Hill  considered  this  way  of  sm^prising  the 
clever  la^vyer  as  an  exquisite  touch  of  humour, 
and  he  secretly  chuckled  over  it  for  some  time 
after  between  the  pauses  in  reading  the  will  of  a 
City  banker  who  had  had  the  luxury  of  dying  that 
week  actually  worth  "  a  plum." 

In  an  instant  the  busy  man  had  darted 
out,  closed  the  door  behind  him,  and  seized  Mr. 
Goodrick's  hand. 

"  What,  Mr.  Goodrick,"  he  said,  "  I  am  so  glad 
to  see  you — only  back  from  Paris  on  Wednesday — 
divorce  case — not  been  home  yet — so  dreadfully 
busy,  or  should  have  called  at  No.  30  long  ago." 

The  old  man,  without  at  once  rising,  took 
Fairfield's  hand  quietly,  and,  holding  it,  eyed  the 
worn-looking  lawyer  as  a  recruiting  oflicer  migh 


102  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

inspect  a  promising  would-be  recruit  when  lie 
liad  nearly  got  his  number;  half-liking,  half- 
indifferent,  cynical,  suspicious,  half-inclining  to 
the  applicant,  and  no  more. 

"  I'm  going  down  to  Wiltshire  to-night,  Fair- 
field. Your  cousin  Beauflower  has  asked  me  so 
often  that  I  mean  now  to  give  him  a  lesson, 
and  show  him  how  troublesome  an  old  man  can 
be.  I  want  to  see  those  "Wiltshire  people  he  boasts 
of.  My  old  friend  Staunton  once  lived  down 
there." 

"  I  am  so  glad,"  said  the  hearty  lawyer  ;  ''  I 
like  Wiltshire.  Beauflower  will  be  so  glad  to 
welcome  you.  They're  such  good-natured  people 
down  at  Summerleas,  you'll  soon  like  them  as 
well  as  I  do." 

"  I  never  expect  much,  Fairfield.  I've  seen 
too  much  of  the  dark  side  of  human  nature, 
the  usual  meanness,  envy,  hatred,  all  unchari- 
tableness,  I  suppose — ugh — that  one  finds  every- 
where under  difierent  shapes.  Men  of  sixty  and 
men  of  thiity  think  difi*erently  about  most 
things.'^ 

"  Of  course  they  do,  naturally,"  said  the  young 
lawyer.      "  Let  us  have  our  illusions,  pray  ;  let  us 

be  in  the  sunshine  as  long  as  we  can "     Just 

then  the  door  opened,  and  a  boy  thrust  in  his 
head. 


KO.  5,  furnival's  inn.  103 

"  If  you  please,  sir,  Mr.  Bassevi  and  Mr.  Kobin- 
son  have  come  about  these  pictures." 

"  Oh,  yes  ;  bring  them  in — show  in  the  gentle- 
men. Please  to  stop,"  he  said,  turning  round  to 
Mr.  Goodrick.  "I  want  yom^  opinion  on  these 
pictures." 

Mr.  Goodrick  gave  a  reluctant  consent,  and 
stopped.     Bassevi  was  his  special  abhorrence. 

Mr.  Bassevi  and  Mr.  Kobinson  entered — ^the 
picture-dealer  and  his  drudge.  The  former  was 
a  surly,  ill-dressed  man,  with  a  gross  brutality  of 
manner  that  tried  to  pass  itself  off  as  honest 
frankness.  He  wore  a  rusty-brown  paletot,  but- 
toned up  to  the  throat ;  dingy  plaid  trousers ;  his 
white  hat  was  greasy ;  his  neckcloth  a  mere 
wisp  of  purple ;  his  hair  was  long,  dusty,  and 
neglected.  There  was  about  him  a  look  of  ruf- 
fianism and  avarice,  and  he  kept  his  dull  eye 
fixed  on  the  little  artist  with  an  air  of  threaten- 
ing not  unmingled  with  anxiety. 

"  Good  morning,"  he  said,  "  Mr.  Fairfield  ; 
morning,  Mr.  Goodrick.  Well,  about  these 
Koobenses.  Mr.  Cantelupe  wants,  I  hear,  to 
dispute  my  price,  and  leaves  it  to  you  to  arbi- 
trate. I've  brought  ^Ir.  Eobinson  here,  a  well- 
known  restorer,  to  depose  to  their  value.  He's 
not  seen  them  before,  and  his  judgTQcnt  will  be 
impartial." 


J  04  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

''Mr.  Cantelupe  certainly  objects,  Mr.  Bassevi, 
to  the  high  price  originally  charged  by  you  for 
these  pictures,"  said  Fairfield.  ''  Boy,  bring  them 
in." 

The  three  enormous  pictures  were  brought  in 
seriatim  by  two  of  the  clerks,  and  placed  against 
a  bookcase  at  the  further  end  of  the  room.  Bas- 
sevi went  up  to  the  first,  and  ostentatiously 
removed  the  green  baize  that  covered  it.  It  was 
a  large,  coarse,  glossy  picture,  meretriciously 
coloured,  representing  "The  Triumph  of  Bacchus;" 
the  figures  podgy  and  Aoilgar,  the  colour  detest- 
ably hot  and  overdone. 

Fairfield  glanced  at  Goodrick,  but  the  old  con- 
noisseur gave  no  signal  of  approbation. 

The  second  picture  was  a  ''Judgment  of 
Solomon,"  equally  cumbrous  and  unfeeling  ; .  the 
third,  a  Classic  Battle. 

"There,"  said  Bassevi,  "there's  pictures  some- 
thing like !  There's  genius,  Eobinson !  Dirt 
cheap  at  two  hundred  and  fifty  each.  Eoobens 
never  did  a  thing  with  a  bolder  hand  than 
that." 

"  Bold  enough,"  growled  Goodrick. 

"  Well,  Mr.  Eobinson,  what  do  you  think  of 
these  works  1 "  said  Fairfield. 

The  little  artist  was  in  a  state  of  nervous  ex- 
citement, playing  with  his  eye-glass,  advancing 


xo.   5,  fuexival's  ixx.  105 

and  recedinor  to  tlie  Eubenses,  and  toucliino-  them 
with  his  wet  fino-er  in  an  uncomfortable  way, 
that  implied  extreme  irresolution. 

"Now,  Eobinson,  did  you  eyer  see  Eoobenses 
more  worth  the  money  ?  "  said  Bassevi.  '*'  Ain't 
they  regiar  gems  of  hart  ?  Look  at  that  woman's 
profile  !  Here's  colour,  too,  about  the  flesh  of 
this  Bacchy  !  Now  then,  my  man,  teU  them  what 
you  think." 

"  Mr.  Basseyi,"  said  Eobinson,  slowly  and 
reluctantly,  "  they're  bold  pictures,  sir,  in  a 
large  style  ;  but,  to  be  conscientious,  they  should 
be  called,  not  Eubens,  but  '  the  school  of  Eubens.' 
Excellent  imitations  of  Jordaens,  I  should  term 
them  ;  their  yalue  about " 

"  Fourteen  pounds  each,"  said  Goodrick.  "  To 
ask  more  than  that  is  a  robber}'.  They're  mere 
furniture  pictm^es." 

Bassevi  was  thunderstruck.  His  drudge  turned 
against  him  !  his  paid  ad\dser  faithless.  Chaos 
had  come  again.  He  expected  a  dishonest  back- 
ing up  of  eyer}i:hing  he  said  ;  here  was  rank 
mutiny.  Faii^field,  unable  to  repress  his  amuse- 
ment at  the  rascal's  discomfitm^e,  burst  into  a 
hearty  laugh. 

Basseyi  scowled,  grew  pale,  bit  his  lips,  and 
flung  the  baize  covering  back  again  over  the 
pictures. 


106  THE  vicar's  courtship. 

"They're  worth  all  the  money  I  asked,"  he 
said,  savagely,  "  and  Til  set  the  lawyers  on  my 
young  spark  ;  they  cost  me  all  I  asked." 

"  Then  you'll  not  take  them  back  ?  "  said  Fair- 
field. 

"  Certainly  not ;  see  you  d first.     I  sold 

them  fairly,  and  Til  have  my  money." 

"What  price  should  you  fix  on  them,  Mr. 
Eobinson  ?  "  said  Beauflow^r. 

Eobinson  hesitated,  and  looked  cleprecatingly 
at  his  enraged  partner. 

"  I  would  rather  not  say,  but  certainly  more 
than  this  gentleman  (looking  at  Mr.  Goodrick) 
suggested — a  good  deal  more." 

"  But  still  not  half  so  much  as  Mr.  Basse^d  here 
asked  ? "  said  Fairfield. 

"  Not  quite  so  much.  AVell,  I  had  rather  not 
mention  the  sum  I  should  fix.  Prices  of  pictures 
are  fancy  prices." 

''  Mr.  Bassevi,  we  shall  fight  this  question  for 
our  client.  We  refuse  to  pay  you  the  sum  you 
ask."  Fairfield  said  this  firmly.  "  We  will  not 
let  our  client  be  plundered." 

"  Plundered  ? "  shouted  the  picture  dealer. 
"  Take  care  what  you  say  !  " 

*'  Yes,  plundered !  You  ask  ten  times  their 
price  for  these  pictures  of  the  school  of  somebody ; 
we  refuse  to  pay  it.     There  !  " 


NO.  5,  furnival's  inn.  107 

"  Inferior  specimens  of  tlie  school  of  Rubens," 
said  Eobinson,  blandly. 

"  You  old  fool,  you  be  quiet,"  said  Bassevi, 
grasping  the  poor,  meek  little  man  roughly  by 
the  arm  ;  "  youVe  said  quite  enough  for  one  day. 
We'll  go." 

*'  But,  Mr.  Bassevi,  my  dear  sir,''  said  the  little 
man,  deprecatingly,  "you  asked  for  my  real 
conscientious  opinion,  I  give  it,  and  now  youre 
annoyed." 

"  Your  conscience !  "  said  Bassevi,  contempt- 
uously ;  "  I  like  that.  You  Avho  live  by  painting 
copies  to  be  sold  as  originals  !  you  who  paint 
half  Bodger's  historical  pictures  !  you  talk  of  con- 
science !  You  can't  afford  one.  The  fact  is,  I 
don't  believe  you  know  a  Kubens  when  you  see 
it,  and  I  was  a  fool  to  ask  your  opinion.  You'll 
have  no  more  work  from  me,  old  fellow  ;  and  as 
for  you,  you  lawyer,  mind  I  mean  to  have  this 
money — every  penny  of  it." 

So  saying,  with  sundry  threats,  curses,  and  ad- 
jurations, the  amiable  picture  dealer  put  on  his 
dirty  hat,  drove  it  over  his  eyes  with  a  violent 
blow,  and  strode  out  of  the  office,  slamming  the 
door  furiously  behind  him. 

"  That's  one  of  the  carrion  crows  preying  on  our 
young  spendthrift,"  said  Fairfield  to  Goodrick  ; 
"  but  he  shan't  plunder  him  any  more,  if  I  can 


108  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

help  it.  And  we  have  to  thank  you,  sir,"  he  said, 
turning  to  Robinson,  *'  for  your  very  honest 
opinion  about  these  pictures." 

The  little  artist  seemed  very  far  from  elated 
at  the  strong  approbation  he  had  attained.  He 
blew  his  nose  nervously,  looked  at  the  pictures 
anxiously,  shook  his  head,  and  turned  rather  pale. 

''  It's  a  very  serious  thing,  gentlemen,"  he  said, 
"  to  me.  I'm  a  struggling  man,  and  Mr.  Bassevi 
sends  me  a  good  deal  of  work — portraits  to  re- 
touch, and  old  masters  to  repair,  and  I'm  afraid 
I've  offended  him.  It'll  be  a  loss  of  a  hundred  a 
year  to  me." 

''  If  you're  useful  to  him,  Mr.  Robinson,"  said 
Fairfield,  "  there's  no  fear  he'll  leave  you." 

That  comfort  was  too  late.  The  old  artist  sank 
down  on  to  a  chair  close  to  the  pictures,  and 
sluggish  tears  stole  from  his  eyes.  Then  he  rose, 
gathered  up  his  hat  and  faded  umbrella,  gave 
another  melancholy  glance  at  the  detestable 
causes  of  the  day's  misfortune,  wished  Fairfield 
good  morning,  bowed  to  Mr.  Goodrick,  and  left 
the  ofiice. 

Before  he  had  got  to  the  outer  door  a  hand 
touched  him  on  the  shoulder.  It  was  Mr. 
Goodrick. 

^'  Mr.  Robinson,"  said  he,  ''  call  upon  me  some 
day ;  there  is  my  card.     I  shall  have  some  work 


NO.    5,    FURXIVAL's   IXX.  109 

in  which  you  can,  perhaps,  help  me.  There,  no 
thanks.  I  live  opposite  to  you  in  Buckingham 
Street.     Good  day." 

Before  the  artist  could  turn  to  thank  him,  Mr. 
Goodrick  had  gone  back  into  the  office  and  closed 
the  door  after  him  with  a  slam  that  echoed 
through  the  passage. 


110  THE   vicar's    courtship. 


CHAPTER  YI. 

THE     JOUEXEY     DOWN. 

The  4-15  train  was  nearly  ready  to  start  from 
the  "Waterloo  station.  A  nimble  porter  was 
already  springing  from  carriage  roof  to  roof 
dropping  in  the  lamps,  for  it  would  be  dark 
before  the  train  reached  Salisbury.  The  earlier 
passengers  were  busy  buying  the  evening  papers 
or  the  latest  magazines  ;  the  later  passengers  were 
nervously  getting  their  tickets  or  seeing  to  the 
labelling  of  their  luggage.  In  a  few  minutes  the 
bell  would  ring,  the  white  flag  wave,  and  the  train 
would  launch  forth  swift  as  a  cannon-shot  upon 
its  long  journey. 

Three  minutes  before  the  booking-office  doors 
closed,  an  elderly  but  alert  man,  followed  by  a 
black  servant,  passed  through  to  the  platform,  and 
made  his  way  to  a  first-class  carriage. 

"Tony,"  he  said,  looking  out  of  window  the 
moment  he  had  gained  the  carriage  and  closed  the 


THE    JOUEXEY    D0^^^.  111 

door  ;  ''  see  all  the  luggage  in  safe — is  it  all 
labeUed  'Slobiuy?'" 

"  Every  single  one.  And  have  you  got  all  yoiu^ 
things,  sir?  Never  mind  me.  Your  umbrella, 
and  your  bamboo,  and  your " 

"  Going  on  ? "  said  the  guard.  "  Take  your 
places,  ^^^lat  class  are  you,  my  man  ? — second 
class.  And  have  you  got  your  ticket  ?  Now, 
then,  my  good  man,  take  yom^  seat  or  you'll  be 
left  behind.  Where  are  you  for,  sir?"  (This 
was  addressed  to  the  first-class  passenger.) 

"  Slobury." 

''  Slobury— right." 

Andover, — Basingstoke, — a  cluster  of  red-roofed 
houses, — a  grey  arch  or  two  in  ruins, — heath, 
ploughlands,  where  the  rooks  stalked  about  and 
paced  gravely.  Gradually  wider  fields  where 
bleating  sheep  were  penned.  Then,  as  the  country 
grew  wilder  and  ^dllages  fewer,  the  passengers 
who  got  in  at  the  quiet  stations  became  redder 
of  face  and  louder  and  more  pro^dncial  in  voice. 
Wideawakes  became  more  popular  than  hats  as 
the  train  got  nearer  to  Wiltshire,  and  country 
women  with  bundles  were  conspicuous  features 
at  the  station  platforms.  Sheep  and  corn  seemed 
the  chief  subjects  of  conversation  now. 

Presently  a  tall,  keen  grey  spire  rose  above  some 
rank  water  meadows  that  had  little  gardens  sloping 


112  THE    YICAE's    courtship. 

clown  to  tlieni.  That  was  Salisbury.  A  banging 
of  doors,  a  clatter  of  hearty  country  voices,  the 
jangle  of  a  bell,  and  again  the  train  dashed  for- 
ward, eager  to  reach  the  borders  of  Dorsetshire. 
Then  small  stations,  glimpses  of  grey  ranges  of 
breezy  down  with  cahn  green  meadows  below, 
and  solid  stone  cottao;es  Avith  snus^  thatched  roofs, 
and  elm-shadowed  lanes  and  orchards.  Then  it 
grew  dark,  and  the  train  threaded  viaducts  and 
dived  into  tunnels  that  were  wrapped  in  a  dream- 
like mystery.  A  star  came  out,  and  sj)arkled  above 
Slobury,  and  instantly  as  it  did  so,  as  if  in  answer, 
a  lamp  changed  colour  at  the  second  arch  on  the 
Salisbury  side  of  the  town,  a  bell  rang,  and  the 
train  shot  in. 

"  Slobury  !  Slobury  !  ^'  shouted  the  porter. 

''  Here,  you  sir,  let  me  out,"  cried  the  irritable 
voice  of  some  one  tapping  violently  at  the  window 
of  a  first-class  carriage. 

The  porter  wrenched  the  stiff  handle  round,  and 
released  the  irascible  passenger. 

"  Why  the  d ,  man,  ain't  you   quicker  ? " 

said  the  passenger.  "  Do  you  want  me  to  go  on 
to  Exeter  ?  Any  conveyance  here  from  Summer- 
leas?" 

"  Not  that  I  know  of,  sir,"  said  the  porter, 
rather  ruffled  by  the  tone  of  his  interrogator. 

"Where  the  d is  that  Tony?"  said  Mr. 


THE   JOURNEY   DOWN.  113 

Goodrick,  dragging  down  from  the  step  of  a  second 
class  carriage  Tony,  wlio,  but  half  awake,  had  just 
aroused  himself  to  a  sense  of  his  situation.  ''Here, 
guard,  there's  a  portmanteau  and  a  hat-box  of 
mine.  Tony,  you  rascal,  run  and  get  out  the  lug- 
gage, or  111  pack  you  off  to-morrow  morning." 

"  Would  you  be  kind  enough  to  help  me  down," 
said  a  soft  little  voice  from  the  darkness  of  the 
carriage  next  to  that  from  which  Tony  had 
emerged  ;  ''it  is  so  very  dark." 

The  old  West  Indian  was  cynical  and  rough, 
but  he  was  a  gentleman,  and  he  could  not  resist 
the  appeal  of  such  a  voice  ;  so  he  put  out  his 
hand,  received  a  soft  little  pressure  in  return,  and 
helped  down  in  the  dim  light  a  young  lady  with 
the  voice  whose  tones  had  arrested  him. 

"  I  have  one  square  box,"  she  said,  "  and  Fm  so 
afraid  they'll  take  it  on.  But,  I'm  so  sorry  to 
trouble  you." 

"No  trouble,  madam,"  said  Mr.  Goodrick. 
*'  Here,  guard,  this  lady  wants  a  square  box." 

"What  name?"  said  the  guard  impatiently, 
turning  his  lantern  on  the  luggage  that  strewed 
the  platform. 

"  Eobinson." 

"  Don't  see  it.  Must  be  left  behind.  Couldn't 
have  been  properly  labelled.  Can't  stay  here  all 
night." 


114  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

"  Oh,  dear,  dear !  it's  a  large,  square  black  box. 
Indeed  it  was  properly  directed.  It  is  very  im- 
portant to  me." 

"  Tony,  yon  rascal,"  said  Mr.  Goodrick,  taking 
the  warmest  interest  in  the  subject,  "look  about 
for  this  young  lady's  box.  Get  into  the  van  there. 
Help  the  porter  to  look,  d'  ye  hear  ?  Some  one 
of  you  bring  a  light." 

When  the  guard  came  up  and  flashed  his  lamp 
upon  the  group,  Mr.  Goodrick  recognised  to  his 
infinite  surprise  and  pleasure  the  face  he  had 
seen  that  morning  at  the  window  opposite  his 
own. 

"  I  felt  sure  I  had  seen  you  before,''  he  said  to 
the  young  lady.  "  I  live  opposite  you  in  Bucking- 
ham Street."  Miss  Kobinson,  for  there  is  no  need 
to  lono'er  diss:uise  it  was  Miss  Robinson,  at  once 
recognised  him,  and  thanked  him  shyly  for  the 
trouble  he  was  taking. 

"  So,  you  see  I'm  a  neighbour,"  he  said  plea- 
santly, and  in  a  way  that  quite  reassured  her. 

But  there  was  no  black  box ;  and  the  guard, 
furious  at  losing  five  minutes  more,  and  the  train 
abeady  late,  slammed  the  doors  of  the  van,  blew 
his  whistle,  leaped  into  his  carriage,  and  the  next 
moment  the  ruthless  train,  with  a  gleam  of  lamps, 
disappeared  in  the  darkness. 

"Oh,  what  shall  I  do?"  said  the  young  lady. 


THE   JOURNEY   DOWN.  115 

wringing  her  little  hands,  in  the  prettiest  form  of 
unaffected  despair.     "  What  shall  I  do  ?" 

"  I  should  telegraph  to  Salisbury,  Miss,  if  I  was 
you,"  suggested  the  porter. 

"  I  will  see  to  that,''  said  Mr.  Goodrich.  "Here, 
my  dear  young  lady,  pray  accept  an  old  gentle- 
man s  aid.  Well  soon  recover  this  box.  It  has 
been  put  out  at  Salisbury,  I  dare  say.  Careless 
villains.'' 

"  Oh,  it  is  so  very,  very  kind  of  you,"  said  the 
lady  who  owned  the  box. 

In  a  few  minutes  the  telegraph  needles  at  the 
Slobmy  station  began  to  tattle,  and  soon  brought 
back  word  that  the  box  had  been  left  at  Salisbury 
and  should  be  forwarded  by  the  first  train  in  the 
morning.  Mr.  Goodrich,  warmly  thanked,  took 
his  leave. 

The  porter,  sent  by  the  young  lady  to  the 
Railway  Hotel  for  a  fly,  soon  after  brought  back 
word  that  they  had  only  one  fly  in,  and  that  was 
engaged  by  a  gentleman  going  to  Summerleas. 
If  she  liked  he  would  go  and  ask  the  gentleman 
to  give  her  a  seat.  He  was  an  old  gentleman,  and 
alone. 

As  she  still  stood  irresolute  and  rather  forlorn, 
a  fly  drove  up  with  gleaming  lamps.  As  it 
stopped  at  the  station  door,  a  voice  called  from 
the  window — 

I  2 


116  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

"  Pray,  my  dear  young  lady,  accept  a  seat  in 
my  fly.  I  find  we  are  botli  going  the  same  way. 
Tony"  (to  a  servant  on  the  coach  box),  "  get  do^vn, 
sii\  directly,  and  open  the  door  for  this  lady." 

The  young  lady  stepped  in,  with  warm  expres- 
sions of  thanks,  and  Mr.  Goodrick  expressed  the 
pleasure  he  felt  in  assisting  her.  He  grew  indeed 
quite  gallant  on  the  subject.  He  seemed  charmed 
by  the  tones  of  her  voice  and  her  gentle  sensible 
manner.  Presently,  as  the  fly  toiled  up  a  steep 
hill  out  of  Slobury,  passed  through  the  straggling 
main  street,  and  emerged  into  the  open  country 
road,  Mr.  Goodrick  became  more  silent. 

"  Pray  excuse  me,"  he  said  to  his  companion, 
'^  if  I  am  silent  now.  The  place  I  am  approaching 
arouses  many  old  recollections  of  a  dear  dead 
friend.     They  come  upon  me  faster  and  faster." 

The  young  lady  made  such  an  answer  as 
amiability  and  politeness  required.  She  had  ob- 
served as  she  sat  quietly  in  one  corner  of  the  fly 
the  uncontrollable  agitation  of  the  old  gentleman. 

Every  cottage  that  he  passed  he  gazed  after 
from  the  window  as  if  he  was  parting  from  the 
dearest  of  relations ;  every  turn  of  the  road  he  eyed 
with  curiosity  ;  every  path  or  road  that  led  from 
it  he  surveyed  as  if  he  was  expecting  to  meet 
some  one  at  every  corner. 

Then  the  road  j)assed  by  a   lodge  and  went 


THE   JOURNEY   DOWX.  117 

down  liill  through  a  dell  thickly  shadowed  with 
trees.  Presently  it  grew  lighter.  They  were  in 
Summerleas  Park.  By  the  dim  Hght  of  a  moon  in 
her  first  quarter  they  could  see  a  lake  on  which 
countless  wild  fowl  were  stirring,  uttering  strange 
calls,  sounding  rather  unearthly  at  that  time  of 
night. 

''Stop/'  cried  Mr.  Goodrick  to  the  driver, 
thrusting  his  head  suddenly  out  of  window.  "  I'll 
walk  now  for  a  bit,  just  to  stretch  my  legs.  You 
drive  along  after  me.  Good-bye  for  a  minute  or 
two,  my  dear  young  lady — au  revoir." 

Shutting  the  door  of  the  fly  as  he  got  out,  ^Ir. 
Goodrick  walked  forward  at  a  smart  pace,  till  the 
shrubberies  of  a  large  mansion  being  past,  the 
Abbey  itself,  blazing  with  light,  came  suddenly 
into  view,  lookino-  like  a  o-reat  illuminated  vessel 
at  anchor.  The  cold  night  air  from  the  lake 
blew  fresh,  the  dying  leaves  of  the  chestnuts 
rustled  above  Mr.  Goodrick's  head.  He  stood  for 
a  moment  gazing  at  the  house,  then  suddenly  he 
gave  a  deep  groan,  and  fell  forward  upon  his  face 
on  the  grass. 

There  was  a  scream  from  the  fly,  a  shout 
from  Tony,  and  the  next  moment  Tony,  in  an 
agony  of  distress,  was  bathing  his  master  s  temples 
with  water  from  the  lake. 

The  young  lady,  too,  had  come  to  his  assistance, 


118  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

and  was  bendino;  over  him.  The  moonlio-ht  was 
upon  her  face  as  Mr.  Goodrick,  slowly  recovering, 
opened  his  eyes,  and  fixed  them  upon  her  with  an 
earnest  surprise. 

"  For  a  moment,"  he  said,  "  I  thought  I  was  in 
heaven.  Thanks  for  your  aid,  my  dear  young  lady. 
Yes,  I  felt  giddy.  I  shall  be  well  in  a  moment. 
Tony,  help  me  to  the  fly,  I  can  walk  now."  (Then 
they  got  in.)  "  Drive  on  slowly,  coachman.  I  am 
afraid  I  alarmed  you,"  he  said,  turning  to  his  com- 
panion. "It  was  a  mere  giddiness  ;  quite  over 
now.  I  am  so  sorry.  Driver,  go  slowly  through 
the  lodge  gateway." 

"  Has  your  governor  ever  been  here  afore  ? " 
said  the  driver  to  Tony.  "  I  never  seed  him  in 
these  parts.  How  did  he  know  about  a  gateway 
as  ain't  in  sight.    Often  taken  giddy  in  that  way?" 

"  Neber  been  here  before,"  said  Tony.  "  Speck 
he  guessed  most  big  houses  have  lodges." 

"  Are  they  all  black  where  you  come  from  ? " 
said  the  driver,  thirsty  for  information  about  the 
dark  races. 

"  All  more  or  less  darkish,"  said  Tony ;  "  the 
sun  been  so  hot  out  there  for  several  years  now." 

"  West  Injies  or  East  Injies  1 " 

"  West  Indies." 

The  driver  relapsed  into  silence  after  this.  He 
would  like  to  have  asked  if  you  could  get  to  the 


THE    JOURXEY    DOWN.  119 

Indies  by  land,  but  lie  was  afraid  lie  migiit  be 
on  the  wrong  track. 

"Who  lives  at  that  big  house  we  passed?"  said 
Tony. 

"  That  house  ?  Why,  Mr.  Harker— succeeded 
to  all  Squire  Staunton's  property — used  to  be  his 
steward,  and  no  more  account  than  you  or  me. 
Bullying  sort  of  man — hard  to  the  poor." 

As  he  said  this  the  driver  gave  a  vicious  cut 
to  his  horse  as  if  to  visit  on  him  the  sins  of 
Harker. 

A  few  minutes  more  and  the  fly  passed  under  a 
great  black  archway,  which  echoed  as  the  fly  rum- 
bled over  the  stones  beneath  it.  Then  a  sharp 
turn  to  the  right  over  a  little  grey  bridge  under 
which  a  brook  murmured,  and  the  fly  drew  up  at 
a  garden  door.  In  the  moment's  lull  of  stopping 
the  owls  could  be  heard  hooting  to  each  other  to 
the  left  in  the  Abbey  woods. 

"  This  is  the  Vicarage,  sir,"  said  the  driver, 
getting  down  and  opening  the  door  of  the  fly, 
having  first  given  a  wrenching  pull  at  the  bell. 
A  moment  after  a  pleasant  hearty  looking  young 
clergyman  came  out  and  greeted  Mr.  Goodrick. 

"  My  dear  sir,  how  are  you  ?  What,  and  Miss 
Kobinson  !  and  how  do  you  do  ?  Welcome,  wel- 
come back  to  Summerleas." 

"  This  gentleman,  Mr.  Beauflower,  lives  opposite 


120  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

papa  and  mamma,  and  was  kind  enougli  to  give 
me  a  seat  in  his  fly  as  tliere  was  no  other  at  the 
inn/'  said  Miss  Eobinson.  "  How  are  Mrs.  Beau- 
flower  and  your  sister  ? '"' 

"  Very  well,  thank  you — quite  well." 

"  I  have  been  proud  to  escort  so  amiable  a 
young  lady,"  said  Mr.  Goodrick. 

The  luo-gage  was  soon  taken  down  and 
the  flyman  paid ;  Mr.  Goodrick  lifted  his  hat 
with  the  most  approved  gallantry  of  the  old 
school,  Mr.  Beauflower  bowed  in  his  best 
manner,  and  the  fly  drove  ofi"  to  Summeiieas 
Abbey. 

"  Well,  we  are  delighted  to  see  you  at  last," 
said  Edward  Beauflower ;  "  you're  our  prisoner 
at  last." 

"  Ah  !  you'll  be  glad  to  get  rid  of  me.  I'm  a 
queer  three-cornered  sort  of  person,  erratic  in  my 
movements,  and  full  of  suspicious  fancies.  Well, 
and  how  do  you  get  on  1  " 

"  Oh !  we  go  on  vegetating  here.  We  have 
our  troubles  and  our  pleasures." 

"  Tony,  take  care  of  that  hamper  of  wine !  "  said 
Mr.  Goodrick,  turning  sharp  round  on  Tony,  who 
was  struggling  along  laden  with  luggage  up  the 
the  gravel  walk  that  led  to  the  front  door  of  the 
Parsonage ;  "  always  bring  my  own  wine,  Beau- 
flower," he  said.     "  Don't  like  your  hot  country 


THE   JOUKXEY   DOWN.  121 

sherry  and  your  sweet  port.  You  mustn't  let  your 
pride  be  hurt." 

"Well,  I  did  think  we  could  find  you  a  glass  of 
wine,"  said  the  clergyman  in  a  slightly  vexed 
voice;  "but  as  you  will.  I  daresay  you. London 
club  men  get  particular.  Were  no  great  con- 
noisseurs in  wine  at  Summerleas.  Mr.  Harker's 
the  man  for  wine.'' 

Beauflower  s  mother  and  sister  met  them  at 
the  hall  door.  The  mother,  the  pleasant  old  lady, 
fussy  and  cheerful,  the  sister,  the  handsome  sensible 
girl,  somewhat  sarcastic,  yet  really  more  warm- 
hearted than  she  allowed  herself  to  appear.  Mr. 
Goodrick  was  grandly  ceremonious  to  both  ladies. 

"  You'll  have  to  put  up  with  very  humble  ac- 
commodation in  our  poor  little  cottage,"  said  Mrs. 
Beauflower ;  "  if  it  had  only  been  my  husband's 
rectory  in  Worcestershire,  where  w^e  had  ten  bed- 
rooms and ■" 

"  I  shall  be  very  comfortable,  madam,  no 
doubt.  It  is  the  size  of  the  welcome,  not  the 
size  of  the  house,  I  regard." 

"  Oh  !  we  shall  all  do  our  best,  mamma,  to 
entertain  our  distinguished  visitor,"  said  Julia 
Beauflower,  with  laughing  stateliness  ;  ''  I  sup- 
pose he  does  not  expect  to  find  a  palace." 

''  That  girl's  got  a  temper  of  her  own,"  thought 
Goodrick,  "  I  can  see." 


122  THE   VICAe's   courtship. 

"  Cross  old  bachelor,"  tliouglit  Julia,  "  square- 
toed  and  punctilious.  I'll  tease  liim.  And  yet, 
I  supj)ose,  there's  sometliing  nice  about  liim,  or 
Ed^vard  would  not  like  liim,  or  ask  liim  down." 

"Very  distinguished  manners,  Mr.  Goodrick 
has,"  said  Mrs.  Beauflower,  when  she  was  alone 
with  her  daughter,  making  the  tea ;  "  seen  very 
high  society,  no  doubt.  I  really  think  he's  rather 
like  Sir  John  Cripps,  my  dear,  who  proposed  to 
me,  you  know,  the  day  I  had  accepted  yom^  dear 
papa — just  his  bow." 

"  I  like  easier  manners  myself,"  said  Juha. 
*'  "WHio  on  earth  wants  a  minuet  bow  now  a  days  ; 
besides,  how  he  looks  at  one  from  under  his  eye- 
brows.    I  feel  as  if  I  was  being  tried  for  my  life." 

"  Ah  1  you're  very  young,  my  dear,"  said  Mrs. 
Beauflower,  with  a  dignity  that  was  beyond  logic, 
"you'll  cling  to  old  times,  my  dear  Juha,  when 
you  get  as  old  as  I  am." 

"  What  a  charming  little  girl  that  Miss  Eobin- 
son  is,"  said  Mr.  Goodrick,  as  he  sat  down  to  tea 
in  the  place  of  honom^,  "  so  simple,  so  unaffected, 
so  unlike  the  young  ladies  of  the  present  day 
(Miss  Beauflower,  you  must  excuse  an  old  cynic), 
she  did  not  know  me,  but  I  recognised  her  in  a 
moment." 

"  You  recognised  Amy  ! "  exclaimed  both  the 
ladies. 


THE   JOURNEY   DO^YX.  123 

"  How  curious,  your  knowing  Amy  Eobinson," 
said  Mr.  Beauflower  ;    "  well,  that  is  siu-prising  !  " 

"  Yes  ;  she  is  the  daughter  of  a  poor  artist  and 
picture  restorer  who  lives  opposite  me  in  Buck- 
ingham Street,  and  I  got  the  situation  down  here 
for  her  thi'ough  a  Mr.  Thorndyke,  a  friend  of 
mine,  a  dealer  in  cmiosities,  but  the  family  never 
knew  it ;  the  young  lady,  however,  knew  me  by 
sight,  at  least  she  recognised  me  at  the  station 
at  Slobury." 

"  Is  the  tea  as  you  like  it '? "  said  Mrs.  Beau- 
flower,  in  her  good-natured,  old-fashioned  way. 

"  Quite,  thank  you,  madam  ;  but  would  you 
allow  me  to  ring  for  Tony,  he  knows  how  to  bake 
the  sort  of  toast  I  like.     I  taught  him." 

The  ladies  looked  rather  nettled  at  this,  each 
in  her  way  ;  but  Mr.  Goocbick  was  impertm-- 
bable,  so  Tony  was  rung  for,  and  the  directions 
given  with  the  utmost  nonchalance. 

"  AVhat  a  remarkable  valet  !  "  said  Julia  Beau- 
flower,  sarcastically. 

"  Do  as  you  like,''  Beauflower  said,  "  never 
mind  my  womanfolk,  and  Julia's  fling  at  Tony. 
Don't  you  let  Julia  despotise  over  you.  She  is  a 
Semiramis  by  nature." 

"  I  a  Semiramis ! "  said  Julia,  with  a  toss  of  her 
fine  head. 

"Of  course  we  must  fight  for  our  frontiers," 


124  THE   YICAe's    COURTSHIP. 

said  Mr.  Goodrick  ;  "  every  one  in  a  new  place 
does  that,  you  know,  ship  or  camp,  shop  or  col- 
lege. All  I  can  say  is,  that  if  I  am  victorious, 
Miss  Beauflower,  I  will  be  merciful." 

"  There,  Julia  !  now  you  say  something  pretty," 
said  Edward  Beauflower,  passing  his  cup  for  a 
third  time,  "  promise  to  be  generous  in  the  hour 
of  victory." 

"  I  promise  nothing,"  said  Julia,  saucily  ;  "  if 
the  enemy  is  hard  to  beat  he  must  expect  seve- 
rity. A  city  that  holds  out  long  must  expect  to 
be  sacked." 

"  There  is  likely,  mother,  to  be  incessant  spar- 
ring between  Julia  and  Mr.  Goodrick,  I  can  see. 
They  are  both  keen  in  seeing  other  people's  follies 
and  inconsistencies,  and  they  are  both  rather 
merciless.  Ju,  you'll  die  an  old  maid,  now  mark 
my  words  !  " 

"  At  all  events,  I'll  not  marry  a  man  Avithout 
sense,"  said  Julia.  "  Ned,  please  to  ring  the  bell, 
not  for  that  horrid  black  creature,  who  reminds 
me  of  a  Thug,  but  for  ]\Iary." 

"  Another  fling  at  Tony,  Mr.  Goodrick,"  said 
her  brother.  "  You  must  put  down  this  tyranny  ; 
Tony  shall  be  j^rotected.    Tony  is  a  good  Friday." 

"  Horrid  creature  ! "  said  Julia,  with  a  mali- 
cious shudder,  her  pitcher-shaped  earrings  dancing 
as  she  tossed  her  pretty  head,  which,  bound  up 


THE   JOURNEY   DOWN.  125 

trimly  with  bands  of  hair,  looked  rather  Greek  in 
shape,  and  decidedly  intellectual. 

Just  then  a  blast  of  a  horn  sounded  through 
the  village,  and  there  came  the  rattle  and  grind  of 
wheels  and  a  shout  of  wild  and  rather  tipsy 
laughter. 

''  Good  Heavens,  what  is  that  ? "  said  Mrs. 
Beauflower. 

"I  feel  almost  sure  that  must  be  some  of  the 
Cantelupe  party  coming  back  from  Codford 
races,''  said  Beauflower.  "Oh,  how  fast  that 
young  fellow  is  coming  to  grief.  It's  a  pity  too,. 
for  he's  a  generous  fellow,  if  he  was  in  good 
hands." 

"The  sooner  he  drives  to  ruin  the  better,  if 
the  drag's  off","  said  Mr.  Goodrick,  bitterly. 
"  That  spending  money  is  a  form  of  madness." 

"Oh  !  he's  not  a  bad  young  fellow,"  said  Beau- 
flower, "not  by  any  means  bad;  but  he's  got 
into  bad  hands." 

"  Talking  of  squandering  money,"  said  Mr. 
Goodrick,  "  are  you  ladies  judges  of  jewels  ?  I've 
got  a  fine  opal  here  that  I  lately  secured,  and 
which  I  think  you  will  admire." 

"  Oh  !  it  is  beautiful,"  said  Julia  Beauflower, 
as  she  held  the  opal  up  to  the  hght,  in  which  it 
glowed  with  aU  its  harlequin  colours.  "  It  is  fit 
for  an  empress  ;  just  look,  mamma  !  " 


126  THE    vicar's    COUETSHIP. 

''  Very  beautiful !  It  reminds  me  of  an  eme- 
rald old  Lady  Cantelupe  used  to  wear,"  said  the 
old  lady.  "  Ay  !  what  a  beautiful  woman  she 
was !  His  Majesty,  George  the  Fourth,  once 
said,  'if  there's  a  woman  in  all  England  born 
to  be  a  queen,  it  is  Lady  Cantelupe.' " 

"  Eather  a  pity  to  keep  it  in  a  cabinet,"  said 
Julia  Beauflower;  "really  it  should  be  one  of  the 
Crown  jewels."  The  old  collector  was  pleased.  He 
warmed  the  opal,  he  held  it  in  various  directions 
to  evolve  its  colours.  Then  he  replaced  it  gravely 
in  the  silver  box. 

"  I  have,"  he  said,  "  one  more  treasure  which  I 
always  carry  with  me  from  old  travelling  habits ; 
it  is  a  blue  diamond,  that  once  belonged  to  the 
Potemkin  collection.  It  cost  me  four  thousand 
pounds.  It  is  worth  ten.  It  is  of  the  finest 
water." 

"Oh,  do  let  us  see  it,"  said  Julia,  her  eyes 
sparkling  with  curiosity  and  delight. 

Mr.  Goodrick  opened  a  small  shagreen  case,  and 
drew  out  a  large  diamond,  which  from  its  soft 
lined  case  shot  out  keen  rays  of  light.  "  There," 
said  he,  "  there's  a  splendid  fellow ;  shines  as 
lustrous  as  the  Hope  diamond,  and  is  not  much 
inferior  to  the  Eegent.  The  Pitt  has  points  of 
superiority,  but  the  Queen  has  nothing  approach- 
ing it  except  the  Koh-i-noor.     I  have  its  whole 


THE   JOURNEY   DOWN.  127 

pedigree  from  tlie  time  it  left  Brazil.  It's 
known  to  the  Dutcli  diamond  merchants  as  the 
Eostopchin  diamond,  and  it  was  secretly  sent  to 
Amsterdam  when  the  French  entered  Moscow. 
There,  ladies,  is  what  would  buy  honour,  virtue, 
honesty — anything.  Here  is  the  essence  of 
money.  See,  when  I  screen  it,  it  shines  like  a 
little  lamp.' 

''  Oh,  how  beautiful ! "  said  the  ladies. 

*^  Well,  I  can  go  out,''  said  Beauflower,  philoso- 
phically, "  any  morning,  and  look  at  a  tree  with 
dew  on  it  in  the  sunshine,  and  enjoy  the  lustre 
just  as  much.  The  rain-drops  sparkle  just  as 
well,  and  I  have  no  fear  of  losing  them,  and  no 
power  to  bu}^  them." 

"  Wait  till  you  get  a  pretty  wife  and  want  to 
adorn  her,"  said  Goodiick,  "then  you'll  find  that 
women  generally  prefer  diamonds  to  dewdrops, 
and  would  throw  you  over  for  any  one  Avho  could 
give  them  most  rank,  wealth,  and  flattery.  This 
stone,  which  weighs  twelve  carats,  is  supposed 
to  have  been  cut  from  the  celebrated  blue  dia- 
mond which  was  stolen  from  the  French  cro^AOi. 
But,  Lord  !  what  is  this  to  the  Nassuck  diamond, 
which  was  as  big  as  a  walnut  and  Weighed  eighty- 
nine  carats  ! " 

"  Or  the  Koh-i-noor,"  suggested  Edward  Beau- 
flower. 


128  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

"  Well,  tliat  is  nothing  to  the  Maximilian,  with 
its  one  hundred  and  thirty-nine  carats,  or  even 
the  Orloff  with  its  one  hundred  and  ninety-three." 

"  Oh  !  you  rich  people,  don't  talk  about  these 
things,"  said  Julia  Beauflower,  ''it  makes  me 
envious  and  discontented.  I  shall  say  good  night 
now,  or  I  shall  he  dreaming  of  diamond-mines 
and  thieves  for  hours." 

"  Miss  Beauflower,  you  have  not  the  spirit  of  a 
true  connoisseur,"  said  Mr.  Goodrich,  "  the  beauty 
of  this  diamond  is  evidently  not  fully  appre- 
ciated by  you.  I  was  going  to  tell  you  about 
the  discovery  of  an  Indian  diamond-mine — most 
singular  discover}^ — but  I  shall  now  be  silent,  just 
to  tax  your  cm^iosity." 

"  Oh,  do  tell  me,  do  ! "  It  was  the  prettiest 
entreaty,  but  the  old  connoisseur  was  obdurate. 

*'  First  victory  to  Mr.  Goodrich.  Julia,  you 
are  defeated." 

Julia  was  saucily  indignant,  would  not  make  a 
second  request,  and  swept  out  of  the  room. 


SUMMERLEAS.  129 


CHAPTEK  YII. 

SUMMERLEAS. 

SuMMERLEAS  Avas  a  pleasant  little  Wiltshire 
village,  nestling  confidingly  in  one  of  tlie  folds  of 
tliat  long  range  of  wild  open  moorland  that 
stretches  from  Stonehenge  to  the  very  borders  of 
Dorsetshire.  It  was  a  mere  cluster  of  little 
thatched  grey-stone  cottages  bordering  two  or 
three  sunken  green  lanes,  that  led  from  the  upper 
Downs  to  the  post  town  of  Fontford.  There  were 
sloping  fields  rising  all  around  the  village,  with 
a  little  fringe  of  fir  plantation  here  and  there, 
outposts,  as  it  seemed,  of  Mr.  Barker's  coverts. 
There  were  no  buildins^s  of  more  architectural 
pretension  than  labourers'  cottages  at  Summer- 
leas,  except  a  few  small  shops,  a  blacksmith's, 
a  gun-maker's,  and  two  farm-houses.  On  rising 
ground  behind  Mr.  Beauflower's  vicarage,  stood 
the  church,  a  little  cruciform  building,  of  a  very- 
distant  century,  with  a  squat  square  tower  of 
such  extraordinary  strength,  that  it  seemed  as  if 


130  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

intended  as  a  fortress  or  shelter  against  sudden 
forays,  or  as  a  safe  store-place  for  cliiirch  plate  in 
those  times  of  intestine  war  that  disturbed  the 
reigns  of  the  early  Norman  kings.  Whether 
its  monastic  builders  really  planned  it  for  such 
purposes  we  do  not  know,  but  certain  it  is  that 
no  mangonel  or  catapult  of  the  fom^teenth  cen- 
tury could  have  made  much  impression  on  the 
massive  broadside  of  that  old  Wiltshire  church 
tower.  Time  had,  however,  done  by  slow  sap 
what  its  fiercer  onsets  had  long  failed  in  accom- 
plishing. Long  nights  of  blustering  tempest, 
long  winters  of  bitter  frost,  furious  days  of  lash- 
ing rain,  hundreds  of  years  of  storm,  had  at  last 
achieved  their  tardy  victory.  The  faithful 
mortar,  so  long  invincible,  had  at  last  crumbled 
out  of  many  of  the  joints,  and  a  threatening  rift 
on  the  south  side  of  the  tower,  just  over  the  little 
gable  of  the  porch,  was  now  held  together  by  a  large 
rusty  X-shaped  clamp,  that  seemed  single-handed 
to  be  the  only  mainstay  of  the  old  time-worn 
building,  and  to  alone  save  it  fi-om  falling  in  an 
avalanche  of  stones  upon  the  heads  of  the  congre- 
gation. Nor  was  this  the  only  inroad  Time  had 
made  upon  its  stubborn  old  enemy,  for  at  the  east 
end,  imder  the  Early  English  window,  an  ivy  stem, 
years  ago  a  thin  green  pliant  stalk,  harmless  and 
fragile,  had  wormed  its  way  between  the  stones 


SUMMERLEAS.  131 

till  it  had  grown  as  thick  as  a  man's  arm,  and 
become  part  and  parcel  of  the  wall  it  was 
doomed  some  day  to  force,  like  a  crow-bar,  in- 
w^ards.  Many  influences,  indeed,  were  at  work  to 
effect  the  destruction  of  that  old  church  (a  type 
in  some  respects  of  the  Church  of  England  itself) 
from  the  winds  that  raved  round  it  nightly,  to 
the  starlings  that  loosened  the  spongy  moss  that 
bound  its  tiles  together.  Dissenter  or  sceptic, 
they  were  both  busy  at  destruction,  each  after  his 
kind  ;  while  the  moths  fretted  the  pulpit-cushion, 
the  diy  rot  ate  into  the  chancel  roof;  and  so, 
imperceptibly,  yet  surely,  the  ruin  went  on. 

What  a  type  of  English  permanence  and  sta- 
bility is  one  of  these  old  country  churches,  sunk 
deep  amidst  the  graves  which  for  generations 
have  been  rising  around  it,  as  generation  after 
generation  of  ploughmen  and  shepherds  have 
succumbed,  more  or  less  reluctantly,  to  Death's 
command,  and  have  been  engulphed  in  Death's 
garner.  Many  pass  to  and  fro  under  that  dark 
yew-tree,  but  all  meet  at  last  under  its  boding 
shadow. 

"You  must  really  see  our  little  church,  Mr. 
Goodrick,"  said  Mr.  Beauflower,  the  morning  after 
his  guest  arrived,  "  and  I  and  Julia  will  be  your 
cicerones."  Clerg}mien  always  delight  in  showing 
friends  over  their  churches,  as  much  as  country 


132  THE   vicar's   COUETSHIP. 

gentlemen  do  in  showing  friends  over  tlieir  im- 
provements. 

"  I'm  quite  ready,"  said  Mr.  Goodrick,  rather 
enthusiastically  for  him  ;  "  true,  I  had  some  letters 
to  write — but  they  can  wait." 

''  Oh,  pray  finish  your  letters  first,  ]Mr.  Good- 
rick," said  Julia,  in  her  hasty  way. 

"  Oh,  no ;  they  can  wait.  Miss  Beauflower.  I 
am  cpiite  at  your  service." 

It  was  a  fresh  autumn  morning.  There  had 
been  rain  in  the  night,  and  the  sky  was  clearer 
and  purer  for  it.  A  blackljird  singing  in  one  of 
the  great  elms,  was  pouring  forth  notes  glowing, 
mellow,  and  worthy  of  spring.  The  dew  was 
diamonding  the  laurel  and  aucuba  Ijushes,  and 
sparkled  cold  and  bright  upon  the  autumn  roses 
round  the  porch.  Just  as  the  vicar,  his  sister,  and 
guest  stepped  out  upon  the  lawn,  the  postman, 
with  his  budget  slung  round  him,  came  striding 
over  the  little  grey  bridge  opposite  the  vicarage. 

''  Oh,  here's  the  postman,"  cried  Julia,  and 
clapped  her  hands. 

The  man  touched  his  hat  to  Mr.  Beauflower,  as 
he  passed  over  the  bridge;  the  next  moment  the 
housemaid  came  out  with  the  bag,  Beauflower 
unlocked  it  with  a  little  brass  key  he  carried  in  his 
pocket,  and  took  out  three  letters,  two  for  his 
sister  and  one  for  himself. 


SUMMERLEAS.  133 

His  own  was  directed  in  a  bold  business-like 
hand.  He  turned  rather  pale  when  he  saw  it, 
opened  it  with  nervous  haste,  and  thrust  it  into 
his  pocket. 

"  No  bad  news,  Edward?"  said  Julia. 

*'  No — only  a  business  letter;  and  who  are  yours 
from,  Julia  ? '' 

"  One  from  that  dear  Miss  Chivers ;  the  other 
from  that  stupid  dressmaker  at  Salisbury — she 
can't  match  the  Irish  poplin  ;  but  there,  what's 
the  use  of  telling  you  silly  men  ?  ' 

So  Julia  betook  herself  to  her  mother,  and  the 
two  women  plunged  into  a  deep  consultation.  As 
they  stood  there,  several  of  those  market-carts 
covered  with  barrel-shaped  a^vnings  jangled  by  on 
their  way  to  Slobury ;  and  from  several  of  these 
hearty  greetings  were  shouted  to  the  Vicar,  who 
returned  them  with  cheery  affability.  Next  trotted 
by  on  a  big  black  cob  a  thin  old  farmer  with  a 
frosty  face  and  a  look  of  gTcat  good-nature  mingled 
with  shrewdness. 

"  How  do  do.  Muster  Beauflower  ? ''  he  shouted 
in  broad  Wiltshire.  "You'll  be  glad  to  hear 
wheat's  down  again." 

"  Glad  of  it,  Mr.  Brown.  Hope  Mrs.  Brown  is 
quite  well." 

"  She's  tidy,  thank  you.  Comes  back  to-day 
by  the  dree  (three)  o'clock  train." 


131.  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

*'  They're  a  nice  hearty  people  down  here,"'  said 
Mr.  Beauflower ;  "very  straightforward  and  sincere. 
And  now  for  the  church.  Julia,  brino-  alono-  our 
reluctant  sight-seer." 

There  is  always  something  rather  weird  and 
solemn  in  opening  the  door  of  an  empty  building, 
and  more  especially  so  the  door  of  a  church — a 
vague  sort  of  feeling  pervades  one  that  if  the  door 
was  only  thrown  open  very  suddenly  one  would 
come  on  a  procession  of  fairies  doing  penance,  or 
a  witch  in  ambush,  or  mass  being  said  by  monkish 
ghosts.  But  ever  as  the  bolts  creak  back  and 
the  sunshine  streams  in,  the  enchantment  flies. 
Ghosts  are  never  to  be  taken  by  surprise. 

In  her  Beatrice  way,  rattled  on  Julia  Beau- 
flower  as  her  brother  unlocked  the  door  with  a 
large  ofiicial-looking  key,  and  the  three  entered. 

"  There  is  a  tradition  among  us  clergymen, 
Mr.  Goodrich,"  said  Beauflower,  "that  when  a 
rector  tolls  the  bell  on  induction,  the  number  of 
times  he  tolls  foretells  the  number  of  years  he 
will  hold  the  living." 

"  Pooh  !  "  said  Goodiick,  "  I  have  no  belief  in 
any  superstitions.  Tony,  I  beheve,  has  some 
respect  still  for  Obi  women ;  and  they  used  to 
say  he  had  a  fetish,  a  cockatoo's  feather,  and  a 
snake's  head  that  he  very  much  venerated ;  but 
I  really  believe  it  was  a  libel." 


SUMMERLEAS.  135 

*'  It  is  no  nonsense  ;  it's  quite  true,"  said  Julia 
Beauflower,  jealous  in  the  cause  of  superstition. 
"  There  was  Uncle  Eobert  at  Telford ;  he  tolled 
four  times.  We  sat  at  the  vicarage  ^^dndow 
listening  to  him  and  thinking  about  the  belief ; 
well,  he  lived  only  four  years  and  a  half." 

"  The  post  hoc,  but  not  the  propter  hoc — he  died 
after  the  bell-tolling,  but  not  in  consequence." 
"  Ah,  you  have  no  faith,  Mr.  Goodrich." 
*'  No,  and  least  of  all  in  what  I  see." 
The  little  church  was  dusty  where  it  was  not 
damp,  and  damp  where  it  was  not  dusty.  The 
matting  in  the  aisles  was  ragged  in  places.  The 
few  cushions  were  mouldy.  The  tables  of  Com- 
mandments and  the  Creed,  painted  on  one  of  the 
walls,  were  blurred  and  cob-webbed.  The  rudely 
carved  doors  of  the  pe\vs  were  rickety  on  their 
hino'es.  The  chancel  ceilino-  was  cracked.  The 
stones  of  the  chancel  pavement  were  broken  and 
uneven.  The  parish  was  evidently  not  enthusi- 
astic about  church  decorations.  There  was  very 
little  of  ruined  splendour  about  the  building. 
Even  the  founder's  tomb  against  the  chancel  wall 
was  a  mere  flat  low  stone  monument,  jagged 
and  fretted  by  time,  and  without  either  recum- 
bent figure  or  inscription.  There  were  no 
orand  alabaster  fio;ures  there  with  hands  closed 
in    eternal    supplication.      Xo  Crusaders,    with 


136  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

fixed  calm  stony  faces,  submitting  with  proud 
patience  to  their  doom — no  heraldic  blazonry  of 
gold,  sable  and  gules — nothing  but  that  one  blank 
solemn,  mysterious,  and  desolate  tomb. 

But  above  it  there  was  a  sumptuous  modern 
mural  monument  supported  by  small  fluted  Co- 
rinthian pillars  of  white  marble,  edged  dolefully 
with  black  after  the  old  dismal  country  fashion. 
It  was  to  the  memory  of 

HERBERT    STAUNTON,   Esq., 

Of  Suinmerleas  Abbey, 

For   many  years   M.P,    for   North   Wilts, 

Died  Nov.  13,  1844.     Aged  74,  Sec.  &c. 

Then  came  a  long  Latin  inscription  enumerating'^ 
Mr.  Staunton's  many  virtues,  his  generosity,  bene- 
volence, and  public  S23irit. 

*'  Eeally  an  old  hunx,  as  I  have  heard,''  said 
Mr.  Beauflower. 

"  I  have  heard  quite  the  contrary,"  said  !Mr. 
Goodrich,  gravely. 

''  Yoit  have  heard  V 

"  Yes.  That  gentleman's  son  was  my  great 
friend  in  Jamaica ;  there  is  his  monument." 

Mr.  Goodrich  pointed  as  he  spoke  to  a  small 
mean  marble  slab  below  the  monument  first  de- 
scribed, on  which  was  the  following  inscription  : — 

To  the  memory  of 

HERBERT    STAUNTON,   Esq., 

Who  was  drowned  at  sea  off  the  Pearl  islands,  the  ord  of  June,  1 S30. 

Aged  30, 


SUMMERLEAS.  137 

Mr.  Goodrick  stood  contemplating  tlie  two  mo- 
numents, with  one  hand  over  his  mouth,  and  he  did 
not  speak  for  several  minutes.     Then  he  said, — • 

"  I  feel  a  great  interest  in  this  little  church, 
Beauflower.  I  have  heard  Staunton  describe  it  so 
often,  when  he  ^Yas  talking  of  the  scenes  of  his 
boyhood.  These  open  pews  in  the  chancel,  that 
old  shaky  carved  pulpit,  the  squire's  pew  there  to 
the  right — they  all  seem  as  familiar  to  me,  as  if  I 
had  known  them  myself  years  ago.  You  know 
that  feehng;  that  sometimes  comes  over  one,  as  if 
the  place  you  were  in  and  the  people  you  are 
talking  to  for  the  first  time  had  been  known  to 
you  before  V 

"  Oh,  yes  ;  isn't  it  curious,"  said  Julia  Beau- 
flower.     "Why  is  it?" 

*'  Well,  metaphysicians  have  discovered  several 
grand  reasons  for  it,"  said  Mr.  Goodrick,  with  a 
smile ;  "  but  none,  I  fear,  that  render  it  much 
clearer  to  ordinary  people  like  you  and  me,  Miss 
Julia.     But  where's  Beauflower  ? " 

Beauflower  had  strolled  out  of  the  church,  and 
just  then  stood  leaning  against  the  rusty  railings 
of  one  of  those  huge  prison  tombs  that  disfigure 
country  churchyards.  It  was  the  tomb  of  a 
former  vicar — a  Eeverend  Mr.  Bennet,  who  had 
died  in  1745  ;  it  stood  near  a  little  side-door 
leading  into  the  chancel,  blocldng  up  one  of  the 


13S  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

small  loop-hole  windows.  He  drew  from  liis 
breast-pocket  tlie  letter  the  postman  had  just 
brought,  read  it  twice  over,  sighed  deeply,  and 
slowly  replaced  it  in  its  envelope.  The  letter  w^as 
a  dunning  one  for  money,  interest  on  a  sum  bor- 
rowed many  years  before  at  Oxford,  at  an  exorbi- 
tant rate  of  interest.  It  was  a  stern,  pressing 
business  letter,  and  not  to  be  evaded. 

Mr.  Beauflower  was  not  a  rich  man.  The  only 
son  of  a  Wiltshire  vicar,  he  had  been  sent  early 
to  college,  and  had  there  had  the  misfortune  to 
get  into  a  silly  fashionable  expensive  set,  whose 
expenditure  he  had  been  obhged  to  imitate.  He 
had  left  college  encumbered  with  debt,  the  interest 
on  which  had  swallowed  up  all  his  ready  money. 
Strict  economy  alone  had  enabled  him  to  keep 
his  head  above  water.  He  was  like  one  of  those 
men  that  tlie  cruelty  of  old  times  condemned  to 
imprisonment  in  a  room  which  slowly  filled  with 
water,  the  only  escape  from  which  was  incessant 
toil  at  a  pump — a  moment's  relaxation  or  de- 
spair, and  the  prisoner  was  droAvned.  Just  then 
the  sky  seemed  darkening  round  the  Vicar.  Where 
should  he  turn  for  help  ?  Yes,  he  would  write  to 
Fairfield,  and  get  him  to  appeal  to  Messrs.  Fox  and 
Shekall,  and  beg  for  time — a  week  or  two — time 
to  turn  round — a  respite — till  he  could  get  a 
cheque.    Who  could  he  ask  for  money  ?    Once  the 


SUMMERLEAS.  139 

thought  flashed  across  his  mind  of  asking  his  rich 
visitor,  but  that  he  instantly  dismissed.  He  did 
not  know  enouo-h  of  him.  He  had  no  rioht  to  ask 
him.  No.  He  would  not  ask  him,  come  what 
miofht. 

o 

Just  then  a  little  country  cart  with  a  Avhite 
awning  jogged  up  the  road,  and  stopped  at  the 
Vicarage  gate.  A  thickset  greasy-looking  man  in 
blue  jumped  out  in  front,  and  led  the  cart  up  the 
glebe  meadow  towcirds  the  back  door.  The  mea- 
dow lay  on  the  other  side  of  the  churchyard  wall, 
and  the  Ijutcher's  eye  caught  sight  of  the  Vicar  as 
he  came  up  the  field.  He  at  once  left  his  cart, 
and  came  towards  the  Vicar,  smiling  obsequiously, 
and  in  a  sidling,  false  way  that  betokened  mischief. 
The  Vicar  slightly  coloured. 

"  Good  morning,  sir.     Fine  morning,  sir." 

''Good  morning,  Mr.  Pitts.  Got  any  beef  to- 
dayr^ 

"  Don  t  kiU  beef  till  Saturday,  sh\" 

''  How's  business  ? ''  This  was  a  fatal  question, 
it  gave  the  opening  to  the  enemy. 

"Very  slack,  very  slack  ;  business  is  desperate 
bad  to  be  sure.  Hardly  ever  remembers  it  so 
bad." 

"Indeed!  I'm  very  sorry  to  hear  that,  Mr. 
Pitts." 

"  Well,  business  is  plaguy  bad,  to  be  sm^,  and — 


140  THE    VICARS    COURTSHIP. 

I  beg  your  pardon,  sir,"  the  butcher  had  taken 
three  stejDS  from  the  Vicar,  he  now  turned  again ; 
the  Vicar,  too,  had  turned  away,  and  was  almost 
at  the  church  porch,  where  Julia  was  calling  him. 
Mr.  Beauflower  susj^ected  evil  and  coloured  again. 

"  Beg  your  pardon,  sir,"  said  Mr.  Pitts,  coming 
close  up  to  the  churchyard  wall,  and  s]Deaking  in 
a  familiar  yet  confidential  voice  which  implied  a 
consciousness  of  power  and  a  certain  equality ; 
"  but  you  couldn't  oblige  me  with  ten  pounds  on 
account  ?  I  am  going  to  Salisbury  this  afternoon  ; 
and  IVe  got  a  heavy  sum  to  pay  for  sheep  to 
Mr.  Harker  s  bailiff.  It  would  be  very  accept- 
able." 

The  demand  was  very  inopportune,  could  not 
have  been  more  inopportune.  It  was  for  that 
reason  that  pride  instantly  induced  Mr.  Beau- 
flower  to  jyay  the  ten  pounds  at  any  sacrifice. 

"  Wait  a  moment,"  he  said,  "  and  111  get 
you  the  money.  I  meant  to  have  paid  you 
before." 

The  butcher  had  not  expected  to  get  the 
money.  It  Avas  merely  what  he  called  "  a  try 
on."  He  was  pleased,  and  could  not  help  show- 
ing it  offensively. 

Mr.  Beauflower,  as  he  walked  to  his  vicarage 
side  by  side  with  the  butcher,  reflected  with  what 
cruel  virulence  such  a  man  as  Pitts  would  spread 


8UMMERLEAS.  141 

tlie  report  of  his  want  of  ready  money ;  dwelling 
to  the  servants  at  every  house  at  which  he  stopped 
on  his  fears  that  the  Vicar  was  "  coming  to  grief," 
and  lamenting  how  hard  it  was  to  get  any  money 
out  of  him. 

"Next  week  would  do/'  Pitts,  with  a  rather 
coarse  kind  of  good  nature,  said,  as  they  walked 
together,  Mr.  Beauflower  silent  and  pre-occupied. 
"  Should  be  sorry  to  put  you  to  any  incon- 
venience, sir ;  your  money's  always  good,  though 
the  bill  has  been  runnino;  six  months  over.  I  no 
doubt  could  scrape  up  money  enough.  Every  one 
is  short  of  ready  money  sometimes.  If  it  is  more 
convenient  next  week." 

"  It  is  not  at  all  inconvenient  to-day.  I  would 
rather  pay  you  now ;  the  bill  has  stood  already 
longer  than  I  intended." 

The  proud,  sensitive  man  in  that  three  minutes' 
walk  suffered  more  than  a  man  bound  by  Indians 
and  w^aiting  to  be  scalped.  The  butcher's  pity  was 
hard  to  bear ;  he  had  no  doubt  heard  from  the 
Slobuiy  baker  and  the  Bibury  brewer,  j^erhaps 
that  very  morning,  that  money  was  hard  to  get 
at  Summerleas  Vicarage. 

The  butcher,  with  many  apologies  for  his  boots, 
clumped  into  the  Vicar's  study,  received  the  ten 
sovereigns,  gave  a  receipt  with  much  patronising 
solemnity,    and  pocketed  it  with   much  inward 


142  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

cliuckling.  How  people  talked ;  the  Vicar  paid 
readily  enough,  he  only  wanted  pressing,  it 
seemed.  He  should  report  that  to-night  at  the 
Peal  of  Bells. 

As  he  took  up  his  hat,  and  left  with  many 
thanks,  Mr.  Beauflower  rested  his  head  on  his 
hand,  and,  as  he  locked  his  desk,  said  to  himself : 

"  Yes,  it  is  a  hard  struggle,  but  I  will  ask  Mr. 
Harker  to  advance  that  money.  He  is  a  vulgar, 
purse-proud  man,  but  he  will  not  refuse,  for  it  is 
a  small  sum,  and  the  security  is  good.  I  shall 
treat  it  lightly,  as  a  mere  momentary  convenience, 
a  mere  saving  of  time ;  he  will  take  it  as  a  man 
of  the  world  does  such  things,  and  refuse  at  once 
or  consent  graciously." 

Comforted  with  this  hopeful  view  of  things, 
Beauflower  rejoined  Mr.  Goodrick  and  his  sister. 
Julia  was  eager  to  communicate  the  last  atrocity 
of  her  new  enemy. 

"  Oh,  Ned,  only  think  what  this  dreadful  person 
says;  he  declares  that  travelling  is  pleasant,  only 
because  it  changes  one's  annoyances." 

"  Well,  and  is  not  that  a  sufficient  motive  for 
travelling,  my  fair  enemy?"  said  Mr.  Goodrick, 
resolutely. 


NEW   MONEY.  143 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

NEW  MONEY. 

When  Amy  Robinson's  fly  drove  up  the  long 
winding  road  leading  to  Summerleas  Abbey  it 
became,  before  it  bad  gone  half  a  hundred  yards 
from  the  spot  where  Mr.  Goodrick  fainted,  en- 
tangled in  a  string  of  carriages  forming  a  proces- 
sion which  had  evidently  one  common  purpose. 
There  was  an  evening  party,  that  was  evident ; 
the  gravel  crunched  and  ground  under  the  in- 
numerable wheels  that  came  faster  and  faster ; 
lamps  gleamed  on  the  glossy  leaves  of  the 
arbutuses  and  laurels  in  the  shrubberies,  and,  as 
the  long  line  of  vehicles  every  now  and  then 
halted  (there  being  occasionally  a  dead  lock, 
indicated  by  the  signal  hand  of  the  footmen,  who 
watched  the  interests  of  the  coachmen  in  a  sort  of 
temporary  first  lieutenant  capacity),  there  came 
from  the  carriages  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of 
the  little  governess  the  sound  of  cheery  and  merry 
talking ;  she  caught  glimpses,  too,  did  our  little 


144  THE   vicar's    COUETSHIP. 

Cinderella,  of  briglit  necklaces  glittering  head- 
dresses and  spangled  fans,  and  of  white-gloved 
hands  resting-  on  window-ledo-es.  Dio^nified  and 
portly  members  for  the  county  and  justices  of 
the  peace  displayed  large  surfaces  of  white  waist- 
coat and  placid  faces,  epicurean,  contented,  and 
slightly  selfish. 

"Dear  me, how  very  unfortunate,'' thought  Amy, 
"just  to  arrive  the  very  evening  of  a  party.  How 
can  I  creep  in  unobserved  ?  Oh,  how  I  wish  I  was 
a  mouse,  and  could  slip  between  people's  feet, 
and  get  up  to  my  own  bedroom,  where  that  kind 
creature,  Mrs.  Spelman^  the  housekeeper,  would 
get  me  some  tea." 

But  there  was  no  such  lucky  chance.  Kemorse- 
lessly,  just  after  Lord  Mazagan's  carriage,  the 
Slobury  flyman,  careless  of  appearances,  drove 
stolidly  forward  under  the  huge  CTrecian  portico, 
to  the  indignation  of  three  (^.onspicuous  footmen 
in  lio-ht  drab  liverv  and  crimson  breeches.  Con- 
temptuously  one  of  them  threw  open  the  door, 
and,  seeing  who  it  was,  merely  said,  "  Oh,  it's  you, 
Miss,"  in  an  injured  way  received  one  or  two 
of  Miss  Eobinson's  small  parcels,  then  hurried  off 
to  help  a  large  party  of  ladies  out  of  a  stylish 
close  carriage  that  just  then  drove  up. 

"Allow  me,"  said  a  stalwart  young  fellow, 
with  a  handsome  flighty  expression,  who  had  just 


NEW    MONEY.  1^5 

aliglited  from  a  l^roiigliam,  and  helped  Amy  to 
descend. 

Amy  bowed,  and,  paying  the  driver,  was  about 
to  hurry  in,  feeling  what  an  incongruous  figure 
she  was  among  all  the  grand  people  in  full  dress. 

"Here,  this  wont  do,  Miss,"  said  the  driver, 
cruelly  seizing  his  opportunity.  *' What's  this? 
What,  one  shilling  for  three  miles  ? '' 

"  You  ve  been  paid  at  the  Vicarage,''  said  Amy, 
almost  crying  with  vexation,  for  the  footman  and 
the  young  man  were  both  listening.  "I  need 
not  give  you  anything ;  that  gentleman,  indeed, 
told  me  not  by  any  means  to  give  you  anything." 

"  He  be  blowed,"  said  the  driver ;  "  I  drives 
two  fares  reg'lar  dree  miles  ;  two  fares  when  I 
w^as  only  hired  for  one  ;  I  expect  my  three  bob." 

"  Now  then,  move  on,  flyman,  you're  keeping 
several  carriages  waiting  ;  no  wrangling  here,  the 
lady  has  paid  you." 

"  Lady  arn't  paid  me,  and  I  don't  go  till  she 
does,"  said  the  fellow,  who  had  been  drinking ; 
"  who  are  you,  I'd  like  to  know,  turning  uj)  your 
nose  at  an  honester  man  than  ever  wore  plush  ? 
Though  I  do  drive  a  fly,  I'm  not  going  to  be  put 
upon  either  by  you  or  your  master." 

"You  feUow,  move  ofl","  said  one  of  the  footmen 
before  alluded  to  ;  "  come  !  or  we'll  have  you 
took  up." 

VOL.    I.  L 


146  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

*'  ril  have  yon  taken  doA\Tii ;  you  don  t  tliink  I 
care  two  straws  for  you  or  your  master  either — we 
all  know  him.  He  was  a  servant  once  himself,  we 
all  know  that.  What  right  has  he  to  be  proud  ? 
He's  only  a  hupstart.  Who  are  you  a-movingon?'' 

"  Oh,  pray  give  him  this/'  said  Amy  to  one  of 
the  footmen,  trembling  with  horror  at  the  scene 
that  had  ensued.     It  was  half-a-crown. 

The  gentleman  interfered.  ^'No,"he  said,  ''by 
Jove,  no,  the  fellow  shan't  have  an}i^hing." 

Then  he  stepj)ed  up,  six  foot  of  him,  to  the 
driver,  who  still  continued  his  objurgations.  "  If 
you  don't  get  on  your  box,  and  shut  up,  you 
fellow,"  he  said,  "  and  drive  off  directly,  by  Jove, 
sir,  I'll  make  you  ;  you  shan't  insult  this  lady — 
you'd  better  think  t^vice  about  it.  I  hit  rather 
hard,  they  tell  me,  from  the  shoulder." 

The  man  eyed  his  antagonist  from  top  to  toe, 
then  sullenly  got  up  on  the  box,  and  submitted 
to  his  audience  that  perhaps  two  shillings 
wouldn't  hurt  the  young  lady. 

The  officer  took  out  a  shilling,  and  gave  it 
the  man.  Then  the  fly  drove  away.  Amy  stopped 
for  a  moment  to  thank  her  champion,  and  then 
glided  away  up  stairs. 

"  How  do  you  like  that  girl  ? "  said  the  cham- 
pion to  a  friend  still  more  flighty  than  himself  ; 
*'  governess,  I  suppose  '? " 


KEW   MONEY.  147 

"  Eatlier  like  lier,"  said  the  friend  ;  "  but  no 
go  about  her — looks  like  a  milliner ;  hasn't  two 
ideas,  I  should  say — not  my  style.  AYill  be  awful 
slow  to-night  here.  I  wish  we'd  kept  at  loo. 
What  sort  of  a  fellow  is  Harker — a  cad  ? " 

"  Well,  rather  a  cad,  but  he  lends  a  fellow  tin, 
and  doesn't  press  a  fellow  ;  old  bird  wants  me  to 
marry  her  daughter — lots  of  mopuses,  but  I  don't 
seem  to  see  it.     Suppose  you  have  her.  Jack  ?  " 

*^  Thank  you  ;  won't  deprive  you  of  such  a 
chance.  I  say,  Cantelupe,  I  ^\dsli  we  could  have 
a  smoke  "v\ithout  smelling  of  it ;  by  George, 
wouldn't  you  like  a  smoke  ? " 

"  Eather." 

Two  ladies  met  Amy  on  the  stairs.  The  elder 
stout,  with  large,  hard  features,  and  hard,  cunning- 
eyes  ;  the  younger,  bony,  shrill- voiced,  rather 
red  in  the  nose,  and  much  over-dressed.  It  was 
Mrs.  Harker,  and  the  eldest  Miss  Harker. 

"What,  Miss  Eobinson  !"  they  both  exclaimed  ; 
"  why  when  did  you  return  ?  Oh,  how  fortunate  ; 
for  we  want  you  to  play  while  the  charades  are 
doing.     You're  not  tired  ? " 

"  Oh,  not  at  all ;  only  a  little  headache,"  said 
Amy,  with  a  slight  shudder ;  "  and  that  will  soon 
go  oflf  ^dth  some  eau  de  Coloo^ne." 

"J\lr.  Harker  thought  it  hardly  worth  while  hav- 
ing a  professional,  besides  we  felt  sure  you  would 

L   2 


148  THE  vicar's   COURTSHIP. 

come.  Ah  !  you  missed  the  carriage — really,  the 
servants  were  too  busy.  We  felt  you  would  be  sure 
to  get  a  fly.  You  won't  be  long  dressing — will 
youl" 

Amy  said  she  would  not. 

*'  Spelman  will  bring  you  a  cup  of  tea  and  a 
biscuit,  and  you'll  dress  and  be  down  directly. 
Father  and  mother  well,  I  hope  ?  " 

Poor  Amy  !    They  had  no  heart  for  her  fatigue. 

"  Hope  you  enjoyed  your  holidays,  Miss  Eobin- 
son  ?  "  said  Mrs.  Harker. 

"  It  was  a  short  time,  and  it  passed  very  quick  ; 
but,  yes,  I  enjoyed  it  very  much." 

"  And  come  back,  I  trust,  with  renewed  vigour 
to  your  duty  \ "  said  Mrs.  Harker,  with  a  high 
moral  tone. 

"  I'm  come  back  quite  happy  to  do  my  duty," 
said  Amy.     "  Can  I  see  Ethel  ? " 

"  Ethel  is  down  stairs  ;  I'll  tell  her  you're 
come,"  said  Mrs.  Harker,  as  she  swept  out  of  the 
room,  followed  by  the  thin  daughter  in  blue. 

Presently  Ethel  burst  into  the  room,  a  hearty, 
pretty  girl  of  fourteen,  her  warm  toned 
brown  hair  streaming  down  her  back.  She  was 
delighted  to  see  Amy,  and,  holding  her  hands, 
loaded  her  with  boisterous  kisses,  laughing  all 
the  while ;  she  was  full  of  news.  Mamma  had 
got  a  pony  to   match   the  cream-coloured  one ; 


NEW   MONEY.  149 

the  medlars  were  ripe ;  the  Beauflowers  were 
expecting  a  visitor;  there  was  to  be  such  fun 
with  the  charades  ;  old  Bennet's  son  had  been 
taken  up  for  poaching. 

Amy  listened  with  interest. 

*'  And  they  say,  too,  Mr.  Beauflower  s  going  to 
marry  one  of  the  Miss  Stillwells  of  Compton- 
Deverill?^^ 

"What!  one  of  those  horrid  gaunt  girls .1 
Well,  I  don  t  admire  his  taste.'' 

"  And  that  is  all  you  have  to  say,  Amy?  Why, 
I  thought  you  would  be  vexed  ? " 

"Why  should  I?" 

"  Oh,  I  don't  know  ?"  said  the  laughing  girl,  "  if 
you  don't;  bat  he  has  beautiful  eyes — hasn't  he?" 

"  Eeally,  Ethel,  I  never  studied  them." 

"  Ah,  but  they  are  bright,  now,  ain't  they  ? " 

"  Ethel,  you  goose,  don't  talk  such  nonsense." 

"  Well,  I  won  t  ever  marry  any  one,  no,  that  I 
won't,  who  has  not  got  black  (Oh,  such  very 
black)  hair,  and  blue  (Oh,  such  blue)  eyes,  like  Mr. 
Beauflower  s ;  he  must  be  a  general  or  a  prince, 
and '' 

'•  Ethel,  what  spirits  you're  in  to-night ;  I  see 
you  want  me  back  to  keep  you  in  order,  you  little 
scatterbrains.  Now,  dear,  run  down  and  ask  Mrs. 
Spelman  to  send  up  me  a  cup  of  tea ;  I'm  so  tired 
and  thirsty." 


150  THE   vicar's   COUETSHIP/ 

Ethel  ran  off  like  a  lapwing.  The  housekeeper, 
a  cosy,  fussy  old  body,  came  up  with  it  herself. 

"  Why,  my  dear  child  ? "  she  said  ;  "  I  am  so 
glad  to  see  you  back ;  and  how  were  papa  and 
mamma,  bonny  ?  But  you  look  pale,  dear  :  now 
you  ought  to  go  to  bed,  and  not  sit  up  any  more 
■ — ought  n't  she.  Miss  Ethel  ?  Is  the  tea  nice  ? 
I  made  it  myself  ;  and  there's  a  piece  of  thin  toast 
coming,  it  not  being  good  to  drink  alone,  as  Lady 
Blanche  used  to  say.  My  dear,  we've  been  so 
successful  with  the  preserves.  "Wliat,  you're  not 
o'oino:  down  as^ain  to-nis^ht  ?  " 

"  I  must." 

"  Well,  that's  too  bad.  My  dear,  you  ain't  fit 
for  it.  You  look  quite  worn.  Doesn't  she.  Miss 
Ethel  ? " 

"  Oh,  it's  cruel,  very  cruel,  of  mamma,"  said 
Ethel. 

Poor  Amy ! — in  a  few  minutes  she  had  dressed, 
and  was  down  in  the  drawing-room.  Quietly  she 
threaded  her  way  to  the  piano,  unnoticed,  and 
waited  there  till  the  first  charade  was  ready.  In 
the  meantime  Mrs.  Harker  had  given  her  direc- 
tions when  to  begin  and  what  to  play. 

The  room  was  very  hot  where  she  stood,  and 
the  crowd  was  great.  They  pressed  closer  round 
her.  Her  head  began  to  swim.  Just  then  Mrs. 
Harker  fixed  her  stern,  steely  eye  upon  her  as  the 


NEW   MONEY.  151 

signal  to  play  the  accompaniment  to  the  first  cha- 
rade. Suddenly  her  head  sank — there  was  a  crash 
upon  the  keys.     Poor  Amy  Eobinson  had  fainted. 

"  Who  is  it  ? — what  is  it  ? "  everybody  cried, 
straining  their  necks  to  see — even  the  charade 
performers  broke  up  the  scene  and  crowded 
forward. 

"  Was  there  ever  anything  so  provoking  ?  "  said 
Mrs.  Harker,  in  her  dry,  unrelenting  way. 

"  What  is  all  this  about?"  said  a  coarse,  bluster- 
ing voice,  as  a  man  pushed  his  way  through  the 
crowd  in  an  authoritative  way ;  "  why  don't  the 
charades  go  on  ?  good  gracious  me,  why  doesn't 
the  performance  proceed  ? " 

It  was  ]Mr.  Harker  who,  pompously  making  his 
way  through  the  ring  of  spectators  that  sur- 
rounded the  fainting  girl,  scowled  angrily  when 
he  discovered  the  cause  of  the  confusion,  and  saw 
Amy  Eobinson  pale  as  a  corpse  being  supported 
by  two  ladies,  while  the  Honourable  Mr.  Cant- 
elupe,  who  had  manifested  great  anxiety  on  her 
behalf,  was  emerging  from  the  opposite  side  of 
the  ring  with  a  doctor  whom  he  had  been  to  seek 
in  some  other  part  of  the  room.  The  medical 
man  felt  Amy's  pulse. 

"  Mere  fainting  fit,  Briscoe,  I  suppose  ? "  said 
Mr.  Harker. 

"Yes  ;  she  will  soon  recover,  it  is  only  fatigue; 


152  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

but  she  must  not  remain  any  longer  in  the  hot 
room/' 

"  She  must  come  back  presently.  We  rather 
want  her  services  at  the  piano." 

"  No  ;  she  really  must  not  try  to  play  to-night 
again,"  said  Dr.  Briscoe,  somewhat  drily,  for  he 
saw  at  once  the  coarse  unfeeling  nature  of  the 
man  he  addressed,  yet  did  not  wish  to  irritate 
him.  Then  he  turned  to  Amy,  who  was  slowly 
recovering,  and  looked  alarmed  and  distressed  at 
being  the  centre  of  a  crowd  of  staring  spectators, 
"  Do  you  feel  better.  Miss  Eobinson  ?  "  He  said 
this  in  a  gentle  and  friendly  tone. 

"Oh,  yes.  Dr.  Briscoe,  Tm  much  better,  thank 

you." 

"  I'm  awfully  sorry  to  see  you  so  ill,"  said  Mr. 
Cantelupe. 

Just  then  Miss  Harker  appeared  on  the  scene 
smilingly  ferocious  at  the  interruption  of  the 
evening,  at  the  interest  exhibited  by  young  Cant- 
elupe, and  at  a  governess  daring  to  break  down 
in  health  at  the  very  moment  her  services  were 
specially  needed. 

"  You'd  better  get  into  the  fresh  air,"  she  said 
to  Amy,  in  a  sardonic  whisper;  "you're  quite 
well  now." 

Dr.  Briscoe  offered  Amy  his  arm,  which  she 
accepted. 


NEW  MONEY.  153 

"  It  s  a  doosed  deal  too  bad  treating  the  poor 
girl  that  way,"  thought  Cantelupe.  "I'm  sure 
from  her  look  the  old  bird  has  been  bullying  her." 

Amy  quite  recovered  in  the  cooller  air  of  the 
hall. 

"I  must  not  leave  you/'  Dr.  Briscoe  said,  "my 
dear  Miss  Kobinson,  till  you  tell  me  you  feel 
quite  yourself.  Did  the  heat  oppress  you  ?  Did 
you  feel  fotigued  ? '"' 

"I  only  came  back  from  London  this  evening," 
said  Amy,  in  her  gentle,  uncomplaining  way, 
"and  I  suppose  the  jom^ney  tired  me.  I  did  not 
feel  anything  till  the  moment  I  began  to  play." 

"  ■Mrs.  Harker  is  a  severe  disciplinarian,"  said 
the  doctor,  smilingly ;  "  and,  like  most  hardy 
persons,  has  a  way  of  almost  resenting  any  one 
about  her  being  ill.  Pardon  me,  as  a  friend,  dear 
Miss  Eobinson,  if  I  beg  you  not  to  over-work. 
Take  plenty  of  exercise  and  oxygenate  the  blood 
on  those  grand  broad  downs  of  ours." 

"  And  how  is  she  now.  Doctor  ? "  said  Miss 
Harker,  who  came  gliding  between  the  scagiiola 
pillars  like  the  ghost  of  somebody's  youth,  and 
looking  harder  and  sterner  than  ever. 

"  Oh  !  I'm  quite  well  again,  thank  you,"  said 
Amy. 

"  Yes  ?  then  you'll  play  for  us  presently  ?  I 
don't  like  asking  ]\Irs.  Grafton  to  play  all  the 


154  THE   vicar's   COURTSHIP. 

charades   in,  though  she  is  such   a  dear,  good- 
natured  creature." 

"  Oh  !  I  certainly  will  try,"  said  Amy,  with 
rather  a  quavering  voice. 

"  No ;  come,  on  that  I  put  my  decided  veto," 
said  the  doctor,  buttoning  his  coat  fiercely  over 
his  breast.  "  Miss  Eobinson  must  not  play  again 
to-night!" 

"  But,  Dr.  Briscoe,  do  let  me  ! " 

"  You  do  not  enter  that  room  again  to-night," 
said  the  doctor,  firmly. 

"  Why,  Dr.  Briscoe,  you  are  quite  a  tyrant ! " 
said  Miss  Harker,  sarcastically.  "  You  must 
think  women  are  very  poor  weak  creatures. 
Fainting  is  nothing — why  everyone  faints." 

"  I  mean  to  be  a  tyrant  in  this  case.  Miss 
Eobinson  must  not  play  again  to-night.  She  is 
tired  with  her  journey." 

Mrs.  Harker  just  then  appeared  inquiringly 
at  the  door  of  the  drawing-room,  glanced  round 
the  hall,  then  darted  on  the  group. 

"  Miss  Eobinson,"  she  said,  ''  Fm  so  sorry,  but 
you  really  must  come  and  take  the  piano,  if  you 
are  better,  for  Mrs.  Grafton  is  getting  tired. 
You  are  quite  well  now,  my  dear — come  !  Good 
gracious  me,  what  are  girls  made  of  now  to  think 
so  much  of  a  little  faintness  !  Why,  when  I  was 
young,  if  Fd  made  so  much  fuss  as  you  have,  I 


XEW   MONEY.  155 

should  never  have  heard  the  last  of  it.  Come, 
gkl ! " 

"  I  must  really  enter  my  protest/'  said  the  old 
doctor,  firmly. 

"  Oh,  nonsense,  doctor  !  I  insist  upon  it.  We 
can't  get  on  at  all  without  musical  introductions ; 
and  one  can't  ask  one's  own  guests  to  play  the 
piano  all  the  evening.  ^^Ir.  Harker  is  very  much  put 
out  about  this  delay.    He  is  such  a  business  man." 

"  I  will  go  at  once.  I'm  sure  I  shall  not  feel 
ill  again,"  said  Amy,  but  with  rather  a  piteous 
look — a  look  that  would  have  softened  any  heart 
but  ^Irs.  Harker's. 

"  AYell,  I  can  only  continue  my  protest,"  said 
the  doctor,  looking  down  sternly  at  his  boots. 
*'-You  are  in  your  own  house,  Mrs.  Harker,  but  I 
must  be  pardoned  for  saying  that  I  think  you  are 
displapng  a  decided  want  of  feeling  in  thus  press- 
ing Miss  Eobinson  to  do  what  may  be  injurious  to 
her,  and  if  any  illness  ensue  from  her  disobedi- 
ence to  my  wishes  as  a  medical  man,  I  shall  cer- 
tainly lay  those  results  at  your  door." 

Mrs.  Harker  only  shrugged  her  shoulders, 
laughed  in  a  hard,  metallic  way,  and  smiled  at 
her  cast-steel  daughter. 

"Oh!  I  will  answer  for  the  consequences,  Doctor 
Briscoe.  There  will  be  no  second  scene,  I  feel  sure, 
Miss  Eobinson,  I  see  you  are  now  convalescent. 


156  THE   vicar's   COURTSHIP. 

I  shall  feel  much  obliged  by  the  young  lady  re- 
suming her  seat  at  the  piano  I  " 

''  Stuff  and  nonsense,"  she  said  to  her  daughter, 
as  they  returned  to  the  drawing-room,  "  people  are 
better  for  rousing — that  girl  is  a  mass  of  aifectation. 
She  is  as  artful  as  she  can  be.  As  for  Doctor 
Briscoe,  he  had  better  remember  that  there  are 
other  medical  men  in  Wiltshire.  He  is  evidently 
getting  on,  or  he  couldn't  afford  to  be  so  inde- 
pendent. Pretty  pass  governesses  are  come  to  ! 
We  shall  have  scullery  maids  fainting  next,  and 
footmen  going  to  bed  when  they  have  a  headache. 
A  pretty  pass  indeed  ! — and  the  salary  we  pay 
her  1 " 

Poor  Amy !  she  braced  herself  to  the  effort, 
w^alked  boldly  to  the  place  of  torture,  and  began 
to  play. 

"  If  that  girl  dares  to  faint  again,"  Mr.  Harker 
said  in  a  whisper  to  his  wife,  as  he  watched  Amy 
with  the  look  of  a  detective,  "  111  give  her  notice 
to-morrow ;  I  will  have  my  money's  worth  out  of 
those  I  employ.  No  cats  here  that  don't  catch 
mice.  How  badly  she  plays — no  vigour  about  it 
at  all.  Go  and  tell  her  to  be  lively  or  she  shaU 
hear  of  this  to-morrow.  A  governess,  indeed, 
give  herself  airs  I  WeU,  I'm  sure !  StiU,  at  all 
events,  she  saves  a  band  ! " 

"Wliat  a  charming  girl  your  governess  is,"  said 


NEW  MONEY.  157 

Lord  Mazagan,  at  the  same  moment  to  Mrs. 
Harker,  as  the  fourth  charade  began  ;  ''  and  what 
taste  she  has  in  playing !  She  must  be  a  great 
acquisition  to  your  daughter/' 

"  She  sadly  wants  manner,"  said  Mrs.  Harker, 
drily;  "and  her  French  is  very  imperfect.  We  are 
not  altogether  satisfied  ;  but  we  might  do  worse. 
You  know  manner  is  of  such  importance.  I  only 
wish  we  could  have  got  Lady  Clackleton  s  gover- 
ness, she  was  a  treasm^e — fom^  languages — harp, 
piano,  and  teaches  drawing  ! — always  cheerful, 
only  asks  thirty  pounds  the  year ;  and  never 
cares  about  going  out  of  doors,  being  subject  to 
lumbago. '^ 

"  Dear  me,  ivhat  a  treasure  !  But  then.  Lady 
Clackleton  is  a  person  of  great  tact — such  wonder- 
ful tact.  The  governess,  I  hear,  has  a  son  who 
was  a  Mormon  and  an  advertising  tailor,  and  that 
prevents  her  asking  more.  People  did  not  like 
a  governess  mtli  a  Mormon  son  who  was  an 
advertising  tailor,  so  they  made  her  change  her 
name." 

Dr.  Briscoe  left  the  Abbey  that  night  secretly 
furious  at  the  Harkers'  \Tilgarity  and  cruelty. 

"  The  air  positively  smells  of  money ;  and 
ever}^thing  so  bran  new,  and  so  vulgarly  and  osten- 
tatiously costly.  Oh!  that  Mrs.  Harker,  she  is  a 
Tartar,"  he  thought  to  himself  as  he  drove  home. 


158  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

'She  lias  no  more  heart  than  a  fossil  fish;  and  is 
trying  to  hook  that  young  fool  for  her  daughter ! 
I  do  firmly  believe  she  would  have  seen  that 
nice  gentle  girl  drop  dead  at  the  piano,  and  only 
have  been  vexed  then  that  the  party  should  be 
interrupted.  Well,  give  me  the  old  money  :  and 
that  Harker,  too,  is  not  a  happy  man,  Fm  sure, 
with  all  his  wealth.  If  I  was  a  young  fellow 
now,  be  hanged  if  I  would  not  propose  to  that 
Miss  Eobinson  to-morrow.  That  is  the  sort  of 
girl  to  make  a  good  wife — no  nonsensical  affec- 
tation about  her  ! " 


RIDING   TO   COVERT.  159 


CHAPTEE  IX. 

RIDING    TO    COVERT. 

It  was  a  pleasant  autumn  morning,  and  Sum- 
merleas  looked  at  its  best.  The  trees  in  the 
clear  sunshine  were  like  huge  bouquets,  with 
their  varicoloured  leaves.  There  was  the  squirrel 
plapng  graceful  antics  on  the  large  beech-tree 
that  hung  over  the  Abbey  park  waU  opposite  the 
Vicarage  ;  his  gambols  expressed  all  the  fun  of 
fairyland,  and  all  a  child's  delight  in  mere  exist- 
ence. The  sounds  from  the  J&elds  and  farmyards ; 
the  defiant  crow  of  the  monarch  of  the  dung- 
hill, the  chuckling  grunt  of  the  pigs,  the  neigh  of 
the  horses,  the  grotesque  laughter  of  the  turkeys, 
— all  blended  into  a  sort  of  pastoral  s}Tuphony, 
expressive  of  quiet  country  happiness.  Such 
unconscious  concerts  only  reach  certain  favoured 
ears.  Nature,  lavish  of  skyey  splendours,  aerial 
music,  and  a  thousand  such  innocent  delights,  is 
careless  of  audience  and  of  spectators.  For 
her    great    theatre    the    old    scenes    are    every 


160  THE   VICARS   COURTSHIP. 

spring  repainted.  Constant  in  lier  love  for  the 
old  enchantments,  infinitely  varied,  infinitely 
monotonous  are  her  wonders,  the  dawn  s  roses 
to-day  kindled  and  glowed  with  the  same  tint 
which  once  flushed  over  Eden,  and  to  youth  and 
happiness,  to-day  they  seemed  as  beautiful. 

Nothing  could  be  more  calmly  cheerful  than 
the  little  Wiltshire  village.  Every  now  and  then 
the  sound  of  a  gun-shot  rung  through  the  Abbey 
woods.  The  keepers  were  out  ferreting,  plough- 
boys  were  shouting  to  each  other  from  the  high 
fields  towards  the  Downs,  and  from  the  Vicarage 
lawn  their  teams  could  be  seen  pacing  down  the 
long  dark  furrows.  Every  now  and  then  a  white- 
awninged  m.arket-cart  jogged  over  the  little  grey 
bridge.  The  roads  were  hard  and  dry  with  the 
cold  north  wind,  and  over  them  little  gusts  of  dead 
beech  leaves  now  and  then  rustled  wildly,  as  if  in 
search  of  the  parent  tree  that  had  cast  them  off 
to  seek  their  fortunes.  A  thrush  on  the  his^liest 
airy  twig  of  a  big  elm,  from  which  the  leaves 
drifted  in  soft  golden  rain  before  the  wind, 
mistakino;  the  season,  beo;an  to  flute  his  lono-inofs 
for  spring.  In  such  places  one  forgets  that  great 
cities  exist,  as  one  forgets  the  great  restless  sea 
that  once  vexed  its  heart  out  upon  the  white  clifls 
that  are  now  downs.  Swift  the  cloud  shadows 
passed  along  the  white  roads ;  a  few  minutes  ago 


EIDING   TO    COVERT.  161 

tliey  were  miles  away  upon  tlie  Do^\^ns,  and  now 
they  are  crossing  the  Abbey  Park,  on  their  way 
to  catch  the  9 '30  exjDress  train  at  Slobury.  Sounds 
for  the  ear,  light  for  the  eye  ;  the  morning  brought 
in  countless  innocent  delights  for  those  who  loved 
the  simple  pleasures  of  the  country. 

The  Vicarage  looked  very  pleasant  in  the  autumn 
sunlight.  It  was  a  square  solid  building  of  grey 
stone,  which  the  grey  and  orange  blots  of  lichen 
had  crusted  with  a  mottle  of  grave  warm  tints, 
brightened  round  the  basement  and  under  the 
drawing-room  window  by  the  crimson  berries  of 
some  dark  netting  evergreen. 

Nature,  to  the  pictorial  eye,  had  "  carried 
through ''  a  gay  colour,  as  Mr.  Eobinson  would 
have  said,  first  by  the  great  scarlet  bunches  of 
berries  on  a  feathery  mountain  ash  that  grew  by 
the  garden-gate,  and  secondly  by  the  red  drops  on  a 
thorn  tree  that  guarded  a  side-walk.  The  long  roof 
of  cosy  thatch  gave  the  house  the  look  of  an  ark,  and 
an  air  of  comfort  and  shelter  that  no  red-scaled 
armour  of  tiles  or  hard  blue  mosaic  of  slates  could 
ever  have  conveyed.  In  front  of  the  little  green 
stage  of  lawn  rose  a  thick  bushy  hedge  of  box ; 
beyond  and  over  that  the  eye  passed  readily  to  the 
little  gTey  bridge,  the  straight  road  on  into  Dor- 
setshire and  the  side  road  to  the  left  leading^  to 
the  great  archway  that  opened  into  Mr.  Harker's 


162  THE   VICARS   COURTSHIP. 

park;  just  beyond,  a  by-patli  led  to  some  poor 
people's  houses  ;  while  to  the  right  there  flowed 
a  brook  well  tenanted  by  trout  of  fair  size  and 
excellent  flavour. 

Mr.  Beauflower  and  his  guest  were  out  for  a 
walk  in   one   of  the  hioh  fields  at  the  back   of 

o 

Brown's  Farm.  All  round  them  spread  green  acres 
of  turnips  and  bristly  acres  of  stubble,  as  far  as  the 
fir  plantations  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  \allage ; 
and  from  one  spot  they  could  see  the  great  arch- 
way, built  from  a  design  of  Inigo  Jones  by  the 
first  Squire  Staunton  about  1750.  It  looked  from 
there  like  the  gateway  of  a  toy-house.  Turning 
your  back  to  that,  you  saw,  about  a  mile  away, 
the  long  blue  waves  of  the  Upper  Downs,  crested 
here  and  there  with  fir  covert.  A  slight  frost 
lay  in  a  silvery  curd  upon  the  broad  turnij)  leaves, 
on  the  flakes  of  the  fir  trees,  and  on  the  blades 
of  the  rank  grass  in  the  dark  shadows  under  the 
hedges.  They  put  up  some  partridges  as  they 
walked  towards  a  bridle  road  that  led  close  to 
sdme  bean  stacks  on  high  ground  commanding  a 
fine  \dew  of  the  Do^^ms. 

As  they  stood  there  enjoying  the  landscape, 
they  saw  some  hounds  and  two  whippers-in  pass 
through  the  gateway,  and  turn  towards  the  Downs 
and  the  road  to  Winterbourne. 

"  That  is  another  form  of  folly,"  said  jMr.  Good- 


EIDING   TO    COVERT.  163 

rick,  in  his  dry,  bitter  way,  "  inventing  an  excuse 
for  mad  riding  and  injuring  one's  tenants'  land. 
If  I  was  a  farmer,  I  would  dig  pit-falls  for  the 
fools — ugh  !  " 

*'  AYell,  now,  I  don't  go  as  far  as  you  do,"  said 
his  companion.  "  In  moderation,  I  hold  hunting 
to  be  a  fine  manly  exercise — quite  a  training 
in  hardihood  for  om^  country  gentlemen  ;  it  braces 
the  nerves,  and  teaches  promptitude,  sangfroid, 
and  presence  of  mind.  I  was  fond  of  it  before  I 
took  orders,  and  I  confess  my  heart  beats  faster 
even  now  at  the  sight  of  a  scarlet  coat ;  but  who 
are  these  two  coming  ?  Why,  it's  Dr.  Briscoe,  I 
declare,  giving  himself  a  holiday,  and  young 
Cantelupe.  The  meet  to-day  is  at  Winter- 
bourne." 

In  a  minute  or  two  more  the  horsemen  rode 
up.  Dr.  Briscoe  was  on  a  safe  cobby  horse,  fit 
for  his  age  and  weight,  and  Cantelupe  bestrode  a 
superb  hundred-guinea  bay  hunter  that  seemed  to 
disdain  keeping  pace  with  his  humbler  com- 
panion. They  stopped  and  greeted  the  young 
Vicar. 

"We  had  quite  a  scene  last  night  at  the 
Abbey,"  said  the  Doctor.  "  That  nice  little  girl. 
Amy  Kobinson,  fainted  at  the  piano.  She  was 
tired,  just  come  in  from  a  journey,  and  that 
old  Turk,  Mrs.  Harker,  would  make  her  play  the 


164  THE   vicar's   COURTSHIP. 

openings  to  some  charades  in  tlie  most  crowded 
corner  of  the  room.  A  good,  brave  little  creature 
she  is." 

*'  It  was  an  infernal  shame,  by  Jove,"  said  the 
young  Honourable,  and  quite  earnestly  for  him. 
"  People  ought  to  have  hissed.  Awful  shame  ! 
She  is  really  a  charming  girl !  I  know  a  fellow 
who's  a^^^u]  spoons  on  her." 

Mr.  Beauflower  was  much  interested,  but 
rather  vexed — he  hardly  knew  why,  at  the  young 
spendthrift's  expressions  of  sympathy. 

"It  was  a  monstrous  shame,"  he  said,  *^but 
that  Mrs.  Harker,  with  some  good  qualities,  is 
as  hard  as  the  nether  mill-stone.  She  has  no 
mercy.  I  am  going  to  the  Abbey  to-day,  and  I 
shall  see  if  Miss  Eobinson  is  better." 

"  I  gave  it  her  weU,"  said  the  Doctor,  laughing. 
"  0,  I  told  her  a  bit  of  my  mind.  She  ought  to 
have  married  a  slave-driver.  She  thinks  every 
one  is  cast  iron,  like  herself." 

"  Have  a  cigar,  Beauflower,"  said  the  Honour- 
able Mr.  Cantelupe.  ''  You'U  find  this  a  first-rate 
weed  ;  imported  direct  for  me." 

"  I  have  given  up  smoking." 

*'  The  deuce  you  have  !  Oh,  I  could  never  do 
without  my  smoke  ;  but  Ive  limited  myself  now, 
old  fellow,  to  fourteen  a  day.  What  do  you  think 
of  my  new  horse  ?     Gave  a  hundred  sovs.  for  him 


EIDING   TO    COVERT.  165 

last  week  to  Lord  Doddlington.  He  takes  liis 
fences  like  a  bird." 

"  A  beautiful  creature,"  said  Cantelupe's  quon- 
dam tutor  ;  "  but  a  large  price." 

"  A  pot  of  money ;  but  you  must  give  a  pot  if 
you  want  to  show  the  way  across  country.  Can  t 
get  the  real  thing  cheap,  and,  after  all,  what  is  a 
hundred  ?  But  I  must  push  on  ;  I  shall  be  late. 
By-bye.  Do  you  remember  how  rusty  you  used 
to  cut  up  when  I  wanted  to  go  out  with  the 
hounds  when  I  was  with  you,  Beaufiower  ? " 

"  I  remember  very  well  that  I  tried  to  make  a 
sensible  fellow  of  you." 

"  Couldn't  be  done.  Never  could  sap  over 
work  much  ;  but  put  me  on  a  horse,  and  give 
me  a  steady  forty  minutes'  burst,  and  I  bet  you 
a  fiver  I'm  there  or  thereabouts.  What  good  did 
Greek  plays  ever  do  me  ? " 

"  Not  much  help  across  country,  I  fear,"  said 
Mr.  Beaufiower,  smiling. 

''  Do  you  want  to  know^  the  horse  to  put  money 
on  for  the  next  Derby  1 "  said  Cantelupe,  half  in 
fun. 

"  Not  in  my  way,  thank  you.  What  is  your 
favourite  horse  called  ? " 

Cantelupe  turned  round  in  his  saddle  as  if  to 
make  sure  there  were  no  listeners,  then  enunciated 
mysteriously  the  odd  word  ''  Immenschikoff"."    He 


166  THE   vicar's   COURTSHIP. 

tlien  winked  violently,  blew  Ms  cigar  into  almost 
a  flame,  and  rode  sharply  towards  the  covert.  The 
Doctor  stayed  behind  for  a  moment's  further  talk. 

"  That's  a  nice  specimen  of  Young  England," 
said  Mr.  G-oodrick,  contemptuously. 

"  He  is  weak,"  said  the  Vicar,  "  but  he  does  not 
mean  bad.  He  is  generous,  too,  in  a  foolish  sort 
of  way,  and  the  people  about  here  like  him. 
Poor  fellow,  he's  getting  through  his  property  as 
fast  as  he  can.  His  last  purchase  was  a  per- 
forming pony  that  comes  on  the  table  after 
dinner.  He's  building  a  yacht,  too,  that  is  to  be 
the  finest  in  the  world." 

"  I  thought,  Beauflower,"  said  the  Doctor,  after 
a  moment's  pause,  "  that  that  young  scatterbrains 
seemed  rather  enthusiastically  earnest  about  Miss 
Robinson.  Is  he  touched  in  that  quarter,  do  you 
think?" 

Beauflower  coloured.  He  felt  that  he  did,  and 
was  angry  with  himself  that  he  did  so. 

Why  should  he  blush  ?  He  was  not  in  love 
with  Amy  Robinson.  He  admired  her,  as  he  did 
and  had  done  one-third  of  the  marriao^eable 
daughters  in  the  neighbourhood,  but  he  had  never 
spoken  to  her  much.  She  had  manifested  no 
liking  for  him  either.  Then  why  should  he  colour  ? 
He  hardly  knew,  but  still  colour  he  did.  He 
knew  it  as  well  as  if  he  had  seen  his  cheeks  glow 


EIDIXG   TO    COVERT.  167 

crimson  in  a  looking-glass.  He  felt  he  must  do 
something,  however,  to  hide  his  assumption  rather 
than  betrayal  of  feeling,  so  he  said,  rather  abruptly, 

"  Oh,  there's  nothing  of  that  kind.  Youll  have 
a  nice  day  for  hunting,  Doctor  ;  the  scent  will  lie 
well.'' 

*'Yes,  I  think  w^e  shall  have  a  run  to-day, 
though  I  ought  to  be  on  my  rounds ;  I  must  be 
off,  or  I  shan't  catch  up  Cantelupe.  Good-bye! 
Adieu  !  I  can't  see  why  on  earth  shouldn't  you 
clergjTuen  hunt  sometimes,  and  enjoy  yourselves," 
and  he  rode  off  lauohino;. 

"  I  want  to  take  you,  Mr.  Goodrick,  to  see 
Harker's  pictures,  jewels  and  cameos ;  he  has  a 
fine  collection,"  said  Beauflower. 

"  Seen  almost  enough  pictures  ;  but  still  I  don't 
care  about  going." 

Beauflower  was  nettled. 

"  Oh,  there's  no  compulsion,  you  know,"  he 
replied,  laughing ;  "  this  is  Liberty  Hall." 

"  Oh,  I  don't  mean  it  is  any  hardship,  but  I 
suppose  Harker's  is  only  a  third-rate  collection  ? " 

Beauflower  at  once  took  up  arms  for  the  local 
collection. 

"  It  is  thought  a  first-rate  collection  by  the 
judges,"  he  said ;  "  there  is  a  splendid  Kaphael, 
and  some  superb  Claudes." 

"  Don't     care    much    about    Claude.       Often 


1G8  THE  vicar's    courtship. 

insipid  and  artificial.     What  sort  of  a  man,  then, 
was  that  late  Mr.  Staunton  1 " 

"  What,  the  young  man  who  was  drowned  ? " 
''  No  ;  the  father — the  millionnaire.'' 
"  Oh,  an  eccentric  man,  who  quarrelled  with 
half  the  county,  built  seven  miles  of  park  wall 
to  keep  out  the  poachers  and  fox-hunters,  and 
ended  his  days  a  recluse,  and  a  collector  who 
never  received  friends  nor  shared  any  friend's 
hospitality.  He  left  all  his  English  property  to 
his  steward,  this  Mr.  Harker.  The  son,  early  in 
life,  had  married  clandestinely  and  imprudently 
some  poor  girl,  and  his  father  threw  him  off  from 
that  time.  Some  say  this  Mr.  Harker  fomented 
the  quarrel  and  prevented  the  father  and  son 
from  ever  being  reconciled.  People  delight  in 
repeating  ill-natured  stories ;  for  my  own  part  I 
do  not  credit  the  calumnies.  The  fact,  I  believe, 
is,  he  made  himself  indispensable  to  the  old 
man,  just  as  those  sort  of  people  do.'' 

Mr.  Goodrick  listened  with  the  deepest  interest. 
"  I  have  heard,"  he  said,  "  of  his  building  the 
great  Belvidere,  and  making  the  men  work  night 
and  day,  and  even  on  Sundays.  My  friend 
Staunton  used  so  often  to  talk  of  his  father  that 
I  have  always  felt  a  curiosity  to  see  the  place." 

"  No,  that  was  the  grandfather  who  built  the 
tower — an    old    city    alderman,    Wilkes'    great 


RIDIXG   TO    COVERT.  169 

friend.  He  left  his  son,  tlie  recluse,  the  disap- 
pointed man  whose  money  Mr.  Harker  got,  one 
hundred  thousand  a  year,  and  a  million  ready 
money.  Only  imagine!  It  seems  incredible  to  a 
poor  man  like  myself    It  is  an  Atlantic  of  gold !  " 

Just  then  a  boy  came  running  towards  them 
from  the  village. 

"I  wonder  what  this  boy  wants?"  said  Beau- 
flower  ;  "  it  is  one  of  Mr.  Barker's  stable  boys." 
The  boy  came  up  panting.  "  Well,  boy,  what  do 
you  want?" 

''  If  you  please,  sir,  old  Mrs.  Flower  has  been 
taken  worse,  and  she'd  be  glad  if  you'd  look  in. 
Doctor  Briscoe  says  she  won't  live  over  the  night. 
She's  quite  insensible.  I'm  going  to  Fontford  for 
medicine  now,  sir." 

"  Tell  her  I'll  be  there  in  about  an  hour." 
Then  Mr.  Beauflower,  wishing  his  friend  good-bye, 
started  at  once  for  the  Abbey.  That  morning  he 
would  not  choose  for  introclucino-  his  friend,  it 
was  to  be  devoted  to  a  very  different  jDurpose. 
He  must  get  money  somewhere,  whatever  the 
mortification. 


170  THE    vicar's    courtship. 


CHAPTER  X. 

THE    HEAD    KEEPER. 

Julia  Beauflower  ran  out,  tearful  and  in- 
dignant, as  she  saw  her  brother  approaching.  Her 
eyes,  from  which  the  tears  distilled,  shot  also  angry 
glances.  She  held  the  little  Skye  terrier  in  her  arms. 

''Oh,  Ned!  Oh,  Ned!"  she  cried,  kissing  the 
whimpering  dog  at  every  other  word,  "  one  of 
those  cruel  keepers  has  just  shot  at  Wasp  and  hit  it 
in  the  leg.  How  cruel  it  is  of  them  ;  they  shoot  at 
everything.  If  I  was  a  man  and  had  seen  this 
wretch  fire,  Td  have  struck  him,  that  I  would." 

Beauflower  Avas  angry,  but  in  a  less  demon- 
strative way.  He  would,  he  said,  complain  to  the 
head  keeper  about  it  as  he  went  to  the  Abbey.  If 
the  head  keeper  was  uncivil  he  would  speak  to  Mr. 
Harker  himself;  he  was  sure  he  never  encouraged 
the  men  in  these  things.  The  dog  was  not  dan- 
gerously hurt ;  the  leg  bone  Avas  not  broken,  and 
the  shot  could  be  picked  out. 

Old  Mrs.  Beauflower  was  inconsolable. 


THE    HEAD    KEEPER.  171 

"  Cruel,  bad  fellows,"  site  said,  ''  how  could  tliey 
shoot  a  poor  inoflfeusive  creature  like  that.  Poor 
little  Wapsy,  did  it  hurt  it  dreadful  ? " 

Then  the  worthy  old  lady  plunged  into  tra- 
ditional surgery,  and  proposed  bandages  of  dock- 
leaves  steeped  in  vinegar.  "Your  dear  papa,  Julia," 
she  said,  "always  thought  me  very  clever  as  a 
doctress,  and  no  one  could  bandage  as  I  could. 
To-morrow  we'll  try  a  snail  poultice,  it  is  an  in- 
valuable remedy,  my  dear." 

"  It  is  too  bad,"  said  the  Vicar  ;  "  that  Travers 
is  a  great  t}T:ant.  He  makes  the  men  do  these 
things,  but  Til  give  him  a  lesson;  I  know  he 
can't  bear  complaints  reaching  ^li\  Harker.  A 
man  who  would  do  this  cannot  come  to  good. 
Poor  little  Wasp,  chasing  a  rabbit,  perhaps,  just 
outside  our  garden  hedge,  and  unable  to  catch  it 
to  begin  with." 

"  And  if  it  did,"  said  Julia,  angrily,  "  haven't 
they  millions  of  rabbits  !  Poor,  dear  Wasp!"  and 
here  she  again  fondled  the  wounded  cIoq:. 

"  m  go  at  once,"  said  the  Vicar,  "  and  see  to 
this  ;  it  is  too  bad.  I'll  stop  this  man's  insolence. 
He  shaU  not  do  this  with  impunity." 

"  Now  don't  be  rash,  my  dear  Edward,"  said 
his  mother;  but  the  Vicar's  blood  was  up,  and  off 
he  strode. 

At  the  lodge  he  saw  the  keeper's  boy  rubbing  a 


172  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

gun  barrel.  He  went  up  at  once  and  asked  if  Mr. 
Travers  was  in.  The  boj  said  he  was,  and  ran 
to  call  him.  Travers  came  out  presently,  a  tall, 
gaunt  man,  with  long,  tough,  muscular  limbs,  and 
a  bullying,  blustering  manner,  which  he  could 
sometimes  mask  with  a  spurious  joviality. 

"AVell,  Mr.  Beauflower,  sir,  how  are  you?"  he 
said,  in  a  careless,  half-conscious  way;  "what  can 
I  do  for  you,  sir?" 

"  Good  morning,  Mr.  Travers,"  said  the  young 
Vicar,  drily.  "  I  have  come  on  rather  an  un- 
pleasant business." 

"  Oh  !  and  what  may  that  be?"  said  the  keeper, 
shoving  his  hands  deep  down  in  his  shooting 
jacket's  pockets.  "You've  heard  that  mother's 
taken  bad  again?" 

"  Yes ;  I'm  going  to  see  her  presently.  I've 
thoucrht  her  not  so  well  for  a  Ions;  time.  The  busi- 
ness  I've  come  upon  is  this.  One  of  your  men 
has  just  shot  and  wounded  my  sister's  little  terrier. 
You  know  Wasp  ?  Now  it  is  really  too  bad  ;  the 
doo;  is  a  harmless  little  thino\" 

The  keeper's  brow  gloomed. 

*' I'm  not  accountable,"  he  said,  "for  all  my 
men  do ;  young  hands,  always  coming  fresh. 
They'd  no  directions  from  me,  except  to  kill  all 
dogs  found  poaching  in  ]\Ir.  Harker's  coverts." 

"  The  dog  was  wounded  in  our  own  meadow, 


THE   HEAD   KEEPER.  178 

Mr.  Travers  ;  lie  could  not  have  gone  far  with  his 
wounded  les;." 

"  I  don  t  know  how  far  he  could  have  got,"  said 
the  keeper,  insolently ;  "  all  I  know,  Mr.  Beau- 
flower,  is  that  I  gave  no  directions  for  shooting 
the  dog.  Fm  not  accountable  for  every  poaching 
dog  my  men  shoot  in  the  woods." 

"  If  you  gave  no  orders  to  shoot  this  dog,"  said 
the  Yicar,  persistently,  "  I  wish  you  to  find  out 
who  did  shoot  him,  for  I  tell  you  before  your  face 
it  is  a  cowardly  piece  of  cruelty,  and  one  I  Avill 
not  submit  to  from  the  keepers  of  even  the  richest 
nobleman  in  England.  If  you  refuse  to  make  the 
inquiry  your  master  shall  hear  of  it." 

The  keeper  made  no  reply  for  a  moment,  but, 
taking  a  shot  pouch  from  his  pocket  clicked  the 
spring  insolently. 

"  I  tell  you  again,"  he  said,  "  I  gave  no  orders. 
What  use  is  asking  the  men?  They'll  only  deny  it, 
and  then  you'll  lay  it  to  me.  I  get  aU  the  blame 
for  whatever  the  pack  of  skulking  rascals  do.  It's 
not  my  fault  if  I  can't  get  good  men." 

"  Then  you  refuse  to  ask  them  ? " 

"  I  shan't  trouble  myself  about  a  stray  dog  or 
so.     I  know  what  my  master  wishes." 

"  Then,"  said  Beauflower,  firmly,  "  there  is  but 
one  remedy ;  I  shall  appeal  to  your  master. 
We'll  soon  see  what  he  wiU  say."  ^ 


174  THE   vicar's    COUETSHIP. 

"  You  can  do  just  as  you  like,  Muster  Beau- 
flower.  If  that's  your  remedy,  try  it.  Fm  not 
going  to  get  my  men  in  trouble  about  such  a 
thing  as  a  dog.  You're  not  going  to  whistle  me 
out  of  my  place,  I  tell  you  ;  I'm  too  firm  in  my 
seat  to  be  shaken  out  by  you  or  any  one  like  you. 
You Ve  complained  of  me  before.  Oh,  I  remember 
these  thino^s." 

The  Vicar  for  a  moment  looked  as  if  he 
would  have  struck  the  brute  to  the  ground.  "  I 
thought  he  was  going  to,"  Travers  said  to  him- 
self afterwards ;  "  but  he  dared  not  do  it ;  I'd 
have  made  him  remember  it  as  long  as  he  lived, 
parson  or  no  parson."  "  '  If  he  smite  thee  on  the 
one  cheek,  turn  to  him  the.  other  also,'  "  thought 
-the  Vicar ;  "  that  is  the  precept  of  our  religion,  but 
in  my  college  days  I'd  certainly  have  tried  what  an 
arm  of  flesh  could  do  to  chastise  the  evil  spirit  in 
this  petty  tyrant."  By  a  strong  effort,  however, 
Beauflower  curbed  the  unruly  member,  and  strode 
away.  But  before  he  stepped  out  of  the  shadow 
of  the  great  lodge  gateway  into  the  sunshine,  he 
tm^ned  and  said  : 

"  Mr.  Travers,  one  of  your  men,  and  as  I  susj^ect 
by  your  oi?der,  has  done  an  act  of  wanton  cruelty 
to  a  poor  unoffending  dumb  creature.  I  do  not 
believe  your  master  would  encourage  such  conduct, 
and  in  that  belief  I  shall  appeal  to  Mr.  Harker." 


THE   HEAD   KEEPER.  175 

"  Appeal  away,  sir  ;  'peal  away :  it'll  amuse 
you,  and  it  won't  hurt  me.  I  know  my  business, 
and  I  want  no  parson's  advice  about  it." 

As  he  shouted  this  impudent  defiance,  Travers, 
as  if  to  vent  his  rage  on  something  or  other, 
snatched  his  loaded  gun  from  where  it  stood  in 
the  corner  of  the  archway,  and  discharged  it  at  a 
flock  of  pigeons  that  just  then  broke  circling 
from  an  outer  cornice  of  the  gateway.  One  bird  fell 
dead  at  his  feet,  and  another  dropped  wounded 
a  few  yards  off.  There  was  an  insolent  defiance 
in  the  action,  that  made  it  almost  equivalent  to  a 
blow.  Mr.  Beauflower,  however,  took  no  notice 
of  it,  and  walked  on  without  turning  his  head. 

Insolent  masters  make  insolent  servants.  The 
footmen  and  housemaids  at  the  Abbey  surged  in 
waves  of  insolence  that  rippled  into  fainter  circles 
of  insolence  among  the  grooms,  gardeners,  and 
lodge-keepers.  The  pride  of  new  money  of 
its  omnipotence,  and  its  crushing  power,  was 
vii-ulent  at  Summerleas.  The  head  keeper  was  a 
type  of  the  whole  band. 

Mr.  Beauflower  resolved  to  take  a  short  tm^n 
in  the  park,  to  walk  off"  this  momentary  and 
pardonable  flush  of  temper  before  he  faced  the 
terrible  ordeal  which  his  own  imprudence  had 
prepared  for  him.  With  elastic  natures  like  his, 
and  at  his  age,  troubles  soon  loosen  their  fetters. 


176  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

When  sunshine  plays  upon  youth,  sorrow's  chains 
melt  in  a  moment;  green  meadows  and  woods 
musical  with  birds  soon  cast  their  talismanic  in- 
Huence  on  the  young  senses.  Nature  that  morning 
refused  to  be  sad  with  him,  so  he  soon  became 
glad  with  her.  That  silent  but  pleasant  com- 
panion rebuked  his  sorrow ;  gentler  influences 
one  by  one  stole  over  him,  and  weaned  him 
from  care.  The  very  murmuring  of  the  lake 
came  to  him  in  a  low  undertone,  hke  the  brood- 
ing lullaby  of  a  mother  afraid  of  awaking  her 
child  that  is  but  half  asleep,  and  the  wood- 
23igeons,  whose  note  is  but  one  changeless  mono- 
tone of  love,  answered  it  from  the  firs  in  a  low 
lingering  tone  of  dreamy  delight. 

It  was  one  of  those  mornings  of  the  Indian 
summer  in  which  the  dying  year  seems  to  fall 
asleep  smiling  at  recollections  of  its  spring  time. 
The  great  golden  woods  stretching  down  the 
steep  banks  towards  the  lake  lay  motionless  in 
the  hot  sunshine,  their  golden  reflections  making 
a  Pactolus  of  one  half  the  water  and  beyond  the 
border  of  rich  shadow  the  lake  glistened  like  a  broad 
sheet  of  steel.  Some  dappled  deer  were  moving 
in  procession  down  the  little  valley  between  the 
woods ;  here  and  there  a  frightened  wild  duck, 
with  protruded  head,  splashed  across  the  lake, 
quacking  with   affright,   and  drawing  a  line  of 


THE   HEAD   KEEPER.  177 

light  across  the  water,  which  his  feet  just 
skimmed  where  the  swans'  young  flotilla  moved 
to  and  fro.  Dragon-flies,  in  gleams  of  emerald, 
flashed,  ravenous  and  savage  as  highwapnen, 
over  the  dry  reeds  of  the  waterside.  Now 
and  then  a  fat  aldermanic  carp,  weary  even  of 
sleep,  gurgled  among  the  water-plants,  or  a  trout 
sparkled  up  in  a  spring  at  a  gnat  that  had  roused 
his  capricious  and  pampered  appetite.  Now  and 
then  a  heron  flapped  up  in  a  grey  waft  of  feathery 
light  against  the  brazen  beech  woods,  or  a 
blackbird  broke  chirping  from  one  of  the  little 
islands,  and  sped  across  to  the  mainland  from  some 
mysterious  enemy.  The  only  jarring  sound  that 
broke  the  harmony  of  this  paradise  was  the 
occasional  report  of  a  keeper  s  gun,  that  went 
rolling  in  echoes  through  the  woods,  as  if  the 
first  shock  had  brought  do^^m  some  avalanche  by 
its  concussion.  As  Beauflower  went  on  through 
the  woods  by  the  lake's  side,  a  pheasant,  glisten- 
ing with  jewelled  colours,  would  sometimes  stalk 
before  him,  and  then  rocket  away  into  the  open. 
Every  moment  across  the  ground-i^y  that  spread 
between  the  hazels,  the  brambles,  the  dog-wood 
and  the  sallowing  larches,  a  rabbit  would  trot 
carelessly,  darting  away  as  s^Yift  as  light  when 
it  discerned  an  intruder  on  its  domains.  The 
beech   nut   husks    crackled    under    Beauflowers 


178  THE  VICARS   COURTSHIP. 

feet  as  he  strode  on  past  a  certain  spot  generally- 
known  as  ''  Queen  Elizabeth's  Grotto."  A  flight 
of  stone  steps  between  two  pillars,  crowned  by 
stone  urns  here  marked  the  place  where,  in 
former  times,  water-parties  used  to  land.  The 
steps  were  green  with  damp,  the  m-ns  cracked  and 
mossy. 

Suddenly,  a  laughing  voice  shouted  from  the 
wood  in  a  sort  of  half  echo  song,  and  a  voice 
from  near  the  steps  replied. with  a  snatch  of  the 
same  wild  Swiss  or  Tyrolese  tune.  A  corner  of 
the  path  brought  Beauflower  in  sight  of  the  latter 
singer.  It  was  Amy  Robinson.  She  was  seated 
on  the  top  step,  her  back  towards  him,  her  beau- 
tiful eyes  intent  on  a  little  emerald-green  float 
that  was  dancing  in  a  ripple.  Suddenly  the 
water  grew  troubled,  and  out  splashed  a  huge 
brown-orange  perch,  his  back  fin  spiked  and 
threatening,  his  body  contorted  with  anger.  In  a 
moment  he  was  nimbly  drawn  up  on  shore. 

"  Ethel !  Ethel ! "  shouted  Amy,  in  alarm  at 
her  ovm.  victory.  "  Fve  caught  one,  and  such  a 
monster.  Oh,  do  come  and  take  the  hook  out  of 
his  mouth.     Oh,  dear,  dear,  he's  trying  to  get  in 


again. 


Ethel,  intent  on  gathering  chestnuts  up  in  the 
wood,  only  replied  by  a  faint  shout,  which  in- 
dicated return  some  time  within  half  an  hour. 


THE    HEAD    KEEPER.  179 

Amy  shouted  again  and  more  earnestly.  The  reply 
came  still  fainter.  The  wood  spirits  had  allured 
Ethel  farther  still  within  the  mossy  recesses  of 
their  dominions.  Just  then,  the  step  of  some  one 
behind  her  caught  Amy's  ears,  and  she  turned. 

"  Oh,  Mr.  Beauflower,"  she  said,  naively,  after 
the  first  greeting,  "will  you  do  me  a  gTeat  ser- 
vice, and  take  this  dreadful  fish  ofi"  the  hook  ? 
Ethel  always  does  that,  but  she's  gone  away 
looking:  for  chestnuts." 

"I  shall  be  too  happy,"  said  the  young  vicar; 
and  he  seemed  so  as  he  acted  as  gratuitous 
dentist  to  the  perch  in  trouble,  extracted  the 
hook  and  re-baited  it.  "I'm  so  glad  to  meet 
you.  Miss  Kobinson,"  he  said,  '■  because  Dr.  Bris- 
coe, when  I  met  him  this  morning,  told  me  that 
you  fainted  last  night  at  the  party." 

"  Oh,  I  have  cjuite  recovered,"  said  Amy.  ''  I 
think  it  was  my  journey,  that  was  all." 

"  It  was  very  cruel  to  make  you  play  at  all." 

"  Oh,  no  ;  it  was  my  duty,  you  know.  I  was  not 
a  guest,  but  a  governess.  It  was  not  pride.  I 
assure  you,  Mr.  Beauflower,  Mrs.  Harker  is  very 
kind,  and  I  wanted  so  much  to  oblige  her." 

"  That  you  forgot  yom^  own  health.  I  cannot 
think  how  Mrs.  Harker  could  be  so  unfeeling  as 
to  even  propose  such  a  thing.  There  is  a  bite ;  it 
k  an  eel,  I  think." 

N   2 


180  THE   VICAe's   courtship. 

"  Oh,  dear,  dear,  I  struck  too  soon.  How  very 
stupid  of  me.  No;  there  it  is  again.  Oh,  it's 
pulled  it  quite  under.  Oh,  Mr.  Beauflower,  do, 
do  pull  it  out  for  me.     It  is  something  dreadful." 

There  was  no  trace  of  self-consciousness  about 
Amy,  no  thought  that  all  this  time  she  might  be 
winning  a  heart  by  this  look,  that  turn  of  the 
head.  She  was  only  intent  on  the  moment's  occu- 
pation— dum  capimus  capimur.  Love  was  watch- 
ing the  float  and  barbing  the  hook.  Perhaps 
but  for  the  emergency  of  the  moment  she  would 
have  been  shy ;  but  love  is  so  ingenious  in  pro- 
viding such  emergencies. 

Beauflower,  too,  was  not  one  of  those  effemin- 
ate young  clergymen  who  walk  on  tip-toe  and 
lisp,  and  seem  to  have  lost  all  manliness  and 
spirit.  He  liked  Amy,  he  was  pleased  at  an  oppor- 
tunity of  doing  her  a  little  service,  and  not  being 
devoid  of  humour,  he  felt  the  oddity  of  the  occa- 
sion, nor  was  he  by  any  means  opposed  to  the 
faint  approach  to  flirtation  which  the  opportunity 
demanded.  Why  are  clergymen,  forsooth,  to  be  cut 
off  from  all  such  innocent  delights  ?  So,  without  a 
thought  of  anything  but  the  happiness  of  the 
moment,  and  careless  in  his  happiness  as  the  bird 
of  spring  or  the  butterfly  of  summer,  the  young 
Vicar  struck  the  fish,  and  then  placed  the  rod  in 
Amy's  hand,  urging  her  to  play  it  without  fear, 


THE   HEAD   KEEPER.  181 

secure  in  liis  co-operation.  There  was  a  struggle — 
Amy  resolute,  the  monster  obdurate  ;  Amy  artful, 
and  relaxing — the  monster  more  patient  and  be- 
guiled. Then  grew  Amy  sterner  and  more  im- 
patient, the  monster  ^dolent,  but  more  hopeless. 
One  great  sj)lash,  and  he  was  drawn  on  to  the 
steps.  It  was  a  large  tench — a  beautiful  fish, 
with  shining  olive  scales  and  a  Avarm  brown  eye. 
Amy  turned  her  head,  almost  regxetful  at  her 
\T.ctory,  while  Beauflower  killed  the  creature  with 
a  rapid  and  merciful  blow,  and  removed  the  hook. 

At  that  moment  Ethel  shouted  again  from  far 
up  in  the  woods,  and  echo  answered. 

The  Vicar,  still  busy  in  baiting  Amy's  hook, 
quoted  Tennyson's  beautiful  bugle  song — 

*'  0  hark,  0  hear, — how  thin  and  clear, 

And  thinner,  clearer,  further  going ! 
Oh,  sweet  and  far  from  cliff  and  scaur, 

The  horns  of  Elfland  faintly  blowing. 
Blow,  let  us  hear  the  purple  glens  replying, 
Blow  bugle;  answer  echoes,  dying,  dying,  dying." 

"How  beautiful!  how  very  beautiful!''  Amy 
said,  clapping  her  hands,  and  her  eyes  glowing. 
"  Oh,  I  must  learn  that  by  heart.  How  does  it 
go  on  ; 

Mr.  Beauflower,  who  was  watching  her  face  with 
almost  unconscious  intentness,  slightly  coloured, 
and  paused  a  moment ;  then  he  replied — 


182  THE   VICARS   COURTSHIP. 

"Olove," 

He  said  this  very  faintly, 

"  they  die  in  yon  rich  sky, 
They  faint  on  hill,  or  field,  or  river. 
Our  echoes  roll  from  soul  to  soul, 
And  grow  for  ever  and  for  ever. 
Blow  bugle,  blow,  set  the  wild  echoes  flying, 
And  answer,  echoes,  answer,  dying,  dying,  dying." 

There  was  a  silence  for  a  moment  when  Mr. 
Beauflower  had  repeated  this  verse.  Then  he 
said — 

"It  is  quite  fairy-land  this  side  of  the  lake." 

"  Yes.  Ethel  has  been  calling  herself  Titania 
and  me  the  Lady  of  the  Lake.  She  said  if  she 
came  on  any  fairies  dancing  round  a  mushroom, 
she'd  call  to  me ;  and  there,  there  she's  calling." 

"  0,  no  doubt  she's  found  them ;  but  I  am  afraid 
I  must  leave  this  pleasant  spot  and  its  fairy  court, 
for  I  have  important  business  with  JMr.  Harker, 
and  I  must  catch  him  before  I  go  out.  Give  my 
love  to  Ethel.  Good-bye,  Miss  Robinson.  I  wish 
you  sport.  The  fish  will  come  up  and  see  what 
little  enchantress  it  is  beguiling  them,  and  then 
you  must  beguile  them  to  your  hooks." 

Amy  gave  a  deprecatory,  pleased  look.  Then 
she  rose  frankly,  with  the  natural  grace  which 
was  her  natural  dowry,  and  held  out  her  little 
soft  white  hand.  Beauflower  pressed  it  in  his 
hearty  way,  and  in  a  moment  or  two  was  seen  on 


THE   HEAD    KEEPER.  18 

the  path  leading  round  the  head  of  the  lake, 
passing  a  rustic  bridge  that  crossed  a  fall.  He 
turned  and  raised  his  hat,  and  then  disappeared 
behind  the  wood. 

Amy  did  not  shout  again  to  Ethel,  but  she  re- 
sumed her  seat  on  the  steps,  and  gazed  down  in- 
tently on  the  water  which  glimmered  before  her 
— a  little  dim  dream-world  of  hope  and  mystery 
like  her  future. 


1S4  THE   vicar's   courtship. 


CHAPTER    XL 

PADDY   BLAKE. 

The  very  moment  tliat  tlie  Vicar  had  left  the 
lodge  and  taken  the  path  across  the  bridge  by  the 
kennel  to  the  side  of  the  lake  facing  the  abbey, 
the  keeper,  who  had  been  earnestly  watching  him, 
came  to  a  prompt  resolve.  Bad  as  he  was,  mean, 
violent,  dishonest,  and  tyrannical,  he  flew  swift  as  a 
falcon  to  his  purpose,  ran  staunch  as  a  bloodhound 
to  his  narrow  aim.  He  had  gloried  specially  in  this, 
that  his  hard  drudo;e  of  a  wife  in  the  lodg;e  and  seve- 
ral  of  the  keepers  scattered  about  the  kennels  had 
heard  his  quarrel  with  the  Vicar.  As  Dr.  Busby 
abstained  from  taking  off  his  hat,  even  to  King 
Charles,  for  fear  of  lessening  his  authority  with 
his  boys,  so  the  head  keeper  made  a  point  of  never 
yielding  a  jot  to  any  one  but  the  squire  himself  or 
any  visitor  from  whom  he  might  expect  a  five- 
pound  note.  Servile  by  nature,  Travers  knew 
when  to  crawl  and  when  to  ride  the  high  horse. 
He  was  blunt  to  the  squire,  and  yet  subservient. 


PADDY    BLAKE.  185 

He  had  power  over  him — that  every  one  knew  to 
their  cost.  The  farm  bailiff,  the  steward,  the  head 
gardener,  had  all  by  turns  felt  the  danger  of  cross- 
ing Travers.  Why  he  had  such  a  hold  no  one 
knew,  but  hold  he  had  for  all  that.  There  was  an 
instinctive  feeling  at  Summerleas  that  no  plot, 
no  stratagem  could  unseat  him. 

He  first  ran  down  to  the  shed  where  the  men 
were  lunching  (taking  their  '^  bevers  "  they  called 
it),  and  shouted  out  with  the  voice  of  a  savage 
boatswain — 

"  Look  alive,  you  men  there,  with  those  guns. 
Mr.  Cantelupe's  party  will  be  here  to-morrow;  and 
not  so  much  idling  over  meals.  Ten  minutes  is 
all  the  time  I  ever  had  the  dree  and  twenty  years  I 
was  at  Lord  Duml^arton's  ;  and  what  was  enough 
for  me  is  enough  for  you  chaps." 

He  then  took  the  back  way  to  the  house  past 
the  stables,  resolving  to  look  in  to  see  the  head 
groom  as  he  passed  the  harness  room. 

There  were  three  grooms  to  be  found  there,  pale, 
thin,  hard-featm^ed,  Yorkshire  lads,  reckless,  rather 
drunken,  and  very  vicious.  They  had  been 
listening  to  the  stories  and  racing  prophecies  of  a 
poor,  ragged,  pariah  of  a  fellow,  in  a  dirty  torn 
coat,  once  scarlet,  that  time,  and  rain,  and  mud 
had  gradually  degraded  into  a  sodden  ignoble 
purple.     He  was  the  "  Paddy  "  of  the  district,  the 


186  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

hanger-on  of  the  kennels,  the  errand-boy  of  Wilt- 
shire stables,  the  oracle  of  village  tap-rooms,  the 
communicator  of  special  sporting  secrets.  His 
bullet  head  and  elf-locks  of  scattered  sandy  hair 
was  crowned  by  a  muddy,  threadbare,  black  velvet 
cap,  while,  in  contradiction  to  his  professional  coat, 
he  wore  a  pair  of  ragged  once  fashionable  plaid 
trowsers,  torn  at  the  knees,  and  displayed  bare  feet 
instead  of  top-boots.  His  eyes,  vacant  and  wild 
in  their  ordinary  expression,  were  at  times  lit  up 
by  gleams  of  cunning,  and  not  unfrequently  by  a 
good-natured  smile  that  was  by  no  means  un- 
pleasant. People  differed  as  to  what  the  man  had 
been ; — some  said  a  rich  farmer  at  Warminster, 
who  had  drunk  aAvay  his  brains  and  squandered 
his  property ;  others  said  a  small  shopkeeper  of 
Shaftesbury,  who  had  lost  all  his  money  in  racing. 
He  had  now  sunk  into  a  poor  despised  sot,  feasting 
to-day  on  champagne  at  a  county  race-course,  to- 
morrow lying  struck  down  with  fever  in  some 
lonely  hovel  on  the  Downs.  If  Paddy  Blake,  as 
he  was  called,  was  not  ridden  over  in  the  hunting 
field,  it  was  inevitable  that  he  would  die  in  some 
ditch,  or  be  found  frozen  and  dead  some  winter's 
morning  inside  a  Druid's  ring.  The  life  he  led  was 
a  sort  of  ghastly  parody  of  a  sporting  career,  and 
his  death,  come  when  it  may,  was  sure  to  "  point 
the  moral "  of  such  a  life. 


PADDY   BLAKE.  1S7 

Joe  Dennison,  a  pale-looking  stolid  fellow,  ^^tli 
a  pewter  pot  in  his  hand,  and  one  foot  on  the 
hob,  was  narrating  the  exploits  of  a  certain  horse 
that  had  belonged  to  his  old  master,  Squire  Osbal- 
diston. 

"  T  oud  squire,"  he  said,  ''  used  always  to  say 
if  a  horse  wants  sweating,  you  may  as  well  sweat 
him  for  the  brass.  I  w^ore  the  purple  and  orange 
the  day  Blue  Bonnet  was  beaten,  for  the  first  two 
heats  by  a  mare  of  Mr.  Kirby's  cos  the  squire 
wouldn't  let  me  make  the  running.  Well,  I  went 
down  on  my  knees  to  him.  Said  I  to  t'  oud 
squire,  '  Do  mak  a  bit  more  running,  squire.  Blue 
Bonnet  can  run  for  a  week,  I  know  ;  and  we'll  beat 
him  yet.'  '  Do  as  you  like,  Joe,'  squire  says  at 
last,  and  s'elp  me  if  I  didn't  win  the  next  heat 
like  a  bird.  I  went  sailing  past  'em  all,  lads ; 
and  bless  yer  I'd  have  won  if  the  bridle  had 
broken.  He  was  a  long,  loose-legged  horse,  too, 
but  he'd  the  right  stuff  in  him;  and  the  next 
St.  Ledger  he  came  in  three  lengths  ahead  of 
thirty  horses." 

"  I  remember  him,"  said  Jack  Bennet,  a  quick, 
sharp,  choleric  fellow,  the  groom  next  him,  whose 
lazy  head  was  embedded  in  the  harness  that  tapes- 
tried the  walls.     Archer,  the  third  lad,  said, 

"  An  ugly  horse,  with  deep  shoulder,  big  ribs, 
and  a  coarse  head;  he  was  one  of  Navell's  lot,  eh?" 


188  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

"  Ugly  lie  wasn't,  Jim ;  and  he'd  always 
make  a  rush  at  last  for  the  post ;  Lor'  he  was 
never  second  if  he  could  help  it — ah  !  that  ivas  a 
horse.  That  day  he  broke  down  at  Epsom  on  the 
near  fore  tendon,  I  could  have  cried  like  a  babby. 
He  was  never  saddled  again.    I  shot  him  myself." 

Here  Paddy  Blake  broke  in  with  a  drunken 
shout  and  a  scrap  of  an  old  hunting  song — 


"  Lately  passing-  o'er  Bamsdale  I  happened  to  spy 
A  fox  stealing-  on  with  the  hounds  in  full  cry, 
'Tis  Darlington  sure,  for  his  voice  I  well  know, 
Crying  '  Forward  !  Hark  forward  !'  for  Skelbrook  below, 
With  my  Ballymonoora, 
The  hounds  of  Old  Raby  for  me. 


I'm  the  champion  of  the  light  weights.  Here, 
100  to  1  on  Brown  Bess.  Done,  my  Lord 
Marquis.  Put  me  on  a  hunter,  and  I'll  show  you 
what  riding  is,  my  boys.  I'll  split  the  park  palings 
for  you.  Pass  that  beer  here,  Joe,  like  a  man. 
Give  me  a  silk  jacket,  and  see  how  I'll  cut  down 
the  field.  Is  there  any  one  knows  how  to  use  the 
whalebone  at  the  right  moment  as  I  do.  I'll 
fight  any  one  who  says  I  can't  ride  and  win,  but 
you  mustn't  give  me  one  of  your  cursed  flat  sides, 
light  back  ribs,  leggy  quadrupeds,  half  grass- 
hopper, half  giraffe.  Put  me  on  that  horse  I've 
seen  to-day,  give  me  five  minutes'  start,  and  I'll 
back  myself  to  touch  Salisbury  Cathedral  door 


PADDY   BLAKE.  189 

before  any  man  living,  even  thougli  lie  rode  on 
an  express  train." 

''  What  horse  is  that  you're  magging  about, 
Paddy  ? "  said  Archer,  hitherto  silent,  and  busy 
cutting  a  briar  root  pipe ;  "  anything  to  put 
money  on  ?  Is  it  the  new  horse  Vates  talks  of  as 
good  for  the  Derby  ? " 

Paddy  looked  mysterious,  and  irritated,  then 
sang — 

•'  Come  listen,  all  you  sporting-  coves, 

Oh,  listen  unto  me, 
Wliilst  a  song  I  do  relate,  of  the  nag  that,  sure  as  fate, 

Will  win  at  Salisbury." 

"  Give  US  the  tip — come,  Pat  ? ''  cried  all  the 
grooms  at  once. 

"  Is  it  a  horse  with  a  black  speck  on  one  of  the 
front  coronets,  a  flesh-coloured  nose,  and  a  round 
quarter?"  said  Joe,  the  groom  who  had  first  spoken. 
"Yes?  Why,  it's  that  cofiin-headed  thing  of 
Cantelupe's — Lor',  a  dozen  of  'im  are  not  worth 
one  of  master's  cart  horses.  I  wouldn't  put  a 
crown  on  Immenschikoff".  Why,  he's  not  half  as 
much  in  him  as  the  little  chestnut  of  Sir  Ed- 
mund's. Pat,  you  don't  get  us  to  lay  our  money 
on  that  class  of  horse  ;  it  ain't  our  style." 

"  I  teU  you,"  said  Paddy,  "  he  has  got  a  temper, 
but  he's  a  flash  of  lightning  when  he  chooses  ;  and 
he'll  pass  them  all,  if  he  is  properly  ridden — I've 


190  THE   VICAe's   courtship. 

no  interest  in  him  myself,  luit  put  me  on  liim,  and 
see  if  I  couldn't  beat  a  rifle  bullet,  and  give  it 
ten  yards  — that's  the  horse  !  " 

"Why,  Blue  Bonnet,"  said  Bennet,  "would 
have  distanced  him  on  three  legs ;  I'll  back  our 
old  Syntax  against  him,  with  a  little  start.  Pooh  ! 
get  out  of  that,  Paddy." 

"I  saw  him,"  said  Paddy,  "when  he  was  a 
colt  taking  his  airing  on  Lady  Down,  and  I 
never  had  my  eye  ofi"  him  since.  I  never  knew 
any  horse  promise  so  Avell,  and  I'll  put  aU  my 
money  on  him.  Pass  the  beer,  you  chaps,  the 
champion  of  the  light  weights  is  dry  as  a  lime 
kiln. 

With  my  Ballymonoora, 
Ballymonoora, 
The  hounds  of  Old  Raby  for  me." 

I  tell  you  what  it  is,  you  chaps,  you  sit  there  and 
o-et  so  fuU  of  corn,  and  so  lazy,  that  you  forget 
what  a  good  horse  is.  Why,  haven't  I  seen  all  the 
o'ood  stables  ?  Don't  I  know  the  Bay  Middletons 
by  the  black  speckles,  the  Orlandos  by  the  white 
on  their  legs,  the  Birdcatchers  by  their  golden 
chestnuts,  the  Touchstones  by  their  black  browns. 
I  want  no  teaching  from  Mr.  Harker  s  grooms. 
I  am  a  man  that  has  had  property ;  I'm  no  stable 
sweeper.  I've  lost  more  money  than  you  ever 
saw,   and  I've  won  more  than  you'll   ever   see. 


PADDY   BLAKE.  191 

I  don't  come  here  to  beg,  or  to  tout  you  out  of 
shillino;s." 

''  Here,  take  some  beer  ;  no  one  wanted  to  rile 
you,"  said  Joe,  the  ex-groom  of  Mr.  Osbaldiston ; 
"  you  can  be  good  company." 

"It's  your  stuck-up  master'' — Paddy's  voice 
was  growing  every  moment  louder  —  "  that 
pampers  you,  till  you  fancy  yourselves  gentle- 
men, and  your  horses  your  o^\m.  You  spend 
the  time  that  you  ought  to  be  exercising  in 
cheating  each  other  at  cards ;  you  ain't  fit  to 
back  a  horse,  not  one  of  ye ;  you  don't  know  a 
horse,  if  it  kicked  you  down ;  you're  only  fit  to 
bruise  oats  and  currycomb  cart  horses  ;  you're  a 
pack  of " 

"  Come,  none  of  that,  Pat,"  said  Jack,  the 
smartest  lad  of  the  three  ;  "  keep  a  civil  tongue 
in  your  head,  or  I'll  show  you  the  door,  and 
double  C[uick  too." 

"  You  show  me  the  door  ? "  said  Paddy, 
menacingly. 

"  Yes  ;  what  do  you  come  here  for,  spying 
about  ? " 

"  Spying  about  ? " 

"  Yes,  spying  about,  and  trying  to  chisel  us  lads 
out  of  money  ;  you  call  us  a  pack  of  anything 
again,  and  I'll  just  give  you  a  one-two  you  won't 
forget  easily,  my  man.     Joe  and  Jim  may  bear 


192  THE   vicar's    COUETSHIP. 

it — I  won't,  though  you  are  a  poor  drunken 
beggar,  not  worth  wasting  time  upon.'^ 

"  And  who  are  you  ?"  said  Paddy;  "  why,  if  you 
sold  me  a  horse  in  the  morning,  I'd  sell  him  you 
again  before  night,  and  you  wouldn't  know  I  had 
sold  you  unless  I  told  you.  You're  a  pack  of  idle 
loafers,  only  good  to  hold  a  horse  while  other 
men  mount.  I  tell  you  the  best  horse  in  your 
stables  is  a  mere  pig  compared  to  the  one  I  saw 
this  morning  at  his  gallop.  You  teach  me  about 
horses  ? — why,  I'd  ride  any  one  of  you  on  a  tor- 
toise and  give  you  a  mile  start.     That  for  you  ! " 

Paddy,  as  he  uttered  this  challenge,  snapped 
his  fingers  defiantly. 

"  Let  him  have  it,  Jack,"  said  one  of  the  grooms 
to  the  defender  of  Mr.  Harker's  stables ;  "if 
he  doesn't  mind  what  he's  saying." 

''  I  know  this,"  said  Paddy,  "that  you'd  sell  a 
race  every  one  of  you,  if  any  fool  would  let  you  ride 
for  him ;  and  that  you  never  see  a  fox  killed 
unless  your  horse  runs  away  with  you.  0, 1  know 
you.  I've  seen  you  sneaking  round  by-corners, 
and  shirking  the  fences.     There's  not  one  of  you 

can  ride  like  a  man.     You're  a  pack  of  d 

tailors,  every  mother's  son  of  you — your  master 
and  all.  You  ain't  worth  a  sieve  of  oats,  any  one 
in  the  stable.  Every  fool  in  Wiltshire  knows  you 
are  a  pack  of  drunlvcn,  lazy " 


PADDY    BLAKE.  193 

Paddy  had  no  time  to  finish,  for  that  instant 
the  irritable  groom  struck  out  at  Paddy;  the 
blow  was  sharp  and  quick,  but  Paddy  was  far 
quicker.  He  ducked  his  head,  then,  rising  with 
great  agility,  planted  his  bony  fist  heavily  on  the 
right  cheek  of  his  assailant,  who,  however,  instantly 
grappled  and  threw  him.  The  other  two  lads  ran 
to  separate  them,  but  falling  over  the  comba- 
tants, all  four  rolled  together,  Paddy  being  alter- 
nately the  antagonist  of  each,  and,  by  his  sin- 
gular wiriness,  coming  ofi"  by  no  means  so  badly 
as  might  have  been  expected.  The  boy  Joe, 
who  at  first  tried  to  make  peace,  getting  jostled 
and  struck  in  the  fight,  lost  patience,  and  soon 
withdrew. 

"Let  them  fight  it  out,"  he  said.  "Go  it, 
Jack,  knock  some  of  the  sauce  out  of  him — 
cheeking  us  about  being  a  gentleman,  too.  Give 
it  the  beggar.  He  shan  t  come  here  calling  us 
all  the  names  he  can  lay  his  tongue  to.  Knock 
his  head  off,  and  it'll  serve  him  hano;ed  well  rio;ht." 

But  Archer,  the  second  groom,  proposed  peace, 
good  naturedly — 

"  Paddy  had  once  given  him  a  good  tip — he 
didn't  forget  those  sort  of  things — and  they^d 
better  leave  the  man  alone." 

Joe,  thus  appealed  to,  then  pulled  the  cham- 
pions apart.     By  this  time  both  were  consider- 

VOL.    I.  O 


194  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

ably  bruised  and  out  of  breatli,  and  were  dragged 
apart  with  no  great  difficulty. 

Paddy,  flushed  and  crimson  on  one  cheek,  had 
had  one  tail  of  his  dishevelled  coat  nearly  torn 
off,  and  his  black  velvet  cap  trodden  flat,  while 
his  opponent's  lips  were  swollen  as  large  as  those 
of  a  negro  king,  and  one  eye  was  palpably  dis- 
coloured. There  was  some  English  honesty  about 
the  fellow,  however,  in  spite  of  his  lazy  insolence, 
for  he  shook  hands  with  Paddy  with  evident 
sincerity,  and  they  all  sat  down  together,  passing 
the  quart  pot  about  with  as  much  formality  as  if 
it  had  been  the  Pipe  of  Peace,  and  moreover  they 
filled  Paddy  a  long  wdiite  churchwarden  pipe  and 
gave  him  a  seat  by  the  fire. 

"  I  w^as  wa^ong,  perhaps,  in  saying  the  horse 
wasn't  a  good  horse,"  said  Jack  the  warrior,  tired  of 
war's  alarms  ;  "  but  Paddy  put  my  back  ujd.  It 
is  a  good-looking  horse,  though  a  trifle  too  short 
in  the  neck  and  barrel  ;  and  I  heard  Pitts  say 
he  heard  in  Salisbury  that  he'd  killed  tw^o 
grooms,  and  couldn't  be  ridden.'^ 

''  It's  all  a  lie,"  said  Paddy  ;  "  I  stroked  him 
this  morning,  and  he  Avas  quiet  as  a  lamb.  That 
w^as  Moloch  w^ho  was  so  spiteful — you  people  here 
are  jealous  of  the  other  stables." 

Then  he  began  to  sing  a  scrap  of  a  sporting 
song  : 


PADDY    BLAKE.  195 

"  The  bell  is  ring-ing  for  the  start, 

There's  Jim  in  blue  and  white, 
With  Heseltine  in  red,  and  Job 

In  lilac,  and  Cartwright." 

"  There's  Holmes  in  blue  and  scarlet  sleeves, 

And  now  I  can  descry 
The  tartan  vest  and  yellow  cap 

Of  Mr.  Thomas  Lye." 

"  There's  a  Yorkshire  stave  for  you,  you  Don- 
caster  lads !  " 

"  What  do  you  think  of  this  ? "  said  Joe,  the 
groom  who  had  acted  as  arbitrator.  "  Here's 
Billy  Barlow  in  the  'Life  '  says  next  year's  Derby 
will  be  won  the  easiest  ever  known.  Put  the 
pot  on  for  Springbok,  says  he." 

"  Yes  ;  terms  for  one  year  two  guineas,  to  the 
Derby  one  guinea,  to  the  Chester  Cup  ten  shil- 
lings and  sixpence,  postage  stamps  taken.  I  know," 
said  Paddy,  winking  violently  over  the  edge  of  the 
quart  pot ;  "I  know  their  little  game ;  why,  I 
used  to  prophesy  myself  before  I  took  to  selling 
cards  and  got  down  in  my  luck,  and  grew  too 
fond  of  lush.  I'm  told  Springbok's  lost  all  his 
form.     He  ivas  worth  something  once." 

"  Well,  I've  heard  for  certain  they  can't  ride 
that  horse  you're  so  sweet  on,"  said  Joe,  the  first 
groom,  stolidly,  "  and  I  believe  it.  It's  your 
business  to  crack  up  Immenschikoff,  but  you'll 
never  get  me,  Paddy,  to  put  my  money  on  him. 
Too  wide  awake  for  that." 

O  2 


196  THE    vicar's    COUETSHIP. 

''  Only  give  me  the  Harlequin  colours,  and  I'd 
ride  him  to-morrow,"  shouted  Paddy,  in  his  craziest 
mood.  "  Make  way  there  for  the  Honourable 
Mr.  Cantelupe's  jockey"  (here  he  got  astride  a 
chair),  "no  curb  bridle  for  me.  111  ride  him  with 
a  plain  snaffle.  His  temper's  all  right.  There's 
the  saddling  bell  ringing  —  now  we're  ready. 
Houp  !  my  lads,  nineteen  horses  to  beat — more 
the  merrier.  Give  us  a  leg  up — all  in  a  line  there 
— no  start !  no  start ! — now  the  flag  drops  and 
we're  off  leisurely — wait  a  bit — now  they  go — 
plenty  of  time — loads  of  time — I'll  soon  cut 
them  down — last  off,  and  by  like  a  swallow — only 
three  left  at  Tattenham  corner.  Houp,  lads ! 
Now  then  for  the  Chifney  rush,  for  he  means 
it  now.  Houp,  la !  give  him  the  whalebone — 
work  him  in — dark  bay  horse  close  at  my  side 
—  give  him  the  whalebone,  lad — hand  and 
knee,  work  him  in — slash  him  along.  There's 
twenty  thousand  golden  guineas  to  win,  look, 
every  face  on  the  Grand  Stand  is  turning  white 
— slash  him  along — now  for  the  rush — now  or 
never  ! " 

Paddy,  at  all  times  half-crazed  about  sporting 
matters,  had  worked  himself  almost  to  frenzy  by 
the  race  he  had  been  imitating ;  flogging  the 
chair  with  an  ash  stick  that  lay  on  the  table,  he 
was  shouting  himself  rapidly  hoarse,  when  the  door 


PADDY    BLAKE.  197 

of  the  harness-room  opened  and  the  head  keeper 
strode  in  scowling. 

"  Well,  this  is  nice  goings  on  !  "  he  said,  as  he 
thrust  one  hand  fiercely  into  the  pocket  of  his 
brown  shooting-jacket,  "  very  pretty  goings  on. 
Mr.  Benson  (the  head  groom),  must  hear  a  little 
about  this,  my  lads.  And  what  does  this  poaching 
feUow  do  here  ? '' 

Paddy,  stopped  in  his  monologue,  stood 
on  the  defensive,  but  he  still  somewhat  blenched 
and  cowered  before  the  harder  nature  that 
confronted  him,  having;  once  fallen  into  trouble 
among  the  Abbey  AVood  keepers  for  snaring 
rabbits. 

"  What  harm  am  I  doing  1 "  .he  said,  piteously, 
and  yet  saucily  ;  "  Mr.  Benson  s  seen  me  here 
often  enough.  I  ain't  doing  nobody  any  harm, 
Mr.  Travers." 

"  No  harm  ?  Why,  I  could  hear  your 
drunken  shoutino:  almost  as  far  as  the  lodere. 
Look  here,  you  groom  fellows,  Tm  Mr.  Barker's 
bailiff,  and  it's  his  wish  I  should  look  after  every 
one  as  works  on  the  place,  groom  or  no  groom, 
and  I  won't  have  these  poaching  spies  about  here 
to  get  up  lies  about  the  place,  steal  pheasants' 
eggs  or  some  devilry  or  otherwise.  Come,  you 
fellow,  get  out  of  this  !  " 

The   keeper    spoke   as   a   young  Irish  poHce- 


198  THE   VICAE's    courtship. 

man  intoxicated  by  liis  uniform  and  first  good 
meal,  miglit  talk  to  a  transgressing  cabman,  and 
as  he  spoke  lie  laid  one  large  horny  hand  on  the 
poor  harmless  fellow's  shoulder.  Paddy  demurred, 
but  the  keeper  took  him  by  the  shoulder  to  move 
him  to  the  door. 

"  If  you  touch  me,  Mr.  Travers,"  Paddy  cried, 
"  it'll  be  the  worse  for  you  ;  take  care,  I'm  doing 
no  harm  here." 

"  Harm,  or  no  harm,  out  you  go  ! " 

The  petty  tyrant  was  furious.  He  made  a 
dart  at  the  poor  tout,  seized  him  by  the  collar, 
half  throttled  him,  knocked  doYvm  a  chair  and  a 
dirty  table  on  Avhich  two  of  the  grooms  had  been 
playing  at  cards,  and  eventually  threw  Paddy 
sprawling  several  yards  from  the  door. 

"  I'll  get  a  summons  for  you,"  shouted  the  man, 
as  he  rose  covered  with  mud,  and  looking  the  most 
pitiable  of  sights.  "  I'll  pull  you  up,  you  Jack  in 
office — you  beggar  on  horseback — you  shall  an- 
swer for  this  knocking  about  people  who've  done  no 
harm  to  you — ^you  shall  answer  for  this  some  day! '' 

"  Summons  away  !  "  shouted  the  keeper  ;  ''  I 
know  my  place,  and  don't  you  come  on  this  pro- 
perty again,  or  you'U  get  what  you  won't  like.  You 
look  out,  for  I'll  take  care  you  get  pepper ;  we'U 
have  no  vagabonds  about  here.  Come,  be  off ;  I 
know  you ! " 


PADDY    BLAKE.  199 

Paddy  retreated,  not  gracefully,  but  ^vitIl 
reasonable  speed,  and  the  keeper  stayed  a 
moment. 

"You  boys,"  he  said  to  the  grooms,  **  don't  you 
encourage  that  scoundrel  here  any  more — don't  you 
let  me  find  him  inside  these  doors  again,  or  you 
and  I  will  be  having  a  quarrel.  I  don't  want  to 
cross  Mr.  Benson,  but  I  won't  have  those  cado^inor 
fellows  about  here  to  see  w^here  the  game  is  and 
find  the  best  place  for  putting  nooses.  Mind,  you 
know  me,  and  I  won't  have  it !  Another  time,  and 
you  all  go.  You  know  as  well  as  I  do  that  there 
is  not  a  man  on  the  place  I  can't  start  if  I  choose. 
So  (friend's  advice)  take  care,  or  you'll  be  off  your 
saddles  in  a  brace  of  jiffies." 

"  I'd  as  lief  ride  a  flat  race  against  Sattin 
hisself  as  cheek  that  fellow,"  was  the  remark  of 
Jack  the  groom  to  Joe  the  groom,  as  the  keeper, 
with  a  severe  eye  at  the  cards  and  pewter  pot, 
went  out  and  slammed  the  door  behind  him  ; 
"  he's  a  regular  sweep,  and  perhaps  he'll  have  a 
fall  some  day  that'll  hurt  him.  He  turns  master 
round  his  finger — drat  him.  But  why  didn't  you, 
Joe,  up  and  say  something  about  it  being  our 
own  room  and  w^e  w^anted  to  keep  ourselves  to 
ourselves — we  ain't  in  prison  here." 

"  Oh,  yes.  Jack,  it's  all  very  well,"  said  Joe  the 
pacific  ;  "  but  why  didn't  you  ?  you've  been  the 


200  THE   VICAe's    courtship. 

longest  here.  I  don't  like  getting  in  the  way  of 
a  man  as  has  got  master's  ear.  He  could  put  a 
spoke  in  our  wheel  any  fine  morning,  and  you 
know  that  as  well  as  I  do." 


THE   AUDIEXCE.  201 


CHAPTEE  XII. 

THE    AUDIEXCE. 

SuMMERLEAS  Abbey  was  just  tlie  place  in 
which  the  new  money  of  our  day  delights  to 
display  itself.  There  was  room  to  lavish  it  there. 
It  was  an  old  house  of  Inigo  Jones's  design,  that 
had  been  spoiled  by  Kent  and  other  impudent 
charlatans  of  the  early  Georgian  era,  who  had 
removed  the  oriels,  and  added  a  huge  Doric 
porch,  hideous,  cumbrous,  but  comfortable.  It 
Avas  surrounded  by  woods,  which  gradually 
passed,  by  transitions  of  huge  shrubberies  of 
rhododendron,  into  flower-gardens  and  velvety 
lawn.  All  that  wealth  could  lavish  had  been 
lavished  on  it  till  every  stone  of  its  walls 
betokened  the  vitalising  presence  of  wealth. 

Mr.  Beauflower  was  a  frank  honest  man,  with 
a  good  nerve  and  a  large  heart,  but  he  was  as 
timid  that  morning  as  if  he  had  been  a  schoolboy 
going  up  to  be  lectured  by  the  head  master. 
He  felt  his  colour  come  and  go  as   the    gravel 


202  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

crunched  under  his  feet,  and  as  at  every  step  he 
drew  nearer  to  the  front  door.  A  lover  going 
to  propose  could  not  have  felt  more  nervous  and 
distrustful.  Once  or  twice  he  half  resolved  to 
turn  back  and  abandon  his  resolution.  But 
then  again  the  pressure  of  his  trouble  came  upon 
him,  and  he  determined  at  all  hazards  to  appeal 
to  Mr.  Harker.  He  rang,  but  the  bell  gave  no 
sound.  He  rang  again,  and  the  next  time,  to  his 
horror,  with  such  force,  that  the  sound  of  the  bell 
echoed  all  throuo;h  the  house.  In  a  few  moments 
a  footman  opened  the  door — an  imperturbable, 
insolent  footman,  whom  nothing  could  ruffle. 

"  Is  Mr.  Harker  at  home  1 " 

"  I  don't  know,  sir,  I'm  sure ;  but  I  think 
master's  in  his  study.  Ill  see,  sir,  if  you'll  walk  in." 

*'No,  thank  you,"  said  Beauflower,  nervously, 
"  I  won't  walk  in.  I'm  rather  in  a  hurry ;  I'll 
wait  here." 

"  I'll  go  and  see,  sir,  directly.  Mrs.  Harker's  in, 
I  know." 

The  man  returned  in  a  moment  with  a  messao;e 
that  Mr.  Harker  was  very  busy  about  some  im- 
portant business,  but  would  have  pleasure  in 
seeing  Mr.  Beauflower  if  he  would  kindly  wait  a 
feAv  minutes.  Mr.  Beauflower  was  shown  into  the 
drawing-room.  It  was  very  gorgeous,  but  yet  it 
wanted  that  look  of  calm  comfort  and  intellectual 


THE   AUDIENCE.  203 

luxury  that  a  pleasant  room  sliould  have.  There 
were  costly  Indian  caskets  inlaid  with  coloured 
ivories,  and  mediaeval  reliquaries,  and  carvings, 
and  enamels,  and  statuettes,  and  Louis  Qua- 
torze  clocks,  and  Sevres  china,  and  costly  Japan 
screens.  But  they  were  heaped  together  with 
^ailgar  profusion,  and  were  too  numerous. 

Mr.  Beauflower  opened  a  photograph  book  that 
lay  upon  the  table,  and  studied  the  family  and  its 
friends.  There  was  Mr.  Harker  in  as  many  shapes 
as  Proteus,  his  hard  iron-bound  face  ever  the 
same,  whether  he  was  bestriding  his  hunter  or 
sitting  as  Chairman  of  the  Quarter  Sessions,  or 
resting  his  hand  on  a  pile  of  books,  or  standing 
^^dtli  his  gun  under  his  arm.  There  was  JMrs. 
Harker,  hard,  false,  and  specious,  with  her  com- 
pany smile  and  her  costliest  dress.  There  was 
Miss  Harker,  with  her  favourite  simper,  in  several 
aflfected  attitudes — at  croquet,  at  an  archery  meet- 
ing, in  a  riding  habit,  and  attired  for  the  count}' 
ball.  Then  came  all  sorts  of  county  people — 
Lord  Mazagan,  the  colonel  of  the  local  volunteers, 
and  the  Honourable  Fitzegbert  Cantelupe,  and 
the  bishop  of  the  diocese,  and  many  of  the  neigh- 
bouring squires,  their  wives,  and  daughters.  But 
one  page  chiefly  arrested  ]\Ir.  Bcaufiower's  atten- 
tion, and  that  contained  a  photograph  of  Ethel  and 
her  governess.     Ethel  looked  frank  and  smiling. 


204  THE    YICAP/S    COURTSHIP. 

and  was  leaning  against  Amy,  who  was  seated. 
Amy  looked  beautiful  and  gentle  in  it,  but  there 
was  a  shade  of  sadness  on  her  features.  While 
Mr.  Beauflower  was  still  absorbed  in  study- 
ing the  sweet  pure  face,  and  contrasting  it  with 
Miss  Barker's  bold,  knowing  expression,  much 
to  the  disadvantage  of  the  latter,  a  great  buhl 
clock  on  the  mantel-piece  chimed  twelve  on  a  sharp 
silvery  little  bell  that  gave  a  bright  sharp  stroke 
that  made  him  start.  He  had  been  waiting  half 
an  hour,  and  the  Harkers  had  lunch  at  two. 
Mr.  Beauflower  was  an  impetuous  man  ;  even  his 
profession  could  not  subdue  that  in  him.  He  never 
allowed  considerations  of  self-interest  to  stand 
in  his  way  when  any  indignity  was  shown  him. 
He  rose  to  go.  He  would  first  ring  the  bell.  He 
would  not  be  kept  waiting  like  a  servant  who  had 
come  for  a  place.  He  was  implacable.  He  would 
go.  He  had  just  got  as  far  as  the  mantlepiece, 
Avhen  the  footman  who  had  let  him  in  opened  the 
door,  and  said  cavalierly, — 

"  Mr.  Harker  can  see  you  now,  sir.  Walk  this 
way.'' 

"  I  was  just  going." 

"  Sorry  to  keep  you,  sir;  but  master  never  likes 
to  be  disturbed  when  he's  busy — gave  strict  orders, 
sir — much  as  my  place  is  worth,  sir;  says  he,  'ShoAV 
in  no  one  till  the  gentleman  as  is  with  me  goes.'" 


THE    AUDIENCE.  205 

Mr.  Harker,  when  Mr.  Beauflower  entered  the 
sanctum,  was  seated  at  his  desk,  with  several 
account-books  before  him,  and  was  as  busy  as  a 
steward  on  quarter  day.  He  had  the  worn  look 
of  a  man  who  had  been  hard  at  work,  and  some- 
what worried  by  business. 

The  Barkers'  career  was  imperfectly  known  at 
Summerleas.     General  report  said  the  fether  had 
been  a  picture  dealer  in  early  life,  and  that  he 
boasted  of  coming  to  London  to  seek  his  fortune,  as 
a  carver  and  gilder,  with  only  a  shilling  in  his 
pocket.     But  this  is  a  common  boasfc  among  the 
new    rich.     He    had    been    employed    by    Mr. 
Staunton,  the  former  owner  of  the  Abbey,  to  buy 
old    carvings   and   pictures,  and  had  eventually 
wheedled  himself  in   as    a   steward  and  sort  of 
confidential  adviser  of  the  old  man,  who,  having 
cut  ofi"  his  rebellious  only  son,  had  at  last  left 
everything  but  a  plantation  or  two  in  Jamaica  to 
the   son   of  his   indispensable  man  of  business. 
Harker  No.  2  was  a  pompous,  blustering  hard  man, 
considered  by  his  friends  and  toadies  to  be  a  first 
rate  organiser  and  man  of  business,  and  a  great 
experimental  farmer ;    in  reality  a  grinding,  re- 
morseless landlord,  a  t}T:annical  game-preserver, 
and  a  man  who  set  his  face  like  a  flint  against  the 
class  from  which  he  had  risen.    His  room  was  full 
of  rain-gauges,  and  models  of  agricultural  imple- 


206  THE   VICAH'S   COURTSHIP. 

ments,  while  a  large  covered  zinc  tank  seven  feet 
long  stood  in  a  corner  of  the  room,  near  a  turning 
-latlie,  for  Mr.  Barker  was  a  scientific  man,  and  had 
a  mechanical  tm-n,  which  he  evinced  by  turning 
tortoise-shell  rings  and  handles  for  drawers.  His 
science  consisted  in  a  dabbling  in  manures,  but  it 
must  be  confessed  that  he  was  eager  to  test  new 
improvements,  and  did  some  good  in  his  neigh- 
bom^hood  by  costly  experiments,  and  by  his  energy 
in  upsetting  the  old  superstitions  of  farming.  He 
looked  up  as  Mr.  Beauflower  entered,  rose,  and 
shook  hands  in  a  patronising  way. 

"Sorry  to  keep  you  waiting,  Beaufiower,"  he 
said,  "  but  had  some  important  county  business 
to  transact." 

"Oh,  dont  mention  it,"  said  Mr.  Beauflower. 
"  I  know  your  time  is  very  much  taken  up." 

"You've  heard  of  the  great  experiment  were 
going  to  make  on  the  Home  Farm  V 

"  I  have  heard  something  of  it." 

"  It  is  the  Glasnevin  experiment.  Mechi's  hand- 
sowing  has  done  so  well  under  that  active  fellow 
Travers  that  we  re  going  now  to  try  sowing  the 
seed  in  a  bed  and  transplanting  it ;  .we'll  part  the 
roots  so  as  to  save  the  seed,  and  make  each  j)lant 
into  ten  or  more.  In  wet  seasons  when  the 
weather  is  bad  that  will  be  a  great  thing.  You 
know  the  old  proverb  '  set  wet,  sow  dry;'  and  the 


THE   AUDIENCE.  £07 

cost  of  transplanting  will  be  nothing.  Travers 
says  the  women  hereabouts  will  do  it  for  two- 
pence the  four  thousand  plants." 

"  Poor  women  !  "  said  ]\Ir.  Beauflower,  with  an 
honest  man's  utter  want  of  tact.  "  Nothinsj  I 
lament  so  much  about  the  poverty  of  my  people, 
as  the  necessity  for  the  women  doing  field  labour. 
It  is  most  demoralising,  and  it  makes  them 
neglect  their  homes  and  their  children." 

"  I  do  not  myself  regard  these  things  from  the 
sentimental  point  of  view,"  said  ]\Ir.  Harker,  with 
a  dry  superciliousness.  "  If  the  women  choose  to 
work,  let  them  work  ;  they  know  their  ot\ti  in- 
terests best.  I  adopt  vnlh.  the  transplantation 
system  the  Lois  Weedon  system,  and  mean  to  try 
that  on  the  same  land  year  after  year,  with- 
out manm-e.  By  the  bye,  what  did  you  ^vrite 
to  me  about  that  cottage  of  old  Davis  at  Stoat's 
Nest?" 

"  That  it  is  entirely  unfit  for  human  habita- 
tion. The  water  runs  down  the  walls,  and  after 
several  days'  rain  they  can  ladle  it  up  off  the  floor. 
It's  killincTj  that  old  rheumatic  mother-in-law  who 
lives  with  them." 

"  Don't  you  believe  a  word  they  say.  They're 
the  most  lying  lot  that  I  ever  came  across.  They'll 
tell  you  an}^hing  to  wheedle  out  a  shilling. 
Travers  tells  me  the  thatch  wants  looking  to,  and 


208  THE  vicar's    COUETSHIP. 

that's  all.  That  is  the  worst  of  you  clerg}^meii ; 
the  poor  are  always  acting  before  you.  They  hide 
away  their  dinners  when  you  come,  and  bring  out 
their  Bibles.  Look  at  that  man  Anderson  you 
gave  so  much  to,  not  a  worse  fellow  in  the  place. 
Travers  says  he  kills  no  end  of  hares." 

"  Travers  has  some  dislike  to  the  man.  Fm 
sure  he's  honest,  and  he  is  regular  at  church." 

"  That's  his  art :  he  knows  he'd  get  very  little 
money  without  that.  I  tell  you  they  all  humbug 
you.  They're  a  cunning,  thievish,  poaching  lot 
here,  and  if  I  could  I'd  pull  down  half  the  cot- 
tages. The  rates  are  enormous.  But,  by  the  bye, 
I  say,  Beauflower,  what's  this  Travers  tells  me 
about  some  old  gentleman  visiting  you  having  a 
fit  in  the  park  \  One  of  the  keepers  saw  him 
drop  just  opposite  the  house.  What  is  it  ? — who 
is  he  ? " 

"I've  heard  nothing  of  it,"  said  Beauflower. 
"  We  have  an  old  gentleman  staying  with  us — a 
Mr.  Goodrick,  an  old  West  Indian  friend  of  ours, 
whom  we  have  never  had  before.  It  can  hardly 
be  true  about  the  fit,  or  he  would  have  told  me  ; 
besides,  he  arrived  at  our  house  perfectly  well." 

"  Oh,  I  suppose  it  was  the  same  old  gentleman 
who  brought  Ethel's  governess." 

''Yes,  it  was;  he  did  give  Miss  Eobinson  a 
seat   in  his    carriage;    by  the  bye,  Mr.  Harker, 


THE    AFDIEXCE.  209 

would  you  allow  me  to  bring  him  some  day  to 
see  your  pictures  and  your  collection  of  jewels  ? 
He  is  a  connoisseur  in  those  things.  I  have  been 
warm  in  the  praises  of  your  collection/' 

'•'  Oh,  they're  nothing,"  said  Mr.  Harker,  with 
that  unconscious  smile  that  a  flattered  person 
always  wears — "  nothing.  I've  a  few  good  things, 
and  that's  all.  I've  got  an  opal  or  two,  and  a 
pink  diamond  that's  thought  superior  to  the  Hope 
Diamond,  and  that's  all.  One  or  two  good  pic- 
tures ;  my  Watteaus  and  that  great  Leonardo  I 
gave  Beckford  three  thousand  pounds  for.  I  can  t 
afford  pictures,  still  I  won't  have  an}i:hing  second- 
hand.    AU  I  have  are  the  best." 

An  offensive  humility  was  a  prominent  feature 
of  the  man's  character.  Beauflower  still  delayed 
to  disclose  the  real  object  of  his  visit.  He  put  it 
off  as  long  as  he  possibly  could.  Besides,  there 
was  the  complaint  against  Travers  to  first  broach. 
He  dashed  at  it  abruptly. 

"  I  am  very  sorry,  Mr.  Harker,"  he  said,  in  an 
evident  tone  of  regret,  "  to  ever  have  to  complain 
of  any  of  your  servants.  I  am  a  man  of  peace,  I 
preach  peace,  I  practise  peace ;  but  a  case  has 
arisen  that  compels  me  to  speak.  One  of  your 
men,  I  feel  sure  by  Mr.  Travers's  express  orders, 
has  shot  at  and  wounded  a  favourite  terrier  of 
ours,  a  poor,  inoffensive  little  thing." 

VOL.   L  P 


210  THE   VICAe'S   courtship. 

"  I  cannot  believe  that  Travers  would  order 
sucli  a  thing.  There  is  an  unfortunate  prejudice 
existing  against  this  person.  He  is  a  very  faith- 
ful fellow,  and  everything  the  men  do  is  laid  to 
him.  The  keepers  complain  very  much  of  the 
people's  dogs  about  here." 

"  Ours  never  strayed,  and  had  no  sporting 
tendencies." 

"  Ay,  so  you  think ;  but  you  can  t  help  dogs 
straying  near  a  preserve.  I  mil  tell  Travers 
to  procure  you  a  Skye  terrier,  one  of  Lord 
Mazagan's  breed." 

Beaufiower's  pride  was  hurt. 

*'  Thank  you,  Mr.  Harker,"  he  said,  "  it  is  not 
the  value  of  the  dog  we  care  about,  but  he  was  a 
special  pet.  The  poor  people  all  complain  that 
they  cannot  keep  a  cat,  the  keepers  kill  every  one." 

"  Quite  right,  too.  I  don't  wish  my  labourers 
to  keep  cats.  They  are  sure  to  kill  game.  I 
gave  orders  to  have  every  cat  found  poaching 
shot.  I'll  speak  to  Travers  about  this  dog,  but  I 
feel  sure  he  ordered  no  such  thing.  He  knows 
his  duty  too  well.  There's  not  a  better  head- 
keeper  in  all  "Wiltshire ;  he's  worth  two  hundred 
pounds  a  year  to  me." 

"If  you  insist  in  thinking  him  incapable  of 
doing  wrong,"  said  Mr.  Beauflower,  rather  nettled, 
"  of  course  it  is  no  use  my  making  any  complaint. 


THE   AUDIENCE.  211 

All  I  hope  is  that  yon  may  not  some  clay  repent 
yom"  confidence  in  him." 

"  I  m  sure  I  shall  not.  I  have  a  tolerable  per- 
ception in  such  matters.  He  is  never  rude  to 
you,  I  hope  ? '' 

"  He  vras  extremely  insolent  this  morning — 
he  defied  me,  in  fact." 

'•'  I  must  speak  to  him,  then.  His  zeal  carries 
him  too  far  sometimes,  I  find,  and  he  has  a  strong 
dislike  to  stransrers  interference  with  his  duties. 
Indeed,  he  complained  to  me  once  that  some  re- 
marks of  yours  about  the  game  lavrs  had  done 
great  harm  in  the  ^-illage,  and  encouraged  poach- 
ing.    I  did  not  myself  hear  that  sermon." 

"  I  certainly  do  think  our.  game  laws  too 
severe,  Mr.  Harker.  AVe  have  often  discussed 
that  matter.  The  rabbits  destroy  the  farmers' 
crops.  Mr.  Brown  himself  tells  me  he  loses  a 
hundred  a  year  by  your  rabbits." 

"  Oh,  he'll  say  anything,  though  half  the  game 
he  gets  on  his  land  is  mine.  He  and  his  son  are 
little  better  than  poachers." 

"  I  cannot  share  in  your  prejudice  against  !Mr. 
Brown.     The  old  man  is  honest  to  the  backbone." 

Both  speakers  were  getting  rather  heated.    ^Ir. 

Beauflower  had  thrown  by  now  all  thoughts  of 

mentioning  his  pecuniary  difficulties  to  ^Mr.  Harker. 

"  If  I  remember  right,"  said  Mr.  Harker,  his 

p  2 


212  THE   VICAES   COUETSHIP. 

eyes  lialf  slmt,  as  he  stretched  out  his  coarse  feet 
towards  the  fender,  and  played,  half  angrily, 
with  his  watch-chain  and  the  bunch  of  four  or 
five  spade  guineas  attached  to  it,  "you  object  to 
the  modern  system  of  battue  shooting  ?  I  like  to 
discuss  these  things.  AVhat  objection  can  you 
find,  now,  to  battue  shooting  ? " 

"  "Well,  I  must  confess  I  do,"  said  Beauflower, 
with  his  hands  clasped  over  his  knee.  "  I  cannot 
see  the  pleasure  of  going  about,  followed  by  an 
army  of  beaters  driving  up  flocks  of  half- tamed 
birds  that  are  instantly  knocked  down  by  the 
cartload.  The  pleasure  I  used  to  find  in  shoot- 
inor  consisted  in  the  individual  search,  the  ex- 
pectation,  the  pleasant  labour  of  overcoming  the 
instincts  of  self-preservation  in  the  animal. 
Butchery  has,  I  think,  taken  the  place  of  real 
sport." 

"  I  have  no  sentiment  in  these  matters.  I  am 
a  practical  man  in  everything,"  said  Mr.  Harker, 
with  insolent  carelessness,  as  if  his  opponent's 
arguments  were  hardly  worth  seriously  grappling 
with.  "  My  pheasants  cost  me  a  guinea  each, 
and  my  pleasure  is  in  killing  them  in  the 
way  I  do.  I  would  not  give  a  thank  you  to 
go  sneaking  about  the  edge  of  a  covert.  It 
would  be  like  sparrow-shooting  in  comparison. 
For    myself,    I   like    to    do    things    in   a   large 


THE   AUDIENCE.  213 

way.  I  have  always  been  accustomed  to  do  them 
in  a  large  way." 

Beauflower  tliougiit  to  himself,  "That  is  the  mis- 
take all  you  rich  people  make.  They  always  think 
they  can  buy  pleasure ;  but  with  all  their  battues, 
the  farmer's  boy,  spending  all  day  looking  for  one 
rabbit,  enjoys  his  final  shot  more  than  Dives  does 
all  his  battues."     He,  however,  merely  said  : 

"  I  fear  we  difier  in  these  matters.  I  do  not 
think  the  pleasure  of  a  day's  shooting  can  be 
increased  by  merely  having  twenty  birds  to  kill 
instead  of  five.  All  true  pleasure  must  be  earned. 
It  can  t  be  bought  ready-made." 

Just  then  the  door  opened,  and  Ethel  darted 
in,  her  golden  hair  tossing  behind  her. 

''  Papa,"  she  cried,  "  are  you  coming  in  to 
lunch  ?  Mamma  hopes  Mr.  Beauflower  will 
stop." 

Mr.  Beauflower  shook  hands  with  Ethel.  ''  I 
am  afraid,"  he  said,  "I  must  deny  myself  the 
pleasure.  Mr.  Harker,  please  make  my  apologies. 
IVe  got  a  train  to  catch  at  Slobury.  It  is  the 
Visitation  to-day  at  Salisbury,  and  I  must  see 
the  Archdeacon.  By  the  way,  I'm  seriously 
thinking  of  setting  to  work  about  our  little 
church.     AVill  you  aid  ?  " 

"You  may  rely  on  me,"  said  ]\Ir.  Harker, 
patronisingly,  "and  I  can  strongly  recommend 


214  THE   vicar's   COURTSHIP. 

you  the  architect  who  built  that  fresh  wing  for 
me.     He's  a  first  rate  man — an  A  1  man." 

''  By  the  bye,"  said  Mr.  BeaufloAver,  ''  before  I 
go,  just  one  word.  Might  I  ask  you  if  you  have 
any  portrait  of  the  Stauntons  still  about  the 
house  ? " 

Mr.  Harker  s  face  changed  rather  at  this  ques- 
tion, and  he  gave  the  speaker  a  look  of  searching, 
and  rather  offensive,  inquiry,  without  answering. 

"  The  fact  is,  the  friend  I  m  going  to  bring 
knew  some  of  the  family  years  ago,  and  feels 
rather  anxious  to  see  any  portraits  of  them  you 
misfht  have." 

o 

''  I  think  there  are  one  or  two  knocking 
about  in  the  nursery  or  the  garrets,"  said  Mr. 
Harker,  very  icily,  "  but  I  really  don't  know.  I 
have  almost  forgotten  the  very  name  of  Staunton. 
They  were  a  queer  lot.  However,  Fll  make  the 
housekeeper  see  about  it  if  it  will  gratify  your 
friend.     What's  his  name  ?  " 

"  Goodrick." 

"  Goodrick.  There  was  a  man  of  that  name, 
a  tax-collector,  at  Shaftesbury." 

"  My  friend,"  said  Beauflower,  with  a  slight 
sense  of  hurt  dignity,  "  has  no  relations  in  this 
part  of  England.  He  is  of  an  old  Norfolk  family, 
I  think  I  have  heard  my  cousin,  the  la^vyer, 
say." 


THE   AUDIEXCE.  215 

1^'  Oh,  indeed — a  Norfolk  family!"  said  Harker, 
with  a  parvenu's  full  sense  of  the  guarantee  im- 
plied by  family.  "  AYell,  he'll  be  one  of  the  first 
persons  for  years  that  I  have  ever  heard  even 
speak  of  the  Stauntons.  I  never  knew  a  family 
so  utterly  forgotten — not  a  trace  of  them  left. 
It  is  most  sino;ular." 

Mr.  Beaufiower  thought  differently,  but  he  said 
nothing.  If  Mr.  Staunton,  the  miUionaKe,  who 
cast  his  son  adrift  for  an  imprudent  elope- 
ment and  marriage,  had  been  in  later  life  a  self- 
isolated,  soured,  gloomy  man,  collecting  pictures 
and  books  for  his  own  use,  and  declining  ail 
society,  still  he  had  been  princely  in  his  charities, 
and  many  a  widow  and  orphan  still  cherished  his 
memory ;  but  the  man — the  servant  he  had  en- 
riched and  made  his  son  had  long  ago  forgotten 
him.  " Gratitude,"  says  Eochefoucault,  "is  a 
burden  hard  to  bear,  and  every  one  tries,  if  pos- 
sible, to  shake  it  off  his  shoulders."  To  a  base 
nature  like  Mr.  Harker's,  gratitude  was  impos- 
sible. The  Yicar  began  to  lose  all  trust  and  belief 
in  Mr.  Harker's  goodness  of  heart.  As  he  was 
taking  leave,  the  gong  thundered  out  for  lunch. 
One  would  have  thought  a  Hindoo  festival  was 
being  held,  and  that  the  gong  announced  the 
moment  of  sacrifice.  That  pompous  announce- 
ment of  a  small  event  was  quite  in  accordance 


216  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

with  the  general  spirit  of  the  house  and  the  tone 
of  the  proprietor's  mind. 

"  We  shall  never  get  on,  I'm  afraid/'  thought 
the  Vicar  to  himself,  "  but  at  all  events  I'll  not 
come  into  actual  collision  if  I  can  help  it.  On  the 
game  laws  we'll  agree  to  differ.  I  don't  think  he 
dislikes  me  yet." 

Nor  did  Mr.  Harker  dishke  the  Vicar.  He 
thought  him  an  honest,  frank  man,  rather  too  in- 
dependent and  theoretical,  utterly  unpractical, 
and  no  more  fitted  to  manage  business  matters 
than  a  child. 

The  "  PiemTe "  of  debt  would  have  to  clutch 
Beauflower  far  closer  before  he  would  stoop  to 
borrow  money  of  a  proud  and  insolent  man  like 
that. 


MISS    CHIVERS.  217 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

MISS    CHIVERS. 

The  Misses  Cliivers,  two  maiden  sisters,  as  in- 
separable as  the  Siamese  twins,  inhabited  a  small 
stone  house  just  at  the  entrance  of  Fontford,  and 
about  a  mile  from  Summerleas.  It  was  a  demure, 
rather  dull  house,  quiet  as  a  family  vault,  with 
a  nice  lawn  at  the  back  commanding  a  view  of 
the  Abbey  woods,  that  ran  in'  towering  terraces 
to  the  south  of  it. 

Good  old  souls !  They  lived  on  their  C[uiet 
unbroken  life  unruffled  by  the  jars  and  bustle  of 
the  outer  world,  the  roar  and  rattle  of  whose 
railway  wheels  reached  them  occasionally,  via 
Slobury,  as  they  walked  among  their  rose  trees. 
Ordinarily  no  sound  crossed  them  louder  than 
the  gentle  roll  of  Dr.  Briscoe's  gig,  or  the  grind 
of  some  farmer's  ponderous  waggon.  The  sole 
surviving  daughters  of  the  captain  of  an  India- 
man,  who  had  left  them  comfortably  off,  they 
had  resided  for  twenty  years  in  this  part  of  Wilt- 


218  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

sliire,  and,  apart  from  a  little  gossip,  passed  as 
guileless  and  inoffensive  a  life  as  could  well  be 
imamned. 

o 

Their  little  parlour,  looking  out  on  the  lawn, 
Avas  a  pattern  of  prim  neatness.  It  only  wanted 
tumbling  about  to  make  it  really  comfortable. 
The  furniture  never  altered  its  place,  and  was 
never  changed.  It  never  seemed  to  wear  out 
nor  to  decay.  The  portraits  of  duU  old  George 
the  Third  and  snuffy  Queen  Charlotte,  greeted 
visitors,  year  after  year,  from  either  side  of  the 
mantlepiece.  On  the  wall  facing  the  window 
there  was  an  engraving  of  the  Eepentant 
Gambler  after  Stothard,  and  another  of  West's 
picture  of  the  Death  of  Nelson.  On  the  Indian 
shells  on  the  mantlepiece  no  grain  of  dust  ever 
lingered  more  than  a  few  hours.  Among  the 
old  china,  on  the  square  stand  with  shelves  for 
nick-nacks  that  stood  between  the  two  pictures, 
was  a  great  blue  jar,  of  delicious  old-fashioned 
Pot  Pourri,  the  spiced  rose  leaves  in  which  spread 
a  pleasant  aroma  through  the  room.  An  inlaid 
ivory  w^ork-box  stood  on  a  small  table,  in  a  recess 
near  the  wide  stone  mullioned  window,  and  some 
miniatures  of  by-gone  Chiverses,  with  pigtails 
and  strange  head-dresses,  hung  over  this.  A 
beautiful  case  of  humming  birds,  of  a  hundred 
jewel  colours,  stood  in  the  opposite  corner. 


MISS   CHIVERS.  219 

The  two  sisters  sat  by  the  window  reading  the 
"Times,"  as  they  did  every  morning  exactly  at 
the  same  hour.  An  old  fashioned  work-box  stood 
on  a  small  table  between  them,  on  the  varnished 
lid  of  which  was  painted  a  view  of  Vauxhall 
cu'ca  1787.  Elizabeth,  the  eldest  Miss  Chive rs, 
was  a  plain,  pale,  energetic  person,  with  large 
dark  eyes,  that  were  still  keen  and  expressive. 
She  was  the  ruler.  The  younger,  Jane,  was  deaf, 
an  invalid,  and  altogether  of  a  more  negative 
character.  Her  opinions  were  borrowed  from  her 
sister,  for  whom  she  entertained  a  veneration 
that  would  have  been  ludicrous,  if  it  had  not 
been  so  sincere  and  so  full  of  humility.  She 
was  always  beseeching  Elizabeth  not  to  do  so 
much,  not  to  over-do  it,  not  to  wear  herself  out, 
entreating  her  to  rest,  to  take  care  of  the  cold, 
not  to  think  of  her,  and  so  on. 

Both  sisters,  like  most  people,  however  un- 
selfish, who  Kve  by  themselves,  and  have  not 
much  to  think  of,  were  slighty  hypochondriacal, 
and  very  much  disposed  to  talk  of  their  own 
ailments.  But  this  absorbing  subject,  it  should 
in  justice  be  said,  was  instantly  forgotten  when- 
ever sorrow  or  sickness  called  for  their  sympathy. 
No  persons  were  oftener  found  at  the  bedsides 
of  the  dying  than  these  good  old  maids.  They 
lived   to   console   misery   and   comfort   old   age. 


220  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

Tliey  miglit  gossip  a  little,  but  their  life  was  one 
long  act  of  unobtrusive  good. 

"  Here's  a  most  dreadful  thing,  Jane,"  said 
the  eldest  Miss  Chivers,  laying  down  the  paper. 
''An  earthquake  near  Callao  has  swallowed  up 
a  whole  town.  0  dear!  dear!  I  really  think 
the  end  of  the  world  must  be  coming." 

Jane  Chivers  took  the  event  with  great  com- 
posure, and  merely  inquired  if  there  was  any 
account  if  the  Queen  had  reached  Balmoral.  An 
earthquake  several  thousand  miles  off  interests  us, 
after  all,  far  less  than  the  death  of  one's  pet  dog. 

Just  then  a  cart  dashed  up  to  the  back  door, 
and  a  sleek,  sly,  jDortly  man  came  round  to  the 
Avindow  with  a  basket  of  meat  on  his  arm.  He 
took  off  his  hat  when  he  saAv  Miss  Chivers. 

"  Nothing  to-day,  Mr.  Pitts,  thank  you,"  she 
said,  lifting  up  the  window.  "We've  just  had 
some  game  sent  us  from  Dr.  Briscoe." 

The  butcher  said  the  weather  was  turning 
cold,  he  thought,  and  having  uttered  this  meteor- 
ological remark,  returned  to  his  cart,  and  drove 
off. 

"What  a  nice  mannered  man  that  is,"  said 
Miss  Chivers.  "  Yery  straightforward  man." 
(Pitts  was  really  a  plausible  cheat.) 

Jane  agreed  that  he  was  most  well-mannered, 
but  begged  and  prayed  Ehzabeth  not  to  put  her 


MISS    CHIVERS.  221 

head  out  of  window  again  without  slipping  a 
handkerchief  or  something  over  it.  So  the  good 
old  creatures  petted  each  other. 

"You  quite  spoil  me,  Jane.  By  the  bye,  we 
must  ask  the  Beauflowers  to  tea.  Dr.  Briscoe 
wants  to  meet  the  friend  who  is  there.  They 
tell  me  he's  going  to  take  a  house  and  live  down 
here." 

While  they  were  discussing  this  great  event, 
the  latch  of  the  garden  door  suddenly  lifted,  and 
Amy  Robinson  ran  up  to  the  window,  laughing. 

'•'  Why,  here's  dear  Amy,  I  declare,"  said  Eliza- 
beth, at  last.  "  She's  got  a  holiday.  Ethel's 
gone  to  see  the  hounds  meet,  I  suppose,  wdth  her 
father.  Well,  Amy  dear ;  my  dear,  dear  girl,  how 
glad  we  are  to  see  you  !" 

"  Oh,  we  are  so  glad  to  see  her,"  said  Jane ; 
"how  kind  of  her  to  come  and  see  us  old  bores 
that  no  one  cares  for." 

"  Dear  old  bores,  that  every  one  cares  for  and 
every  one  loves,"  said  Amy,  dancing  about  them 
like  a  fawn,  in  pure  restlessness  of  high  spirits 
and  enjoyment.  "It  is  the  poor  governesses  no 
one  cares  for." 

''  Fie,  Amy,"  said  Elizabeth  Chivers ;  "  you 
little  puss,  you  know  you  steal  every  one's  heart. 
Well,  and  how  did  the  great  party  go  off  ?  Come, 
give  me  your  hat." 


222  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

"  Well,  it  ^Yas  so  grand  and  so  tiresome.  Oh, 
Miss  Chivers,  here's  the  crochet  pattern  I  pro- 
mised to  bring,  and  the  wire  for  the  woollen 
flowers." 

"  And  is  Mr.  Cantelnpe  so  handsome,  and  is  it 
to  be  a  match  ?  Dr.  Briscoe  says  they're  evi- 
dently setting  their  caps  at  him.  They  tell  me 
he's  got  such  fine  eyes.     Is  he  clever  ? " 

"Well,  not  very  clever  ;  bnt  he's  a  frank,  dash- 
ing sort  of  fellow.  But  Oh,  do  yon  know,  my 
dear  Miss  Chivers," — here  Amy  sat  down  on  a 
footstool  at  her  friend's  knee,  took  both  her 
thin  hands  in  the  prettiest,  gentlest  way,  and 
poured  forth  the  w^hole  story  of  her  sufierings  the 
night  of  the  party,  when  the  Harkers  w^ould  make 
her  play,  and  she  fainted. 

Miss  Chivers' s  eyes  flashed  with  indignation. 
Jane  was  calmly  indignant  in  faint  echo  of  her 
sister. 

"Did  you  ever  hear  of  an3rthing  like  that? 
"Why,  she  ought  to  be  put  in  the  pillory.  I  call 
it  a  most  unfeeling:  thino\     Don't  vou,  Jane  ?  " 

Jane  decidedly  thought  it  was  most  unfeeling, 
and  got  out  her  crochet  work. 

"  I  wouldn't  have  stayed  a  day  longer,  Amy," 
said  Elizabeth  Chivers ;  "  it's  as  bad  as  slavery. 
How  can  women  behave  so  to  women  ?" 

"  Oh,  you  mustn't  make  me  discontented,"  said 


MISS   CHIVERS.  223 

Amy,  laughing.      "They  did'nt  know  I  was  so 

iu;^ 

"  Didn't  know !  but  they  ought  to  have  known, 
and  I'd  tell  them.  And  is  it  true  Mr.  Beau- 
flower's  visitor  brought  you  in  his  fly,  and  had  a 
fit  in  the  park." 

"Oh,  yes,  he  brought  me  from  Slobury.  I 
could  not  get  another  fly." 

"And  the  fit:  did  he  have  a  fit?  and  what's 
he  like  ?  Is  he  quite  black  ? ''  said  both  the 
sisters,  breathless  with  cmiosity. 

*'  He  was  rather  faint  in  the  park,  but  only  for 
a  moment,  as  he  was  walking  up  the  hill." 

"And  what  is  he  like?  They  tell  me  he's 
quite  black,"  said  Elizabeth  Chivers. 

"  Yes,  we  heard  he's  a  regular  negro." 

"  Oh,  the  silly,  silly  people,"  said  Amy,  clap- 
ping her  little  white  hands.  "Why,  that's  his 
servant !  He's  a  nice  old  gentleman  ;  so  funny  ; 
really  good  natured,  but  he  pretends  to  be  cross. 
The  strangest  thing  is,  he  lives  opposite  papa  and 
mamma  in  London,  and  he  got  me  this  situation 
without  our  knowing  it.  His  laundress,  such  a 
nice  respectable  old  woman,  had  asked  for  me. 
i\Ir.  Beauflower's  cousin  heard  Mr.  Harker 
wanted  a  governess  for  Ethel,  and  told  him  of 
it.  Very  curious,  wasn't  it  ?  and  he  is  so  kind 
and   polite,    I    quite    love    him.       He's   such    a 


224  THE    VICAES    COURTSHIP. 

grand  maniier.     He  treated  me  as  if  I  had  been 
a  princess." 

"Ah  !  he's  of  the  old  school,  my  dear, 
evidently/'  said  Elizabeth  Chivers,  Jane  having 
now  sank  into  a  mere  listener,  as  she  generally  did. 
"  There  were  manners  then.  The  hard,  cold  sort 
of  way  hadn't  come  in  then.  Do  you  remember 
young  Mr.  Staunton  that  county  ball  we  went  to, 
Jane  ?  " 

Ellen  said  she  did  indeed.  Oh,  he  was  an 
elegant  youth,  and  Amy  should  only  have  seen 
him  open  the  ball  Avith  Elizabeth ;  they  were  a 
handsome  pair. 

"Don't  talk  nonsense,  Jane;  I  Avas  always  a 
plain  creature,  but  I  certainly  had  beautiful  hair 
then.  I  was  full  of  life  and  spirits,  and  my 
partner  w^as  handsome  enough  for  two.  Ah !  poor 
fellow,  he  was  drowned  ten  years  or  so  after  that. 
He  ran  away  with  a  Miss  Wilson  of  Knoyle ;  he 
left  her  and  went  abroad,  and  she  died  the  same 
year,  broken-hearted,  some  people  said.  Oh, 
wdiat  a  handsome  fellow  he  was,  and  so  accom- 
plished.    I've  got  a  lock  of  his  hair  now." 

Amy  was  listening  with  the  intensest  interest, 
tears  rose  in  her  eyes,  she  was  so  tender  hearted. 
Then  she  laughed,  her  April  nature  turning  as 
quickly  as  the  colour  on  a  dove's  neck. 

"  Oh,  do  let  me   see  it.     How  I  wish  you'd 


MISS   CHIVERS.  225 

married  him,  dear,  then  he'd  never  been 
drowned." 

"  Ah !  my  dear,  perhaps  it's  better  it  was  not 
so,  no  doubt  the  chastening  has  done  me  good. 
I'm  afraid  I  should  have  been  sadly  proud  and 
ambitious,  and  not  the  meek  old  thing  I  am  now. 
But,  I  did  love  him  dearly.  Oh,  he  was  so  hand- 
some,    ril  show  you  the  lock  of  his  hair,  dear." 

The  good  old  maid,  in  whose  heart  this  memory 
lay  pressed  like  the  dead  flower  in  the  leaves  of 
an  old  book,  sighed  as  she  said  this,  then  laughed 
at  her  own  nonsense  as  she  called  it,  and  im- 
locking  the  Indian  box,  inlaid  with  green,  black, 
and  white  ivory,  opened  a  secret  drawer,  and 
drew  out  a  small  square  of  blue  silk ;  inside  this, 
in  scented  white  paper,  lay  a  glossy  crescent  of 
black  hair. 

"  Oh,  how  beautiful,"  Amy  said,  with  all  a 
girl's  interest.  "Oh,  he  must  have  been  hand- 
some ;  why  it's  darker  than  papa's  used  to  be." 

The  old  maid  replaced  the  relic  as  a  priest 
replaces  the  reHc  in  the  shrine,  yet  quietly,  and 
with  no  afi'ectation  of  deep  feeling. 

"  And  this  archery  meeting,"  said  Miss  Chi  vers, 
"  when  is  that  to  be  ?  " 

"  On  the  20th.  Oh,  it  A\ill  be  such  fun.  Fve 
been  practising  incessantly  with  Ethel." 

"  But   Miss   Harker   is   to   win   the  prize,   of 

YOL.    I.  Q 


226  THE  vicar's   COURTSHIP. 

course  ?  You  won't  really  try,  any  of  you.  That's 
what  that  merry-hearted  creature,  Julia  Beau- 
flower,  said." 

There  was  a  good-natured  sarcasm  about  Miss 
Chivers  manner  that  would  not  have  vexed  even 
Sir  Fretful  Plagiary  himself. 

"  AVon't  we  ? "  said  Amy,  "  we  will,  though.  I 
shall  do  my  best.  Miss  Cantelupe  says  she's  sure 
of  it.  But  how  wicked  of  me,  I  quite  forgot  to 
ask  you  how  yom^  rheumatism  was." 

"I  wasn't  free  from  pain,  dear,  one  day  last 
week,  but  I'm  better  now  since  the  drier 
weather." 

"  I'm  so  glad,"  said  Amy. 

"  Is  Mr.  Beauflower  really  going  to  begin  the 
church  at  Summerleas  ?  I'm  afraid  he'll  have 
a  deal  of  opposition  from  those  obstinate  old 
farmers.  And  between  ourselves,  dear,  I  confess 
I  like  the  high  old-fashioned  pews,  Avhere  one 
isn't  stared  at  by  everybody.  Besides,  if  we  do 
sleep  there,  whose  fault  is  it,  I  should  like  to 
know  ? " 

"  But  one  doesn't  sleep,  Elizabeth,  under  Mr. 
Beauiiower,  he's  so  very  much  in  earnest." 

''  Oh  no,  Jane,  not  under  Mr.  Beauflower. 
"Why,  what  a  colour  you've  got,  Amy.  I'm  afraid 
your  head  aches.  You  find  our  room  too  hot, 
I   fear.     "We  always  make    a   rule  to  light  our 


MISS   CHIYERS.  227 

first  fire  on  tlie  second  of  October,  and  it's  often 
too  much  for  some  people." 

Amy  could  not  account  for  the  flush.  She 
said  she  was  not  conscious  of  it,  and  did  not  find 
the  room  warm. 

Just  then,  before  the  flush  could  be  explained 
or  in  any  way  be  accounted  for,  Euth,  the  pretty 
little  housemaid,  neat  as  if  she  had  stepped  out  of 
a  band-box,  opened  the  parlour  door  and  announced 
Dr.  Briscoe.  The  doctor,  whip  in  hand,  strode  in, 
blufi"  and  hearty  jet,  wdth  all  the  ceremoniousness 
of  the  old  school,  and  all  the  gallantry  of  a  gay 
old  bachelor.  He  greeted  the  Misses  Chi  vers  as 
old  friends,  and  Amy  mth  a  paternal  tenderness. 

"  And  you've  quite  recovered  '? ''  he  said,  still 
holding  her  hand,  which,  indeed,  any  one  would 
have  been  rather  loath  to  let  go,  "  you^re  sure 
now;  no  deception  with  ^sculapius.  You  really 
must  not  overtax  yom^  powers.  I  promised  your 
dear  friend.  Miss  JuJia  Beauflower,  to  insist  on 
this." 

"  Oh,  really,  doctor,  Tm  quite  well  again,  it 
was  only  the  heat  of  the  room  when  I  was  tired. 
Fm  strong  as  possible.     I  can  walk  for  ever." 

"  She  walks  too  far,"  suggested  Jane  Chivers, 
timidly,  and  then  qualified  her  daring  assertion 
by  sa}'ing,  ''  at  least,  in  my  opinion  ; — I  never 
could  walk  far." 


228  THE   VICARS    COURTSHIP. 

"  And  she  won't  take  wine.  Isn't  it  very- 
wrong  of  her?''  said  Miss  Chivers  ;  "now  let's 
form  a  court  of  justice,  and  condemn  her  to  two 
glasses  of  sherry  every  day." 

"  We  don't  care  about  the  walking  or  the 
wine,"  said  the  doctor,  with  his  whip  over  his 
knees,  "but  this  we  insist  on,  that  she  is  not 
kept  in  more  than  three  hours  running.  We 
must  put  a  stop  to  this  over-working.  I'm  sure 
Miss  Ethel  will  be  on  my  side." 

"Ethel?  Oh  yes,  Ethel  doesn't  care  how 
much  holiday  she  has  ;  but  I  mustn't  think  about 
myself  so  much." 

"  This  young  lady  must  rebel.  If  not,"  said  the 
worthy  doctor,  "  she  must  tell  them  that  she  can't 
and  won't  do  it.  Ain't  you  entirely  with  me.  Miss 
Chivers." 

"  Oh,  entirely.  I  should  have  been  tired  long 
ago,"  said  Miss  Chivers,  resolutely. 

"  And  so  should  I,"  said  Jane  Chivers,  timidly. 

"  Oh,  it's  not  so  dreadful  a  life,"  said  Amy, 
laughing,  as  she  took  off  her  gloves.  "They're 
all  very  kind,  but  Mr.  Harker's  rather  stern,  Mrs. 
Harker  sometimes  rather  hard,  and  Miss  Harker 
often  very  cross." 

"Oh,  Miss  Caroline  can  snap,"  said  Dr.  Briscoe. 
"  She's  so  angry  at  the  tardy  appreciation  of  our 
sex." 


MISS   CHIVERS.  229 

"Then,  in  fact,  Amy,"  said  Miss  Chivers, 
"they're  all  very  nice  when  they  ain't  the 
reverse." 

Amy  laughed.  "  Oh,  no.  T  mean,"  she  said, 
"  that  they  are  really  all  very  kind.  Of  course  I 
must  remember  that  I'm  only  a  governess,  and  I 
cannot  dictate  to  them.  And  now  I'll  show  you 
the  new  crochet  pattern.     Oh  it's  so  charming." 

"Mr.  Beauflower,"  said  Euth,  throwing  open 
the  door,  and  Mr.  Beauflower  entered,  frank  and 
pleasant  as  ever.  His  colour  slightly  rose  as  he 
shook  hands  with  Miss  Chivers  and  Amy,  but  other- 
wise he  was  unconscious  of  self  and  self-possessed 
as  ever.  He  had  anecdotes  to  tell,  and  village 
news  to  exchange  with  the  doctor.  Old  Vernon 
of  Dinton  had  broken  his  collar-bone  out  hunt- 
ing for  the  fourteenth  time.  The  volunteers 
were  going  to  shoot  for  a  cup.  There  was  going 
to  be  a  coursing  match  at  Amesbury,  between  Mr. 
Long's  and  the  Earl  of  Portsmouth's  best  dogs. 
The  Honourable  ]\Ir.  Cantelupe,  having  bought 
four  tame  deer,  was  going  to  drive  them  in  a  pony 
carriage.  He  was  losing  a  great  deal  of  money 
on  the  turf.  All  this  news  the  vicar,  and  the 
doctor  repeated,  in  a  pleasant,  witty,  bantering 
way,  and  without  malice  or  personality.  The 
good  old  maids  were  delighted.  Amy  had  never 
seen  Mr.  Beauflower  to  such  advantage,  so  kind, 


230  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

SO  sensible,  so  anxious  to  please.  There  was 
no  acting  a  part,  no  bitter  things  were  said  for 
the  sake  of  being  clever,  no  innuendoes,  concen- 
trating the  wandering  spite  and  malice  of  the 
country  side. 

"You re  always  bitter,  doctor,  when  you  talk 
of  Mr.  Harker,"  said  Miss  Elizabeth  Chivers. 
"  At  all  other  times  you're  amiable.  He  is  surely 
a  very  public  spirited,  energetic  man.  I  hear 
they  re  collecting  subscriptions  for  a  piece  of 
plate  for  him  at  Slobury.'' 

"  I  know  too  much  of  the  man  myself  to  be  very 
enthusiastic,"  said  the  doctor,  in  his  inflexible  way, 
a  stormy  kind  of  light  flashing  from  his  cold  grey 
eyes,  "  I  suppose  they  give  the  fellow  a  piece  of 
plate  on  the  principle  of  the  old  Wiltshire  pro- 
verb, '  To  the  man  who's  got  an  orchard  give  an 
apple.' " 

"  AVlien  the  doctor  is  in  that  mood,"  said  Miss 
Chivers,  "  Mr.  Beauflower,  there  is  no  doing  any- 
thing with  him.  He  fairly  takes  the  bit  between 
his  teeth." 

"  They  tell  me.  Dr.  Briscoe,"  said  Miss  Chivers, 
stooping  to  admire  Amy's  dexterity  with  the  new 
crochet  stitch,  "that  Mr.  Cantelupe  is  going  to 
stand  for  Bibury.  Is  it  true  that  foolish  young 
man  is  running  through  all  his  money '?  Dear 
me,  what  a  handsome  man  his  father  was !  " 


MISS    CHI  VERS.  231 

"  He's  going  to  tlie  dogs  as  fast  as  Hs  worst 
friends  could  wish  him.  He's  deep  in  the  hands 
of  the  Jews  who  force  him  to  take  any  rubbish 
they  choose,  pictures,  furniture,  what  not,  and,  if 
report  says  true,  he's  entangled  too  with  that 
grand,  public-spirited  man,  Mr.  Harker.  Poor  lad, 
he'll  pay  for  it.  He  won't  come  safe  with  all  his 
feathers  out  of  those  redoubtable  claws,  that  I  can 
tell  him.  You  must  pardon  me.  Miss  Eobinson, 
you  are  supposed  not  to  be  present. 

"By  the  bye,  doctor,"  said  Mr.  Beauflower, 
who  had  all  this  time  been  talking  to  Amy 
about  crochet  ^^tli  the  profoundest  interest, 
"  have  you  seen  that  old  Mrs.  Flower  this  morn- 
ing. I  have  been  twice,  and  they  won't  let  me 
see  her.     Is  her  mind  gone  or  what  ? " 

"  Oh,  her  mind's  all  right,  the  little  she  ever  had 
at  least,  for  her  brute  of  a  second  husband  used  to 
beat  her  senses  almost  out  of  her.  It's  the  Travers's 
way,  that's  all,  but  she's  going  fast,  she  may  live, 
perhaps,  four  hours ;  hardly  any  pulse,  kept  alive 
with  beef  tea,  she'U  just  burn  out.  She's  lived 
far  too  low.  That  son  of  hers,  the  keeper,  gave 
her  only  just  enough  to  keep  body  and  soul 
together.  It's  a  great  shame  that  the  Harkers 
allowed  her  to  be  in  such  a  state.  The  cottage  is 
damp  and  unliealthy." 

"  I  pressed  Mr.  Harker  often  about  those  cot- 


232  THE   vicar's   COURTSHIP. 

tages/'  said  tlie  Vicar.  "  They  are  only  fit  for 
cow  sheds." 

"But  they  are  so  picturesque,  Mrs.  Harker 
says/^  said  the  fierce  doctor.  "  Bah  !  I  hate  the 
word,  because  it  implies  degradation,  demorali- 
sation for  the  poor,  and  no  progression." 

*'  And  what  good  is  progression  T'  said  the 
eldest  Miss  Chivers.  "  We  w^ere  much  more 
happy  formerly.  Servants  then  were  not  always 
reading  their  mistresses'  letters  or  writing  their 
own.     People  were  more  contented  then." 

"  And  dressed  less,"  said  Jane  Chivers, 
meekly. 

"  Go  back  far  enough,"  said  the  doctor,  testily, 
"  and  they  didn't  dress  at  all.  People  were  only 
happy  when  you  were  young,  because  they  did 
not  know  their  own  degradation.  Besides,  they 
weren't  happy  at  all,  that's  where  you're  wrong ; 
it  was  you  who  were  happy,  and  therefore  you 
thought  every  one  else  so." 

"  The  pig  is  happy,"  said  Beauflower,  "  but  it 
is  only  because  he  does  not  know  he  is  a  pig,  and 
has  never  heard  of  sausages." 

Amy  and  the  Misses  Chivers  laughed  at  this, 
and  the  doctor  thanked  his  ally. 

"  Ah !  there  is  no  use  in  poor  me  fighting 
against  clever  men,  is  there.  Amy  1  but  you 
haven't   convinced   me,    doctor,    you   have   only 


MISS    CHIVERS.  233 

silenced  my  one  gun  battery.  I'm  sure  people 
were  happier  when  I  was  young,  and  before  rail- 
ways made  us  all  so  restless.  We'd  fewer  wants, 
and  were  easier  satisfied.  There  was  less  jealousy 
of  the  classes  above  us,  and  we  were  all  on  dif- 
ferent decks,  and  yet  content  because  we  were  in 
the  same  ship.  Oh  doctor,  doctor,  you're  a  sad 
radical,  isn't  he,  Jane  '? " 

She  always  appealed  to  her  sister  from  a  kind 
wish  to  keep  her  in  the  conversation. 

"  Very  sad,"  said  Jane,  caring  more  for  the 
new  crochet  stitch  than  for  all  the  British  consti- 
tution put  together. 

"How  I  do  envy  you  ladies!"  said  the  doctor. 
"  Work  is  a  never  ending  pleasure  to  you, 
and  all  the  time  you  can  talk,  listen — I  was 
going  to  say  flirt,  but  I  won't  say  flirt — and 
observe." 

Mr.  Beauflower,  who  was  holdinof  some  scarlet 
silk  for  Amy  to  wind,  looked  guilty,  but  made 
no  reply.  Amy,  quite  unconscious,  defended 
her  sex. 

*'You  always  think  it  is  play,"  she  said, 
"  whatever  we  do.  Why,  this  work  is  quite  a 
serious  study,  isn't  it.  Miss  Chivers  ?  it  wants  the 
greatest  attention;  we  oughtn't  even  to  talk, 
ought  we.  Miss  Chivers?     Do  help  me." 

"  Not  loud,  you  mean,"  said  the  doctor,  rather 


234  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

maliciously,  for  the  Vicar  liad  been  talking  in  an 
under  breath. 

The  Vicar,  refusing  to  take  the  sarcasm,  asked 
the  doctor  if  he  had  seen  young  Brown  lately,  a 
fine  young  fellow  who  had  been  crippled  for  life 
by  a  fall  out  hunting.'' 

"  He'll  never  be  himself  again,"  said  the  doctor, 
rising  to  go.  "  It's  a  sad  case,  but  the  spine's 
injured,  he'll  never  be  sound.  But  I  must  be  off 
on  my  rounds.  Beauflower,  I  leave  my  character 
with  you." 

*'  No,  I  must  tear  myself  away  too.  I've  got 
to  go  to  Birdbrook,  there's  a  funeral  there  at 
two." 

"  Tear  yourself  away,  now  that's  very  pretty," 
said  Miss  Chivers,  "  isn't  it.  Amy  ?  Well,  I  sup- 
pose we  must  let  you  go,  but  we  are  sorry  to  lose 
you,  ain't  we.  Amy  ?  " 

Amy  wished  she  'had  said  ''  Ain't  we,  Jane  1 " 
but  as  she  did  not,  she  said  quietly — "Yes," 
and  bent  again  over  her  work. 

Wlien  the  two  gentlemen  were  gone,  there 
was  a  moment's  silence,  then  Amy  said, 

"  Mr.  Beauflower  repeated  such  a  beautiful  bit 
of  Tennyson  to  me  the  other  day^ — the  Bugle 
Song — did  you  ever  hear  it.  Miss  Chivers." 

"  I  never  read  but  a  page  or  two  of  Tennyson, 
my  dear,  and  I  thought  him  rather  sugary  and 


MISS   CHIVEES.  235 

cloying.  I  prefer  "Thomson's  Seasons,"  that's 
what  I  call  poetr}^  I  liked  that  book  when  I 
was  a  girl,  and  I  like  it  now.     Don't  I,  Jane  '? " 

"  Yes,  you  do,  indeed,  Elizabeth ;  we  used  to 
learn  it  at  school,  at  Miss  Simpson's  in  the  Cres- 
cent. They  gave  you  a  Thomson  as  a  prize,  in 
most  beautiful  binding,  I  remember." 

"Well,  I  don't  know,"  said  the  eldest  Miss 
Chivers  to  her  sister,  after  Amy  left;  "  but  I  think 
there's  something  growing  between  Amy  and  Mr. 
Beauflower.  I  feel  sure  he  likes  her,  and  he 
begins  to  know  it ;  I'm  not  so  sure  that  she  cares 
for  him  yet ;  but  then  a  man  is  twice  as  easy  to 
read  as  a  woman.  His  eye  rested  on  her  the 
moment  he  entered  the  room,  it  hardly  ever 
left  her,  and  there  was  a  sort  of  unconscious  de- 
ference when  he  shook  hands  with  her  at  parting. 
Well,  I  wish  him  success.  I  only  hope  he  is  not 
living  beyond  his  income,  though  some  people 
say  he  is.  It  was  very  rash  of  him  plunging  into 
this  church  business.  There  was  the  rector  of 
Stonecot  Magna  ruined  himself  that  way.  Dear 
Amy,  I  do  hope  those  Harkers  will  be  kind  to 
her,  and  that  horrid  woman." 

Jane  hoped  so  too.  She  had  not  seen  any- 
thing between  the  Vicar  and  Amy.  It  was  for 
her  (Jane  Chivers)  he  had  been  helping  to  wind 
the  silk,  and  very  kind  of  him  too.     Amy  was 


236  THE   VICAe's    courtship. 

only  a  child.  Ten  years  hence  was  time  enough 
for  her  to  marry.  He  talked  more  freely  than 
usual,  she  thought.     She  might  be  wrong. 

"Ah,  but  we  hadn't  such  prudent  notions, 
Jane,  when  we  were  her  age,"  said  Miss  Chi  vers, 
who  was  never  afraid  of  calling  herself  an  old 
maid.  "  You  were  only  sixteen,  I  remember, 
when  you  fell  desperately  in  love  with  that  young 
good  for  nothing  Blagdon." 

Then  the  two  old  sisters  laughed  good-naturedly 
in  chorus. 


THE    EXPOSUEE.  237 


CHAPTER  XIY. 

THE   EXPOSURE. 

Just  a  short  time  before  daybreak,  when  the 
curdling  grey  was  tbiiining  in  tlie  east,  Paddy 
Blake,  leaped  lightly  over  a  ruined  portion  of 
Mr.  Harker  s  park  wall  nearest  the  village  of 
Birdbrook,  which  he  had  honoured  by  selecting 
as  his  sleeping  place.  As  he  had  scooped  out  a 
bed-room  for  himself  out  of  the  side  of  a  snug 
hay  rick,  his  hotel  bill  had  not  been  expensive, 
and  as  his  morning  collation  had  consisted  only 
of  two  fresh  young  turnips  from  an  adjoining 
field,  his  charge  for  breakfast  had  not  been  ex- 
pensive. His  wardrobe  being  more  eccentric 
than  varied,  he  still  wore  the  old  mud-stained, 
torn,  purple  and  scarlet  coat,  the  ragged  shep- 
herd's plaid  trousers,  and  those  shoes  which  nature 
soles  only  once,  and  which  are  never  taken  off. 
His  bruised  black  velvet  cap  still  crowTied  his 
dusty  and  frowzy  elf  locks.  His  crazy,  reckless 
face  still  bore  prismatic  marks  of  the  bony  fist  of 
Jack  the  groom. 


238  THE   vicar's    courtship 

Paddy  never  walked ;  he  always  ran  at  a  sort  of 
jog-trot,  like  that  of  an  Indian  courier ;  a  pace 
which,  at  an  emergency,  he  could  increase  to  a 
desperate  speed.  He  was  on  his  way  to  meet  the 
Cantelupe  fox-hounds,  at  Dinton,  seven  miles  off; 
but  he  had  a  little  business  to  transact  first  at 
the  Abbey. 

At  the  Abbey  ?  "What  could  this  ragged  vaga- 
bond, this  seller  of  race-cards,  this  hanger-on  of 
stables  and  tap-rooms,  have  to  do  at  the  Abbey '? 
Yet  it  was  to  the  Abbey  he  pushed  his  way  through 
copse  and  plantation.  Straight  as  the  crow  flies, 
stealthy  as  an  Indian  scout,  he  wormed  his  way 
through  the  nut  bushes,  avoiding  the  open 
wherever  he  could,  for  fear  of  the  keepers,  whom 
he  regarded  with  as  much  hatred  as  awe.  What 
he  had  to  do  he  wanted  to  do  before  the  light 
grew  fuller ;  then  he  would  gain  the  Salisbury 
road,  and  jog  on  to  Dinton  and  his  legitimate 
business. 

AU  at  once,  as  he  got  into  the  wood  nearest  the 
south  side  of  the  Abbey,  now  looming  like  a  huge 
mausoleum  in  the  cold  twilight,  he  gave  one  stealthy 
look  round,  made  a  dash  down, swift  as  a  frightened 
deer,  through  the  shrubberies  and  across  the  wide 
lawn,  straight  to  the  portico.  Then,  drawing  a  dirty, 
square,  ill-folded  letter  from  his  breast  pocket, 
he  slipped  it  under  the  front  door.     Delighted 


THE    EXPOSUEE.  289 

with  tlie  post-office  lie  had  so  oddly  chosen,  he 
then  executed  two  or  three  wild  steps  of  a  sort  of 
wild  Irish  jig  of  his  own  composing,  and  leaping 
lightly  over  a  high  wire  fence,  intended  to  keep 
rabbits  from  the  garden,  he  regained  the  high 
road  by  a  cross  cut,  and  jogged  on  calmly  at  his 
usual  mechanical  pace. 

Yet,  so  elated  was  he  at  the  delivery  of  the 
mysterious  letter,  that  as  he  approached  the  lodge 
he  began  to  crow  like  a  cock  and  hoot  like  an  owl, 
and  as  he  passed  under  the  great  Inigo  Jones  arch, 
where  the  head  keeper  Hved,  he  could  not  restrain 
himself  from  a  thrilling  imitation  of  a  horn,  which 
woke  Travers,  and  drew  from  him  a  curse,  as 
he  turned  again  to  sleep  after  a  long  nights 
watching  in  the  woods,  for  there  had  been  poachers 
about  lately  in  the  Cantelupe  property,  and  they 
would  probably  try  the  Abbey  pheasants  next. 

"  It^s  only  that  Paddy  feUow,"  Mrs.  Travers 
said  ;  but  her  worthy  husband  was  already 
asleep. 

Eoused  by  the  sound  of  his  own  voice,  and 
beginning  to  shake  off  the  drunken  drowsiness  of 
the  night,  Paddy,  a  hundred  yards  nearer  the 
village,  commenced  a  vociferous,  and  not  unsuc- 
cessful imitation  of  a  whipper-in,  surrounded  by 
all  his  spotted  darlings,  as  an  accompaniment  to 
his  performance  on  the  imaginary  horn. 


24-0  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

"  Hi !  Kookwood,  Eookwood,  Viper,  Sliakebusli, 
Eattler.  Hi !  there,  dog,  forward  !  Eookwood, 
Sweetheart — who-o-o-o  !  At  this  second  blast  Mr. 
Beauflower  turned  uneasily  on  his  pillow,  and 
Farmer  Brown,  up  at  five,  and  already  at  break- 
fast, preparatory  to  a  ride  to  Warminster  Market, 
shouted  out  to  his  Avife  in  the  kitchen  as  she 
loomed,  like  a  witch  in  Macbeth,  through  the 
steam  of  a  month's  w^ash. 

"  Why,  there's  Paddy  ofi"  to  Dinton.  Lord  !  how 
well  he  do  the  ham,  to  be  zure.  Well,  drat  the 
fellow,  it's  martal  like  a  harn,  to  be  zure." 

And  now  Paddy,  clear  of  the  village,  and  as 
proud  of  having  left  his  hand-grenade  with  the 
slow-burning  fuzee  at  Mr.  Harker's  hall-door,  as 
the  soldier  who  tied  the  bag  of  powder  to  the 
Delhi  gate,  was  a  little  cooled  by  a  cold  shower 
that  fell  on  the  young,  hopeful  day,  like  a  sour 
criticism  on  a  young  poet ;  then  he  settled  down 
to  his  old  mechanical  jog-trot,  and  buckled  to  for 
his  seven  miles  run. 

Mr.  Harker  had,  two  hours  afterwards,  just 
planted  himself  with  his  back  to  the  fire,  waiting 
for  breakfast,  when  a  footman  entered  with  a 
square  dirty-looking  letter. 

"  One  of  the  housemaids  found  this,  sir,  if 
you  please,  under  the  hall-door,  this  morning. 
Directed  to  you,  sir." 


THE   EXPOSURE.  241 

"Give  it  liere,"  said  Mr.  Harker,  savagely. 
"Another,  I  suppose,  of  these  anon}Tiious  letters." 

"  Don  t  know,  am  sure,  sir;  told  to  give  it  yon, 
sir. 

"  There,  that'll  do;  you  may  go.  How  long  is 
it  to  breakfast  ? 

"  Gong  -wlU  sound  in  five  minutes,  sir." 

"  Letter  bag  come  yet  ? " 

"  No,  sir." 

]\Ir.  Harker  went  to  the  ^s^indow,  against  which 
a  small  spiteful  rain  was  speckling,  and  read  the 
letter.  It  was  written  in  a  scrambling,  awkward, 
illiterate  hand,  on  the  thinnest  public-house  note 
paper,  and  was  rough  with  red  sand  from  the  public- 
house  floor.  It  smelt  horribly  of  rank  tobacco,  and 
was  splashed  here  and  there  by  the  beer  that  had 
probably  inspired  the  writer.     It  ran  thus  : — 

"HOXOORED  SuR, 

"  Eight  is  right  all  the  world  over,  and 
wrong's  ^Tong,  that's  what  I  say.  If  we  will 
go  over  the  fenze  we  must  expect  a  tumble. 
Your  head  keeper  isn't  doing  the  right  thing  by 
you.  He  pockets  half  the  tin  he  gets  for  the 
fizints,  as  is  very  well  known  by  some  as  is  not 
far  off  the  tap-room  of  the  AMiite  Hoss  at  Salis- 
bury. Iv'e  got  it  all  bokd  what  he  made  last 
year  over  what  he  paid  you.     He  is  a  chit  and  a 


242  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

liar,  as  I  can  proof,  and  so  can  a  gentleman  as 
frequence  the  Eed  Cow  in  Winterbourne.     You 
look  out  and  youl  soon  cotcli  him. 
"  Your  well  wisher 
^*  (and  not  a  discharged  gamekeeper  at  all), 

*^Dash  Blank." 

"  To  Mr.  Haekeb,  Esq." 

"  PS. — It's  72  fizints  he  didn't  account  for  last 
half-year,  and  114  rarebits." 

"  Why,  what  is  that,  dear  papa  ? "  said  Miss 
Harker,  who  just  then  sailed  icily  into  the  room. 
"  "What  a  dirty  letter  !  " 

*'0h,  it's  only  another  of  those  anonymous 
letters  about  Travers.  I  get  about  one  a  fort- 
niofht  on  the  averao^e." 

"  I  suppose,  papa,  they  dislike  him  because  he 
won't  let  you  be  cheated.     Let  me  hear  it." 

"Yes,  that's  it.  He's  worth  all  my  other  ser- 
vants together.  Would  you  like  to  see  the  Times, 
Carry?" 

Just  then  the  footman  entered  with  the  letter- 
bag.  It  contained  half-a-dozen  letters,  but  only 
three  for  Mr.  Harker :  two  were  circulars,  the  third 
was  a  book  parcel,  directed  in  a  clear,  flowing, 
business-like  hand,  which  Mr.  Harker  at  once 
recognised  as  that  of  the  London  poulterer,  to 


THE   EXPOSURE.  243 

whom  he  always  consigned  his  game.     Its  eon- 
tents  were  the  f olio  win  o- : — 

o 

"  144,  Xewgate  Street, 
October  10,  1860. 

"  Sir, 

"As  an  honourable  tradesman,  and  having 
large  dealings  with  you,  I  feel  myself  bound  to 
make  you  acquainted  with  circumstances  which  I 
am  most  reluctant  to  conceal,  and  which  have 
only  lately  forced  themselves  on  my  attention.  I 
have,  as  you  are  perhaps  aware,  only  recently 
succeeded  to  the  business,  and  have  only  just  had 
time  to  go  carefully  through  my  predecessor's 
books.  I  regret  to  say  he  was  a  man  of  no 
principle  and  much  involved  on  the  turf  Lat- 
terly he  had  grown  quite  reckless  in  business 
matters,  and  had  taken  to  drinkins;.  I  find  that 
your  head  keeper  had  two  books,  one  for  yourself, 
another  for  his  own  private  use.  The  books  Mr. 
Dawson  left,  and  which  I  now  forward,  show  me 
that  in  the  last  three  years  Travers  must  have 
pocketed  more  than  £164  of  your  money.  As  an 
honourable  tradesman  I  cannot  allow  this  to  go  on 
without  full  inquir}^.  No  doubt  as  a  strict  busi- 
ness man,  which  I  know  you  to  be,  you  will  at 
once,  by  comparison  of  your  private  books,  see  if 
my  suspicions  are  correct.  It  may  assist  you  in 
this   inquiry,    when    I  teU   you    that   my   head 

s  2 


244  THE   vicar's   COURTSHIP. 

shopman  has  just  come  and  reported  the  arrival 
of  four  dozen  pheasants  (three  dozen  only  to  your 
account),  and  84  rabbits  (32  to  your  account). 
Eegretting  the  necessity  of  this  letter,  apologising 
for  the  intrusion,  and  still  more  hoping  my 
suspicions  may  prove  incorrect, 
"  I  remain,  sir, 
"  Your  most  obedient  servant, 

*'W.  A.  Wilkinson." 

'*Good  morning,  papa.  Oh,  Louisa  Fenton 
writes  the  dearest  letter,"  said  Ethel,  who  had  been 
reading  a  letter  from  that  romantic  friend  that 
girls  always  have,  and  who  disappears  only  to  be 
instantly  replaced,  "  and  she's  coming  with  Clara., 
and  Kate,  and  Lucy,  to  the  archery  meeting,  and 
they  want  us  to  go  to  the  meet  on  Tuesday  ;  the 
fox-hounds  throw  off  at  Mr.  Penruddock's. 
But  how  vexed  you  look !  What  is  the 
matter  1 " 

"  Oh,  nothing,  my  darling,  you'd  care  about 
— only  some  disagreeable  business.  Where's 
mamma  ? " 

"  She'll  be  down  directly." 

Just  then  Amy  entered,  fresh  as  a  new-blown 
primrose,  exquisitely  neat  and  serenely  happy. 
Mr.  Harker  shook  hands  with  her  mechanically  ; 
Mrs.  Harker,  who  soon  after  arrived,  patronisingly; 


THE   EXPOSURE.  245 

Miss  Harker  coldly,  with  evident  dislike  and  no 
little  jealousy.  This  was  natural.  The  urn  came 
in  and  the  breakfast  commenced,  but  Mr.  Harker 
remained  silent,  moody,  and  preoccupied.  He 
read  the  letter  over  several  times,  scrunched  it  into 
his  pocket,  then  took  it  out  and  read  it  again.  He 
rose  several  times  from  the  table  and  looked  out 
of  the  window,  then  he  rang  the  bell  violently. 

"Koberts,"  he  said,  "tell  Travers  when  he 
comes  to  wait  till  I  ring  for  him." 

Roberts  looked  astonished.  Travers  was  a 
privileged  man,  who  came  daily  to  see  Mr.  Jabez 
Harker  at  the  same  hour;  who  spoke  patronisingly 
to  the  servants,  the  man  who  could  get  the  best 
of  them  turned  away  if  they  crossed  him  even  by 
a  look,  and  whose  frown  was  the  terror  of  the 
under  keepers.  He  had  never  been  kept  waiting 
before. 

"  Master  is  in  one  of  his  tantrums,  and  black 
as  thunder,"  Roberts  reported  in  the  housekeeper's 
room,  "  and  Td  advise  the  lot  of  ye  to  keep  out 
of  his  way  to-day." 

''Why,  what  is  the  matter,  Jabez?"  said  ]\Irs. 
Harker,  "  you've  eaten  hardly  any  breakfast." 

"A  very  disagreeable  business,"  said  Mr. 
Harker,  "  111  tell  you  about  it  some  other  time, 
and  yet,  perhaps,  I  shall  turn  it  to  good.  I  think 
I  see  my  way." 


246  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

All  eyes  Avere  turned  wonderingly  on  the  head 
of  the  family,  but  no  more  was  said. 

Three  quarters  of  an  hour  afterwards  Travers 
strode  up  to  the  back  door  of  the  Abbey,  crunch- 
ing the  gravel  under  the  iron  heels  of  his  heavy 
shooting  boots,  and  flapping  his  brown  gaiters 
with  a  long  ash  stick. 

The  poachers  had  not  shown,  and  he  was  proud 
of  the  precautionary  measures  he  had  taken.  He 
exulted  also  over  the  rebuff  he  had  given  Parson 
Beauflower.  He  was  blustering  and  violent  as 
ever,  and  beat  at  the  kitchen  door  loud  and 
sharp,  as  much  as  to  say,  "  Now  double  up,  some 
of  you,  for  Tm  not  going  to  stand  any  nonsense." 

A  scullery  maid  opened  the  door. 

"Betty,  my  dear,"  he  said,  pushing  in,  "send 
one  of  the  footmen  lads  to  tell  Master  Harker  Fm 
here." 

Betty  went,  and  was  a  long  time  absent.  Pre- 
sently a  pert  footboy  came,  rubbing  a  silver  tea- 
spoon in  a  rougey  plate  leather.  There  is  an 
instinctive  consciousness  of  misfortune  in  mean 
natures.  The  world  is  like  a  carrion  crow,  it  can 
scent  death  a  dozen  miles  off. 

"  I  say,  does  Mr.  Harker  know  Fm  here,  you 
boy  ? "  said  Travers,  who  was  sitting  beside  a 
meat  screen,  scratching  figures  with  his  stick  on 
the  tiles  of  the  kitchen  floor. 


THE   EXPOSURE.  247 

"He  do  know  it/' 

"  Well,  I  can't  wait  here  all  day,  so  Fd  better 
go  into  master  s  study  at  once." 

The  boy  looked  hard  at  the  head  keeper,  and 
rubbed  violently  at  the  bowl  of  the  spoon. 

"  Why  the  devil  do  you  stare  at  me  like  that  ? 
If  you've  got  a  message,  speak  out." 

"Master  desires  you'll  wait,"  the  boy  said  at 
last,  "  till  he  rings  for  you  ;  he's  very  particularly 
engaged." 

"  This  is  a  nice  way  of  wasting  one's  time. 
Here,  you  boy,  go  and  ask  the  housekeeper  for  a 
glass  of  sherry.     I  like  it  dry,  mind." 

"  All  right,"  said  the  boy;  "  I  must  go  and  tell 
jMr.  Eoberts  first  though,  or  I  shall  get  a  tidy 
blowing  up ;  for  he  told  me  not  to  wait." 

"  There's  something  up,"  said  Travers,  looking 
at  the  ceiling,  when  the  boy  had  gone ;  "as 
sure  as  there's  a  g  in  gunpowder.  That.  London 
fellow  can't  have  blo^Ti  about  the  pheasants. 
Well,  I've  got  my  answer  ready,  and  I  don't  care 
for  none  of  them.  Master  can't  do  without  me  ; 
I  could  teU  one  or  two  disagreeable  secrets  about 
his  game  preserving  if  I  chose,  and  he  knows  it ; 
and  there's  old  Lord  Mazagan,  he'd  give  his  head 
for  me  to  come  to  him.     It's  all  right,  my  boys, 

it's  no  use  turning  your  backs  on  me.     D 

this  sherry,  it  is  not  dry  enough  for  me.   Betty,  get 


248  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

me  a  glass  of  ale.  I  don  t  like  this  stuff.  There, 
no  talk  about  it,  run  and  get  it.  I'm  dry  this 
morning." 

In  the  mean  time,  Mr.  Harker  was  hard  at 
work  at  the  game  books. 

His  pride  was  no  doubt  hurt  at  finding  himself 
mistaken  in  his  bailiff — his  prime  minister  and 
favourite ;  but  he  was  hardly  sorry.  Always 
suspicious,  and  loving  power,  he  liked  to  have  his 
servants  fear  him,  and  to  keep  some  sword  of 
Damocles  hanging  over  their  head.  "  Old  serv- 
ants," he  said,  ^'  became  tyrants,  and  turning  men 
off  prevented  underhand  plots  forming  to  defraud 
one."  As  Jew  turnpike-men  used  never  to  keep 
a  toll-taker  long  on  one  road,  so  Harker  changed 
servants  frequently.  He  had  begun  to  feel  that  he 
was  often  led  by  Travers,  and  he  resented  it  after- 
wards, though  he  did  not  see  it  at  the  time.  It 
would  be  a  triumph  to  him,  to  hear  his  neighbours' 
astonishment  at  his  suddenly  turning  off  Travers — 
the  factotum,  the  indispensable.  It  would  show 
an  inner  power  always  at  work,  and  superior  to 
all  influences.  For  past  services  he  felt  no  grati- 
tude. He  wanted  to  show  all  about  the  Abbey 
how  frail  was  the  tenure  which  enabled  them  to 
batten  on  his  wealth.  He  was  not  going  to  be  a 
milch  cow  for  any  one.  He  would  break  any  one 
who  tried  to  impose  on  him,  as  a  boy  breaks  the 


THE   EXPOSURE.  24,9 

ice  in  a  cart-rut.  He  had  no  mercy  upon  any 
oflfencler.  He  felt  a  pleasure  beforehand  in  the 
prospect  of  tormenting  and  humbling  this  keeper, 
just  as  a  child  shakes  the  mouse-trap  before  he 
gives  the  mouse  to  the  cat.  He  indeed  always 
felt  a  positive  pleasure  in  seeing  others  suffer  pain 
under  his  gripe.  There  was  a  sense  of  power  in 
it  which  he  enjoyed. 

SHpping  the  books,  which  had  furnished  such 
condemnatory  jfigures,  under  the  broad  sheet  of  the 
"  Times,"  he  rang  the  bell,  and  desired  the  boy 
who  answered  it  to  send  in  Travers.  Harker 
tasted  the  pleasure  of  that  moment.  It  is  those 
who  have  suffered  t}Tanny  who  alone  truly  enjoy 
tyrannising. 

There  w^as  a  tap  at  the  door.-  Travers  entered. 
He  took  his  usual  seat  by  the  door  without  ever 
being  asked,  put  down  his  hat,  and  rested  his 
stick  against  it. 

"  Well,  Travers,  any  news  ? " 

"  No,  sir,"  said  the  grim  man,  ''  the  poachers 
did  not  show  last  night,  or  we  should  have  given 
it  them  rather  hot.  They  were  about  the  Castle 
w^oods,  I  hear.  The  keepers  there  let  'em  do  what 
they  like.  One  of  their  men  told  me  in  fact  that 
they  went  snacks  with  them." 

"  Any  news  of  the  stray  deer  ?  " 

"  Yes,  it's  been  seen  about  Chicklade,  sir  ;  and 


250  THE    VICAE's    COUPvTSHIP. 

IVe  sent  a  man  to  see  if  he  can  head  it.  Is  that 
the  new  tank,  sir,  for  dissolving  bones.  Does  it 
work,  sir  1 " 

Travers  was  looking  at  the  large  zinc  tank,  which 
we  have  before  mentioned.  It  was  now  full  of  a 
dark  liquid,  the  acid  fumes  of  which  were  percep- 
tible in  the  room. 

"  Yes,  that  is  the  tank.  I  left  off  the  lid  to 
show  you  how  quick  it  reduces  the  bones.  I  put 
in  a  bushel  yesterday,  now  see." 

Mr.  Harker  went  with  the  keeper  to  the  tank. 
There  was  nothing  left  but  a  layer  of  brown  paste, 
two  inches  deep,  at  the  bottom  of  the  tank.  "Lift 
on  that  cover,"  he  said,  "it  keeps  in  everything." 

The  keeper  did  so  with  a  smile  of  approval. 
The  master  then  returned  to  his  desk,  the  man 
to  his  seat  by  the  door. 

"  Travers,"  said  Mr.  Harker,  with  a  keen  steady 
look  at  the  rascal  he  addressed.  "  I  hoj)e  you 
can  trust  the  men  who  take  the  game  to  Slo- 
bury.  You  don't  think  they  ever  appropriate 
any?" 

"  I  cant  trust  one  of  'em — they  are  all  rascals. 
You  can  trust  them,  but  I  never  do.  I  check  'em 
in  my  own  way.  They  can't  touch  a  feather  with- 
out my  knowing  it.  Lord,  I've  got  eyes  on  'em 
besides  my  own.  No,  they  don't  touch  the  parcels, 
sir." 


THE   EXPOSURE.  251 

"  I'm  glad  of  it,  because  I  heard  my  men  drank 
about  a  good  deal  with  the  railway  porters  at 
Slobury.  What  was  the  last  consignment  of  game 
to  Wilkinson  ? " 

"  Three  dozen  pheasants  and  thirty-two  rabbits. 
You  can  see  my  book,  sir/' 

Travers  produced  his  book.  The  number  was 
correct. 

"  And  how  many  partridges  last  month  ? " 

"  Fifty-four." 

"And  the  total  pheasants  last  year  ?  Ah  !  I 
see  from  your  book,  280.'' 

"Yes,  sir,  I  think  that's  what  my  book  says." 

"  AVell,  my  book  says,"  said  Mr.  Harker,  draw- 
ing out  the  two  books  from  their  concealment, 
that  the  pheasants  you  really  sent  were  380,  the 
hares  240  instead  of  150.  How  do  you  account 
for  this,  Travers  ? " 

Travers  was  silent  for  a  moment.  Then  he 
took  bis  hat  and  stick,  and  stood  erect,  as  if  going 
to  strip  for  a  fight,  "  I  say  this,  that  it  is  all  a  lie, 
whoever  said  it — someone's  been  altering  the 
book.  That  man  Wilkinson  has  taken  a  grudge  to 
me  because  I  would'nt  bribe  him,  and  would  not 
let  him  rob  you.  He  is  a  rascal,  that  man  is,  and 
he  has  been  writing  lying  letters  to  you." 

There  was  a  great  deal  of  bluster  about  the 
detected   keeper,  but   it   was   faint-hearted   and 


252  THE   vicar's   COURTSHIP. 

unreal.  He  was  only  like  a  liunted  animal  select- 
ing the  best  point  at  which  to  spring  on  his 
assailants. 

"  Is  this  not  your  book  ?     Tell  me  that." 

"  Yes,  but  the  figures  have  been  altered.  They 
ain't  my  figures,  Mr.  Harker.  I  can  account 
before  a  magistrate  for  all  I  ever  sold.  You  always 
knew  what  was  killed  at  the  battues." 

"  I  knew  what  you  told  me." 

"  And  what  I  told  you  was  the  Bible  truth." 

Travers's  face  belied  his  words.  He  had  turned 
livid  pale ;  a  cold  perspiration  was  beading  his 
upper  lip  and  forehead.  A  chill  moisture  had 
risen  on  his  sunken  cheeks,  and  glistened  on  his 
square  heavy  jowl.  He  kept  alternately  wiping 
his  face  and  tossing  his  soppy  handkerchief  into 
the  crown  of  his  hat. 

Mr.  Harker  made  no  reply;  he  had  turned 
to  his  desk  and  was  studying  the  fatal  books. 
Travers  stood  there  by  the  door  like  a  school-boy 
waiting  for  an  imposition.  All  at  once  Harker 
turned. 

''  Travers,"  he  said,  ^'  I  give  you  three  months 
warning.  I  don't  want  to  disgrace  you,  or  to 
have  this  matter  talked  of  all  over  the  county. 
If  your  conduct  bears  full  investigation  I  can  re- 
consider the  matter.  I  have  been  a  good  master 
to  you,  and  haven't  deserved  these  frauds." 


THE   EXPOSURE.  253 

"  I  won't  have  my  character  taken  away,  sir. 
Mind  me,  111  bringr  an  action  as^ainst  this  Wilkin- 
son.    He  daren't  meet  me  and  make  that  charofe." 

"  That  we  shall  see.  I  should  propose  that.  I 
shall  probe  the  matter  to  the  bottom,  depend  on  it. 
m  have  no  servant  of  mine  defraudino:  me.'' 

Travers  grew  more  livid  than  ever  at  this. 
He  smTendered,  but  "without  open  concession.  He 
was  like  those  soldiers  who,  when  they  leave  an 
assailed  position,  leave  their  camp  fires  burning 
to  deceive  the  enemy. 

*'  I  may  have  been  a  little  careless  about 
counting,"  he  said,  "when  we  were  hurried,  ^but 
there's  been  no  fraud.  ]\Iy  father  was  a  very  old 
servant  of  yours,  ^Ir.  Harker,  and  a  faithful  one. 
You  promised  him  on  his  death-bed  that  you 
would  always  be  a  friend  to  me.  Am  I  to  be  cast 
off  now  because  some  enemy  of  mine  considers  he 
could  get  more  profit  with  another  keeper  less 
attentive  to  yom-  interests  ? " 

A  strange  change  had  come  over  Mr.  Harker's 
face  at  Travers's  chance  mention  of  his  father. 
He,  too,  grew  pale,  and  a  nervous  flush  rose  on 
either  cheek  bone. 

"  I  never  meant  my  promise  to  bind  me  in  a 
case  of  this  kind,  no  one  would.  Your  father 
was  addicted  to  drink,  but  he  was  a  good  servant, 
and  I  rewarded  him."' — Mr.  Harker,  as  he  said 


254  THE   VICAES   COURTSHIP. 

this,  leaned  forward  in  his  chair,  and  fixed  his 
eyes  immovably  on  the  keeper, — "  You  have  no 
claim,"  he  said,  "on  one,  Travers,  that  I  know  of; 
2/ you  have,  name  it!' 

He  waited  eagerly  for  an  answer.  At  that 
moment,  John  the  footboy  and  Eoberts  the  butler, 
who  had  been  listening  at  the  key-hole,  and  dis- 
puting for  the  place  of  vantage,  bumped  against  the 
door  in  their  struggle,  but  the  noise  did  not  disturb 
the  S23eakers,  and  the  guilty  pair  retreated  in  safety 
to  a  distant  pantry.  They  instantly  reported 
that  Travers  was  in  a  row  about  some  pheasants, 
and  was  going  to  get  the  sack.  The  footmen  all 
agreed  he  was  a  miserable  hupstart,  and  no  good ; 
pretty  fair  company  for  now  and  then,  but 
never  a  man  they  should  have  chosen ;  he'd  two 
faces ;  he  wasn  t  fast  and  above  board  like,  and 
he  wanted  polish. 

Mr.  Harker  had  had  his  small  triumph.  There 
was  no  fight  left  in  the  unfortunate  keeper.  All 
Travers  could  stammer  was  something  about  "  an 
honest  servant  always  having  a  good  many 
enemies." 

''  All  that,"  said  Mr.  Harker,  "  is  irrelevant.  I 
find  a  dishonest  account  kept,  and  you  can  only 
explain  it  away  by  accusing  a  respectable  trades- 
man of  lying.  You  may  go  now,  but  mind,  be  on 
your  best  behaviour.   I  will  examine  the  matter  for 


THE   EXPOSURE.  255 

myself.  You  shall  liave  opportunity  to  clear  your- 
self if  you  can.  You  can  send  one  of  your  men 
here  to-morrow.  I  don't  wish  to  see  you  personally 
till  this  thing  is  cleared.  Shut  the  door  after  you, 
and  mind  and  get  the  rabbit  nets  ready  for  to- 
morrow. ]\Ir.  Cantelupe  and  some  friends  are 
coming.  I Ve  no  time  to  talk  to  you  any  more 
now." 

For  a  moment  Travers  felt  himself  crushed, 
but  abeady  his  tenacious,  dogged  nature,  always 
intent  on  self-aggrandisement,  had  recovered  its 
spring.  He  was  like  a  New  Zealand  warrior, 
whose  elastic  flesh,  when  wounded,  is  said  to 
close  like  India-rubber  after  the  bayonet  is  with- 
drawn. Before  Travers  had  reached  the  kitchen  he 
had  arranged  some  schemes  of  escape.  "I  shall  lay 
it  all,"  he  said  to  himself,  "  to  that  diamken  beast 
Dawson,  who  died  the  other  day.  I  shall  declare 
he  got  the  numbers  down  all  T\T:ong.  Oh,  I'll  find 
out  some  bolting  hole.  Jack  Travers  isn't  run  to 
earth  so  soon.  They're  barking  up  the  ^^T^ong 
tree  if  they  think  that.  Worst  come  to  the  worst, 
there's  old  Lord  Mazagan  will  have  me,  and  not 
care  a  bit  about  a  few  pheasants.  His  keeper's 
a  duffer,  and  can't  rear  enough  birds  for  him. 
The  vermin  get  them  half,  and  the  men  sell  the 
eggs.  Let  people  take  care  not  to  cross  me  yet 
before  I'm    out  of  the   saddle,   or   I   may  give 


256  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

some  of  them  a  kick  as'll  iinsettle  lialf  their 
teeth/' 

As  Travers  made  his  way  to  the  kitchen,  the 
footboy  and  Eoberts  reconnoitred  him  over  the 
ground-glass  door  of  the  pantry,  and  reported 
him  to  the  French  cook  as  *'  awful  cut  up,  and  a 
muttering  and  swearing  like  any  think."  There 
was  no  one  in  the  kitchen  when  Travers  passed 
through  but  the  scullery  maid  Betty,  to  whom  he 
had  before  spoken. 

"  Where  the  d are  they  all  got  to  ?  avoid- 
ing me,  I  suppose,"  he  growled  to  himself. 

"Where's  Mrs.  Sj^elman,  girl  V  he  asked, 
angrily,  of  the  fat,  greasy,  good-tempered  drudge. 
Mrs.  Spelman  Avas  the  housekeeper. 

"  She's  in  the  larder,  sir ;  and,  if  you  please, 
sir,  she  desired  me  to  say  the  pheasants  the 
keeper  brought  yesterday  were  very  much  shot." 

"  Very  much  shot  1     Who  brought  them  up  '? " 

''  Ned  Hacker,  sir." 

"  Oh,  Hacker,  very  well ;  then  off  he  goes  on 
Saturday.  I  particularly  told  him  not  to  send 
any  over-shot  birds  to  the  house.  I'll  see  to 
that." 

The  girl  began  to  cry,  for  Ned  Hacker  was  her 
sweetheart.  Mr.  Travers  took  no  notice,  and 
slammed  ^he  door  savagely  behind  him.  He  was 
in  no  mood  for  mercy  now. 


THE   EXPOSURE.  257 

*'  By /^  lie  said,  clutching  his  stick  as  if 

it  was  a  gun,  ''  by ,  if  I  had  that  Wilkinson 

before  me  now  I'd  give  him  both  barrels  right  in  the 
eyes.  Ah !  by  all  that's  above  and  below,  I  would, 
thoug^h  I  was  scrag-aed  for  it  the  next  minute  ! " 

There  was  the  making^  of  a  murderer  about 
Travers  if  he  had  had  more  courage.  But  when 
his  storms  of  rage  subsided,  he  grew  cautious, 
stealthy,  and  selfish  again,  and  indisposed  to  risk 
much  without  a  sure  certainty  of  an  adequate 
return.  He  would  have  given  four  years  of  life 
that  moment,  could  a  devil  have  suddenly 
started  from  the  turf  at  his  feet,  or  stepped  from 
the  shadow  of  that  yew  bush  he  passed,  and 
offered  him  revenge  on  his  enemies,  and  security 
from  further  exposure  and  shame. 

When  he  re-entered  his  house,  his  poor  drudge 
of  a  wife  had  got  his  luncheon  laid  out,  but  he 
swore  at  her,  and  pushed  away  the  children,  who 
wanted  to  play.  AVhen  he  had  finished  his  meal, 
he  rose  moodily. 

"  I  shall  go  and  see  mother,''  he  said  to  his 
wife.  "She  won't  be  here  much  longer,  and  I 
shall  be  busy  to-morrow  at  the  rabbit  shooting. 
She  was  never  much  of  a  mother  to  me,  but  still  I 
should  like  to  see  her  before  she  goes.  It's  a  sort 
of  duty,  you  know.  She  missed  father,  though 
they  quarrelled  like  cat  and  dog ;  so  I  suppose 

A'OL.    I.  S 


258  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

I  shall  miss  lier,  though  she  was  always  com- 
plaining and  croaking  about  something  or  other, 
— rheumatism  or  some  cursed  thins^.  Then  I 
shall  go  on  and  look  up  Pitts,  about  that  money 
he  owes  me  for  the  four  hares." 


FARMER   BROWN.  259 


CHAPTER  XV. 

FARMER    BROWN. 

Farmer  Brown  had  for  some  time  gathered 
at  the  "  Peal  of  Bells/'  from  Mr.  Pitts,  much  to 
his  surprise  and  regret,  for  Brown  was  one  of  the 
best  nature d  of  men,  rumours  of  the  difficulty 
of  getting  money  from  the  Vicar.  The  honest 
farmer  had  never  had  a  suspicion  of  such  a  thing 
before,  and  he  felt  vexed  at  a  butcher  in  the  next 
parish,  a  parish,  moreover,  he  rather  despised  for 
its  bad  farming,  spreading  such  rej^orts,  however 
true.  He,  therefore,  when  such  rumours  flew 
about,  generally  refilled  his  pipe,  made  a  restless 
movement  with  his  spoon  against  his  tumbler  of 
mahogany-coloured  brandy  and  water,  gave  a 
spiteful  dig  at  the  fire,  and  asked  the  landlord 
what  price  he  thought  wheat  would  be  at  that  day 
two  months.  Slowly  then,  and  after  a  struggle, 
for  he  loved  his  money.  Brown  had  resolved  on 
an  important  step.  The  step  involved  a  drive  to 
Salisbury.     One  or  two  mean  doubts  whispered 

s  2 


260  THE   vicar's   COURTSHIP. 

by  caution  and  acquisitiveness  he  cast  behind  him. 
As  he  mounted  the  old  gig  and  seized  the  reins,  his 
heart  became  twice  as  big  as  before,  because  he 
was  going  to  do  a  kind  action.  He  dared  not 
mention  the  matter  to  his  wife,  however,  because 
Mrs.  Brown  was  sometimes  inclined  to  thwart  him 
in  business  matters. 

He  drove  to  Salisbury  in  the  pleasantest  frame 
of  mind.  Even  the  Stoke  Deveril  farms  pleased 
him.  He  had  a  w^ord  for  every  one  ;  for  the  old 
turnpike-keeper  and  his  pretty  daughter,  even  for 
the  people  at  the  doors  of  the  roadside  inns.  He 
left  a  Avake  of  good  humour  wherever  he  went. 
He  was  full  of  jokes  at  the  banker's,  and  drew 
fifty  pounds  with  the  utmost  glee.  He  returned 
at  a  smart  pace,  giving  an  old  woman  a  lift  for 
the  last  five  miles.  His  frosty  old  face  beamed 
with  satisfaction.  One  would  have  thought  wheat 
was  up  to  starvation  prices. 

Farmer  Browns  Avas  a  plain,  unpretending 
farm  house,  but  strong,  warm,  and  snug.  There 
was  a  large  porch  to  screen  from  sun,  rain  and 
wind,  with  two  windows  on  either  side  of  it. 
It  was  a  simple  architectural  plan,  yet  the 
house  looked  massive,  permanent,  sensible,  and 
comfortable.  The  windows  had  stone  muUions 
in  the  Tudor  style,  and  latticed  and  leaded  panes. 
The  small  front  garden,  not  much  cared  for — like 


FARMER   BROWN.  261 

farmers'  gardens  in  general — was  a  rough  bit  of 
unkempt  lawn,  bordered  by  a  low  stone  wall 
and  an  overOTown  box  liedo^e.  A  China  rose 
flowered  at  the  door,  and  there  were  one  or  two 
blooms  still  on  the  honeysuckle  that  clung  over 
the  porch.  Four  or  five  purple  and  yellow  dahlias 
flourished  in  the  centre  border,  in  which  glowed  a 
scarlet  geranium  and  some  heliotropes,  while  a 
great  bush  of  fuchsia  crowded  its  graceful  scarlet 
pendulous  blossoms.  Just  across  the  sunken  road 
(a  complete  trout  stream  in  wet  weather,  for  the 
place  was  full  of  springs  feeding  the  brook,) 
opposite  the  vicarage  was  a  part  of  the  farm-yard. 
In  the  central  barn  a  flail  could  be  heard  pound- 
ing, with  a  muffled  sound  when  it  fell  on  the 
straw,  sharp  when  it  struck  on  the  grass-strewn 
floor.  Across  the  road,  a  huge  blustering  dung- 
hill cock,  a  sultan  of  the  Mormon  persuasion,  was 
leading  along  his  cackling  harem  in  a  stately  way, 
as  if  he  was  the  original  fowl  named  by  Adam  and 
all  others  were  impostors.  On  the  very  top  of  a 
large  walnut  tree,  its  leaves  half  beaten  off  by  the 
artificial  autumn  of  a  remorseless  threshing,  from 
which  its  spirits  had  never  rallied,  a  thrush  sat 
and  sang.  In  the  farm-yard,  near  the  house,  some 
'^  young  things,"  as  Farmer  Brown  called  his  juve- 
nile cattle,  were  sulkily  munching,  as  if  conscious 
of  the  impending  market-day,  that  was  to  break 


262  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

up  their  small  society.  The  pigeons  were  fluttering 
about  the  orange  roofs,  while  through  an  open  gate 
a  boy  was  leading  a  string  of  cart-horses,  whose  har- 
ness jingled  as  they  paced  heavily  along.  Up  a  steep 
meadow  crowned  by  some  firs,  and  to  the  right  of 
the  house,  Farmer  Brown's  youngest  son  Greorge, 
a  sturdy  young  fellow  of  eighteen,  with  a  craving 
alternately  for  the  army,  the  sea,  and  the  colonies, 
was  striding,  his  gun  under  his  arm,  in  search  of 
two  wood-pigeons  that  often  visited  an  adjacent 
beanstack.  The  different  sounds,  mellowed  by  dis- 
tance, mingled  pleasantly  together.  The  monotone 
of  the  flail,  now  sharp  now  flat,  the  song  of  the  thrush, 
the  shout  of  the  distant  ploughman,  the  brooding 
happiness  of  the  cooing  pigeons,  the  occasional 
bark  of  the  dog,  the  bleat  of  sheep,  the  low  mooing 
of  the  cows  waiting  for  the  milker,  the  burr  of  the 
distant  threshing  machine,  and  the  song  of  the 
dairy  girl,  heard  through  the  half  open  kitchen  door, 
wove  into  one  hymn  of  industry  and  happiness. 

It  was  just  five  o'clock.  Farmer  Brown  was 
back  from  Salisbury,  and  had  nearly  done  tea.  He 
kept  to  the  old  primitive  hours,  up  with  the  lark 
and  lie  down  with  the  lamb.  It  was  daylight  he 
burned,  and  when  Nature,  or  rather  her  great  solar 
lamp,  dropped  her  remorseless  black  extinguisher. 
Farmer  Brown  put  on  his  night-cap  also  and  went 
obediently  to  bed. 


FARMER   BROWN.  263 

"Morning  hours,"  he  used  to  say,  in  his  plea^ 
sant  Doric — the  broad  Wiltshire — "  had  a  bloom  on 
'em,"  and  he  was  ashamed  of  being  up,  like  the 
gentry  folk,  four  hours  after  the  sparrers.  If  Nature 
didn't  waste  nothing,  she  meant  the  sunlight  to 
be  used  he  was  sure — that's  how  he  read  it — at 
all  events  this  was  sartin,  his  father  had  always 
got  up  at  five,  and  he  wouldn't  be  later.  The  last 
man  at  market  never  made  the  best  bargain." 

How  far  this  justified  Farmer  Brown  in  rising 
at  five  in  winter,  we  do  not  know,  nor  did  he 
care  to  argue  the  question.  His  laws  were  as  the 
laws  of  the  Medes  and  Persians.  It  would  have 
been  useless  to  prove  to  him  that  as  he  went  to 
bed  at  nine,  he  did  not  gain  much  working 
time,  for  after  all  he  was  in  the  right — the  early 
hours  are  healthiest,  and  they  suited  his  work, 
so  he  gathered  his  health,  homely  wisdom,  and 
money  in  his  own  simple  narrow  way.  "  If 
modern  farmers  liked  their  luxuries,"  he  said, 
''and  aped  the  gentry,  they  might  match  themselves 
against  him,  and  see  whose  fortune  turned  out 
best,  and  who  made  most  money  in  the  long  run." 

It  was  just  as  Farmer  Brown  had  had  his 
third  cup  of  tea  poured  out,  and  was  reading 
with  great  zest  the  high  price  of  corn  at  the  last 
Devizes  market,  as  Mrs.  Brown  was  chiding 
Hannah,    a   great,  good-natured,  slatternly  girl, 


264  THE  vicar's   COURTSHIP. 

who  had  broken  a  plate  in  making  some  buttered 
toast,  and  as  William,  the  handsome  son  who'd 
been  crippled  by  a  fall  out  hunting,  was  prac- 
tising a  tune  on  the  concertina,  that  a  knock 
came  at  the  front  door.  Hannah,  in  red  haste, 
announced  that  it  was  Mr.  Beauflower. 

Farmer  Brown  threw  down  his  paper,  sprang 
on  his  legs,  and  shouted  a  boisterous  wel- 
come, loud  enough  to  have  been  heard  a  hundred 
yards  off.  There  was  a  great  deal  more  energy 
expended  than  necessary,  but  it  was  all  in  the 
purest  good  faith. 

''  Come  in,  Mr.  Beaufiower,"  he  said,  "  come  in, 
do  'ee ;  here,  give  Mr.  Beauflower  a  chair, 
Martha.  Why  don't  you  put  a  chair  for  Mr. 
Beauflower,  Hannah  girl  ?  Here,  you  come  near 
the  fire,  now  do'ee,  there's  a  good  man;  now  ]3ray 
have  a  cup  of  tea  with  us,  now  do'ee.  Hannah, 
you  butter  some  more  toast,  now  ;  now  do'ee 
make  yourself  comfortable ;  Hannah,  bring  another 
block.  Well,  and  how  are  you,  and  how's  your 
poor  mother  and  Miss  Julia  ;  seems  a  martal  long- 
time since  we've  set  eyes  on  'em.  Well,  you 
know  we  are  always  martal  glad  to  see  'ee." 

"  Ah,  'tis  a  mortal  long  time  ;  but  now,  John, 
dont'ee  pour  out  that  tea,"  said  his  equally  good- 
natured  wife.  ''  Hannah,  here  make  some  more 
directly,  and  go  and  put  the  cake  out.     We  were 


FARMER   BROWN.  265 

admiring  that  sarmon  of  Sunday,  about  the  tares, 
Mr.  Beauflower.  It  come  home  to  us,  and  Willj 
here  wants  you  to  let  him  read  it." 

It  was  as  much  as  Mr.  Beauflower  could  do  to 
answer  all  these  questions,  to  kindly  but  firmly 
refuse  the  fatal  tea  and  toast  just  an  hour  before 
his  own  dinner,  to  take  a  chair  several  feet  from 
the  lire,  and  to  shake  hands  alternately  with 
Farmer  BroT\Ti,  his  shrewd  and  manag-ing;  but 
tried  wife,  and  the  invahd  son,  whose  fine  dark 
eyes  glistened  at  sight  of  an  old  friend.  The 
impropriety  of  pressing  had  not  yet  been  noted 
in  Farmer  Brown  s  book  of  etiquette. 

Four  times  the  Vicar  smilingly  refused  cake 
and  tea,  and  four  times  Farmer  Brown  returned 
to  the  charge.  A  compromise  was  at  last  effected 
by  Mrs.  Brown,  who,  with  all  the  triumph  of  a 
veteran  diplomatist,  allowed  Mr.  Beauflower  to 
buy  himself  off  with  a  huge  hunk  of  seed  cake 
and  a  bumper  of  treacly  currant  wine,  thick, 
sweet,  and  cloying. 

"  Well,  and  how  are  you  all,  and  how's  the 
farm  getting  on,  and  where's  that  turkey  you're 
getting  ready  for  me  ?  " 

'•'  Well,  we're  like  the  world,  we  roll  on,"  said 
Farmer  Brown,  his  pleasant  frosty  red  face  puckered 
with  smiles;  "  as  for  the  farm  it  just  pays  for  the 
trouble  of  weeding  it,  and  that's  about  all." 


2GQ  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

"  All !  you  farmers,  you  always  say  that." 

"  Well,  just  ask  missis  ;  we  turn  tlie  money, 
that's  all.  It's  not  like  the  war  time.  AVhy  in 
'the  year  one,'  two  of  my  uncles  in  X)orsetshire 
both  bought  the  farms  they  worked  on.  Ah !  that 
was  a  time.  Bony  kept  corn  going  up,  but  lor 
bless  'ee  now — well — there's  no  money  to  be 
made  now.     Why  in  the  year  one " 

"  The  turkey  is  getting  on  nicely,"  said  Mrs. 
Brown,  seizing  an  opening  as  her  husband  was 
sneezing. 

"  The  year  one "  was  a  prolific  text  with 
Farmer  Brown. 

"And  how's  WiUy?" 

**  Well,  he's  big  enough;  he  can  speak  for  him- 
self. He's  very  cheerful,  Mr.  Beautiower,  though 
he  don't  get  as  strong  as  we  could  wish  ;  but 
we  hope,  as  the  spring  comes  on,  he'll  get  about 
a  bit.  He's  very  busy  now  learning  the  con- 
certina." 

This  spring  strength  was  a  pure  fiction  of  the 
farmer's,  intended  to  cheer  his  son. 

"And  how's  Robert  r' 

"  Well,  he's  away  at  some  merry-making  or 
other.  He  sticks  to  that  more  than  he  does  to 
work.  There's  some  rifle  meeting  on — shooting 
for  a  cup,  I  think.  I  am  afeard  they  '11  fill  too 
often,  whoever  wins  it." 


FARMER   BROWN.  267 

"  He  isn't  so  steady,  Mr.  Beauflower,  as  we 
could  wish,"  said  the  mother,  with  a  sigh.  "  But 
then  young  men  will  be  young  men,  and  T  sup- 
pose he'll  settle  down  some  time  ;  there's  good 
about  him.  That  lad  never  told  me  a  lie  yet ; 
but  he's  too  fly  about,  and  likes  hunting  and 
racing  too  much  to  please  his  father." 

"  Well,  Willy,"  said  ]\Ir.  Beauflower,  "  and  so 
you  don't  feel  fit  for  work  yet  ?" 

"No,"  said  Willy,  hopefully.  "But  father 
thinks  in  the  spring  I  shall  get  about  again.  I 
shouldn't  care  if  I  could  only  work  a  bit,  the  days 
do  seem  so  long.  I  saw  Dr.  Briscoe  this  morning, 
but  I  think  one  ride  round  the  farm  would  do  me 
more  good  than  all  the  doctor's  stuif  I've  taken 
since  I  was  ill." 

"  Health  will  come  in  God  s  own  time,  Willy ; 
you  must  be  patient.     And  how's  George  ?  " 

"  Well,  he  still  wants  to  be  a  soldier,"  said 
Farmer  Brown.  "  Nothing  will  do  for  him  now 
but  soldiering,  but  as  I  says  to  him,  a  soldier 
chap  proud  of  his  red  coat  reminds  me  of  all  the 
world  of  a  sheep  proud  of  the  red  ochre  they  rub 
him  with  to  mark  him  for  the  butcher." 

"  They're  so  stiff-necked,  you  see,  lads  of  that 
age,"  said  Mrs.  Brown ;  "  they  always  want  some- 
thing they  haven't  got,  and  the  last  story  fills  up 
all  their  heads  for  the  time.     He's  a  good  boy, 


268  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

though,  and  in  time  the  nonsense  will  go  off,  we 
hope — we  hope  so." 

"  And  is  it  true  that  we  hear  in  the  village," 
said  Farmer  Brown,  ''if  I  may  make  so  bold  as  to 
ask — that  that  gentleman  stopping  with  you  is 
going  to  take  the  house  Mr.  Harker's  farm  bailiff 
used  to  have,  just  out  of  Fontford  V 

"  Oh,  yes  ;  he's  taken  quite  a  fancy  to  Wilt- 
shire." 

''  And  j)ray,  how  did  you  find  old  Mrs.  Flower?" 

"They  wouldn't  let  me  in,  Mrs.  Brown.  They're 
a  curious  j)eople,  those  Traverses." 

"  It's  very  strange ;  to  be  sure  it's  very  strange." 

"  They  let  me  see  her  last  week.  They  say  the 
son  neglects  her." 

"  I  remember  her  such  a  pretty  girl,"  said  Mrs. 
Brown,  "  before  I  married  John  there.  But  her 
second  husband  took  to  drinking,  and  beat  her, 
and  then  she  had  fits,  and  after  the  husband's 
death  her  son  neglected  her,  and  half-starved  her. 
I  never  liked  her,  but  I  always  pitied  her." 

"  And  so  Miss  Amy's  come  back  to  us,"  said 
Farmer  Brown,  cutting  three  huge  sections  of 
cake,  intending  to  reload  the  young  Vicar  s  plate 
when  he  had  struggled  through  the  piece  with 
which  he  was  still  toying  helplessly,  yet  with  a 
melancholy  fortitude  worthy  of  a  better  cause. 
"  Now  that's  a -girl  I  hold  to  be  a  dowmight  good 


FARMER   BROWN".  269 

girl ;  Lord,  how  kind  she  was,  Mr.  Beauflower, 
to  them  Hackers,  coming  and  reading  to  'em 
day  after  day,  through  the  rain  and  mud,  when 
the  old  man  had  that  last  stroke,  and  bringing 
them  little  tit-bits  from  the  house,  and  then  send- 
ing the  elder  girl  to  school  out  of  her  own  money. 
Ah  !  now  that  is  a  girl  as  does  one's  heart  good 
to  see  in  these  times,  when  girls  ain't  what  they 
used  to  be,  and  seem  all  trying  to  be  men,  and 
queer  sorts  of  men  too." 

The  Vicar  assented,  but  in  a  way  much  too  cold 
for  Farmer  Brown's  warm  heart. 

"  It  looks  very  grand,"  he  said,  "  seeing  a  string 
of  poor  people  going  by  with  pitchers  for  soup  twice 
a  week  or  so ;  very  well  it  looks,  like  those  men 
you  see  in  Lunnon,  carrying  boards  with  adver- 
tisements. But  give  me  the  quiet  way  of  doing- 
good,  and  good  that  costs  trouble  to  oneself. 
Lord,  I've  seen  her  scores  of  times  steal  into  a 
cottage  and  say  a  few  kind  words  that  has  been 
like  sunshine  in  a  dark  place,  and  she's  come  out 
smiling,  as  if  no  sorrow  could  be  where  she 
was." 

"  Ay,  she's  a  dear  good  young  lady,"  responded 
Mrs.  Bro^\m,  "worth  half  the -stock  of  madams, 
and  the  old  ewes  dressed  lamb  fashion.  She'll 
make  a  good  wife  for  any  man.  There,  if  I  was 
a  man  I'd  rather  have  her  with  the  one  gown  she 


270  THE   VICARS    COURTSHIP. 

has  on,  than  any  proud  diicliess's  daughter  as  has 
been  all  but  fed  on  gold.  She's  known  trouble, 
and  trouble  is  like  the  first  frost  on  the  savoys,  it 
mellows  and  softens  people.'' 

"  She  is  indeed  a  very  amiable  girl,  I  think," 
said  Mr.  Beauflower,  "and  does  a  great  deal  of 
private  unobtrusive  good  among  the  poor.  And 
she  shows  discrimination,  too,  for  she  is  not  taken 
in  by  the  fine  talkers  and  the  regular  beggars,  the 
plausible  people  wdio  stop  swearing  and  railing, 
and  get  out  their  bibles  directly  they  see  any 
visitor  coming." 

Mr.  Beauflow^er  uttered  this  praise  with  an 
almost  ostentatious  frankness. 

Yet  he  was  vexed,  he  hardly  knew  why,  at 
anyone  outgoing  himself  in  praises  of  Amy,  and 
he  w^as  also  annoyed  at  her  praises  being  forced 
specially  (as  it  seemed)  upon  him. 

"  What  a  pretty  old-fashioned  ornament  this 
is,"  he  said,  "standing  upon  the  mantle-piece  " — 
touching  a  large  bunch  of  dry  transparent  seed 
pods  of  a  heart  shape,  that  mingled  with  peacock 
feathers,  green  and  violet-eyed,  and  an  ear  or 
two  of  wheat,  nestled  over  the  mantel-piece  in  a 
blue  china  jar,  between  two  staring,  highly- 
coloured  pictures  of  fox-hunting  scenes. 

"We  do  call  that  in  this  part,  'Money  in  both 
pockets.'     It's  like  an  old-fashioned  pocket,  you 


FARMER   BROWX.  271 

see,  and  there's  seeds  on  eacli  side.  It's  a 
foolisli  name,  you  see,  that  the  boys  give  it,  I 
suppose,  but  still  it  is  the  name,  and  so  we  call 
it.  Willy  there  likes  to  see  it,  and  we  keep  it 
for  him." 

The  Yicar  laughed,  and  said  it  was  very  pretty. 
He  was  glad  to  see  Farmer  Brown  liked  the  old 
farmhouse  ornaments :  the  books  on  the  side 
table  in  front  of  the  best  tea-tray,  and  the  long 
sentry-box  clock,  ^ith  plenty  of  room  in  it  for  the 
works. 

"  Well,  I  do,  Muster  Beauflower,  and  like  them 
old  clocks,  they  ain't  so  smart  as  things  they 
make  now,  but  he  keeps  good  time,  and  when  I 
wake  in  the  niojht  I  like  to  hear  him  tickino' 
away  steadily  downstairs  ;  it's  company,  too,  for 
Willy,  when  he's  alone,  poor  boy." 

For  some  time  the  good  simple-hearted  farmer 
had  evinced  a  strong  desire  to  be  alone  with  the 
Vicar.  He  had  been  restlessly  looking  at  the  door, 
and  tr}'ing  to  catch  his  wife's  eye,  and  at  last  he 
resorted  to  the  broadest  and  most  unmistakeable 
hint. 

Nodding  ^dolently  at  his  wife,  he  said,  "  You're 
such  an  old  friend,  I'm  sure  you'll  excuse  my  missus, 
who's  very  busy  making  pork  pies,  and  can't  very 
well  leave  'em  to  Hannah,  for  she's  apt  to  make 
the  crust  too  hea\y.     There,  you  go,  my  dear, 


272  THE   vicar's    courtship. 


Mr.  Beauflower  will  excuse  you,  I  know.  There, 
you  go,  Martha." 

Directly  Mrs.  Brown  had  gone,  after  some 
faint  remonstrances  and  many  homely  apologies, 
the  farmer  laid  formal  siege  also  to  Willy. 

"  Willy,  my  lad,"  he  said,  going  up  and  taking 
his  hand,  "  you  look  tired,  you  mus  n't  worrit  any 
more  over  that  there  moosic,  you  go  and  lie  down 
a  bit,  that'll  do  you  good." 

Willy  remonstrated  faintly,  but  capitulated. 
The  moment  he  was  gone.  Farmer  Brown  com- 
placently drew  his  chair  closer  to  the  Vicar,  and 
looked  him  straight  in  the  face.  He  was  embar- 
rassed, but  still  he  darted  boldly  at  the  subject. 

"Mr.  Beauflower,"  he  said,  "my  farm  last 
year  brought  me  a  little  more  jorofit  than  usual — 
not  much  to  boast  of,  but  still  a  little  profit." 

"  I  am  very  glad  to  hear  it."  The  Vicar  won- 
dered what  on  earth  could  be  coming. 

"Now  I  know  you're  going  to  repair  our 
church  (not  that  I  like  giving  up  my  father's  old 
pew,  and  I  don't  pretend  to,)  I  don't  like  yom^ 
draughty  benches,  with  every  one  seeing  if  you 
close  your  eyes  for  a  moment,  and  nothing  takes 
off  sleep  in  sermon  time  like  closing  your  eyes 
for  a  moment,  father  used  to  say.  But  I  know 
you  parsons  have  many  calls  on  you,  and  many 
ways  to  spend  your  money,  poor  men  here,  j)oor 


FARMER   BROWN.  273 

men  there,  and  people  writing  for  charity,  and  it 
struck  me  that  you  might  like  a  little  of  the 
money  you'll  be  promised  down  at  once,  for  the 
architect  will  want  a  hansel,  and  the  builder  and 
the  man  who  hauls  the  stone,  they'll  all  want 
something,  and  there'll  be  circulars  to  print,  and 
all  that,  so  I  turns  this  in  my  mind,  and  this 
morning,  without  telling  my  missis,  I  drives  to 
Salisbury,  and  gets  out  five-and-forty  pounds  in 
gold.  I  never  did  like  those  rubbishy  notes,  and 
here  it  is." 

As  he  said  this.  Farmer  Brown  went  to  an  old- 
fashioned  bureau,  and  pulling  it  open,  took  out 
a  wash-leather  bag  of  sovereigns  and  placed  the 
bag  on  the  table  by  Mr.  Beauflower. 

It  is  a  remarkable  fact  that  there  is  always 
something  hollow,,  strained,  unnatural,  and  jarring 
about  the  voice  when  the  owner  of  it  is  acting  a 
part,  and  not  speaking  from  his  heart.  True 
love  speaks  with  the  deepest  and  fullest  harmony. 
Deception  is  always  a  semitone  or  two  out  of  tune. 

Mr.  Beauflower  felt  this  in  a  moment,  and  the 
blood  flushed  up  to  his  face.  He  knew  how  care- 
ful, close,  and  thrifty  the  farmer  was,  and  felt 
sure  that  no  art  or  eloquence  would  ever  get  more 
than  five  pounds  out  of  him  for  the  restoration  of 
any  church  ever  built.  He  saw  at  once  it  was  a 
kindly  furtive  way  of  ofiering  him  a  loan  without 

VOL.    I.  T 


274  THE  vicar's  courtship. 

hurting  his  pride.  A  horrible  memory  of  the 
manner  of  Mr.  Pitts,  the  butcher,  also  flashed  across 
him ;  was  it  possible  that  his  anxieties  could  be 
the  subject  of  village  conversation ;  did  the  half- 
drunken  ploughmen  at  the  "Peal  of  Bells"  laugh 
at  him — the  keepers  in  their  huts  in  the  woods 
at  night  mock  at  the  possibility  of  seeing  him  ar- 
rested ?  Were  the  tattling  old  women  at  the  village 
grocer  s  talking  about  his  debts  over  the  counter 
when  they  came  for  herrings,  tea,  and  snufl"  ?  It 
could  not  be  for  the  church,  there  was  no  money 
wanted  yet  for  preliminary  expenses,  he  had  told 
every  one  so  at  the  first  vestry  meeting ;  besides, 
Mr.  Harker  had  half  off'ered  him  £200  at  once,  and 
was  going  to  begin  immediately  on  his  own  aisle 
and  family  pew,  and  had  half  promised  two  win- 
dows and  a  new  organ. 

Farmer  Brown  did  not  rightly  interpret  the 
reluctance.  Ostrich-like,  he  considered  his  care- 
fully-arranged ambuscade  complete.  He  con- 
sidered himself  wrapped  in  an  invisible  cloak. 

"Now,  don't  you  make  any  bones  about  it, 
Mr.  Beauflower,"  he  said,  "  I  mean  it,  and  there 
it  is,  and  hearty  welcome  you  are.  When  the 
money  begins  to  come  in,  then's  time  enough  to 
repay  me.     Come,  you  take  it." 

Mr.  Beauflower  rose  and  quietly  dropped  the 
money  into  Farmer  Brown's  hands. 


FARMER   BROWN.  275 

"  No,"  he  said,  ''  Mr.  Brown,  I'm  sincerely 
obliged  to  you,  but  we  are  not  in  want  of  any 
money  for  some  time  to  come ;  besides,  I  do  not 
receive  the  money.  The  subscribers  pay  it  into  the 
County  Bank." 

"  Kow  do'ee,  do'ee  take  it.  I'm  a  straight- 
forward man,  and  I  mean  it.  I  can  afford  it ; 
it'U  get  no  interest  for  me  ^\-orth  mentioning  at  the 
Bank ;  now  do'ee  take  it  and  make  what  use  of  it 
you  like  for  the  present.  I  don't  want  to  see  you 
put  out  by  our  church  matters.  You've  put  your 
name  cIotntl  for  one  hundred  pounds — mind  a 
hundred  pounds  is  a  good  deal  for  any  man,  and 
you  shan't  be  put  out  every  way.  Now  do'ee  take 
the  money  as  'tis  meant." 

Mr.  Beauflower  said,  coldly  and  firmly, 

"  Thank  you,  ]Mr.  Brown  !  I  thank  you  very 
warmly  for  your  kind  offer,  but  I  could  not  take 
the  money,  and  now  I  must  say  good  bye,  dinner 
will  be  waiting  for  me." 

"  I  wish  now,"  thought  Farmer  Brown,  "  I  had 
offered  it  him  point  blank." 

Good  old  soul,  he  had  no  more  power  of  diving 
into  that  refined,  thoughtful,  and  proud  nature 
than  a  mole  has  of  sinkino-  a  coal  shaft. 

The  Vicar  went  forth  into  the  village  lane 
another  man.  The  brand  was  on  him.  He  had 
never  felt  the  curse  till  now.     The  Pieu^Te  of 

T   2 


276  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

debt  had  been  grappling  witli  him,  and  the  scars 
of  the  wounds  it  had  inflicted  were  \T.sible,  he 
found,  to  all  the  world. 

Perhaps  (and  this  seemed  to  sting  him  most,) 
— perhaps,  even  his  mother  and  Julia  had  heard  of 
his  debts. 

Perhaps  even Amy. 

The  bitterest  degradation  is  to  be  degraded  in 
the  eyes  of  those  w^e  love.  Did  the  Vicar  then 
love  Amy?  If  he  did  not,  why  did  her  name 
rise  before  him  at  that  moment  ? 


THE   TWO    CONNOISSEUES.  277 


CHAPTEE  XVI. 

THE   TWO    CONNOISSEURS. 

The  duties  of  a  governess  are  not  too  agree- 
able to  even  the  youngest  and  most  buoyant 
spirit.  Duty  at  times  shrinks  before  them ; 
happiness  cowers  and  mopes ;  even  Love's  smile 
fades  before  their  dull  monotony.  The  back  of 
Atlas  is  not  strong  enough  to-  bear  the  heavy 
burden  of  dependence.  No  governess  that  ever 
lived  but  has  felt  at  times  that  the  meanest 
drudge,  star\4ng  over  slop-work,  was  happier 
than  herself  in  her  luxurious  slavery. 

How  cruel  women  can  be  to  women,  the  Nun's 
recent  trial  shewed  us.  Women  know  well  how  to 
wound.  They  only  prick  with  lancets  where  men 
use  swords  and  bludgeons  that  cut  and  bruise ;  but 
they  can  infuse  the  subtlest  poison  into  a  word  by 
a  single  inflexion  of  the  voice,  by  a  turn  of  the 
head,  the  movement  of  an  eyebrow.  Perhaps  it 
is  because  the  victims  of  such  women  as  Mrs. 
Harker  do  not  drop  down  dead  under  the  lancet 


278  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

and  the  poison  that  the  oppressors  have  no  pity. 
They  know  how  to  inflict  tortures  worse  than  homi- 
cide, and  yet  leave  no  wound  for  which  justice 
can  claim  compensation.  Their  poisons,  like  those 
of  the  Borgias,  kill  years  afterwards  ;  they  see 
no  blood  ooze  from  the  breaking  heart,  and  they 
therefore  feel  no  remorse  ;  they  have  an  unhal- 
lowed pleasure  in  keeping  a  slave  in  a  country 
where  slavery  is  thought  to  be  illegal. 

These  women  have  a  keener  pleasure  still  in 
heaping  indignities  on  natures  that  birth  and  edu- 
cation have  rendered  sensitive  to  the  hio^hest  dcOTee, 
and  that  position  and  misfortune  have  deprived  of 
all  power  of  resistance.  It  is  the  secrecy  of  the 
cruelty  that  makes  it  more  terrible  ; — it  is  the 
secrecy  that  prevents  the  inflictor  being  branded. 
Mrs.  Marker's  nature  was  specially  capable  of  such 
cruelty  to  one  who  resisted  her  caprices,  or  ran 
adverse  to  her  plans. 

There  were  symptoms  already  of  the  dislike 
that  was  growing  in  her  mind  towards  poor 
unconscious  Amy.  Since  the  night  of  the 
soiree,  when  public  attention,  especially  the 
young  Eight  Honourable's,  was  drawn  to  the 
pretty  governess,  Mrs.  Harker  had  grown  colder, 
more  repulsive,  and  more  exacting. 

Ethel  —  still  Amy's  devoted  companion  and 
champion — was  a  nice  high-spirited  child,  hard 


THE   TWO    COXNOISSEURS.  279 

to  lead  except  by  the  silken  bands  of  affection, 
who  had  a  noble  contempt  for  the  vast  desultory 
mass  of  knowledge  at  present  expected  from 
young  ladies  of  her  age. 

"  ^Vhat  is  the  use  of  it  ?  "  she  said,  leaning  her 
pretty  saucy  head  on  her  hand  in  intense  weari- 
ness of  Mangnall's  Questions,  that  range  over 
countless  subjects,  from  the  solar  system  to  lucifer 
matches.  "  What  is  the  use  of  it.  Amy  ?  I'm 
not  o'oins:  out  as  schoolmistress.  AMiat  do  I  care 
about  Mdtiades  and  Epam — pam — paminonclas, 
and  William  Eufus,  and  Oliver  Cromwell,  and 
Gustavus  of  Sweden,  and  how  people  make 
cochineal,  and  how  far  the  sun  is  from  Saturn, 
and  all  that  nonsense  ?  I  shall  •  forget  it  all  the 
year  after  I've  done  with  you.  What  does  Carry 
know  about  vulgar  fractions  1  She  can't  do  a 
figure.  ^Miat  does  papa  know  about  Saturn's 
belt  1     I  don't  believe  he  ever  heard  of  it." 

Amy  hardly  knew  how  to  reply  to  Ethel,  so 
baffling  is  a  child's  philosophy.  It  had  never 
before  struck  her  how  broad  and  shallow  was  the 
modem  education  she  had  to  impart. 

"  Oh,  you  silly  child,"  she  said,  laughing  in  her 
own  sweet,  guileless  way,  "  you  would  not  Hke  to 
know  less  than  other  girls.  If  of  all  you  learn, 
only  a  little  will  remain, — the  more  you  learn, 
the  more  that  little  will  be." 


Si80  THE  vicar's    courtship. 

Ethel  leaned  lier  wise  head  on  her  little  hand, 
and  allowed  that  there  was  somethino'  in  that. 
Then  looking  up,  and  shaking  her  golden  mane, 
she  said  thoughtfully, 

"  Amy,  do  you  like  being  a  governess  ? '' 

"  No,  darling/^ 

"  Then  why  are  you  one  1 " 

"  Because  papa  is  poor,  and  it  is  my  duty  to 
help  them." 

"What  a  pity  it  is  that  what  is  right  isn't  always 
pleasant  too.  I  vdsh  instead  of  these  nasty  French 
verbs,  and  these  horrible  questions,  you  had  only 
to  teach  me  riding,  and  archery,  and  croquet." 

"  Then  I  should  have  to  be  strict,  and  the 
lessons  would  come  so  often  that  you  would  not 
like  them ;  and  you  would  want  to  get  back  to 
the  scales,  and  the  verbs,  and  the  size  of  the 
moon,  and  the  date  of  Magna  Charta." 

People  in  conversation  have  a  way,  as  fencers 
have,  of  acknowledging  a  thrust  received.  Ethel 
gave  that  sign  with  all  the  gravity  of  a  grown-up 
woman.  Girls  are  instinctive  mimics,  and  soon 
learn  the  manners  of  grown  people,  even  while 
they  remain  children  to  each  other. 

"  I  suppose,''  Amy  said,  "  the  standard  rose- 
trees  on  the  lawn,  Ethel,  don't  like  the  iron  rods 
they're  tied  to,  but  yet  they  wouldn't  grow 
straight  without  them." 


THE   TWO   CONNOISSEUES.  281 

"  Oh,  Amy,  how  clever  you  are  !  But  you 
a'nt  an  iron  rod !  Mamma  is,  though,  and 
Carry's  all  iron." 

"  Come,  Ethel,  we  must  go  on  with  the  ques- 
tions, dear.  Now  what  was  the  date  of  the 
battle  of  Marathon  ? " 

"  One  hundred — one  thousand —  Eubbish,  I 
don't  know.  Oh,  Amy,  did  I  tell  you  we're  all 
to  go  to  the  meet  on  Tuesday,  and  Carry's  going 
to  ride  Fire  F]y,  the  big  chestnut.  She  can't 
manage  it,  and  she's  afraid;  but  she  wants  to 
show  off  because  Mr.  Cantelupe  is  to  be  there. 
Such  fun  !  but  Jim,  the  groom,  is  to  keep  close 
to  her,  so  there  is  no  danger.  You're  to  have 
Peacock,  the  grey  horse,  and  •  I'm  to  have  the 
pony.     It'll  be  aw^fully  jolly  !  " 

"It'll  be  very  nice,"  said  Amy,  clapping  her 
little  white  hands  ;  "  I  do  so  like  to  see  hunting. 
But  come,  Ethel,  Ave  must  go  on  now  with  the 
irregular  verbs.     Have  you  done  your  exercise  V 

But  incorrigible  Ethel  was  intent  on  Du 
Manner's  last  clever  drawing  in  a  number  of 
"  Punch"  that  lay  on  the  table. 

"  Oh,  Amy,"  she  said,  going  to  the  window,  "  I 
didn't  tell  you  that  mamma  has  promised  to  ask 
dear  old  Miss  Chivers  to  the  archery.  She 
wouldn't  at  first,  but  I  teased  her  so." 

"  Ethel,  dear,  you  must  go  on,  dear,  with  your 


282  THE   VICARS   COUHTSHIP. 

sums.      You're  very  idle  this  morning.      You  11 
really  make  me  angry." 

"Oh,  Amy,  you  couldn't  be  angry.  Amy, 
Amy,  come  look  here ;  here's  Mr.  Beauflower  and 
that  old  gentleman  we  met  the  other  day,  coming 
to  call." 

Amy  hardly  knew  why,  but,  at  those  simple 
words,  her  heart  seemed,  for  a  moment,  to  stop 
beating,  then  the  blood  seemed  to  flow  faster 
than  ever,  and  she  felt  that  her  face,  too,  in  some 
way,  betrayed  that  inward  sensation ;  so  to  hide 
it,  and  to  prevent  Ethel  seeing  it,  she  went  to  the 
window,  took  her  by  the  silky  mane  playfully, 
kissed  her  hair,  and  looked  out  too  ;  but,  to  her 
disappointment,  the  visitors  had  already  passed 
under  the  portico,  then  the  bell  rang,  and  they 
were  admitted. 

We  must  now  follow  in  their  shadow.  All  the 
way  through  the  park  Mr.  Goodrick  had  been 
silent  and  preoccupied.  The  lake  glistening  in 
places  like  a  steel  blade  shaken  in  the .  sunshine, 
the  white-sailed  armada  of  proud,  angry -looking 
swans,  the  wild  ducks  scattering  before  the 
keeper's  punt,  the  deer  feeding  in  the  valley 
beyond,  on  the  other  side  of  the  park,  the  black- 
birds scudding  with  frightened  chirrup  from  bush 
to  bush,  the  rabbits  trotting  across  the  path,  the 
thouolitful  red  cows  grazino-  in  the  meadows,  the 


THE    TWO    COXXOISSEURS.  283 

swallows  sweeping  past  or  crescenting  over  the 
water,  none  of  these  things  seemed  to  draw  Mr. 
Goodrick  from  some  absorbing:  thoucrht  that  held 
him  captive.  His  friend,  as  a  pleasant  com- 
panion should,  humom^ed  his  mood,  and  was 
silent.  The  vicar's  thoughts  turned  unconsciously 
upon  Amy.  Should  he  see  her  ] — he  wished  to,  and 
yet  did  not  wish.  He  liked  her  best  away  from 
those  proud,  oppressive  people  ;  he  could  not 
bear  to  see  her  a  serf — a  Cinderella,  who  was 
still  waiting  for  the  fairy  prince — the  recreant 
knight  who  still  lingered  in  fairyland.  He  thought 
how  little  likely  it  was  that  the  Pieu^^:e  that  held 
him  fast  would  ever  allow  him  to  marr}^ ;  he  won- 
dered whom  Amy  would  marry,  whether  a  rich  or 
a  poor  man.  Would  she  go  back  some  day  to  the 
sordid  life  in  the  river- side  street  and  sink  into  a 
scraping,  cheating  lodging-house  keeper  '?  After 
all,  she  was  not  a  lady  ;  that  he  had  to  remem- 
ber. She  would  go  away,  and  he  should  think 
of  her  as  a  pretty  face  that  had  passed  across  a 
dream ; — yet  not  merely  that,  he  said  to  himself, 
not  in  her  mere  grace  and  beauty  such  as  meet  in  a 
lily  or  a  violet.  No,  there  was  a  lo veabihty.  Ah !  if 
she  had  only  been  a  lady  fit  to  marry  a  Beaufiower 
of  the  old  Wiltshire  family  dating  back  from  the 
Plantagenets.  Perhaps  really  she  was  sordid, 
with  narrow  views,  and  with  the  craft  that  lies  in 


284  THE  vicar's  courtship. 

women,  as  the  claws  lie  within  the  cat's  velvet 
paw.  His  love  could  not  yet  blossom  freely — the 
cold  winds  of  pride  kept  the  bud  from  opening. 

''  I'm  very  silent,"  Mr.  Goodrick  said  at  last, 
''  but  the  place  so  reminds  me  of  my  old  friend 
Staunton  and  his  stories  of  the  place.  You 
mustn't  think  me  rude — as  they  said  of  Dr.  John- 
son, '  he's  only  the  skin  of  a  bear.'  What  a 
beautiful  place  it  is  !  It  would  be  hard  to  leave 
it.  If  I  was  its  master  I  fear  I  should  say  when 
I  was  dying,  '  and  must  I  leave  aU  this  1 " 

"It  is  very  beautiful,  but  the  man  you  will 
see  in  a  moment  is  not  happy.  He  is  feared 
here,  not  loved.  The  poor  people  are  always 
regretting  the  old  squii^e,  and  he  knows  it. 
There  are  some  bad  stories  about  him,  but  then 
he's  no  favourite  in  this  part  of  the  county.  If 
it  wasn't  for  his  money,  I  don't  think  he  would 
have  a  chance  of  society.  As  for  that  presen- 
tation of  plate  they  talk  of,  it  is  all  got  up  by  his 
own  tradesmen  and  a  few  of  the  smaller  gentry 
who  want  to  toady  him  and  get  to  his  parties." 

"  You  are  severe." 

"  Well,  I  am.  But  the  man  is  so  very  odious. 
But  you  will  judge  for  yourself.   Let's  ring  the  bell." 

The  visitors  were  instantly  admitted.  The 
butler  who  let  them  in  2:)assed  them  on  to  a  foot- 
man, who  ushered  them  into  the  cabinet  room,  as 


THE   TWO    CONNOISSEURS.  285 

it  was  called,  a  square  apartment  of  considerable 
size,  at  the  back  of  the  drawing-room,  and  look- 
ing out  upon  a  small  back  lawn. 

The  room  was  surrounded  by  large  buhl  cabi- 
nets, of  the  florid  Louis  Quatorze  period,  on  which 
stood  large  bronze  busts  of  the  Caesars.  It  was 
one  of  the  disagreeable  features  of  the  house  that 
the  not  very  ancient  arms  of  the  Harkers  seemed 
emblazoned  all  over  it.  They  were  on  the  chairs 
and  on  the  inlaid  tables  and  everywhere.  They 
were  so  much  insisted  upon,  that  they  at  last  drove 
you  to  irresistible  scepticism.  If  a  man  in  con- 
versation repeats  an  assertion  often,  you  may  be 
sure  that  he  is  doubtful  of  it. 

When  Harker  entered,  the  yieen  was  attentively 
studying  the  bust  of  that  wild  beast  Caracalla, 
and  fancying  he  saw  in  it  a  development  of 
some  of  the  features  of  its  owner.  Judging  from 
the  vicar,  men's  hearts  are  not  carried  in  glass 
cases,  for  Mr.  Harker  was  flattered  at  the  atten- 
tion paid  to  one  of  what  he  particularly  con- 
sidered "a  great  bargain.''  Mr.  Goodrick  was 
gazing  intently  in  the  fire,  again  absorbed  in 
some  reverie  that  held  him.  Men  who  have 
lived  much  alone  are  subject  to  reveries,  and  this 
was  a  sad  one,  for  it  invested  his  face  with  an  air 
of  the  most  intense  abstraction  from  the  outer 
world.     With  his  face  crimsoned  in  the  fireliorht, 


286  THE   VIOAPv's    COUETSHIP. 

he  looked  like  some  ancieut  philosopher  expiating 
in  purgatorial  fire  the  errors  of  an  imperfect 
belief. 

Mr.  Harker  was  courtesy  itself ;  but  courtesy 
of  a  patronising,  self-conscious,  and  unpleasant 
kind.  He  was  acting  the  millionaire  host,  and  was 
anxious  to  prove  his  strict  adherence  to  the  rules 
of  the  society  that  welcomed  him  but  despised 
him.  His  manners  were  Lord  Mayor  s  manners ; — 
the  stage  country  gentleman's  manners.  He  was 
not  like  even  Cantelupe,  for  instance,  who  always 
seemed  to  move  as  if  it  was  impossible  he  could 
do  anything  unbecoming  a  gentleman. 

Mr.  Harker  was  evidently  flattered  at  the  visit, 
and  anxious  to  appear  at  his  best  before  a  distin- 
guished London  connoissem-  whose  name  he  had 
heard  at  sale  rooms  and  picture  auctions.  Mr. 
Goodrick  was  watching  Harker  with  keen  eyes,  that 
were  incessantly  turned  on  him  when  he  was  not 
actually  speaking  to  their  owner.  His  look  dis- 
played not  so  much  the  curiosity  of  a  detective  as 
the  ceaseless  curiosity  of  an  inquirer  and  thinker 
— of  a  man  determined  to  thoroughly  search  out 
a  nature  at  once  hateful,  yet  interesting,  and 
strange  to  him.  It  was  the  sort  of  look  a  barrister 
gives  an  important  witness  against  his  client — 
the  look  a  man  gives  an  enemy  whom  he  has  long 
hated  but  never  before  seen. 


THE    TWO    CONNOISSEURS.  287 

"I  am  most  delighted,  Mr.  Beauflower,"  said 
Mr.  Harker,  when  he  had  been  formally  intro- 
duced to  the  Yicar  s  friend,  ''  to  show  a  part  of 
my  poor  collection  to  your  guest.  It  will  con- 
tain nothing  new  to  him  except  perhaps  one  or 
two  things.     You  are  fond  of  jewels  1  " 

"They  are  my  special  study,"  said  Mr.  Goodrick. 
"But  I  have  grown  tired  of  coins,  and  pictures, 
and  shells,  and  china,  and  ivories,  and  enamels, 
and  now  I'm  devoting  myself  entirely  to  jewels." 

"  My  agents  in  Holland  and  France  have  all 
carte  blanche  to  buy  the  best  things  for  me.  By- 
the-bye,  you  were  admiring  those  busts.  I  got 
them  at  Christie's,  quite  a  bargain.  They  be- 
longed to  the  Duke  of  Buckingham ;  they're 
from  Stow.  I  only  gave  three  guineas  each  for 
them ;  they're  worth  fifteen,  I'm  told.  Not  a 
bad  investment.  As  a  business  man,  I  pride 
myself  on  this,  that  not  a  single  article  in  my 
collection  but  would  sell  for  double  what  I  gave 
for  it.     It  is  not  every  one  who  could  say  that." 

"  I  certainly  couldn't,"  said  Mr.  Goodrick, 
drily  ;  "  but  then  I  don't  want  to  sell  again  what 
I  buy." 

''No  more  do  I,"  said  the  rich  connoisseur, 
rather  pompously  ;  "  oh  no  more  do  I.  I  am 
not  a  dealer  :  but  still,  it  is  pleasant  to  think  the 
value      there,  available  at  any  moment." 


288  THE   VICARS    COURTSHIP. 

The  Vicar  assented  to  so  much. 

"  In  such  times  of  great  commercial  ship- 
wrecks, no  precaution  is  useless." 

"  I  don't  know,"  said  Mr.  Harker,  rather  scorn- 
fully, "  that  the  precaution  of  keeping  a  few 
thousands  in  this  way  is  of  much  use,  if  no  other 
was  taken.  But  I  will  just  show  you  a  curious 
tray  here  of  Cingalese  cat's  eyes,  black  opals, 
star  stones,  very  rare  green  amethysts  and  fine 
white  sapphires." 

As  he  said  this,  Mr.  Harker  threw  open  a  large 
buhl  cabinet  and  took  out  an  ebony  drawer 
labelled  ''  India  and  Egypt." 

"  This  black  opal,"  he  said,  taking  a  jewel  from 
its  velvet  cell,  "is  from  Nubia.  It  has  the 
crimson  glow  of  a  ruby,  you  see,  and  looks  like  a 
small  bit  of  coal  red-hot  at  the  end." 

''  Yes,  I've  seen  them  before,"  said  Mr.  Good- 
rick,  coldly.  "This  is  not  so  good  as  I  have  seen; 
it  is  too  cloudy.  I  prefer,  for  my  own  taste,  this 
Brazilian  hyacinth;  the  orange  and  scarlet  are  very 
pure  in  it.  I  see  you  have  some  of  the  Oriental 
hyacinth,  the  honey  coloured,  but  this  bit  marked 
Oriental  is  only  rock-crystal  that  has  been  heated 
and  smoked.  The  Dutch  lapidaries  often  take  in 
the  English  dealers  in  that  way.  This  spangled 
topaz  is  fine,  but  they're  not  hard  to  get." 

Mr.  Harker  was  a  little   nettled  at  the  cold- 


THE   TAVO    CONNOISSEURS. 

ness  of  his  visitor.  He  had  felt  sure  of  dazzling 
him. 

"  My  collection  is  like  most  men's,"  he  said ; 
"  strong  in  some  points,  and  weak  in  others.  My 
emeralds  and  sapphires  I  pride  myself  most  on ; 
and  one  or  two  of  my  diamonds  which  are  histo- 
rical stones.  I  have  one  especially  that  Henry  the 
Eighth  used  to  Avear.  It  was  given  him  by  Francis 
the  Second  "  (Mr.  Barker's  historical  knowledge 
was  rather  shallow).  "  It  was  called  the  '  Phoenix.' 
This  blue  topaz,  too,  is  thought  fine  by  experienced 
judges!' 

Mr.  Harker  infused  the  slightest  possible  drop 
of  acid  into  these  two  last  words,  to  imply  a 
suspicion  of  his  visitor's  infallibility  ;  but  Mr. 
Goodrick  was  granite,  and  like  GalHo,  ''  cared  for 
none  of  these  thing-s."     He  seemed  omniscient. 

o 

''  It  is  pretty,"  he  said,  holding  the  gem  to  the 
light ;  "  but,  for  my  own  part,  I  prefer  the  red 
topaz,  which  is  perhaps  rarer.  This  beryl  is 
good.  Look,  Beauflower,  what  a  fine  green 
colour ;  it  would  look  better  by  candlelight. 
Hgw  curious,  too,  this  Cingalese  cat's  eye  is. 
Hold  it  to  the  window  and  you'll  see  coloured 
rays  issuing  from  a  central  point  and  extending 
to  the  edges." 

"  This  is  my  favourite  stone,"  said  Mr.  Harker, 
taking  a  jewel  from  a  large  central  drawer.     "It 


290  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

is  a  magnificent  sapphire,  nearly  as  large  as  Mr. 
Hope's  ;  it  is  not  however  like  his,  blue  by  day 
and  amethystine  by  night.  It  cost  me  one  hun- 
dred and  fifty  pounds,  and  is  worth  three  hun- 
dred." 

"  Yes,  a  fine  stone,"  said  Mr.  Goodrich,  coldly. 
"But  I  have  seen  such  sapphires  in  Eussia,  in  the 
Eegalia  room  at  the  Kremlin,  that  I  hardly  feel 
surprise  at  any  sapphire  of  moderate  size.  In 
the  Czar's  crown  there  there  are  blocks  of  sap- 
phire almost  as  large  as  pigeons'  eggs — mon- 
sters !  Yes,  that's  a  fine  stone.  It's  a  curious 
thing,  Beauflower,  about  this  Brazilian  topaz," — as 
he  said  this,  he  laid  down  the  sapphire  carelessly 
and  took  a  small  red  gem  from  an  open  drawer 
next  it. — "  You'd  take  this  for  a  ruby,  but  it  is 
only  a  Brazilian  topaz  that  has  been  heated  in  a 
crucible  of  hot  sand." 

''  I  always  called  that  a  Balass  ruby,  and 
I  think  you  must  be  mistaken  about  it.  I 
showed  it  last  week  to  one  of  Hunt  and  Eoskill's 
head  men,  who  was  down  here  with  some  jewels 
for  my  friend  the  Honourable  Mr.  Cantelupe, 
Lord  Mazagan's  nephew,  one  of  our  Wiltshire 
noblemen,  and  he  pronounced  it  a  remarkable 
specimen  of  the  Balass  ruby." 

"  Then  I  do  not  congratulate  Messrs.  Hunt  and 
Eoskill   on    their    young    man,"    Mr.    Goodrich 


THE   TWO    CONNOISSEURS.  291 

replied,  with  cutting  coolness  ;  "  for  I  have  myself 
seen  tlie  topaz  changed  to  this  colour.  They  do 
it  every  day  in  Amsterdam.  But  I'm  sorry  IVe 
undeceived  you." 

"  Oh,  I  would  rather  know  the  exact  nature  of 
any  gem  I  possess,"  said  Mr.  Harker,  with  an 
ill-aiFected  indifference,  that  was  as  vulgar  as  it 
was  badly  assumed. 

"  What  is  this  pretty  olive-green  stone  '?  "  said 
the  Yicar,  appealing  to  Mr.  Goodrick  as  the  un- 
disputed possessor  of  the  most  knowledge  on  the 
subject. 

"Oh,  that,"  said  Mr.  Goodrick,  smiling,  as  if  he 
had  found  an  old  friend,  "is  a  perido],  or 
oh^dne,  as  the  English  jewellers  call  it.  It  is 
found  sometimes  in  lava,  and  it  has  this  special 
merit,  that  it  is  the  only  precious  jewel  that  has 
ever  been  found  in  stones  that  have  fallen  from 
the  moon.  The  people  in  the  moon  don't  seem 
to  throw  away  their  diamonds  much." 

"  That  reminds  me,"  said  the  Vicar,  laughing 
(Mr.  Harker  refused  to  laugh ;  in  fact,  he  seldom 
laughed  at  anything) — i"  That  reminds  me  of 
Farmer  Brown,  the  other  day,  when  one  of  his 
shepherds  found  some  Eoman  coins  in  ploughing 
up  a  bit  of  Down  land  :  'How  them  Eoman 
chaps  seem  to  have  dropped  their  money  about,' 
he   said.     *  When  the  same  time  oroes  bv  a^ain, 


292  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

the  people  who  come  after  me  won't  find  many  of 
my  shillings/  " 

"  Ah !  those  were  the  Vespasians  you  gave 
me  ? ''  said  Mr.  Harker. 

"Yes." 

''  The  turquoise  is  a  curious  stone,  Beauflower/' 
said  Mr.  Goodrick,  assuming  that  the  owner 
knew  all  the  secrets  of  mineralogy  (though  he 
knew  few  or  none,  and  had  only  picked  up  his  col- 
lector s  jargon  from  the  jewellers  and  curiosity 
dealers). 

"  How  ?     It  looks  harmless  enough." 

''The  real  Persian  turkois  loses  its  pure  blue 
colour  if  kept  near  musk  or  camphor,  or  exposed 
much  to  the  fire.  They  imitate  the  stones  in  Paris 
by  dying  bits  of  fossil  ivory  blue.  These  imita- 
tions, however,  always  effervesce  when  tested  with 
acid.     This  is  a  genuine  one  and  a  fine  one." 

''  It  ought  to  be,  for  it  cost  me  twenty 
pounds,"  said  Mr.  Harker,  rather  angrily.  "  And 
now  I  will  show  you  my  imperial  jewel — my 
great  treasure ;  the  one  I  really  hold  to  be 
unique.  I  gave  three  hundred  pounds  for  it  to 
a  Hungarian  nobleman ;  and  it  is  said  to  have 
been  one  of  those  French  crown  jewels  stolen  in 
I7i:^2.  It  is  mentioned,  I  believe,  in  Bantums 
History." 

"  Brantome,"  quietly  suggested  Mr.  Goodrick. 


THE   TWO    CONNOISSEURS.  293 

''Yes,  Brantum.  It  is  a  rose-coloured  bril- 
liant." 

Mr.  Harker,  as  lie  said  this,  took  out  a  small 
key,  opened  a  special  drawer  in  the  very  centre 
of  the  cabinet,  and  took  out  a  small  blue 
silk  bag,  which  he  opened  with  religious  care, 
and  drew  out  a  very  fine  brilliant  that  flashed 
forth  prismatic  colours  as  he  drew  it  from  its 
hiding  place. 

"  There,"  said  he,  "  look  at  that— there  s  life ! " 

"  How  very  beautiful !  "  said  Mr.  Beauflower. 

"  Very  fine  ;  yes,  very  fine  !  "  said  Mr.  Good- 
rick,  after  a  long  and  careful  inspection.  And 
this  was  the  stone  Francis  the  First  ? ■' 

"  Francis  the  Second  gave  Henry.  Charles  the 
First's  queen  sold  it  to  Louis  the  Fourteenth." 

''Francis  gave  Henry  the  Eighth.  I  doubt 
that  part  of  its  history — very  much  doubt  it." 

"  Doubt  it !  why,  it  is  a  stone  mth  a  proved 
pedigree.  Pray,  sii^  as  you  seem  to  know  so 
much  on  the  subject,  may  I  ask  the  reason  of 
your  doubts  ?  I  think  you  will  find  it  difiicult 
to  controvert  the  opinion  of  men  like  Violet  le 
Due  and  Professor  Monson.  I  should  like 
extremely  to  hear  your  reasons  for  this  confident 
opinion  ? " 

The  great  collector  was  obviously  irritated. 
The  legend  of  this  pink  diamond — his  historical 


294  THE   vicar's   COURTSHIP. 

jewel — to  be  impugned,  and  by  a  mere  unkno\sTi 
amateur. 

Mr.  Beauflower  looked  rather  vexed  at  the 
scepticism  of  his  friend  and  the  obvious  annoy- 
ance of  Mr.  Harker.  For  a  moment,  too,  he  felt 
doubtful  of  the  depth  of  his  friend's  knowledge  ; 
he  seemed  too  anxious  to  depreciate. 

"  If  you  really  wish  my  reason,"  Mr.  Goodrick 
said,  with  the  most  cutting  calmness,  "  you  shall 
have  it.  It  may  appear  to  you  insufficient.  My 
reason  is  this  :  This  stone  is  a  brilliant ;  now 
brilliant-cutting  was  not  introduced  into  Europe 
tin  the  time  of  Cardinal  Mazarin " 

*'  Well,"  said  Mr.  Harker,  not  quite  clear  as  to 
how  the  dates  told  in  the  matter,  "  now  suppose 
Cardinal  Mazarin  gave  it  to  Francis  the  Second." 

"  That  could  hardly  be,  considering  that  Francis 
lived  about  a  hundred  years  earlier  than  Mazarin." 

"I  still,"  said  Mr.  Harker,  "can  hardly  imagine 
my  authorities  to  be  wrong.  But  as  you  criticise 
my  collection  with  such  severity,  I  will  not 
trouble  you  more,  but  close  it,  and  show  you  my 
pictures.  I  have  a  few  fine  Watteaus  and  some 
very  choice  Dutch  pictures,  chiefly  from  the  Beck- 
ford  Gallery,  a  Claude  or  two,  and  a  good  head 
by  Leonardi — a  very  sweet  thing." 

Mr.  Goodrick  bowed,  but  expressed  no  wish  to 
see  more  jewels. 


THE   FAMILY   PICTURES.  295 


CHAPTEE    XVIL 

THE   FAMILY    PICTURES. 

"I  AM  afraid,  Mr.  Harker/'  said  Beauflower, 
"that  we  must  leave  the  pictures  for  some 
other  day.  I  promised  to  be  at  Fontford  at 
half-past  four.  Poor  Mrs.  Chetwynd  wants  to 
consult  me  about  the  dilapidations  :  the  surveyor 
for  the  new  incumbent  has  brought  in  a  ruinous 
bill.  Poor  woman,  she  doesn  t  know  what  to 
do.     It  will  beo^o^ar  her.'' 

"How  foohsh  of  her  husband  letting  the  other 
people  off  when  he  came  in — utterly  unbusiness 
like — but  all  you  clergymen  are  poor  men  of  busi- 
ness." (There  was  no  excess  of  human  sympathy 
about  the  parvenu.)  "Well,  gentlemen,  as  you 
will.  Come  any  morning  and  look  about  as  you 
like  ;  I  have  to  thank  Mr.  Goodrick  for  a  most 
valuable  lecture  on  precious  stones." 

Mr.  Goodrick  bowed  ;  the  sarcasm  had  re- 
bounded from  him  as  a  bullet  from  an  alligator. 

"  We  shall  hope  to  have  the  pleasure  of  seeing 


296  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

you  at  dinner,  soon.  We  are  expecting  friends. 
Mr.  Bodger,  the  royal  academician,  is  coming 
down  to  advise  me  about  the  decorating  a  room 
that  I  \Yant  done,  and  a  ceiling  or  two  I  think 
of  having  painted  with  Eubens  subjects." 

As  Mr.  Harker  turned  to  lock  his  cabinet,  Mr. 
Goodrick  whispered  to  the  Vicar,  "  Ask  about 
the  family  pictures  he  promised  to  show  us." 

*'  Perhaps  before  we  go,"  said  Mr.  Beauflower, 
instantly,  as  Mr.  Harker  turned,  "  you  would 
allow  us  to  see  those  family  pictures  I  spoke 
about  ^ " 

''  Oh,  certainly.  I'll  ring  for  Koberts  and  send 
him  to  the  housekeeper." 

Just  then  Ethel  raced  past  the  door  singing 
"The  Three  Fishers."  Her  father  opened  the 
door  and  called  her. 

"  Ethel,  darling,"  he  said. 

Ethel  came  in  carrying  two  white  plates. 

"  I've  been  for  two  plates,"  she  said  ;  "  Amy  is 
giving  me  a  lesson  in  water  colours." 

"  I  told  you  not  to  call  Miss  Eobinson  Amy, 
Ethel ;  you  must  remember  she  is  only  a  governess. 
Shake  hands  with  Mr.  Beauflower." 

Ethel  tossed  her  golden  hair  and  shook  hands, 
a  little  shily,  with  the  visitor,  whom  she  liked. 

"  Kun,  dear,"  her  father  said,  "to  Mrs.  Spelman 
and  ask  her  to  send  some  one  down  with  those 


THE   FAMILY   PICTURES.  297 

two  old  pictures  that  used  to  be  in  one  of  the 
spare  rooms.'^ 

Ethel  looked  surprised,  but  instantly  raced  off 
to  carry  the  message. 

She  had  scarcely  left  before  Eoberts  knocked 
at  the  door,  opened  it,  and  said, — ■ 

"  If  you  please,  sir,  the  keeper's  here  with  the 
police  constable  from  Shaftesbury.  They've 
brought  the  men  for  examination." 

"  Tell  them  I  will  come  directly.  Take  them 
into  my  study.  You'll  excuse  me,  I'm  sure, 
gentlemen.  My  men  have  caught  two  of  those 
Shaftesbury  poachers  that  have  been  troubling  us 
so  long,  and  I  have  to  take  the  depositions. 
Pray  stay  here  and  look  about  as  long  as  you 
like.     Eoberts  will  be  down  directly." 

"  Pray  don't  let  us  keep  you  a  moment,"  said 
the  Vicar,  and  Mr.  Goodrick  also  bowed,  but  was 
silent. 

As  the  door  closed  upon  the  odious  product  of 
new  money,  the  Vicar  said  to  his  friend, — 

"  So,  you  see,  the  man  has  some  respect  for 
his  predecessors.  He  has  some  regard,  however 
faint,  for  the  man  who  cast  off  his  son  and  left 
him  all  his  wealth." 

"  He  has  no  real  knowledge  of  jewels,  and  that 
is  why  I  grew  insolently  pedantic.  No;  I  have 
no  belief  in  the  man,"  said  Mr.  Goodrick,  rousing 


298  THE    VTCAe's    courtship. 

from  a  reverie  ;  "  lie  is  a  concrete  of  selfisliness 
and  vanity.  He  is  capable  of  all  baseness — look 
at  bis  steely  eyes,  bis  bard  moiitb,  and  bis  stony 
jaw — no — expect  notbing  good  from  tbat  man." 

"  I  don't  like  liim,  but  I  am  not  quite  so 
wbolesale  in  my  condemnation  as  tbat.  He 
seems  a  good  fatber,  and  be  is  just  in  business 
matters." 

"  Get  in  bis  grip,  and  try  bis  justice.  No  ; 
tbat  man  is  inexorable,  or  I  know  notbing  of 
pbysiognomy.'' 

''  For  wbo  can  read  tbe  mind's  construction  in 
tbe  face  ?  " 

"  Bab  !  Sbakspeare  could  be  a  fool  sometimes, 
bke  tbe  rest  of  us — besides  be  lived  before 
Lavater.  If  tbis  detestable  man  turns  out  a 
Howard  or  a  Peabody,  tben  cast  it  in  my  teetb, 
and  I  will  renounce  all  attempt  to  find  God's  like- 
ness in  man's  face.  Tbe  Devil's  features  I  know 
well  enougb ;  bis  facsimile  is  common  in  every 
lane  and  street.  Ugb.  But  bere  come  tbe 
pictures." 

Tbe  door  opened  and  in  came  two  footmen, 
directed  b}^  tbe  butler,  eacb  carrying  a  large 
picture,  tbree-c[uarter  size.  "  Tbey're  ratber 
dusty,  sir,"  said  tbe  butler,  as  be  ordered  tbem 
to  be  placed  against  tbe  wall ;  "  but  tbey  baven't 
been   well   treated.      Tbey   used    to   be   in   tbe 


THE   FAMILY    PICTURES.  ^99 

laundry,  and  Miss  Ethel  and  her  playmates  have 
been  playing  their  games  with  them." 

They  were  two  large  pictures  of  the  Lawrence 
school,  dating  back  by  the  costume  to  about  1810. 
They  had  been  injured  by  damp,  and  the  frames 
were  chipped  and  broken.  The  one  picture,  that 
of  Mr.  Staunton,  represented  a  handsome  man 
with  bold  Eoman  features,  and  rather  past  the 
prime  of  life.  It  was  a  proud  austere  face  of 
great  intelligence,  but  turbid  with  suppressed 
passion,  the  eyes  especially  threatening  and  fiery. 

His  costume  was  a  blue  coat  and  brass  buttons, 
and  he  wore  the  bolster  neckcloth  of  the  period. 
The  other  portrait  was  that  of  a  very  handsome, 
dark-haired  woman,  with  a  proud,  but  very  sweet 
expression  about  the  eyes.  She  wore  a  white 
short-waisted  satin  dress,  and  her  arms  were  bare, 
according  to  the  fashion  of  1810.  Both  pictures 
were  spotted  with  damp,  and  pierced  with  arrow- 
holes  as  if  children  had  been  allowed  to  shoot 
at  them  for  amusement.  The  corner  of  the 
second  one  had  come  off  the  stretchers  and  hung 
flapping  over  the  face,  so  that  Mr.  Goodrick  had 
to  lift  it  before  he  could  see  the  beautiful  coun- 
tenance it  concealed. 

Mr.  Goodrick  did  not  utter  a  word,  but  sighed 
heavily  and  stooped  down,  and  then,  kneeling  on 
one  knee,  to  look  closer  at  the  faces,  studied  them, 


300  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

as  if  he  never  could  be  satiated.  The  Vicar, 
standing  behind  them,  looked  at  them  with  a 
lesser  interest  as  the  servants  retired. 

"  So  these  are  my  friend's  father  and  mother," 
said  Mr.  Goodrick.  "  Good  God !  if  Staunton 
had  seen  them  like  this  the  sight  would  have 
killed  him.  Here  is  a  race  not  only  forgotten 
but  despised.  How  cold  and  stern  this  face  is  : 
yet  what  a  grand  expanse  of  brow,  and  what  a 
loving,  tender  face  this  of  the  lady.  No  Avonder 
Staunton  used  to  speak  of  her  with  such  passionate 
affection.  Staunton  was  always  a  man  of  intense 
feeling." 

"  Yes,  it  is  a  face  to  love  :  but  the  father's  face 
seems  to  me  petrified  with  pride.  A  hundred 
thousand  a  year,  and  a  million  of  ready  money 
on  coming  of  age,  is  enough  to  spoil  any  man. 
He  quarrelled  with  all  the  county,  cast  off  his  son, 
and  shut  himself  out  from  the  Avorld.  If  that  wife 
had  lived  he  would  have  been  very  different.  Ah  ! 
you  see  more  in  pictures  than  I  can.  It  is  a  plea- 
sm^e  I  wish  I  shared — they're  well  painted." 

As  the  Vicar  said  this,  he  dropped  himself  into 
an  arm  chair,  and  took  up  a  volume  of  the  Fairy 
Queen  that  lay  on  the  table.  A  pink  and  a  blue 
ribbon  between  the  pages  showed  that  probably 
Ethel,  or  some  lady  visitor,  had  been  reading  the 
book.     The  Vicar,    a   great   reader,    opened   the 


THE  fa:^iily  pictures.  30] 

wonderful   fragment  at   the   fine   passage  where 
Una  wanders  in  the  forest. 

"  One  day,  nigh  wearie  of  the  vrksome  way, 
From  her  unhastie  beast  she  did  alight 
And  on  the  grass  her  dainty  limbs  did  lay. 
In  secret  shadow  far  from  all  men's  sight 
From  her  f  ayre  head  her  fillet  she  nndight, 
And  layd  her  stole  aside.     Her  angel's  face 
As  the  great  eye  of  heaven  shyned  bright, 
And  made  a  sunshine  in  a  shady  place." 

Then,  an  involuntary  thought  came  into  the 
reader  s  mind  of  Amy  Eobinson,  as  he  had  seen 
her  when  seated  on  the  stone  step  by  the  lake. 

The  Vicar  turned  to  the  besfinning;  of  the  book. 
There  was  the  Staunton  crest,  "  an  eagle  with  a 
snake  in  its  month,"  and  the  motto,  "  Sooner  or 
later."  The  Harker  crest  was  a  sheaf  of  corn, 
a  snake  twining  round  it,  with  a  bird  in  its  mouth, 
and  the  motto,  "  Laboro  et  oro." 

The  Vicar  turning  round  to  direct  Mr.  Good- 
rick's  attention  to  the  Staunton  motto  was 
alarmed  to  see  him  turned  very  pale,  and  with  a 
cold  dew  rising;  on  his  forehead. 

"  Are  you  not  well  ?  " 

"  No  ;  it  is  that  old  feeling  again.  I  think  the 
room  is  too  hot.  Take  me  into  the  open  air — your 
arm — thank  you — I  shall  be  better  in  a  moment." 

*'  Shall  I  ring;  to  ask  for  a  grlass  of  wine  ? " 

"  No,  no;  ring  to  show  them  we're  gone,  that's 


802  THE   VICAe's    courtship. 

all.  Let  me  get  out  of  this  room.  My  pulse 
lias  almost  stopped — now  it  beats  a  little  faster — 
come— I  am  afraid  I  sliall  faint  again.'' 

Once  in  the  open  air,  Mr.  Goodrick  soon  re- 
vived ;  his  colour  came  again,  he  walked  erect 
and  firm. 

"  Now  I  feel  better/'  he  said,  in  reply  to  his 
friend's  anxious  inquiries.  "  I  never  could  bear  a 
close  room,  though  I  have  been  half  my  life  in 
Cuba.  Didn't  that  man  say  he  was  going  to 
examine  some  poachers  ?  " 

"  Yes  ;  it  is  the  old  stoiy  : — 

'  The  forest  laws  were  sharp  and  stern, 
The  forest  blood  was  keen, 
They  lashed  together  for  life  and  death 
Beneath  the  hollies  g^reen. 

*  They  wrestled  up,  they  wrestled  down, 
They  wrestled  still  and  sore. 
Beneath  their  feet  the  myrtle  sweet, 
Was  stamped  to  mud  and  gore.' 

They  tell  me  one  of  the  keepers  is  nearly 
killed,  and  they've  broken  one  of  the  poachers' 
arms,  a  bad  fellow  who  lives  at  Swallowcliff, 
and  who's  been  in  trouble  before." 

"  How  can  you  wonder  at  it.  There  are  men 
here  living  on  twelve  shillings,  who  have  perhaps  a 
sick  wife,  a  mother  and  five  children.  Taste 
meat  once  a  month,  work  twelve  hours  a  day  in 
the  cold  and  wet  on  adulterated  bread,  kitchen 


THE   FAMILY    PICTURES.  303 

fat,  and  tea.  All  round  tlieir  feet  every  day  they 
see  fat  hares  and  countless  rabbits  and  pheasants 
worth  five  or  six  shillings  each.  What's  the 
result — the  good  fools  and  the  patient  serfs  every 
now  and  then  turn  poachers,  and  they  buy  drink 
— a  day's  forgetfulness  and  a  dream  of  something 
better — with  the  stolen  game — oh!  these  country 
gentlemen  of  yours — they  will  pay  for  it  some  day. 
Fast  and  savagely,  or  slow  and  contemptuously, 
their  punishment  will  come.  They  have  cen- 
turies of  neglect  to  answer ;  centuries  of  dead 
minds  and  miserable  hopeless  lives.  Oh !  they  will 
pay — the  account  still  runs." 

"  But  there  are  many  good,  and  wise,  and 
true.  I  am  a  Liberal  to  the  back  bone — but  you, 
you  are  a  Eevolutionist." 

"  Not  I.  I  value  \Vliig  and  Tory  alike.  I  see 
what  is  going  on  in  this  England  ;  it  is  one  vast 
struggle  to  get  wealth,  or  power,  and  to  keep  it.  It 
is  only  the  man  without  either  who  cries  out — 
you  clergymen  pander  to  the  gentry,  you  daren't 
tell  them  their  faults.  Your  sympathies  are  with 
them  ;  you  both  join  against  the  poor — Ugh. 
Some  famine  winter  you'll  see  that  there  is  a  limit 
to  patience.     The  old  volcanoes  only  slumber." 

"  You  take  too  gloomy  a  ^dew,  our  Wiltshire 
poor  thrive  even  on  these  small  wages.  Labourers 
are  not  too  numerous,  and  work  is  constant.     Any 


304  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

child  of  talent  is  discovered  at  tlie  school,  and 
passes  on  to  better  things." 

"  Pshaw  ! — to  bird  minding  and  turning  ma- 
nure heaps ;  why,  the  children  leave  school  at 
ten  or  eleven.  —  Don't  tell  me  —  you  don't  see 
these  evils — you  are  too  near  them.  You're  a 
worthy  fellow,  it's  only  the  system  I  blame.  I 
see  in  the  English  labourer  a  hopeless,  degraded 
helot,  debarred  from  all  that  can  help  him  to 
escape  from  his  degradation.  Pent  in  unwhole- 
some and  demoralising  houses,  with  no  amuse- 
ments, no  music  like  the  German,  no  dance  like 
the  French,  no  war  like  the  savage,  no  vote  like  the 
American,  no  skating  like  the  Dutch,  regarded  by 
his  landlord  as  a  beast  of  burden,  neither  loved 
nor  loving ;  his  youth  a  ceasel^fes  toil,  low  debauch 
in  his  middle  age,  toil  and  struggle  in  his  old 
age,  penury  at  last,  and  a  death  in  a  workhouse. 
This  is  your  free  and  glorious  country !  your 
immortal  constitution !  this  is  your  Protestantism 
and  your  Christianity  !  Bah ! — England  is  a 
bladder,  and  time  will  prick  it.  The  ^progression 
of  the  age,  and  the  permanency  of  these  evils, 
must  meet  one  day,  and  then  it  will  be  the 
meeting  of  fire  and  paraffin." 

The  Vicar  was  about  to  answer  these  gloomy 
and  cynical  views,  when  a  gig  drove  past  them. 
They  had  just  reached  the  high  road  that  bordered 


THE   FAMILY   PICTURES.  305 

the  Park.  Dr.  Briscoe  was  in  the  gig,  his  head 
doT\m  to  the  fresh  wind,  and  choleric  and  good- 
natured  as  ever.  He  greeted  the  Yicar  heartily 
(Beauflower  being  an  especial  favourite  of  his), 
and  bowed  to  Mr.  Goodrick. 

"  We  shall  soon  have  the  pleasure  of  calling  you 
neighbour,"  said  the  doctor  ;  "I  hope  you  won t 
find  the  house  at  Fontford  damp — it  used  to  be 
so.  Just  come  from  seeing  the  rascal  that's 
been  hurt." 

*'  Not  seriously  hurt,  I  hope,"  said  the  Vicar. 
"  It's  Davison  ?  " 

*'  Yes ;  well,  he's  got  a  severe  concussion,  and 
the  left  malar  bone  broken — those  gun  stocks  are 
very  hard.     It'll  cure  the  dog  of  poaching." 

"  And  the  keeper,  which  is  it "? — is  it  the  red 
haired  fellow  ?  " 

"It's  young  Hacker,  the  good-looking  lad — 
he's  got  two  fingers  shot  ofi",  and  his  collar  bone 
put  out.  One  of  the  infernal  poachers  had  a 
flail  in  his  pocket,  and  he  used  it,  too.  They  say 
it  was  that  vagabond  Paddy  Blake  told  them  of 
the  keepers  when  they  were  watching  for  them 
on  the  Terraces,  last  Friday.  Good-bye,  I  must 
be  off ;  that  old  fellow  at  Purtwood's  had  another 
fit  of  the  gout,  I  told  him  he'd  have  one  if  he 
went  to  the  farmer's  dinner,  and  drank  too  much. 
He'll  have  one  once  too  often.     Good-bye — you'll 

VOL.    I.  X 


306  THE   VICAH'S    COURTSHIP. 

be  at  this  arcliery  arrangement  ?  Eemember  me 
at  tome.  Good-bye,  Mr.  Goodrick.  Now  then, 
Beauty." 

Beauty  was  the  doctor's  mare ;  the  best  trotter 
that  side  of  the  county. 

"  That's  a  sterling  good  fellow,"  said  the  Vicar, 
but  he's  impetuous  and  doesn't  like  contradiction." 

"  Not  many  of  us  like  it.  We  all  go  well  in  a 
fair  wind.  But  come,  tell  me  the  story  of  my 
friend  Staunton,  that  you  promised.  Why  did 
his  father  cast  him  off  so  remorselessly  ?  He 
would  tell  me  his  story." 

"  I  cannot  tell  you  much,  as  it  happened  before 
I  was  born,  and  my  father,  who  was  fond  of  the 
Stauntons,  did  not  like  to  talk  of  it.  In  fact,  there 
was,  I  believe,  always  a  mystery  about  the 
matter.  The  story  is,  I  believe,  this.  The  son, 
just  fresh  from  Oxford,  a  fine,  generous,  clever 
fellow,  and  the  idol  of  his  father,  fell  in  love  with 
a  pretty,  innocent  girl,  the  daughter  of  a  poor 
Devonshire  curate,  named  Wilson,  who  had  come 
to  Fontford  to  do  temporary  duty  for  the  father 
of  the  very  clergyman  who  has  just  died  at  Bird- 
brook.  There  were  two  sisters,  but  the  youngest 
was  a  child  and  was  at  school  in  London.  The 
Wilsons  lived  then  at  a  large  old  house,  now  a 
farm  house,  that  you  will  see  on  the  right  hand 
going   to   Fontford.     The   father   suspected   the 


THE   FAMILY   PICTURES.  307 

danger,  and  forbade  the  son's  visits.  The  end 
was,  they  eloped  and  went  to  Paris  ;  the  father, 
kept  in  constant  irritation,  it  was  said,  by  the 
machinations  of  the  father  of  that  very  Mr.  Harker 
you  just  saw,  at  once  altered  his  will,  and  swore 
never  again  to  see  his  son.  The  son,  urged  by  his 
friends,  left  his  ^yife  in  Paris,  and  went  to  Jamaica 
to  some  family  friends,  to  enter  a  counting-house 
there.  Ten  months  after  he  left,  the  mfe  died. 
The  son  corresponded  for  a  long  time  with  his 
Wiltshire  friends  through  the  son  of  his  father  s 
Steward,  the  man  you  just  saw,  his  great  con- 
fidant, but  after  four  or  five  years,  a  coolness 
arose  between  them,  and  no  more  was  heard  of 
him — four  years  after  he  was  drowned  while  on 
his  voyage  to  New  Orleans.  Gradually  this  young 
Harker  became  indispensable  to  Mr.  Staun- 
ton, who  had  shut  himself  up  and  renounced  all 
county  society,  become,  in  fact,  a  sordid  miser 
and  misanthrope,  and  as  some  said,  an  epicure 
and  shameless  voluptuary.  He  spent  money, 
however,  largely  on  china,  pictures,  ivories,  and 
enamels.  He  lived  only  for  that ; — this  young 
man,  who  had  been  in  a  large  curiosity  shop  in 
London,  and  had  married  the  handsome  dauo^hter 
of  a  rich*  upholsterer  in  Tottenham  Court  Eoad, 
travelled  for  him,  collectino:  rarities,  bouo;ht  and 
exchanged  for  him,  became,  in  fact,  his  steward, 

X  2 


308  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

agent,  librarian,  curator,  and  secretary.  Tlie  old 
man  announced  openly  to  the  people  round  him 
his  intention  of  making  him  his  heir.  He  did  so, 
and  on  the  old  man's  death  in  1844,  Mr.  Harker 
succeeded  to  all  his  wealth,  personal  and  other- 
wise. Some  second  cousin  of  the  Stauntons  in 
Devonshire  disputed  the  will,  but  it  came  to 
nothing.     You  see  those  posts  there  ?  " 

The  Vicar  pointed  to  some  low  stone  posts,  on 
both  sides  of  the  road  leading  to  the  lodge  where 
Travers  lived. 

*'Well,  the  people  about  here  say  that  old 
Staunton  could  have  put  a  bag  with  a  thousand 
pounds  of  gold  on  each  of  those.  He  was  a  most 
accomplished  man,  I  beheve.  He  had  learnt 
music  from  Mozart,  architecture  from  Sir  W.  Cham- 
bers, and  he  was  a  good  linguist  and  a  traveller. 
His  father  had  been  a  great  West  Indian  merchant, 
and  I've  heard  that,  when  he  was  at  Lausanne, 
he  bought  Gibbon's  library  and  read  tiU  he 
was  nearly  blind.  He  was  a  man  of  impetuous 
passions,  and  never  forgave  the  county  for  throw- 
ing him  out  for  Bibury.  After  that,  and  his  son's 
elopement,  he  never  went  beyond  his  own  park 
walls.  He  made  seven  miles  of  drive  along  those 
terraces  up  there,  and  was  seen  by  no  one  but  the 
keepers  and  the  gardeners.  Poor  man !  That  was 
the  happiness  a  million  of  money  bought  him." 


THE   FAMILY   PICTURES.  309 

"  Poor  old  man,"  said  Mr.  Goodrick,  thouglit- 
fully;  "and  did  he  renounce  all  his  Wiltshire 
friends  ? " 

"Eenounced  them,  or  ^vas  renounced,  for 
people  who  wanted  to  prey  on  him,  spread  mys- 
terious reports  of  his  excesses,  and  at  last  he  was 
avoided  by  every  one,  except,  as  I  have  heard  my 
father  say,  by  three  families — the  Cantelupes — 
our  own  family,  and  Farmer  Brown  s  father,  in 
whom  Mr.  Staunton  delighted,  and  from  whom 
he  got  all  his  news  ;  that  was  his  circle." 

"  What  a  life  ;  what  a  terrible  self-banishment! 
Poor  man  ! " 

"  Some  said  he  voluntarily  led  it  in  expiation 
of  his  cruelty  to  his  son — others  said  his  mind 
was  gone  ever  since  his  wife  died — she  was 
beloved  by  every  one ;  she  died  two  years  after 
young  Staunton  left.  But  I'm  tiring  you  with 
my  story,  and  there  is  my  mother  and  Julia 
coming  for  us." 

"  You've  not  tired  me,"  said  Mr.  Goodrick,  "  I 
like  to  hear  about  my  old  friend's  family." 

"Poor  fellow,"  said  the  Vicar,  "if  he  did  sin 
against  his  father  he  paid  bitterly  for  the  offence, 
and  if  his  father  showed  him  no  mercy,  he,  too, 
lived  in  a  frightful  purgatory  of  his  own  creating. 
No  Hell  can  be  so  terrible  as  the  Hell  some  of  us 
carry  w^ithin  our  own  hearts." 


810  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

Julia  looked  very  liealtliy  and  pretty,  flushed 
with  walking. 

"  Oh  dear,"  she  said,  ''  such  a  dreadful  thing, 
Wasp  and  the  cat  have  been  fighting." 

"  And  George  (the  clerk)  has  been  for  the  keys 
of  the  church,"  said  Mrs.  Beauflower. 

"  I  hope  Mr.  Goodrich  has  enjoyed  his  walk  ?  " 

Mr.  Goodrick  said  he  had,  and  ofiered  Mrs. 
Beauflower  his  arm. 

"  And  Ned,"  said  Julia,  tripping  by  the  side  of 
her  brother,  "Amy  has  been,  and  I  could  not 
remember  that  beautiful  verse  of  Kingsley's  you 
told  me." 

The  Vicar  repeated  them  : — 

"  Be  good,  sweet  maid,  and  let  who  will  be  clever, 
Do  noble  things,  not  dream  them,  all  day  long, 
And  so  make  life,  death,  and  that  vast  for  ever, 
One  grand  sweet  song." 

*'  Yes,  that's  it — how  beautiful  it  is,  isn't  it — 
now  you  must  praise  that,  you  despiser  of 
modern  things." 

"  I  don't  care  for  modern  poetry.  Miss  Beau- 
flower," answered  the  inexorable,  "  any  more 
than  I  do  for  modern  statuary,  enamels,  or 
china.  My  poets  are  Dryden,  Po23e,  and  Church- 
ill. I  want  human  nature,  satire,  and  epigram 
in  verse,  not  sermons  and  landscapes." 

*'  You  are  hopeless." 


THE   FAMILY    PICTURES.  311 

"My    dear    Julia!"    said     Mrs.    Beauflower, 
solemnly  and  reprovingly. 

"I  do  believe  he  even  would  dislike  Aurora 
Leis^h  ?  "  said  Julia  Beauflower. 

"  Never  heard  even  of  the  lady's  name,"  said 
Mr.  Goodrick. 

"  You  mustn't  think,  Mr.  Goodrick,"  said  Miss 
Beauflower,  "  that  I  pretend  to  much  poetry. 
My  nature  is  strictly  practical — I'm  to  marry  a 
doctor  and  roll  out  pills,  mamma  says.  It  is 
Amy  is  the  poet." 

"Julia,  don't  be  absurd,"  said  the  matter-of- 
fact  JMrs.  Beauflower. 

"Oh,  you'n  never  marry,  Julia,"  said  her  brother, 
laughingly,  and  putting  his  hand  on  her  shoulder, 
"you're  so  saucy,  you  frighten  all  your  lovers 
away.'' 

"  You  mustn't  listen  to  all  the  nonsense  this 
scatterbrain  girl  of  mine  talks,  Mr.  Goodrick," 
said  Mrs.  Beauflower,  deprecatingly,  "she  has 
such  high  spirits,  and  she  is  so  very  fliighty." 


312  THE   YICAE's   courtship. 


CHAPTEK  XVIII. 

THE   DEAD   WITNESS. 

Mr.  Harker  discovered  so  many  flaws  in  the 
account  books  of  his  head  keeper,  that  within  a 
week  after  the  letter  from  the  poulterer  he  had  told 
him  privately  that  he  should  dismiss  him  Avithin 
three  months  from  that  time.  He  did  not  wish 
any  open  scandal.  He  made  a  point  of  speaking 
to  him  as  usual  when  he  met  him  in  the  park,  or 
in  the  road,  he  treated  him  with  the  old  famili- 
arity, and  even  gave  him  formal  audiences  at  the 
same  hour.  The  village  was  deceived  and  thought 
Travers  secure,  but  all  this  was  done  merely  to 
prevent  the  public  talk,  and  arose  from  a  cruel 
desire  to  make  the  downfall  more  sudden  and 
more  felt.  The  man  was  to  expiate  his  fraud  by 
having  the  sword  of  Damocles  hanging  above  his 
head  for  three  long  months. 

Mr.  Harker  had  two  motives  in  this, — one  to 
inflict  a  retributive  torture,  the  second  to  hold 
out  a  warning  to  all  future  servants  who  should 


THE    DEAD    WITNESS.  31o 

peculate ;  but  lie  did  not  know  the  stubborn 
tenacity  of  the  man  with  whom  he  had  to  deal, 
his  desperation  when  at  bay,  nor,  above  all,  had 
he  any  forewarning  that  any  real  resistance  was 
possible  in  a  man  whom  he  held  beneath  his 
foot. 

It  was  two  days  after  the  visit  of  ]\Ir.  Goodrick, 
that  Mr.  Harker  s  barouche  drew  up  at  the  door 
of  the  Abbey.  A  great  call  on  Lord  and  Lady 
Mazagan  had  been  planned  by  ^hs.  Harker  and, 
lunch  being  just  over,  the  carriage  awaited  the 
party.  Mrs.  Harker  and  Miss  Harker  were  already 
in  the  carriage,  tucked  in ;  parasols,  card  cases, 
foot- warmers  and  all  complete.  Mr.  Harker  was 
still  delaying,  one  of  the  gardeners  had  just 
brought  him  some  message  from  the  callage. 

"  Is  Mr.  Harker  not  ready  ? "  said  Mrs. 
Harker  rather  loudly  and  acidly  from  the  car- 
riage; "PhilHps,  tell  Mr.  Harker  we  are  waiting." 

Phillips,  a  smart  young  fellow,  was  half  way 
across  the  hall  when  he  met  Mr.  Harker  and 
delivered  his  message. 

"  Tell  your  mistress  that  I  am  unable  to  go, 
some  business  detains  me ;  but  stop,  I'll  go  and 
teU  her  myself.  My  dear,"  he  said,  stepping  out 
to  the  carriage,  "  I  cannot  go  with  you  to  the 
Castle." 

"  Not  go,  papa  1  "  said  Miss  Harker. 


'6l4i  THE   vicar's    COURTSHIP. 

"  Not  go  !  and  why  not  ?  "  said  Mrs.  Harker. 

"  Green  the  gardener  has  just  told  me  the 
keeper's  mother  is  dying.  I  think  it  is  right  I 
should  go  and  see  her ;  you  must  remember 
her  husband  was  a  very  old  servant  of  my 
father's." 

*'I  don't  see  the  necessity,"  said  the  amiable 
Mrs.  Harker,  "  the  clerg}Tnan  and  doctor  will  be 
with  her,  that  is  quite  enough.  It  will  make  pur 
visit  far  less  complimentary,  and  you  know  Lord 
Mazagan's  influence  in  the  county." 

"  You  must  make  my  apologies,"  said  Mr. 
Harker,  looking  down  at  the  white  door  step,  and 
tapping  it  with  his  gold  mounted  pimento  stick ; 
"it  is  most  important  that  I  should  see  this  dying 
woman.  Coachman,  you  may  drive  on, — good- 
bye. Carry,  you  look  charming  in  that  new 
bonnet." 

Without  one  look  at  the  receding  carriage,  Mr. 
Harker  instantly  made  his  way  to  the  cottage  of 
the  keeper's  mother.  If  philanthropy  was  his  sole 
object,  and  not  inward  fear  or  curiosity,  he  must 
have  been  a  perfect  Wilberforce,  for  he  strode 
on  as  if  Death  would  fly  at  his  presence.  The 
great  Inigo  Jones  archway  re-echoed  with  his 
quick  steps,  and  some  pigeons  feeding  at  the 
keeper's  window  flew  off  in  dismay  at  his 
approach.     The  dogs  chained  in  by  the  keeper's 


THE    DEAD    WITNESS.  315 

sheds  started  out  of  their  kennels  wildly  at  his 
approach,  shook  their  chains,  and  tried  to  get 
loose  to  follow  him. 

Some  children  on  the  little  bridge  letting  down 
a  string  and  a  stone  over  the  arch,  stopped  their 
researches  and  pulled  their  forelocks  at  the 
Squire's  approach.  The  village  was  quite  empty  ; 
the  men  were  all  away  at  labour,  on  the  dowTi 
tending  sheep,  or  in  the  fields  ploughing.  The 
school  was  hard  at  work  and  buzzing  like  a 
restless  hive.  George,  Mr.  Beauflower's  gardener, 
was  busy  sawing  wood  at  the  stable  door  in  the 
glebe  field,  which  was  bordered  by  the  church- 
yard wall.  The  gunmaker  was  not  at  his  window, 
nor  the  netmaker  at  his  door. 

Fifty  yards  up  the  village  street  brought  Mr. 
Harker  to  the  gate  of  the  little  garden,  back  in 
which  lay  the  small  cottage  of  the  dying  woman. 
It  was  a  plain  stone  cottage,  with  two  windows 
above  and  two  below.  Smoke  was  rising,  but  only 
from  one  chimney.  The  geraniums  in  the  garden 
were  already  blackened  with  the  frost,  and  nothing- 
showed  any  signs  of  fife  but  a  little  holly  tree, 
crimson  with  sealing-wax  berries  abeady  glowing 
at  the  thought  of  Christmas.  The  door  stood 
ajar,  Mr.  Harker  pushed  it  open  and  entered. 
There  was  no  one  there ;  a  drowsy  cat  was  the 
only  living  thing,  and  the  cat  was  sleeping  rolled 


316  THE    VICAe's    COUETSHTP. 

up  in  a  heap  by  the  side  of  some  smoking  wood 
ashes  on  the  hearth,  in  the  centre  of  one  of  those 
huge  caverns  of  a  fire-place  common  in  Wiltshire 
cottages. 

A  yellow  faced  clock,  toned  by  the  smoke  of 
generations  of  fires,  was  pulsing  on  mechanically 
like  the  breathing  of  a  human  being.  The  plates 
on  the  dresser  rack  were  undisturbed  ;  there  was 
no  meal  preparing. 

Mr.  Harker  knocked — called,  but,  no  one 
answering,  he  opened  the  door  of  the  staircase, 
and  went  slowly  up  the  dark  steep  stairs  that 
opened  at  once  into  the  bedroom.  There,  in  a  bed 
without  curtains  or  head,  lay  the  dying  woman 
with  her  face  turned  to  the  wall;  she  was  asleep, 
and  by  the  side  of  her  bed  nodded  the  palsied  deaf 
old  neighbour  who  acted  as  her  nurse.  It  was  the 
dying  watching  the  dying. 

"  How  is  she,  Mrs.  Payne  ? "  he  asked. 

"Martal  bad,  sir,  to  be  zure,  martal  bad,  all 
over  aches,  and  not  long  for  this  world ;  we  heard 
the  death  watch  all  last  night,  and  there  was  a 
screech  owl  at  half  past  dree  out  in  the  firs  by 
Farmer  Brown's.     Shall  I  wake  her  ? " 

"  No,  don't  wake  her  ;  has  she  expressed  any 
desire  to  see  me  ? " 

*'  Yes,  twice  yesterday ;  Mr.  Travers  said  he'd 
tell  you." 


THE    DEAD    WITNESS.  317 

"He  never  told  mo.  He  said  yesterday  slie  was 
much  the  same.  It  was  Dr.  Briscoe  told  me  she 
was  near  her  end." 

"  Do  let  me  wake  her.  She  said  she  must  see 
you.  Ah  sir,  it's  hard  work,  at  my  age,  answering 
all  her  fancies." 

''  How  long,  Mrs.  Pa}Tie,  since  Dr.  Briscoe  was 
here  ? " 

"Three  weeks  come  Wednesday."  The  old 
crone's  answers  could  hardly  fail  of  being  irrele- 
vant, as  she  never  heard  more  than  a  word  or  two 
of  the  questions. 

"  Pooh !  why,  he  came  this  morning,  you  old 
fool.     Has  her  son  seen  her  this  mornino-  ? " 

o 

"  Nothing  but  arrowroot  and  a  little  wine 
Parson  sent  her,   leastwise  Miss  Beauflower." 

"  Has  Mr.  Beauflower  seen  her  ?  eh  ?  and 
alone  ?" 

"  Only  gets  two  shillings  a  week  as  the  Parish 
gives  me,  and  two  loaves.  Tan't  enough,  tan't 
enough  to  keep  body  and  soul  together." 

"  Look  you  here,"  shouted  Mr.  Harker  in  the 
old  hag  s  ear,  "  here's  a  shilling  for  you,  go  and  get 
a  glass  of  wine  for  yourself  and'this  poor  woman, 
and  ril  watch  here  till  you  come." 

"  It  better  be  sperits,  sperits  'ill  comfort  both  of 
us  more." 

"  Get  what  you  like,  but  go.     I  will  watch  her. " 


318  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

''  A  blessing,  blessing  upon  yer,"  said  the  old 
woman,  putting  on  a  black  rag  of  a  bonnet  that 
hung  behind  the  door,  and  shuffling  off,  "  if  she 
do  call  for  anything,  give  her  a  spoonful  of  that 
doctor  s  stuff  on  the  mantlepiece.  It's  to  stop  the 
pain." 

The  crone  stumbled  downstairs,  stirred  the 
wood  fire,  and  closed  the  door  after  her. 

Mr.  Harker  was  alone  with  the  sleeping  woman. 
He  rose  instantly,  took  a  careful  survey  of  the 
miserable,  ill-lit  room ;  there  were  two  chairs,  one 
bottomless,  a  paper  covered  trunk  with  a  dirty 
bonnet-string  trailino;  from  it.  There  was  a 
square  of  cracked  looking-glass,  with  the 
quicksilver  showing  in  blotches  over  its  once 
faithful  surface,  a  drabby  gown  or  two  behind  the 
door,  a  small  rickety  table  and  a  chest  of  drawers  ; 
on  the  drawers  stood  a  very  common  and  very 
old  writing  desk,  the  lid  of  which  was  open ;  on 
the  opposite  side  of  the  room  to  the  bed  where 
the  dying  woman  lay  was  a  door  leading  into  a 
second  small  bedroom.  This  door,  against  which 
hung  a  dirty  torn  shawl,  was  ajar;  on  the  inner 
sill  of  the  one  small  dingy  lattice  window  was 
a  pot  containing  a  sickly  geranium  with  one 
starved  scarlet  flower;  on  the  mantlepiece  stood 
a  bottle  of  medicine  and  a  bottle  of  red  hair- 
oil. 


THE    DEAD    WITNESS.  319 

The  woman's  breathing  was  so  faint  it  was  not 
audible.  The  only  sound  was  the  ticking  of  the 
clock  downstairs,  and  the  fretful  biizzing  of  a 
blow-fly  in  the  window-pane. 

**  I  wonder/'  said  Mr.  Harker  aloud,  he  was  so 
preoccupied  with  the  thought  that  haunted  him 
that  he  scarcely  knew  whether  the  voice  spoke  to 
him  or  whether  he  himself  gave  it  utterance — 
"  I  wonder  whether  the  old  man  left  any  papers 
behind  him  about  me  or  the  Stauntons.  He 
always  seemed  as  if  he  had  some  hold  over  me  if 
he  chose  to  exercise  it,  but  my  pension  gave  him 
ample  money  for  drink,  and  he  cared  for  nothing 
else;  still  there  might  be  some  letters  that  he  had 
stolen,  and  could  I  but  get  them^  and  this  woman 
dies,  as  she  soon  will,  I  shall  be  safe  for  ever.  But 
nonsense !  there  are  none.  They'd  be  in  this 
desk,  if  there  were  any." 

As  he  said  this  Mr.  Harker  opened  the  desk, 
and  searched  it  thoroughly,  tapping  it  to  discover 
if  there  were  any  secret  drawers.  But  it 
contained  only  some  old  receipts  for  rent,  a  faded 
Daguerrot}^e  or  two,  and  some  dirty  envelopes 
directed  to  "  Mr.  John  Travers,  the  Abbey,  Sum- 
merleas,  Wiltshire  ;  "  no  letters,  no  papers.  The 
desk  stood  before  a  square  swing  looking-glass, 
and  as  he  slammed  down  the  lid  of  the  desk  with 
satisfaction  at  the  result  of  his  search,  and  raised 


320  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

his   head,   his   eyes   fell   upon   the    glass   before 
him. 

There,  to  his  alarm,  he  saw  his  own  surprised 
face,  and  over  his  shoulder  another  face,  swollen 
with  suppressed  passion,  and  with  suffused  eyes 
glaring  like  those  of  a  murderer  about  to  strike. 
He  turned,  it  was  Travers  the  keeper,  who  had 
stolen  in  from  the  other  room  stealthily  with 
stockinged  feet ;  he  had  watched  every  movement 
and  heard  every  word. 

"  Fve  not  been  all  my  life  trapping  weasels  and 
foxes,"  he  said  sardonically,  and  without  any 
attempt  at  respect,  however  faint,  but  as  one 
labourer  to  another,  as  a  criminal  to  an  accom- 
plice— "  IVe  not  been  watching  poachers  ever 
since  I  could  hold  a  gun,  and  not  know  how  to 
get  near  them  before  they  could  be  aware  on  it  ; 
so  you,  you  come  here  under  pretence  of  seeing  a 
dying  woman,  and  when  you  ve  got  the  nuss  out 
of  the  way  by  a  shabby  trick,  you  look  and  see 
what  papers  and  secrets  you  can  steal." 

^' Steal!" 

"  Yes,  I  say  steal,  as  you  said  steal  to  me  the 
other  day,  and  had  no  mercy  when  you  found  a 
few  pheasants  wrong  in  my  account.  Ill  spread 
this  story  everywhere.  Ill  teach  you  to  come 
prying  and  stealing  here." 

"  You  dare  repeat  those  words  ?  " 


THE   DEAD   WITNESS.  S'2l 

'•  Dare  ?  I  dare  do  any  tiling,  but  I've  not  done 
with  you,  my  grand  gentleman.  I've  got  you 
now  in  a  cleft  stick.'' 

"Make  what  charges  you  will,  no  one  will 
believe  you  ;  it  was  mere  foolish  curiosity." 

"Ah,  you'd  no  motive;  that's  another  of  your 
lies." 

Mr.  Harker  turned  paler,  even  to  his  lips,  for 
there  was  some  tio'cr's  blood  in  him,  and  he 
clenched  his  right  hand. 

"  You  are  drunk,"  he  said,  "  you  leave  my 
service  to-day." 

"You  lay  a  finger  on  me,"  said  Travers,  "and 
111  drive  you  through  that  window.  I  am 
younger  and  stronger  than,  you,  and  I  am 
accustomed  to  use  my  hands  roughly ;  you  shall 
tell  me  presently  the  day  I  am  to  leave ;  ah, 
my  grand  gentleman,  I  have  a  grip  on  you 
now." 

A  lull  seemed  to  come  upon  Travers'  passion, 
and  he  all  at  once  put  his  arms  insolently  akimbo 
and  smiled  with  savage  satisfaction.  "You've 
maybe  read,"  he  said,  "  some  of  those  penny 
stories  where  a  villain  gets  some  fine  barr}^net  in 
his  power  and  bleeds  him  Avhen  he  likes  ;  now 
I've  often  wished  I  could  get  a  barrynet  to  bleed ; 
and  I've  got  one,  or  as  good  now ;  and  now  I 
believe  them  stories.    I'm  not  a  villain,  and  you're 


322  THE   VICAES    COURTSHIP. 

a  respectable  rich  man,  but  I've  got  my  teeth, 
across  you,  and  I  mean  to  bleed  you." 

"  You're  drunk,  Travers !  What's  all  this 
nonsense  ?  Let  me  pass  on,  I'll  have  you 
punished  for  this ;  you'll  get  no  promise  out  of 
me  by  this  bullying.  Let  me  go,  or  you  shall 
leave  me  to-day.  This  is  a  shallow  game  of  yours. 
There's  a  policeman  passing,  now  I'll  call  to  him 
out  of  the  w^indow.  If  you  stop  me,  mind  it's 
an  assault,  and  I'll  press  it  hard  on  you  and  turn 
you  out  to-night  without  a  character.  You'd 
better  take  care,  my  man,  you  know  I  don't  forgive 
easily." 

To  do  Mr.  Harker  justice,  he  did  not  look  as  if 
he  did  forgive,  or  would  forgive,  easily. 

But  Travers  was  not  to  be  daunted.  "Look 
here,"  he  said,  beating  his  hand  on  the  desk, 
"you  think  I  don't  know  what  you  looked  in 
here  for,  but  you're  mistaken ;  I  did,  I  had  reason 
to  know;  now  then,  call  for  the  policeman,  and 
I'll  blab  the  whole  affair.  Ha !  I  thought  that 
would  tame  you.  Here "  (he  said,  pulling  some 
papers  from  his  breast  pocket  and  slapping  them 
fiercely)  "these  are  what  you  came  for,  though 
you  weren't  sure  they  existed." 

"  I  know  of  no  papers,  what  are  they?  they  are 
forgeries  of  your  own,  give  them  me." 

"  You  shall  hear; — give  them  you  ?  not  if  I  know 


THE    DEAD   WITXESS.  323 

it, — not  likely ;  you'd  keep  them,  and  carefully, 
wouldn't  you  ?  Sit  down,  and  I'll  tell  you  what 
they  are.  I  always  thought,  from  his  manner  at 
times  when  you  threatened  to  stop  his  annuity, 
that  my  father  knew  more  about  your  doings 
up  at  the  house  than  you  would  like.  But  I  was 
a  wild  lad  and  crossed  him,  and  he  never  made  a 
friend  of  me ;  so  I  ran  away  and  got  keeper  at 
Lord  Portsmouth's,  and  didn't  come  back  till 
after  his  death ;  my  mother  here  never  cared  for 
me  either,  and  if  she  knew  anything  she  never 
told  me ;  she  could  not  read,  and  I  dare  say  never 
looked  over  his  papers  ;  and  she  was  too  cunning 
and  suspicious  to  let  me  do  so.  I  think  she  knew 
a  little,  but  that's  nothino;.  Last  nioht  when  she 
was  Ipng  asleep  with  the  laudanum,  and  Dr. 
Briscoe  told  me  she  wouldn't  live  twenty -four 
hom^s,  I  took  the  key  from  her  pocket,  went  to 
this  desk  and  gave  it  a  good  look ;  the  devil  it 
was,  I  suppose,  told  me  I  might  perhaps  find 
something  that  might  be  of  use — something  that 
might  help  me  with  you." 

]\Ir.  Marker's  face  looked  as  if  it  was  turned  to 
stone. 

"  You  know  why  you  dread  what  I  am  going  to 

■  tell  you.     I  foimd  three  papers  :  one  was  the  copy 

of  a  statement  that  he  had  sent  to  Dr.  Chevalier, 

the  doctor  whose  business  Dr.  Briscoe  took,  to  be 


324  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

023ened  after  his  cleatli ;  another  contained  a 
second  statement ;  and  the  third  a  secret  I  shall 
keep  to  myself." 

"  Read  me  this  absmxl  forgery,"  said  Mr.  Harker, 
defiantly  ;  "  it  is  as  valueless  as  a  yesterday's  news- 
paper ;  your  father,  in  some  drunken  fit  of  malice, 
must  have  invented  this  in  revenge.  I  did  once 
threaten  to  stop  his  pension,  because  he  became 
such  a  disgrace  to  the  village." 

"  You  can  judge  :  I'll  read  it  you  ; — '  Believing 
myself  at  the  point  of  death,  I,  John  Travers  being 
at  the  time  of  sound  mind,  as  Dr.  Chevalier  can 
dej)ose,  swear  that  the  hour  after  Mr.  Staunton 
died,  and  before  it  was  known  in  the  house,  Mr. 
Harker  brought  me  a  will  leaving  all  Mr.  Staun- 
ton's money  and  land  to  him.  He  told  me  that 
the  will  was  drawn  up  a  week  before  by  Mr. 
Staunton's  wish  and  direction,  but  that  he  had 
never  had  strenoth  to  sio;n  it.  He  therefore  asked 
me,  on  promise  of  reward,  to  put  the  pen  in  the  dead 
man's  hand,  and  imitate  his  signature,  which  was 
easy,  as  the  Squire  had  been  paralysed  and  wrote 
very  tottery  and  feeble.  I  consented  after  much 
persuasion,  and  to  quiet  my  conscience  he  let  me 
23ut  a  fly  in  the  dead  man's  mouth,  that  I  might 
afterwards  swear  there  was  life  in  him  when  he 
signed." 

"  It's  a  lie,"  said  Mr.  Harker,  faintly.     He  was 


THE    DEAD   WITNESS.  325 

livid  with  minoied  fear  and  mere,  and  one  liand 
was  feeling  in  his  waistcoat  pocket,  as  if  for  some 
concealed  weapon. 

"  Shall  I  go  on  1     You  seem  unwell,  Mister." 
''Go  on    with   this   impudent  lie.     Tell  your 
whole  story,  but  take  care,  I  shall  not  easily  forget 
this  day.'' 

"  Xo,  I  dare  say  you  won  t,  I  shall  take  care  of 
that.  Bluster  will  never  get  you  out  of  this 
scrape.     Shall  I  read  the  second  paper." 

"Eead  all  the  lies  either  the  sot  or  you  invented." 
"  Sots  can  tell  truth.  This  was  on  father  s 
conscience,  and  he  was  drove  to  tell,  as  I  shall  be 
unless  my  conscience  is  paid  to  be  quiet.  He 
was  like  a  man,  you  see,  who's  ill — he  was  ill  twice 
before  he  could  throw  off  the  whole  thing.  The 
second  paper's  dated  two  months  later,  June — he 
died  in  August.  The  first,  you  see,  only  proves  that 
you  paid  him  to  sign  an  incomplete  Avill  that 
might  have  been  old  Staunton's  ;  the  next  takes 
us  a  step  or  two  farther.  He  says,  '  To  make 
my  peace  with  God,  I,  John  Travers,  wish  to  swear, 
being  on  my  death-bed,  that  the  morning  Mr. 
Staunton  died  he  called  me  to  his  bedside  and 
said,  '*  John,  mind  I've  never  made  any  will  since 
I  left  all  to  my  nearest  blood  whoever  they  are. 
It  was  that  Harker  set  me  against  my  son,  God 
forgive  me !      My  real  will  is  in  the  right  hand 


826  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

top  drawer  of  my  knee  desk." '  This  also  is  signed 
Louis  Chevalier." 

"  It's  all  an  infernal  trumped-up  lie,"  said  Mr. 
Harker,  "Dr.  Chevalier  died  seven  years  ago  at 
Mentone  and  no  such  papers  were  then  produced  ; 
you'll  never  get  a  sixpence  out  of  me,  man,  this 
way." 

"  The  third  paper  is  more  important,  and 
screws  you  a  bit  tighter.  It  proves,  in  fact, 
you  have  no  right  to  one  foot  of  tlie  Staunton 
property." 

"  I'll  hear  no  more  of  this.  Do  your  worst,  you 
leave  the  lodo-e  to-nio;ht." 

"  All  right,  then  my  course  is  clear.  I  ride  off 
for  Dr.  Briscoe,  bring  him,  wake  up  the  old 
woman  here,  who's  got  her  senses  still,  and  will 
stir  up  with  a  good  dose  of  brandy.  I  shall 
then  read  the  three  papers,  get  her  signature 
to  this  being  really  my  father's  writing,  screw 
from  her  all  she  knows,  take  it  down,  sign  it  all, 
and  then  post  off  to-morrow  to  the  sharpest  lawyer 
I  can  find  in  Salisbury.  But  while  I  go  to  the 
doctor,  I  shan't  leave  you  here  alone,  because 
there  have  been — " 

Mr.  Harker's  courage  drooped.  The  revenge- 
ful keenness  and  promptitude  of  the  man  was  not 
to  be  daunted.  There  was  but  one  remedy — 
conciliation. 


THE    DEAD    WITNESS.  327 

"  Come,  Travcrs,"  he  said,  "  we  re  both  men  of 
sense.  Don  t  do  what  you'll  be  sorry  for.  These 
lies  might  give  me  trouble,  and  therefore  I  wish 
to  lock  them  up  ;  but  remember,  if  you  failed  in 
proving  them,  as  assuredly  you  would,  it  would 
be  a  chain-gang  and  transportation  for  life  for  you. 
Study  your  own  interests,  man;  let's  talk  it  over. 
Take  a  chair  ;  don't  talk  too  loud  and  wake  the 
woman.  If  I  give  you  a  thousand  a  year  for  ten 
years  will  you  give  me  those  forged  papers  ?" 
"  Say  four  thousand,  and  that's  cheap." 
"  I  couldn't  give  that.  I've  lost  money  lately 
by  mining  speculations,  and  by  a  London  bank. 
Let's  say  two  and  a  half." 

"  Not  a  penny  less  than  three  ;  and  I  must 
remain  keeper,  and  keep  the  thing  quiet,  for  fear 
you'd  run  away  or  slip  out  of  the  agreement 
somehow." 

"  Two  and  a  half  for  three  forged  and  absurd 
letters  ; — it's  good  pay." 

"  I  want  three  ;  not  a  stiver  less." 
"  Two.  You  know  I  could  refuse  a  penny." 
"  Three ;  not  a  skirrick  less  ; — and  not  a  quarter 
enough  either.  Look  at  seven  mile  of  terraces, 
look  at  the  timber,  look  at  Brown's  farm,  Snelsrove's 
farm,  and  a  thousand  acres  of  arable  land.  Look 
at  the  house,  and  all  your  money  at  the  banker's. 
What  use  would  all  that  be  in  Pentonville  'i " 


328  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

"Three  thousand,  mind,  merely  for  a  precaution." 

"  Yes,  three  thousand  for  a  precaution  ;  and 
dirt  cheap  too." 

"Well,  I  agree." 

"  Paid  quarterly  into  the  London  and  West- 
minster Bank,  in  the  name  of  Troughton." 

''  Agreed." 

"  One  day  after  the  time — unless  the  delay  be 
explained  the  next  day — I  take  the  letters  to  a 
London  lawyer." 


Let  it  be  so. 


"  And  you  will  treat  me  as  before  ;  and  I'm  to 
be  your  head  keeper  till  I  can  get  the  best  farm 
in  Dorsetshire  ;  or  as  much  longer  as  I  like,  for  I 
shall  like  to  feel  I'm  the  real  master  here  now." 

"  If  you  must  have  it  so." 

"'  Good." 

"  And  now  the  papers  \  " 

"  Papers  !  why,  you  must  think  me  a  blessed 
cussed  d — n  fatheaded  fool,  Mr.  Harker.  Oh,  I 
keep  those  ;  they're  my  securities.  You  can  have 
'em,  but  only  on  the  day  the  last  of  the  thirty 
thousand  pounds  is  paid.  And  now  I  think  I've 
let  you  off  very  easy.  It's  a  pretty  penny,  too, 
for  three  mere  forged  letters." 

"  I  have  reasons  not  to  wish  my  past  connection 
with  the  Stauntons  discussed — honest  reasons." 

"  Honest,  of  course.    Well,  now  we  understand 


THE    DEAD    WITNESS.  329 

each  other.  The  first  thousaud  I'll  draw  to- 
morrow." 

"  \Yhen  you  like." 

"  Good:  now  you're  easier  in  your  mind — Lord, 
I  can  see  it  in  youi'  face.  Dr.  Chevalier  is  dead; 
mother  once  dead — the  secret  rests  alone  with  me. 
I'm  safe  now; — it  is  my  interest  to  be  safe,  for 
I'm  an  accomplice,  too.  You  don't  want  the 
police  called  now,  eh  ? — I  could  find  him  at  the 
'  Peal  of  Bells.'  " 

"  I  shall  go  now ;  I  want  no  insolence  :  you 
have  what  you  want." 

^Ir.  Harker  went  moodily  downstairs,  and  the 
door  closed  sharply  after  him. 

As  the  outer  latch-gate  slammed,  Travers  went 
to  the  bed,  and,  with  a  brutal  laugh,  carelessly 
threw  the  sheet  over  the  face  of  his  step-mother. 
The  features  were  stiff  and  waxen  ;  she  had  been 
dead  an  hour ;  he  had  known  it,  but  he  had  not 
told  the  half-tipsy,  lialf-dozing  nurse.  Death  had 
no  majesty  for  that  hard,  pitiless,  revengeful 
nature.  The  corpse  had  been  to  him  but  a  means 
of  extorting  money. 

"  I've  beat  the  penny  stories,  after  all,"  he  cried. 
"They  never  thought  of  that  trick.  Fool,  why 
didn't  he  go  close  and  look  at  her.  WeU,  she 
never  did  much  for  me  in  life,  so  she  ought  to 
Im?  useful  when  she's  dead.     How  Harker  stared 

VOL.    I.  Z 


330  THE    VIC  All's    COURTSHIP. 

when  I  told  him  a  bit  of  that  third  paper  :  hell 
turn  me  off  now,  won't  he '?  Catch  him  at  it. 
It's  my  tm^n  to  crow  now\" 

As  Travers  went  downstairs  whistling,  to  kick 
the  logs  together  and  renew  the  fire,  the  old 
woman  lifted  the  latch  and  shuffled  in,  nodding 
her  head  and  singing  tipsily  to  herself. 

"  She's  gone,"  he  shouted  to  her  ;  "  and  here's 
five  shillings,  go  and  buy  some  gin,  and  brmg  a 
woman  to  help  lay  her  out.  She  wasn't  a  bad 
sort,  take  her  altogether." 

The  old  woman  bore  the  news  with  great 
equanimity.  If  w^e  could  only  hear  and  see  how 
our  friends  would  receive  the  news  of  our  death, 
what  cynics  we  should  become  if  we  ever  returned 
to  earth  I  The  crone  had  been  the  dead  woman's 
special  gossip,  and  she  had  toadied  her  as  steadily 
for  pinches  of  snufi"  and  drops  of  tea,  as  courtiers 
do  a  king  for  titles,  pensions,  and  appointments. 
The  five  shillings,  and  how  to  spend  it,  now 
absorbed  her  whole  mind. 

"  And  tliink  of  them  Traverses/'  she  thought, 
"  doing  the  thing  so  handsome,  and  he  never 
giving  the  old  lady  much,  either,  when  she  was 
alive.  Not  that  I  shall  tell  Mrs.  Munby,  because 
she's  that  greedy  and  fond  of  a  drop,  that  there'd 

be  no  more  use poor  dear  old  thing.  I  wonder 

whether  they'd  miss  that  best  go^vnd  of  hers — it 


THE    DEAD   WITNESS.  331 

can  be  no  use  to  them,  and  she  did  once  ask  me  if 
I  wanted  an  everyday  gownd,  one  evening  when 
I  told  her  I  should  go  first,  just  to  please  her." 

And  ]\Ir.  Harker  thought  to  himself,  as  he 
paced  moodily  back  under  the  shadow  of  the  great 
arch  of  the  lodge,  "  Pray  to  God,"  said  an  inner 
voice,  "  for  some  lightning  to  strike  him  before  he 
can  disclose  that  secret.  Pray  to  God  for  some 
fever  to  sweep  him  off  before  he  knows  the  danger, 
— ^then  you  would  be  free.  If  some  deer  would 
gore  him,  or  some  poacher  put  his  knife  into  him, 
then,  then  you  would  be  safe  and  happy."  And 
another  soft,  low,  mocking  voice  whispered  from 
the  blackness  of  the  shadow  that  doQ;0'ed  at  his 
heels,  "  No !  you  will  never  be  safe  from  such  a 
man  as  that,  never,  never."  He  will  prefer 
revenge  to  money ;  even  when  the  money  is 
paid,  he  will  demand  more,  and  then  betray  you. 
If  you  die  first  he  will  reveal  it  and  beggar  your 
wife  and  children.  The  sword  is  always  over 
your  head.  If  you  stand  for  Parliament,  he  can 
denounce  you  at  the  liustings— he  can  stop  every 
path,  check  every  ambition,  and  he  knows  it.  Pray 
that  cancer  rot  him.  Pray  that  he  die  piecemeal, 
for  he  is  your  master  and  you  are  his  slave  for 
ever.  That  third  secret,  too,  the  deadliest  of  all, 
he  keeps  in  its  sheath.  What  is  that  P  You  hold 
everything  but  by  his  permission,  and  you  know 


3S2  THE   VICAE's   courtship. 


it,  miserable  wretch  !  You  were  unhappy  before, 
but  now  a  darker  and  more  hopeless  misery  will 
press  you  down  for  ever,  unless  you,  in  some  way, 
lireak  this  chain,  but  how  ?  but  how  ? — You  can 
never  break  it — you  can  never  break  it,  never, 
NEVER."  The  first  evil  sj)irit  that  had  spoken 
was  HATRED,  the  second  was  despair. 


END    OF   VOL.   I. 


BRADBURY,   EVAN;?,    AND   CO.,    PRINTERS,   AVHITKFKIARS. 



THE   VICAR'S    COURTSHIP. 


CHAPTER  I. 

THE  LODGINGS  AT  FONTFORD. 

A  DAY  or  two  before  the  great  archery  meeting, 
which  the  Wiltshire  papers  had  already  announced 
side  by  side  with  the  intelligence  of  the  Honour- 
able Fitzegbert  Cantelupe's  intention  of  putting 
himself  forward  as  a  candidate  in  the  Whig  inte- 
rest for  Bibury,  Amy  Robinson  received,  to  her  in- 
finite surprise  and  delight,  the  following  letter  : — 

"22,  Buckingham  Street, 

"  October  IStli,  18G0. 

"  My  own  Darling  Amy, — 

^'  I  am  going  to  tell  you  something  that  I  am 
sure  will  indeed  startle  you.  I  see  your  dear  brown 
eyes  open  wider  when  you  hear  that  dear  papa  and 
I  are  actually  coming  down  to  live  for  a  year  in 
Wiltshire.     Yes,  really.     It  is  like  a  dream,  is  not 


THE    vicar's    courtship. 


it?  "Well;  Mr.  Basse vi,  whom  we  used  to  think  so 
cruel,  and  who  was  always  persuading  papa  to 
borrow  money,  and  then  forcing  him  to  take  furni- 
ture and  cigars  for  it,  and  rubbish  we  didn't  want, 
and  then  used  to  threaten  him  with  prison  and 
every  horrible  thing,  has  been  so  kind,  and  has 
engaged  papa  to  paint  some  ceilings  at  Mr. 
Harker's  and. at  the  Honourable  Mr.  Cantelupe's 
at  Swallowcliff  Castle ;  and  now,  after  this  good 
news,  I'm  going  to  surprise  you,  dearest,  still 
more.  It's  like  a  fairy  story,  isn't  it  ?  We  have 
been  trying  to  let  the  dear  old  house  furnished, 
but  could  not  hear  of  anyone,  till  that  kind 
Major  Donovan  got  us  a  tenant,  a  rich,  very  rich, 
Greek  merchant,  a  M.  Zenocrapolos ;  he  is  the 
importer  of  the  Charlemagne  Champagne  that  the 
major  says  the  Prince  of  Wales  and  aU  the  great 
Belgravian  people  are  now  insisting  on  having.  He 
is  to  give  us  14/.  a  year  more  than  we  pay,  so  it  is 
not  a  bad  bargain ;  and  your  dear,  generous  papa 
thought  he  could  not  give  the  good  major  less 
than  5/.  (it  was  rather  hard  to  part  with)  for  his 
excellent  management  in  the  affair.  The  major 
is  always  talking  of  you,  and  says  such  beautiful 
things,  quite  like  those  you  read  in  '  Lalla  Eookh.' 
Papa  said  to  him  yesterday  something  about 
young  Mr.  Tilbury,  the  cheesemonger,  that  sued  us, 
and  who  said  that  you  Avere  a  true  daughter  of  Eve. 


THE  LODGIXGS  AT  FOXTFORD.         3 

'  Eve  ? '  says  the  maj  or ;  '  bedad,  I  think  there's  more 
of  the  daybreak  about  her/  There,  Amy,  there's 
flattery  to  tm^n  your  little  head.  You'll  never 
have  any  lover  pay  you  a  more  charming  com- 
pliment than  that,  even  if  you  live  to  be  an  old 
woman  like  me.  Indeed,  the  major  is  very  polite 
and  kind,  and  often  gets  papa  work.  I  only  wish 
he  had  a  little  more  strictness  of  principle ;  but 
he  is  always  borrowing  half-crowns  and  never 
thinks  of  them  again,  and  you  know  we  cannot 
afford  that. 

"  Papa  has  just  finished  a  wonderful  rejDlica  for 
Mr.  Bodger,  the  Eoyal  Academician ;  but  Mr. 
Bodger  tells  Mr.  Bassevi  he  will  not  pay  such  large 
prices  the  next  time.  Now,  dearest,  as  we  come 
down  on  Saturday,  will  you  look  us  out  some 
small,  neat,  cheap  lodgings  at  the  nearest  to^vn  to 
Summerleas.  I  was  once,  as  I  told  you,  in  Wilt- 
shire, when  I  was  quite  a  child,  and  I  think  I 
shall  like  to  see  it  again.  I  remember  the  broad 
downs  and  the  fine  air,  and  after  being  pent  up 
in  London,  attending  to  lodgers,  I  shall  quite 
enjoy  it,  if  I  don't  find  it  dull.  Then  we  shall  see 
you  often,  clarling,  and  perhaps  once  in  a  way  call 
and  see  all  the  wonderful  grounds  and  gardens  we 
have  heard  you  talk  of.  Papa  is  just  calling  me  to 
lay  his  palette  and  bring  his  brushes,  and  I  must 
conclude ;    but  first   let  us  thank  you,  my  own 

B  2 


4  THE   VICARS    COURTSHIP. 

dear  child,  for  the  5/.  you  sent  us  so  nobly  from 
the  quarter  owing  you  before  the  hoHdays.  How 
selfish  and  cruel  it  is  of  us  to  take  it !  but  yet  how 
can  we  pay  all  the  small  bills  without  it,  and  the  5  /. 
to  the  major  left  us  rather  bare.  The  major  pro- 
mises to  come  down  and  see  us ;  but  he  is  very 
busy  just  now  organising  a  new  company  to  open 
up  the  old  gold-mines  that  the  Spaniards  left 
unemptied  in  Central  America.  He  is  off  there  in 
the  spring.  He  sends  the  most  high-flown  com- 
pliments. Papa  sends  his  dearest  love ;  he's  so 
longing  to  see  you. 

"  I  am,  my  own  darling  Amy, 

"  Your  ever  loving  mother, 

"Jane  KoBmsoN." 

''P.S. — We  shall  bring  little  Susan  with  us; 
we  shall  be  more  independent  then  of  the  people  of 
the  house.  I  felt  rather  a  pang  in  taking  down 
the  placard  of  '  Apartments  to  Let,'  that  we  used 
to  hopefully  tie  to  the  balcony;  and  yet  how  bitter 
the  disappointment  used  to  be  sometimes  when  Ave 
were  very  poor,  and  had  no  applications  for  two  or 
three  weeks.  Yet  to  look  back  to  those  times, 
seems  quite  pleasant  now.  Your  papa  is  busy 
painting  and  talking  to  the  major,  who  is  singing 
his  favourite  old  song,  'The  Limerick  Car-driver,'  so 
I  steal  back  just  to  write  a  line  more  to  my  darling 


THE    LODGINGS   AT   FONTFORD.  5 

cliilcl.  I  shall  bring  all  your  tilings.  Papa's  can- 
vases and  portfolios  ^1  make  quite  a  business 
for  me  to  pack.  Good-bye.  We  shall  meet  soon. 
I  shall  be  so  proud  to  see  you  among  all  the 
grand  people.'' 

It  was  one  of  those  pleasant  ruffling  days  when 
sun  and  wind  struo-oie  tog-ether  as  if  wrano-ling 
for  the  cloak  of  ^sop's  traveller,  that  Amy  took 
her  way  along  the  Abbey  Terraces,  the  by-road  to 
Fontford.  The  dry  dead  leaves  blew  before  her 
in  countless  droves  or  circled  in  whirls  like  those 
summer  cycles  of  dust  that  Scotchmen  suppose 
to  be  little  processions  of  "the  good  people." 
One  would  almost  have  thought  that,  as  in  the 
days  of  Una,  innocence,  \irtue,  and  happiness  had 
spells  to  win  all  things  to  their  power.  Amy 
moved  so  light  and  noiselessly,  and  with  such  fairy- 
like speed  and  gentleness  over  the  close,  crisp  turf, 
that  the  jetty  blackbird  on  the  mossy  bough  of 
the  great  silver  fir  did  not  even  stay  his  song  as 
she  passed  by;  the  squirrel  at  the  foot  of  the 
larch,  only  forty  yards  off,  T\ith  his  fore-feet  raised 
against  the  trunk,  turned  his  little  quick  head,  but 
did  not  ascend ;  the  wood-pigeon  on  the  summit 
of  the  spruce  murmured  in  its  loving  motherly 
way,  but  took  no  flight ;  the  speckled  thmsh  only 
glanced  before  her  from  bush  to  bush,  as  if  to  lead 


THE   vicar's   courtship. 


her  omyarcls  to  fresh  depths  of  fairy  land;  the  red- 
headed woodpecker  uttered  his  harsh  note  like  a 
dog's  bark,  not  to  startle  but  to  welcome  her ;  the 
little  grey  rabbit,  whose  knowledge  of  the  big  world 
dated  back  only  three  months,  tripped  leisurely 
across  the  terrace  with  no  undignified  confession 
of  terror  ;  even  the  wood  violets  did  not  tremble 
at  the  approach  of  her  foot.  One  would  almost 
have  thought  that  all  the  animate  and  inanimate 
things  about  her  path  loved  her  and  greeted  her. 

No  wonder  that  Amy  enjoyed  that  hour  of  hope 
and  liberty.  The  Terraces  were  favourite  spots  of 
hers.  It  needed  no  artist's  daughter  to  appreciate 
such  a  scene.  The  seven  miles  of  terraces  that 
traversed  the  Abbey  domains  were  the  plateaus 
partially  levelled  by  art  of  huge  scarped  ramparts 
of  chalk  rising  abruptly  from  the  valleys.  They 
were  probably  mere  undulations  of  the  bed  of  some 
bygone  ocean;  but  they  almost  resembled  the  vast 
earthworks  of  some  primeval  race,  their  sides  were 
so  abrupt  and  their  formation  so  regular.  Perhaps 
down  these  descents,  in  spring  purple  with  violets 
and  in  summer  undulating  with  every  sort  of 
flowermg  grass,  mailed  Eomans  and  half-naked 
Britons  may  have  often  rolled  in  the  death  lock. 
These  terraces  Mr.  Staunton  had  crested  with  phm- 
tations  of  beech  and  fir.  Dogwood,  hazel,  and  wild 
cherry  formed  the  undergrowth,  that,  fringed  by 


THE    LODGIXGS   AT   FO^'TFORD.  7 

here  and  tliere  a  tall  sable  lignum  vitae  or  a  spread- 
ing rhododendron,  gave  the  plantation  more  of  the 
look  of  a  shrubbery  than  of  a  mere  tract  of  wild 
neglected  wood. 

Once  Amy,  leaving  the  open  terrace,  struck  a 
narrow  path  through  the  covert  that  led  to  a 
second  smaller  siding  parallel  with  a  loose  mossy 
stone  wall  bordering  the  Abbey  woods.  Beyond 
lay  open  ploughed  lands,  where  sable  rooks, 
taking  very  open  order,  strutted  with  that 
portly  air  that  such  birds  will  assume  after  a 
heavy  cold  collation  of  worms.  Three  or  four 
fields  below  ran  the  high  road  from  Summerleas 
to  Fontford.  Looking  down  into  the  road  just 
by  a  square  old-fashioned  house  that  had  been 
pointed  out  to  her  as  the  house  where  the  clergy- 
man's daughter  once  lived  who  eloped  with  young 
Mr.  Staunton,  and  which  she  therefore  always 
regarded  T\T.th  a  sort  of  ghiish  romantic  interest, 
Amy  saw  a  line  of  black  figures  moving  along 
in  a  direction  towards  Fontford.  It  was  the 
funeral  of  Mrs.  Flower,  which  her  step-son  had 
had  carried  out  on  a  most  la"\dsh  scale.  Latterly  a 
great  change  had  come  over  the  head  keeper.  He 
was  always  driving  about  the  country  in  a  smart 
new  dog[-cart  he  had  boui>:ht,  and  he  had  assumed 
the  manner  of  a  well-to-do  gentleman-farmer,  who 
would  not  brook  opposition,  even  from  his  supe- 


THE   VICAe's    COUETSHIP. 


riors.  That  black  line  seemed  to  jar  with  the 
clear  blue  sky  and  the  sunshine,  and  Amy  turned 
again  into  the  wood  to  avoid  the  sight,  frightening 
up  a  pheasant  as  she  did  so.  A  moment  afterwards 
she  came  to  a  rude  thatched  hut  built  by  the  Abbey 
keepers  for  their  night  watchings.  It  stood  close 
to  a  broken  part  of  the  wall,  and  adjoined  a  thick 
brambly  part  of  the  covert.  Amy  ran  by  it,  half 
dreading  that  some  ferocious  poacher  would  rush 
out  of  the  darkness  of  the  deserted  hut.  Then 
laughing  at  her  own  fears  in  such  broad  sunshine, 
she  tripped  back  into  the  open  terrace  and  walked 
briskly  on  till  she  came  to  an  embattled  viaduct 
above  the  bye-road,  which  there,  turning  abruptly 
to  the  right,  led  down  into  Fontford. 

From  this  high  pathway  a  beautiful  country 
spread  itself  before  Amy  like  a  rolled  out  map. 
To  the  left,  beyond  the  line  of  the  terrace  wood 
that  ended  abruptly  on  the  very  frontier  of 
Dorsetshire,  stretched  downland  in  rolling  blue 
undulations  like  the  waves  of  a  vast  sea.  There 
was  nothing  to  break  the  grand  monotony, 
freedom,  and  loneliness,  but  a  windmill  on  the 
distant  horizon,  and  a  flock  of  sheep  that  speckled 
here  and  there  the  crop-eared  turf.  Down  below, 
where  the  blue  smoke  blew  north-westward  from 
some  hundred  or  two  chimneys,  clustered  the  vil- 
lacre  of  Fontford.     Immediately  beyond  its  last 


THE  LODGIXGS  AT  FOXTFOED.         9 

house  the  doTvn  rose  ag-ain  bare  and  wild  as  in 
the  time  of  the  Eomans. 

Fontford  was  a  place  between  a  town  and  a 
village,  but  with  more  of  the  \Tllage.  One  long 
dull  street,  with  an  ivy-towerecl  church  at 
one  end,  and  a  school-room  at  the  other.  It 
had  returned  a  member  to  parliament  in  Pitt's 
time,  and  was  one  of  the  first  ripe  grains  that 
fell  before  the  Eeform  Biirs  sc}i:he-like  clauses. 
Before  that  time  a  golden  age  had  prevailed,  when 
every  voter  in  Fontford  had  always  40?.  laid  down 
on  his  door-step  for  his  free  and  iadependent  vote. 
It  was  a  tradition  that  Mr.  Staunton  had  once 
sent  his  butler  to  parliament,  and  that  when  the 
delighted  butler  had  thanked  the  voters,  they 
had  told  him  not  to  think  too  -  much  of  it,  for 
that  if  Squire  Staunton  had  sent  his  Newfound- 
land dog,  they'd  have  returned  him. 

Before  Amy  had  entered  Fontford  three 
minutes,  her  coming  was  known  to,  and  can- 
vassed by,  half  the  people  of  the  not  over-abun- 
dantly lively  place.  Trade  not  being  vigorous  in 
Fontford,  nor  driven  on  with  that  dangerous 
rapidity  common  elsewhere,  the  small  trades- 
men and  artizans  of  the  place  had  ample  time 
to  study  the  movement  and  demeanour  of  all 
strangers,  and  also  of  each  other.  The  blacksmith 
striking  the  red-hot  horse-shoe  suspended  the  fall 


10  THE   VICAe's    COUKTSHTP. 

of  liis  hammer,  and  wondered  who  she  was  ; 
the  tailor,  cross-legged  like  a  Turk,  and  shoeless 
on  his  board,  discussed  of  her  to  his  pale 
apprentice.  A  customer  at  the  general  shop 
pointed  her  out  to  the  shopman ;  sots  saw  her 
over  the  red  curtain  at  the  Harker  Arms  ;  the 
worn-looking,  pallid  dressmaker  next  door  gave  her 
languid  look  of  curiosity,  and  then  bent  her  eyes 
again  on  the  wearisome  finery  of  some  farmer's 
buxom  daughter.. 

At  the  turning  by  the  post-office.  Amy  came 
suddenly,  to  her  great  delight,  upon  the  eldest 
Miss  Chivers,  who,  calm  and  sensible  as  ever,  was 
on  her  way  to  the  dressmaker's. 

"  Oh,  I  am  so  glad  to  meet  you,  my  dear,"  she 
said  ;  "  and  how  have  I  been  ?  Well,  I  have  had 
two  days  since  I  saw  you  of  the  most  awful 
sciatica — could  hardly  crawl  down  stairs ;  and 
poor  May  has  been  very  unwell,  too,  and  isn't  even 
now  able  to  come  out.  Well,  and  how  are  you, 
darling  ?  why,  you  look  more  charming  than  ever." 

Amy  poured  forth  her  news.  Papa  and 
mamma  were  both  coming  down  to  live  for  a  year 
in  Wiltshire ;  papa  had  great  paintings  to  do  at 
the  Abbey  and  the  Castle  ;  he  had  given  up  his 
house  in  Buckingham  Street,  and  she  was  looking 
for  lodoino^s. 

When  persons  are  hapj)y,  they  wish  to  call  all 


THE   LODGIXGS   AT   FOXTFORD.  11 

the  world  togetlier  to  share  it.  It  is  well  the 
world  is  hard  of  hearing,  for  if  it  did  come  together 
at  such  appeals,  its  coldness  would  be  sadly  dis- 
apjDointing.  ]\Iiss  Chivers  received  the  news  with 
somewhat  too  great  calmness.  She  had  a  vague 
notion  of  the  social  position  of  artists,  and  had 
rather  a  di-ead  of  a  mother  who  had  kept  a 
lodging-house.  Amy  she  dehghted  in,  but  she 
could  not  promise  to  swallow  all  Amy's  relations, 
so  she  said, — 

"  Oh,  indeed  I  am  so  glad.  Well,  dear,  and 
where  do  you  think  of  putting  them  ?  " 

Amy  did  not  know.  She  thought  there  might 
be  rooms  at  the  post-office,  but  papa  must  have 
a  large  airy  room  to  himself  for  painting. 

]\Iiss  Chivers  looked  up  and  -do^Ti  the  street, 
and  thought  a  few  moments  ;  then  she  said,  taking 
one  hand  from  her  muff,  and  lapng  it  impres- 
sively on  Amy's  shoulder, — 

"  I've  thought  of  it ;  Lawson's — Lawson's  will 
do.  They  are  nice  clean  people,  and  have  no 
young  children ;  and  as  he  is  a  carpenter,  they  have 
large  lofts  and  sheds,  which  are  just  the  thing." 

"  I  reaUy  think  they  would  do  ;  and  how  kind 
of  you  to  think." 

"  Let's  go  and  see ;  but  here's  Mr.  Cantelupe's 
drag  coming.  Oh,  that  young  man,  how  fast  he  is 
driving;  to  the  doo;s!" 


12  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

A  well-built  London  drag,  mtli  four  horses, 
had  just  then  swept  round  the  corner  of  the 
Fontford  road — no  one  inside ;  two  smart  top- 
booted  grooms,  with  arms  folded,  as  if  in  defiance 
of  the  world,  were  behind,  and  Mr.  Cantelupe  was 
on  the  box,  dressed  in  a  light  grey  wrapper,  which 
was  thrown  o|)en,  and  disclosed  a  light  cut-away 
coat,  with  a  red  camelia  in  the  button-hole.  He 
manipulated  the  reins  professionally,  with  hands 
cased  in  lavender  kid  gloves.  The  way  in  which 
he  caught  up  his  whip  lash,  and  then  launched  it 
forth  at  the  near  leader,  was  a  sio-ht  for  Tatter- 
sail.  He  took  off  his  outrageously  fashionable 
hat  when  Miss  Chivers  bowed,  but  he  fixed  his 
eyes  on  Amy.  A  moment  more,  and  the  four 
bays  had  swept  round  the  corner  leading  to  the 
open  down,  across  which  the  road  to  Bibury 
led. 

Miss  Chivers  was  rather  flattered  by  the  bow. 
*'  A  very  handsome  fellow,"  she  said  ;  "  and  very 
like  his  uncle,  Lord  Mazagan,  when  he  was  younger. 
I  do  not  myself  see  the  pleasure  of  playing  at  stage 
coachmen,  but  I  suppose  it  is  a  pleasure ;  these 
reckless  young  men,  they'd  drive  engines  if  any  one 
would  ride  in  their  trains,  and  they  say  he  is  going 
to  marry  Miss  Harker.  Well,  it  will  be  a  very 
good  match,  though  she  is  older  than  he  is,  and 
I'm  sure  I  wish  them  happy  with  all  my  heart." 


THE    LODGINGS    AT    FOXTFORD.  13 

]\Irs.  Lawson's  house  was  a  small  building,  with 
four  windows  looking  out  on  the  street.  The  ladies 
were  just  knockin.o;  at  the  door  when  it  opened, 
and  out  walked  Dr.  Briscoe  and  Mr.  Goodrick, 
who  had  abeady  met  at  the  vicar's  and  become 
great  allies. 

*'An  unexpected  pleasure,"  said  the  doctor, 
shaking  hands  with  both.  "  Allow  me  to  intro- 
duce a  gentleman,  who  is  to  be  a  near  neighbour 
of  ours.  Miss  Chivers,  Mr.  Goodrick."  (The  doctor 
disdained  to  see-saw  the  names  in  the  confusing 
conventional  way.)  "  Miss  Eobinson,  I  think  you 
told  me,  you  have  met  before  ?  " 

Mr.  Goodrick  bowed  gravely  to  Miss  Chivers, 
and  smilingly  to  Amy.  "  Miss  Eobinson,''  he 
said,  "I  have  met  before.  It  is  not  easy  to  forget 
such  an  event." 

Miss  Chivers  was  charmed,  and  smiled  approval 
at  Amy,  as  if  part  of  the  compliment  devolved 
upon  her.  While  the  doctor  was  addressing 
himself  more  immediately  to  Miss  Chivers,  Amy 
mustered  up  courage,  and  said  to  the  gallant  old 
gentleman  who  stood  beamino-  on  her  with  an 
expression  not  cynical,  but  paternal,  and  glow- 
ingly benevolent, — 

"  Julia — -I  mean  Miss  Beauflower — told  me 
that  it  is  to  your  kindness  I  am  indebted  for  my 
present  situation.     It  is  so  strange  that  we  should 


14  THE   VICAE's    courtship. 

meet  down  liere.  I  am  sure  yon  will  not  tliink 
me — that  yon  will  pardon  my  not  tlianking  yon 
more  warmly  when  yon  were  driving  me  from 
Slobnry." 

"  My  dear  young  lady/'  said  Mr.  Goodrick, 
still  holding  the  hand  that  he  had  shaken,  "  I  am 
afraid  you  have  little  to  thank  me  for.  I  am 
afraid  the  Harkers  are  not  pleasant  people  ;  they 
are  certainly  not  good  enough  for  you.  They 
seem  purse-proud  and  offensive." 

"  Oh,  indeed,  they  are  very  kind '' 

"  Ah,  you  are  too  good ;  you  shut'  your  eyes,  I 
fear,  to  their  meanness  and  harshness.  We  must 
find  you  some  nicer  people  than  that,  mustn't  we, 
doctor?" 

"  What  are  you  talking  about  ? — find  what  ? 
Now,  you  have  been  five  or  six  minutes  there 
flirting  outrageously  with  my  especial  flame,  I 
know ;  then,  to  turn  it  off,  you  ask  me  some 
matter-of-fact  question.  Mr.  Goodrick,  you  are 
'an  artful  man." 

"  All  men  are  deceitful,"  said  Miss  Chivers, 
laughing ;  "  and  you,  doctor,  with  all  your 
pretended  blunt  honesty,  you  are  as  bad  as  the 
rest,  every  bit." 

Mr.  Goodrick  strongly  denied  flirting,  and 
appealed  to  Amy,  who  was  also  earnest  in  her 
protestations. 


THE  LODGIXGS  AT  FOXTFORD.        15 

"  AVlio  ever  did  own  flirting  ? "  said  tlie  doctor. 
Eemember,  Mr.  Goodrick,  I  have  a  prior  claim  on 
Miss  Eobinson,  and  I  shall  bring  an  action  for 
breach  of  promise,  mind  that/' 

"  Amy's  come  over,  doctor,"  said  Miss  Chivers  ; 
"  what  do  you  think  for  ? — now  guess." 

"  To  ask  you  to  the  Archery  Meeting." 

"  No ;  I've  been  asked  before." 

"  Give  it  up.     Is  it  a  conundrum  ? " 

"  Conundrum  ?  no  !  Amy's  come  over  to  see 
about  lodgings  for  her  papa  and  mamma,  who  are 
coming  to  live  for  a  time  down  in  AYiltshire." 

"I  am  so  glad.  We  want  society  here 
sacUy." 

Society  !  thought  Miss  Chivers,  with  floating 
notions  stiU  of  plumbers,  glaziers,  and  char- 
women. 

"  Are  -Mrs.  Lawson's  rooms  spacious  enough  ? " 
said  the  doctor. 

"  They're  the  very  thing,"  said  Miss  Chivers ; 
*'but  I  am  sure  we  shall  frighten  poor  Mrs.- 
Lawson  if  we  go  in  in  such  a  strong  body." 

"  A  decided  hint  for  the  two  gentlemen,"  said 
the  doctor,  "  to  make  themselves  scarce.  Oh,  1 
know  the  ways  of  you  ladies.  Come,  let's  go.  They 
want  to  see  about,  and  go  all  over  the  house, 
as  if  they'd  got  a  search  warrant,  and  eventually 
they'U  go  somewhere  else.     That's  their  women's 


16  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

plan,  Mr.  Goodrick.  Come  ;  we  old  bachelors  are 
in  the  way." 

"I  have  not  the  honour,  doctor,  of  being  an 
old  bachelor,"  said  Mr.  Goodrick,  smiling  ;  "  I  am 
a  widower." 

"  Widower  or  bachelor,  they  don't  want  us. 
They  want  to  torture  poor  Mrs.  Lawson  about  the 
rent  and  the  washing,  and  a  thousand  things,  price 
of  coals,  age  of  grown-up  children,  and  so  on." 

"  It's  nothing  of  the  sort.  You  men  are  just 
as  curious  as  we  women  are,"  retorted  Miss 
Chivers,  gallantly.  "  I  meant  what  I  said.  We 
should  overpower  poor  Mrs.  Lawson.  Oh,  you 
always  must  have  your  fun,  doctor." 

"  Good-bye,  Miss  Chivers.  I  leave  my  character 
behind  me." 

"  It's  quite  safe  in  our  keeping." 

"Good-bye,  Miss  Eobinson.  Don't  let  Miss 
Chivers  abuse  me  too  much.'^ 

Amy  promised  to  consider  herself  retained  for 
the  defence,  and  shook  hands  with  the  doctor 
and  Mr.  Goodrick. 

"And  now  that  tiresome  man  is  gone.  Amy, 
let  us  see  what  Mrs.  Lawson  says." 

Mrs.  Lawson  had  two  rooms,  a  sitting-room  and 
a  bed-room,  and  very  neat,  clean,  and  pleasant 
they  were  for  their  size.  The  view  of  the  main 
streets  of  Fontford  was  perfect. 


THE    LODGIXGS    AT    FOXTFORD.  17 

"  Could  slie  find  any  place  wliere  Mr.  Kobin- 
son  could  paint  ?  " 

Mrs.  Lawson  looked  slightly  aghast. 

"  What  sort  of  paints  1  Furniture  1  varnish- 
ing ?  graining  ? " 

"  No  ;  painting  historical  pictures  for  the 
Abbey.     Mr.  Eobinson  was  an  eminent  artist. '^ 

Oh,  yes  ;  she  now  understood.  She  thought 
there  was  a  back  room  of  the  shop  that  would  be 
just  the  thing,  with  a  stove  in  it,  as  it  got  colder ; 
or  they  had  a  loft,  but  there  was  no  window  in 
that.  Would  they  like  to  see  the  room  behind  the 
shop  ?  There  was  rather  a  vagueness,  an  intellec- 
tual haziness  about  Mi's.  Lawson's  notions  of  Mr. 
Eobinson's  professional  employments ;  nor  was 
Miss  Chivers  quite  in  the  full  light  either.  Amy, 
certainly,  would  like  to  see  the  studio,  for,  poor 
girl,  in  her  mind  the  poor  drudge  of  a  low,  half- 
Jew  picture  dealer  was  a  Kaphael  and  Michael 
Angelo  combined,  with  aspirations  stretching  from 
St.  Paul's  to  the  top  of  Chimborazo.  What  an 
enchanter  Love  is  ;  like  the  moonbeam,  it  throws 
a  magic  light  over  the  meanest  object  as  w^ell  as 
the  grandest — on  wild  deer  and  tame  donkey,  on 
the  Alps  and  on  the  dunghill.  In  her  innocence 
and  freshness  of  heart,  Amy  possibly  believed 
that  Miss  Chivers  w\as  awe-struck  at  the  profes- 
sional dignity  of  her  father,  and  eager  to  make 


7 


18  THE    VICAFt's    COUETSHIP. 

liis  acquaintance  ;  wliereas  Miss  Chivers  was  at 
that  moment  quietly  thinking  what  was  the  fewest 
times  she  could  possibly  ask  the  probably  objec- 
tionable people  to  tea.  How  good  it  was  of 
Nature  not  putting  our  hearts  outside  us  in 
crystal  cases.  What  a  strange  world  it  would  be 
when  there  was  no  fighting  behind  walls,  and  all 
one's  enemies  were  enemies  in  the  open ! 

One  peculiarity  of  Mrs.  Lawson's  family  was 
that  there  was  always  in  the  kitchen  a  full-grown 
son  or  a  married  daughter  just  come  for  the  day. 
Therefore  it  was  that  as  the  two  ladies  passed  the 
door  of  the  culinary  department  a  tall,  handsome 
young  woman  and  a  rather  sheepish-faced  over- 
grown gowk,  with  an  obtrusive,  bulging  sky-blue 
scarf,  stood  up,  and  "  made  obeisance,"  as  the 
poor  call  it,  in  a  resjDcctful  way. 

"  My  son  Willy  and  his  wife,  from  Warminster," 
Mrs.  Lawson  said,  with  a  sort  of  marginal  reference 
to  the  fact. 

The  exploring  party  having  passed  the  equator, 
which  was  the  kitchen,  now  emerged  in  a  paved 
yard  behind  the  house,  and  scattering  some 
alarmed  fowls,  who  were  as  frightened  as  if  they 
had  never  been  in  any  society  but  their  own, 
reached  the  shop,  out  of  the  open  folding-doors  of 
which  some  curls  of  deal  shavino^s  were  blowings. 

In  that   long  apartment,  filled  with  benches. 


THE   LODGINGS   AT   FONTFORD.  19 

Mr.  Lawson,  a  civil,  chirpy  man,  with  an  apple- 
john  face,  was  busy  planing  the  planks  from 
which  the  shavings  had  just  regained  their  liberty. 
Mr.  Lawson  wore  a  square  browm-paper  cap,  that 
cheapest  of  all  useful  articles  of  costume,  and  his 
ap]3rentice,  a  hearty  young  fellow,  was  sharpening 
a  chisel  on  a  Turkish  hone.  A  healthy  smell,  but 
not  bottled  for  fashionable  use  as  yet  by  Eimmel, 
pervaded  the  shop,  which  was  ankle-deep  in 
odorous  shavino^s  and  sawdust,  that  waste  ma- 
terial  as  yet  almost  unutilised  by  art.  He  wished 
the  ladies  a  very  good  morning,  and  made  a 
sensible  but  not  strikingly  original  remark  on 
the  weather.  An  early  glass  or  two  had  made 
Mr.  Lawson  chirpy,  but  not  chirpier  than  usual, 
the  hour  followinsf  "  Bevers."  Mrs.  Lawson  was, 
however,  obviously  a  little  nervcms  at  his  over- 
chirpyness,  and  tried  to  abate  him  by  a  rather 
sharp,  overruling  manner,  and  by'telling  him  very 
drily  and  briefly  what  was  wanted. 

"  I  know,  I  know,  Eliza,"  he  said;  "  and  I  ought 
to  know,  for  my  father  was  the  best  grainer  in 
Salisbury — was  generally  considered  so,  at  least, 
in  the  Close.  I'll  show  the  ladies  the  room  as  we 
have  at  their  dispojal.'^ 

"  Don't  you  leave  your  work,  Frederick." 
"Yes,  but   I  will  leave  my  work,   Lizah.      I 
know  what's  due  to  ladies  like  Miss  Chivers  and 

c  2 


20  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

Miss  Eobinson  ;  and,  please  God,  my  dooty  I 
iiope  to  do  in  the  way  which  it  shall  please  God 
to  call  me.  John,  go  on  with  that  dovetailing, 
ril  be  back  directly,  and  don't  hammer  while 
I'm  talking.  Do  ye  hear  ?  It  ain't  respectful  in 
an  apprentice,  whatever  his  caUing  be  !  " 

The  inner  room  was  large  and  lofty,  with  a  long, 
latticed  window  that  looked  out  on  the  garden. 
It  had  been  a  coach-house  of  a  fly  proprietor  a 
lono'  time  ag-o,  and  since  that  a  wash-house,  and 
there  was  a  copper  still  at  one  end. 

"There,"  said  Mr.  Lawson,  throwing  out  his 
bare  arm ;  his  shirt-sleeves  were  rolled  up. 
"  There's  the  place,  and  yoiu'  father,  Miss  Eobin- 
son, is  as  welcome  to  it — (What's  the  rent  to  be, 
Lizah  % — Oh,  fourteen,  good  !) — welcome  to  it  as 
the  flowers  in  May.  Excuse  my  walking  rather 
unsteady  :  it's  the  rheumatiz  in  my  knees — fur- 
niture— any  sort  of  painting  or  graining  he  can 
do  here  all  to  isself ;  and  if  he  ever  wants  a  glass 
of  beer,  he's  only  got  to  call  out,  and  my  boy 
John  will  run  for  it  to  the  Harker  Arms ;  which 
he  knows  the  Avay." 

There  was  very  little  doubt  from  Mr.  Lawson's 
loquacity  that  John  did  know  the  way.  Mrs. 
Lawson  consigned  her  husband  back  to  his  bench 
as  soon  as  possible,  and  the  negotiation  soon  con- 
cluded, for  Amy  was  too  unsuspecting  to  drive  a 


THE  LODGIXGS  AT  FOXTFORD.        21 

bargain,  and  Mrs.  Lawson  overthrew  j\Iiss  Chivers 
at  once  on  tlie  item  of  coals  and  attendance. 

*''  Fourteen  shillings  a  week  is  what  Mr.  Baker 
(a  shopman  at  Bailey,  the  draper's)  paid," — and  to 
that  she  referred,  as  lawyers  quote  Tidd  and 
Blackstone,  or  High  Churchmen  the  fathers — 
"  fourteen  shillino-s  a  week,  not  including^  wash- 
ing,  use  of  kitchen  fire,  or  attendance.  Boot 
cleaning  the  only  other  extra — yes,  boot  cleaning 
and  the  use  of  the  piano." 

'Amy  having  discovered  the  piano  to  be  a  mere 
cupboard,  and  destitute  of  two  notes  in  every 
octave,  with  great  promptitude  proposed  to  cancel 
that  item.  Agreed.  The  treaty  was  finally  drawn 
up,  and  the  whole  weekly  payment  put  down  at 
sixteen  and  sixpence,  not  including  washing. 
Amy  left  dehghted,  with  Miss  Chivers,  who  was 
smilingly  self-confident  that  without  the  aid  of 
her  experience  the  lodgings  would  have  been 
twice  as  expensive,  and  that  Amy  would  never 
have  had  the  painting-room  thrown  in.  Even 
small  illusions  help  to  make  life  bearable ;  with- 
out those  greater  ones,  love,  hope,  ambition,  who 
would  care  to  live  an  hour  ? 


22  THE   vicar's    courtship. 


CHAPTER  11. 

THE   ARCHERY   MEETING. 

The  eventful  day  had  come  tliat  Mrs.  Harker 
had  resolved  was  to  render  secure  the  future 
alliance  of  the  houses  of  Harker  and  Cantelupe, 
and  to  make  the  grandson  of  the  future  Lord 
Mazagan  the  heir  of  fifteen  miles  of  good  Wilt- 
shhe  land. 

Countless  money  had  been  expended  on  the 
event.  Two  white  marquees,  one  striped  with 
blue  and  the  other  with  pink,  had  been 
erected  in  a  broad  well-mowed  meadow  that  lay 
under  the  Abbey  terraces,  and  between  the  gar- 
dens Avhich  were  detached  from  the  house  and 
the  Inigo  Jones's  archway  where  Travers  lived. 
By  a  flight  of  fancy  to  which  they  were  indebted 
to  Amy's  quick  and  lively  invention,  the  one  tent 
bore  the  flag  of  England,  and  the  other  the 
tricolor  of  France.  It  was  to  be  a  small  Field  of 
the  Cloth  of  Gold  in  miniature.  The  space  was 
close  mown  and  well  rolled,  and  everything  was 


THE   ARCHERY    MEETING.  23 

ready,  even  to  tlie  Duke  of  Downsliire,  who, 
having  played  liide-and-seek  with  the  gout  for 
six  weeks,  had  got  well  just  in  time  to  present 
the  chief  prize — good,  kind  creature — although 
he  would  have  to  take  the  train  that  very  after- 
noon and  attend  a  meetino;  of  the  alarmed  Con- 
servative  party  at  Lord  Derby's  early  the  next 
day.  Nothing  can  be  so  agreeable  as  a  false 
managing  and  fashionable — or  would-be  fashion- 
able— Avoman,  when  all  goes  exactly  as  she  wishes. 
She  literally  skates  over  the  world,  slides  down 
the  path  of  fashion  radiant  as  a  sunbeam.  So 
among  her  assembling  guests  that  day  slided  Mrs. 
Harker. 

Lord  Mazagan  had  just'  come,  and  the  Duke 
was  expected  every  moment.  .  Lord  Mazngan 
was  a  gallant,  made-up  young  old  man,  of  the 
Palmerstonian  type, — a  thin,  wiry,  middle-sized 
sham  person,  affecting  a  youthful  jaunty  style  of 
dress,  spite  of  scanty  hair  and  full  wiry  grey 
whiskers.  You  could  mark  the  period  when  he 
ceased  to  adapt  himself  vigorously  to  modern 
fashions  by  his  stiff  upright  collars  and  his  cascade 
stock  fastened  by  a  large  carbuncle.  He  was  a  hunt- 
ing man  when  the  gout  would  let  him.  He  was 
also  a  Whig  of  the  old  school,  that  is,  a  behever  in 
clique  government,  and  his  sympathies  with  the 
working  man  and  labourer  were  about  equal  to 


24  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

those  of  a  Jesuit's  with  Garibaldi.  In  a  word,  he 
was  a  pleasant,  flippant,  gay,  insincere  old  im- 
postor, living  on  respectable  terms  of  fashionable 
indifl'erence  with  his  wife,  meeting  her  not  nnfre- 
quently  at  other  people's  houses ;  still  with  the  ordi- 
nary world  and  the  county  a  very  popular  man, 
ready  to  join  in  anything  that  the  majority  liked, 
and  calmly  watching  with  selfish  indifl'erence  the 
nephew  who  was  to  succeed  him  in  the  title 
''  coming  to  grief "  at  one  of  t}iQ  earliest  fences 
on  "  the  primrose  path."  Attired  in  a  cut-away 
coat,  buttoned  over  the  chest,  rather  light  trou- 
sers, with  a  bunch  of  Eussian  violets  in  his 
button-hole,  and  the  most  immaculate  Magenta- 
coloured  kid  gloves.  Lord  Mazagan,  shrewd  and 
debonair,  looked  the  very  man  who  ought  to 
keep  a  pack  of  fox-hounds,  but  leaves  it  to  a 
nephew  to  incur  the  expense.  It  was  indeed 
generally  supposed  in  his  part  of  Wiltshire  that 
Lord  Mazagan,  having  no  children,  regarded  the 
aberrations  of  the  Honourable  Fitzegbert  Cante- 
lupe  with  a  quiet  but  still  rather  malicious  satis- 
faction. If  the  young  Honourable  was  throAvn,  it 
was  pretty  clear  to  everybody  that  Lord  Mazagan 
would  not  pick  him  up;  nor  did  this  gay  old 
nobleman's  selfish,  but  good-natured  and  sensible 
wife,  either  convey  by  her  manner  much  promise 
of  future  aid  in  an  emergency.     As  a  j^rofessed 


THE   ARCHERY   MEETING.  25 

ladies'  man,  Lord  Mazagan  was,  liowever,  an  im- 
mense acquisition  at  a  i^arty,  and  ]\Irs.  Harker 
made  great  play  with  him. 

It  was  half-past  one,  and  the  Duke  had  not 
yet  arrived.  Things  began  to  look  serious.  Days 
were  short  now.  Mr.  Harker  reconnoitred  the  road 
to  Fontford  with  anxious  eyes.  In  the  meantime 
Miss  Harker,  the  crack  shot  of  the  day,  was  ex- 
plaining to  Mr.  Cantelupe  and  a  group  of  her  spe- 
cial adherents,  the  respective  merits  of ''  self-bows  " 
(bows  made  of  one  piece  of  wood)  and  ''backed 
bows "  made  of  yew  and  hickory,  illustrating 
her  statements  by  stringing  and  unstringing  her 
own  bow,  which  was  an  old  "  Kensal,"  which  en- 
abled her  to  throw  herself  into  some  very  graceful 
and  Dianesque  attitudes,  much  to  -the  loud  whis- 
pered admiration  of  her  coterie.  She  had  also 
read  aloud,  after  much  pressing,  the  register  of 
her  last  week's  shooting,  which  proved  her  success 
to  be  infallible.  The  chief  prize,  a  regal  brooch 
of  remarkably  fine  brilliants  and  opals,  was  al- 
ready as  good  as  hers.  It  would  be  for  her  mer- 
cifully to  allow  others  to  contend  for  the  other 
prizes,  a  chased  silver  bracelet,  and  a  gold  arrow 
with  ruby  and  emerald  feathers. 

It  must  be  confessed  that  even  a  prejudiced 
spectator  would  have  found  something  to  admire 
in  Miss  Harker  s  costume,  though  it  was  perhaps 


26  THE    TICAE's    COUETSHIP. 

just  a  little  theatrical  and  over-clone.  Slie  wore  a 
green  belted  jacket  lapelled  like  a  man  s  coat,  but 
with  green  silk,  and  a  skirt  of  fine  green,  a  shade 
darker  than  the  jacket.  A  grey  deer-stalker, 
with  stiff  scarlet  feathers  slanting  to  the  top,  gave 
her  bold,  hard  face  a  jannty  amazonian-look  by 
no  means  unbecoming.  Quiver  at  her  side, 
bracer  on  her  left  arm,  tassels  at  her  belt,  and 
shooting-glove  on,  she  looked  a  very  Belphoebe, 
dangerous  to  all  susceptible  men  who  admired 
st^'le  more  than  modest  grace,  and  ''go ''more 
than  the  frank  purity  that  still  clistingTiishes  the 
true  unsophisticated  English  girl  before  her  fresh- 
ness and  bloom  have  vanished  in  the  heat,  bad 
air,  and  the  hardening  competition,  envy,  and 
jealousy,  of  several  London  seasons.  Self-confi- 
dent, conscious  of  wealth  and  a  certain  cleverness, 
she  moved  a  self-elected  queen  among  the  girls 
and  matrons  of  all  ages  who  smTOunded  her, — 
the  tall,  the  short,  the  plain,  the  quiet,  the  fast, 
and  the  slow.  Amy — Amy  the  flower  of  them 
all — was  like  a  hidden  primrose  behind  these 
flaunting  dahlias,  and  moved  unnoticed  in  the 
thronor. 

Amy  had  not  even  a  bow — she  did  not  intend 
to  shoot ;  on  reflection  she  had  so  decided, 
although  latterly  her  practice  had  been  steadily 
improving,    especially   in    a    shght    breeze,    the 


THE   ARCHERY    MEETING.  27 

effects  of  T\'liicli  slie  had  amused  herself  and 
Ethel  by  studying.  She  was  devoting  herself 
to  Miss  Chivers,  whose  old-fashioned  dress  and 
largish  bonnet  gave  her  rather  an  incongruous 
appearance  amid  such  a  bed  of  tulips.  Ethel  was 
engrossed  with  Julia  Beauflower  and  two  girls 
dressed  in  black  of  about  her  own  age,  daughters 
of  the  Eector  of  Fontford,  who  had  lately  died. 
The  Honourable  Fitzegbert,  looking  tall,  tawny, 
and  handsome  in  his  well-cut  dress,  was  strolling 
from  group  to  group  with  a  recurrence,  perhaps 
scarcely  accidental,  to  Amy,  and  some  very  loud- 
talking  dashing  girls  near  her,  to  whom  Beau- 
flower  was  talking;. 

Lord  Mazagan  was  taking  the  most  gaily  af- 
fected interest  in  Miss  Harker's  equipment. 

"Ton  my  soul,"  he  said,  "I  daresay  Fm  a 
stupid — awfally  stupid  creature,  but  I  can't  see 
any  difference  in  what  you  call  the  bobtailed 
arrow  from  any  of  the  others.  Now  frankly,  can 
you,  Harker  V 

Harker  thought  there  was  a  difference,  but 
could  hardly  tell  where  it  lay. 

"  Oh,  papa  !  how  can  you  be  so  blind  ? 
Don't  you  see  the  feather  on  the  arrow  is  bob- 
tailed  ?  " 

Lord  Mazagan  put  up  his  gold  double  eye- 
glass, and  declared, — 


28  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

"  It  really  is  !  Oh,  yes,  so  it  is !  Extraordi- 
nary I  didn't  see  it  at  a  glance." 

"  These  are  barrel-shaped  arrows,  you  see,'' 
said  the  fair  archer,  "  thicker  in  the  middle  ;  then 
the  points  differ  in  shape." 

"  Awfully  interesting,"  said  my  lord,  who 
seemed  positively  thirsting  for  knowledge,  and 
ready  like  Cato  to  begin  Greek  at  sixty. 

Mr.  Goodrick  was  discoursing  to  Dr.  Briscoe, 
who  had  been  pressing  Amy  to  compete,  but 
without  eifect,  on  the  old  English  archery.  The 
doctor  wanted  to  know  whether  Eobin  Hood 
could  really  shoot  a  mile,  split  a  willow  wand  or 
his  adversary's  arrow. 

"  Not  he  ! "  said  Mr.  Goodrick,  who  was  pre- 
pared even  on  this  out-of-the-way  subject ;  "bah ! 
all  brag  and  lies  ;  bows  are  a  foot  shorter  now 
and  arrows  ten  inches ;  even  three  hundred  yards 
is  tremendous  shooting.  You'll  see  these  ladies 
presently ;  half  the  arrows  will  go  anywhere,  and 
all  to  the  left,  just  as  rifle  bullets  have  a  ten- 
dency to  the  right.  There  is  no  real  accuracy 
over  a  hundred  yards." 

"England  would  be  a  fhng,  but  for  the 
crooked  stick  and  grey  goose  wing,"  said  the 
doctor,  rubbing  up  his  memory. 

"All  nonsense  ;  they  nsed  eagles'  and  peacocks' 
feathers,  but  turkeys'  are  best.     One  thing,  how- 


THE    ARCHERY    MEETING.  ^9 

ever,  is  certain,  that  tlie  old  archers  used  heavier 
arrows,  for  these  shafts  here  would  never  penetrate 
well-tempered  plates  of  Milan  steel." 

"  One  thing  I  cannot  understand  very  clear," 
said  Miss  Chivers  to  Amy.  ''  I  know  Tm  a  stupid 
old  thing;,  but  how  do  the  shots  count  ? " 

"  Oh  !  it's  so  simple,"  said  Amy  ;  ''  it's  one  for 
the  white,  three  for  the  black,  five  for  the  blue, 
seven  for  the  red,  and  nine  for  the  glorious  gold 
— that's  the  bull's  eye.  I  got  two  golds  yester- 
day in  three  shots ;  wasn't  that  nice  ?  '  I  do  best 
when  there  is  wind." 

"  Oh,  I  see,"  said  Miss  Chivers,  ruminatingiy, 
having  already  quite  forgotten  the  relative  value 
of  the  rings.  The  facts  had  evaporated,  all  but 
the  one  fact,  that  the  gold  was  the  best. 

"  Good  gracious,  how  pale  mamma  looks  ! " 
said  Miss  Harker,  as  Mrs.  Harker  suddenly 
stepped  from  one  of  the  marquees  with  an  open 
letter  in  her  hand. 

"  Oh,  such  a  disappointment — dear,  dear,  how 
unfortunate,"  said  Mrs.  Harker,  in  vain  trying  to 
conceal  her  chagrin.  "  His  Grace  is  obliged  to  go 
off  this  morning  to  Windsor.  Council  called 
sooner  than  he  expected — great  regret.  And  now 
I  have  come  to  ask  you,  my  lord,  to  do  us  the 
honour  of  presenting  the  prizes  on  this  occasion." 

"  I  shall  have  the  sincerest  pleasure,"  said  the 


30  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

gay  young-old  lord.  Tlien  drawing  Mrs.  Harker 
mysteriously  aside,  lie  said,  ''  Will  you  do  me  the 
favour  of  telling  me  wlio  that  very  charming  girl 
is  talking  to  that  old  bird  in  the  hideous  bonnet. 
She  is  not  one  of  the  Chetwynds — eh  1  She  is 
indeed  really  most  charming." 

Mrs.  Harker  s  face  visibly  chilled,  and  a  slight 
foo'  of  chamn  rose  over  it. 

''  That  girl,"  she  said,  drily,  "  why,  that  is  our 
governess.  Yes,  she  is  very  well,  but  she  is  spoiled 
by  that  dreadful  English  mauvaise  lionteJ^ 

"Mauvaise  horde  or  not,"  thought  Lord  Mazagan, 
"  Fitzegbert  is  making  great  play  with  her ;  and 
'pon  my  word  I  don't  wonder  at  it." 

A  slight  wind  had  sprung  up,  a  nor'-wester, 
that  sent  the  brazen  varnished  beech-leaves 
sweeping  over  the  range.  It  made  Miss  Harker 
rather  cross,  for  she  did  not  shoot  so  well  when 
there  was  wind.  Presently  the  brass  band  began 
in  the  English  tent,  relieved  at  intervals  by  a  rifle 
band  in  the  other  tent,  and  the  competitors  took 
their  places.  There  Avere  eleven  ladies  on  either 
side.  There  were  to  be  fifty  arrows  shot  at  sixty 
yards  and  forty  at  fifty  yards.  The  shooting  was 
to  commence  at  sound  of  the  bugle. 

A  constant  arrival  of  carriages — the  continuous 
grinding  of  the  gravel  under  whose  wheels  had 
long  been  heard — had  now  filled  the  meadow  w^ith 


THE   ARCHERY   MEETING.  31 

half  the  beauty  and  fashion  of  Wiltshire.  The 
servants,  too,  and  some  of  the  country-people, 
chiefly  women  and  children,  and  several  of  the 
farmers  and  local  tradesmen,  including  Farmer 
Brown,  Mr.  Pitts,  the  Lawsons,  the  landlord 
of  the  Peal  of  Bells,  &c.,  had  been  allowed  to 
seat  themselves  on  the  lower  slope  of  the  terrace 
on  steps  cut  for  them  in  the  turf  and  covered  with 
carpeted  planks.  The  notion  of  this  section  of 
the  spectators  was  of  the  vaguest. 

"  Well,  I  do  like  to  see  bow-arrow  shoot,  they 
flies  so  pretty,''  observed  ]\Irs.  Brown. 

"  It's  all  nice  enough,"  said  her  worthy  husband, 
"but  I  don't  believe  that  any  one  of  them  girls 
would  ever  kill  a  Frenchman  if  she  were  to  fire 
away  from  now  till  next  Warminster  Fair." 

It  may  be  necessary  to  observe  that  by  French- 
men the  honest  farmer  did  not  mean  Gauls,  but 
crows,  who  were  much  more  his  enemies. 

Foremost  among  this  section  of  the  spectators, 
and  close  to  the  grooms  and  one  or  two  gardeners, 
stood  Travers,  who  was  talking  to  Mr.  Pitts  with 
patronising  arrogance,  as  if  the  whole  meeting  had 
been  got  up  for  his  sole  amusement.  Mr.  Harker, 
conscious  that  the  man's  eye  was  on  him,  avoided 
looking  that  way,  feeling  in  him  a  nightmare  that 
made  the  very  sunshine  darkness. 

In  the  meantime  every  form  of  nervous   pe- 


32  THE    vicar's    COUHTSHIP. 

clantiy  prevailed  among  the  competitors.  There 
were  discussions  as  to  the  strength  of  their  bows, 
whether  under  or  over  fifty  pounds,  the  weight 
of  arrows,  the  style  of  loosing,  the  way  of  aiming, 
the  Belgian  bow-strings  and  Meyler  targets. 
Miss  Harker,  who  was  a  theorist,  was  great  upon 
aiming,  and  had  pins  arranged  on  her  left-hand 
glove  to  guide  her  as  to  the  elevation.  There  are 
just  such  pedants  in  rifle-shooting,  pragmatic  prigs, 
who  do  nothing  without  their  wdnd-gauges,  small 
telescopes,  powder-funnels,  and  such  pedantic 
paraphernalia,  which  are  despised  by  the  true  eye, 
firm  hand,  and  steady  nerve. 

The  bugle  was  just  about  to  sound  when  it  was 
discovered  that  one  of  the  French  eleven,  a  Miss 
Ada  Bennett,  of  JMot combe,  had  not  come. 

"  Is  there  no  one,  my  dear  sir,  who  can  take 
her  place  ? "  said  Lord  Mazagan  to  Beauflower, 
who  happened  to  be  next  him.  "  This  is  really 
very  serious — a  very  serious  obstacle  indeed.  It 
seems  a  pity  to  remove  one  of  the  English  eleven ; 
and  yet,  my  dear  Mrs.  Harker,  I  really  see  no 
other  remedy." 

"  There  is  a  young  lady  here,"  said  Dr.  Briscoe, 
kindly  urging  forward  Amy,  whose  hand  he  held, 
*'  who,  Ethel  tells  me,  Mrs.  Harker,  is  by  no 
means  an  unskilful  shot  in  private.  She  will, 
Im  sure,  oblige  the  French  party." 


THE    ARCHERY    MEETING.  33 

Mrs.  Harker  looked  by  no  means  pleased  at 
this  mode  of  loosino;  the  knot. 

"  She  has  no  bow,  and-  is  hardly  properly 
equipped." 

"  Oh,  mamma,"  cried  Ethel,  bursting  forward, 
"  I  can  run  and  get  Miss  Seymour's  bow  that  she 
left  here  last  week;  and  Amy  does  not  use  bracer 
or  belt,  and  as  for  gloves,  any  old  glove  will 
do." 

Mrs.  Harker  was  carried  away  in  the  applause 
of  several  dozen  more  or  less  silvery  voices,  and 
Amy,  whose  face  wore  a  beautiful  flush,  was  duly 
chosen  Captain  of  the  French  eleven  in  place  of 
the  missing  miss.  She  took  up  her  bow  with 
quiet  self-assurance,  and  resolved  to  do  her  best. 
Th'^  wind  was  fresher  now,  and  she  knew  how  to 
humour  that  capricious  element.  Ethel,  in  spite 
of  a  correction  from  her  sister,  was  gambolling 
in  triumph  round  Amy  as  she  took  up  her  posi- 
tion and  sent  her  first  arrow  into  the  blue  in  a 
good  line  for  the  gold,  and  an  inch  nearer  than 
Miss  Harker's,  which  had  been  uproariously 
applauded. 

"  She  has  a  good  eye,"  said  the  doctor  to  Mrs. 
Harker,  who  made  no  reply,  but  turned  to  a  lady 
next  her. 

"  He  that  can  shoot  fayre,"  said  Mr.  Goodrick 
to  the  Vicar,   "lacketh    nothing   but    shootynge 


Si  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

straigiit  and  keeping  of  a  lengtli,  whereof  cometh 
liitynge  of  the  mark/^ 

"Oh,  so  you  have  read  Eoger  Ascham  1 " 

"  I  have,  I  confess/' 

"  What  is  there  you  have  not  read  V 

"  Your  modern  poets." 

"  Ah,  you  shouki  read  the  best  of  them.'' 

"  Not  now.  Well,  at  all  events  we  are  spared 
in  women  the  tricks  Ascham  describes  in  Henry 
the  Eighth's  time — the  hurry  after  the  arrow,  the 
lifting  up  one  leg,  the  shouting,  the  swinging  round 
the  bow.  These  girls,  you  see,  do  this  shooting  as 
they  are  taught  to  do  everything,  in  a  restrained, 
conventional,  entirely  formal  v^ay — all  exactly 
alike — as  they  ride,  and  dance,  and  play,  and 
think — ugh !  Sheep ;  yes,  we're  all  sheep  now, 
men  and  women." 

The  Vicar,  being  anxious  to  advise  JuHa,  who 
was  on  the  French  side,  had  placed  himself 
between  her  and  Amy — a  very  pleasant  neigh- 
bourhood. Cantelupe,  after  a  faint  attempt  to 
keep  himself  on  the  side  with  which  Miss 
Harker  was  shooting,  had  gradually  sidled  off 
to  Amy's  target,  and  was  flirting  \dgorously 
with  Julia  Beauflower,  of  whose  Beatrice-like 
sarcasms  he  had  a  wholesome  fear,  not  un- 
mingled  with  that  sort  of  relish  that  men 
acquire  for  olives  and  other  things  at  first  unpala- 


THE   ARCHERY   MEETING.  35 

table  till  the  taste  has  been  educated  for  them. 
In  the  same  group  with  Cantelupe  stood  Jack 
Talbot,  a  young  Guardsman,  his  especial  friend 
and  adviser,  a  good-looking  fellow,  mth  a 
blonde  mustache  and  a  great  deal  of  light  haii\ 
He  had  been  l^rought  by  Cantelupe  for  the 
express  purpose  of  asking  his  opinion  of  Miss 
Harker,  and,  what  was  equally  important,  of  her 
father  and  her  irrepressible  and  alarming  mother. 
He  was  paying  great  attention  to  a  dashing 
brunette,  selecting  her  arrows  and  giving  her 
advice  as  to  the  elevation.  The  result  of  the  good 
and  disinterested  advice  was  not  so  satisfactory, 
however,  as  might  have  been  wished,  as  the 
brunette^s  arrows  generally  went  under  or  over 
the  target,  a  fact  which  she  satisfactorily  attributed 
to  the  arrows  beins:  of  a  wrong;  kind  of  wood. 
But  she  was  kindly  consoled  by  JuHa  Beauflower, 
who,  shooting  recklessly,  and  mth  the  sauciest 
iu  difference,  somehow  contrived  to  nail  the  target 
nearly  every  time,  though  never  very  near  the  gold. 
The  French  became  much  discouraged.  Ethel, 
who  alternated  between  the  two  camps,  reported 
that  Carry  had  been  scoring  like  anything  till  the 
wind  began  to  rise,  and  since  then  she  had  only 
got  two  reds  in  four  shots. 

*'  Vive  la  France  !  "  cried  Dr.  Briscoe.     "  Miss 
Kobinson  has  got  a  gold.    Let's  hurrah." 

B   2 


36  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

It  was  Amy's  fii'st  gold  that  day,  so  she  was 
pleased  when  the  folks  and  all  her  friends  came 
round  and  congratulated  her.  Mr.  Cantelupe 
declared  it  was  awfully  well  aimed,  and  all  her 
party  began  to  applaud.  She  had  allowed  well 
for  the  wind,  and  given  them  a  notion  of  how  far 
to  the  right  of  the  target  to  shoot.  The  words 
awfully  good  were  used  several  hundred  times  on 
that  occasion ;  and  Amy  looked  very  pretty  as 
she  became  excited;  the  colour  rose  rather  fuller  to 
her  cheek,  and  her  clear  grey  eye  sparkled  with  plea- 
sure. Ethel  stayed  so  long  congratulating  her  that 
she  had  to  be  recalled  rather  sharply  by  her  jealous 
sister,  and  sent  to  the  house  for  another  bow-string. 
Miss  Harker  had  had  two  misses  running. 

"  Vive  ]a  France  ! "  again  cried  the  doctor. 

Miss  Chi  vers  and  Julia  were  delighted.  The 
Yicar,  too,  was  warm  in  his  congratulations,  and 
that  seemed  to  please  Amy  more  than  any  of  the 
others.  Mr.  Harker  came  round,  gave  a  cold 
approval,  and  said  with  such  a  wind  there  was 
no  knowing  where  the  arrows  would  fall.  Talbot, 
with  the  malicious  intention  of  what  he  called 
"  riling  the  old  party,"  went  round  to  Mrs.  Harker 
and  praised  Amy's  shooting. 

"Awfully  good,"  he  said,  stroking  his  mustache; 
"awfully  good;  that's  a  gold  twice  running.  France 
will  run  you  close,  now." 


THE   AECHERY   MEETING.  37 

"  Pray  don't  talk  so,  you  good  people  there," 
said  Mrs.  Harker,  spitefully;  "this  is  a  most  im- 
portant moment  in  the  contest.  Ethel,  don't  run 
about  so,  but  keep  near  your  sister  and  select  the 
arrows  for  her." 


38  THE   VICAE's    courtship. 


CHAPTEE  III. 

GIVING    THE    PEIZES. 

It  was  a  pretty  sight,  the  field  under  the  Terraces 
at  that  moment.  The  wind  considerably  increasing, 
much  to  Miss  Harker's  vexation,  and  Amy's  quiet 
satisfaction,  blowing  the  rival  flags  out  in  azure 
and  crimson  streams.  The  two  targets  at  each 
end,  with  their  rings  of  motley  colours,  shone  in 
the  occasional  sunlight  like  shields  of  ancient 
chieftains  before  the  introduction  of  heraldry. 
The  brazen  leaves  scattering  across  the  range, 
gave  life,  animation  and  movement  to  the  scene ; 
the  bells  of  Fontford,  in  the  distance,  were  ringing 
a  merry,  hopeful  marriage  peal,  recklessly  defiant 
of  all  divorce  courts.  The  young  Amazons  who 
were  competing,  flirting,  laughing  and  chattering, 
had  formed  in  pleasant  and  ever-varying  groups 
round  the  targets  nearest  to  the  lake  where  Lord 
Mazagan  and  his  nephew  were  the  centre  of  noisy 
circles.  The  oi  j^oUoi,  in  the  shape  of  grooms, 
keepers,   footmen,   coachmen   and   farmers,   were 


GIVING   THE    PPJZES.  o9 

loudly  discussing  the  chances  of  the  contest,  with 
strong  predilections  for  Miss  Amy,  "whose  gentle, 
unassuming  ways  had  won  every  one  about  the 
Abbey.  "  Xo  pride  about  her,"  as  Farmer  Bro^^Ti 
said,  '*and  as  good  a  girl  as  ever  trod  shoe-leather." 
Travers,  far  in  advance  of  the  rest,  was  loudly, 
very  loudly  expressing  his  opinion  to  the  head 
o;room  and  the  farm  bailiff — the  latter  a  rouo-h, 
red-faced  man,  who,  having  been  a  labourer  once, 
was  peculiarly  severe  to  every  one  under  him — 

that  the  Avhole  business  was  a  d piece  of 

foolery,  and  that  a  httle  pigeon  shooting  would 
have  been  worth  all  the  bow  and  arrowing;  he  ever 
set  eves  on.  Travers  had  edo-ed  so  near  the  targ-et 
that  Mr.  Harker,  who  was  discussing;  with  Lord 
Mazagan  Cantelupe's  chance  for  Bibury,  turned 
and  frowned  at  him;  but  the  head  keeper  returned 
the  froAvn  with  a  stare  of  insolent  indifference, 
and,  walking  a  little  further  from  the  target,  lit 
an  enormous  cioar,  and  continued  his  conversa- 
tion  with  all  the  calmness  of  a  man  of  the  world 
and  an  equal. 

"AVho  is  that  man,  Harker?"  said  Lord 
Mazagan,  putting  up  his  gold  eye-glass  for  a 
moment,  with  slight  surprise.  "  Isn't  that  your 
head  keeper  ?     Eather  a  free  manner,  eh  '? " 

Mr.  Harker's  blood  curdled. 

'•'Yes/'    he    replied,    carelessly,    ''he   has   bad 


40  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

manners,  but  lie's  an  invaluable  servant,  and  very 
careful  of  the  pheasants/' 

"  I  hear  he's  a  dead  hand  on  the  poachers.  I 
wish  my  man,  Parkinson,  was  half  as  good,  but 
you're  lucky  in  everything,  Harker.  We  of  the 
old  stock  are  too  conservative,  and  we  are  such 
bad  men  of  business.  So  you  really  think  Fitz 
has  got  a  chance  for  Bibury  ? " 

"  If  he  stands  I  feel  sure  he  will  get  in,  but  he 
may  meet  with  formidable  competitors." 

"  Oh,  no  ;  there's  only  young  Bennet  of 
Eidgway,  and  he  has  no  position.  Fitz  will 
make  the  running." 

Harker  meditated.  At  that  moment  there  was 
a  moving  off  of  the  Amazons  towards  a  third 
marquee,  where  a  collation  was  laid  out.  They 
were  waiting  for  the  wind  to  go  down.  That  was 
Mrs.  Harker's  notion. 

"  Come,  my  lord,"  he  said,  "  let's  join  the  ladies; 
my  wife  thought  a  glass  of  champagne  would  give 
a  pleasant  fillip  to  the  shooting.  This  wind  has 
rather  spoiled  the  affair.  There  is  no  certainty, 
such  weather  as  this." 

"  Well,  I  thought  that  very  pretty  little — very 
charming  little  governess  of  yours  shot  extremely 
steady." 

"  Mere  fluking ;  she's  had  no  practice.  That 
sort  of  slap-dash  shooting  away  sometimes  scores 


GIVING   THE   PRIZES.  41 

wonderfully.  You'll  see  my  girl,  now,  when  she 
really  has  it  to  do.  It  is  really  very  uphill  fight- 
ing ;  she  has  no  one  to  back  her,  and  she  has 
hitherto  been,  jDerhaps,  rather  too  contemptuous 
of  her  humble  adversary." 

"  More  fool  she,"  thought  Lord  Mazagan  ;  but 
he  only  said,  "  Outsiders  will  sometimes  win  when 
the  best  horse  loses.  Look  how  Fitz  dropped  his 
money  on  that  favourite  last  year." 

Mrs.  Harker  was  especially  polite  to  Mr.  Good- 
rick,  and  as  patronizingly  familiar  to  the  Vicar  as 
he  would  permit  her  to  be,  for  his  defensive  pride 
was  always  an  armour  he  kept  ready  to  slip  on 
against  such  assailants ;  she  was  condescendingly 
kind  to  Miss  Chi  vers.  She  also  took  excellent  care 
so  to  manoeuvre  as  to  seat  her  elio;ible  dauorhter 
next  the  eligible  heir  to  a  peerage.  As  for  poor 
Amy,  no  one  would  have  thought  of  her  had  not 
the  Vicar  secured  her  a  place,  and  found  for  her, 
Julia,  and  the  brunette  Amazon,  who  was  always 
lively  and  rattling,  three  places  in  the  snuggest 
corner  of  the  tent,  where  he  supplied  them  with 
the  whitest  wings  of  fowls,  and  a  proper  quantity 
of  champagne ;  but  Amy  was  obdurate,  nothing 
would  induce  her  to  sip  more  than  half  a  glass. 
The  l^runt  of  the  contest  was  still  to  be  borne, 
and  her  comrades  were  eager  to  have  her  opinion 
as  to  the  best   manner  of  loosing,   aiming,   and 


42  THE    VICAE's    courtship. 

other  pedantic  mysteries  of  the  art,  which  they 
discussed  in  a  pretty,  mysterious  conclave,  quite 
away  from  their  English  antagonists.  Amy, 
elected  queen,  and  general  as  well  of  the  well- 
fought  field,  gave  herself  no  airs  of  sovereignty ; 
she  listened  to  the  merest  "mufi""  in  her  band, 
she  had  no  secrets,  she  disowned  all  claims  to 
wonderful  eye  or  artful  hand,  she  had  read  Ford's 
book  Avith  care,  that  was  all.  She  preferred  light 
arrows,  and  a  bow  not  too  heavy.  She  took  care 
to  select  shafts  perfect  in  the  feathers.  She  was 
careful  to  loose  steadily  and  sharply,  and  not  let 
the  arrow  waver  in  the  pulling ;  she  disregarded 
the  old  Avarning  dictum  of  keeping  the  target  a 
little  to  the  left  of  her  knuckles.  There  was  no 
infallible  rule,  she  thought.  It  was  necessary  to 
study  the  different  conditions  of  various  shots. 
When  in  o-ood  shootins;  one  felt  where  the  arrows 
would  go. 

The  brunette  tapped  her  bow  on  the  table  and 
requested,  "  Silence,  girls,  for  our  captain."  Ten 
pretty  faces  were  stretching  towards  Amy ;  twenty 
bright  eyes,  a  little  brighter  for  the  champagne, 
were  fixed  on  her.  This  disconcerted  Amy,  who 
thereupon  leaped  up,  and  said, 

"  Oh,  pray  don't  all  look  at  me  so.  I've  no 
more  rules  to  oive.  I'm  a  mere  beoinner.  What 
is  the  score,  Julia  ? " 


GIVING   THE    PRIZES.  43 

''English,  100;  French,  86,  and  six  more 
shots.     I'm  afraid  we  shall  lose  it."" 

"  Oh  no,  dear  ;  not  if  we  all  do  our  best." 

"  Come,  girls,"  said  the  dashing  brunette,  "  let's 
have  a  trial  arrow  before  they  come  out." 

At  the  other  end  of  the  table.  Lord  Mazagan 
was  on  his  legs  making  a  short  speech  about  the 
whole  business,  and  hoping  that  Miss  Harker,  the 
Maid  Marian  of  the  present  occasion,  would  carry 
off  the  prize,  to  which  her  previous  skill  at  many 
such  festive  meetings  had  so  richly  entitled  her. 
He  would  not  anticipate  events,  but  he  might  say 
that  the  score  showed  that,  in  spite  of  all  the 
skill  and  energy  of  the  charming  champions 
enlisted  under  the  French  banner,  the  jewelled 
brooch  to  be  awarded  by  their  hospitable,  most 
hospitable  host  on  the  present  occasion,  was  as 
securely  Miss  Harker  s  as  if  it  already  sparkled 
on  her  breast.  He  heartily  wished  both  sides 
success  (laughter),  but  as  that  was  impossible, 
he  should  rejoice  in  the  victory  (hear,  hear)  that 
would  award  so  splendid  and  deserved  a  prize 
to  so  fair  and  skilful  an  archer.  (Deafening 
applause.) 

The  shooting  began  again  with  great  spirit;  every 
arrow  drawn  from  the  quiver  was  pruned  with  a 
loving  care ;  even  Julia  Beauflower  discharged  her 
shafts  with  less  impetuosity  and  more  success. 


44  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

Her  first  two  arrows  actually  pricked  the  target 
in  the  white,  and  her  third  was  on  the  verge  of 
the  blue.  The  irrepressible  brunette  got  two 
arrows  in  a  fair  line  under  the  target,  and  one  on 
the  extreme  edge  to  the  left.  Miss  Harker,  a 
little  gayer  but  more  severely  scientific  than  ever, 
now  arranged  fresh  pins  in  her  glove,  on  a  new 
and  sure  principle.  The  first  three  shots  left  the 
French  party  only  ten  behind,  but  their  chances 
were  small.  The  brooch  already  glittered  before 
Miss  Harker's  greedy  eyes.  The  rival  competitors 
were  so  nearly  equal — so  equally  bad,  that  is — 
that  it  was  now  quite  evident,  as  no  one  else 
secured  red  or  gold,  that  the  contest  lay  between 
]\Iiss  Harker  and  Amy.  The  rival  groups  of  France 
and  England  regarded  each  other  with  laughing 
defiance.  Amy's  friends  were  slightly  depressed, 
quiet  and  very  anxious ;  Miss  Harker's  partook 
of  their  leader's  spirit,  and  were  loud  talking, 
arroo^ant,  and  rather  crowino-.  Lord  Mazag^an 
eyed  the  target  through  his  double  eye-glass, 
and  said,  "  Now  for  a  gold."  Mrs.  Harker  was 
repressing  talking  and  questions,  Mr.  Harker 
attending  to  the  scoring.  Ethel,  divided  in 
interest,  was  watching  Amy  from  a  distance. 
Mr.  Cantelupe,  we  regret  to  say,  was  whispering 
nonsense  to  a  pretty,  tall,  gushing  blonde  who, 
being  sister  to   a  competitor,  affected  the   most 


GIVIXa   THE    PRIZES.  45 

sensitive  and  touching  interest  in  every  shot,  but, 
being  peculiarly  short  sighted,  required  Mr.  Can- 
telupe  to  tell  her  exactly  how  the  game  went. 
Jack  Talbot  (longing  for  a  cigar)  was  in  the 
other  camp  stringing  a  bow  for  the  brunette, 
who  had  always  some  part  of  her  panoply  hope- 
lessly out  of  order,  much  to  Julia  s  indignation. 

There  was  a  cheer  from  the  French  at  Amy's 
fourth  shot.  She  had  got  a  red  to  Miss  Barker's 
blue.  She  w^as  steadier  than  ever  now,  point  blank 
to  the  wind,  and  let  the  string  go  with  exquisite 
steadiness. 

"  What  is  that  cheer  for  ? "  said  Miss  Chivers 
to  Mr.  Goodrick,  who  was  delighted  with  her. 
"  I  wish  some  good-natured  person  would  tell  us." 

"  Miss  Eobinson  has  made  the  ■  best  shot  since 
lunch.  Now,  if  she's  a  toady  she'll  fall  off,  and 
let  the  future  peeress  win." 

"  But  she  won't  do  anything  of  the  kind. 
How  dare  you  think  such  a  thing  possible  ? 
iVmy  is  doing  her  very  best — doing  wonderful, 
isn't  she,  Dr.  Briscoe  ?  How  hard  and  suspicious 
some  people  are  !  " 

"  One  for  us,"  said  Mrs.  Harker,  with  rather  a 
nervous  exultation,  as  her  daughter  drew  her  bow 
with  extreme  care  and  at  a  carefully  chosen  eleva- 
tion, and  the  sounding  arrow  struck,  quivering, 
full  in  the  gold.    The  English  gave  a  silvery  shout. 


46  THE   VICAe's    COUETSHIP. 

"I  congratulate  you,  Miss  Harker/'  said  Mr. 
Cantelupe.  "  By  Jove  !  tliat's  an  A  1  shot.  By 
Jove  !  it  is.     Just  look,  Talbot." 

"  First  class,''  said  tlie  not  enthusiastic  Talbot. 
"  I  wonder  if  Eobin  Hood  ever  shot  as  well  as 
that.     Couldn't  touch  it,  I  should  think." 

"  Now  then,  Amy,  dear,"  said  Julia,  "  now  for 
one  of  your  best  shots.  Don't  go  too  much  to 
the  right ;  the  wind's  down  now." 

Amy  said  nothing,  but,  without  turning  to  her 
friends,  pulled  true  and  firmly  for  a  sound  point- 
blank  shot.  The  arrow  left  the  strino;  clear  and 
sharp,  and  descended  on  the  blue  ring  in  a  good 
line  for  the  gold. 

"  We've  no  chance,  Julia,"  she  said,  as  she 
made  way  for  the  brunette;  ''but  still  we're  nearly 
ecjual.  If  Miss  Dobson  gets  even  a  white  this 
time,  we  shall  be  only  two  behind.  The  English 
seem  to  forget  we've  been  creeping  up,  though 
j\Iiss  Harker  has  beaten  me.  I  feel  very  sure  of 
the  target  now,  but  I  must  keep  a  little  more  to 
the  right ;  the  wind's  increasing  a  little.  I  shall 
use  my  new  arrows  for  these  last  two  shots.  Oh, 
I  should  so  like  to  win." 

"  And  I  should  so  love  to  see  you  carry  oflf  the 
brooch.  Amy.  But  just  look  at  Miss  Dobson ; 
flirting  to  the  last  moment  with  that  horrid  man 
with  the  fair  mustaches." 


GIVING   THE    PRIZES.  47 

And  so  she  was.  Jack  Talbot  had  offered 
a  special  arrow :  she'd  pulled  it  sharply  from 
him,  and  he,  artful  fellow  (pretending  he  was 
hurt),  obtained  her  sympathy,  and  uttered  some 
nonsense  in  a  low  voice  about  Cupid's  arrows,  by 
Jove,  being  ten  thousand  times  sharper.  But 
the  brunette  had,  nevertheless,  an  eye  to  busi- 
ness, and  did  her  best  to  hit  the  target,  and 
she  did  so,  too,  to  her  great  delight,  on  the 
very  extreme  edge  of  the  blue.  The  French 
were  just  one  ahead  ;  still,  with  Miss  Harker's 
superiority,  the  odds  were  two  to  one  against 
them. 

There  was  something  about  Amy^s  manner 
now  that  irresistibly  drew  the  A^icar's  eye  to  her. 
She  was  so  quiet,  resolved,  and  unpresuming  ;  no 
sharp  words,  like  Miss  Harker,  for  the  careless 
and  "  the  muffs  " — no  grand  manner  when  her 
turn  came — no  ostentation  of  leadership — no 
great  depression  at  doing  badly — no  ill-restrained 
arrocrance  at  success.  She  was  all  throuo-h  the 
same  happy,  equable,  resolute,  amiable  girl,  a 
little  conscious  of  being  put  forward  as  a  cham- 
pion, yet  by  no  means  shrinking  from  the  respon- 
sibility ;  quietly  pleased  when  the  Vicar  had  a 
word  of  praise  for  her,  or  Miss  Chivers  came  up 
with  Julia  and  cheered  her  on,  or  Ethel  l^rought 
her  a  special  arrow,  or  Dr.  Briscoe  or  Mr.  Good- 


48  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

rick  complimented  her  on  lier  skill.  Amy  did 
not,  like  some  girls,  seem  confident  that  love 
and  fortune  awaited  her  the  moment  she  put 
out  her  hand  for  them  :  she  had  rather  a  slightly 
passive  look,  that  seemed  to  express  the  feel- 
ing that  where  she  was  no  love  could  reach 
her,  and  that  her  life  was  consecrated  to  duty. 
It  was  not  an  ascetic  or  a  Pharisaic  look ;  it  was 
only  an  unconscious  shadow  of  sacrifice,  devotion, 
and  resignation,  but  it  gave  a  tenderness  to  her 
artless  beauty  that  joy  and  happiness  could  never 
have  given. 

Miss  Harker  got  a  blue,  and  Amy  a  red. 
There  were  two  more  shots ;  on  them  hung  the 
fate  of  the  match,  for  the  wind  was  now  so 
strong  that  only  the  two  leaders  came  on  the 
target  at  all.  Miss  Harker  had  watched  Amy 
and  discovered  the  plan  of  keeping  far  to  the 
right.  In  the  next  round  Julia  got  a  white,  and 
no  one  else  anything,  but  Miss  Harker  struck  the 
blue,  and  Amy  the  red.  A  gold  now  would  tie 
them.  Amy  took  good  aim.  She  was  calmer 
than  usual.  She  aimed  a  foot  from  the  target, 
and  in  a  good  line.  She  drew  the  bow  firmly, 
till  the  back  of  the  bow  touched  the  lower  part  of 
the  steel  of  the  arrow. 

"  I  daren't  look,"  said  Julia  to  her  brother  ; 
"  tell  me  what  it  is." 


GIVIXG   THE    PRIZES.  49 

Whiz !  Avent  the  arrow,  and  then  Tick  !  against 
the  strained  canvas. 

The  Enghsh  gave  a  groan,  the  French  a  ring- 
ing shout. 

"  It's  a  gold,  Ju,"  cried  the  Vicar,  waving  his 
hat. 

"  Oh,  you  dear  pet !  "  said  Miss  Chi  vers,  em- 
bracing her. 

"  Now,  Carry,  take  great  care,"  said  Mrs. 
Harker,  "  and  you'll  tie  her ;  but  oh,  this  terrible 
wind.  I  A\dsh  to  gracious  it  wouldn't  blow  just 
now." 

Miss  Harker  was  a  little  flurried.  She  thought 
herself  sure  of  tying,  and  she  wanted  to  tie  in  a 
careless,  indiflerent  way,  but  yet  she  was  fully 
aware  it  required  good  shooting,  and  she  felt  her 
hand  shake,  and  the  pin  arrangement  at  the  back 
of  her  left  hand  seemed  to  grow  as  large  as  a 
forest  of  fir  trees.  Moreover,  she  observed  her 
quasi  lover  picking  up  Amy's  glove,  and  that  put 
her  out ;  and  moreover,  Julia  Beauflower,  whom 
she  detested,  and  whose  sarcasm  she  rather  feared, 
smiling.  She  seized  a  moment  when  there  was  a 
lull,  and  aimed.  She  had  drawn  the  arrow  to 
the  full,  when,  just  as  she  loosed  it,  a  tremendous 
gust  of  wind  came,  and  the  arrow,  too  much 
elevated,  fell  just  to  the  left  of  the  outer  leg  of 
the  target  stand.     The  French  were  victorious  by 


50  THE    vicar's    COUETSHIP. 

seven.  In  a  moment  Amy  was  surrounded  by 
her  delighted  friends. 

"  If  we  had  been  only  men,"  the  brunette  said, 
"  we  Avould  have  carried  Amy  round  in  a  lady's 
chair." 

Amy  was  almost  unduly  calm. 

"Miss  Harker,"  she  said,  going  up  to  that 
mortified  archer,  whom  her  mother  was  vainly 
consoling,  "  that  last  shot  of  ours  was  hardly  fair ; 
the  wind  quite  carried  away  your  arrow.  Let  us 
shoot  it  again." 

"  Oh,  no,  thank  you.  Miss  Eobinson,"  Miss 
Harker  said,  with  cold  hauteur,  and  her  head 
thrown  back.  "  Oh,  no,  thank  you.  You've  won  : 
how,  I  don't  say — but  still  you've  won." 

"  I  would  really  take  her  offer,"  whispered  Mrs. 
Harker. 

"  No,  ma  ;  111  shoot  no  more  such  a  day  as  this." 

"  It's  a  day  for  accident,  not  for  skill,"  said 
Mr.  Harker,  sourly.  "  But  as  the  time  is  going, 
I  must  ask  Lord  Mazagan  to  kindly  step  into  the 
tent  and  bestow  the  prize.  I  hardly  like  to  give 
your  lordship  the  trouble,  but  as  you — — " 

"  No  trouble  in  the  world,"  said  Lord  Maza- 
gan. "  I  shall  be  only  too  happy  to  bestow  the 
prize  on  the  fair  victor." 

"  I  cannot  accept  it,"  said  Amy,  firmly,  ad- 
dressing herself  specially  to  his  lordship  and  Mrs. 


GH'IXG    THE    PEIZES.  5i 

Marker.  "  I  never  intended  to  accept  it.  I  only 
joined  the  French  side  by  accident.  I  do  not  belong- 
to  the  Wiltshire  Ladies'  Archery  Club.  Directly  I 
saw  that  I  might  win,  I  resolved  not  to  accept  it. 
I  would  rather,  my  lord,  if  I  may  be  allowed  to 
fix,  I  would  rather  it  was  made  the  second  prize 
for  the  short  distance.'' 

"Afi'ected  little  proud  thing,"  said  Miss 
Barker  to  her  ladies. 

"  That  is  mere  pride,"  said  Mrs.  Harker  to 
her  husband  ;  "  what  intolerable  airs  these  gover- 
nesses give  themselves." 

"  She  knows  they'll  press  it  on  her,"  said  Miss 
Harker  to  her  party. 

She  had  disliked  poor  Amy  before,  but  now 
she  hated  her  as  a  rival.  Naturally  full  of  spleen 
and  not  bearing  her  protracted  maidenhood  with 
any  very  exemplary  patience,  she  said  to  herself, 
"A  mere  governess  at  forty  pounds  a  year — a  little 
underhand  thing"  (she  stood  at  the  last  target, 
spitefully  plucking  out  the  arrows  as  these  bitter 
thoughts  passed  through  her  mind) — "affecting 
not  to  care  about  that  splendid  brooch  and  all  the 
homage  she's  had  to-day,  and  looking  as  demure 
as  a  nun,  just  to  make  a  scene.  If  I've  any  power 
at  home,  she  shall  go  within  three  months.  / 
hate  her !'' 

"  I  think,"  said  ]\Ir.  Harker,  stepping  forward, 


LIBRARY 

UNIVERSITY  OF  ILLINOIS 


52  THE   VICARS   COURTSHIP. 

for  people  had  begun  to  collect  to  hear  what  was 
going  on  about  the  award,  "  every  one  will  agree 
that  Miss  Eobinson  has  shown  very  good  taste 
in  this  matter,  and  in  declining  the  prize  to 
which  she  had  become  entitled  by  what  we  may 
perhaps  not  unfairly  call  an  accident.  I  shall, 
therefore,  with  her  consent,  put  it  up  for  the 
second  contest  at  the  shorter  distance." 

There  was  much  secret  indignation  at  this  dis- 
graceful injustice,  but  the  servile  herd  soon  dis- 
covering that  Amy  was  only  the  governess  to  the 
Harker  s,  applauded  the  decision.  The  oi  polloi 
on  the  Terrace  took  this  disgraceful  shuffle  much 
more  to  heart,  and  after  their  manner  were  much 
prompter  in  their  decisions,  and  much  more  out- 
spoken in  their  ojDinions. 

"  Well,  I  never  seed  the  like  of  that,"  said 
honest  Farmer  Brown  to  Mr.  Pitts  who,  serving 
the  family,  was  much  more  reserved  in  his  re- 
marks ;  "  I  never  seed  the  like  of  that ;  if  I  was 
to  get  my  hand  on  one  of  those  silver  cups  my 
boy  shoots  for,  catch  me  letting  it  go  again  till  I 
knew  the  reason  why.  Suppose  I  caught  a  rabbit 
in  a  snare,  do  you  think  Td  let  him  go  merely  to 
have  the  pleasure  of  catching  he  again  ?  Not  a 
bit  of  it.  But  I  suppose  these  gentlefolks  know 
their  own  ways." 

"  I  tell  you  what  it  is,"  said  the  head  keeper, 


GIVIXG    THE    PRIZES.  53 

very  loud,  to  his  friend  Benson,  the  head  groom, 
"it's  another  of  the  governor's  confounded  mean 
tricks,  he's  always  at  'em — cursed  tomfoolery. 
Come  along,  Benson,  you  come  to  the  Lodge  and 
let  us  have  a  friendly  glass  together.  I've  got 
some  of  the  oldest  rum  to  be  got  in  all  London  ; 
we've  seen  enough  of  this  cursed  humbug  for  one 
day." 

"  You  lads  be  off  to  the  stable  dnectly  and  see 
to  the  horses,"  said  Benson,  in  a  valedictory  ad- 
dress to  the  grooms,  who  hung  about  near  him ; 
"  and  mind  if  I  find  those  body-clothes  again  not 
brushed,  I'll  make  a  clearance  of  some  of  you  as 
sure  as  my  name's  Benson." 

All  Mr.  Harker  s  servants  had  become  tyrants, 
small  imitations  of  himself. 

The  three  grooms  followed  the  two  men  wist- 
fully till  they  grew  small  in  the  distance  and 
disappeared  in  the  Lodge,  and  quaffed  the  rum 
several  times  over  in  their  imag-inations. 

Nearly  everybody  had  retired  into  the  English 
marquee  to  arrange  the  conditions  of  the  next 
match.  Mrs.  Harker  was  all  smiles,  for  she  was 
delighted  at  her  husband's  clever  promptitude  in 
taking  Amy  Kobinson  at  once  at  her  word. 

''  The  little  artful  hussy,"  she  said  to  herself, 
"  attracting  everyone  to  her  wdth  her  affected 
ways  and  sham  modesty,  and  then  giving  up  the 


51.  THE   vicar's    COUETSHIP. 

prize  hoping,  of  course,  tliat  Mr.  Cantelupe  and 
every  one  would  speak  up  for  her/' 

Amy  in  the  meantime,  unobserved  except  by  a 
few  friends,  had  wandered  up  the  meadow  towards 
the  lake,  her  bow  in  her  hand,  her  quiver  still  by 
her  side.  Miss  Chivers  was  with  her,  and  Mr. 
Beauflower  and  Dr.  Briscoe  (Mr.  Goodrick  had 
left  before)  having  -washed  the  Barkers  and  their 
more  immediate  friends  good-bye,  followed  her. 
All  at  once  Ethel  came  racing  from  the  tent, 
put  her  hand  in  Amy's  and  looked  up  at  her  be- 
seechingly with  tears  in  her  eyes. 

"  Oh,  Amy  dear,  you  ought  to  have  taken  the 
prize.  Papa  and  mamma  were  so  vexed  you 
didn't  take  it,  and  Carry  is  so  hurt.  Do  take  it, 
Amy  ! " 

"  No,  Ethel  dear,  it  was  never  meant  to  be  put 
within  my  reach,  and  I  had  no  right  to  compete 
for  it.  Xo,  run  back,  darhng,  I  shan't  slioot  any 
more.     I  wish  I  hadn't  shot  at  all." 

Amy's  other  friends  were  equally  vexed  at  her 
decision,  yet  secretly  they  applauded  her  for  her 
unselfishness. 

"  It  was  too  generous  of  you,  dear,"  said  Miss 
Chivers,  with  kind  reproof,  "for  you  had  fairly 
won  it ;  it  was  all  nonsense  about  the  wind,  that 
was  as  much  against  you  as  against  the  others." 

"  Oh,  I  am  not  generous — it  Avas,  I   daresay, 


GIVING   THE    PRIZES.  55 

my  pride  ;  but  I  fear  tliey  never  meant  me  to 
have  it,  and  I  saw  ]Miss  Harker  looking  so  dread- 
fully vexed  that  I  quite  pitied  her.  For  the  time, 
perhaps,  in  the  excitement  I  had  almost  forgotten 
I  was  only  a  poor  governess  whom  nobody  cares 
about."' 

''Whom  every  one  cares  about,  you  dear. 
You're  a  deal  too  good  for  these  hard,  selfish 
people  ;  they  judge  you  by  themselves.  I  won- 
der if  j\Iiss  Caroline  would  have  griven  back  the 

o 

prize  !  0  dear  no ;  I  don't  think  so,  do  you, 
Dr.  Briscoe  ? " 

The  doctor  was  walkino;  behind  her  with  the 
Vicar. 

"  Not  she  !  " 

"  Doctor,  come  and  walk  with  me  a  little ;  I 
want  to  ask  you  about  those  poor  Chetwynds." 

The  doctor  came,  leaving  Mr.  Beauflower  with 
iVmy.  Could  that  have  been  the  object  of  worthy 
Miss  Chivers  ?  They  were  both  silent  for  a  mo- 
ment, and  then  Amy  said  in  her  beautifully  frank 
and  natural  way, — 

"  I  have  to  thank  you,  Mr.  Beauflower,"  she 
said,  "for  all  your  kindness  to-day  among  these 
great  people.  I  do  think  it  was  your  advice 
about  allowing  for  the  wind  that  made  me  win. 
It  was  so  very  kind  of  you." 

"You  value  the  little  advice  I  gave  you  too 


56  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

highly,  Miss  Eobinson ;  it  was  your  own  good 
eye,  accurate  observation,  and  calm  persistency. 
I  was  astonished  to  see  you  so  unrufEed  at  failure 
and  so  undated  with  success." 

''  I  felt  almost  sorry  when  1  won,  to  see  how 
mortified  those  I  had  beaten  appeared.  Still  I 
tried  hard  to  beat,  that  I  confess.  Miss  Harker 
would  have  beaten  me,  I  know,  but  for  the  wind, 
and " 

"  Her  thinking  that  she  shot  too  well  to  be 
beaten  by  any,  that  made  her  careless." 

"  Yes ;  how  could  you  tell  what  I  was  going  to 


sav 


?" 


"  Because  I  tried  to  read  your  thoughts." 

The  Vicar  said  this  in  such  a  peculiar  and 
almost  tremulous  voice  that  Amy  grew  silent 
again.  Suddenly  she  looked  up  with  a  frank 
smile,  and  said, — 

"  Do  you  know  I  have  broken  one  of  the  com- 
mandments to-day,  for  I  have  been  envying  Lady 
Mazagan,  who  can  do  what  she  Hkes,  and  is  rich 
enough  to  despise  other  people's  wealth,  and  has 
no  one  over  her." 

Beauflower  was  silent  for  a  moment.  A 
thought  of  his  OAvn  poverty  struck  him  then  as 
with  a  knife. 

"I  am  afraid,  my  dear  Miss  Eobinson,"  he 
said,  "  that  even  Lady  Mazagans  are  not  as  inde- 


GIVING   THE    PEIZES.  57 

pendent  as  you  would  think.  These  great  people 
often  want  money.  It  used  to  be  reported  that 
Lady  JMazagan  pawned  her  jewels  twice  every 
year  for  her  two  chief  parties.  But,  good  gra- 
cious, who  are  those  odd  people  stopping  in  the 
fly  ?     I  suppose  they  take  it  for  some  fair." 

As  he  spoke,  the  very^Slobury  fly  that  had 
brought  Amy  and  Mr.  Goodrick  had  stopped  in 
the  high  road  opposite  the  target,  almost  exactly 
in  the  place  where  Mr.  Goodiick  had  fallen.  The 
same  man  drove  the  fly,  but  he  was  now  sober 
and  alert.  A  pretty  little  maid-servant  in  a  plaid 
shawl  sat  beside  him  on  the  box,  and  shared  his 
throne,  and  a  little  trim  man  was  mounting  his 
head  out  of  the  window.  All  at  once  seeing  Amy 
he  looked  back  into  the  carriage,  said  something, 
then  opened  the  door,  let  down  the  steps,  and  got 
out. 

"  Why,  it's  j)apa  ! ''  said  Amy,  running  forward. 
"  Here  are  papa  and  mamma.  Miss  Chivers.  Oh  ! 
how  glad  I  am." 

The  little  man,  in  a  seedy  blue  boat  cloak  with 
a  ram's  wool  collar,  advanced  to  Amy,  who  ran 
to  him  and  kissed  him,  and  then  darted  to  the  fly 
to  welcome  and  kiss  her  mother. 

"  My  darling  Amy,  how  nice  meeting  you  so  ! 
We  heard  at  Slobury  of  this  gxeat  archery  meet- 
ing, and  thought  we  might  perhaps  see  you  as  we 


58  THE   VICAe's    courtship. 

passed,  if  only  at  a  distance.  Doesn't  papa  look 
well  since  his  good  fortune  1 " 

"  Wonderfully  well !  Dear  papa,  I  liave  got 
you  such  nice  lodg^ino-s  at  Fontford.  Mr.  Law- 
son's,  driver — the  driver  will  know — and  I  shall 
come  to-morrow  to  see  if  you  are  comfortable. 
Mr.  Lawson  is  such  a  nice,  cheerful,  chatty  man, 
papa,  and  Mrs.  Lawson  is  a  nice,  civil  woman ; 
and,  papa,  there  is  such  a  nice  large  work- 
shop for  your  painting.  But  I  must  introduce 
you  to  my  friends.  You  have  heard  me  talk  of 
Miss  Chivers  ;  and  this  is  Doctor  Briscoe — good, 
kind  Doctor  Briscoe — and  this  is  Mr.  Beau- 
flower,  the  brother  of  Julia,  whom  I  so  often  write 
about.'' 

The  introductions  were  made  with  the  usual 
formality. 

"  I  do  hope,  sir,"  said  Mr.  Eobinson  to  Beau- 
flower,  with  perhaps  rather  too  sudden  cordiality, 
"  that  we  shall  have  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you 
soon  at  Fontford  1 " 

"  I  shall  have  great  pleasure,"  said  Beauflower, 
his  heart  rather  sinking  within  him  at  the  ill- 
bred  little  man  who  kept  saying  sir ;  but  the 
mother  he  liked,  as  far  as  he  could  judge. 

''  Are  you  fond  of  art,  sir  ?  " 

"Yes,  Very!" 

"  Then  we'll  have  a  chat  together  about  art. 


GIVIXG    THE    PRIZES.  59 

IVe  got  some  sketches  I  sliould  like  to  show 
you." 

"  I  shall  be  most  happy/' 

"  I  think,  Beauflower/'  said  Doctor  Briscoe, 
"  we  are  de  trap.  We'd  better  leave  ]\Iiss  Eobin- 
son  with  her  father  and  mother,  they  will  have 
much  to  talk  of.    We'll  go  back  for  your  sister?" 

That  night  as  ]\Ir,  Cantelupe  and  his  friend 
Talbot  sat  with  slippered  feet  resting  on  the  fender 
of  the  dining-room  at  Swallowcliff  Castle,  Mr. 
Cantelupe  said,  suddenly, — 

"  Well,  Jack,  do  you  think  the  Harker  daugh- 
ter will  do  ?  " 

"  Yes,"  replied  Jack  ;  "she  might  do,  but  the 
father  and  mother  won  t.  But,  by  Jove,  if  that 
little  governess  had  only  ten  thousand  a  year, 
I'd  go  in  for  her  to-morrow." 


60  THE    vicar's    courtship. 


CHAPTEE  lY. 

MR.    AND   MRS.    ROBINSON   AT   FONTFORD. 

Three  or  four  days  after  the  archery  meeting 
the  Vicar  and  Mr.  Goodrich  sallied  forth,  attended 
by  Leo  and  Wasp,  to  pay  a  visit  to  the  Eobin- 
sons.  The  former  felt  curious  to  gauge  the  mind 
of  the  artist,  the  latter  to  see  the  parents  of  Amy, 
to  whom  he  had  taken  a  liking  almost  unaccount- 
able in  so  cynical  and  apparently  cold  a  nature. 

November  had  begun ;  the  leaves  were  almost 
gone ;  the  harvest  was  over ;  the  swallows, 
those  summer  friends  of  ours,  had  flown  to  the 
African  sands.  The  downs  were  looking  bare  as 
the  Eussian  steppes.  The  few  beech  leaves  left, 
hung  like  a  spendthrift's  rags  upon  the  chilled 
boughs.  It  was  arranged  that  Beauflower  was  to 
show  Mr.  Goodrich  the  ruins  of  an  old  Jacobean 
manor  house  that  lay  a  little  distance  from  the 
road,  and  about  half-way  between  Summerleas 
and  Fontford.  The  place  would  have  more  than 
an  antiquarian  interest  to  him,  the  Vicar  said, 


MR.    AND    MRS.    ROBINSON    AT   FONTFORD.        61 

because  the  ruins  stood  close  behind  the  old 
house  from  whence  his  friend  Staunton  had  thirty- 
eight  years  before  eloped  with  the  daughter  of  the 
poor  clergyman. 

It  was  one  of  those  cold  fresh  mornings  after 
rain  when  the  air  is  washed  crystalline.  The 
distant  woods  appeared  nearer  to  the  eye  than 
usual,  and  their  spiry  outlines  cut  clear  and  sharp 
against  the  pale  blue  of  the  sky.  There  was  no 
sun  visible  as  a  distinct  orb,  but  there  was  a 
diffused  brightness  where  it  lay  in  ambush,  ready 
to  leap  out,  and  claim  its  throne.  To  the  south- 
west a  long  roll  of  ashen  grey  cloud  portended 
future  rain.  The  leafless  hedges  sparked  with 
rain  drops;  and  the  withered  branches  of  the 
larches,  strung  with  small  rough"  brown  cones, 
glistened  also  with  the  evanescent  jewellery  of  the 
morning.  The  road  to  Fontford  lay  between 
sloping  plough  lands  and  meadows,  the  Terrace 
woods  rising  at  a  little  distance  to  the  left,  and 
on  the  right  rose  above  the  village  of  Summer- 
leas  the  hioii  fields  of  Farmer  BroA\Ti,  that  led 
towards  the  upper  down,  and  the  wind-swept 
region  between  Bibury  and  Stonehenge. 

About  half  a  mile  on  the  road  they  met  Dr. 
Briscoe  driving.  He  was  good-naturedly  testy, 
and  had  about  him  rather  more  than  usual  that 
secret  air  of  latent  power  that  doctors,  Jesuits, 


62  THE   VICAES    COURTSHIP. 

and  confessors  almost  unconsciously  display.  He 
looked  like  a  good-natured  but  ratker  ruffled 
Jove,  wko  was  too  kindly  to  use  his  tkunberbolts. 
"The  secrets  of  a  hundred  families  reposed  in  his 
safe  keeping.  The  skeletons  of  many  houses  were 
under  his  lock  and  key.  Not  a  house  he  passed 
but  he  knew  the  secret  sorrow,  the  threatened 
calamity,  the  thorn  in  the  flesh,  to  which  only 
death  could  furnish  the  anodyne.  Not  a  man  or 
woman  he  met  but  he  knew  their  vices  or  their 
self  sacrifice.  He  knew  stories  that,  cast  abroad, 
would  have  fallen  like  shells  and  shattered  the 
peace  of  a  dozen  families.  He  lived  like  a  man 
in  a  perpetual  battle,  and  met  death  daily  in  his 
most  hideous  shapes.  Yet,  such  is  the  efiect  of 
habit,  he  could  dine  and  talk  as  usual  after  these 
terrors,  and  the  secrets  lying  safely  in  his  heart, 
causing  him  no  more  trouble  than  the  poisons 
that  nestled  in  the  gilt-lettered  drawers  of  his 
surgery. 

"  "Well,  doctor,  busy  ?  "  said  Beauflower,  after 
Briscoe  had  greeted  his  two  friends. 

"  Busy,"  growled  the  worried  practitioner ; 
"  busy,  yes — pretty  life  mine  ;  went  to  bed  last 
night  late,  tired  as  a  dog,  just  warm  in  my  first 
sleep,  the  infernal  night-bell  rings  as  if  it  was 
gone  mad  ;  popped  my  night-cap  out  of  that 
little   window.      I   made   up  stairs,    found    old 


ME.    AXD   MRS.    EOBINSOX   AT   EONTFOED.        63 

Farmer  Hacker  at  Purtwood  was  desperate  ill. 
Purtwood  six  miles  off  across  the  Downs — cold, 
and  raining  liard ;  got  there,  found  it  simj^le  case  of 
cholic — merely  wanted  hot  fomentations  that  any 
child  might  have  given  ;  charge  two  shillings, 
and  the  old  hunx  will  pay  me  about  next 
Michaelmas,  and  perhaps  not  then ;  delightful 
life,  country  medical  man  ;  came  back  and  found 
my  assistant  drunk — spirits  of  wine  all  gone ; 
turned  him  off  on  the  spot,  and  now  got  double 
work  to  do  ;  hardly  had  time  for  breakfast — 
glorious  life.  Good-bye,  I  must  be  off — good 
deal  of  measles  at  Birdbrook." 

"  Brave-hearted  fellow,  that  is,''  said  Mr.  Good- 
rick  ;  "  been  in  Bath,  now,  or  that  sort  of  place, 
would  by  this  time  in  the  day  have  called  on  half 
a  dozen  hypochondriacal  old  maids,  and  earned 
his  six  guineas.  How  irregularly  these  things 
go  !  I  should  have  confidence  in  this  man,  he  is 
quick  and  prompt ;  doesn  t  humbug  about  and 
flatter,  and  try  experiments,  and  dose  you,  only 
intent  on  bleeding  yom-  purse." 

"  He  is  too  honest  for  his  own  interest.  Some 
people  don't  like  to  be  told  they  are  not  ill. 
They  don't  like  a  doctor's  visits  ceasing  too  soon : 
and  why  not  visit  them  if  they  choose  to  pay  ?  he 
is  too  honest." 

"  Being  a  rare  fault,  let's  forgive  him." 


C4  THE    VICAPvS    COURTSHIP. 

At  a  turn  of  the  road  the  Vicar  took  off  his 
hat  to  a  hidy  in  black  and  her  two  daughters, 
pale,  gentle-looking  girls,  with  auburn  hair. 

"  That  is  poor  Mrs.  Chetwynd  and  two  of 
her  daughters,"  said  Mr.  Beaufiower,  "a  very 
amiable  woman  she  is,  and  very  nice  good  girls 
the  daughters  are,  though  the  eldest  has  not 
much  character.  AVhat  an  iniquitous  thing  that 
dilapidation  law  is  ? " 

"  I  should  like  to  hear  about  it." 

"  Well,  I'll  tell  you.  Chetwynd,  the  husband, 
who  is  just  dead,  was  a  kind,  excellent  man,  but 
indolent,  and  generally  careless  about  money 
matters.  He  was  thirty  years  a  curate  in  Dorset- 
shire." 

"Oh,  your  admirable  Church  of  England  !  Oh, 
your  self-devoted  bishops  ! " 

"  There  is  no  brevet  in  our  profession." 

"Graveyard  of  hope  and  honest  ambition,  as 
modern  journalism  is  the  graveyard  of  genius." 

"Well,  it  is,  I  fear.  After  thirty  years  of 
struggle  and  deferred  hope,  and  at  the  close  of  life, 
health  abeady  going,  Chetwynd,  a  man  with 
five  children,  got,  by  importunity,  and,  I  believe, 
the  interest  of  Lord  ]\Iazagan,  the  living  of  Font- 
ford,  which)  brings  in  245/.  a  year  ;  but  as  there 
are  no  resident  great  men  there,  the  poor  popu- 
lation of  to^^Ti-people  came  to  him  for  everything, 


MR.    AXD   MRS.    ROBINSON   AT   FONTFORD.        65 

subscriptions,  wine,  mutton  —  everything.  He 
was  careless  and  generous,  and  never  refused  his 
aid  ;  but  I  should  tell  you  one  thing  first.  How 
stupid  I  am  !  I  had  forgot  the  very  gist  of  the 
thing.  When  Chet^vynd  came  down  to  take  the 
living,  I  and  my  father  went  over  with  him  (my 
father  had  been  his  fellow-student  at  Oxford)  to 
reconnoitre  the  place,  and  see  the  widow  and 
dauo'hter  of  the  late  incumbent.  The  widow,  who 
had  been  the  rector's  cook,  I  believe,  was  a  vulgar, 
ignorant,  lazy  woman,  entirely  in  the  hands  of  her 
daughter,  who  was  one  of  your  cunning,  chattering, 
dashing  young- old  maids." 

Mr.  Goodrich  laughed  bitterly,  as  if  he  knew 
the  race. 

"  We  found  the  place  miserably  slovenly,  not 
the  least  like  the  house  of  a  gentleman.  The  old 
man  was  said  to  drink  ;  quarrelled  with  every- 
body ;  once  threatened  to  throw  his  church- 
wardens from  the  roof  of  the  church,  where  they 
had  scrambled  to  see  about  some  repairs.  The 
bedrooms  smelt  of  smoke  ;  the  hall  was  like  a 
kennel ;  the  paper  was  peeling  off  the  walls  ;  there 
was  no  stair  carpet  ;  the  cooking  was  done  in  a 
sort  of  hen-house  ;  the  rain  came  in  at  the  draw- 
ing-room. Well,  the  old  woman  and  the  daughter 
played  their  part  admirably.  They  pretended  to  be 
miserably  poor;  they  cried;  they  talked  of  the  dear 


66  THE    VICAE's    courtship. 

deceased,  and  tlie  cruelty  of  moving  before  the 
grave  had  "well  closed  over  him.  They  even  hinted 
at  pauperism.  They  prayed  above  all  things  for 
time.  Chetwynd  was  a  good  Christian  man,  and 
a  warm-hearted  one  ;  he  W' as  touched  to  the  core  ; 
he  felt  that  their  sorrow  might  be  his  wife's  some 
day.  I  remember  well  seeing  the  tears  spring  up 
in  his  eyes.  He  did,  of  course,  all  a  gentleman 
could  do.  He  gave  them  time  to  his  own  great 
loss  and  inconvenience." 

"  More  fool  he." 

"No,  don't  say  that.  Moreover,  he  told  his 
surveyor,  ■\dio  w^as  to  meet  them  that  day  three 
months  about  the  dilapidations,  not  to  be  hard 
upon  the  widow — to  take  a  lenient  and  generous 
view  of  the  repairs,  and  not  to  stick  at  ten  pounds 
or  so  against  his  side  of  the  question.  Their  sur- 
veyor w\as  their  relation  and  the  sharpest  man  in 
Salisbury.  Chetw^ynd's  surveyor  was  a  good- 
natured,  easy  man,  like  himself,  w^ho  did  not  know 
how  poor  Cliet^\ynd  himself  was.  When  the  day 
came  to  examine  the  roofs,  walls,  floors,  &c.,  of 
the  rectory,  the  old  maid  w^is  there  standing 
before  him,  masking  that,  explaining  away  this, 
and  so  chattering  and  bothering  them  that  the 
survey  went  entirely  in  their  favour.  They  got 
off  for  £117,  of  W'hich  Chetwynd  eventually  let 
them  off  £30." 


MR.    AXD    MRS.    ROBINSOX    AT    FOXTFORD.        67 

"Foolao-ain." 

"  No ;  you  would  liave  done  tlie  same.  Well, 
one  more  child  came.  Then  the  fifth  year  Chet- 
wynd  caught  small-pox  in  a  poor  man's  cottage, 
where  he  went  to  pray  by  a  dying  man's  side,  and 
he  died  after  a  short  but  expensive  illness,  which 
also  seized  two  of  his  children,  who  were  with  difii- 
culty  saved.  The  poor  old  fellow  named  me  one  of 
his  executors,  and  I  soon  found  out  how  matters 
stood.  The  family — the  widow  and  five  children, 
had  literally  nothing  to  depend  upon  but  the 
interest  on  an  insurance  for  three  thousand  pounds 
which  Chetw}'nd  had  kept  up  through  all  his 
struggles  and  miserable  embarrassments.  The 
poor  woman  was  still  struck  down  with  the  loss, 
and  the  necessity  of  almost  instantly  leaving  the 
home  she  loved  so  dearly  (and  more  dearly  now 
than  ever,  because  it  was  near  the  grave  where 
all  her  hopes  lay  buried),  when  a  cold  business-like 
notice  came  from  the  new  incumbent — a  fellow  of 
Oriel — that  his  surveyor  would  meet  any  one  they 
appointed,  on  such  a  day  and  hour." 

'•'  Ah  !  I  can  see,  poor  things/' 

"  The  Avidow  came  to  me  about  it,  quite 
sanguine  and  unconcerned.  The  house  had  been 
so  lately  surveyed,  and  so  much  money  spent 
upon  it,  besides  rather  lavish  outlays  on  the  gar- 
den— new  pahngs  and  walls,  that  they  felt,  and 


68  THE   VTCAK's    courtship. 

tlieir  Salisbury  surveyor  confirmed  their  confidence, 
that,  twenty  pounds  would  cover  ever3rthing." 

"  Twenty  !    Five  pounds  ought  to.     Paper  and 
Avhitewash." 

"  Wait  a  bit.  The  day  came.  The  surveyor 
from  London,  with  no  interest  in  the  place,  a 
keen,  restless,  energetic  man,  with  two  smart 
clerks,  pushed  ofi"  at  once  (as  it  were)  the  fussy, 
good-natm'ed  old  fellow  employed  by  the  poor 
widow  ;  he  disdained  all  references  to  the  past ; 
he  pried,  and  probed,  and  peered ;  wrenched  up^ 
planks  ;  went  up  himself  into  the  roof,  and  re- 
ported sternly  and  badly  of  the  whole  house  ;  the 
floors  were  full  of  dry  rot,  and  one  wall  was 
wrenched  out  of  the  perpendicular  by  ivy.  When 
his  bill  came  in,  the  poor  woman  was  almost 
paralysed  by  a  total  of  £267  10s.  4c?.,  of  which 
our  surveyor,  with  all  his  zeal,  coidd  only  abate 
£14  6s.  '2d.  There  they  are  now,  poor  creatures, 
with  that  dreadful  debt  hanging  over  them  like 
the  sword  of  Damocles  ;  and  they  have  to  leave 
the  day  after  Christmas,  for  the  new  incumbent 
is  a  hard  business  man  and  a  EituaHst,  and  he  is 
eager  to  begin  with  his  chasubles  and  upholstery 
nonsense.     Now,  is  that  cruel,  or  is  it  not  V 

"It  is  cruel,  but  our  laws  cannot  be  modified 
to  meet  every  case  of  individual  sufiering.  We 
must  do  somethino;  for  them." 


ME.    AXD    MES.    ROBIXSON    AT    FOXTFORD.        69 

''I  knew  you  would  lielp  me,  and  so  will  all 
the  clergy  about  here  ;  and  I  shall  ask  ]\Ir. 
Harker,  he  gives  large  sums  sometimes  to  our 
local  charities." 

"  Yes,"  said  Mr.  Goodiick,  with  a  bitter  sneer  ; 
"  on  the  eve  of  elections,  I  suppose.  Now,  you 
mark  me,  Beauflower,  he  will  do  nothing  unless 
the  subscription  list  is  advertised  in  the  county 
papers.  My  dear  young  fellow,  you'll  find  out 
that  man  some  day  ;  oh,  the  mark  of  Cain  is 
on  him.  But  here  we  are — is  this  the  old 
house  ? " 

A  little  back  from  the  road,  down  in  a  sort  of 
hollow,  there  stood  a  laro^e  brick  house  with  count- 
less  windows,  with  the  shallow  setting  and  heavy 
white  framework  peculiar  to  the  early  part  of  the 
last  centurv.  The  brick  had  oTown  a  mellow  crim- 
son  with  time,  and  contrasted  pleasantly  with  the 
fibrous-like  stems  and  the  green  duplicated  leaves 
of  the  French  honeysuckle,  that  covered  one  half 
of  the  south  front.  The  garden  between  it  and 
the  road,  bordered  by  some  beech  trees,  was  a 
neglected  waste  of  old  shrubbery.  Job's  tears, 
Japanese  mottled-leaved  aucubas  ;  glossy  laurel, 
grown  out  of  all  shape  ;  holly,  and  laurustinus. 

Mr.  Goodrich  observed  the  place  with  the  eyes  of 
a  painter  curious  in  such  studies.  Every  window 
by  turn  he  eyed  almost  as  if  searching  for  some  face 


70  THE    vicar's    COUPvTSHIP. 

to  greet  liim,but  all  looked  desolate.  At  the  largest 
of  the  lower  windows  stood  a  corn-sack  with  a 
sieve  upon  it.  No  fire  could  be  seen,  no  merry 
children's  faces ;  all  was  cold  and  deserted  as  a 
cenotaph.  A  starling  or  two  sat  chattering  on 
the  roof — that  was  the  only  sign  of  life.  The 
rooks  in  the  elm  trees  of  the  nearest  meadow 
Avere  drowsily  rejoicing  in  the  mildness  of  the 
day.     Both  friends  were  sad. 

'''  So  this  is  the  house  ;  yes,  and  there  is  the 
window,  the  second  to  the  right  on  the  second 
floor,  where  the  poor  girl  Staunton  used  to  de- 
scribe put  up  the  signal  for  him  when  it  was  safe 
to  meet  in  the  evening  in  the  ruin.  Poor  girl ! 
Poor  Staunton  !  A  June  night,  thirty-eight  years 
ago ! — thirty-eight  years  ago  ! " 

"  There  used  to  be  an  old  postilion  who  lived 
near  the  Harker  Arms,  at  Fontford,  who  remem- 
bered bringing  the  post-chaise  to  the  farm-gate 
after  dark.  He  drove  them  to  Bath,  and  Mr. 
Staunton,  he  said,  gave  him  fiYe  guineas  for  him- 
self." 

"  A  tall,  gaunt  fellow,  with  prominent  cheek- 
bones V 

"  Yes  ;  why,  how  do  you  know  'i " 

"  Oh,  Staunton  told  me  the  story  a  hundred 
times.  They  had  four  bays.  The  Harker  Arms 
— "  Staunton  Arms  "  then  was  famous  for  its  bays. 


MR.    AND   MES.    EOBIXSON    AT   FONTFORD.        71 

There,  that  small  window  on  the  ground  floor  on 
the  far  right  is  where  she  leaped  down  into  his 
arms.  Poor  girl !  Thirty-eight  years  ago  I  She 
lived  only  a  year.'' 

"  Only  a  year  !     Oh,  yes,  five  years  ;  went  to 
Paris,  and  taught  the  piano  and  drawing." 

"  No,  no,  I  tell  you ;  she  only  lived  a  year — 
one  year  and  a  few  days." 

"  I  think  you  are  wrong,  but  never  mind." 

"I  am  not  wrong.  Well,  where's  the  ruin? 
Somewhere  behind,  I  think  Staunton  used  to 
describe  it.  I  want  to  see  where  he  used  to  meet 
her.  Oh,  how  they  must  have  loved  each  other  ! 
Eight  years  afterwards  Tve  seen  the  big  hot  tears 
stream  do^\^l  his  cheeks  as  he  told  me  of  those 
three  short  months  they  lived  together ;  yes, 
people  loved  then — good  was  good  then,  and  truth 
true.  That's  all  changed.  I  loved  once,  too, 
and  I  love  still ;  l^ut  there  are  no  women  worth 
loving  now — only  those  half-men,  who  talk  slang, 
and  are  ashamed  of  their  own  sex  and  tliek  own 
natural  feelings  of  gentleness  and  tenderness. 
Ugh  !  I  hate  the  whole  pack  !  There  were  angels 
on  the  earth  in  my  days,  and  they  loved  the  sons 
of  men,  and  the  sons  of  men  took  them  for  wives. 
"Where  are  these  ruins  you  talk  of  ? " 

Beauflower  would  not  cross  his  companion  in 
the  mood  that  then  held  him.     Old  men  are  like 


72  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

those  who,  Tennyson  says,  placed  the  golden  age 
in  the  past.  The  Vicar  was  of  the  young  race 
who  see  it  brio-htenino-  before  them  in  the  future. 
How  can  old  men  share  the  hopes  of  the  young  ? 
Sympathy  with  youth  is  an  effort  to  them.  They 
know  what  a  mirage  love  is,  they  know  that  all  our 
pleasures  are  only  illusions  of  more  or  less  vivid- 
ness. They  have  so  often  seen  hopes  pass  like 
slides  in  and  out  in  life's  magic-lantern,  and  they 
know  that  they  all  end  at  last  with  the  plain 
white  surface  of  the  shroud. 

But  the  blood  beat  warm  and  fast  in  Beau- 
flower's  heart,  his  brain  printed  its  ceaseless  pho- 
tographs brightly  and  sharply,  a  vague,  longing 
aspiration  for  deeper  love  and  fuller  happiness 
was  fermenting  in  his  heart.  He  smiled  plea- 
santly Avitli  an  untroubled  face  at  the  old  man's 
bitterness  and  his  regrets,  and  ran  before,  shout- 
ing to  Leo,  who  ramped  after  him,  and  to  poor, 
little,  lame  Wasp,  who  trotted  and  shook  gravely 
after  his  sager  and  more  dignified  companion. 

They  had  turned  through  a  farm-yard,  for  Mr. 
Harker's  farm-bailiff  had  the  house  now,  and 
lived  in  one  corner  of  it,  leaving  the  rest  to  the 
damp,  the  ghostly  draughts,  and  the  rats.  A 
path  across  a  meadow,  where  sheep  were  feeding, 
and  a  side  door  out  of  a  second  farm-yard,  led  to 
the  ruin,  one  side  of  which  looked  upon  a  large, 


MR.    AXD    MES.    ROBINSON   AT   FONTFORD.        73 

old,  neglected  garden,   one  angle   of  wbicli  was 
alone  cultivated. 

It  had  been  a  manor-liouse  of  some  pretensions 
in  the  reign  of  James  I.  Its  first  lords,  the 
Mer^yns,  were  people  of  some  consequence,  and 
stood  several  times  for  the  county.  Some  crime 
was  committed  there  in  the  reign  of  Charles  L, 
and  after  that  the  Merv}ms  sank  into  neglect  and 
obscurity.  The  Charles  II.  Mervyn,  who  cut  down 
the  avenue  leading  to  the  house,  spent  his  gay 
buttei-fly  time  in  London  with  the  Court  rakes, 
and  was  eventually  killed  in  a  duel  in  the  lobby 
of  Drury  Lane,  where  he  had  struck  off  the  hat 
of  a  man  about  town  who  had  kissed  a  pretty 
acti'ess  then  under  Mer^yn"s  protection.  The  next 
Mervyn,  going  too  far  the  other  way,  was  a  mere 
country  moth,  fretting  at  home  in  obscurity  and 
proud  idleness.  (It  is  just  one  race  in  a  dozen 
that  does  not  deteriorate  in  four  generations — 
only  the  strongest  wine  bears  keeping.)  He  was 
only  known  six  miles  from  home  by  his  breed  of 
sheep  and  his  extreme  litigiousness.  Once  only 
the  sun  shone  upon  his  house,  and  that  was  when 
William  of  Orange  spent  the  night  there  on  his 
way  from  Torbay  to  London.  The  expenses  and 
display  of  that  night  nearly  ruined  him.  He  died 
a  few  years  after,  leaving  no  chikben,  and  his 
estate  involved  in  debt.     The   cousin  who   sue- 


74  THE   vicar's    COUETSHIP. 

ceeded,  after  a  ten  years'  lawsuit,  was  a  Bristol 
mercliant,  who  never  visited  it,  but  let  it  out  in 
farms,  compelling  tenants  to  buy  liis  sugar  and 
tobacco,  and  oppressing  them  through  middlemen. 
The  house  then  fell  into  ruin,  and  was  partly 
pulled  down  by  a  bailiff  who  grew  rich  and 
bought  it.  Eventually  it  fell  into  the  hands  of 
Alderman  Staunton,  the  great  "West  India  mer- 
chant whom  we  have  before  mentioned  as  the 
founder  of  the  family,  and  the  friend  of  Beckford 
and  Wilkes,  who  used  it  as  a  quarry  from 
which  to  draw  materials  for  the  house  of 
his  farm-bailiff. 

It  was  almost  difficult  now  to  judge  what  the 
Jacobean  house  had  once  been.  The  moat  that 
had  guarded  its  south  side  was  now  a  mere  ditch, 
partly  filled  with  water  that  in  winter  turned 
to  a  full  flowing  stream,  traversed  by  innumerable 
trout.  A  tree  or  two  only  of  the  old  avenue  re- 
mained, the  lower  boughs  of  which  were  hung 
with  wheat  straws — toll  that  they  had  swept  from 
passing  waggons.  The  back  part  of  the  old 
manor  house,  mere  roofless  walls  and  tottering 
gables  bound  together  by  ivy,  Avas  boarded  up, 
and  used  for  a  tool-house,  which  opened  one  way 
into  the  farmyard. 

The  door  leading  into  the  garden,  on  which  the 
front  of  the  old  house  looked,  was  locked. 


MR.    AND   MRS.    ROBINSON   AT   FONTFORB.        /o 

*'  One  of  the  carters  close  by  here  keeps  the 
key;''  said  Beauflower  ;  "  111  run  and  get  it." 

"  It  used  to  be  kept  open." 

"  What,  do  you  remember  that  ?  " 

"  Yes  ;  I  particularly  remember  that  the  lovers 
used  to  meet  in  the  porch ;  she  came  there  in 
the  dusk  by  the  garden,  and  he  came  by  the  back 
fields  and  through  the  farmyard." 

"  What  a  memory  you  have  ! '' 

"  Yes,  of  some  things.  I  never  had  but  that 
one  friend,  and  I  love  all  that  he  loved.  He  had 
regard  for  three  families  here,  Avho  had  been  kind 
to  his  father — the  Cantelupes,  your  own,  and  the 
Browns.  Those  three  families  I  shall  always 
regard  for  that  reason.  Go  for  the  key,  there's  a 
good  fellow.  I  should  like  to  see  the  old  trysting 
place  that  love  had  so  consecrated  in  Staunton's 
memory.     I'll  wait  here." 

Beauflower  ran  ;  when  he  returned,  he  found 
Mr.  Goodrick  seated  near  some  wheat  stacks,  on 
an  elm  that  had  been  cut  down  ;  and  so  wTapped 
in  thought,  that  he  was  not  at  first  conscious  of 
the  Vicars  return. 

"  Oh,  here  you  are  !  "  he  said,  rising.  "  Well, 
come,  let  us  open  the  door  into  this  enchanted 
garden,  the  scene  of  my  poor  friend's  short-lived 
happiness  and  of  his  long  sorrow." 

Beauflower  opened  the  door  and  Leo  and  Wasp 


76  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

raced  in.  It  was  a  large  deserted  garden,  half  full 
of  nettles  and  overgrown  currant  bushes,  with 
here  and  there  a  mossy  barren  apple  tree.  It 
typified  the  abandoned  hopes  and  the  self-sown 
regrets  of  many  a  man's  life.  Here  and  there  a 
peach  tree  still  partly  hung  to  the  wall,  from 
which  half  its  boughs  had  dragged  the  nails  and 
cloth  loops  that  had  once  held  them  in  vassalage. 
At  one  end  of  the  garden  still  stood  almost  per- 
fect the  porch  of  the  old  Manor-house,  with  one 
large  stone  mullioned  Tudor  window  to  the  left 
of  it.  The  pillars  of  the  porch  were  square,  and 
panelled  with  what  architects  call  the  strap  orna- 
ment. The  slanting  stone  canopy  of  the  roof 
was  partly  displaced,  otherwise  the  whole  work 
Avas  as  fresh  as  if  it  had  been  finished  only  a  year 
ago.  But  the  paving-stone  of  the  entrance  Avas 
cracked  across  and  lined  with  moss,  and  the  stone 
benches  of  the  side  were  displaced.  The  gene- 
rous window  was,  however,  perfect ;  and  it  could 
scarcely  have  surprised  one  if  Master  Shallow  had 
looked  over  a  transom  and  asked  one  the  time, 
or  if  the  arch  face  of  pretty  Mistress  Page,  her 
little  white  neck  girdled  with  a  quilled  ruff",  had 
peeped  from  behind  the  massy  central  mullion, 
and  inquired  if  any  one  had  seen  good  Master 
Slender  lately,  since  he  had  been  hurt  at  fence. 
But,  alas  !  it  was  long  since  the  fire  had  gone  out 


MR.    AXD    MRS.    ROBIXSOX   AT    FOXTFORD.        77 

on  that  hearth,  and  since  guest  had  entered  to 
claim  a  welcome. 

"  It's  a  fine  specimen  of  Jacobean  !  " 

"  Yes  ; "  said  j\Ir.  Goodrick,  replying,  but  to 
himself,  "  this  was  the  place  that  Staunton  used 
to  talk  of;  here  they  met  and  exchanged  their 
vows  eight  and  thirty  years  ago.  Out  upon 
Time!  the  poor  ghd  is  first  taken,  then  my  friend, 
next  his  father,  all  his  race,  and  some  day  the 
whole  ruin  will  tumble  in,  the  whole  story  be 
forgotten,  and  the  very  scene  of  it  destroyed. 
True  is  your  dial's  motto,  "  Man's  life  is  but  a 
shadow,"  and  yet  eight  and  thirty  years  ago  the 
two  who  met  here  thought  their  love  immortal, 
and  their  joy  an  anticipation  of  heaven  !  Bah  ! 
there  are  no  pleasures  but  those  of  the  moment — 
a  good  dinner,  a  full  purse,  a  fine  picture.  My 
philosophy  is  of  the  garden  !  " 

"  And  mine  of  the  porch,"  said  Beauflowei^, 
laughino;.  "  I  hold  those  brief  hom^s  of  true 
love  were  in  themselves  centuries  of  bliss.  After 
all,  only  death  destroyed  that  love." 

"  Ha !  Youth,  youth — the  old  wheel  of  illu- 
sions ;  but  you  will  one  day  find  what  these 
things  are  worth,  and  how  many  grains  of  sand, 
how  many  parrot's  feathers,  how  many  soap-bub- 
bles, a  woman's  love  is  worth  ! " 

"  Philosopher  of  the  deserted  garden  of  Eden, 


78  THE    VICAP.S    COURTSHIP. 

you  will  never  make  me  forswear  my  allegiance 
to  love." 

"  Be  it's  slave  then,  and  awake  a  shivering  pri- 
soner in  the  dungeon  of  matrimony.  Ugh  !  you 
will  think  differently  at  my  age." 

"  As  you  thought  differently  at  mine.  By  the 
bye,  Mr.  Goodrick,  did  Mr.  Staunton  die  rich  ? " 

''  Yes  ;  he  had  only,  I  believe,  two  hundred 
pounds  given  him  by  his  father  when  he  cast  him 
off,  and  half  that  he  left  his  wife  for  her  use  till 
he  could  send  for  her  ;  but  he  entered  a  mer- 
chant house  in  Cuba,  in  which  I  was  junior 
partner,  and  made  a  considerable  fortune." 

''  Who  did  he  leave  it  to  ! " 

"To  me.  We  had  agreed,  half  in  jest,  that 
whichever  of  us  died  first  should  inherit  the 
other  s  money.  With  the  yellow  fever  about,  one 
was  never  safe,  and  such  a  compact  was  not 
uncommon  at  that  time  among  mercantile  men 
in  the  West  Indies.  This  is  an  interesting  place, 
I  shall  come  here  again  and  see  it.  Tell  them, 
please,  I  shall  want  the  key  again." 

Beauflower  ran  and  took  the  key  back,  and  the 
two  friends  started  again  for  Fontford,  episoding 
again  from  the  road  to  the  left  to  gain  the  Abbey 
terrace  as  a  pleasanter  way.  As  they  got  over 
the  stile  into  a  turnip  field,  the  first  of  three 
fields  between  them  and  the  Abbey  park   wall 


MR.    AXD    MRS.    ROBINSON    AT    FONTFORD.        79 

tliat  bounded  the  terraces,  a  man  in  uniform  made 
way  for  them. 

It  was  Archer,  one  of  the  county  police,  in  the 
usual  grotescjue  helmet  and  frock  coat  with  pewter 
buttons  of  his  class — heartier,  but  roug-her  and 
more  undrilled  than  his  city  brethren — he  wore  a 
beard,  was  a  little  clumsy  in  gait,  and  had  trousers 
tucked  up  in  a  most  irregular  way,  for  field  walk- 
ing. He  gave  a  sort  of  rough  salute  as  the  two 
gentlemen  came  up,  with  a  "  Good  morning,  sir  ; 
nice  weather,''  and  as  they  passed,  stopped  and 
looked  after  them.  A  policeman  always  seems  to 
regard  ^T.rtue  as  merely  permitted  to  go  at  large 
on  promise  of  future  good  behaviour.  Terrible 
cynic,  he  meets  no  one  whom  he  may  not  some 
day  have  to  arrest.  He  believes  in  no  one's 
honesty,  not  even  his  own  father's.  He  may 
even  have  to  lock  him  up  some  day. 

''There  was  an  old  gent,"  thought  the  P.  C.  to 
himself,  "  in  the  last  'Hue  and  Cry'  I  saw  at  War- 
minster, just  like  that  old  party;  not  as  I  suspect 
this  old  gent,  but  it's  always  well,  as  the  In- 
spector says  to  me  this  last  Petty  Sessions,  to 
keep  one's  eyes  open.  This  wouldn't  be  the  first 
old  gent  as  had  drawn  a  parson  into  some  swindle 
and  cracked  his  crib  into  the  bargain.  Must  in- 
cjuire  of  that  black  fellow  as  I  sees  about  what 
he  is  ;  but  they  tell  me  he's  taken  that  house  in 


so  THE    VICAE's    courtship. 

the  lane  out  of  Fontforcl,  so  I  suppose  it's  all 
square.  But  as  for  those  parsons,  they  are  mere 
children;  why,  any  flat  can  gammon  them.  There 
isn't  an  area  sneak  in  London  that  couldn't  get  a 
skiv  out  of  them  if  he  tried.  Oh,  they  are  soft, 
and  no  two  words  about  it." 

In  the  meantime  the  Vicar  and  Mr.  Goodrick 
had  mounted  over  the  broken  wall  close  to  the 
keeper's  hut  which  had  so  frightened  Amy  in  the 
dusk,  and  following  a  side  path  through  the 
covert  parallel  to  the  wall,  they  had  pushed  on 
towards  Fontford,  Leo  and  Wasp  driving  up  the 
pheasants  before  them  on  all  sides,  while  count- 
less rabbits  scudded  down  side  paths,  and  now 
and  then  a  grey  wood-pigeon  broke  flustered 
from  the  tops  of  the  fir  trees  over  head. 

"  Isn't  it  a  pity,  Mr.  Goodiick,"  said  Beau- 
flower,  "that  these  keepers  kill  nearly  everything 
but  the  game — squirrels  because  they  nibble  the 
tops  of  the  firs,  kingfishers  because  they  eat  fish, 
owls  because  they  kill  young  pheasants,  moorhens 
because  they  disturb  the  ducks — everything,  in 
fact,  that  does  not  swell  the  bag  and  the  kee]3er's 
fees,  everything  that  gives  variety  to  a  country 
walk  like  this." 

"  Everything  that  cannot  go  to  market,  in  fact. 
Oh  !  huckstering  age,  with  the  lowest  of  ideals,  at 
home  starving  labourers  and  fattening  pheasants. 


ME.   AXD   MES.    KOBINSOX   AT   FONTFOKD.        81 

abroad  spreading  civilisation  by  combined  Chris- 
tianity and  cotton,  wliicli  are  inseparable  in  tlie 
Manchester  mind." 

Mr.  Goodrick  had  scarcely  given  vent  to  his 
last  bitterness  when,  at  a  turning  of  the  path, 
Travers  bore  down  on  them,  his  cheeks  swollen 
with  anger  and  a  too  frequent  recurrence  to  the 
little  flat  bottle  in  his  right  hand  breast  pocket. 
His  hands  were  thrust  violently  do^vn  into  the 
pockets  of  his  stained  brown  velveteen  shooting- 
jacket.  He  was  followed  by  an  insolent  grinning 
fellow  with  a  bundle  of  rabbit  traps  in  his  left 
hand,  and  a  spade  on  his  shoulder. 

"  This  is  a  pretty  bear-garden  you're  making  of 
the  place,"  said  Travers,  shouting  to,  and  cursing 
the  two  dogs ;  "  come  here,  you  big  beast,  or 
111  shoot  you.  Come  to  heel,  d  ye  hear  ?  or 
you'll  have  a  charge  in  you  in  double  quick  time. 
Do  you  know,  gentlemen,  you're  both  trespass- 
ing ?  Perhaps  you're  not  aware  these  are  Mr. 
Harker's  preserves  ?  This  won't  do,  all  this  tor- 
menting of  the  game.  We  breed  'em  at  a  great 
expense,  and  we  can't  afibrd  this  'ere  hurly-burly. 
You  must  clear  out,  gentlemen,  the  less  I  see  you, 
or  any  one  else,  in  this  park  the  better.  I'm 
master  here,  and  I  won't  have  tresjDassing,  and 
that's  what  I  call  what  you  are  doing.  The  open 
terrace  is  free,  but  these  here  walks  must  be  kept 


82  THE   vicar's   COUETSHIP. 

for  me  and  my  men  ;  and  now  you  know,  and 
the  sooner  yon  get  out  of  them  the  better  I  shall  be 
pleased,  for  there's  a  battue  to-day,  and  I  must 
be  getting  the  guns  and  the  dogs  ready.  I  won't 
have  the  pheasants  distm^bed,  and  so  I  tell  you ! " 

This  volley  of  insolent  words,  uttered  in  a 
loud  voice  and  with  sufficient  gesticulation,  had 
startled,  and  for  the  moment  dumbfoundered 
even  the  high-spirited  young  Vicar.  He  fell  back, 
as  braver  men  on  the  advance  sometimes  fall 
back  from  a  sudden  fire  opening  upon  them  from  a 
masked  battery.  The  man  that  formed  Travers' 
retinue  was  grinning  with  stupid  wonder  and 
admiration  at  the  audacity  of  the  head  keeper. 

"  Cheeking  the  parson,"  as  he  afterwards  ex- 
pressed it  at  the  Peal  of  Bells,  seemed  to  him 
'*  reglar  nuts  to  Muster  Travers,  he  warn't  going 
to  stand  no  trespassing,  he  warn't.  Lord  bless 
'ee,  he'd  turn  back  Lord  Mazagan  or  the  Bishop 
hisself  as  soon  as  look  at  he." 

"  What  does  the  man  mean,  Beauflower,  by  this 
insolence  ?"  said  Mr.  Goodrick,  grasping  his  heavy 
gold  mounted  pimento  stick  rather  menacingly, 
and  two  angry  spots  of  red  flushing  out  on  his 
cheek  bones. 

"  I  t(ill  you  what  I  mean,"  shouted  Travers. 
"  I'll  tell  both  of  yer.  That  I  won't  have,  tres- 
passing in  these  here  woods,  gentle  or  simple,  or  be 


MR.    AXD    MRS.    ROBINSOX   AT    FOXTFORD.        83 

he  who  he  will.  I'm  master  here  as  far  as  that 
goes,  and  look  you  here,  sir,  I  don't  know  your 
name,  and  I  don't  want  to,  but  if  that  big  hulking 
dog  of  yours  comes  here  again,  and  you  find  him 
taken  uncommon  ill  before  he  gets  home,  don't 
you  blame  me.  As  for  the  other  dog,  you  see,  he 
keeps  to  heel,  he's  had  one  dose  already,  and  he 
doesn't  want  another,  or  it  might  take  him  in  a 
different  part,  you  see." 

"  You're  an  impertinent  scoundrel,"  said  Beau- 
flower,  his  temper  quite  gone  for  the  moment. 
"  We  have  free  right  from  your  master  to  walk 
here,  or  in  any  other  part  of  his  property.  Take 
care,  take  care,  Mr.  Travers,  a  little  more  of  this 
insolence  and  your  place  won't  be  worth  a  day's 
purchase.  I  shall  write  this  very  night  and  tell 
your  master  exactly  what  has  happened  to-day." 

''  And  mind  it  is  exactly,  for  I  shall  have  my 
story  to  tell  too,  long  before  yom-  letter  can  reach. 
Take  my  advice,  sir,  and  you  won't  waste  yom- 
time  and  your  paper — much  good  your  complaint 
about  the  dog  there  did.  I  tell  you  no  one  inter- 
feres with  me.  I'm  lord  here,  and  I  don't  care 
that  for  you,  or  all  the  parsons  in  the  county. 
And  one  word  more — don't  you  be  so  free  with 
yom'  scoundrils  and  sich  talk,  or  you'll  have  a 
letter  from  my  la^v}'er,  and  he'll  put  you  up  a 
worse  tree  than  you  are  ahx^ady  up.     I  wish  yer 


b4  THE   VICARS   COURTSHIP. 

a  good  morning,  gents,  you'll  find  a  road  there  to 
the  left,  and  don't  try  this  again." 

As  Travers  uttered  this  defiance  he  snapped 
his  horny  fingers,  threw  his  gun  upon  his  shoulder, 
whistled  to  his  abject  dogs,  gave  some  blustering 
direction  to  his  man,  and  clambering  over  the 
breach  in  the  wall  into  the  field  of  young  wheat, 
passed  out  of  sight. 

That  last  taunt  of  the  keeper's  struck  home — 
was  it  j)ossible,  then,  that  the  whole  village  was 
talking  of  his  embarrassments  \  The  Vicar  felt  the 
blood  rush  up  into  his  head.  If  he  had  not  caught  a 
fir  tree  near  which  he  stood  he  would  have  fallen. 
Did  the  very  birds  of  the  aii*  spread  these  secrets, 
or  did  they  ooze  out  slowly  but  surely  from  his 
daily  business  transactions,  and  the  delay  of  this 
or  that  small  payment  ? 

The  next  instant  a  fire  of  anger  blazed  up  in 
his  heart,  and  he  felt  half  inclined  to  club  his 
blackthorn  stick,  follow  the  insolent  rascal, 
and  fell  him  to  the  ground.  A  moment  more, 
and  the  long  acquired  professional  habit  of  self- 
control,  doubly  his  as  a  born  educated  gentleman, 
and  as  a  minister  of  God,  checked  those  wild 
impulses  that  in  the  vvdld  man  are  the  dawnings 
of  murder.  It  was  but  a  moment,  yet  it  seemed 
years.  He  turned  round  to  see  what  impression 
those  wildfire  words  had  produced  on  his  com- 


MPc.    AXD    MES.    ROBIXSOX    AT   FOXTFORD.        85 

panion,  but  Mr.  Goodiick  was  walking  slowly- 
forward,  striking  meditatively  with  his  stick  at  the 
little  dry  fir-cones  that  strewed  the  path. 

"  And  you  expect  much  from  a  man  who 
employs  such  fellows  as  that  ?  " 

''I  do  not  like  Mr.  Barker,"  said  Beauflower, 
with  a  voice  still  perturbed  by  a  ground  swell  of 
anger ;  "  he  is  overbearing  and  mean,  and  tyran- 
nical, but  still  111  do  him  this  justice,  if  he  had 
heard  that  man  just  now,  he  would  have  turned 
him  off  on  the  spot." 

"  Not  he,  that  man  spoke  hke  an  authorised 
man — that  man  has  a  hold  on  his  master,  how- 
ever he  gets  it — write  to-night  and  you'll  see." 

"  I  will  write  to-night,  strongly  too,  and  I  feel 
confident  of  the  result.  I  will  never  set  foot  on 
this  path  again  till  that  man  is  gone." 


86  THE   VICAE's    courtship. 


CHAPTER  V. 

ME.    EOBINSON   SHAKING   DOWN. 

It  was  about  eleven  o'clock,  and  Fontford  was 
as  deserted  as  a  plague-struck  city.  The  children 
were  at  school,  the  poor  people  preparing  dinner 
for  the  shepherds  and  ploughmen  in  the  fields. 
The  sickly  sycamores  planted  by  Mr.  Harker  on 
the  Prince  of  Wales  being  born  looked  sicklier 
than  usual.  There  was  a  waggon  at  the  Harker  s 
Arms,  and  a  boy  knocking  at  the  door  of  Snooks 
the  plumber,  up  near  the  church.  If  London  is 
too  noisy  and  restless,  Fontford  was  certainly  too 
dull ;  they  could  not  l)oth  be  in  the  right.  Salis- 
bury Plain  was  not  half  so  desolate,  because  it  pro- 
mised nothing,  but  the  vexatious  thing  about 
Fontford  was  that  there  was  an  assumption  of 
life  not  borne  out  by  results. 

Susan,  the  pretty  little  maid  who  missed 
London  and  would  have  given  a  year's  wages  for 
Punch,  the  Happy  Family,  the  blind  man  with 
the  dog,  the  dwarf  with  the  accordion,  the  para- 


MR.    ROBINSON   SHAKING   DOWN.  87 

lysed  barrister  in  the  Batli  cliair,  a  street  organ  to 
play  "  I  m  as  beautiful  as  a  butterfly/'  the  latest 
novelty  then  out,  or  any  other  metropolitan  excite- 
ment, opened  the  door  to  theni  when  they  knocked, 
and  informed  them  in  a  modestly  coquettish  way 
that  Mr.  Robinson  was  at  home  and  Miss  Amy, 
but  that  ]\Irs.  Eobinson  had  g-one  out  to  call  on 
]\Iiss  Chivers  and  Mrs.  Chet^Yynd. 

"  Your  names,  if  you  please  V 

"  Rev.  Mr.  Beauflower,  and  Mi\  Goodrich." 

A  slight  tremor  of  which  he  felt  almost  ashamed, 
an  anxiety  for  which  he  could  not  account,  a 
pleasure  which  spread  a  glow  through  his  heart 
— these  were  the  sensations  that  in  the  single 
instant  that  they  waited  at  the  door  passed 
through  Beauflower  s  mind. 

A  quick  volatile  httle  voice  said — '*'  Pray,  show 
the  gentlemen  in.'' 

Susan  tripped  back  radiant  with  smiles  of  plea- 
sure at  the  excitement  of  any  visitors,  and  showed 
them  into  the  small  parloitr.  A  chill  succeeded 
to  the  glow.  Beauflower  saw  no  Amy,  but  there 
was  a  little  brown  glove,  that  must  surely  have 
been  Titania's,  lying  crumped  up  on  the  table 
near  a  roll  of  crimson  and  green  worsted  work. 

Mr.  Robinson  was  busy,  his  little  thin  pink 
face  heated  by  the  atmosphere  of  the  small  and 
rather  '^sti^y"  room,  his  white  hair  rufiled  by  the 


88  THE   vicar's   COUETSHIP. 

hasty  j^^i't^"^!'!^^'^  movements  of  liis  Land.  He 
was  diligently  draAving  on  a  larger  scale,  and 
through  a  large  convex  glass,  a  fine  photograph 
of  some  Titianesque  subject.  The  little  table 
was  strewn  with  portfolios,  books,  drawings,  ivory 
rules,  crumbled  bread,  chalks,  charcoal,  and 
pencils.  One  or  two  photographs  from  Kaphael, 
Vandyck,  and  Eeynolds,  adorned  the  walls.  On  the 
mantlepiece,  beside  a  Parian  cup  full  of  Kussian 
violets,  was  a  pretty  little  water-colour  sketch  of 
the  Abbey  as  seen  from  the  other  side  of  the  lake. 
A  bottle  of  sherry  and  a  wine-glass  stood  on  the 
table.  At  one  of  the  windows  hung  one  of  those 
pretty  Dresden  transparencies  of  the  Madonna 
della  Seggiola.  Whatever  the  merits  of  the  poor 
serf  of  a  copier  might  be,  however  much  he 
might  be  entangled  in  the  deadly  folds  of  that 
Jew  lyieuvre,  Bassevi,  no  one  could  have  glanced 
round  that  room  without  seeing^  that  a  taste, 
however  humble,  for  art,  had  given  it  an  intel- 
lectuality that  was  at  once  refining  and  elevating. 
A  breath  of  the  air  of  Olympus  had  stolen  in 
and  transformed  the  poor  lodging-house  of  a 
petty  and  ineffably  dull  Wiltshire  town  into 
Fairy  Land.  Art  and  Beauty  had  cast  their 
glamour  over  it,  and  bathed  it  in  an  atmosjDhere 
of  poetry  such  as  pervades  Cuyp's  homely  scenes. 
If  our  pleasures  are  all  illusions,  one  of  the  plea- 


ME.    ROBINSON   SHAKING   DOWN.  89 

santest  of  the  illusions  had  effected  this  wondrous 
change.  No  one  knows  so  well  as  an  English 
girl  how  to  spread  an  air  of  grace,  poetry,  and 
refinement  over  common  unromantic  daily  life. 
All  the  Titians  in  the  world  could  not  have  done 
what  those  violets  and  the  glove  did  to  idealise 
the  room  in  Beauflower  s  imagination. 

In  a  fussy  inconsequential  way,  Mr.  Eobinson 
was  most  polite  to  his  guests.  He  remembered 
that  the  vicar  of  Summerleas  Avas  the  cousin  of 
Amy's  great  friend,  and  he  had  already  wormed  out 
from  Tony,  when  he  had  brought  over  some  music 
books  from  Julia,  that  the  old  gentleman  in  the 
spencer  to  whom  he  had  been  introduced  in 
the  park,  was  an  immensely  rich  West  India 
merchant,  a  great  art  connoisseur  and  virtuoso, 
who  had  taken  a  fancy  to  Wiltshire,  and  was 
enlaroino-  a  house  that  he  had  rented  from  Mr. 
Harker  up  somewhere  near  Fontford,  so  he  was 
all  bows,  and  wreathed  smiles,  and  waving  of  the 
hand,  and  regrets  that  Mrs.  Eobinson  was  out, 
and  apologies  for  the  miserably  small  lodgings, 
and  hopes  that  they  would  take  a  glass  of  sherry; 
a  new  and  too  sweet,  "but  he  really  believed  a 
sound  and  pure  wine,  obtained  at  the  adjoining 
grocer  s.''  There  was  a  good  deal  of  the  fag  end 
of  George  the  Fourth's  reign  about  Mr.  Eobin- 
son's  manners,  and  though  too  naturally   bland 


90  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

and  chatty  and  weakly  good  natured  to  be 
disagreeable  for  a  short  time,  he  rather  spoilt 
everything  by  a  strained  simpering  smile,  and 
the  attitudinising  grimaces  of  a  second  rate 
French  style,  which  Mr.  Eobinson  had  been  taught 
to  think  fashionable. 

The  artist  was  the  son  of  a  curator  of  the 
British  Museum  ;  evincing  an  early  taste  for  art, 
he  had  been  sent  to  an  Art  Academy  in  Newman 
Street,  where  he  drew  from  the  model  and  the 
cast,  and  learned  a  great  deal  too  much  of  the 
technicalities  and  academical  jargon  of  his  art, 
and  a  great  deal  too  little  of  the  inner  and  true 
spirit.  A  prize  for  the  best  copy  of  Sir  Joshua 
in  the  mischievous  British  Institution  ruined  him 
for  ever.  He  less  and  less  aimed  at  originality 
of  even  the  humblest  kind,  cultivated  like  most 
of  us  in  life  his  strong  points,  neglected  to 
devclope  his  weak  ones,  and  gradually  sank  into 
that  most  hopeless  and  miserable  of  all  artists — 
the  professional  copier.  A  Jew  picture  dealer 
sent  him  to  Rome  and  Dresden  to  copy  for  a 
nobleman,  a  friend  of  Lord  Mazagan's,  and  he 
returned  to  spend  all  his  money,  to  marry  the 
daughter  of  a  very  poor  Dorsetshire  clergyman, 
to  sink  into  hopeless  poverty,  and  to  become  the 
inextricable  slave  of  Bassevi — a  heartless  vulgar 
wretch,  Avithout  pity  or  remorse,  who  had  in  his 


ME.    ROBINSON   SHAKING   DOWN.  91 

time  sucked  the  blood  of  half  a  dozen  young 
artists  of  twice  the  genius  of  poor  Eobinson,  and 
whose  profession  of  a  pawnbroker  was  a  mere 
mask  for  money  lending,  and  still  more  dis- 
creditable means  of  extorting  money.  It  had 
been  one  of  the  Jew  scoundrel's  finest  strokes  to 
decoy  this  poor  little  meek  slave  of  his  away  from 
all  friends  who  could  warn  him  or  rescue  him, 
away  from  all  beacons  and  light-ships,  to  a  lonely 
country  place,  where  he  could  make  him  work  for 
ten  shillings  a  day  at  what  l^rought  Bassevi  in 
two  guineas,  and  where  the  Anglo- Jew  could  exert 
aU  his  detestable  wiles  to  win  the  heart  of  the 
prett}^  daughter,  who  had  abeady  caught  his  wan- 
dering eye. 

"  The  gal  has  spirit,"  he  said  to  himself  the 
first  day  he  saw  her,  "  and  she's  deuced  clever, 
but  by  the  tabernacle  stones  Fd  soon  bring  that 
down  when  I  once  got  her  safe  in  Charlotte  Street, 
and  s'elp  me  if  I  wouldn't  put  her  in  a  bran  new 
tobacconist's  shop  in  Piccadilly ;  she'd  draw  in  the 
swells  and  make  a  nice  thing  of  it ;  and  wouldn't 
she  look  well  neither  in  an  open  carriage  in  the 
Park  on  a  Sunday  ?  Strike  me  if  I  don't  make 
her  take  me,  whatever  airs  she  puts  on,  and  if 
she  doesn't  behave  afterwards,  she  had  better 
look  to  it.  I  generally  find  I  get  my  o\^ti  way 
somehow." 


92  THE    VICARS    COURTSHIP. 

Poor  Amy,  liappy  in  her  first  unsliaped  dreams 
of  life  as  Andromeda  when 

"  Over  the  sea,  past  Crete,  on  tlie  Syrian  shore  to  the  southward," 

Cassiopeia's  dark-haired  daughter  chased  the 
waves  on  the  shore,  heedless  of  sorrow  or  danger. 
There  she  sat  now  in  the  inner  studio  painting,  as 
heedless  of  Bassevi  and  his  wiles  as  little  Eed 
Eiding  Hood  of  the  wolf.  Alas  for  life  !  If  we 
could  foretell  the  future,  what  miserable  Cas- 
sandras  we  should  all  be,  and  without  hope. 

"  You  are  painting  for  Mr.  Harker,  I  think  ? " 
said  Beaufiower. 

"  Yes  ;  a  selection  from  Titian's  works,  pastic- 
cios  to  go  round  a  dining-room  in  panels.  It  will  be 
a  room  fit  for  an  emperor,  and  it  is  to  have  a  ceiling 
to  match,  which  I  am  now  making  drawings  for." 

"I  am  not  fond  of  painted  ceilings  myself," 
said  Mr.  Goodrick  ;  "  they  crick  one's  neck.  I'd 
as  soon  have  frescoes  in  my  wine  cellar  ;  but  these 
rich  people,  I  suppose,  must  have  their  whims 
indulo;ecl." 

''  Of  course  they  must.  I  am  to  do  a  similar 
room  for  the  Honourable  Mr.  Cantelupe.  His  are 
pasticcios  from  Eubens.  There  is  to  be  a  land- 
scape by  Claude  between  each  two.  It  will  ha^^e 
a  very  sweet  efiect." 

*'  Claude  is  so  insipid." 


MR.    ROBIXSOX    SHAKING    DOWN.  93 

"  Claude  insipid  ? ''  said  the  artist,  witli  uplifted 
eyebrows.  "  Well,  he  is  a  little  monotonous  ;  but 
what  charmino^  classical  o-usto !  what  breadth  ! 
what  repose  ! " 

'•'  I  see,"  thought  the  old  virtuoso  to  himself, 
"this  is  a  mere  technicalist  and  texture  seeker. 
I  hold  him  as  little  higher  than  a  door  grainer ; 
but  still  he  loves  art,  and  has  seen  fine  pictures, 
and  he  U  amuse  me  and  rouse  my  memory  of  the 
great  galleries." 

"  Claude,  Mr.  Eobinson,''  he  said,  ''  painted  an 
ideal,  but  his  ideal  was  inferior  to  what  he  could 
have  seen  any  day  of  his  life  at  Terni,  or  Tivoli, 
or  in  the  Apennines." 

"  I  quite  agree  with  you,''  said  Beauflower,  who 
was  also  fond  of  art,  and  no  mean   iudo-e.     ''I 

'  I/O 

would  rather  see  this  world  exhausted  before  we  go 
to  dreamland.  Cuyp,  now,  had  a  sentiment, 
one  sentiment,  and  that  he  always  tried  to  express, 
but  throuo^h  the  medium  of  common  nature." 

There  could  not  have  been  a  greater  contrast 
than  Mr.  Goodiick  and  the  painter's  drudge.  The 
one,  hardened  l)y  time  and  fortune,  polished  into 
a  cold  indifferentism,  never  betraying  by  any  out- 
burst of  enthusiasm  (even  momentary)  any  strong 
predilection  for  this  or  that  master,  but  rather  leav- 
ing the  impression  of  a  thorough  knowledge  of  and 
contempt  for  all.     The  other  perennially  boyish. 


94?  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

weak,  shallow,  full  of  inflated  eclecticism,  a  tech- 
nicalist,  a  student  of  yarnislies,  mediums,  and  out- 
ward appliances  ;  a  brigiit-featliered,  airy  shuttle- 
cock of  a  man,  of  a  gay  mercurial  temperament, 
easily  elevated,  easily  depressed ;  a  bright-coloured 
little  bubble  of  a  man,  certain  to  swim  down  eddy 
after  eddy,  and  break  at  last  without  residue  and 
without  result. 

While  Beauflower  was  turning  thoughtfully 
over  an  open  portfolio  of  exquisite  Earlom's  and 
M'Ardeirs  mezzotints  after  Eeynolds,  Mr.  Good- 
rick  was  turning  over  some  coloured  Titian  photo- 
graphs, which  he  at  once  recognised  as  taken 
from  the  doubtful  but  clever  Blenheim  pictures. 
Eobinson  did  not  make  any  remark,  but  kept 
placing  the  series  in  his  hand  one  after  the  other, 
watching  him  with  an  innocent  shjmess,  and 
exultino;  in  his  certain  admiration. 

The  first  was  the  Mars  and  Yenus,  that  fine 
picture  in  which  the  lovers  are  seated  together, 
his  brawny  sunburnt  arm  across  her  fair  back,  the 
Avanton  goddess  holding  his  head  while  she  lifts  a 
little  mirror  in  which  she  contemplates  the  two 
flushed  faces. 

"  Mars'  coarse — mere  soldier  s  head,"  grumbled 
the  inexorable  critic,  still  evidently  enjoying  the 
beauties  of  the  grand  composition.  "  The  flesh  of 
Venus  not  up  to  Titian's  usual  mark." 


MR.    PvOBINSON    SHAKING    DOWN.  95 

''But,  bless  me,  my  dear  sir,  only  see  liow 
nobly  the  rosy  colours  of  this  Cupid  blend  the 
rich  browns  and  the  creamy  carnations." 

"  Hu-umph !  yes,  to  a  degree.  But  what's 
this  next  ? '' 

It  was  the  Cupid  and  Psyche.  She  is  dreaming 
of  her  heavenly  lover,  who  stands  gazing  at  her, 
his  "  gTeat  brooding  wings  "  outspread  above  and 
seeming  to  lift  as  you  look  at  them. 

"That's  better." 

"  Better ! — it's  j^erfect.  Look  at  the  value  of 
that  little  bit  of  ultramarine  in  the  drapery  round 
the  neck  of  the  Cu]3id ;  it's  like  a  bit  of  blue  sky 
clinging  to  him,  some  critic  says,  and,  'pon  my 
honour,  it  really  is." 

"That  was  added  only  a  few  years  ago  by  a 
picture  restorer." 

"  Impossible.  No  ;  it  is  Tiziano  ;  it's  the  great 
man,  sir.  I  ouo-ht  to  know  his  brush  marks.  I 
spent  two  years  in  Venice  copying  him." 

"It  was  added,  I  assure  you,  in  1798.  The 
man  who  showed  the  pictures  at  Blenheim  told 
me  so  himself  last  year.'' 

"  Then  you  know  this  set  ?  " 

"  Oh,  yes,  very  well ;  but  they  ain't  Titians  at 
all." 

'■'  You  cannot  mean  to  say  you  doubt  the 
authenticity  of  these  sublime  works  ? " 


96  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

"  I  do.  I  know  tliey  are  not  his.  Use  your 
eyes ;  look  at  this  Cupid  and  Psyche — ^very 
poetical,  very  pleasing  ;  but  it's  full  of  faults  ;  the 
Apollo  is  vulgar,  nothing  ideal,  ill  drawn,  clumsy  ; 
going  away  from  nature  without  improving  it ; 
the  motive  of  the  picture  low  and  debased  ;  as 
usual  with  Titian,  the  man  a  mere  makeweight 
to  the  woman.  No ;  it  won't  do — won't  do  at 
all.  This  Pluto  and  Proser23ine  is  worth  a  dozen 
of  it." 

"  I  am  astonished,"  said  the  little  artist,  putting 
up  his  double  eye-glass  to  select  a  chef  d'oeuvre  ; 
"it  seems  to  me,  sir,  quite  blasphemy  to  deny 
such  works  as  these ;  but  I  suppose  people  will 
always  differ  about  these  things.  Now,  here  is  a 
master-piece — the  Hercules  and  Dejanira.  Look 
at  the  unity  and  harmony  here ;  look  at  the 
grand  spirit,  the  expression,  the  colour,  the 
design;  the  breadth;  look  at " 

"I  far  prefer,  for  my  part,  this  Bacchus  and 
Ariadne.  The  Bacchus  is  vulgar,  but  the  twine 
of  Ariadne's  body  is  very  graceful,  and  the  rosy 
Cupid  with  the  grapes  a  fine  bit  of  colour ;  but  the 
back  of  this  Juno  is  the  most  glowing  bit  of 
colour  to  my  mind,  only  the  picture  is  spoiled  by 
patches  of  crude  white.  I  see  the  restorers  have 
been  busy  here." 

The  little  artist,  utterly  incapable  of  original 


MR.    ROBIXSOX    SHAKING    DOW^\  97 

opinions,  was  awed  and  subdued  by  tlie  knowledge 
of  his  wonderful  visitor.  He  owned  tlie  white  in 
the  Jupiter,  Juno,  and  lo  was  rather  obtrusive, 
met  the  eye  a  leetle  too  much, — yet  he  scarcely 
knew,  and  he  turned  the  photograph  upside  down 
and  every  way. 

In  the  meantime  the  Vicar,  roused  to  a  languid 
interest  in  pictures  that  were  mere  grand  composi- 
tions, had  no  story,  pointed  no  moral,  and  were 
not  either  transcripts  of  nature  or  yet  improve- 
ments upon  it,  had  turned  over  the  photographs 
as  Mr.  Goodrick  threw  them  somewhat  con- 
temptuously. He  paused  a  long  time  at  the 
Neptune  and  xVmphitrite,  one  of  the  most  imagi- 
native of  the  somewhat  monotonous  series. 

"  I  am  almost  ashamed  to  give  my  opinion  after 
you  two  pundits,"  he  said,  taking  up  the  photo- 
graph ;  "  but  this  seems  to  me  by  far  the  finest. 
It  overflows  with  passion.  How  the  frightened 
mmiph  flings  her  white  arms  into  the  stormy 
ocean  air,  and  away  from  the  god,  who  is  bear- 
ing her  to  his  cave.  In  what  a  golden  torrent  her 
hair  streams  down  a  back  worthy  of  Venus  1 
AMiat  a  glow  of  Hfe  about  the  flesh  !  " 

"  Ah  !  that  is  youth  speaking  ;  and  youth  and 
love  are  one,  as  Hazlitt  says,  finely.  Yes,  it  is 
not  so  bad  ;  and  the  Cupid  and  dolphin  har- 
monise  the   whole    skilfully.     That   is    quite   in 

VOL.  II.  H 


98  THE   VICAPJs   COURTSHIP. 

Titian's  early  manner  ;  but  still  it  is  no  more 
Titian  than  it  is  Fra  Bartolommeo.  That  Apollo 
we  were  looking  at  just  now,  that  one  by  the 
Eembrandt  etching,  is  as  vulgar  as  Jordaens." 

"  Now,  I  cannot  agree  with  you.  My  dear  sir, 
only  look  at  the  grand  manner — the  gusto — the 
—the " 

"  Yes — Oh,  yes  ;  I  see  the  big  old  style  ;  but 
they  are  not  Titians,  they  are  twenty  years  later  ; 
why,  they  are  1 5  9  6,  if  they  are  a  day.  On  this  sky 
you  will  see  dry  smalt  has  been  blown,  a  custom 
which  Lodovico  Carracci  introduced,  in  order  to 
prevent  mixing  oil  that  might  turn  yellow  with 
the  blue.  In  this  drapery  of  Ariadne  there  is 
lily  green.  Yes,  I  can  see  even  by  this  copy  a  lily 
green,  made  from  purple  Iris  flowers,  not  used 
till  the  seventeenth  century.  You  see  I  have 
reasons  for  my  doubts.  By  the  bye,  Mr.  Eobin- 
son,  did  you  ever  try  mixing  Canada  balsam — 
the  balm  of  Gilead,  I  mean — with  verdigris ;  it 
renders  nearly  all  fugitive  colours  durable ;  it 
may  crack  a  little,  as  in  the  National  Gallery  Van 
Eyck,  but  that's  all." 

The  little  receipt-monger  was  charmed ;  he 
flew  to  his  note-book,  and  his  annotated  edition 
of  the  late  Sir  Charles  Eastlake's  "  Materials  for  a 
History  of  Oil  Painting."  He  could  have  fallen 
down  and  kissed  the  boots  of  his  learned  visitor ; 


ME.    ROBIXSOX   SHAKING  DOWN.  99 

laying  aside  his  work  entirely,  lie  clreAv  up  his 
chair  close  to  Goodrick — literally  grappled  and 
boarded  him,  and  plunged  into  technicalities, 
chiefly  about  Sir  Joshuas  methods,  the  fact 
being  that  Mr.  Eobinson  had  been  always  unsuc- 
cessful as  a  portrait-painter  from  the  heavy  opaque 
tone  of  colour  into  which  he  fell  when  not  merely 
copying. 

''There  is  no  medium,"  said  the  little  man, 
nursing  one  knee,  "  like  Sir  Joshewa's  solution  of 
wax  in  Venice  turpentine ;  his  whitening  and 
gTim  tragacanth,  covered  with  wax  and  varnish, 
always  cracks  —  cracks  a^^ful.  I  lost  fifteen 
guineas  by  it  once.  AAHien  I  want  Sir  Joshewa  s 
cheesy  impasto,  I  grind  my  colours  first  with  oil  ; 
I  then  mix  with  wax,  but  you  must"  take  care  of 
the  fire,  and  for  heaven's  sake  avoid  orpiment  and 
yellow  lake." 

"  Sir  Joshua  (somewhat  scornfully,)  was  a  fool 
in  some  things  ;  he  used  that  treacly  bitumen,  and 
then  drying  varnishes  over  the  half-dry  colour,  and 
so  it  tore  away — he  was  never  content.  You  know 
the  old  story,  Beauflower,  of  his  Indian  portrait  ? " 

One  sign  of  a  well-bred  man  is  to  keep  conver- 
sation fairly  distributed,  and  to  resist  all  tempta- 
tions to  favouritism.  Beauflower  did  not  remem- 
ber the  stoiy;  a  well-bred  man  never  remembers 
a  story  that  is  about  to  be  told.     Mr.  Goodrick's 


100  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

eye  kindled  pleasantly  as  lie  launched  into  tlie 
anecdote. 

''Sir  Joslma  painted  the  portrait  of  a  young 
nobleman  who  went  to  India.  The  picture, 
executed  with  some  of  the  most  fugitive,  mere- 
tricious, and  dangerous  vehicles,  sallowed  and 
faded  year  after  year ;  year  after  year  the 
original  yellowed  and  shrunk  too,  till  he  almost 
exactly  matched  the  colour  of  the  j)icture  when 
he  returned  and  once  more  stood  beside  it."  This, 
like  the  anecdote  in  a  scientific  lecture,  went  all 
very  well,  but  when  the  two  connoisseurs  relapsed 
again  into  purely  technical  conversation  about 
meguilps  and  varnishes.  Beau  flower  soon  grew  un- 
deniably weary,  half  yawned,  then  restrained  it 
so  much  that  two  or  three  more  yawns  broke  out, 
one  after  the  other.  He  turned  listlessly  a  second 
time  over  the  photographs,  opened  and  shut  a 
book,  looked  out  of  window,  took  a  deep  draught 
of  the  dulness  of  Fontford,  then  relapsed  to  the 
mantelpiece,  and  there  found  to  his  delight  a  very 
pretty  Wiltshire  view  of  the  Upper  Downs,  which 
instinctively  he  felt  to  be  Amy's.  It  was  not  one 
of  those  conventional  scrimmages  with  slopes  of 
dark  foreground  to  the  left  and  right,  and  draw- 
ino;  master  fio-ures  in  red  and  blue  in  conventional 
places,  but  a  quiet,  earnest  little  bit  of  realism, 
gentle    and    unpretending,    as    Amy    Kobinson 


MK.    EOBIXSOX    SHAKING    DOWX.  101 

lierself.  Wave  after  wave  of  blue  distance,  fading 
dimmer  and  dimmer,  witli  a  little  grey  needle 
which  was  the  spire  of  Salisbury  Cathedral  rising 
over  the  furthest  wave.  In  the  foreground  a 
clump  of  fir  trees,  passing  into  furze  covert, 
beyond  a  boy  sleeping  under  a  crimson-berried 
thorn  bush,  and  some  sheep  feeding  in  scattered 
groups.  Here  and  there  Amy's  quick  eye  had 
observed  a  rabbit  or  two  peering  from  the  furze. 
It  was  a  mere  transcript  of  a  simple  passage  of 
Wiltshire  nature — no  Niagara,  no  mountain,  no 
ocean — nothino-  bis:  or  tremendous,  but  still  there 
was  a  harmony  about  it,  and  a  sense  of  sympathy 
with  things  "  that  daily  seen  please  daily." 
The  Vicar  knew  the  very  spot,  yet  he  liked  it 
a  thousand  times  better  as  seen  by  Amy's  eye, 
and  rendered  poetical  by  her  taste  ;  so  rapt  was 
he,  indeed,  in  his  observation  of  it,  and  the 
pleasant  feeling  it  gave  him  that  she  loved  the 
county  which  he  too  loved,  though  why  that  should 
give  him  such  a  thrill  of  pleasure  he  scarcely 
knew,  that  he  actually  did  not  hear  Mr.  Eobinson 
twice  ask  him  if  he  did  not  think  the  drawing  a 
pretty  one  for  a  mere  beginner.  The  third  time  he 
startled,  and  slightly  coloured,  as  he  turned  round 
and  apologised  for  his  inattention.  He  almost 
fancied  that  there  was  a  slight  sarcasm  in  Mr. 
Goodrich's  manner,  when  the  old  virtuoso  said — 


102  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

"It  seems  to  interest  you,  Beauflower,  more 
tlian  the  so-called  Titians  1 " 

Beauflower  said,  "  Yes,  it  is  very  pretty.  I  am 
so  fond  of  the  scenery  of  the  higher  Downs." 

"  Ha !  you  should  see  a  glen  in  the  Blue 
Mountains,  that's  something  like  scenery  ;  these 
Do^^Tis  tire  one.  They're  as  much  alike  as  the 
palms  of  one's  hands." 

The  Vicar  was  about  to  j^i'ick  forth  to  the 
combat  and  do  battle  for  "Wiltshire  scenery,  when 
Mr.  Eobinson,  looking  up  from  a  portfolio  of  the 
finest  studies  from  Turner's  "  Liber  Studiorum," 
said  over  his  silver  double  eye-glass, — 

"Amy — I  mean  my  daughter — Mr.  Beau- 
flower, is  in  the  studio  drawing.  I  should  like 
you  so  to  see  the  Highland  sketch  she's  doing  ;  it 
is  really  very  promising,  considering  her  age,  and 
the  little  tuition  I  ever  gave  her.  You  can  leave 
your  friend  here  with  me  ;  he  is  telling  me  about  a 
very  costly  work  of  Van  Eyck's  at  Louvain — Lou- 
vain,  I  think  you  said,  sir?  We'll  join  you  directly." 

Mr.  Beauflower  was  most  anxious  to  see  Miss 
Eobinson's  work  ;  he  had  himself  done  a  little  in 
water-colour.  There  was  no  one  in  the  outer 
workshop,  a  plane  rested  in  a  companionable  way  on 
the  plank  it  had  been  shaving,  the  'prentice  being 
at  dinner ;  and  on  the  top  of  a  half-finished  salt- 
box  stood  Mr.  Lawson's  brown  paper  cap,  looking 


MR.    EOBINSON   SHAKING   DOWK.  103 

like  ratlier  ta  vacant  likeness  of  its  owner,  who  at 
that  moment  was  sipping  a  pint  of  egg-hot  at 
the  Harker  Arms,  and  discussing  the  hopeless 
prospects  of  France  in  case  of  a  war  with  Eng- 
land. The  usual  pleasant  resinous  odour,  as  of  a 
half-cut  fir  wood,  pervaded  the  shop.  Beaufiower's 
feet  moved  as  noiselessly  over  the  muffled 
sha^dngs  as  King  Lear's  horses  shoed  with  felt. 
Half  way  towards  the  inner  room  the  Vicar  was 
arrested  by  a  bird-like  voice  singing  that  pretty 
inspired  song  of  the  Ettrick  Shepherd — 

"  Bird  of  the  -wilderness, 
Blythsome  and  cumberless." 

The  song  rose  in  a  pure  gush  of  liquid  melody, 
artless,  and  full  of  melody  as  if  it  had  poured 
from  a  blackbird's  golden  beak  on  an  April 
mornincr.  It  rose  and  fell  in  wafts  of  deli- 
cious  sound,  not  operatic,  but  charming,  from 
the  happiness  that  inspired  the  singer,  delightful 
from  the  absence  of  subtle  flourishes  and  fantastic 
variations.  Beauflower  stood  there  like  some 
shepherd  who  has  stolen  upon  a  fairy  revel,  and 
dares  not  move  further,  lest  the  enchantment  be 
broken,  and  the  sound  and  sight  melt  away  into 
air.  The  slamming  of  an  outer  door,  and  a  great 
raw  country  voice  shouting — 

"  They  double-chained  the  highwayman, 
And  cooped  him  in  a  gaol," 


104  THE    vicar's   courtship 

awoke  him  from  his  reverie.  It  was  the  appren- 
tice coming  back  from  dinner.  Quickly  then,  for 
to  a  sensitive  man  all  listening  seems  a  sort  of 
social  sin,  the  vicar  stepped  into  the  inner 
room,  hat  in  hand. 

Amy,  sitting  with  her  back  to  the  door,  busy 
copying  a  water-colour  drawing,  started  when  he 
entered,  and  rose,  as  if  to  prevent  her  work  being 
seen.  She  held  out  her  hand  with  that  unaffected 
grace  that  was  her  special  dowry  from  heaven. 

*'  Pray  don't  let  me  interrupt  you,  Miss 
Eobinson,''  said  Beauflower  ;  "I  came  on  pur- 
pose to  see  your  draAving.  Your  father  told  me 
you  were  busy." 

"  Oh,  it's  a  wretched  thing.  I  am  quite  a 
beginner  ;  but  I'm  very  fond  of  painting.  Papa 
is  so  kind  in  showing  me  how  to  work ;  he  does  not 
paint  landscape  himself,  but  then  he  is  so  clever 
in  showing  me  the  reasons  for  this  or  that  tone ; 
and  Mrs.  Harker  wants  me  to  teach  Ethel." 

Need  we  say  that  Beauflower  praised  her 
work,  and  found  a  fresh  charm  in  it  that  was 
not  in  the  copy.  Amy  was  copying  a  very 
pretty  sketch,  from  Mr.  Tyrwhitt's  book  on  "  Pic- 
torial Art,"  of  a  little  Highland  mountain  stream, 
edged  with  purple  heather,  oak,  ash  bushes, 
brambles,  and  fans  of  fretted  fern,  with  a  great 
lapis  lazuli  cone  of  mountain  in  the  far  distance. 


ME.    EOBIXSOX    SHAKIXG    DOWX.  105 

Amy  had  mapped  in  the  washes  of  cobalt  and 
rose  madder,  and  the  sienna  and  gamboge  the  day 
before.  She  had  nowreached  the  second  stage,  and 
had  abeady  flushed  the  left  hand  mountain  top 
•with  rose  madder  where  the  heather  was  glowing. 
She  had  cut  out  the  forms  of  the  ash  and  black- 
berry bushes,  and  had  heightened  the  shadows  of 
the  peat  water  in  the  pool  with  burnt  sienna  and 
gamboge,  darkening  under  the  big  stones.  Her 
quick,  sure  eye  had  not  forgotten  the  touches  of 
Vandyck  brown  where  the  water  was  deepest,  or 
the  yellow  gleams  of  pebbles  from  the  bottom, 
mottled  by  faint  grey  reflections  from  the  large 
stones  above  water. 

It  was  so  pretty  and  simple-hearted  a  little 
sketch  that  the  Yicar,  in  his  fervent  appreciation 
of  it,  found  his  cheek  almost  close  to  Amy's. 

"  What  a  lovely  little  bit  of  nature  ! "  he  said, 
"just  one  of  those  spots  that  I  came  upon 
in  the  Hio^hlands  in  mv  last  walking;  tour.  I 
remember  especially  one  Sunday  morning  in 
July,  when  I  walked  through  Killiecrankie,  we 
sat  doT\Ti  among  the  heather,  and  lunched  by  a 
linn,  where  there  was  an  old  shepherd  reading 
his  Bible — a  fine  venerable  fellow,  with  grey 
locks,  the  very  image  of  a  Covenanter  who 
had  souo'ht  refuore  where  the  sound  of  the  moun- 
tain  stream  would  prevent  any  pursuing  soldiers 


r06  THE   VICAE's   courtship. 

hearing  liim  as  lie  sang  the  psalms  of  David — 
David,  who,  like  himself,  had  been  a  shepherd, 
and  a  fugitive  among  the  mountains." 

Beauflower,  Avho  had  taken  a  seat  near  Amy, 
had  grown  quite  enthusiastic  as  he  recalled  the 
Highland  scene.  He  looked  very  handsome  as 
his  eyes  kindled  and  his  face  glowed,  and  Amy, 
laying  down  her  brush,  was  dwelling  on  his 
words,  rapt  by  that  magnetic  power  that  intellec- 
tual excitement  has  over  minds  like  hers,  espe- 
cially when  they  are  conscious  it  is  the  excitement 
of  one  who  sees  further  and  deeper  than  them- 
selves. All  women  are,  or  would  be,  hero  worship- 
pers. They  must  look  up  before  they  can  worship. 
Amy  had  never  been  alone  with  Beauflower  before ; 
she  had  never  seen  or  heard  him  in  a  moment  of 
eloquent  enthusiasm  for  the  good  and  beautiful. 
She  regarded  him  now  with  a  secret  admiration, 
not  unmingled  with  awe.  He  was  so  different  from 
the  sordid,  blustering  city  men,  and  the  pompous, 
proud  country  people  she  saw  at  Mr.  Harker  s, 
or  the  shifty  Bohemian  sort  of  lodgers  she  had 
known  in  Buckingham  Street.  It  gave  her  a 
glimpse  of  a  world  of  brighter  and  higher  beings. 
"  Are  the  Highlands  so  very  lonely  ?  " 
"  Desolate  as  a  paradise  resolved  into  chaos.  I 
remember  one  stony  glen,  where  no  blade  of  grass 
grew,  and  where  the  eagle's  scream  was  the  only 


MR.    ROBINSON   SHAKING   DOWN.  107 

sound."  Suddenly,  tlie  Vicar,  like  a  true  Engiisli- 
man,  felt  that  he  had  been  talking  in  somewhat  too 
hio'h-flown  a  strain,  foUowins;  rather  the  current 
of  liis  own  feelings  than  the  necessities  of  the  con- 
versation, and  he  paused  and  ended  somewhat 
abruptly,  drinking  in  as  he  spoke  a  profound 
sense  of  the  purity  and  grace  of  his  listener.  "  I 
never,"  he  said,  "remember  anything  like  the 
grey  volcanic  barrenness  of  Glen  Ogle,  except  in 
a  wonderful  drawing  of  Martin  s,  '  The  Search  for 
the  Waters  of  Oblivion,'  where  the  searcher,  a  mere 
crushed  sop  of  flesh,  is  hanging  over  a  great  flat 
ledge  of  rock  where  he  has  clung  and  died." 

"  Oh,  I  should  so  like  to  see  that.  Don't  you 
think,  Mr.  Beauflower,  these  fern  leaves  want 
cutting  out  rather  sharper." 

Again  their  cheeks  came  near  together,  so  near, 
indeed,  that  Beauflower  almost  felt  the  rosy 
warmth  of  Amy's  face. 

"  Yes,  I  think  so,  they  are  a  little  indistinct. 
May  I  touch  them  V 

"  Oh,  do  ;  ah  !  that's  beautiful !  Art  is  so  diffi- 
cult— at  first  it  seems  quite  hopeless — but  I  love 
it  so  that  I  don't  care  for  any  trouble." 

"  Love  makes  all  labour  seem  lioiit." 

Then  neither  of  them  spoke  for  a  moment.  It 
seemed  a  year  to  both  of  them. 

"  This  way,  sir,  this  way,  Mr.  Bassevi,"  cried  a 


lOS  THE    vicar's    COUETSHIP. 

cheery  voice.  The  hammer  of  the  apprentice  was 
for  a  moment  silent ;  then  Mr.  Kobinson  appeared, 
waving  in  grandly  Mr.  Goodrich  and  Mr.  Bassevi. 
Why  Amy,  with  all  her  self-possession,  and  the 
vicar,  with  all  his  pride  and  calmness,  should 
appear  a  little  guilty,  can  only  be  explained  by 
philosophers.  But  undeniably  they  did  so,  and 
Mr.  Beauflower  was  not  relieved  by  seeing  a  faint 
flicker  of  a  smile  play  around  Mr.  Goodrich: 's  eyes. 
Mr.  Bassevi  viewed  him  with  evil  eyes.  The 
"  pieuvre,"  intent  on  a  new  victim,  was  dressed 
in  a  light  drab  greatcoat,  and  had  a  sporting 
look,  which  he  assumed  in  the  country,  and 
thought  nonchalant  and  fashionable.  He  was 
tapping  his  right  leg,  which  was  covered  with  a 
Havannah  brown  trouser  of  "  loud ''  Jewish  cut, 
with  a  rhinoceros-horn  stick,  heavily  and  vulgarly 
mounted  in  pseudo  gold. 

Amy  held  out  her  hand  to  him,  with  but  ill- 
concealed  dislike,  and  a  chano;e  came  over  her 
expressive  face. 

"  This  is  a  great  pleasure,''  he  said.  "  I  need 
not  ask  if  Wiltshire  air  suits  you,  ]\liss  Amy. 
What,  is  this  yours  ? "  (He  took  up  the  draw- 
ing in  a  familiar  way  which  made  the  vicar's 
blood  boil.)  ''  Why,  I  could  sell  any  number  you 
Hke  of  those,  miss,  if  you  didn't  put  on  too  high 
a  figure.     At  the  Crystal  Palace,  now,  they'd  go 


MR.    ROBINSON   SHAKING   DOWN.  109 

like  anything  for  copies.  Suppose  you  do  me  a 
dozen  of  those  ;  now  don't  be  proud." 

Amy  smiled  and  said,  "You  forget  I  am  a 
governess.     I  can  seldom  get  time  for  painting." 

"  Oh,  you  can  make  time.  Twelve  guineas  are 
not  to  be  sneezed  at.  You  do  a  dozen  first,  you 
know  my  money's  sure.  Put  in  some  Highlanders, 
with  a  dead  deer  in  the  foreground,  and  a  pretty 
girl  looking  on  with  some  children.  You  do 
them  by  Cliristmas,  and  they'll  sell  for  presents." 

"  I  would  rather  wait  till  I  can  do  better,  and 
sketch  for  myself.  I  don't  like  copying,  Mr. 
Bassevi." 

"  Oh,  well,  if  you  don't  accept  the  money,  it's 
no  use  my  talking.  I  only  thought  it  was  putting 
a  good  thing  in  your  way." 

Mr.  Goodrick  had  praised  the  drawing  to  Beau- 
flower  in  four  words,  "  Careful,  but  wants  unity." 

"  My  darling,"  said  ]\Ir.  Eobinson,  leaning  over 
Amy,  and  kissing  her  forehead  theatrically;  she 
felt  rather  lowered  before  Mr.  Beauflower :  "  it's 
very  nice  and  very  clever  ;  but  your  touch  is  too 
timid  still,  you  must  be  quick  and  sure ;  and  stiU  a 
little  spotty.  Don't  ever  l^e  satisfied  unless  you 
get  breadth.  Mr.  Basse^d's  offer  is  very  kind,  but 
you'll  do  better  than  this." 

"  By  the  bye,  Beauflower,"  said  Mr.  Goodrick, 
"  I've  promised  Mr.  Bassevi  here  to  ask  you  to  let 


110  THE   VICAES    COURTSHIP. 

liim  see  that  Cuyp  and  that  Karl  Du  Jardin  of 
yours.     He  is  a  great  judge  of  these  matters.'' 

"  Yes,"  said  Bassevi,  "  there's  rather  a  demand 
for  Cu}^3s  now ;  a  year  or  two  ago  we  were 
glutted  with  them."  The  scoundrel  talked  as  if 
Cuyps  were  bales  of  cotton  or  legs  of  mutton. 

Proud  Beauflower  rather  .coldly  said  that  Mr. 
Bassevi  was  most  welcome  to  call  at  any  hour  he 
liked,  before  twelve  Avas  best,  as  he  generally 
went  out  among  the  poor  then. 

Mr.  Bassevi,  whose  politeness  was  not  carried 
much  about, 

"  For  fear  that  lie  should  wear  it  out/"' 

growled  thanks. 

Mr.  Goodrick  and  the  ^icar  then  left ;  the 
soft  warmth  of  Amy's  hand  at  the  leave-taking 
seemed  to  linger  all  that  day  in  Beauflower's 
memory.  Without  kno^dng  it,  he  was  on  the 
verge  of  the  precipice  of  love.  On  their  way 
home  the  two  called  at  the  Harker  Arms  to  order 
a  fly  to  go  and  see  Stonehenge  on  the  next  day — 
waiting  for  a  moment  in  the  bar  parlour  talking 
to  the  smart  bustling  landlady  and  the  landlord, 
who  was  a  sero-eant  and  crack  shot  in  the  local 
volunteers.  Mr.  Goodrick  took  up  that  day's 
copy  of  the  Salisbury  and  Winchester  Journal. 
It  contained  a  glowing  paragraph  in  the  country 
penny-a-liner's  best  manner,  touched  up  evidently 


MR.    ROBINSON   SHAKING   DOWN.  Ill 

from  a  private  communication  from  the  butler. 
After  narrating  the  first  part  of  the  event,  it  con- 
cluded thus  : — "  Unfortunately  a  gale  from  the 
sou'- west  soon  set  in  with  such  remorseless  violence 
that  the  shooting  became  altogether  wild,  and 
the  judges  determined  (by  consent  of  all  parties) 
to  have  the  prize  shot  for  again  when  the  wind 
luUecl.  The  scoring  was  then  properly  attended 
to,  and  the  prize  (a  superb  diamond  and  opal 
brooch,  manufactured  expressly  for  the  occasion 
by  Messrs.  Hunt  and  Eoskill)  was  awarded  to 
that  superb  shot.  Miss  Caroline  Harker,  the  eldest 
daughter  of  the  host,  who  has  abeady  carried  ojf 
the  prize  at  nearly  every  archery  meeting  of  the 
season.  The  second  prize,  a  silver  arm  bracer, 
was  not  competed  for.  The  magnificent  collation 
was  furnished  by  our  eminent  townsmen,  Messrs. 
Browm  and  Co.,  and  did  them  the  greatest  credit." 

Mr.  Goodrich  was  fmious,  Beauflower  quietly 
contemptuous. 

"  Detestable  meanness,"  said  the  former,  '^  not 
even  to  give  the  poor  girl's  name,  or  to  mention 
her  generous  refusal  of  the  prize." 

Below  the  respectful  but  toadying  archery 
paragraph  was  another,  in  the  jocose  familiar 
manner,  also  interesting  to  the  vicar. 

"  Second  Meet  of  the  Season. — On  Monday, 


112  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

Nov.  5,  the  SwallowclifF  Foxhounds  will  meet  at 
Bibuiy  Wood,  on  the  property  of  the  late  Mr. 
Foulkes.  AVe  expect  this  news  will  delight  our 
sporting  readers,  as  the  lay  is  a  good  one,  and  they 
know  that  the  master  of  this  pack  needs  no  jumping 
powder,  and  is  always  in  '  the  first  flight.' " 

"  Madmen,"  said  Mr.  Goodrich. 

At  the  bottom  of  another  column  in  the  same 
page  was  this  announcement,  in  the  mysterious 
^'  puff  preliminary  "  manner  : — 

"The  Borough  of  Bibury. — The  lamented 
death  of  William  Foulkes,  Esq.,  of  Birdbrook, 
leaves  this  important  borougli  open  to  competi- 
tion. We  hear  on  the  best  authority  that  a 
young  nobleman  of  decidedly  Liberal  views,  not 
a  thousand  miles  from  Swallowcliff,  is  likely  to 
enter  the  arena,  and  this  time  with  a  certainty  of 
success.  His  agents  are,  we  learn,  already  solicit- 
ing votes  from  the  chief  members  of  this  important 
constituency.  It  could  not  be  represented  l)y  the 
scion  of  a  more  distinguished  house,  which  has,  how- 
ever, hitherto  been  more  Whio^  than  Liberal  in  its 
tendencies." 

"  Oh,  that  incredible  young  idiot ! "  said  Mr. 
Goodrich. 


MR.    ROBIXSON   SHAKING   DOWN.  113 

Immediately  following  this  was  the  subjoined 
important  paragraph,  in  the  enthusiastic  and 
social  manner  : — 

"  Presentation  of  Plate  to  Jabez  Harker, 
Esq. — The  splendid  service  of  plate  purchased  by 
the  combined  subscriptions  of  the  noblemen, 
o'entlemen,  and  veomen  of  South  Wiltshire  as  a 
testimonial  of  respect  to  Jabez  Harker,  Esq.,  of 
Summerleas  Abbey,  for  his  twenty-five  years' 
zealous  services  as  county  magistrate,  his  kind- 
ness as  a  landlord,  and  his  benevolence  as  a  man, 
is  to  be  presented  to  that  gentleman  by  the 
Salisbury,  Slobury,  and  Fontford  committees,  on 
"Wednesday  week,  November  1 7.  The  gentlemen 
will  meet  at  the  Harker  Arms,'  Fontford,  at 
eleven  o'clock  on  that  day,  and  proceed  in  proces- 
sion to  the  Abbey,  where  a  cold  collation  will 
await  them." 

''Pack  of  fools,"  said  Mr.  Goodrick,  "present- 
ing plate  to  a  man  like  that,  because  he  is  lucky 
enough  to  have  twelve  thousand  a  year,  and 
knows  how  to  keep  it.  If  I  was  obliged  to  be 
present  at  this  ridiculous  farce,  I  really  think, 
Beauflower,  I  should  burst  with  spleen." 

"  As  to  the  meet,  my  dear  Mr.  Goodrick,"  said 
Beauflower,  "  I  have  been,  in  my  wild  oat  Oxford 


114  THE   vicar's   COUETSHIP. 

days,  a  hard  rider,  so  that  I  can  hardly  sympa- 
thise in  your  contempt;  as  to  the  election,  I 
wonder  at  any  man's  coveting  such  an  expensive 
honour  ;  and  as  to  the  presentation  of  plate,  I 
cordially  share  in  your  astonishment  and  your 
indignation.  I  only  wonder  they  did  not  propose 
to  gild  his  house  for  the  man,  but  the  age  wor- 
ships money,  and  we  Wiltshire  people  down  here 
are  not  wiser  or  less  selfish  than  the  world  in 
general.  It  is  only  his  tradesmen  and  a  few 
toadies  who  want  to  be  invited  to  his  parties,  who 
have  got  up  this  thing.  It  is  not  the  county 
does  it.  No  one  respects  him,  and  very  few  like 
him,  that  is  perfectly  well  known.'' 


THE    TWO   COMMERCIAL   GENTLEMEN".  115 


CHAPTER  VL 

THE   TWO    COMMERCIAL   GENTLEMEN". 

K\RLY  in  this  K'ovember  of  the  year  of  wliicli  we 
write,  two  comniercial  gentlemen  liad  arrived  at 
Slobury  one  night  by  a  late  train.  They  were  tra- 
vellers for  some  large  Houses  in  "White chapel,  one 
of  which  dealt  in  fancy  goods,  the  other  in  cut- 
lery, of  which  they  brought  a  gxeat  many  tin  boxes 
of  samples.  They  were  both  men  a  little  over 
thirty,  both  wore  cut-away  coats,  staring  scarfs, 
small  and  very  glossy  French  hats — both  dis- 
played diamond  rings — both  were  loud  and  flashy 
in  their  talk — both  drank  frequent  glasses  of  pale 
sherry,  and  boasted  of  the  enormous  business  of 
their  respective  firms — both  insisted  on  treating 
almost  everybody  who  gave  them  orders,  or  who 
even  devoted  any  time  to  examining  their  sam- 
ples. They  each  hired  a  dog-cart  and  drove  over 
the  country  in  every  direction.  In  Slobury  they 
were  decidedly  popular,  being  show}%  jovial  sort 
of  men,  and  by  no  means  bad  "  company  "  in  the 

I  2 


116  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

estimation  of  the  small  tradesmen  and  farmers 
nightly  frequenting  the  coffee-room  of  the  Eail- 
way  Hotel,  one  of  those  raw  new  brick  buildings 
full  of  flimsy  ornamentation  common  to  country 
stations.  The  landlord,  a  sharp,  active  man,  who 
was  also  a  carrier,  liked  them  because  '^  they  paid 
their  way  like  gentlemen,"  the  landlady  and  bar- 
maid liked  them  because  they  were  "  so  genteel," 
and  paid  them  extravagant  compliments,  and 
gave  them  Mosaic  presents. 

.  The  Kailway  Hotel  was  one  of  those  staring 
new  inns  which  are  called  hotels,  just  as  misters 
have  grown  into  esquires,  shops  into  ''emporiums," 
and  third  class  schools  into  "  academies." 

The  coffee-room  had  an  elaborate  bronze  and 
gilt  gaselier,  hung  with  trappings  of  pink  and 
green  cut  paper,  walls  decorated  with  a  paper 
studded  with  gilt  and  chocolate-coloured  flowers, 
on  which  hung  half-a-dozen  harsh,  crude  engrav- 
ings of  winners  of  the  Derby,  and  Landseer's 
dogs  and  horses,  in  staring  gilt  frames,  and 
over  the  mantel-piece  a  portrait  of  Lord  Mazagan 
in  his  uniform  as  Colonel  of  the  local  rifles.  On 
a  side  table,  behind  a  shell-work  box,  there  w^as  a 
five-year-old  Post-Office  Directory,  and  a  Guide 
to  the  Exhibition  of  '51  ;  and  on  another  table 
two  stuffed  night-hawks  in  one  glass  case,  and  an 
enormous  perch  in  another. 


THE    TWO    COMMERCIAL    GENTLEMEN.  117 

It  was  the  third  day  after  ]\Ir.  Bassevi  had 
honoured  Wiltshire  by  his  presence,  that  Farmer 
Brown,  arriving  at  Slobury  from  the  Salisbury 
market  by  the  3 .  p.m.  train,  turned  into  the 
coffee-room  at  the  Railway  Hotel  to  get  a  glass 
of  hot  brandy  and  water  while  the  ostler  was 
saddling  his  horse.  The  two  commercial  gentle- 
men with  the  large  glosssy  whiskers  were  seated, 
one  by  the  fire  langaiidly  with  his  feet  on  the 
hob,  and  a  bottle  of  sherry  and  a  pack  of  cards 
on  the  table  near  him ;  the  other  writing  at  a 
side  table.  They  had  just  finished  dinner,  and  an 
almost  visible  odour  of  beefsteak  and  onions  still 
pervaded  the  rather  stuffy  apartment. 

'•  Good  morning,  gen'lemen  both,"  said  Farmer 
Brown,  courteously,  unbuttoniug  his  long,  snuff- 
coloured  greatcoat,  and  placing  his  Sunday  hat 
with  almost  refio-ious  care  on  a  side  table  :  "  been 
a  deal  of  rain  lately.  May  I  trouble  ee,  zur,  to 
ring  the  bell  ?     Thankee  kindly." 

There  was  an  evident  overflowing  sociability 
about  old  Brown  that  was  homely  and  yet 
kindly.  The  London  men,  always  contemptuous 
of  the  rustic  mind,  saw  in  his  frosty  face  only 
the  dull  farmer  whose  knowledge  lay  in  turnips, 
short-horns,  southdowns,  and  threshing  machines. 
They  overlooked  in  the  magnificence  of  their  con- 
ceit and  narrow   (quickness,  the  occasional  swift 


118  THE   vicar's    COUETSHIP. 

keen  glance  that  shot  from  the  farmer  s  little  cold 
grey  eyes,  that  instantly  relapsed  into  a  blank 
good  nature. 

The  idle  commercial  gentlemen  with  the  bushy 
whiskers  and  redundant  gold  Albert  chain,  with 
three  spade  guineas  appended  to  it,  and  with 
evident  power  to  add  to  their  number,  rephed 
"with  the  greatest  pleasure,  sir,"  and  rang  the 
bell  accordingly.  When  the  waiter  came.  Farmer 
BrowTi  ordered  his  brown  brandy  and  water  of 
him  in  a  friendly  way,  yet  with  a  manner  that 
implied  he  did  not  every  day  reward  his  skill 
at  market  with  such  a  treat. 

"  Soda  and  brandy,"  said  the  man  by  the  fire, 
with  the  grand  insolence  of  his  species. 

''  And  bring  me,  waiter,  a  bottle  of  cham,  and 
mind  it's  dry."  The  waiter  bowed  and  left  the 
room.  "  And  what  do  you  say,  Danvers,  to  a 
game  at  three  card  loo,"  said  the  man  b}^  the 
mndow ;  "  it's  so  awful  dull  down  here."  (He 
kept  tattooing  the  table  with  his  ring  finger — 
quite  a  tune  he  kept — his  business  friend  some- 
times tapping  too  as  if  impelled  by  irresistible 
musical  predilections  to  help  out  the  tune). 

"  I  don't  care  " — Englishmen  are  fond  of  this 
cold  form  of  expressing  consent,  and  the  languid 
man  as  he  spoke  drew  up  his  long  shapely  legs — 
"  if  I  join  just  to  kill  time  ;  but  mind,  Montague, 


THE   TWO   COMMERCIAL   GENTLEMEN.  119 

only  tlireepenny  pool.  I  am  not  going  to  make 
ducks  and  drakes  of  my  money,  I  work  a  cursed 
deal  too  hard  for  it.  Got  a  weed  that  a  man  can 
smoke  ? " 

"  Ya-a-as/'  said  Montague,  shutting  up  his  wri- 
ting case,  locking  it,  and  stamping  three  letters 
that  he  had  just  finished,  with  the  most  sharp, 
prompt,  business-like  air  imaginable;  "as  you  like,, 

I  don  t  wish  to  win  your  d money.     I  only 

want  to  pass  an  hour  pleasantly.  Try  this  cigar, 
old  fellar,  at  all  events  it's  better  than  the  cab- 
bage leaves  they  sell  in  this  hole  of  a  place  "  (and 
he  tapped  the  table  again  reflectively  with  his 
bediamonded  finger).  "Perhaps  you'U  take  a 
hand,  sir  ? " 

Farmer  Brown  said  he  had-  no  objection  to 
be  zoshiable  like,  and  he'd  take  a  hand — he  was 
a  mere  boy  like  at  keards,  for  the  missus  'ud 
never  hear  of  'em  at  whoame.  "rmamiddhn' 
hand  at  krebbage,  but  as  for  loo  I  never  played 
thich  geam  sept  once  on  AYarminster  market  day. 
Thankee,  zur,  you  keep  your  chaer,  and  I'll  keep 
theas  un." 

It  was  a  singular  thing  that  the  commercial 
gents  sang  scraps  of  music-hall  and  nigger  songs. 
"  Immenschikofi","  "  The  Daughter  of  the  Baba," 
"  Kafoozleum,"  and  such  ribald  rubbish  now 
under  the  patronage  of  Koyalty,  but  never  l:)efore 


120  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

23opular  since  the  infamous  clays  of  Offley,  the 
Coal  Hole,  and  the  Eegeney — and  tapped  out  so 
many  tunes,  and  smoked  out  so  many  cigars  that 
in  the  course  of  half  an  hour  Farmer  Brown 
found  that  he  had  actually  won  two  pounds  six 
and  sixpence. 

*'Take  some  cham,"  said  Montague,  brushing 
his  scented  and  redundant  whiskers  with  a  small 
pocket  brush  with  a  looking-glass  on  the  back. 

"  Yes ;  try  some  fizz,  old  fellow,"  shouted  Dan- 
vers,  who  had  grown  quite  alert  now,  and  was 
slapping  the  cards  in  the  most  artistic  way  ; 
"  make  the  cards,  Montague,  they  ain't  half  shuf- 
fled." 

"  Thee  bist  a  queer  quist,"  said  Farmer  Brown, 
jovially,  and  admiringly  to  the  shuffler. 

"  Here,  take  some  cham ;  it's  woke  me  up," 
said  Danvers.  "  Suppose  this  time  we  try  half- 
crowns  ;  all  the  luck  seems  with  you,  sir." 

"  I'll  be  drattled  if  it  ain't  hitherto.  Him's  the 
vool  that  loses  is  my  vayther's  motter,  and  it's 
been  mine." 

"  Well,  take  some  fizz." 

"I  don't  like  that  zart  of  ginger-beer;  I'll  stick 
to  my  brandy  ;  but  I  must  go  now  and  see  after 
my  mare,"  said  the  Farmer,  putting  up  his  win- 
nings very  complacently  in  a  great  greasy  pocket 
book  stuffed  with  notes,  for  Farmer  Brown  had 


THE    TWO   COMMERCIAL   GENTLEMEX.  121 

been  selling  sheep,  "  that  infernal  ostler  is  always 
half  asleep." 

''  0,  hang  the  mare,  sixes  all  right.  Take  a 
hand  now  in  half-crown  pool — five  shilling  pool 
if  you  like.  Give  us  our  revenge,  it  passes  the 
time." 

The  eyes  of  the  two  London  men  flashed  cross 
glances.  Danvers  tattooed  on  the  table  in  a 
more  lively  way  then  ever.  Montague  shouting 
"  Campdo^^Ti  Eaces,"  flapped  the  cards,  and  sent 
them  in  a  rainbow  arch  from  one  hand  to  the 
other. 

As  if  that  had  been  a  signal  for  Farmer  Brown 
he  instantly  drank  off"  the  last  drop  in  his  tum- 
bler, pushed  back  his  chair,  rose,  buttoned  his 
snufi'-coloured  coat  firmly,  re-tied  his  red  neck- 
handkerchief,  and  rano;  the  bell. 

"  Good  marning,  gents,''  he  said  ;  "  I  wish  'ee 
good  marning.  I've  spent  a  very  pleasant  hom% 
and  now  I  must  trot  whoam,  or  my  good  missus 
'11  be  waiting  tea.  I  make  a  rule  never  to  play 
keards  with  strangers  ;  but  with  gen'lemen  like 
you — do^^mright  Lunnon  gen'lemen — there's  no 
danger.  Good  marning  !  Ill  pay  at  the  bar  for 
my  brandy ! " 

'*  I  bayn  t  zich  a  fool  as  they  thinks,"  he  said, 
as  he  closed  the  door  on  the  two  dumbfoundered 
cardsharpers,  through  whose  nets  he  had  broken, 


122  THE   vicar's   COUETSHIP. 

and  ^ye  minutes  afterwards  tlie  sound  of  his  black 
cob's  hoofs  died  away  across  Slobury  bridge.  He 
laughed  all  the  way  tln^ough  Slobury,  and  several 
persons,  especially  Mr.  Pinnegar  at  the  post-office, 
and  Master  CuUum  the  blacksmith  at  the  corner, 
reported  that  Farmer  Bro^m,  though  usually  a 
steady  going  man,  had  taken  a  great  deal  more 
than  was  good  for  him  at  Salisbury  market. 

"Well,  Im  blowed,"  said  Danvers,  angrily, 
with  quite  a  different  voice  and  manner  from 
his  assumed  one  as  the  farmer  rode  off,  "  if  I  was 
ever  so  chiselled  in  my  life.  The  blamed  old 
fool,  just  as  we  had  the  noose  round  him,  too. 
Another  hour,  and  we'd  have  sweated  his  pocket- 
book  for  him." 

''  It's  a  blessed  rum  start,"  said  Montague. 
"  Left  us  in  a  hole,  by  the  living  jingo  !  " 

Here  he  gave  a  vivid  but  brief  imitation  of 
Mr.  Toole  in  the  "Pretty  Horsebreaker,"  and 
then  burst  into  a  scream  of  vulgar,  uncontrollable 
laughter,  doubling  up  almost  as  if  in  pain. 

"  D if  I  see  it,"  said  Danvers,  Avho  when 

not  acting  the  commercial  fop  was  prompt  and 
savage,  having  served  his  time  as  shop-lifter,  swell- 
mobsman,  and  burglar,  being,  moreover,  by  no 
means  unacquainted  with  the  more  distant  of  our 
foreign  colonies.  "  You're  always  such  a  cursed 
soft  fool — you  seem  to  quite  relish  being  bit  by  a 


THE    TWO   COMMERCIAL   GENTLEMEN.  123 

bumpkin  like  that.  By  all  above  and  below,  if 
it  bad  been  a  little  safer  crib,  if  I  wouldn't  have 
split  bis  nob  with  a  Kennedy  rather  than  have 
let  him  go  away  with  his  pocket  full  of  notes  to 
grin  over  the  business  with  his  yokels  1 " 

''Ah!  your  bloocVs  soon  put  up.  You're 
always  for  the  high  Toby,  Dan  ;  you  were  never 
meant  for  the  cj[uiet  game.  That  comes  of  the 
salt  water  you  ve  tasted,  with  a  dash  of  red  in 
it,  too,  I  expect,  coming  back  in  that  Yankee 
schooner  Avithout  a  cars^o." 

"  Well,  it  would  have  been  better,  with  all  the 
risk  of  scrao'o;iiio'  than  rottino;  down  here  for  a 
mere  chance.  You  see  we  can  t  get  a  lift  inside. 
A  thing  like  this  must  be  put  up.  I  feel  so  cursed 
riled  now,  I  could  close  my  teeth  on  any  one. 
It's  the  pride  of  the  thing.  I'll  get  drunk,  and 
have  an  infernal  row  to-night  in  the  billiard-room, 
unless  the  pool  goes  very  well  for  us." 

"  Yes  ;  and  get  foolish,  and  blab  everything. 
The  bobby  inspector  here  cbops  in  there  very 
often.  That  would  be  nice,  now,  wouldn't  it,  old 
pal  ? — very  convenient." 

Montague  was  about  to  burst  into  a  second 
severe  explosion  of  laughter,  but  Mr.  Danvers 
checked  him  by  swearing  if  he  grinned  again  like 
an  infernal  Cheshire  cat,  he'd  knock  every  tooth  he 
had  down  his  throat,  and  spoil  his  beauty  for  him. 


124  THE    vicar's    courtship. 


At  that  very  moment  a  man  witli  a  lividly 
sallow,  Jewish  face,  looked  in  at  the  door,  mut- 
tered some  words  of  apology,  dropped  back,  then 
appeared  again.  The  stranger's  eye  had  recog- 
nised some  old  friends.  It  was  Bassevi,  who, 
having  come  to  Slobury  station  to  see  if  some 
buhl  cabinets  had  arrived  for  the  Castle,  had 
dropped  in  at  the  Eailway  Hotel  to  get  a  glass  of 
sherry.  There  are  men  like  Bassevi,  who  get  into 
a  habit  of  taking  sherry  at  almost  every  house 
they  pass. 

"Why,  Dan,  it's  old  Shiv,  I  declare!"  said 
Montague.  "  I  say,  Dan  vers,  here's  a  go  !  Fancy 
old  Shiv  down  in  the  turnip-fields  !  I  wish  he'd 
come  in  time  to  be  chiselled  by  that  old  buffalo 
that  slipped  off  our  hook.  Well,  how  are  you, 
my  old  Israelite  ?  Wha,t's  your  little  game, 
now  { 

Danvers  greeted  Bassevi  more  sullenly,  and 
watched  him  keenly  from  where  he  sat. 

Bassevi  did  not  look  as  if  he  was  especially 
proud  of  meeting  his  old  "  companions,  partners 
of  his  toil,"  but  he  made  the  best  of  it.  He 
shook  hands  heartily  even  with  Danvers,  who 
was  sullen. 

"  Down  here,  boys,  I  suppose,  out  of  the  way, 
or  bound  to  some  races,  eh  ?  Both  in  the  same 
swim  again,  eh  ? " 


THE    TWO    COMMERCIAL    GEXTLEMEX.  125 

Montague  nodded  in  a  way  that  meant 
anything  or  nothing.  "  And  what  are  you 
up  to  1 '' 

"  Oh,  on  the  honest  lay.  I'm  decorating  Swal- 
lowcliff  Castle  and  the  Abey." 

"  The  Abbey  ? "  said  Montague. 

"  The  Abbey !  Oh,  you  are,  are  you  ? '"'  said 
Danvers,  stretching  out  one  arm,  and  whistling  to 
his  honest  and  alert  chum.  "  Let  me  come  and 
talk  to  Shiv  Kke  a  father." 

As  he  said  this,  he  drew  his  chair  close  to 
Bassevi,  who  was  warming  himself  uneasily,  with 
his  back  to  the  fire,  seating  himself  with  his 
face  the  ^^Tong  way  of  the  chair,  as  if  he  was 
riding.  "  You  remember,  Shiv,  six  years  ago  '? 
I  and  Monty  here,  you  know,  and  Joe  Barnett, 
Silkey,  and  the  Spider,  all  went  to  Eome  on 
special  business  for  you  ?  " 

Bassevi's  face  lengthened,  but  he  nodded  feeble 
assent. 

"  Good ;  I  thought  it  might  have  slipped  your 
memor}",  you  not  being  a  Christian,  like  me  and 
Monty.  In  our  anxiety  to  bring  you  home  some- 
thing worth  having  from  one  of  those  cursed 
palaces,  the  lot  of  us  one  morning  chloroformed 
the  old  custoddy,  and  got  out  half-a-dozen  of  the 
best  things.  Unfortunately,  coming  out,  we  was 
stopped  by  a  sentinel,  who  nobbled  Silkey  and 


126  THE   vicar's   COUETSHIP. 

the  Spider,  and  ran  a  bayonet  into  my  leg.  Do 
you  want  to  see  the  scar  ? '' 

"  No,  never  mind.     Well '?  " 

"  Silkey  and  the  Spider  have  not  been  heard  of 
by  their  affectionate  relatives  since ;  but  Monty, 
Barnett,  and  I  nailed  a  picter  each,  which  you 
had." 

"  And  have  now.  Advertised  everywhere  by 
Pollaky  and  all  that  lot.  No  chance  for  twenty 
years  to  come.     Dead  loss.'' 

''  May  be ;  but  we  ran  the  same  risk  as 
Silkey  and  the  Spider,  and  all  we  got  was 
a  fifty  each.  Now,  we  want  you  to  do  us 
a  turn." 

"  But  I've  left  the  profession." 

"  Greater  fool  you.  Time  to  work  again,  then. 
It's  no  use  talking  gammon  with  us.  What  I 
mean  is,  you  must." 

Bassevi  bent  before  the  blast. 

"  Well,  what  is  it,  Dan  ?  If  it's  found  out,  you 
know,  I'm  ruined  for  ever." 

"  Not  you.  The  devil  keeps  his  decoy  ducks 
fat.  If  the  bobbies  nobble  us  we  won't  split, 
even  if  we  go  over  the  herring-pond  for  it.  Will 
we,  Monty  ? " 

"  Honour  bright.  Here,  Shiv,  try  this 
cham." 

Bassevi  drank  with  the  languid  enjoyment  of 


THE   TWO   COMMERCIAL   GENTLEMEN.  127 

a  man  drinking'  on  tlie  way  to  execution.  His 
old  sins  were  bearing  fresh  seed.  "  Well,  out 
with  it — sink  you  all ! '' 

"  It's  just  this  :  you  know  this  plate  that  is  to 
be  presented  to  the  rich  old  bloke  at  Summerleas. 
You  are  about  the  house.  Now,  all  we  want  is 
for  you  to  unbolt  the  glass  doors  of  the  dining- 
room  that  open  on  the  back  lawn.  You  ve  got 
a  fine  watch  there.  You  see,  you  must  get  in 
somehow — keep  every  one  away,  and  unbolt 
those  doors  twenty  minutes  before  the  presen- 
tation. A  pretty  maid-servant  Monty  here  met 
coming  to  Slobury  told  him  that  the  grub  is 
to  be  all  cold,  and  laid  the  night  before,  and 
the  room  is  to  be  then  locked.  The  plate 
is  to  come  the  night  before,  too,  and  it  is  just 
possible  Monty  and  I  might  hke  to  have  a  look 
at  it  undisturbed." 

"  But  you  don  t  know  the  house  ? " 

"  Don't  we,  really.  Oh,  yes,  we  do.  Monty 
and  I  were  taken  in  one  morning  by  one  of  the 
grooms  before  the  family  was  down,  and  besides 
Monty  and  I  have  been  at  night  and  looked  at 
the  back  windows.  A  child  might  crack  that 
crib,  if  it  wasn't  for  the  bells  the  fools  hang  on 
every  door  and  the  loose  non  shutters  in  the 
lower  rooms.  No  ;  it  must  be  a  '  put  up/  Monty 
somehow  couldn't  bring  the  slavey  to  the  mark. 


128  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

and  the  old  bloke  of  a  butler  keeps  a  six-sliooter 
loaded  in  liis  room/' 

"I  wish  he  had  it  against  your  skull  now/' 
thought  Bassevi,  as  he  muttered  a  sullen 
assent. 

"  What  is  that  noise,  Monty  ?  Some  one  lis- 
tening," said  Danvers. 

There  certainly  was  a  thump  at  the  door  ; 
Bassevi  looked  frightened,  Montague  curious  to 
know  what  it  was,  and  Danvers  savage. 

They  opened  the  door.  It  was  Paddy 
Blake,  evidently  dead  drunk,  and  leaning 
against  the  wall.  They  kicked  him,  shook 
him,  but  he  made  only  one  answer  in  broad 
Wiltshire. 

"  That's  the  beer  to  drow  a  man.  Bring  a 
quart  more,  I  zay,  of  the  knock-me-down  stuff." 

"  Leave  that  fool,"  said  Danvers  ;  "  he's  all 
right.  He  comes  here  with  Harker's  grooms 
and  the  keepers  that  bring  the  rabbits.  He 
came  over  this  morning  to  see  Cantelu]3e's  horse 
Immenschikoff  started  for  York  ;  the  blackguard 
is  stark  mad  about  that  horse.  Is  there  any 
good  in  the  beast,  Shiv  ?  Is  he  worth  putting  a 
fiver  on  ? " 

"  Put  a  dozen  fivers  on  him,  Dan,  if  you  can  ; 
heTL  whip  the  whole  lot." 

It   is  unnecessary  to  any  longer  linger  with 


THE   TWO   COMMERCIAL   GENTLEMEN.  129 

these  three  scoundrels.  SufiS.ce  it  to  say  that 
Bassevi  finally  consented,  somewhat  reluctantly, 
if  possible  to  undo  the  windows;  and,  moreover,  by 
all  that  was  "  open  and  shut,"  that  greatest  and 
most  binding  of  thieves'  oaths,  not  to  betray  the 
"  little  game  "  of  the  two  shrewd  swell-mobsmen. 


VOL  II. 


130  THE   VICAe's    courtship. 


CHAPTER  YIL 

THE   SECOND   MEET   OF   THE   SEASON. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  tlie  second  meet  of 
the  Swallowcliff  fox-hounds,  Mr.  Beauflower  re- 
ceived the  following  curt  letter  from  the  Abbey, 
relative  to  his  complaint  about  the  insolence  of 
the  head  keeper. 

"  ^''ove?)lheJ'  5,  1860. 

''Dear  Sir, 

I  am  sorry  that  you  should  have  expe- 
rienced any  annoyance  whilst  walking  in  my  pro- 
perty. Mr.  Travers,  my  head  keeper,  has,  how- 
ever, the  entire  management  of  these  petty 
matters,  and  I  feel  sure  he  exercises  his  power 
with  sagacity  and  discretion.  The  stray  dogs  of 
the  poor  people  are  very  destructive  to  my  game, 
and  I  can  scarcely  wonder  at  his  irritation  at 
any  intrusion  on  the  by-paths  near  the  choicest 
parts  of  my  coverts,  when  all  the  chief  roads  on 
the  terraces  and  elsewhere  are  now  fully  thrown 


THE   SECOXD   MEET   OF    THE    SEASOX.         131 

open,  as  they  always  were,  to  my  friends  and 
neighbours. 

"  I  am,  dear  sir, 

"  Yours  most  faithfuUy, 

''Jabez  Haekee/' 

"Eev.  Edward  Beauflowee." 

The  Yicar  was  too  mortified  to  confess  his  rebuff 
to  Mr.  Goodrick,  or  even  his  sister,  so  he  scrunched 
up  the  letter  angrily,  thrust  it  deep  into  his  study 
fire,  and  said  nothing  about  it.  Nor  was  there 
indeed  a  necessity  for  any  immediate  notice  of  it, 
for  Mr.  Goodrick  had  gone  up  to  town  to  select 
some  articles  of  vertu  (chiefly  ivories  and  enamels), 
which  he  had  been  requested  to  send  to  an  exhi- 
bition about  to  be  opened  at  Berlin.  He  would 
not  return  for  a  week. 

The  fifth  was  a  day  long  looked  forward  to  by 
the  boys  of  London,  being  the  anniversary  of  the 
death  of  that  misguided  hero,  Guido  Fawkes, 
the  son  of  the  Yorkshire  doctor  ;  but  the  festival 
was  not  much  appreciated  at  Summerleas,  except 
as  an  excuse  for  satirical  scarecrows,  or  as  a 
means  of  procuring  money  for  fireworks. 

Mrs.  Beauflower  was  that  morning  in  a  state  of 
great  and  eloquent  indignation,  Mary  the  house- 
maid having  broken  a  tea-cup  whilst  bringing  in 
the  breakfast  things,   and  Mrs.   B.   having   also 


132  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

detected  several  spots  of  rust  on  the  steel  fire- 
irons  in  the  best  bedroom. 

"Servants  are  no  servants  now-a-days,"  she 
exclaimed,  pathetically,  while  putting  sugar  in 
the  cups  ;  "as  I  told  Miss  Chivers  and  Mrs.  Eobin- 
son,  myself,  only  yesterday  ^Yhen  they  called. 
Servants  are  all  ladies  now,  fine  madams,  forsooth, 
with  their  silk  dresses,  and  letter-writing,  and 
brooches,  and  nonsense ;  but  things  are  all  altered ; 
the  world  is  turned  upside  down,  and  it's  no  use 
your  saying  it  isn't  bad,  Ned,  for  it  is,  and  every 
sensible  person  must  see  it.  They  do  nothing  well. 
They  Avaste  and  spoil,  and  just  as  you  are  getting 
them  a  little  in  your  ways,  they  go  and  marry." 

Julia  suggested  that  servants  j^erhaps  liked  to 
be  independent,  with  a  home  of  their  own,  like 
other  people. 

"  Stufi"  and  nonsense !  I'm  surprised,  Julia,  a 
girl  of  your  usual  good  sense  to  talk  so  exaspe- 
ratingly.  What  do  nine-tenths  of  them  marry  to 
but  rags,  and  poverty,  and  slommocking,  idle, 
good-for-nothing  husbands,  for  whom  they  slave, 
without  getting  a  thank  you.  J\Ir.  Goodrick  and 
I  agree  on  this  point  entirely.     He'll  tell  you." 

"  My  dear  mother,"  said  the  Vicar,  in  hopeless 
appeal,  "  do  throw  yourself  in  their  place.  Is  the 
life  an  agreeable  one  ?  perpetual  imprisonment 
with  hard  labour,  a  glimpse  of  a  sweetheart  once 


THE    SECOXD    MEET    OF    THE    SEASOX.         133 

a  week,  and  then  generally  a  surreptitious  glimpse 
— in  the  far  distance,  perhaps,  as  in  a  penny  valen- 
tine— a  marriage  with  a  young  man  in  a  blue  frock 
coat,  and  subsequent  bliss,  on  fourteen  shillings  a 
week,  finally,  an  old  age  in  a  workhouse,  separated 
from  the  blue  frock  coat,  doubled  up  with  rheuma- 
tism, and  shivering  with  palsy." 

"  I  don't  like  to  hear  you  talk  so  lightly,"  said 
Mrs.  Beauflower,  in  her  matter-of-fact  way,  ''  and 
pray,  Edward,  don't  mention  these  things  when 
the  servants  are  in  the  room,  or  you'll  ruin  them 
entirely.  They're  bad  enough  abeady,  and  how 
]Mrs.  Robinson  can  send  that  flighty  girl  of  hers 
here  so  often,  when  she  knows  that  that  silly 
young  man  of  Mi\  Bassevi's  always  waits  for  her 
at  the  Post  Oflice,  I  can't  think ;  but,  there,  some 
people  have  no  more  thought  than  children.  I 
suppose,  poor  thing,  she  has  not  been  much 
accustomed  to  any  comfort." 

Mary  just  then  came  in  to  clear  away,  and  Mrs: 
Beauflower  by  a  side  wind  (a  woman's  favourite 
but  somewhat  ungenerous  mode  of  administering 
advice),  improved  the  occasion,  as  her  son  and 
daughter  divided  the  "Times"  between  them 
with  an  unobserved  smile  at  their  mother's  untir- 
ing but  mistaken  energy. 

"  And  I  am  sure,"  continued  the  old  lady, 
talking  to  the  world  in  general,  "  that  servants 


134  THE   vicar's   COUETSHIP. 

now  are  no  more  like  the  servants  of  my  young 
days,  than  clialk  is  like  cheese.  Old  Nancy 
Hodges,  who  lived  with  my  father  two-and- 
twenty  years,  never  wore  anything  but  mob  caps 
in  her  life,  and  never  anything  but  dark  stuff 
dresses,  generally  brown.  As  for  your  flyaway  rib- 
bons and  brooches,  we  should  have  thought  she 
had  gone  mad,  if  she  had  ever  attempted  such  a 
thing,  and  I  remember  once  when  she  went  to 
Dorchester  fair,  she — Let  me  see,  it  was  in 
eighteen  hundred  and '' 

Mary,  thoroughly  cognisant  of  the  severity  of 
the  side  wind,  here  maliciously  interrupted  the 
old  lady's  sluggish  flood  of  memory,  by  asking  in 
a  c[uick,  smart  manner,  if  she  should  put  on  some 
coals. 

"  No.  Certainly  not,"  said  the  old  lady,  in- 
dignantly, ''  you  servants  will  ruin  your  master  in 
coals.  We  had  a  ton  in  only  three  weeks  ago,  and 
now '' 

"  Shall  I  bring  a  block  of  wood,  ma'am  ?  I 
suppose  master's  study  fire  is  to  go  out  ?  " 

''  Yes,  Mary,"  said  Beauflower,  in  that  kindly 
manner  he  always  maintained  to  servants,  and 
which  tended  to  mitigate  the  severity  of  the 
maternal  government.  "  I  and  Miss  Julia  are 
going  to  the  fox-hounds'  throw  off  ?  Is  George 
any  where  about  ?" 


THE    SECOND    MEET    OF    THE    SEASOX.  135 

"He  is  rolling  the  lawn,  sir.  Shall  I  tell  him 
to  put  the  horse  in,  sir  ? " 

*•'  No,  thank  you,  Mary,  I'll  go  out  myself.  I 
want  to  see  how  the  weather  looks." 

"  I  do  so  miss  Mr.  Goodrick,  mamma,  you  don't 
know,''  said  Julia.     '•'  Don't  you,  Ned  ?  " 

'•'  Very  much,  indeed,"  said  ]\Irs.  Beauflower. 

"  Yes,  very  much,  and  yet  you're  always 
sparring,  you  two." 

"  Oh  !  that's  all  fun.  I  shall  be  quite  sorry 
when  his  house  is  finished  ;  and  they  like  Tony, 
too,  in  the  kitchen.  Mary  tells  me  he's  as  proud 
of  his  master  as  old  Leo  here  is." 

Then  Jidia  stooped,  and  fondled  the  grand  head 
that  the  Newfoundland,  much  to  Wasp's  jealousy, 
was  thrusting  into  her  hand.  On  the  hearth-rug, 
the  Vicar's  favourite  cat  lay  curled  up  into  a 
ball,  the  very  image  of  luxurious  and  careless 
happiness. 

''You're  never  o-oino-  to  that  fox-huntins;?" 
said  Mrs.  Beauflower,  who  had  a  small  wet 
blanket  generally  ready  to  throw  on  all  youthful 
expectations ;  "  what !  such  a  chilly  morning  as 
this,  shivering  about  at  a  wood  side  just  to  see  a  lot 
of  foolish  people  ride  after  a  fox,  and  break 
throucrh  hedg-es,  and  tumble  over  o;ates,  and  break 
their  bones  in  what  they  call  '  sport.'  " 

"Oh  yes!  we're  going,  mother,"  said  Beauflower, 


136  THE   vicar's    COURTSHIP. 

firmly,  being  accustomed  to  such  onslaughts;  "the 
sun  is  coming  out,  and  it  will  do  Julia  good  to  see 
the  men  in  scarlet.  I  only  wish  I  could  follow 
them,  but  I  don't  like  friends'  horses ;  besides,  I 
have  parish  work.  Come,  Ju,  put  on  your  water- 
proof, the  pony-carriage  will  be  round  in  twenty 
minutes.    Now,  don't  dawdle;  sharp's  the  word!" 

The  Vicar  went  to  the  front  door,  and  looked 
out.  There  was  George  sweeping  the  part  of 
the  lawn  which  he  had  not  yet  rolled.  The  part 
he  had  done  was  clearly  traceable  by  the  darker 
stripes  where  the  roller  had  not  passed,  and  the 
broad  silvery  bands  where  it  had.  The  slight  frost 
of  the  morning  still  lay  in  shady  places  round  the 
pond  that  was  filmed  with  the  thinnest  ice,  and 
it  was  held  up  in  small  patches,  as  if  re]3roach- 
fuUy,  in  the  green  hoUoAved  palms  of  the  cabbage 
leaves.  A  robin  was  singing  innocently  and  con- 
fidingly to  George,  in  thanks  for  the  worms  his 
spade  had  lately  turned  up  in  the  potatoe  patch. 
A  thrush,  with  his  eye  on  a  retiring  snail  at  the 
foot  of  a  tree,  nestled  in  the  dark  Portugal  laurel, 
waiting  till  George  left  the  lawn,  or  was  called 
in-doors  for  a  moment.  The  frosty  dew  was 
melting  fast,  and  the  sun  growing  stronger  over 
the  Abbey  woods. 

"  Do  you  think  the  scent  will  lie  this  morn- 
ing 1  "  said  the  Vicar. 


THE    SECOND    MEET    OF    THE    SEASON.  137 

"  'Ees,  zur.  Eight  down  well ;  it'll  be  breast 
high  afore  you  get  to  covert  side.  Mr.  Cantloop 
he  past  just  now  in  his  scarlet.  He's  always 
\Tirst." 

"  How's  old  lies  gettino;  on  now  ?  I  hear 
bad  reports  of  him.  Doesn't  he  drink  a  good 
deal  ? " 

George,  a  gaunt,  red-haired  fellow,  of  about 
thirty,  was  much  too  fond  of  beer  himself ;  but  he 
assumed  an  air  of  the  most  Pharisaical  self-conse- 
quence on  being  asked  for  this  information.  He 
leant  on  his  broom,  and  tilting  up  his  rusty  hat 
(originally  a  Bond  Street  one  of  the  Vicar's),  and 
scratching  his  head,  grinned,  but  made  no  answer. 

"Speak  out,  man.  What  is  this  new  story 
about  old  lies  1     I  am  afraid  he's  incorrigible." 

"  Old  gen'leman  was  drunk  three  days  together 
last  lambing  time,  and  he  laid  down,  as  old  Pin- 
negar  told  me,  by  the  doower  of  the  '  Peal  of 
Bells,'  and  wanted  zumbody  to  hould  un.  ^Mien 
the  carter  at  the  Abbey,  and  Mr.  Pitts,  and  one 
or  two  others,  kept  axing  if  a'd  ha'  a  leetle  drap 
mwore,  old  lies  zung  out,  ^  Noa,  noa,  I  won't  ha' 
a  drap.'  '  Do'ee,'  zaid  they,  '  do'ee  ha'  a  drap 
mwore.'  '  Noa,  I  won't,  not  a  drap,'  grunts  he 
again.  At  last  the  old  shepherd  of  Muster 
BroAMi's  goes  up  to  un,  and  tries  un,  and  then 
old  lies  cried  out,  '  Noa,  I  can't  get  a  drap  mwore 


138  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

down  iin.  Drow't  ouver  m'  veace/  zays  he ;  'od 
rat  un,  lie's  a  good  im." 

George,  as  lie  completed  this  story,  by  no  means 
exalting  to  the  Saxon  character,  laughed  in  a  dry 
inaudible  way,  and  got  very  red  in  the  face  over 
it.     The  Vicar  laughed  too,  but  deprecatingly. 

"  But  lambing  time's  a  long  time  ago,  George  ; 
he  took  the  pledge,  you  knoAv,  in  the  summer, 
with  you." 

"  Zo  he  did,  but  he  broke  it  zoon.  I  seed  him 
last  night  at  Fontford,  so  drunk  that  he  couldn't 
walk,  or  stand,  or  lie  down,  without  houlding. 
He  zaid  to  me  all  the  houzes  Avas  a  dancing, 
and  so  were  the  moon  and  the  zeven  stars,  zays 
he.  Policeman  took  he  up  at  last  for  shouting 
zo  for  more  beer  at  the  '  Harker  Arms.'  I  told  he 
it  was  mortal  wrong  not  to  keep  pledge.  I've 
been  a  different  man,  zur,  ever  since  I  took  pledge. 
Yell's  nought  to  me  now." 

'' '  Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed 
lest  he  fall.'  Mind  you  keep  it,  George,  and 
don't  be  too  confident  of  yourself  Now  go  and 
get  the  mare  in,  and  mind  you  take  the  cart  to- 
day to  Birdbrook  for  those  potatoes,  George." 

Presently  the  little  basket  carriage  came 
round.  Julia  appeared  in  her  grey  waterproof, 
and  a  round  black  hat  with  a  saucy  scarlet  wing 
on  one  side  of  it,   alert,  lively,  and  sensible  as 


THE   SECOND   MEET    OF   THE   SEASON.         139 

usual,  and  with,  lier  driving  gloves  on.  George 
stood  stolidly  pleased  at  the  mare's  head,  having 
already  thrown  open  the  back  gate.  Mrs.  Beau- 
flower  was  smiling  to  them  from  the  side  parlour 
window,  the  old  lady  being  much  refreshed  by  a 
recent  severe  and  public  denunciation  of  modern 
servants  and  their  ways  in  the  kitchen,  apropos 
of  the  excessive  consumption  of  butter  the  pre- 
cedino'  fortnioht.  The  compact  was,  that  Julia 
was  to  drive  to  the  covert,  and  the  Vicar  back. 

The  sun  was  growing  warmer,  the  road  was  in 
good  condition,  the  laurel  leaves  in  the  village 
gardens  shone  like  mirrors.  As  George  let  go  the 
mare's  head  in  the  true  professional  way,  Julia 
steered  her  out  between  "  the  dock  gates,"  as  her 
brother  called  them,  with  solidness  and  dexterity. 
She  was  smart  and  quick  in  all  she  did,  and 
always  intent  on  what  she  was  about.  The  chil- 
dren at  the  village  school-door  gave  a  shout  of 
greeting  as  they  dashed  past,  and  Mrs.  Pinnegar, 
a  tall  lank  slut,  rushing  out  of  her  mucky  cottage, 
snatched  up  a  sturdy,  half-naked  youngster,  "  a 
little  mossul "  as  she  called  him,  who  was  playing 
recklessly  in  the  mud,  from  under  the  very  feet  of 
the  Vicar's  high-spirited  mare. 

The  elm  boughs  shook  down  dew  drops  on 
them.  The  lake  gleamed  with  a  silver  radiance, 
like  a  degenerated  Pactolus.     Julia  chattered  and 


140  THE   vicar's    COURTSHIP. 

laughed,  as  liappy  as  any  of  the  skylarks  singing 
overhead.  Merrily  the  carriage  wheels  chased 
each  other  in  their  hopeless  competition.  Pleasant 
it  was  to  see  the  lodgekeepers  and  the  rosy  shy 
children,  and  the  old  people  at  cottage  doors,  and 
the  old  men  digging  in  their  gardens,  and  the  red 
burly  waggoners  greet  the  pleasant-spoken  Vicar 
and  his  pretty  sister,  who  was  indeed  a  favourite 
with  every  one  that  was  not  afraid  of  her. 

Now  and  then  they  met  somebody  bound  on 
the  same  errand.  First  Farmer  Brown's  wild  young 
son  Eobert,  a  fine-grown  fellow  with  broad  chest, 
roving  dark  eyes,  and  large  wiry  black  whiskers. 
Then  two  of  Mr.  Barker's  grooms,  one  with  a 
led  horse.  As  they  grew  nearer  the  covert,  they 
overtook  more  farmers,  and  last  of  all  Tom  Burton, 
Mr.  Cantelupe's  huntsman,  with  the  hounds,  fine 
dapple  fellows,  that  required  incessant  shouting 
of  their  names  to  prevent  them  at  once  beginning 
an  impromptu  wild  hunt  of  their  own. 

Just  then  Swallow 0113"  woods,  tree  after  tree, 
came  in  sioht,  with  that  blue  mist  that  the  Slo- 
bury  people  always  call  ''Kitty  Bailey  brewing," 
steaming  up  from  them.  The  nearer  woods  stood 
out  quite  dark  against  the  further  and  bluer  waves. 
The  wind  blew  fresher  too  as  the  sun  rose  higher. 

The  Vicar,  in  wild  spirits,  forgetful  for  the 
moment  of  l)lack  Care,  that  takes  the  back  seat 


THE    SECOND    MEET    OF    THE    SEASON.         Ill 

sometimes  even  in  pony-carriages,  was  sliouting, 
mucli  to  Julia  s  delight,  with  excellent  and  un- 
affected elocution,  Mr.  Charles  Kingsley's  clever 
but  2:)aradoxical  eulogy  of  the  north  east  wind. 

"  Welcome,  wild  north-easter, 
Shame  it  is  to  see 
Odes  to  every  zephyr, 
Ne'er  a  verse  to  thee. 

"  Welcome  back,  north-easter, 
O'er  the  German  foam, 
O'er  the  Danish  moorlands, 
From  thy  frozen  home. 

"  Hark,  the  brave  north-easter  ! 
Breast  high  lies  the  scent. 
On  by  holt  and  headland. 
Over  heath  and  bent," 

"  There  are  dashing  lines.  Do  you  hear  the 
horn,  Ju  ? " 

Julia  looked  very  pretty  as  she  leant  forward 
and  bent  her  saucy  head  to  listen. 

"  Chime,  ye  dappled  darlings, 
Through  the  sleet  and  snow, 
Who  can  over  ride  you  ? 
Let  the  horses  go  ! 

"  Chime,  ye  dappled  darlings, 
Down  the  roaring  blast ; 
You  shall  see  a  fox  die 
Ere  an  hour  be  past." 

"AYliy,  hallo!  Beauflower,"  said  a  sturdy  voice 
behind  him,  "  what's  the  matter  with  you  ?  I 
heard  you  a  quarter  of  a  mile  off,  shouting  like  a 
Cheap  Jack  at  a  fair." 


142  THE   VICAE's    courtship. 

It  was  Dr.  Briscoe,  full  of  secrets  as  usual,  and 
keen  and  self-contained,  but  enjoying  the  hour 
of  leisure,  and  tlie  anticipations  of  a  fine  sight. 

"  I  can't  follow  them,"  he  said,  pointing  to  the 
head  of  the  big  bony  cob  he  bestrode,  "  though 
this  horse  is  very  sure  at  his  fences,  and  would 
not  be  by  any  means  last ;  but  IVe  got  a  case 
of  measles  at  Stoat's  Nest,  and  I  only  take  the 
covert  by  the  way." 

"  Dr.  Briscoe,"  said  Julia,  leaning  forward,  "  if 
you  broke  your  leg  out  hunting,  should  you 
attend  yourself '? '' 

The  doctor  laughed  in  his  dry  w^ay.  "No, 
certainly  not,  without  a  fee.  I  should  be  a  bad 
23atient,  for  I  don't  like  medicine.  By-the-bye, 
Beauflower,  what  a  confounded  shallow  as^e  this 
is.  I  constantly  meet  fellows  who  will  talk  shop 
with  me,  and  I  generally  find  their  knowledge  is 
exhausted  in  about  the  third  question.  I  met 
that  young  prig  Talbot  just  now,  on  a  short- 
legged  brown  animal  that  he  considers  up  to  any- 
thing; he  began  talking  of  heart  disease,  as  his  rich 
uncle  in  Norfolk  shows  favourable  symptoms  of 
it.  He  had  read  some  article  in  a  medical  journal, 
knew  all  about  systole  and  diastole,  and  thick 
blood  and  thin  blood,  and  the  valves,  the  aorta, 
ossification,  and  all  the  rest  of  it,  but  I  went  one 
inch  furtjjaer,  and  he  was  quite  lost.     Clever  people 


THE   SECOND   MEET   OF   THE    SEASON.  143 

now  want  spoonfuls  of  everjrthing;  tlieyre  like 
children  at  a  dessert,  they  don't  relish  a  cut  from 
the  solid  joint.  It  is  the  shallowest  age  that  ever 
was.  Young  fellows  go  about  now  snapping  at 
every  new  fact,  like  dogs  in  a  snow  storm." 

By  the  time  the  doctor  had  delivered  this 
tirade  against  modern  sciolists,  the  Vicar's  pony- 
carriaofe  had  reached  the  lane  leadino;  to  the 
covert. 

"  I  hope  the  Harkers  will  let  poor  Amy  come," 
said  Julia,  "  she  is  so  fond  of  riding,  and  she  rides 
so  well,  twice  as  well  as  that  odious,  envious  [Miss 
Harker,  who  is  always  talking  at  her." 

A  short  lane,  and  then  a  waggon  road  across  a 
stubble  field,  brought  them  to  the  covert  side, 
where  some  twenty  horsemen  were  already  col- 
lected. There  was  Lord  Mazagan  there,  looking 
very  knowing,  on  Moonraker,  his  grey,  light, 
fleshy,  "  varmint "  looking  horse,  tall,  but  all 
muscle  and  wire  ;  famous  for  his  raking  style  at 
a  fence,  and  ready,  as  the  whipper-in  used  to  say, 
to  jump  two  fields  at  once ;  and  Mr.  Cante- 
lupe  was  very  conspicuous  on  Clinker,  a  golden 
coloured,  lengthy,  fifteen-three  chestnut,  a  six 
hundred  guinea  horse,  warranted  to  go  at  any- 
thing, safe,  fast,  and  never  known  to  tire.  There 
were  also  all  sorts  of  men  on  all  sorts  of  horses, 
doctors,  gentlemen-farmers,  yeomen,  livery-stable 


144  THE    vicar's    COUETSHIP. 

keepers,  grooms,  and  a  sporting  rector  or  two. 
There  were  one  or  two  farm  bailiffs,  on  thick  lumpy 
horses,  and  several  old  squires  on  the  now  scarce 
old  stamp  of  hunters,  the  lengthy  short-legged 
animal,  slow  over  grass,  but  great  over  plough 
and  strong  fences.  Lord  Mazagan  and  Mr.  Can- 
telupe  had  abeady  trotted  up  to  the  pony-carriage 
and  greeted  BeauHower  and  his  sister,  when  the 
Harkers'  barouche  arrived.  It  contained  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Harker  and  Ethel.  Mr.  Harker  was  in 
hunting  dress,  his  groom  having  his  first  horse, 
Eavenhill,  a  thick  sort  of  animal,  a  bay,  with 
short  legs  and  a  clean  made  head,  waiting  ^for 
him.  Mrs.  Harker,  all  smiles  and  nods,  was 
watching  her  daughter,  who,  followed  by  her 
groom,  rode  somcAvhat  distrustfully  on  a  flashy, 
fast,  high-tempered  chestnut  mare,  with  a  rest- 
less reddish  eye,  but  no  particular  fault,  except 
that  grievous  one,  of  short  shoulders.  Presently 
up  came  crowds  of  more  horsemen,  then  the 
hounds  and  more  hunting  men. 

Amy,  by  special  request,  rode  Ethel's  piebald, 
mouse-coloured,  AVelsh  pony,  not  yet  recovered 
from  clipping ;  she  looked  very  pretty  in  her 
tight  fitting,  trim  riding-habit,  and  little  round 
hat  with  green  feathers,  and  she  rode  humbly 
and  silently  by  Miss  Harker's  side,  playing  the 
captive  King  John  to  her  Black  Prince. 


THE    SECOND    MEET    OF    THE    SEASON.  145 

Miss  Harker  looked  unusually  well  for  her, 
her  fashionably  made  habit  fitting  to  perfection  ; 
her  rather  scanty  hair,  screwed  up  in  a  cm^t  Diana 
like  knot,  threw  her  tall  hat  rather  forward,  and 
gave  it  a  piquancy ;  such  momentary  advan- 
tages women  of  Miss  Harker's  age  and  character 
always  know  how  to  make  the  best  of,  just  as 
clever  artists  avail  themselves  of  small  accidents 
in  surface  and  texture.  She  smiled  archly  as  she 
bowed  to  Cantelupe,  and  with  that  indescril3able 
manner  that  women  know  how  to  assume  when 
they  like  a  person,  leaving  the  interpretation 
of  it  entirely  to  the  recipient.  Her  smile, 
however,  was  not  so  spontaneous  and  sunny 
as  it  ougrht  to  have  been,  and  had  a  habit  of 
checking  itself  suddenly,  as  if  some  spring  in  the 
facial  machinery  did  not  work  so  freely  as  it 
ought  to  do,  and,  to  tell  the  plain  truth,  this 
partly  arose  from  one  of  those  prudential  reasons 
that  check  social  spontaneity,  for  Miss  Harker's 
side  teeth  were  a  Httle  deficient  in  whiteness,  and 
art,  that  rather  valuable  auxiliary  to  the  beauty 
of  certain  ages,  had  not  yet  been  called  in  to 
repair  the  inroads  of  time.  Still  it  must  be 
confessed  that  Miss  Harker  coquetted  very 
prettily  with  her  little  gold-mounted  whip,  and 
had  thoroughly  mastered  all  the  little  minaU' 
deries  of  the  fashionable  horsewoman.     She  had 

VOL.    II.  L 


146  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

learnt,  to  the  y eiy  faiis  of  the  book,  the  agacerie 
that  attracts  and  pleases  men  who  like  to  see  a 
woman  on  horseback.  By  her  side  came  poor  Amy, 
with  her  innocent  enjoyment  of  riding  for  its 
own  sake,  her  youthful  delight  of  the  fresh  morn- 
ing and  the  animated  scene  by  the  covert  side, 
where  a  squadron  of  some  two  hundred  stalwart, 
strong  nerved  men  in  scarlet  had  now  gathered 
round  Lord  Mazagan,  to  whom  his  nephew  had, 
with  the  best  taste,  delegated  that  day  his  com- 
mand as  master  of  the  hounds,  already  in  a  rest- 
less ferment  of  excitement  round  the  nearest 
gorse  bushes ;  Amy  was  guileless  and  unconscious 
of  the  appreciative  glances  that  crossed  and  re- 
crossed  as  people  ambled  past  her,  and  who  was 
pleased  that  Julia  and  her  brother  could  see  her 
progress  in  the  noble  art — she  had  only  two 
circumstances  that  lessened  her  enjoyment,  and 
those  were  that  her  father  and  mother  and  the 
major  could  not  see  her  enthroned  on  her  pony, 
and  that  the  terrible  Mrs.  Harker,  who  had  of  late 
been  so  harsh  and  repelling,  was  present  to  damp 
her  spirits. 

Talk  of  skeletons  in  the  cupboard, — we  have 
all  of  us  living  skeletons,  who  confront  us  at  the 
club,  who  jostle  us  in  the  ball-room,  who  waylay 
us  in  the  street;  some  antipathies,  some  scarecrows 
of  nature's  or  our  own  making,  who  poison  the  air 


THE   SECOND   MEET    OF   THE   SEASON.         147 

for  US,  and  ever  cross  the  path  of  our  enjo}Tiieiit. 
It  is  not  legal  to  kill  them,  so  day  after  day  they 
stop  our  train,  and  block  our  carriage,  and  in- 
trude on  the  friends  vre  wish  to  monojjolLse,  and 
still  the  great  question  remains  as  to  whether 
a  future  state  will  be  also  dimmed  by  their  ac- 
cursed presence. 

!Mrs.  Harker  from  her  barouche,  "  the  cynosure 
of  neighbouring  eyes,"  dispensed  her  smiles  and 
nods  to  the  richest  and  most  distinguLshed  of 
the  county  gentry.  With  ]Mr.  Cantelupe  she 
had  a  long  badinage,  the  most  playful  and  arch 
that  can  be  conceived;  and  Lord  Mazagan's 
gallant  comjjliments  she  returned  with  interest, 
darting  them  back  in  the  direction  of  his  nephew, 
whose  horse  and  equipment  she  found,  as  she 
expressed  it  in  the  most  lady-like  French, 
"  tootarfo.y  parfo.y"  and  the  whole  scene  ''  char- 
mong,  hiang  charmong!'  The  grace  with  which 
she  hung  one  hand,  cased  ia  a  primrose  glove, 
over  the  side  of  the  barouche  as  she  fondled  Ethel 
with  the  other,  was  a  study  for  a  sculptor — 
especially  a  sculptor  of  the  present  day.  ^Ir. 
Frith  would  have  made  several  daiaty  pictures 
out  of  such  material.  Jack  Talbot,  who,  with 
his  \)\^Sy  little  clean  shaven  face,  as  usual  strictly 
guarded  by  a  stiff,  crisp  all-round  white  collar,  sat 
on  a  clever  Irish  horse  he  had  picked  up  when  his 

L   2 


14-S  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

regiment  was  camped  on  the  Cnrragli,  calmly 
smoking  the  butt  end  of  a  cheroot  in  a  sort  of  pro- 
testing way,  thought  differently,  for  the  reflection 
which  shot  across  his  mind,  just  an  inch  below 
his  lips,  was, — 

"  Cursed  old  humbug ;  I  hope  Fitz  won't  be 
fool  enough  to  marry  that  tall  Harker  girl.  Td 
take  that  little  governess  now  if  she'd  only  a 
thousand." 

Self  confident  Jack  !  that  little  trim  city  there, 
so  unconscious  of  its  possible  besiegers,  was  not 
to  be  taken  so  easily.  That  fort  they  call  a  heart 
needed  better  heart  and  brains  than  yours,  my 
hlase  friend,  to  storm  it. 

Fashionable  to  the  last  extremity  was  the  little 
velvet  arrangement,  called  by  courtesy  a  bonnet, 
on  Mrs.  Harker 's  astute  head.  Fashionable  her 
Indian  shawl,  with  its  glistening  humming-bird 
colours;  from  the  finest^loom  came  her  gown;  ex- 
quisite as  a  prize  azalia  was  the  little  rose-coloured 
parasol  trimmed  with  Mechlin  lace,  that  she  held 
over  her  head  to  improve  her  complexion,  and 
to  intercept  Heaven's  scanty  gifts  of  sunshine ; 
but  hard  was  her  visage,  lined  by  social  intrigues 
and  diplomatic  disappointments  (for  new  money 
gets  its  homage  tempered  by  many  snubs  from 
pride,  envy,  and  malice),  and  her  griping  mouth 
was  depressed   by  years    of  unrepressed  temper. 


THE    SECOND    MEET    OF    THE    SEASON.  149 

The  hard  hysena-like  smile,  that  she  beguiled  her- 
self into  believing  so  winning  and  so  gracious, 
had  a  certain  charm  that  deserved  praise,  as  a 
tolerably  successful  struggle  against  nature.  But 
it  had  one  cbawback,  that  cold,  keen-eyed  persons 
could  not,  and  did  not,  indeed,  try  to  overlook, 
and  that  was,  that  it  revealed  certain  golden 
glimpses  of  art's  handiwork,  that  gave  one  some- 
how an  mipression  of  half-concealed  machinery, 
the  work  of  J\Iidas  partially  accompHshed ;  and 
silent  satirists  at  dinner  parties  wondered  to  them- 
selves in  the  pause  after  the  soup,  whether,  as 
time  prosecuted  its  blotting  out  of  youth,  the 
teeth  would  not  aU  turn  to  gold,  in  the  Ogress 
manner.  But  enough  of  a  repulsive  woman; 
enough  of  this  imperfect  and  marred  image  of 
the  Eve  of  the  world's  daybreak. 

Cantelupe,  it  must  be  confessed,  and  even 
Julia  Beauflower  tacitly^  allowed  it,  satirical  as 
she  was  about  the  Harkers  and  their  "royal 
chariot,''  looked  very  alert  and  handsome  in  his 
well  made  scarlet  coat,  white  cords,  and  perfect 
top-boots.  He  and  Clinker  looked  quite  ready 
for  business,  and  bound  to  be  in  the  first  flight. 

"  Well,  Tom,"  said  he,  to  his  huntsman,  "  w^hat 
do  you  think  of  Mr.  Barker's  horse?  Do  you 
think  he'U  go?" 

"  AVhat,  that  bay  with  the  white  stocking  ?     I 


150  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

don't  know  about  going,  sir ;  but  lie's  strong  ;  lie 
can  do  the  work  if  lie  likes.  I  saw  bim  tbe  last 
time  we  was  out,  leap  that  brook  down  by  Pitt 
House  in  first  class  st}ie;  but  Lord,  he  won't  come 
near  you.  Clinker  can  give  him  half  a  mile  start 
across  grass  land,  he'd  beat  you  though  in  going 
in  dirt." 

*'  He  can't  go  the  steeplechase  pace  ? " 

"Ha,  sir,  but  Whalebone  Avas  the  one  for 
timber." 

"  Come,  Clinker's  pretty  well  at  most  games,  but 
Yarnish  was  cleverer  at  water." 

"  Do  you  look  there,  sir,"  said  Tom.  "  I'm 
blessed  if  that  chestnut  mare  with  the  short 
shoulders,  isn't  a  sight  too  much  for  Miss  Harker. 
She's  afraid  of  her,  that's  it,  sir ;  and  the  mare, 
bless  you,  knows  it,  and  is  cutting  her  capers. 
The  lady  has  no  seat,  Mr.  Cantelupe ;  if  she  was 
to  try  and  follow  us,  she'd  be  left  in  the  first  ditch 
as  sure  as  my  name's  Tom  Burton.  Now  she's 
upon  her  hind  legs  like  a  horse  at  a  circus  ;  blow 
me,  but  it  will  be  a  good  many  miles  before  she'll 
have  the  steel  taken  out  of  her." 

Tom  Burton  was  quite  correct ;  in  fact,  to  do 
him  justice,  he  was  seldom  wrong — about  horses. 
The  chestnut  mare  was  desperately  fresh,  and 
she  knew  her  power.  Miss  Harker,  always  a 
timid  and  fussy  horsewoman  (for  courage  cannot 


THE   SECO^T)   MEET   OF   THE    SEASON.  151 

be  learnt  from  Kensington  riding  masters),  had 
been  frightened  on  first  mounting  that  morning, 
and  had  never  recovered  her  nerve.       Much  as 
she  wished  to  show  off,  she  dreaded  the  throw  off 
far  too  much  to  wish  to  prolong  the  rather  pain- 
ful and  doubtful  pleasure.     Her  nose  got  redder, 
the  flesh  round  her  eyes   more  contracted;    her 
mouth  pinched  every  moment  as  she  saw  Cante- 
lupe  riding   by  Amy's  side,   and   speaking   in  a 
dangerously  low  voice,    which    made  Amy    cast 
down   her    eyes,    and    reply   in   rather   nervous 
monosyllables.     The  Devil,   always   on  duty  in 
our  hearts,  saw   his   opportunity,  and   seized  it 
with  the  leap  of  a  soft-footed  leopard.     It  would 
look  well  to  surrender  the  mare  to  Amy,  who  was 
so  fond  of  riding.     The  whole  field  would  see  the 
generous  self-sacrifice,  and  praise  the  heart  that 
prompted  it;  and  if — and  if  the  mare  should  prove 
restive,   and  Amy   was  thrown, — well,    she   did 
not  care  to  pursue  that  absurd  line  of  thought, 
or  imagine  anything  so  shocking.     At  all  events, 
one  person  would  be  saved,  and  it  might  as  well 
be  the  one  whose  life  was  most  valuable.     So  she 
trotted  up  to  Amy,    and   at  once  proposed  the 
exchange. 

"Oh,  I  could  not,  really,  IMiss  Harker,"  said  poor 
innocent  Amy ;  "  you'd  never  hke  poor  tame  little 
Puss;  but  oh,  it  is  so  kind  and  generous  of  you." 


152  THE    YICARS    COURTSHIP. 

Then  secretly  she  taxed  herself  for  ha\dng  thought 
unworthily  of  Caroline  Harker.  Ethel  was 
delighted. 

"  Oh,  Tm  so  glad,  Amy,  you'll  delight  in  Firefly; 
she  gallops  lovely ;  but  you  must  let  her  have 
her  head.  She  frets  if  you  pull  at  all,  as  Carry 
will  keep  doing." 

Mr.  Harker  approved  of  the  change.  "  Carry 
has  rather  a  heavy  hand  on  a  bridle,"  he  said  to 
his  wife,  as  he  mounted  his  own  horse  ;  "though 
she's  a  very  good  horsewoman  generally." 

Mrs.  Harker  in  secret  earnestly  hoped  that  the 
little  paltry  girl  the  gentlemen  made  so  much 
fuss  about,  would  have  some  slight  accident  that 
would  take  down  her  vanity,  and  make  her  afraid 
to  try  and  rival  Carry  again. 

"Take  great  care,"  she  said,  with  friendly  malice 
to  Amy,  "you re  sure  you're  not  afraid  of  a  real 
horse." 

"  Oh  no,  Mrs.  Harker  ;  I  love  horses.  I  shall 
enjoy  a  canter  home  on  Firefly.  I  was  never  on 
her  before.  Now,  Ethel,  I  feel  I'm  really  going 
to  ride,  but  yet  Puss  is  a  dear,  darling  thing. 
Don't  laugh  at  me,  Julia,  if  I'm  run  away  with." 

It  was  a  remarkable  fact,  that  promptly  as 
Beauflower  threw  the  reins  to  his  sister,  and 
leaped  from  the  pony-carriage,  he  arrived  just  a 
moment  too  late  to  help  Miss  Harker  from  her 


THE    SECOND    MEET    OF    THE    SEASOX.  153 

horse,  and  just  in  time  to  help  Amy,  who  seemed 
pleased  at  his  kind  promptitude. 

It  is  a  momentary  act  to  help  a  lady  on  horse- 
back, yet  perhaps  there  is  nothing  so  pleasant  and 
so  self-rewarding  as  that  small  act  of  chivalrous 
attention.  How  pleasant  to  grasp  a  little  dainty 
foot,  cleared  from  the  habit,  and  to  feel  the  soft 
pressure  of  the  hand  upon  one's  shoulder  of  the 
dainty  horsewoman,  as  she  vaults  into  her  saddle, 
light  as  a  feather. 

Miss  Barker  would  not  have  blushed  at  the 
natural  politeness  of  a  gentleman  as  Amy  did, 
who  was  so  young,  and  so  unaccustomed  to  hom- 
age. 

"  Artful  little  hussy,"  hissed  the  inward  voice 
of  Mrs.  Harker.  "  I  wish  I'd  never  set  eyes  on 
her.  Every  one  is  after  her.  There's  that  fool, 
young  Cantelupe,  looking  as  if  he  could  eat 
Mr.  Beauflower  because  he  was  there  first  to  help 
her  up." 

"  She  does  look  so  nice,"  said  Julia  to  her 
brother,  as  he  came  near  the  carriage  where  Dr. 
Briscoe  stood  sentinel. 

"  Yes,  she  has  a  natural  taste  for  riding.  How 
well  she  sits.  The  mare  does  not  fidget  half  so 
much  now,  you  see." 

"  How  this  young  fellow,  Cantelupe,  is  running 
through  his  money.     What  a  pity  it  is,"  said  the 


154  THE   VICAES   COUETSHIP. 

doctor.  "  Harker  tells  me  these  hounds  cost  him 
nearly  a  thousand  guineas,  and  the  expenses  of  this 
pack,  with  the  fourteen  horses,  are  never  less  than 
two  thousand  a  year.  Then  there's  his  Leicester- 
shire expenses.  I  expect  he's  over  head  and  ears 
too  in  mortgages  with  Harker.  There'll  be  a 
break-up  some  day.  He's  going  too  fast — he  must 
come  to  grief." 

Travers  just  then  rode  up  on  a  bony  and  coffin- 
headed  black  horse,  touched  his  hat  to  Mrs. 
Harker  and  the  family  in  a  brusque  and  almost 
contemptuous  way,  and  then  pushed  on  to  shake 
hands  with  half  a  dozen  farmers  he  wanted  to 
invite  to  a  day's  shooting. 

Great  red  hands  were  thrust  out  to  the  fellow 
in  every  direction,  and  peals  of  coarse  laughter 
broke  forth  wherever  he  came.  Young  Brown 
alone  did  not  greet  him,  but  rode  in  another 
direction. 

"  That  is  the  most  detestable  fellow,"  said  Beau- 
flower,  Jbitterly ;  "  but  I  wonder,  doctor,  why 
young  Brown  and  he  don't  put  up  horses  to- 
gether." 

"Well,  there  was  a  little  scuffle  yesterday  in 
the  covert,  Birdbrook  way,  I  hear,  and  Travers 
swears  young  Brown  was  one  of  the  lot,  though 
the  men  didn't  see  his  face." 

"  I'm  afraid  he'll  give  his  father  some  trouble." 


THE   SECOND   MEET   OF   THE   SEASON.         155 

"  He  rides  very  straight/'  said  tlie  doctor,  re- 
fusing to  take  the  moral  point  of  view  ;  "  no  man 
gets  better  to  hounds ;  but  he's  got  such  a  great 
raw  horse,  and  he  crams  him  at  everything.  I 
should  like  to  see  him  on  that  little  roan  horse  of 
Barker's  that  the  groom's  leading.  That's  a  stepper 
— hundred  guinea  horse,  Harker  is  steady  ;  he 
takes  the  lowest  places.  He's  not  a  bruising 
rider,  like  Lord  Mazagan  used  to  be.  He  actually 
flew  a  lane  once ; — fact.  Ha !  my  fine  fellows." 
Here  the  doctor  surveyed  the  men  in  scarlet  with 
a  sweep  of  the  eye  and  a  fox  and  the  grapes  bit- 
terness. "  Before  they  come  on  the  open  there's 
a  brook  in  the  fifth  field  down  there,  just  by  the 
turning  to  Swallowclifi",  a  regular  stopper,  that 
will  wash  out  the  starch  of  some  of  you." 

The  doctor  was  quite  loquacious  in  his  delight. 

"  And  much  you  care,  Dr.  Briscoe,"  said  Julia. 
"  You  surely  don't  want  to  drown  them  because 
you  can't  join  them." 

"  Not  I,  Miss  Julia  Beauflower  ;  broken  collar- 
bones would  do  me  more  good.  I  should  like 
to  have  a  fling  at  the  brook  myself ;  though  I  dare 
say  I  should  get  in,  for  sober  John,  here,  isn't  what 
he  was,  and  the  road  has  rather  hurt  his  feet.  Did 
you  observe,  Beauflower,  how  red  Harker  turned 
when  that  man  Travers  rode  by?  I'm  sure  he 
doesn't  like  the  rascal,  and  yet  for  some  reason  or 


156  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

other  can't  get  rid  of  liim.  I  wonder  what  the 
reason  is.  How  the  wind's  taken  your  face, 
Beauflower." 

It  was  not  the  wind  ;  it  was  that  sleek,  dun- 
ning, always  imj^ecunious  Mr.  Pitts,  whose  in- 
quiring eye  from  his  light  cart  just  then  caught 
the  Vicar's.  That  was  Mr.  Beauflower's  skeleton, 
and  by  its  side  sat  a  red-faced,  hearty  country 
girl,  gazing  open-mouthed  at  the  whole  scene,  for 
Lord  Mazagan  was  just  then  artistically  waving 
the  dogs  into  the  covert,  which  in  an  instant 
seemed  to  swallow  the  Avhole  forty  couple. 

In  a  moment  every  cigar  was  thrown  away  ; 
one  or  two  farmers  took  a  sup  from  their  pocket- 
flasks  ;  Jack  Talbot  topped  ofi'a  spoonful  of  curagoa. 
Every  one  arranged  his  bridle,  looked  at  his 
stirrups,  and  put  himself  together.  The  dogs 
would  soon  find.  They  always  found  here, 
the  covert  wasn't  too  close  for  them,  so  they  could 
soon  shake  Reynard  out.  The  grooms  with  the 
led  horses  beo^an  to  arrano-e  for  a  strike  across 
country  to  good  points  for  meeting  their  masters. 
The  outsiders  drew  back,  and  the  few  carriages 
and  carts  receded  some  twenty  yards,  to  leave  a 
clear  course  when  the  crash  came. 

And  now  for  a  special  metaphor.  You  may 
bring  up  an  eagle  on  bread  crumbs,  and  even 
teach  him  to  take  them  out  of  your  children's 


THE    SECOND    MEET    OF    THE    SEASON.  157 

hands,  but  be  sure,  if  you  cany  him  up  a  moun- 
tain, and  cast  him  out  to  the  cross  lightning  and 
the  storm,  that  the  bird  will  spread  forth  his  great 
broad  ^'ings  and  launch  forth  at  once  into  the 
tempest  with  all  the  raj)ture  of  freedom.  So  it  was 
that  the  Nimrod  of  Oriel,  the  hard  rider  of  Oxford 
in  the  old  times,  felt  his  eyes  sparkle  and  his 
blood  warm,  as  he  saw  the  preparations  for  the 
noble  pastime  that  chivalry  still  glories  in,  and 
he  began  chanting  in  a  low  voice  to  Julia,  to 
whom  Amy  had  been  chatting,  Kingsley's  fierce 
verses — for  the  young  Vicar  himself  was,  to  a 
degree,  a  quiet  disciple  of  muscular  Christianity, 
and  gloried  in  trampling  under  foot  the  too  pre- 
valent effeminacy  of  his  profession.  It  is  not  the 
prerogative  of  the  rich  Norman  alone  to  relish  the 
joys  of  hunting. 

"  Forward  !  hark  forward  !  the  cry  ! 
One  more  fence,  and  we're  out  on  the  open  ; 
So  to  us  at  once  if  you  want  to  live  near  us  ! 
Hark  to  them,  ride  to  them  beauties !  as  on  they  go, 
Leaping  and  sweeping  away  in  the  vale  below  ! 
Cowards  and  bunglers,  whose  heart  or  whose  blood  is  slow, 
Find  themselves  staring  alone." 

Perhaps  the  dashing  verses  of  the  aggressive 
Christian  stirred  the  blood  of  the  chestnut  mare 
too  ;  certain  it  is  that  her  eyes  reddened  and 
stared,  she  began  snorting  like  a  war-horse,  and 
scratching  at  the  ground,  and  rearing  in  a  way 


158  THE   VICARS    COURTSHIP. 

that  rather  alarmed  Julia  Beanflower,  and  made 
Amy  silent  and  watchful,  but  not  the  least 
nervous,  for  her  feelings  were  equable  and  sus- 
tained, never  coming  in  rash  gusts  or  um^easoning 
impulses.  She  felt  that  the  mare  required  un- 
ceasing care,  but  she  had  no  fear  or  distrust  of 
herself,  riding  being,  like  most  other  things,  she 
thought,  chiefly  a  matter  of  common  sense. 

Beauflower  stepped  out  of  his  carriage,  and 
going  up  to  Amy,  and  patting  the  chestnut's  neck, 
said,  in  a  low,  earnest  voice, — 

"  You  are  not  afraid  ? " 

"  Oh,  no,  thank  you.''  /  <  , ,    // 

"  Shall  I  hold  her  when  the  dogs  give  tongue, 
or  will  you  dismount  V 

"  Oh,  no,  Mr.  Beauflower,  I  can  quite  hold  her. 
She's  only  restless  for  a  moment.  I  can  get  a 
little  behind,  and  she'll  see  less  there." 

"  Do.  She's  very  restless  to-day,  and  Ju  is 
rather  frightened  about  her." 

The  road  where  they  were  skirted  the  covert 
side.  It  commanded  a  view  of  the  high  slop- 
ing fields  that  stretched  up  to  the  sloe  bushes, 
brambles,  dead  fern  and  hazel,  that  were  studded 
here  and  there  with  lovv^-growing  oak  trees. 

"Hark  in,  hark!"  cried  Lord  Mazagan,  with  a 
slight  cheer,  and  a  wave  of  his  hunting-cap,  for 
he  was  alive  now,  and  all  the  insincere  tripping 


THE    SECOND   MEET    OF    THE    SEASON.         159 

jauntiness  of  the  mere  lady's  man  was  put  away 
far  out  of  sight.  In  a  few  mioutes  the  gorse  that 
bordered  the  wood  shook  fretfully  and  inquir- 
ingly. Then  one  or  two  restless  hounds  appeared 
bounding  over  some  stubborn  and  thorny  bushes 
they  could  not  penetrate,  and  their  hanging  ears 
and  spotted  sides  speckled  the  edge  of  the  cover 
for  a  moment.  Two  minutes  more  and  one  old 
hound,  keen  as  an  Indian  on  the  war  trail,  slipped 
out  of  cover,  took  a  short  tm^n  to  and  fro  out- 
side, his  nose  down,  his  tail  lashing  his  side, 
hoping  to  catch  some  scent  that  his  companions 
had  overlooked.  The  second  whipper-in  not 
relishing  this  wandering  from  the  text,  gave  one 
crack  of  his  whip,  with  a — 

"  Eattler,  Eattler,  where  are  you  going,  Eattler? 
Get  to  cover,  Eattler." 

Eattler  leaped  back.  Five  minutes  more,  "No 
fox  ! "  cried  the  novices  and  the  impatient. 

"Patience,"  cried  Tom  Burton,  prophetically; 
"  they  are  drawing  it  beautifully." 

That  very  instant  the  cover  shook — shook 
wildly.  Every ^stem  was  alive  ;  to  use  Ninn^od's 
words,  "  it  was  waving  like  a  corn  field  in  the 
wind." 

The  sterns  of  the  hounds  "  flourished"  as  they 
do  when  dogs  feel  a  scent,  but  are  unwilling  as 
yet  to  fully  acknowledge  it. 


160  THE   VICARS    COURTSHIP. 

"  Have  at  liim  tliere  !  "  shouted  Tom  Burton, 
and  as  he  shouted  the  gorse  went  mad  with 
hounds  leaping  over  each  other  s  backs  to  get  on 
the  scent. 

"  Have  at  him  there  again ;  a  fox  for  a  hun- 
dred ! "  shouted  Lord  Mazagan,  putting  one  finger 
to  his  right  ear,  and  uttering  a  scream  like  the 
screech  of  a  scalded  witch.  Jack  Talbot  coolly 
looked  at  his  watch,  "fifteen  past  eleven,"  whilst 
Cantelupe,  Harker,  and  some  other  of  the  prompt 
ones  stole  round  to  a  point  where  the  fox  was 
Hkely  to  break. 

"  Hold  hard  !  "  cried  Tom  Burton,  "  stand  still, 
gentlemen,  pray  stand  still ! " 

Call  to  Niagara  to  stop,  call  to  a  falling  ava- 
lanche 1  Those  hitherto  procrastinating  or  phleg- 
matic drew  on  gloves,  threw  away  cigars,  gathered 
up  their  bridle  reins  handy,  pushed  their  hats  well 
down  on  their  foreheads.  There  was  an  undulation 
of  scarlet  coats  here  and  there.  "'Ware  hounds," 
cried  the  second  whipper-in.  "  Give  them  time, 
gentlemen,"  shouted  Tom.  There  was  a  faint, 
dreamy  whimper  in  the  cover,  it  was  from  a  noted 
finder,  "Jupiter."  Lord  Mazagan  cheered  him. 
In  an  instant  another  hound  challenged  him,  then 
another,  and  another.  "  Tally-ho,"  cried  a  keeper's 
boy,  in  a  pollard  oak.  "He's  gone!"  cried  Cante- 
lupe, and  with  a  bound  he  was  in  the  first  rank. 


THE    SECOND    MEET    OF    THE    SEASON.  161 

"  Stand  still,  pray  stand  still,"  shouted  Tom 
Burton. 

"  That's  right,  overrun  the  scent,"  said  an  old 
farmer,  contemptuously. 

"  No  hurry,''  cried  Dr.  Briscoe. 

"  Go  along,"  shouted  Lord  Mazagan,  "there  are 
four  couple  on  the  scent." 

In  a  moment  the  more  outlying  hounds  shot 
through  the  crowd  of  horses  and  joined  the 
leaders.  You  could  cover  the  fine  pack  now  with 
a  table  cloth,  every  stern  down,  every  head  up ; 
the  scent  was  breast  high.  No  music  after  the 
first  crash,  one  in  a  dozen  only  throwing  his 
tongue  to  rouse  the  laggers.  Away,  in  a  torrent 
of  scarlet,  flew  the  riders.  The  pace  was  good,  it 
was  a  terrible  bm\st.  The  wild  hunt  passed  like  a 
flash  of  scarlet  lightning  over  that  high,  straggling 
hedge  at  the  bottom  of  the  first  turnip  field.  The 
dogs  were  already  two  fields  ofi",  and  on  the  fallows. 
Two  men  were  down  at  that  double  rail.  Some- 
body says  "Jack  Talbot  has  had  an  ugly  spill;  " 
one  riderless  horse  seems  chasing  the  whole  flying 
army  before  him ;  some  one  remarks  "  that  it 
looks  like  Bob  Brown's  black  mare." 

"They're  taking  a  good  line  of  country,  doctor," 
said  Beauflower,  whose  heart  beat  faster  with  that 
grand  excitement,  which  only  that  of  a  battle  can 
equal.     He  said  it  wistfully. 

VOL.    II.  M 


162  THE   VICARS   COURTSHIP. 

"  Now  I'm  sure,  Yicar/'  said  tlie  doctor,  ''  you 
would  like  to  be  with  them/' 

"  Yes,  and  in  the  first  flight,"  replied  Beauflower, 
frankly.  "  There's  no  harm  in  avowing  that,  but 
I  shall  never  hunt  again.  Quite  apart  from 
having  no  horse,  and  being  too  proud  to  ride 
other  people's,  I  do  not  think  a  clergyman  in 
these  days  of  conflict  has  a  right  to  waste  a 
whole  day  once  a  week  in  mere  amusement ;  but, 
dear,  me  that  mare  of  Miss  Eobinson's  is  too  much 
for  her.  That  fool  of  a  groom  ought  to  hold  her. 
Good  God!  there  will  be  an  accident  if  she  doesn't 
take  care." 

The  mare  was  indeed  too  much  for  Amy.  She 
had  by  degrees,  just  before  the  hunt,  fidgeted 
and  fretted,  and  curvetted  through  the  spectators 
collected  behind  the  carriages,  and  was  now  on 
her  hind  legs,  staring  with  reddened  eyes  at  the 
receding  horsemen,  and  striking  out  with  her  fore 
feet,  impatient  of  restraint.  Amy  looked  anxiously 
at  Ethel  and  Julia,  but  she  was  perfectly 
cool,  and  kept  her  seat  with  a  calm  courage 
that  was  her  peculiar  gift.  But  the  mare,  roused 
to  madness  by  seeing  Beauflower  run  to  seize 
its  bridle,  at  that  moment  gave  a  frantic  bound, 
more  like  a  leopard  than  a  horse,  rose  again 
almost  erect  in  the  air,  and  then  broke  into  a 
maddened  gallop  across  country  in  a  straight  line 


THE   SECOND   MEET   OF   THE    SEASON.  163 

for  the  hounds.  Amy's  hat  fell  off  as  the  mare 
rose  at  the  first  fence,  but  she  kept  her  seat  bravely, 
and  as  she  s^Yept  on  over  the  farther  fields,  her 
bridle  was  as  powerless  to  restrain  the  mare,  as  a 
gut  line  would  be  to  hold  a  shark. 

A  cry  of  terror  broke  from  the  ladies,  even  Miss 
Harker  turned  pale,  and  held  her  breath.  Julia 
and  Ethel  screamed. 

"  Gracious  heavens  !  "  said  the  doctor,  "  shell 
be  killed.  They're  making  straight  for  Warring- 
ton Brook,  and  it's  swollen  with  Monday's  rain. 
Beauflower,  something  must  be  done,  Beau- 
flower  ! '" 

But  Beauflower  was  gone.  In  a  moment  he 
had  pushed  Miss  Harker's  groom  from  his  saddle, 
and  sprang  upon  the  horse.  In  another  moment 
he  had  put  himself  together,  pressed  his  hat  down 
over  his  eyes,  thrown  off  his  dark-grey  paletot, 
seized  the  doctor's  heavy  whip,  and  striking  his 
heels  into  the  horse's  sides,  galloped  straight  to  the 
fence  which  the  last  horseman  was  just  clearing. 

"Now,  that's  a  true  man!"  said  the  doctor, 
enthusiastically,  as  he  strained  his  eyes  to  watch 
the  pursuer  and  the  pursued. 

Ethel  was  crying  violently,  Julia  was  in  raptures 
with  her  brother. 

'•  I  always  said  there  was  something  between 
them.     Come,  come,  Carry,"    said  Mrs.  Harker, 

M  2 


104  THE   vicar's    courtship. 


the  inexorable,  to  her  daughter,  who  had  turned 
rather  faint,  *' there's  no  danger  ;  it'll  teach  the  girl 
not  to  show  off  her  riding  again.  Come,  don't 
let  us  have  a  scene  ;  all  the  people  are  looking." 

The  groom  who  fought  Paddy  was  staring  in 
stupid  admiration  at  Beauflower's  promptitude, 
and  at  his  good  style  of  riding,  when  the  doctor 
came  up  and  asked  him  if  he  thought  the  fox 
was  makino;  for  Warrin2;ton  Brook. 

"They're  taking  a  splendid  line,  sir,  but  that 
brook's  a  reglar  stopper  ;  that's  where  old  High- 
field  was  drowned,  no  the  fox  won't  take  it  unless 
he's  hard  pressed ;  more  likely  make  for  Charford 
Bottom,  and  so  work  round  to  Swallowcliff. 
They  lost  there  last  Friday.  I  hope  that  young 
lady,  sir,  will  be  able  to  pull  the  mare  in  before 
Mr.  Beauflower  comes  near.  She's  such  a  violent 
temper  that  she'll  never  let  anything  come  up  to 
her.  I  told  Miss  Carry  she  hadn't  ought  to  ride 
such  a  'oss,  but  she  would  have  it,  and  this  is 
what  it's  come  to." 

"  I  am  terribly  afraid  the  poor  dear  girl  will 
come  to  grief,"  thought^  Dr.  Briscoe,  as  he  rode 
slowly  across  the  fields,  "but  I  can't  afibrd  to 
break  my  neck  pursuing  her,  whatever  others  do. 
I'm  too  old  for  that." 

It  is  not  the  persons  who  boldly  own  their 
selfishness  who  are  the  most  selfish.     The  mare 


THE    SECOND    MEET    OF    THE    SEASON.  165 

liad  not  straggled  more  violently  with  Amy,  than 
the  doctors  warm  heart  was  just  then  struggling 
with  him,  urging  him  to  hurry  to  the  rescue  in 
case  danger  should  ensue.  His  horse,  too,  seemed 
to  share  in  the  excitement  that  was  darting  from 
nerve  to  nerve  of  Lis  master.  The  doctor  trotted 
back  to  Mrs.  Harker's  carriage. 

"  No  lady  ought  ever  to  have  been  allowed  to 
get  on  such  a  beast  as  that,"  he  said,  testily; 
*'  it's  shameful,  it's  homicide.  I  think  I  had 
better  ride  slowly  towards  them ;  in  case  of  au 
accident,  my  services " 

"  Oh,  pray  go  and  see,  dear  doctor,"  said  Julia, 
imploringly. 

The  doctor  rode  slowly  for  twenty  yards, 
then  he  trotted,  then  he  cantered,  then  he 
galloped  till  some  twenty  yards  from  the  first 
fence  he  pushed  his  horse  to  full  speed,  and 
cleared  the  hedge  like  a  bird. 

"  That  girl  infatuates  every  one  she  comes 
near,"  said  Mrs.  Harker,  spitefully.  "  The  people 
couldn't  be  more  anxious  about  the  little  chit  if 
she  was  the  Queen  herself.  John,"  but  John  the 
groom  was  abeady  beyond  hearing,  he  was  just 
riding  at  his  third  fence,  not  twenty  yards  behind 
the  worthy  doctor,  who  was  riding  like  Osbal- 
diston  himself,  and  making  straight  and  bold  as  a 
lion,  for  the  well-known  "  stopper." 


166  THE   VICARS   COUETSHIP. 

"  Fll  discharge  that  man  to-morrow/'  said  Mrs. 
Barker,  indignant  at  any  even  involuntary  ont- 
bm"st  of  humanity,  when  it  ran  counter  to  middle 
class  etiquette. 

For  four  fields  Beauflower  had  not  caught  a 
glimpse  of  Amy.  At  the  fifth  fence,  a  drop  into 
a  lane,  he  saw  one  of  her  gloves  and  a  little 
white  pocket-handkerchief  that  blew  struggling 
jfrom  a  dead  thistle  on  the  field  side.  In  a  heavy 
bit  of  plough  beyond  he  met  young  Brown,  red 
and  angry,  pursuing  his  runaway  horse.  Yes, 
Miss  Eobinson  had  gone  on — she  was  riding 
steadily,  but  the  mare  was  evidently  too  much 
for  her;  she  had  dropped  her  whip  by  the  fence  in 
the  brook  field. 

Beauflower  flew  on.  Death  was,  perhaps, 
waiting  by  the  brook  side  to  claim  its  destined 
victim.  He  drew  his  horse  steady,  drove  his  own 
feet  low  in  the  stirrups,  and  flew  at  the  tall  fence 
where  it  seemed  most  broken.  The  horse,  tor- 
mented by  the  thorny  boughs  through  which  he 
forced  his  head,  landed  badly  on  a  slippery  clay 
bank,  and  fell,  but  not  badly.  Beauflower  fell  and 
rose  with  his  horse.  He  was  shaken,  and  plastered 
with  clay  down  the  left  side  of  his  head  and  his 
black  coat.  A  thorn  branch,  too,  had  brought  blood 
from  his  right  cheek,  and  the  blood  and  clay 
together  made  him  resemble  a  hunted  cavalier. 


THE   SECOND   MEET   OF   THE   SEASON.  167 

And  now  through  the  next  thick  fence,  where 
there  was  a  gap  broken,  he  caught  sight  of  Amy. 
She  was  alone,  and  the  mare  was  making  straight 
for  the  brook  that  ran  between  two  banks,  with 
here  and  there  a  pollard  willow  or  a  patch  of" 
osiers.  It  flowed  at  the  bottom  of  a  grass  field, 
with  a  dozen  acres  or  so  of  green  young  wheat 
beyond. 

A  dozen  horsemen  were  streaming  over  the  brow 
of  the  wheat  field,  while  three  or  four  more,  who 
had  been  in  the  brook,  were  catching  their  horses 
or  mounting  them  rather  ruefully,  and  as  fast  as 
possible  under  the  circumstances.  Before  Beau- 
flower  could  gallop  half  down  the  field,  the 
chestnut  mare,  roused  by  the  sound  of  pursuing 
hoofs,  flew  at  the  water,  here  about  fourteen  feet 
wide.  Unfortunately  it  took  ofi"  at  a  bad  place, 
where  the  opposite  bank  was  rather  higher  than 
the  one  1  it  quitted.  To  Beauflower  s  horror  it 
came  down  with  only  its  front  feet  on  the  bank, 
scrambled  for  a  footing,  then  fell  sideways  into 
the  water.  One  bound  brought  Beauflower  to 
the  brook ;  leaping  off  his  horse,  and  lea^dng  it 
to  go  or  remain  at  its  will,  he  dashed  into  the 
flood,  with  a  shout  of  encouragement  to  Amy, 
who,  pale  as  death,  was  clinging  to  the  horn  of 
her  saddle,  from  which  she  had  at  last  been 
shaken,  and  for  the  moment  buoyed  up  by  the 


168  THE   yiCAP/s    COURTSHIP. 

floating  of  her  habit.  The  mare,  madly  pawing 
at  the  bank,  which  it  struck  clown  in  showers  of 
earth,  was  every  moment  threatening  to  break 
from  the  now  faintins;  airl,  or  to  strike  her  dead 
with  a  blow  of  its  hoofs.  There  was  no  one  to 
help,  but  Beauflower  had  not  been  to  Eton  for 
nothing;  he  struck  out  boldly  to  her,  and  called  to 
her  to  encourage  her  to  leave  the  horse,  but  the 
noise  of  the  splashing  prevented  her  hearing  him. 
Next  he  seized  the  mare's  bridle,  and  forced  her 
back  from  the  bank  to  a  lower  and  shallower 
place,  where  she  scrambled  on  shore,  and  dashed 
off  at  once  after  the  dogs.  Then,  as  Amy  fell 
back  fainting  in  his  arms,  Beauflower  loosened 
her  hand  from  the  saddle,  and  swam  with  her 
to  where  the  low  branch  of  a  pollard  willow 
gave  him  a  leverage  to  assist  him  in  helping  her 
out.  Just  then  the  good  doctor,  pounding  along 
to  the  rescue,  gave  a  war  whoop  of  mingled  delight 
and  alarm  when  he  saw  the  chivalrous  young 
Vicar  emerge  like  a  water  god  from  the  brook, 
with  Amy  insensible  and  dripping  like  Ophelia 
in  his  arms.  In  an  instant  the  doctor  leaped  off 
his  horse  and  began  chafing  her  hands  with  all 
the  fondness  and  anxiety  of  a  father.  He  put  one 
hand  to  her  heart,  and  then  bent  his  head  as  if 
he  was  listening  to  a  stethescope.  Beauflower 
waited  with  23assionate  eagerness  for  his  words. 


THE    SECOND    MEET    OF    THE    SEASON.  169 

"  Thank  God!  she  is  still  alive/'  he  said,  as  he 
rose  from  his  knees.  "  Chafe  one  hand  while  I 
chafe  the  other." 

Beauflower  did  so,  but  she  did  not  revive. 
Once  only  she  half  lifted  her  eyehds,  moaned  the 
words  "  save  me,"  and  then  again  fainted. 

"  There  is  danger  if  this  state  of  collapse  con- 
tinues," said  the  doctor,  anxiously.  "  I  must 
ride  back  with  her  to  the  carriage,  and  get  her 
home  as  soon  as  possible.  Here's  the  groom 
coming  ;  you  can  take  his  horse,  Beauflower,  and 
let  him  catch  yours.  He's  a  good  lad  for  coming. 
I  dare  say  it  was  against  orders,  for  that  Harker 
woman  has  no  more  heart  than  a  mill-stone. 
Just  hold  Amy  while  I  look  and  see  if  I  haven't  a 
bottle  of  smelling  salts  in  some  side-pocket,  and 
then  help  me  up  with  her.  I  must  go  round  by 
the  gates,  and  you  must  ride  forward  and  open 
them  for  me." 

There  lay  Amy,  white  as  a  marble  statue.  Can 
we  pardon  the  Vicar  if,  as  the  doctor  turned  to  get 
at  his  pocket,  intercepting  for  a  moment  the  ^dew 
of  the  groom,  who  was  dashing  up  in  hot  haste, 
like  a  moss-trooper  late  for  a  rising  on  the  border, 
he  stooped  and  pressed  the  little  ice  cold  mouth 
with  his  glowing  lips.  Certain  it  is  that  he  him- 
self felt  guilty  of  felony,  for  he  instantly  became 
absorbed    in    trying    to    lift  Amy  gently  in  his 


170  THE    VICAe's    COUETSHIP. 

arms.  The  doctor  got  into  the  saddle,  and  Amy 
was  lifted  up  before  him.  Under  this  kind 
convoy  she  was  soon  placed  in  the  carriage, 
to  Mrs.  Harker's  secret  annoyance,  for  she  was 
very  wet,  and  she,  and  her  daughter,  and  Ethel, 
had  to  get  out  and  walk.  Soon,  under  the  care 
of  the  worthy  housekeeper  and  Ethel,  who  had 
been  crying  ever  since  the  mare  ran  away.  Amy 
revived,  and  in  a  warm  bed,  and  with  proper 
restoratives,  was  soon  convalescent  enough  to 
hear  of  her  escape,  and  to  blush  at  the  name  of 
her  rescuer,  with  whose  courage  and  promptitude 
the  whole  of  Summerleas  was  already  ringing. 

"  Well,  how  is  this  young  lady  ? ''  said  Mr. 
Harker,  coldly,  to  Dr.  Briscoe,  the  next  morning, 
as  he  met  the  worthy  man  descending  the  stairs 
that  led  to  Amy's  bed-room.  "  It  might  have 
been  a  serious  accident." 

"  Might  have  been,"  said  the  doctor,  rather  drily. 
"  I  think  it  was.  Another  moment  and  the  mare 
would  have  drowned  her  as  sure  as  if  a  ruffian  had 
been  holding  her  down.  She  never  ought  to  have 
been  allowed  to  ride  that  savage  mare.  She  is 
young  still,  poor  girl,  at  riding.  She's  wonderful 
to-day  considering,  but  she's  weak  with  the  reac- 
tion still.  If  we  can  only  fend  off  rheumatic  fever 
she'll  do  now,  but  it  may  perhaps,  any  Avay,  lead 
to  a  slight  derangement  of  the  heart." 


THE    SECOND    MEET    OF   THE    SEASON.  171 

''  If  you  please,  sir,"  said  the  tiger,  lianding  a 
card  he  had  just  received  from  a  mounted  man  at 
the  door,  "  the  Honourable  Mr.  Cantelupe  has 
sent  over  to  ask  how  Miss  Eobinson  is,  and  here's 
a  boy,  too,  from  Miss  Chivers  to  ask  how  she  is." 

''  Say  she's  much  better,  but  not  yet  out  of 
danger,"  said  the  doctor. 

"  The  girl  will,  no  doubt,"  said  Mrs.  Harker  to 
herself  that  mornino;  when  she  heard  of  the  mes- 
sage  from  the  Castle,  on  her  way  downstairs  to 
the  breakfast  table,  after  a  formal  visit  with  her 
daughter  to  Amy,  whose  side  Ethel  and  Julia 
could  scarcely  be  prevailed  upon  to  leave,  "  have 
a  romantic  attachment  for  the  man  who  fished 
her  out.  I  must  foster  that,  or  that  young  fool 
of  a  sjDcndthrift  will  fall  in  love  with  her,  and 
jilt  my  Carry,  after  all." 


172  THE    vicar's    courtship. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

MR.    BASSEVI    VISITS    THE    VICARAGE. 

Worthy  old  Mrs.  Beauflower  was  subject  to 
paroxysms  of  house-cleaning.  It  conduced  to  no 
one's  comfort ;  indeed  her  son  sometimes  lost  his 
temper  for  a  moment,  and  loudly  asserted  that  it 
conduced  to  quite  the  reverse.  Not  that  the  Vicar 
disliked  cleanliness,  which  is  generally  supposed, 
according  to  the  axiom,  to  live  next  door  to  godli- 
ness ;  but  that  these  storms  of  scrubbing  and  wash- 
ing were  all  works  of  supererogation,  for  they  often 
took  place  when  the  house  was  as  clean  as  silver 
and  fresh  as  a  pink.  Some  people  had  a  theory 
(originated  by  Dr.  Briscoe),  that  they  were  "  for 
mortification,"  on  the  principle  which  makes  a 
Jesuit  a  casuist,  when  he  utters  these  words 
under-breath,  and  calls  his  host's  bad  dinner  a  good 
one.  Others,  and  amongst  this  class  of  thinkers 
was  Miss  Chivers,  held  that  they  were  assertions 
of  power,  and  were  not  meant  to  have  any  result, 
except  as  assertions.     A  third  class  of  social  theo- 


ME.    BASSEYI   VISITS    THE   VICARAGE.         173 

rists  contended,  and  Julia  Beauflower  unfurled 
her  banner  at  the  head  of  them,  that  these  clean- 
ings were  not  practical,  but  were  intended  to  keep 
the  servants  out  of  idleness,  just  as  martinet 
captains,  during  calms  and  lulls,  set  the  men 
to  polish  the  ballast  iron.  A  nervous,  careful, 
and  over-anxious  temperament  had  in  excellent 
Mrs.  Beauflower  been  so  fostered  by  the  indul- 
gence of  a  husband  who  did  not  care,  and  subse- 
quently of  a  good-natured  son,  who  did  not  wish 
to  rule,  that  it  had  grown  into  a  sort  of  domestic 
mania,  which  hke  all  other  manias  had  its  feverish 
fits  and  lucid  intervals.  Its  symptoms  were, 
servants  looking  cross,  strange  noises,  raps  and 
knockings ;  passages  blocked  with  furniture,  din- 
ners unpunctual  and  badly  cooked  ;  strong  smells 
of  soap-suds,  bees'  wax,  gin,  turpentine,  and  fur- 
niture polish ;  draughts  from  open  doors  and 
windows,  and  damp  vapours  from  wet  stairs. 
Never  was  a  small  result  obtained  with  so  much 
inconvenience;  and,  after  all,  it  was  "gilding 
refined  gold,"  for  a  house  can't  be  cleaner  than 
clean.  Its  more  alarming  symptoms  were  Mrs. 
Beauflower  refusing  to  go  for  a  walk,  being  "  very 
busy  about  the  house,"  being  "  very  anxious 
to  get  breakfast,  dinner,  &c.,  over"  (instead  of 
calmly  enjoying  those  short  truces  from  trouble), 
being    "very   angiy   with   the   way  that  Susan' 


174-  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

had  been  going;  on  about  the  work,"  and  vmd 
descriptions  (especially  when  a  servant  was  in  the 
room,  of  the  work  got  through  by  some  fabulous 
demi-god  of  the  kitchen,  fifty  years  before,  in 
some  paradisaical  ''  early  li\dng,  Ned,  of  your 
father's/'  Perhaps  Mrs.  Beauflower's  brightest 
dream  of  impossible  happiness  was  the  getting 
her  son  to  go  away  for  a  couple  of  weeks,  and 
then  doing  up  the  house  from  top  to  toe,  and 
taking  down  all  Ned's  books ;  but  this  was  too 
glorious  a  vision  to  be  often  reahsed,  and  Mrs. 
Beauflower's  worthy  son  took  good  care  it  should 
not  be.  It  was  one  special  feature  of  the  too 
zealous  lady's  housekeeping  that  the  more  work 
the  servants  had  to  do,  the  more  she  heaped  upon 
them  fresh  tasks,  and  at  all  times  of  special 
emergency  she  ingeniously  contrived  to  throw 
them  into  a  state  of  secret  mutiny  and  discon- 
tent. Too  intent  on  rule  and  task-setting  to  re- 
member the  weakness  of  human  nature,  she  quite 
forgot  that  no  work  is  so  well  and  so  quickly  done 
as  willing  work.  She  forgot  that  slaving  all  day 
at  petty  monotonous  occupations  (half  of  them  un- 
necessary) is  not  the  ideal  of  even  Cinderella's  hfe. 
She  forgot,  also,  that  servants  were  now  educated 
persons,  and  were  no  longer  the  patient  drudges 
that  she  had  known  in  her  youth.  Of  this  last 
secret  she  had,  however,  perhaps  some  faint  glim- 


MR.    BASSEYI   VISITS    THE   VICAEAGE.  175 

mering,  for  she  often  lamented  the  increased  edu- 
cation of  servants,  that  enabled  them  to  read  every 
letter  that  was  left  about,  and  induced  them  to 
thumb  the  drawing-room  books,  when  they  ought 
to  be  doing  up  the  room.  It  did  not,  therefore, 
surprise  the  Vicar,  when,  one  morning,  after  break- 
fast, about  ten  days  after  the  terrible  adventure 
at  the  brook,  just  as  he  had  .retired  to  his  study 
for  a  quiet  morning's  read  before  his  parochial 
work,  there  came  a  dry  curt  knock  at  the  door, 
and  the  two  servants  entered,  ]\Irs.  Baker,  the  cook, 
a  short-tempered  fat  person,  and  Mary,  a  neat 
and  slim  girl,  but  also  with  a  not  altogether  dor- 
mant spirit  under  provocation.  Mary  was  crying, 
a  fact  chiefly  evidenced  by  her  pressing  her  right 
eye  with  the  extreme  left-hand  corner  of  her  blue 
apron.  The  cook,  being  a  widow,  and  decidedly 
some  distance  in  the  vale,  was  the  spokeswoman. 
"  If  you  please,  sir,''  she  said,  "  1  and  Mary 
wishes  to  give  warning  this  day  month  as  is 
reglar,  being  so  chivied  about  by  missus,  all 
about  a  muSin  plate  the  cat  cracked  three  weeks 
ago,  and  which  came  to  pieces  this  morning  in  loo 
warm  water  (for  I  tried  it  with  my  finger),  that 
we  don't  know  arf  om^  time  whether  we  stand  on 
our  'ed  or  our  'eels.  Not  that  we've  the  least 
fault  to  find  with  you,  sii%  and  Miss  Julia  (who's 
the   sweetest  young   lady),    as   I   said   not   ten 


176  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

minutes  ago  to  Mary  here,  which  was  recipro- 
cated ;  but  it's  impossible  to  bear  missus  any 
longer,  and  we  begs  this  to  be  for  warning  this 
day  month,  being  put  no  confidence  in.  There's 
George,  sir,  he's  taken  on  so  about  missus's  ways, 
that  he's  been  drinking." 

Mary  nodded,  and  expressed  complicity. 

At  that  very  moment,  Julia,  suspecting  mis- 
chief, put  her  smiling  face  in  at  the  door. 

"Julia,  dear,"  said  the  Yicar,  "just  take  and 
have  a  talk  with  Mrs.  Baker  and  Mary  here, 
they  have  got  some  foolish  notion  into  their  heads 
about  going,  because  they  say  they're  driven  so 
about.  I'm  sure  mother's  quite  satisfied  with 
them,  it  is  only  her  way  sometimes.  You  women 
must  bear  with  her." 

"  Come  with  me,  you  siUy  things,"  said  Julia, 
and  led  them  away,  in  her  coaxing  and  irresistible 
manner,  to  send  them  ofi"  to  their  work  in  five 
minutes,  satisfied  with  themselves,  and  content 
even  with  old  ]\Irs.  Beauflower's  slave-driving  and 
suspicions.  With  the  best  intentions  in  the 
world,  that  old  lady  had  the  special  knack  at 
times  of  rendering  every  one  supremely  miserable. 
A  true  woman  general  in  this,  that  not  content 
with  leading  her  forces  into  action,  she  wanted, 
also,  to  help  drive  the  baggage  cart,  and  load  the 
cannon.     Instead  of  sittino-  in  the  centre  of  her 


ME.    BASSEVI    VISITS    THE    VICARAGE.         177 

domestic  factory,  survepng  the  whole  like  a  spider 
from  the  centre  of  its  ^yeb,  she  must  needs,  in  the 
morbid  over-anxiety  of  her  restricted  and  over- 
worked thoughts,  run  about  greasing  the  cogs  of 
wheels,  and  testino-  the  strenoth  of  the  drivinsj 
bands. 

Just  as  the  Vicar  was  beatinsf  throuo-h  the  index 

o  o 

of  an  enormous  St.  Augustine,  to  see  what  traces 
of  Mariolatry  he  could  find  in  that  most  practical 
of  the  Fathers,  in  came  Mr.  Goodrich,  just  arrived 
from  London,  and  on  his  way  from  Slobury  to 
Fontford  with  an  architect,  who  had  gone  on  in 
the  fly,  leaving  Mr.  Goodrich  to  follow,  as  he 
wished,  on  foot.  He  was  full  of  Amy's  accident, 
of  which  he  had  heard  by  a  letter  from  Beau- 
flower.  He  spoke  of  her  with  all  the  glowing 
affection  of  a  father.  Having  just  called  at  the 
Abbey  to  inquire,  he  had  found,  to  his  great  de- 
light, that  Amy  A\'as  down  that  day  for  the  first 
time ;  the  nervous  fever  had  left  her  weak,  but 
she  was  fast  recovering. 

"  Those  Harkers,"  he  said,  indignantly,  "  are,  I 
really  believe,  angiy  at  the  constant  inquiries  from 
Lord  Mazagan,  young  Cantelupe,  and  ail  the  gen- 
tlemen of  the  hunt  who  live  within  six  or  seven 
miles.  The  saucy  jackanapes  of  a  footman,  obey- 
ing orders,  no  doubt,  said  he  hellevecl  Miss  was 
nearly  well  now,  and  that  is  all  I  should  have 

VOL.  n.  N 


178  THE   VICAE's   courtship. 

heard,  if  Ethel  had  not  just  then  come  bounding 
downstairs  to  pick  some  violets  for  Amy.  That 
Mrs.  Harker  ought  to  have  been  the  wife  of  a 
Carolina  slave  owner." 

Having  thus  vented  his  indignation,  Mr.  Good- 
rick  complimented  Beauflower  warmly  on  his 
promptness  and  courage,  of  which  the  county 
papers  had  been  full;  he  had  heard  it  men- 
tioned, too,  by  some  farmers  as  he  came  down  in 
the  train. 

Beauflower  waived  the  compliments.  "  Who 
wouldn't  have  done  the  same?"  he  said;  "there 
was  no  danger  except  from  the  mare  struggling, 
and  the  bank  being  rather  slippery.  Well,  and 
did  you  send  the  jewels  to  the  Berlin  exhibi- 
tion ? " 

"  No,  they  are  to  go  in  May ;  the  thing  is 
put  off"  by  the  special  wish  of  Count  Bismarck. 
But  you  seem  worried?" 

"  Well,  I  am,  our  servants  have  just  given  warn- 
ing. My  dear  mother  follows  them  about  so,  and 
is  so  suspicious — she  lijill  overdo  it.  Her  mind 
is  always  fretting  on  small  domestic  troubles  ; 
something  cracked,  or  scratched,  or  scorched, 
which  to  her  seems  one  of  the  signs  of  the  Last 
Day." 

"  Old  story,  good  old  soul !  Servants  are  not 
like  bees,  they  won't  work  in  glass  hives.     They 


ME.    BASSE YI   VISITS    THE   VICARAGE.  179 

do  mucli  better  left  alone.  AVomen  don  t  see  this. 
Pity  slie  doesn't  dismiss  domestic  things  some- 
times from  her  mind,  and  unbend  like  Miss 
Chi  vers  and  the  doctor  at  whist." 

"  But  she  won't ;  she  likes  her  voluntary 
martyrdom,  and  an  account  book  is  her  notion 
of  relaxation." 

"  I've  just  been  reading  in  the  train  one  of 
those  clever  paradoxes  on  Women's  Eights,  in  the 
'Satmxlay';  mere  special  pleading,  pretending  to 
look  for  truth,  and  always  finding  six  on  one  side, 
and  half-a-dozen  on  the  other.  The  man  whose 
brain  has  acquired  the  art  of  secreting  that  kind 
of  article,  would  prove  the  murder  of  Abel  justi- 
fiable homicide.  Yet  I  like  the  fellow  too,  because 
he  ridicules  Dr.  jMary  Walker,  -  and  all  her  lot. 
'Bear  children  and  nurse  them,'  that  is  my  notion 
of  woman's  mission.  Inferior  minds  or  not, 
where  are  the  women  Newtons,  and  Shaksperes, 
and  Beethovens  ?  Eubbish  !  but  I  see  you're  busy. 
Perhaps  I'm  boring  you.  The  doctrine  of  Pre- 
destination, or  any  fresh  discovery,  eh  '? " 

The  Vicar  confessing  he  was  busy  partly  agTeed 
with  the  old  cynic  about  women's  mission,  which 
was,  he  thought,  to  love  and  be  loved,  and  to 
wean  man  from  low  and  selfish  ambitions. 

"  Which  they  don't  do,  liaving  no  imagination, 
and  being  eminently  practical  and  common-place; 

N   2 


180  THE   vicar's   COUETSHIP. 

but  there,  enjoy  your  illusions,  and  pursue  the 
phantom  of  perfect  love.  Some  day  it  will  turn  to 
a  cloud  as  you  grasp  it,  and  you,  too,  will  become 
a  poor,  despised,  desjDairing  cynic,  like  one  of  us. 
Ugh  !  Good-bye.  I  shall  be  in  to  tea ;  tell  your 
sister  to  make  it  specially  good,  or  I  shall 
growl." 

So  he  went,  and,  as  he  went,  Mary  came  in 
with  a  letter.     Miss  Julia  had  opened  the  bag. 

What  strange  instinct  is  it  that  sometimes 
makes  one  shudder  at  the  sight  of  a  letter  that 
brings  misfortune  ;  that  is  indeed  a  Pandora's 
casket  of  evil,  without  even  hope  lingering  at  the 
bottom.  This  letter  had  come  like  a  Shrapnel 
shell  to  burst,  and  scatter  misery  where  it  fell.  Oh 
pleasant  vices  of  youth,  from  which  the  Gods  make 
our  scourges.  Flowers  of  past  folly  had  turned  to 
nettles  for  Beauflower — nettles  that  the  golden 
scythe  of  tardy  prudence  could  never  mow  down 
fast  enough.  Hydra-like,  the  mischief  grew,  and 
cast  its  perennial  seed.  This  letter  was  an  appli- 
cation from  the  solicitor  of  a  livery  stable-keeper, 
in  Carfax  Lane,  Oxford,  announcing  his  retirement 
from  business,  and  the  necessity  of  the  instant 
payment  of  30/.  lis.  6d.,  the  residue  of  a  bill  of 
64:1.  12s.  6d.  for  the  hire  of  horses,  dog-carts, 
and  tandems,  in  the  years  18.52 — 53,  and  the 
further  sum    of    60/.,  being    interest  at  20  per 


MR.    BASSEVI    VISITS    THE    VICARAGE.  181 

cent.,  as  agreed  "upon  at  the  last  payment.  The 
letter  was  curt,  sharp,  and  insolent,  treating  the 
matter  as  a  disgrace  that  might  be  exposed,  and 
trying  to  rouse  at  once  the  pride  and  the  fears  of 
the  debtor.  The  items  were  made  out  with  that 
severe  deliberation  with  which  cheating  trades- 
men often  cover  their  exactions  and  their  lies, 
but  no  memory  could  go  back  to  such  a  mass  of 
details,  seven  and  eight  years  before,  the  first  two 
years  of  Beauflower's  Oxford  folly,  long  since 
bitterly  repented  of  He  had  already  referred 
this  bill  several  times  to  his  cousin,  and  always 
received  the  same  answer.  "The  bill  is  exorbitant, 
you  have  paid  .part  of  it,  it  is  more  than  six 
years  old.  Plead  the  statute  of  limitations  ;^'  but 
his  pride,  and  chivakous  sense  of  honour  recoiled 
from  this  step  ;  he  would  avoid  no  fair  debts,  and 
besides,  the  interest,  however  exorbitant,  had  been 
agreed  to  by  him  four  years  before,  when  he 
paid  part.  Often  since  he  had  thought  of  this 
nightmare,  but  with  all  the  claims  ujDon  him,  his 
charities,  and  his  insurance,  had  been  compelled 
to  again  and  again  defer  payment.  His  income 
was  like  a  turpentine  tree,  the  moment  a  cuj) 
full  of  it  collected  he  had  to  empty  it  out  and 
wait  for  the  next  supply.  It  was  that  worst  of 
all  incomes,  an  unimprovable  one. 

Bitter  slavery  of  debt.     Fast  chained  to  the 


182  THE   vicar's   COURTSHIP. 

invisible  galley,  Conscience  scourging  us  at  our 
profitless  toil  in  that  glutinous  sea  of  bird-lime 
where  the  ship  makes  no  progress.  This  debtor  was 
the  sufierer  in  a  worse  purgatory  than  Dante  ever 
trod.  Come  what  may,  he  would  throw  this 
greedy  lawyer  some  sop  to  stay  his  barking,  but 
where  to  get  it  ?  He  opened  a  private  drawer  in 
his  knee  desk,  and  took  out  his  cheque-book;  in 
taking  it  from  the  drawer  a  circular  dropped  out. 
The  circular  was  headed  : — 

"CROWX   IMPERIAL    FIRE   AND   LIFE   INSURANCE 
OFFICE. 

"  New  Beidge  Steeet,  Blackfeiaes, 

LoxDON,  E.C.,  20a  Octoher,  1860." 

and  ran  thus  : — ■ 

"  Sir, 

I  am  directed  to  inform  you  that  the 
annual  premium  of  47^.  Os.  Ocl.  on  your  policy, 
No.  3014,  for  the  insurance  of  2000^.  on  the  life  of 
yourself;  will  become  due  on  the  1st  of  December 
next ;  and  that  if  the  same  be  not  paid  within  30 
days  from  that  date  the  poHcy  will  become  void. 
"  I  am.  Sir, 
''  Your  most  obedient  servant, 

''JOSIAH    WiLLOUGHBY. 

"  Actuarf/  and  Secretary .^^ 
"Rev.  E.  Beauflowee." 


MR.    BASSEVI   VISITS   THE   VICARAGE.  183 

Cured  of  extravagance,  yet  still  thoughtless 
about  money,  Beaufiower  had  thrust  this  notice 
into  a  drawer  and  forgotten  it;  now  it  seemed  to 
fall  upon  him  like  the  axe  of  a  guillotine.  It  must 
be  paid,  or  all  the  money  put  by  to  eke  out  his 
sister  s  and  mother  s  small  income  in  case  of  his 
death,  would  be  forfeited.  Seven  years'  payments 
lost  as  if  they  had  been  thrown  into  the  deep  sea. 
Akeady  his  vi^dd  imagination  pictured  to  him- 
self their  pining  misery,  the  -WTctched  garret  in 
some  country  town,  where  they  sat  w^eeping  for 
him,  and  praying  to  Heaven  for  bread.  A 
thousand  tormenting  thoughts  environed  him, 
and  shot  at  his  heart  their  little  poisonous  and 
corroding  shafts.  A  brooding  darkness  fell  over 
the  present,  and  a  coffin  blackness  over  the  future. 
Hope  for  the  moment  seemed  a  mere  will-o'-the 
wisp,  sent  to  allure  men  into  sloughs  of  despair, 
and  to  leave  them  there  with  pitiless  mockery. 
A  miserable  lawyer  had  the  power  to  sneer  at, 
insult  him,  even  (unless  help  came)  drag  him  to 
prison,  a  degraded  heart-broken  man,  and  he  was 
powerless,  for  his  own  youthful  folly  had  forged 
the  very  chains  that  were  even  then  eating  into 
his  flesh.  Pay  the  SOL,  clutch  the  receipt,  and 
bright  freedom  would  come  once  more,  and  he 
would  again  breathe,  and  look,  and  feel  like  other 
people,  and  no  one  could  point  at,  threaten  or 


184  THE   VICAE's   courtship. 

ridicule,  the  helplessness  of  his  poverty,  the 
false  pretences  of  the  clergyman  who  had  plunged 
into  debt,  and  who  was  a  man  for  safe  and 
prudent  people  to  avoid  as  if  he  had  the  plague. 
Who  should  he  go  to  ?  to  his  cousin  ?  no,  that 
was  too  bitter  a  mortification.  To  receive  a 
half  reluctant  dole  of  some  hard  earned  money, — 
the  reluctance  but  ill  concealed ;  and,  perhaps, 
a  look  of  surprise  and  reproof,  or,  what  was  still 
more  unbearable,  a  homily  on  improvidence,  and 
a  caution  not  to  throw  ujDon  a  cousin  soon  about 
to  marry  the  whole  burden  of  aiding  the  income 
of  his  mother  and  sister.  No,  that,  to  a  man 
naturally  proud,  and  hitherto  accustomed  to  in- 
dependence, was  unbearable.  Better  those 
harpies  the  Jews,  and  100  per.  cent,  than  that. 
What  other  remedy  was  there  ?  His  rich,  eccen- 
tric, but  too  new  friend,  Mr.  Goodrick,  who 
seemed  so  rich,  but  perhaps  had  no  money 
beyond  just  enough  to  cover  his  lavish  expenses  1 
to  be  refused,  or  met  with  a  cynical  remark  that 
"  lending  loses  both  itself  and  friend,  and  borrow- 
ing dulls  the  edge  of  husbandry,"  or  the  lancet 
edge  of  some  less  trite  but  equally  keen  quotation  ; 
no,  it  was  not  to  be  thoug^ht  of.  He  had  no  rio-ht 
to  ask  the  man,  the  mere  friend  of  an  old  friend  of 
his  father,  the  man  who  seemed  so  expensive  in  his 
tastes  and  was  yet  so  thrifty.  Young  Cantelupe,  his 


MR.    BASSEVI   VISITS   THE   VICARAGE.         185 

former  pupil,  who  tlirew  liundreds  awaj  on  every 
race  course,  who  ordered  down  half-a-dozen  sets  of 
studs  and  gold  latch  keys  and  lockets,  (to  give 
to  male  visitors,  or  less  estimable  and  more  ex- 
pensive creatures),  and  who,  it  was  well  known  in 
the  county,  had  a  gold  dressing  case  almost  as  large 
as  a  plate  chest,  that  two  footmen  could  scarcely 
carry?  Yes,  he  would  sign  a  cheque  in  a  moment, 
no  doubt,  for  a  cool  hundred  or  two,  and  think 
no  more  of  it  than  if  he  had  put  his  name  to  a 
subscription  list  for  a  guinea.  But  then,  w^as  it 
fair  or  generous  to  take  advantage  of  the  generous 
recklessness  that  was  hurrying  the  young  spend- 
thrift, like  a  wild  horse,  to  ruin.  Did  not  the 
very  lodgekeepers  at  the  Castle  know  that  he  was 
already  over  head  and  ears  in  debt  with  some 
Jew  money-lender,  besides  having  mortgaged  half 
his  estate  to  Mr.  Harker  1  Was  he  not  said  to  be 
trusting  blindly  to  recover  (more  likely  to  lose) 
thousands  by  his  horse  Immenschikoff  at  the  next 
Slobury  races,  in  the  forthcoming  May?  Let  alone 
the  conscience  of  the  matter,  would  it  be  well  that 
his  (the  Yicar  of  Summerleas')  name  should  be  here- 
after mentioned  as  that  of  one  of  the  bloodsuckers 
that  had  fastened  on  this  warm-hearted — well,  it 
must  be  said — young  fool  ?  No  !  he  would  not 
put  into  that  port,  whatever  storm  might  come. 
Where    else    to    turn  ?       To   Mr.    Harker,    that 


1^6  THE   VICAE's   courtship. 

arrogant  impersonation  of  new  money,  tlie  man 
who  would  forfeit  Heaven  to  get  a  knighthood 
by  presenting  an  address,  or  some  other  task  of 
generous  chivahy  :  the  man  who  so  cruelly  and 
selfishly  neglected  the  poor  who  toiled  for  him ; 
who  produced  by  thousands  those  detestable  birds 
that  led  men  to  theft  and  murder ;  who  bred  game 
to  such  sinful  excess,  that  it  devastated  the  lands 
not  only  of  his  own  farmers,  but  of  the  miserable 
ground  down,  hopeless  poor  ?  No  ;  better  starve 
and  beg  than  ask  a  man  who  would  either  refuse, 
or  treat  the  loan  as  a  means  of  cruel  exaction  and 
perpetual  insult.  Yes ;  this  would  be  indeed  to 
voluntarily  descend  into  hell :  besides,  above  all, 
might  not  this  insolent  and  overbearing  man,  in  his 
selfish  indifierence  to  the  feelings  of  more  sensitive 
people  of  a  finer  fibre  and  higher  breeding  than 
his  OMTi,  talk  of  the  loan  to  his  wife  and  daughters ; 
then  Amy  would  hear  of  it,  and  he,  Beaufiower, 
would  appear  to  her  (for  he  could  no  longer 
conceal  from  himself  that  he  loved  her)  a  miser- 
able improvident  beggared  borrower,  and  it  was 
madness  even  to  think  of  such  inefi'able  disgrace. 

Gracious  heaven  !  ordering  so  inflexibly  all  sins 
to  bear  apples  of  Sodom  for  the  future,  willmg  so 
inflexibly  that  sin  shall  only  bring  forth  shame  and 
misery,  and  that  godless  pleasure,  though  sweet 
for  the  moment,  shall  be  poison  on  the  morrow. 


MR.    BASSEVI   VISITS    THE   VICARAGE.  187 

Was  there  no  help  then  from  these  cares,  that 
stood  now  like  ravening  lions  in  his  path  '?  Was 
there  no  repentance  that  could  be  secretly  worked 
out?  Would  no  prayers  nor  sorrow  avail?  Must  he 
stand  barefooted  on  the  red-hot  ploughshares  of 
suffering,  mortification,  and  disgrace  ?  Could  no 
toil  of  brain  devise  an  escape  from  this  syren  s 
net,  this  poisoned  garment  of  Nessus,  this  devil's 
pit-fall  for  youth?  These  bonds,  small  indivi- 
dually ^as  the  Lilliputian  threads  that  held  Gul- 
liver, yet,  united,  were  strong  and  indestructible. 
Would  no  angel's  sword  strike  do^vn  from  the 
clouds,  and,  pitying  his  marred  life,  his  shattered 
dream,  sever  this  Gordian  knot  devised  by  Satan 
to  make  him  hate  life,  and  curse  the  day  in 
which  it  was  said  ''  a  man  child  is  born."  So 
wrestled  the  fettered  man  with  the  great  trouble 
that  was  choking  out  his  life;  as  he  buried  his 
pale  face  in  his  hands,  and  some  burning  tears 
sprang  out  upon  them. 

All  at  once,  like  a  flash  of  lightning  in  a  dark 
night,  a  flash  of  hope  lit  up  his  gloom.  Perhaps 
he  might  have  fifty  pounds  left  at  the  Salisbury 
bank.  Some  one  might  have  paid  in  some  secret 
subscription  to  the  Chetwynd  fund  to  his  name. 
He  knew  he  had  a  slight  balance  of  his  own 
still  left.  Nothing  could  be  easier,  confident, 
firm  as   adamant   in   his   own    principle    as   he 


188  THE    vicar's   courtship. 

was,  than  to  take  that  money  and  repay  it  in 
January. 

Then  his  tithes  were  paid,  and  the  first  half  of 
his  400?.  a-year  came  as  sure  as  sunrise  ;  no  one 
would  be  the  wiser,  and  no  one  Avould  sufier  any 
harm.  That  was  his  way  of  release  from  this 
care  that  was  pressing  upon  his  bram  and  on  his 
heart.  He  pulled  out  his  keys,  opened  the  right 
hand  top  drawer  of  his  knee  desk,  where  all  his 
account  books  and  charity  memoranda  were,  and 
took  out  the  sealed  parcel  containing  his  bankers' 
book  just  as  it  had  last  arrived  by  post.  Beauflower 
had  never  been  taught  to  feel  the  value  of  money. 
His  father — good  and  easy  man — had  never 
known  it.  He  had  petted  his  son,  and  sent  him 
to  Eton,  where  he  had  no  business  to  go,  and 
where  he  only  learnt  to  write  tame  alcaics  full  of 
other  people's  thoughts,  and  to  acquire  habits  of 
expenditure  beyond  his  station.  He  had  not 
looked  at  the  book  for  three  months.  He  cracked 
the  lavish  seal,  and  tore  open  the  paper  like  a 
hungry  man  searching  a  wreck  for  food.  Last 
page.     Yes,  there  were  one  or  two  subscriptions. 

£  s.  d. 

Rev.  Robert  Smiles,  of  Broad  Chalk,  for  C.  Fund    15  0  0 

Arthur  Bradley,  Winterbourne         .         .        .     .     10  0  0 

Francis  Hopwood,  Hindon 5  5  0 

And  that  was  all,  30?.  there.     His  own  balance 


MR.    BASSEVI    VISITS    THE    VICARAGE.  189 

was  19/.  10s.  6d.  There  it  was  ;  it  would  not 
leave  much,  but  the  bank  would  not  care  for 
once,  there  would  be  more  subscriptions  coming 
in  soon,  and  January — the  end  of  January — 
was  the  time  named  for  those  cruel  dilapidations 
coming  due.  He  would  write,  therefore,  a  cheque 
for  the  4:71.  due  to  the  insurance  office,  and  send 
it,  there  would  then  be  2/.  15s.  6d.  left  in  the 
bank,  so  the  balance  Avould  not  be  overdrawn, 
and  he  had  some  13/.  to  go  on  with  till  January, 
for  current  expenses. 

The  air  grew  bright  again,  and  that  sweet  pale 
face  that  was  nearly  always  before  him  now,  day 
and  night,  but  had  faded  and  receded  during  that 
wrestle  with  despair,  for  love  shrinks  from  the 
sight  of  care,  smiled  forth  again  like  a  lode  star 
to  happiness.  The  chains  had  fallen  from  his 
hands,  like  the  Philistines'  bonds  from  Samson  s 
wrists,  his  sorrows  had  snapped  like  green  withes 
before  his  strong  hope.  The  sky  was  blue  and 
laughing  again.  The  blackness  had  lifted.  He 
felt  no  longer  like  a  hunted  thief ;  he  could  look 
straight  into  any  man  s  face.  No  trouble  would 
cloud  him  or  weigh  upon  his  heart  when  the  great 
joy  came  of  seeing  Amy  next.  He  had  opened 
his  chec|ue-book,  and  was  just  filling  in  the  figures, 
when  Julia  came  running  in.     She  looked  angry. 

"  Oh,  Ned,"  she  said. 


190  THE   VICARS    COURTSHIP. 

"  AVhy,  dear,  how  ill  you  look  ! " 

"  Oh,  do  you  know  that  horrid  Mr.  Pitts  has 
been  so  rude  to  mamma  just  now  in  the  kitchen, 
and  before  all  the  servants,  too  ? " 

''  Mr.  Pitts'?  and  what  about  ? " 

"  Yes  ;  when  mamma  told  him  the  last  mutton 
was  tough,  he  said  there  was  a  butcher's  saying 
that  mutton  was  often  tough  when  it  came  from 
a  butcher  that  hadn  t  been  paid.  In  fact,  he 
said,  he  wanted  his  money  up  to  June." 

The  Vicar  looked  vexed  and  angry.  Were 
these  mortifications  never  to  cease  1  They  were 
hydra-headed.  He  answered  sharply,  **Why 
didn't  you  bring  me  the  man's  bill  ?  We'll  have 
no  more  of  him.  I'll  send  him  the  money 
to-morrow." 

"  But  he's  waiting  'now ;  says  he  must  have  it 
to-day  to  pay  old  Brown  for  some  sheep.  He  is 
driven,  he  says,  and  so  he  must  drive.  Money 
somehow  he  must  get  to-day.  He  was  really 
quite  insolent,  Ned,  and  talked  so  loud." 

"AVhere's  the  fellow's  bill'?  I'll  pay  it  at 
once." 

"  Don't  be  angry  with  me,  dear.  He  said  he 
couldn't  keep  making  out  fresh  bills;  we  knew 
well  enough  what  it  was,  12l.  65.  2d" 

Beauflower  wrote  the  cheque  angrily,  and 
thrust  it  with  a  roughness  unusual  to  his  nature 


MR.    BASSEYI   VISITS   THE   VICARAGE.  191 

into  his  sisters  hand.  She  looked  hurt  at  his 
irritability.  She  moved  a  step  or  two  towards 
the  door.     Then  she  turned  and  said, — 

"  And,  Ned,  mamma  wants  two  pounds.  That 
man  from  Fontford  has  come  to  be  paid 
for  the  potatoes.  He  came  before,  last  week 
when  you  were  out,  and  we  hadn't  money 
enough.'^ 

Beauflower  was  jaded  with  these  fretting 
thoughts.  It  takes  a  great  deal  of  healthy  brain- 
work  to  tu^e  a  man. 

"  A  merry  heart  goes  all  the  day, 
Your  sad  tires  in  a  mile-a." 

He  flew  into  a  momentary  passion. 

"  Every  one  at  my  pm^se,"  he  said  ;  "  leeches  that 
never  fill.  The  only  thought  of  every  one  here — 
money,  money,  from  morning  till  night.  I  shan  t 
have  been  an  hour  quiet  before  you'U  be  coming 
for  something  else — some  paltry  bill  or  other." 

"  Ned,  dear,"  said  Julia,  surprised  at  such  an 
unusual  display  of  temper,  "how  put  out  you 
seem  this  morning.  I  never  knew  you  speak  so 
sharp  to  me  before.  I  was  obliged  to  come  and 
tell  you.  You  wouldn't  wish  people  like  Pitts  to 
insult  mamma,  and  go  about  saying  they  could 
not  get  paid.  Never  mind  the  two  pounds,  if 
you  re  too  busy  just  now  to  get  the  money." 


192  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

''  Fm  not  too  busy.  What  is  it,  two  pounds. 
Here  it  is — take  three,  you  may  want  it,  and 
don't  worry  me  again.  There's  the  cheque  for 
Pitts.  Don't  mind  me  this  morning,  Ju,  some- 
thing distresses  me." 

JuHa  looked  hurt,  but  ran  down  with  the  money. 

Twelve  pounds,  six,  and  two,  and  three  pounds  ! 
out  of  the  £47  wanted  for  the  insurance.  The 
dark  figure  came  again  and  sat  by  his  side, 
Amy's  angel  face  faded  as  a  rainbow  fades. 
Where  was  it  to  be  got  now?  He  dared  not 
think  of  it.  "  That  way  madness  lies."  Like 
all  men  habitually  careless  in  money  matters,  he 
rallied  his  courage,  dismissed  the  care  as  far  as  he 
could  from  his  thoughts,  and  hoped  for  some  pro- 
vidential deliverance.  More  subscriptions  might 
come  in,  or  he  could  even  wTite  for  them.  Janu- 
ary was  the  certain  time,  and  in  January  his  own 
money  was  certain.  For  money  from  then  till 
July,  he  must  shift  as  he  had  shifted  before,  with 
no  loss  of  credit  or  reputation.  He  could  trust 
his  own  resolution  to  repay.  Nine  years  ago  it 
had  been  different ;  now  the  repayment  was  sure 
as  sunrise,  so  he  struggled  in  the  closing  grasp  of 
the  horrible  pieuvre  of  debt !  Degraded  in  his 
own  eyes,  lamenting  the  miserable  follies  of 
the  past,  young  love  trampled  under  his  feet,  at 
that  hard  moment  when  all  the  world  seemed  so 


MR.   BASSEVI   VISITS   THE   VICARAGE.         193 

cruel  and  so  selfish,  he  sat  there  (staring  at  the 
red  coals,  that  seemed  to  change  into  horrid  faces, 
mocking  at  his  misery),  wishing  but  not  willing 
— one  ceaseless  thought,  as  in  incipient  insanity, 
revolving  like  a  wheel  in  his  brain. 

In  vain  Zoe,  a  favourite  kitten,  Wasp's  capri- 
cious playmate,  leaped  up,  purringly,  soothingly, 
in  his  lap,  and  tried  a  thousand  pretty  tricks,  as  if 
sent  by  some  good  fairy  to  wean  him  from  his 
troubles.  It  played  ^^dth  his  watch-chain,  bit  at 
his  studs,  and  at  last,  meeting  no  recognition,  dis- 
covered it  had  mistaken  its  man,  and  curling  itself 
up  in  a  cosy  baU,  head  tucked  between  its  paws, 
went  to  sleep. 

So  deep  was  the  Vicars  reverie  just  then,  that 
he  did  not  hear  two  gentle  taps  at  the  door  ;  the 
third  aroused  him.  He  cried  petulantly,  ''  Come 
in," — the  wind  at  the  key  hole,  any  trifle,  vexed  his 
jaded  brain  now.     It  was  ]\Iary. 

"If  you  please,  sir,"  she  said,  "there's  a 
gentleman  wants  to  see  you  ; — he  gave  me  this 
card." 

Beauflower  snatched  it  angrily.  It  was  a  vulgar 
staring  glazed  card,  with  the  name  of — 

glr,  Isaac  33asseiji, 

PICTURE  DEALER   AND   RESTORER, 

124a,  charlotte  STREET, 
FITZROY  SQUARE. 


194.  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

"  Where  have  you  shown  him  V 

''In  the  drawing-room,  sir.  Missus  is  in  the 
parlour  with  Miss  Chivers,  Miss  Julia,  and  Miss 
Ethel." 

"How  is  Miss  Amy?" 

"  Oh  !  much  better,  sir.  She's  down  to-day  for 
the  first  time,  I  heard  Miss  Ethel  say." 

"  Bassevi !  Bassevi !"  thought  the  Vicar,  as 
Mary  closed  the  door.  He  threw  the  kitten 
roughly  from  him  and  rose  to  go  downstairs. 
''  I  had  forgotten.  Oh,  yes,  that's  the  vulgar 
Jew  picture-dealer,  that  Goodrich  introduced  me 
to.  I  suppose  he  has  come  to  see  the  Cuyp.  I 
wish  he  had  chosen  some  other  day.  Bother  the 
fellow." 

When  he  went  down,  Bassevi  was  standing 
with  his  back  to  the  door,  intently  examining, 
apparently  with  the  tip  of  his  nose,  a  view  of 
Dort  by  Cuyp,  that  hung  over  the  fire-place. 
He  turned  round  as  the  door  opened,  and  bowed 
familiarly  to  the  Vicar. 

"  Not  a  bad  bit  of  Cuyp,"  he  said,  waving  his 
white  hat  at  it ;  "  and  I  like  the  frame.  But  the 
room's  too  cold  for  it;  the  varnish  has  got  chilled. 
I  suppose  you  don't  have  a  fire  here  often.  I 
should  advise  you  to  have  it  cleaned.  I  could 
make  quite  another  thing  of  it.  I've  got  one  of 
the  best  restorers  in  London  at  work  for  me  ;  and 


ME.    BASSE VI   VISITS  THE   VIC AE AGE.         195 

I  never  let  liim  use  ammonia,  for  it  plays  the 
devil  with  things." 

It  was  a  glorious  picture  by  that  most  poetical 
of  all  Dutchmen  except  Eembrandt.  Cattle, 
men,  clouds,  distant  towers,  and  vessels  the  great 
painter  of  Dort  had  steeped  in  ''  the  very  essence 
of  sunshine"  (Hazlitt).  In  looking  at  it  you 
forgot  all  about  canvas,  fine  or  rough,  brushes, 
hog  or  sable,  oils,  or  paint.  It  seemed  a  tranquil 
dream  of  a  golden  age,  full  of  a  repose,  never  to 
be  broken ;  but  the  cloven-hoofed  satyr  who  was 
now  secretly  pricing  it,  was  only  thinking  of  the 
five  pound  notes  it  would  fetch,  and  the  way  it 
could  be  run  up  by  his  '^  puffers  "  at  a  London 
picture-auction.  He  knew  exactly  its  value  as 
a  master-piece,  but  as  for  its  inner  soul  of  beauty, 
he  regarded  that  no  more  than  a  butcher  does  the 
life  in  the  sheep  he  is  dragging  into  the  slaughter- 
house door. 

"  So  you  think  it  a  genuine  Cuyp  V  said 
Beauflower,  rather  sarcastically,  for  he  was  in  a  bad 
humour  with  himself  and  every  one  else  just 
then  ;  and  he  disliked  the  impudent  insolence  of 
the  man,  and  the  sort  of  sheriff-officer  air  with 
which  his  eyes  wandered  over  the  room,  apprais- 
ing article  after  article. 

"Well,  it  may  be  a  replica,  and,  no  doubt,  it  is. 
I  think,  in  fact,  I  saw  something  very  like  it  at 


196  THE   VICARS   COURTSHIP. 

Christie's,  last  week,  only  ratlier  bolder  in  exe- 
cution." 

This  was  a  hastily  snatched-np  lie,  but  Bassevi 
knew  well  where  to  go  to  for  such  weapons. 

"  This  fellow  fishino;  here  to  the  left  is  not  a  bit 
in  Cuyp's  manner  ;  he  never — no  ;  that's  more  in 
Both's  style.  Eeal  Cuj^s  are  very  rare.  And 
may  I  ask  where  you  picked  up  this  school  of 
Cuyp  ^     It's  the  older  Cuyp,  I'm  nearly  sure." 

"  It  was  bought  by  my  father  at  the  Beck- 
ford  sale  ;  it  was  put  up  the  first  day  before  the 
dealers  came  down  ;  their  train  happened  to  be 
rather  late.  My  father  was  offered  £200  for  it 
for  the  National  Gallery." 

"  Then  I'd  have  let  'em  had  it.  Two  hundred  ! 
why,  half-a-dozen  of  'em  would  not  run  to  that." 

Bassevi  said  this  with  an  air  of  real  scorn,  not 
to  be  acquired  by  a  novice  in  bargaining.  He 
began  to  regret  saying  so  much  about  the  picture. 

"  S'elp  me,"  he  said,  with  more  and  more  of 
the  Jewish  gabble  about  him  as  he  got  ex- 
cited ;  "  if  I  didn't,  last  October,  see  four  Cuyps 
as  good  as  this,  and  a  Carlo  Maratti  thrown  in, 
go  for  eighteen  pun'  and  three  crowns.  Two 
hundred  !  well,  that  was  a  let  in." 

''  It  may  be,"  said  Beauflower,  Y\^ith  icy  cold- 
ness. "  Well,  and  what  do  you  say  to  the  fellow 
picture  V 


MR.    BASSEVI   VISITS    THE    VICARAGE.         197 

The  other  picture  was  smaller  and  less  showy 
than  its  fellow,  but  even  more  deliciously  tran- 
quil and  sunny.  The  foreground  was  a  reach  of 
sun-steeped  water,  golden  as  pale  sherry,  its 
liquid  surface  only  broken  by  a  long  line  of  fish- 
ing-net corks  ;  beyond  a  boat  or  two  with 
broad  broA^ni  sails,  turned  to  cloth  of  gold  by 
the  universal  harmony  of  sunny  colour  that  had 
soaked  the  faint  long  gold  line  of  the  walls  of 
Dort  into  the  same  hue,  and  made  all  the  air  and 
even  the  soft  fleeces  of  lingering  sunset  clouds 
golden  mellow  also. 

Basse^i's  machinery  was  in  better  order  this 
time.  He  was  all  cold  contempt ;  he  looked  at 
the  frame,  then  turned  the  picture,  and  tapped  it ; 
it  was  painted  on  oak  panel. 

"  Yes,"  said  he,  "  pretty  enough  ;  but  not  a  real 
Cuyp.  Evidently  copy ;  many  people  painted  like 
him.  My  man  could  copy  that  so  as  you  wouldn't 
know  it.  rd  change  it,  and  I  swear,  you  actually 
would  not  know  it.  I  tell  you  what,  there's  not  ?i 
man  in  the  trade  gives  better  prices  than  I  do  ; 
and  I  wouldn't  give  more  than  thirteen  pounds 
for  that  picture ;  and  I  don't  think  even  then  I 
should  ever  see  my  money  again.  I  give  you 
my  word  of  that." 

"  What  you  would  give  is  of  little  consequence 
to  me,"  said  Beauflower,  rather  sharply,  for  he 


198  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

was  disgusted  witli  the  wretch's  manner.  ''  The 
trade  value  of  a  picture  is  only  interesting  to  the 
trade.  We  all  regard  that  as  a  chefcVceuvre,  and 
prefer  it  much  to  the  other.  To  me  it  has  an 
indescribable  charm.  I  know  little  of  art  techni- 
calities myself,  but  all  our  family  are  fond  of  art. 
Mr.  Goodrick,  too,  who  is  a  great  judge,  endorses 
our  opinion  in  this  matter.  I  suppose,  as  a  profes- 
sional man,  you  consider  Mr.  Goodrich  a  judge  "?  " 

"  Oh,  yes,  he  knows  his  way  about,  and  he  ought 
to,  he's  paid  well  for  his  experience.  He's  given 
money  for  jewels  that  I  wouldn't  (and  I  was 
brought  up  as  a  clerk  at  a  diamond  cutter's  in  Am- 
sterdam)— that  I  wouldn't  give  that  for"  (and  Bas- 
sevi  snapped  his  dirty  fingers  till  his  coarsely-fine 
rings  glistened  again).  ''  That's  a  fairish  picture, 
but  as  for  Cuyp,  no,  not  for  Joe,  Oh  no,  no,  no," 
and  Bassevi  grinned  sardonically,  and  looked  as 
cunning  and  insolent  as  a  croupier  at  Baden- 
Baden  when  the  Bank  has  been  doing  peculiarly 
well. 

Bassevi  had  never  sat  down,  indeed  the  Vicar 
had  never  asked  him;  he  did  not  want  to  prolong 
the  visit  of  the  detestable  "  cad." 

"This,  perhaps,  is  worth  your  notice,"  said 
Beauflower,  with  ill-restrained  contempt,  and 
pointing  to  a  very  exquisitely-carved  German 
portrait  head  of  some  great  man  of  Charles  the 


ME.    BASSE VI    VISITS    THE    VICARAGE.  199 

Fifth's  time,  one  of  the  seven  Electors  perhaps, 
or  Uhieh  von  Hutten,  or  Franz  of  Sickendorf. 
It  was  carved  in  lime  wood,  with  almost  Chinese 
care,  the  broad,  square  features  were  finely  mo- 
delled, the  beard  and  ruff,  ^vith  every  hair,  every 
pleat  given  with  almost  pre-Eaphaelite  realism, 
and  yet  with  fine  artistic  breadth. 

Bassevi's  eye  gloated  upon  the  gem,  he  could 
not  this  time  conceal  his  longing. 

"Ah! ''  said  he,  "now,  that's  something  like,  it's 

a  copy  I  think,  but  it's  d good,  and  no  two 

words  about  it,  and  would  fetch  its  price  ;  might 
even  run  to  10?.  if  it  was  well  fought  for.  I  know 
a  man  would  give  9l.  for  it  do^m,  and  no  auction 
expenses." 

"  These  things  have  a  value  to  me  beyond  all 
money,"  said  the  Vicar,  proudly.  "  I  have  been 
accustomed  to  them  ever  since  I  could  walk.  All 
the  Httle  art  I  know  I  have  learned  from  them. 
But  I  am  afraid  I  really  must  hmTy  away,  I 
have  some  letters  to  write  to  catch  the  three 
o'clock  post,  and  our  boy  goes  at  two." 

"  Oh,  no  ceremony  with  me.  I'm  a  plain  man. 
I  suppose  there  is  no  chance  of  a  deal  with  you  ; 
but  if  you  ever  should  want  to  swop  these  things 
for  real  slap-up  west-end  furniture,  you've  got  my 
card;  or  if  ever  you  should  want  a  little  ready 
money  and  have  any  old-fashioned  family  jewels 


200  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

or  curiosities,  there  is  not  a  man  in  all  London 
gives  larger  prices  or  deals  more  like  a  gentleman 
than  I  do." 

Beauflower's  blood  boiled.  Was  it  possible  that 
this  blood-sucker,  too,  had  heard  of  his  embarrass- 
ments? Should  he  push  him  at  once  out  of  the 
door  ?  but  no,  the  pettifogger,  quite  unconscious, 
was  stooping  down,  whistling,  to  look  at  some  old 
Chelsea  china,  and  Pompadour  Sevres,  on  the 
bottom  shelf  of  a  chiffonier. 

"  I  see  you've  got  some  Sevres  there,"  he  said, 
as  he  rose,  "  that  always  fetches  its  price.  Well, 
you  won't  forget,  Mr.  Beauflower,  where  I  hang  out, 
if  ever  you  do  Avant  to  part  with  anything.  Perfect 
secrecy,  you  know.  You'll  excuse  me  mentioning 
it,  but,  you  know,  everyone  wants  ready  money 
sometimes.  I  must  be  off  to  Fontford;  that  old 
Eobinson  is  no  more  use  than  a  child,  unless  he 
is  told  just  what  to  do.  I  only  wish  I  could 
paint,  I'd  show  'em.  I  know  what  people  Avant. 
If  you  believe  me,  that  old  duffer  spends  half  his 
time  pottering  about  different  sorts  of  mediums 
and  imperishable  colours.  What  does  it  matter, 
as  I  tell  him,  when  the  thing  is  once  sold.  Let  it 
go,  they'll  want  more ;  besides  he  will  always 
put  in  too  much  finish  for  the  money." 

The  Vicar,  not  in  a  mood  to  see  any  one,  had 
stolen  upstairs  to  his  study,  after  telling  Tony, 


MR.    BASSEVI   VISITS    THE    VICARAGE.         201 

whom  he  met  carrying  up  some  clothes  he  had 
brushed  to  his  master  s  room,  to  send  George  in 
half  an  hour  for  the  post-bag,  and  betook  him- 
self to  letters  ;  first  and  foremost,  one  to  the 
Oxford  lawyer,  then  several  to  friends  to  solicit 
subscriptions  for  the  Chetwynd  Dilapidation 
Fund,  and  first  and  foremost  to  his  old 
pupil  Cantelupe,  who  was  safe  for  50/.  at 
least. 

There  were  laughing  voices  in  the  hall — they 
were  those  of  Ethel,  Julia,  and  Miss  Chivers — then 
the  front  door  slammed.  They  Avere  gone.  Thank 
goodness. 

He  had  just  finished  his  letters  when  his 
mother  and  sister  came  in,  and  sitting  by  the 
fire  began  an  animated  description  of  "  the  talk- 
ing to''  the  servants  had  had,  and  their  final 
surrender  to  Julia ;  and,  lastly,  of  the  intolerable 
conduct  of  Mr.  Pitts,  who  had  never  even  said 
"thank  you,"  for  the  money,  but  rattled  off  in 
his  light  cart  as  if  he  had  done  a  rather  merito- 
rious action,  and  gained  the  money  by  consum- 
mate ingenuity.  Beauflower,  who  had  a  keen 
sense  of  humour,  was  listening  with  much  amuse- 
ment to  Julia's  description  of  the  servants'  talk, 
which  her  mother  regarded  in  a  much  severer  way, 
when  there  came  slow  hea\y,  clumpy  footsteps 
along  the  passage  leading  from  the  back  stairs  to 


202  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

tlie  study,  Avliicli  Avas  in  a  line  witli  some  of  the 
bed-rooms. 

There  was  a  rough  hand  at  the  door,  it  sloAvly 
opened,  and  the  gaunt,  bony  form  of  George 
appeared  on  the  threshold.  He  was  pale,  sodden, 
and  morbidly  melancholy.  His  red  hair  was 
rough  and  tumbled.  He  tried  to  speak  twice, 
but  only  a  wild  hiccup  came.  At  last  his  fishy 
and  wandering  eye  alighted  on  the  angry  and 
surprised  face  of  Mrs.  Beauflower.  That  recalled 
him  to  the  cause  of  the  many  antidotes  to  grief 
that  he  had  taken.  He  pointed  at  her  with  an 
enormous  beefy  hand,  red  with  cold  and  darkened 
with  earth. 

"  Here  we  are,"  he  stammered.  "  Three  broken 
'arts,  here  we  be,  tln^e  broken  'arts."  (He  was 
evidently  past  counting.) 

"Oh,  the  horrid  man  s  been  drinking,"  flew  out 
Mrs.  Beauflower  ;  "  this  time,  Ned,  dear,  he 
really  must  go." 

George  smiled  languidly,  and  repeated  that 
three  broken  'arts  had  now  undoubtedly  met,  and 
there  seemed  to  him  deep  consolation  in  the  fact. 

"  Go  down,  sir,  go  down  directly,"  cried  the 
Vicar,  hardly  able  to  keep  decently  majestic,  "or 
I  can  tell  you  there'll  be  one  broken  head.  Go 
down,  and  don't  come  near  the  place  again  till 
you  are  told ;   to-morrow  we'll  have  a  talk." 


MR.    BASSEVI   VISITS   THE   VICARAGE.         203 

George  retreated,  but  still  asserting  that  three 
broken  'arts  had  for  once  met  and  exchanged  their 
sorrows.  He  was  an  excellent  servant  when  he 
was  not  drunk  :  steady,  silent,  and  faithful ;  but 
when  drunk  he  was  always  either  consequential 
or  maudlin. 


204  THE   vicar's   courtship. 


CHAPTEE  IX. 

THE   DINNER   PARTY   AT    THE    ABBEY. 

Mrs.  Harker,  a  pushing  Avoman  if  ever  there 
was  one,  always  intent  on  enlarging  the  social 
circle  within  which  she  conjured,  was  now  entirely 
intent  on  securing  the  young  lord  {in  futuro,  at 
least)  at  any  cost,  however  foolish,  or  vicious,  or 
heartless  he  might  be.  Her  grandson  a  lord! 
that  seemed  the  very  end  of  all  possible  happi- 
ness. That  was  the  one  thing  that  wealth  could 
not  buy.  A  coronet  was  not  like  fame,  virtue, 
or  such  shadows,  but  a  palpable  fact,  to  be  seen, 
and  touched,  and  handled.  Then,  then  she  would 
tread  under  foot  the  few  proud  county  families 
who  still  delayed  (in  a  sort  of  hopeless  protest 
against  new  money)  inviting  her  and  hers  to 
their  parties.  She  had  planned  a  dinner  that 
was,  for  a  certain  known  cost,  to  secure  so  many 
steps  forward. 

Nor  had  her  worthy  husband  been  idle  in  his  own 
dark  mole-like  way.     The  young  spendthrift  was 


THE    DINNER-PARTY    AT    THE    ABBEY.  205 

SO  involved  in  loans  and  mortgages,  proffered — 
indeed,  forced  upon  him  by  his  only  too  zealous 
friend,  that,  bound  hand  and  foot,  the  gull  could 
scarcely  stir  without  permission  from  the  Abbey. 
He  did  not  as  yet  feel  the  restraint,  but  the 
invisible  wires  of  the  cage  were  fast  closing 
round  him.  Carefully,  thought  by  thought, 
Harker  had  planned  the  way  in  which  so  to  en- 
tangle and  drive  into  a  corner  the  thoughtless 
young  prodigal  as  to  compel  him,  without  the 
compulsion  being  in  any  way  visible,  to  marry 
his  (Harker's)  daughter.  The  worthy  couple  had, 
to  facilitate  this  desirable  measure,  half  resolved 
at  once  to  get  rid  of  Amy,  but  on  second  thought 
had  decided  that  such  a  step  .  might  in  some 
degree  disclose  their  plans,  and  perhaps  excite  in 
the  reckless  young  scapegrace  a  romantic  interest 
for  the  gill,  of  which  he  had  already  betrayed 
some  symptoms  by  his  repeated  inquiries  for  her 
since  her  accident  in  the  hunting  field.  Moreover, 
Mrs.  Harker,  with  a  true  womanly  instinct,  had 
presumed  that  no  one  but  a  lover  (m  ^90556  or 
in  esse)  could  have  shown  such  eager  and  chival- 
rous devotion  as  Beauflower  had ;  and  knowing 
something  of  the  human  heart,  she  conjectured, 
not  unwisely,  that  if  there  had  been  no  love 
before,  some  would  probably  have  arisen  since  a 
rescue   so   timely   and   so   daring.      She   looked 


206  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

forward,  therefore,  witli  keen  expectation  to  this 
dinner  to  detect  this  love,  and,  if  possible,  to 
render  it  conspicuous  to  every  one,  and  especially 
to  her  future  son-in-law. 

Dressing  for  a  grand  dinner  you  don't  want  to 
go  to,  but  must,  although  you  would  enjoy  dining 
at  home  tea  times  as  much,  being  not  in  the 
mood  for  strangers,  or  talking,  or  elaborate  meals, 
a  dinner  where  there  will  be  too  much  for  every 
one,  and  yet  not  enough  for  any  one,  is  a  ghastly 
ordeal,  and  produces  in  ill-organised  minds  a 
maniacal  wish  to  break  away  at  all  risks;  nor 
does  a  cold  December  evening  render  the  cor- 
poreal mortification  less,  especially  when  you  are 
not  a  pushing  person,  and  are  going  rather  to 
oblige  the  host  than  yourself  The  task,  how- 
ever, completed  (the  cold  linen,  chilly  as  a  shroud, 
put  on),  a  reaction  of  self-approval  ensues,  and 
the  unfortunate  victim,  who  finds  life,  as  Sir 
Cornewall  Lewis  said  with  pleasant  cynicism, 
tolerably  bearable  but  for  its  pleasures,  efiects  a 
Curtius  plunge  of  it,  and  prepares  to  make  the 
best  of  himself 

If  any  of  our  readers  have  ever  been  in  love 
(as  is  by  no  means  improbable),  they  will  imagine 
Beauflower's  feelings  as  he  walked  through  the 
park  with  his  rather  moody  companion  that 
gloomy  damp  December  evening.     Mr.  Goodrick 


THE   DINNER-PARTY   AT   THE   ABBEY.  207 

had  never  been  to  the  Abbey  since  that  morning 
the  mutilated  family  pictm^es  of  the  Stauntons 
were  shown  him,  to  his  infinite  disgust,  and  the 
thought  of  that  day  seemed  to  have  awoke  in 
him  many  bitter  feehngs.     He  had  indeed  told 
his  friend  the  Yicar  openly  that  he  should  not 
have  accepted  the  invitation   but  for  him.     He 
hated  the  Harkers,  he  boldly  confessed,  all  that 
belonged  to  them,  and  all  who  liked  them.     He 
did  not  hold  out  either  any  very  great  promise  of 
being  pecuHarly  pleasant   or   conciliating.      The 
Vicar  had  never  been  so  particular  in  his  dress 
before  :  after  many  failures  he  had  accomplished 
the  most  carelessly  graceful  white  tie;  his  clothes 
fitted  his  fine  stalwart  frame  to  perfection — he 
looked  the  very  picture  of  an  English  gentleman, 
subdued  and  restrained,  but  not  to  any  mincing 
efieminacy,  by  a  grave  and  responsible  profession, 
while  Talleyrand  himself  could  not  have  looked 
more  reserved  or  more   imperturbably  negative 
than  ]\Ir.  Goodrich. 

"  Will  she  be  at  dinner  1 "  thought  the  lover, 
as  the  great  house,  illuminated  at  every  window, 
rose  before  them  at  a  turning  of  the  road. 
''  How  I  long  and  yet  how  I  dread  to  see  her ! '' 

No  schoolboy,  going  to  the  half-year's  examina- 
tion, ever  felt  more  nervous,  or  yet  more  proudly 
anxious  to  conceal  his  nervousness.     He  felt  that 


208  THE   VICARS    COUKTSHIP. 

the  Harkers  would  suspect  the  anxiety  with  which 
they  could  not  but  be  acquainted,  and  would 
observe  at  once  that  his  eyes,  on  entering  the 
room,  were  seeking  for  Amy.  Then,  like  a  brave 
frank  fellow,  he  cast  off  these  fears  as  a  young 
oak  tree  shakes  off  the  rain-drops.  He  would 
keep  the  volto  sciolto  and  the  peiisieri  stretti  that 
the  Elizabethan  sage  advised,  and  no  one  should 
guess  the  workings  of  his  heart.  He  would  turn 
his  mind — till  he  had  an  opportunity  of  talking 
to  Amy — to  his  friend,  and  watch  the  aspect  he 
would  assume,  as  a  man  of  the  world,  among 
people  he  disliked. 

The  people  in  the  drawing-room  were  not  very 
interesting.  There  was  Horace  Bodger,  E.A.,  a 
sardonic,  bilious  man,  a  painter  of  conventional 
battle  scenes,  who  lived  on  his  replicas,  chiefly 
painted  by  old  Kobinson  and  other  unknown 
drudges;  and  there  was  Dominic  Ergot,  E.A.,  a 
painter  of  High  Church  subjects,  who  affected  to 
talk  broken  English,  and  used  still  more  broken 
French;  and  there  was  Mr.  Oscar  Wildair,  a 
young  novelist,  who  imagined  he  was  seeing 
fashionable  life,  and  was  generously  resolving  to 
reproduce  his  host  and  every  one  he  met  in  his 
next  highly  coloured  work  (there  was  no  Arab 
veneration  for  the  salt  about  this  daring  young 
writer) ;  and  Dr.  Bumpus,  a  philosophical  writer. 


THE   DINNER-PARTY   AT   THE   ABBEY.         209 

who  was  SO  tedious  in  liis  theories  for  making  a 
short  north-west  passage  to  knowledge  in  some 
way  hj  use  of  the  auxihary  verbs,  that  one  would 

have  almost  thought  him  a  writer  for  the ;  and 

there  was  Lord  Mazagan  (and  therefore,  of  course, 
not  his  lady),  gallant  as  ever,  and  very  polite  in 
his  inquiries  for  Amy ;  there  were  several  county 
gentlemen  and  their  wives ;  and  there  was  a  shy 
young  pink-and-white  lady,  a  friend  of  Miss 
Harker's,  Avhose  face,  moving  inharmoniously 
with  her  body,  gave  her  somewhat  the  appear- 
ance of  a  waxwork  figure  with  moveable  eyes. 
Cantelupe  and  his  inseparable  friend  and  sponge, 
Jack  Talbot,  were  there,  too,  as  great  in  small 
talk,  and  quite  as  much  bored,  as  usual. 

Amy  did  not  make  her  appearance  at  dinner. 
To  all  inquiries  for  her,  Mrs.  Harker  gave  cold, 
curt,  and  rather  repelHng  answers.  She  believed 
Ethel's  governess  was  not  quite  well  enough  to 
bear  the  fatigue  of  sitting  all  through  dinner,  but 
she  had  no  doubt  she  would  come  down  for  a 
short  time  to  the  drawing-room.  She  really 
hoped  what  had  happened  would  cure  the  silly 
girl  of  making  further  displays  of  horsemanship. 
AVitli  Carry,  now,  the  matter  would  have  been 
different,  as  Carry  was  a  perfect  horsewoman. 

"  Is  she  not,  Mr.  Cantelupe  ? "  said  an  old  maid 
toady. 

VOL.    II.  P 


210  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

"  Oil  yes;  rides  a^^iilly  well,  I'm  sure,"  said  the 
young  gentleman  appealed  to;  ''but  that  mare 
isn't  ridden  enougli  to  be  safe/' 

The  conversation  at  dinner  was  stiff  and 
guarded,  in  spite  of  a  momentary  effervescence 
and  babbling  thaw  when  the  champagne  began  to 
come  round,  but  which  relapsed  again  because  the 
new  and  old  money  somehow  could  not  amal- 
gamate. Every  one  was  watching  the  other,  being 
afraid  he  should  make  unbecoming  concessions  or 
advances  that  might  be  mistaken.  There  were 
only  two  or  three  exceptions,  and  one  was  Jack 
Talbot,  who,  on  the  look  out  for  an  heiress,  flirted 
desperately  with  Miss  Harker,  in  case  Cantelupe 
should  after  all,  as  he  half  expected,  throw  her 
over  for  Amy,  and  to  this  flirtation  Miss  Harker 
warmly  res|)onded,  hoping  to  arouse  the  jealousy 
of  her  very  frigid  lover.  Beauflower,  too,  deter- 
mined to  make  himself  quietly  agreeable,  had 
tackled  Mrs.  Bodger  on  the  subject  of  Eome, 
which  was  her  favourite  theme,  she  having  once 
spent  a  week  there  with  Bodger ;  while  Mrs. 
Harker,  wishing  to  keep  the  party  alive  by 
affected  conviviality  and  sham  enthusiasm  for  art 
and  nature,  talked  incessantly  and  laughed  as 
much  as  she  dared  with  Lord  Mazagan  and  Dr. 
Bumpus,  the  former  being  gallant  in  a  light,  and 
the  latter  in  a  clumsy  and  ponderous  manner.    The 


THE   DINNER-PAETY   AT   THE   ABBEY.  211 

otlier  county  people  talked  the  usual  empty  county 
talk  about  Tuesday's  ball,  and  yesterday's  hunt- 
ing, and  Beaver  of  the  26th,  and  the  game  killed 
at  the  last  battue  at  Swallowcliflf,  and  so  on. 

At  Mr.  Goodrick's  end  of  the  table,  just  as  the 
serious  part  of  the  pompous  and  interminable 
dinner  (according  to  the  gilt  bills  of  fare)  was 
over,  the  conversation  fell  on  the  adulteration  of 
food,  especially  in  London,  and  the  universal  cor- 
rujDtion  of  tradesmen's  moraUty. 

"  I  am  really  told,"  said  a  prim,  rather  shy  young 
curate,  from  Birdbrook,  "  I  am  really  told  that 
half  the  butter  eaten  in  London  is  only  lard/' 

The  young  curate,  fresh  from  Oxford,  had 
heard  that  Lord  Mazagan  had  one  or  two  livings 
in  his  gift,  and  was  anxious  to  shine  in  the  con- 
versation. Hitherto  he  had  been  flagrantly  flirt- 
ing with  a  little  gui  in  pink — who  had  eyes,  and 
knew  it — next  him,  and  suddenly  conscious  that 
he  was  watched  by  Mrs.  Barker's  vulture  orbs, 
turned  very  red  and  plunged  into  talk. 

Mr.  Goodrick,  whose  indignation  and  contempt 
at  the  fussy  display  of  the  dinner  had  long  been 
boUing  up,  swooped  down  at  once  on  his  young 
victim. 

"  Sir,"  he  said,  his  rough  grey  eyebrows  arching 

^-ith  Johnsonian  grandeur,  ''you  know  little  of 

London  :  sir,  there  is  nothing  unadulterated  there 

t2 


212  THE   vicar's   COUETSHIP. 

but  eggs  and  water,  and  the  eggs  are  generally- 
stale  and  the  water  is  impure." 

The  curate  grew  very  hot,  and  hiding  himself 
behind  an  epergne,  sipped  his  wine,  and  made 
a  confused  and  inaudible  remark  to  the  angel 
in  pink,  who,  to  his  infinite  confusion,  looked 
mischievously  amused.  Seeing  Mr.  Goodrick 
was  a  character,  Mr.  Bodger,  who  was  taking 
in  all  the  food  he  could,  and  who,  indeed,  was 
not  nearly  such  a  fool  as  he  looked,  though  a 
wretched  artist,  and  a  "shamster''  and  pretender 
altogether,  being  a  sharp  business  man,  with 
very  fair  common  sense,  made  a  suggestive  re- 
mark about  the  great  increase  of  demand  in 
London  for  small  luxuries,  which  Bodger  was 
pleased  to  regard  as  a  proof  of  growing  civili- 
sation, in  which  absurd  opinion  Mr.  Harker 
loudly  agreed. 

Beauflower  quietly  asserted  his  dissent  from 
this  proposition. 

"  I  am  sorry  to  entirely  differ  from  the  first 
two  gentlemen,"  said  Mr.  Goodrich.  "  I  have 
spent  the  greater  part  of  my  life  in  the  West 
Indies,  and  since  then  have  visited  nearly  every 
capital  of  Europe.  When  I  returned  to  London 
I  was  astonished  by  the  increase  of  small  inven- 
tions that  crowd  English  shop  vdndows.  Snippers 
to  cut  the  wire  of  soda-water  bottles,  things  to  test 


THE   DINNER-PARTY   AT   THE   ABBEY.  213 

milk,  boxes  for  stamps,  brushes  to  wet  stamps, 
boxes  to  hold  the  brushes  that  wet  stamps,  cases  to 
contain  the  boxes  that  hold  the  brushes  that  wet 
the  stamps — every  sort  of  fanciful  rubbish  to 
create  new  wants.  Sir,  if  you  want  to  learn  all  that  a 
sensible  man  can  do  without,  walk  down  the  Strand 
or  Regent  Street — what  the  wise  man  does  is  to 
lessen  his  wants,  and  reduce  the  friction  of  life." 

Bodger  having  no  answer  ready  sufficiently 
crushing  to  this  discharge  of  grape  shot,  and  Mr. 
Harker  disHkino-  the  somewhat  oracular  tone  of  his 

o 

visitor,  the  conversation  again  turned  to  the  last 
run.  Mrs.  Harker  had  ingeniously  shifted  the  organ 
to  this  new  stop  by  a  single  question  to  Cante- 
lupe  as  to  whether  he  had  been  out  since  the  day 
of  Miss  Robinson  s  accident.  She  felt  this  would 
bring  forward  the  young  future  peer,  and  some  of 
the  taciturn  sporting  men,  who  began  to  look  un- 
mistakably bored  and  were  ungallantly  longing  for 
the  ladies  to  retire.  A  pack  of  four  or  five  men 
instantly  gave  tongue  all  at  once,  as  if  they  had 
been  set  going  by  electricity.  Cantelupe  led  oflf 
with  the  find  in  East  Dean  Wood,  and  kept  up  the 
running  very  spiritedly  through  Coney  Coppice 
and  the  Marlows  back  to  Forest  Westgate,  over 
the  plough  to  Nightingale  Bottom,  Cobdens  and 
Drought  up  to  Pine  Pit  Hanger,  where  Jack  Talbot 
got  an  awful  spill,  and  Cantelupe  blew  his  first  horse. 


214  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

The  violent  cough  of  old  Colonel  Harcourt,  of 
Dinton,  here  producing  a  slight  lull,  Lord  Maza- 
gan  took  up  the  running  with  his  usual  gay 
alertness,  pushed  on  through  West  Dean  Wood 
to  the  corner  of  Cellars  Down,  crossed  Hacking 
Place  and  Herring  Dean  at  a  fearful  pace,  and 
leaped  Warrington  Brook  (where  four  went  in). 
A  remark  about  the  cropper  that  that  mad  fellow 
young  BroAvn  got  between  Hindon  Do\^'n  and 
Madehurst  Parsonage,  however,  enabled  Cantelupe 
to  slip  in  again. 

Off  he  went,  disdaining  all  inquiries.  Away 
to  Haughton,  then  back  by  Knoyle  to  Ofham 
Hill,  where,  thank  goodness,  partly  owing  to  the 
wine  passing  round  for  the  first  time,  and  it 
being  necessary  to  help  the  ladies,  twenty-three 
hounds  ran  into  their  fox  at  20  to  4,  after  a  one 
hour  and  fifty  minutes'  glorious  run. 

"  God  bless  the  young  fellow,''  whispered  Mr. 
Goodrick  to  Mr.  Eroot,  who  sat  next  him.  "  I 
thought  he  never  would  kill  that  fox." 

"  Qui,  oui.  He  vos  tres  fatigant,"  said  the  gentle- 
man with  the  Don  Quixote  face,  who  affected 
French  English  ;  "  it  was  terribly  ennuyeux  zat 
fox." 

"  There  is  no  doubt  in  the  world,"  said  Bodger, 
replying  very  loud  to  some  very  small  remark  on 
modern  art  by  the  young  curate,  who  had  ralHed 


THE   DINNER-PARTY   AT   THE   ABBEY.  215 

after  his  tliird  glass  of  champagne,  and  when  he 
found  he  was  not  so  much  observed  as  he  at 
first  thought ;  "  and  it  is  my  sincere  opinion  that 
our  Enghsh  school  of  art  is  to  rank  high  in  the 
futiu'e.  AVe  have  got  over  our  Pre-Eaphaelite 
extravagancies  (the  young  coxcombs  soon  found 
their  absurd  finish  didn't  pay),  and  we  are  every- 
day struggling  towards  a  larger,  grander,  and  I 
may  say,  more  historic  style  ;  but  Ave  still  greatly 
want  recognition.  Even  the  public  hall  of  every 
country  town  some  day  will  have  its  historic  deed 
and  religious  aspirations." 

"  Tres  bien  dit — ver  well,''  said  Mr.  Ergot, 
clapping  his  hands,  "  bis,  bis." 

"  Eehgious  haspirations,  delineated  for  warning 
and  for  incitement." 

"  Brava,  brava,  vary  well  put." 

"  How  very  eloquent,"  said  Mrs.  Harker,  sweetly 
smiling,  and  showing  her  gold  tooth  confiden- 
tially to  Lord  Mazagan. 

"  It  may  be  so,"  said  I\Ir.  Goodrich,  as  ready 
with  his  wet  blanket,  as  a  Eetiarius  with  his 
fatal  net ;  "it  may  be  so,  and  I  dare  say  it  is, 
but  upon  my  life  I  walk  round  the  exhibitions, 
and  I  see  nothing  but  dull  imitations  of  Leys,  and 
Gerome,  and  that  fellow  who  paints  Greek  girls 
and  Cupids.  I  find  little  timid  bits  of  copied  land- 
scape painted  in  a  small  afi'ected  manner,  pretty 


216  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

sham  faces,  and  great  slip-slop  portraits  staring 
and  vulgar.  I  find  no  powerful  true  drawing, 
little  vigour,  no  command  of  brusli ;  in  fact,  mere 
little  neat  boudoir  and  drawing-room  pictures 
painted  to  order.  What  do  the  crowds  gape  at 
most  ?  why,  a  white  satin  gown  painted  by  a  fifth- 
rate  Terburg ;  a  trunk  of  a  tree  (took  half  a 
year)  not  a  quarter  so  good  as  Tintoret  used  to  do 
in  three  strokes  ;  stiff  pretty  groups  at  a  railway 
station,  borrowed  from  photographs  ;  dead  salmon, 
every  scale  copied.  Bah  !  where  are  Hogarth 
and  Velasquez  ? " 

"  I  am  afraid,"  said  Mrs.  Harker  (who  could 
have  stifled  the  cynic  in  his  own  wet  blanket),  in 
her  most  cutting  way,  and  she  prided  herself  on 
using  a  very  keen  knife ;  "I  am  afraid  there  is 
very  little  anywhere  that  you  do  like.  I  pity 
the  poor  artists  if  critics  are  all  like  you." 

"  I  pity  their  want  of  brains,  madam — but  you 
are  quite  right,  there  is  very  little  I  do  like.  I 
don't  like  dramatists  who  steal  from  the  French 
without  acknowledgment.  I  don't  like  poets  who 
steal  from  one  another.  I  don't  like  artists  who 
sell  rephcas  as  their  own  work,  and  starve  and 
bully  their  drudges." 

"  But,  on  my  parole,  artists  are  men  of  honeur," 
said  Ergot,  angrily,  for  he  never  had  had  an  order 
for  a  replica  in  his  life.    "  They  paint  replicas  with 


THE    DIXXER-PARTY    AT    THE    ABBEY.  217 

zeir  own  main, — all !  pardonnez  moi,  I  forget  my 
English, — with  their  own  proper  hand,  the  assist- 
ant does  merely  the  dead  colour." 

"It  may  be  so,"  said  Mr.  Goodrich,  ''but 
there  is  a  poor  artist,  a  Mr.  Eobinson,  down 
here  now,  decorating  for  Mr.  Harker,  who,  to 
my  knowledge,  for  he  told  me  so  yesterday,  has 
painted  the  entire  of  one  E.  A.'s  replicas  for  several 
years. 

"  Quelle  honte,  what  shame  is  that  ? "  said 
Ergot. 

Bodger  said  nothing,  but  turning  a  deep  yellow 
red,  helped  himself  to  almonds  and  raisins. 

"  Allow  me  to  help  you  to  some  more  w^ine  ? " 
said  Lord  Mazagan  to  Mrs.  Harker. 

"  No,  thank  you,  my  Lord,  no  more."  Mrs. 
Harker  gave  the  usual  conventionally  unmeaning 
look  and  smile  to  the  nearest  ladies,  and  they 
gathered  themselves  up.  Beauflower  opened 
the  door.  Then  the  ladies  all  swept  out  with 
parting  smiles  (those  at  least  who  had  been  flirt- 
ing), and  everybody  seeming  much  relieved,  began 
to  get  lively,  and  to  pass  the  wine  and  make  forays 
on  the  dessert  in  the  English  manner. 

Conversation  feU  very  much  on  Cantelupe's 
pet  ImmenschikofF,  which  had  "  run  a  great  horse" 
recently  at  Chantilly,  but  had  eventually  come 
in  fourth,  owing  to  some  error,  as  it  appeared, 


218  THE   VICAPJS   COURTSHIP. 

of  Wells's,  who  liad  not  pressed  liim  enough  the 
last  hundred  yards.  However,  it  Avas  pleasant 
to  hear  Mr.  Barker  s  opinion  that  he  was  safe  for 
the  Two  Thousand,  and  that  only  one  horse  of  Sir 
Joseph  Hawley's  was  in  better  form  for  the  Derby. 
The  great  question  among  the  Wiltshire  backers 
present  seemed  to  be  whether  he  could  be  steered 
round  the  corner  safely  or  stay  over  the  Epsom  rise 
of  the  last  half  mile.  He  had  only  stood  a  good 
thirteenth  at  Newmarket,  but  then  every  one 
allowed  his  fine  speed  across  the  flat,  and  all 
round  Slobury  to  the  east  Avas  level  as  your  hand. 

"  Better  throw  the  money  do^Yn.  a  sink,"  said 
Mr.  Goodrick  to  Mr.  Ergot.  Bodger  had  gone 
round  near  the  fire,  for  he  had  had  great  difficulty 
in  not  flying  at  the  Eetiarius  with  a  dessert  knife. 
He  began  to  think  now  that  he  remembered 
having  seen  Goodrick  at  some  of  Christie's  sales, 
and  he  longed  to  poison  him.  He,  Horace  Bodger, 
E.A.,  who  had  painted  Prince  Albert  in  three 
different  costumes,  to  be  sneered  at  as  an  im- 
postor ! — him — fight  him  ? — no — duels  were  gone 
out. 

Ergot  pretending  not  to  hear,  began  peeling 
an  orange  in  an  absorbed  manner,  for  he  saw 
Bodger  was  in  a  deuce  of  a  state,  and  camara- 
derie always  made  him  austere  to  art  critics  on 
principle.     He  had  long  toaded  them  unsuccess- 


THE   DINNER-PAPtTY   AT   THE   ABBEY.  219 

fully,  and  artiste,  like  woman,  have  the  ''  spretse 
injuiia  formae/'*  Mr.  Harker  was  also  silently 
furious,  because  Bodger  was  a  man  of  consequence, 
and  had  been  a  lion  ever  since  lie  painted  "  The 
opening  of  the  Thames  Tunnel,"  a  very  Eem- 
iDrandtic  picture  that  was  engraved,  yet  w^as  not 
so  appreciated  perhaps  as  it  deserved. 

"Any  more  wine,  my  Lord?  more  wine, 
Cantelupe  ?  come,  take  a  glass  of  whitewash." 
(Why  should  this  always  be  said  as  if  it  was 
clever  ?)  "  No  ?  no  ?  well,  then,  suppose  we  join 
the  ladies.'' 

Now  was  Bodger's  time.  It  was  expected  of 
him. 

"  I  think,  Harker,  I  must  remind  you  of  a 
promise,"  he  said,  oratorically  (he  was  a  toady  of 
the  deepest  dye,  and  Harker  had  abeady  ordered 
a  replica  of  "  The  Battle  of  the  Boyne "),  "  the 
promise  of  showing  us  your  wonderful  collection 
of  the  Dutch  school,  before  we  have  the  pleasm^e 
of  joining  the  ladies." 

"  Brava,  brava,"  said  Mr.  Ergot,  clapping  his 
hands  aflfectedly. 

Everybody  mumbled  something.  "  Bother  ! " 
groaned  several  of  the  sporting  men,  who  had 
secretly  sworn  to  Cantelupe,  if  possible,  to  stop 
behind,  and  race  two  filbert  maggots  for  50/.  a 
side. 


220  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

Mr.  Harker  seemed  quite  surprised,  and  yet 
pleased. 

"  I  shall  have  the  truest  pleasure,  my  Lord,"  he 
said,  quite  ignoring  poor  Bodger,  who  had  led  up 
to  him  so  well.  "It  is  a  poor  collection,  but 
there  are  just  one  or  two  good  things.  A  curious 
Holbein,  believed  to  be  unique  ;  a  fine  Bellini  and 
some  very  wonderful  Vanderheydens,  if  you  like 
finish.  The  fact  is,  the  grand  ideal  school  is  all 
very  well,  but  I  generally  find  people  like  a 
highly  finished  Gerard  Dow  or  Denner,  better 
than  anything  else,  after  all.  Ive  ordered  a  fire 
in  the  gallery  in  case  anyone  cared  to  see  them." 

"  Denner  !  "  croaked  Mr.  Goodrick. 

"  Trop  dur,"  whispered  Ergot ;  ''  no  good,  but 
these  rich  people  will  have  their  parafes.  Oh ! 
peste,  I'm  talking  French  again." 

"  Intolerable  coxcomb  !  "  thouoiit  the  old  vir- 
tuoso.     "  Now,  then,  for  the  fellow's  pictures." 

Mr.  Harker  threw  open  a  pair  of  folding  doors, 
and  led  the  way  into  the  gaUery,  a  long  and  very 
handsome  room,  the  ceiling  of  which  old  Eobin- 
son  was  going  to  decorate  with  a  pasticcio  from 
Paul  Veronese. 

The  collection  described  with  such  repulsive 
humility  was  really  a  very  good  one  of  its  limited 
kind.  There  were  some  fine  portraits  by  Hon- 
tliorst,  a  charming  ice  scene  by  Berchem,  two  or 


THE    BIXXER-PARTY    AT    THE    ABBEY.  221 

three  breezy  Backliuysens,  a  fair  Cuyp  or  two, 
some  great  boar  hunts  by  Snyclers,  a  spirited 
cock-fight  by  Hondekoeter,  a  very  good  breakfast 
scene  by  Metzu,  a  reasonably  good  Teniers,  and  a 
vulgar  Jan  Steen. 

Every  one  was  delighted  with  a  finely  finished 
view  in  Eotterdam,  by  Yanderheyden.  Bodger 
here  stopped  and  delivered  a  short  harangue,  it 
being  necessary  to  reassert  himself. 

"Just  observe  this,  my  Lord,"  he  said,  always 
singling  out  the  unfortunate  nobleman,  who  had 
not  had  nearly  his  usual  allowance  of  port,  and 
was  cursing  the  whole  affair  to  himself  in  a  sub- 
terranean way,  "  excuse  my  directing  your  atten- 
tion to  the  extraordinary  breadth  and  finish  of 
this  incomparable  picture;  look,  you  can  see  every 
brick  and  the  lines  of  mortar,  yet  it  is  all  bathed 
in  a  beautiful  harmonious  atmosphere." 

"  Partly  the  result  of  age,"  said  Mr.  Goodrich. 

Bodger  could  but  ride  over  the  interruption. 
"  The  water  in  the  canal,  too,  clear  as  crystal." 

"  BroTSTi  crystal !  " 

"  The  figures  are  perfect.  The  artist  on  the 
quay,  you  see,  is  painting." 

"  Bai  Jawv  ! "  said  Talbot,  putting  by  his  eye- 
glass, "  and  so  he  is.  Til  go  and  see  where  Can- 
telupe's  got  to."  He  was  already  off  to  the  filbert 
race,  and  Talbot  was  afraid  of  being  too  late,  for  he 


222  THE   VICAE's   COUETSHIP. 

had  money  on,  having  indeed,  just  borrowed  it  of 
Cantelupe  on  purpose. 

"  Here's  a  fine  thing,  too,''  said  Bodger  to  his 
audience,  "  a  genuine  Holbein,  portrait  of  Crom- 
well, the  fellow,  you  know,  who  pulled  down 
everything."  Bodger  was  rather  afraid  of  further 
historical  description,  as  he  did  not  know  whether 
this  was  or  was  not  the  grim  Oliver.  "How 
that  flat  cap's  painted,  and  that  clove  pink 
he  holds; — flat  green  background,  you  see,  as 
usual." 

Mr.  Goodrick  lifted  the  painting  and  tapped 
the  back.  It  was  wood.  "  This  is  no  Holbein," 
he  said;  "stufi*!  this  is  painted  on  mahogany. 
Ealeigh  brought  the  first  mahogany  over,  and  it 
was  not  common  in  England  till  Queen  Anne's 
time.     This  is  only  a  very  fair  copy." 

Bodger  was  livid  with  rage,  but  he  had  no 
reply.  He  merely  said,  "  Very  likely  transferred 
to  mahogany.  We  have  no  time  here  to  discuss 
these  hypercriticisms.  Nobody  but  this  gentle- 
man could  doubt  its  being  a  Holbein,  and  a  very 
fine  Holbein,  too.  Bellini,"  said  Bodger,  angrily, 
stopping  before  a  large,  hard,  dry,  reddish-brown 
picture  of  the  Adoration  of  the  Magi,  in  the 
early  Venetian  manner. 

''  Don't  care  much  for  that,"  said  Lord  Maza- 
gan,  waxing  mutinous  as  the  oracle  proved  fallible, 


THE   DINNER-PARTY   AT   THE   ABBEY.  223 

and  devoting  liimself  to  some  rosy  nymphs  by 
Poelembm^g. 

"It's  a  remarkable  picture,"  said  Bodger,  ''very 
remarkable  and  of  enormous  value/' 

"  It  is.  It  was  painted/'  said  the  impostor's  tor- 
mentor, ''  by  Bartolommeo  Yenezianio ;  all  his 
pictures  but  three,  poor  man,  are  attributed  to 
Bellini.  I  know  his  work  by  the  invariable  com- 
position, and  by  the  drawing  of  the  child's  head.'' 
"  I  think  you're  wrong,"  said  Bodger,  timidly, 
but  he  would  not  fight.  Lord  Mazagan,  who  was 
quick  enough,  now  lost  all  faith  in  the  blind 
leader  of  the  blind. 

''All  I  can  say  is,"  said  Mr.  Barker,  "Bellini 
or  no  Bellini,  I  bought  it  of  the  best  judge  in  Paris, 
and  that  is  M.  Chassepot,  for  three  thousand 
francs.     It  came  from  the  Foscari  palace." 

"Oh,  no  one  can  doubt  it  is  a  Bellini,"  said 
Bodger,  rudely,  for  he  had  quite  lost  his  temper. 
"Now,  here  is  a  picture  by  Karl  du  Jar  din ; 
*  the  Diamond '  it  is  caUed  in  the  trade.  It  was 
in  the  Fonthill  gallery  ;  a  gem,  indeed.  Beckford 
bouo'ht  it  at  the  Duke  de  Choiseul's  sale." 

Well,  it  was  a  gem.  Bodger  was  right  for  once. 
Broken  foreground — a  piece  of  water — cows  and 
cowherd — buildings  in  middle  distance — rocky 
hills  further  off  to  the  right — ^the  touch  pure  and 
delicate — the  blue  sky  clear  as  a  royal  sapphire — 


224  THE   VICARS    COURTSHIP. 

tlie  light  clouds  beautifully  put  in — over  all  a 
perfect  harmony,  unity,  and  breadth. 

To  Bodger's  disgust,  and  Beauflower's  infinite 
amusement,  Lord  Mazagan,  before  compromising 
himself  at  all,  looked  at  Mr.  Goodrick,  vdio  smiled 
approval. 

"  Yes,"  said  the  obdurate  connoisseur,  coldly, 
"  that  will  do.  Better  than  his  master,  Berchem, 
but  still  far  too  smooth  and  tame.  I'd  rather  my- 
self have  one  of  Wilson  s  landscapes,  or  a  Turner 
water  colour ; — matter  of  taste.  Yes,  it's  a  fine 
thing,  that.     First-class  picture." 

"  I  thought,"  said  Harker,  with  subdued  malice, 
"that  not  one  picture  of  mine  was  going  to 
meet  your  royal  approbation.  Do  you  like  good 
Watteaus?" 

"  Yes  ;  oh,  yes  ;  flimsy,  but  very  charming.  A 
model  for  all  drop  scenes  for  ever.  Where  are 
they  1     Oh,  these  are  them." 

The  Watteaus  were  four  large  j)ictures — Spring, 
Summer,  Autumn,  and  W^inter.  The  summer — 
masquerading  lovers  under  bluish  trees,  close  to  a 
fountain.  Winter,  a  girl  gracefully  turning  round 
as  she  sat  by  the  fire  to  throw  a  ball  of  thread  to  a 
kitten  that  was  lying  on  its  back  and  playing  with  it. 

''  There,"  said  Mr.  Harker,  relieving  guard  with 
Bodger. 

"Very   pretty,   indeed,"    said    Mr.    Goodrick, 


THE    DINNER-PARTY   AT    THE    ABBEY.  225 

"  but  I  suppose  I  must  not  give  my  real  opinion, 
for  those  were  Beckford  pictures,  I  know;  lie 
bought  them  of  the  Marquis  of  Hertford." 

"  Oh,  yes,  jDray  do  ;  say  your  worst.  These  are 
generally  considered  to  be  the  finest  Watteaus 
existing.  I  had  two  people  from  Paris  to  see 
them  only  last  week.     Well,  what  is  the  matter  1 " 

"  They're  very  pretty,  but  the  fact  is  they're  not 
Watteaus  at  all ;  they're  Lancrets.  I  have  indeed 
engravings  of  them  that  I  bought  at  Vienna.'' 

''  You  may  have,  my  dear  sir,  but  that  proves 
nothing.  Many  of  Watteau's  pictures  were  en- 
graved, were  they  not  ? " 

"  But  my  engravings  bear  Lancret's  name,  and 
have  the  contemporaneous  date.  -Call  them  Wat- 
teaus ;  but  after  all,  a  good  Lancret  is  better,  any 
day,  than  a  bad  Watteau.^' 

Mr.  Harker  was  too  angry  to  answer,  so  he 
only  waved  his  hand,  and  said, 

"  Gentlemen,  I  think  that's  nearly  all  I  have 
to  show  you,  and  now  we'll  join  the  ladies." 

On  their  way  the  procession  was  enriched  by 
Cantelupe,  Jack  Talbot,  and  the  rest  who  had 
been  sitting  apart,  but  not,  like  Milton's  angels, 
to  talk  of  predestination  and  such  high  matters. 
Cantelupe  looked  j)leased,  for  he  had  lost  two 
hundred  pounds,  and  Talbot,  who  had  won, 
looked  rather  sorry  because  he  had  not  run  the 

VOL.    II.  O 


226  THE    YICAll's    COURTSHIP. 

last  maggot  for  double  or  quits.  As  the  seceders 
had  artfully  slipped  back  to  the  gallery  door,  and 
were  found  poring  over  a  second-rate  Eeubens, 
their  secret  was  not  discovered. 

"  Ah  !  Fitz/'  said  Lord  Mazagan,  yawning  with 
pleasure,  "  you  should  have  gone  round  the  whole 
of  'em  with  us." 

"  They  are  very  fine  indeed,"  said  the  worthy 
nephew. 

"By  the  bye,  Harker,"  said  Lord  Mazagan, "have 
you  such  a  thing  about  the  place  as  an  air-gun. 
Lve  got  a  little  rascal  of  a  nephew  from  Eton, 
come  to  spend  the  Christmas  with  me,  and  he's 
mad  to  try  an  air-gun  at  the  rooks.  It  shall  be 
sent  back  all  right.  My  young  gentleman  will  tire 
of  it  in  two  days." 

"  I  think  Lve  got  one  somewhere  about,"  said 
Mr.  Harker.  "  My  poor  boy,  Ned,  that  died  at 
Eugby,  was  a  very  clever  shot  with  one.  It  used 
to  be  in  one  of  the  cupboards  of  my  study,  and  if 
it  is  there  still,  I'll  send  a  man  over  with  it  to- 
morrow." 

Lord  Mazagan  expressed  his  thanks;  "the  boy 
would  be  delighted." 

"By  the  bye,  Beauflower,"  said  Mr.  Harker, 
having  now  Cantelupe  and  Beauflower  next  to 
him  as  they  moved  across  the  hall  to  the  drawing 
room,  "  you  will  find  Miss  Kobinson,  I  believe,  in 


THE    DIXXER-PARTY    AT    THE    ABBEY.  227 

the  dra^ving-room,  she  is  naturally  very  anxious, 
Ethel  tells  me,  to  thank  her  preserver." 

This  home-thrust  was  very  well  meant,  Ijut  it 
fell  short  of  a  perfectly  successful  lunge,  as  at  that 
moment  Cantelupe  had  slipped  his  arm  into  Beau- 
iiower's  and  drawn  him  aside. 

"  I  say,  old  fellow,"'  he  began,  "  I  want  to  ask 
you  to  do  me  a  favour." 

"  Well,  that's  a  respectful  way  to  speak  to  your 
old  tutor." 

"  Well,  you  are  a  good  old  fellow.  But  come, 
no  chaff,  I  really  want  to  ask  you  to  draw  up  my 
address  for  the  county  papers.  I  want  you  to  pull 
me  through.  I  don't  know  any  more  about  it  than 
the  man  in  the  moon.  I'm  a  regular  duffer  at 
writing.  I  want  you  to  put  me  in  training  as  a 
Liberal-Conservative." 

''  Oh,  the  hybrid." 

"  Yes,  that's  the  line  my  agent  tells  me  I  must 
take.  Cautious  extension  of  suffrage — vote  by 
ballot  un-Eng:lish — OTadual  retrenchments — no 
democratic  innovations,  and  all  that  sort  of  thing." 

"  Well,  it's  not  much  in  my  way,  but  I  suppose 
1  must  not  refuse  you.  Can  you  come  the  day 
after  to-morrow  ?  When's  the  nomination  day  at 
Slobuiy  ? " 

"Friday  week.  Oh,  yes;  I'll  come,  like  a  bird. 
Mind,  I  really  am  coming." 

Q  2 


228  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

They  threw  open  the  drawing-room  door  and 
entered  into  the  brilliantly  lit  noisy  room  where 
the  coffee  was  now  joermeating.  Beauflower  would 
rather  have  ridden  at  a  battery  of  cannon.  He 
felt  his  heart  beat  faster  as  his  eye  glanced  around 
the  room  looking  for  the  one  face  that  haunted 
him.  Lord  Mazagan  and  the  young  curate  and 
Bulger  and  Dr.  Bumpus,  and  one  or  two  others, 
were  in  such  a  knot  at  the  door  talking  to  Mr. 
Ilarker,  who  was  laughing  and  lively  in  a  forced 
and  rather  overdone  way,  that  there  was  no  getting 
past  them  for  a  moment  or  two,  till  the  footmen 
charged  down  upon  them  with  the  coffee.  Cante- 
lupe  and  old  Colonel  Harcourt  and  Ergot  were 
yardarm  and  yardarm  with  Mrs.  and  Miss  Harker, 
while  Jack  Talbot  was  addressing^  himself  to  the 
young  lady  in  pink,  much  to  the  vexation  of  the 
curate,  who  was  pretending  to  be  absorbed  in 
Dore's  Dante ;  a  tall  insipid  girl  in  white  was 
moaning  some  inaudible  song  at  the  piano,  watched 
in  silent  agony  by  the  rising  novelist,  who  had 
been  told  off  for  this  purpose,  and  who,  wanting 
to  get  near  a  lively  girl  in  blue,  and  moreover 
having  to  turn  the  music,  and  not  knowing  the 
least  when  to  turn,  was  in  a  purgatory  from  which, 
however,  no  pra}'ers  could  extricate  him  for  the 
next  awful  five  minutes. 

"  Hush  ! "  said  a  stout  old  gentleman,  father  of 


THE    DIXXER-PARTY    AT    THE    ABBEY.  229 

the  tall  girl  in  white,  sternly,  but  no  one  attended 
to  him,  sinoino'  being;  an  excellent  cover  for  con- 
versation. 

Beauflower's  heart  sank  within  him.  Amy  was 
not  there,  after  all.  What  interest  had  the  party 
for  him  now  ?  Unconsciously  to  himself  he  had 
been  dwelling  on  a  sight  of  Amy  as  the  golden 
crown  of  the  evenino;.  Mrs.  Harker  looked  at 
him  and  smiled,  as  if  she  divined  his  thoughts  ; 
she  said  something  in  a  low  tone  to  Colonel 
Harcourt,  then  her  coterie  put  their  heads  to- 
gether, and  looked  towards  where  he  stood  alone. 
By  the  window  in  front  of  Mr.  Harker  s  chatter- 
ing party  there  was  a  large,  round,  yellow  and 
crimson  silk  settee,  with  a  high  luxuriant 
cushioned  back,  against  which,  and  facing  him, 
leaned  Jack  Talbot  and  the  pretty  girl  in  pink. 

The  interminable  song  ending  with  a  ghastly 
dangerous  shake  on  the  word  "  never,*'  every- 
body seemed  relieved  and  grew  almost  grateful 
with  their  thoroughly  sincere  ''  thank  you's.'' 
At  that  very  moment  Ethel,  tossing  her 
golden  mane  like  a  little  fairy  queen  run  wild, 
darted  forward  from  behind  somewhere  or  other, 
shook  hands  with  the  Vicar,  and  led  him  to  the 
other  side  of  the  room.  There,  with  her  back  to 
the  settee,  which  had  hidden  her,  pale,  but  gentle, 
calm    as    ever,    and   even   more    beautiful   from 


280  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

the  saintly  pallor  that  had  not  yet  left  her  cheek, 
leaned  Amy.  She  was  charmingly  dressed  in  pale 
bine  silk,  trimmed  ronnd  the  neck  with  swans 
down. 

"  Amy/'  said  Ethel,  "  I've  brought  a  stranger 
to  introduce  to  you." 

A  slight  colour,  pale  as  that  which  dyes  the 
winter  rose,  came  upon  Amy's  cheek,  and  her  soft 
brown  eyes  brightened  as  she  put  out  her  little 
white  hand,  which  the  Vicar  eagerly  pressed  as  he 
asked  after  her  healtli  with  that  low  tender  cooing 
tone  that  only  love  can  give  the  human  voice. 

"  Oh,  how  much  I  have  to  thank  you  for,  Mr. 
Beaufiower ! "  she  said,  at  first  a  little  shyly. 
"  How  brave  of  you  to  risk  your  life  for  me  !  " 

"  It  was  so  brave  of  him,  wasn't  it  ?"  said  Ethel ; 
"  everyone  says  so,  Amy." 

"  You  mnst  never  mention  it  again,"  said  Beau- 
flower.  "  There  was  not  a  man  in  the  field  that 
would  not  have  done  exactly  as  I  did." 

"  That  does  not  make  me  less  grateful.  I  don't 
think  I  shall  be  afraid  of  a  horse  even  now  when 
I  get  stronger,  but  Dr.  Briscoe  won't  let  me  venture 
out  for  a  day  or  two.  Oh,  I  do  so  long  to  get  out. 
I've  promised  an  old  school-fellow  of  mine  a 
drawing  of  the  old  Manor  House.  Can  you  teU 
me  the  date  of  it  ?  Is  it  as  early  as  Shakspeare  1 
Miss  Harker  thinks  it  is.     I  don't  think  it  is." 


THE    DINNER-PAETY   AT    THE    ABBEY.  231 

"Take  my  seat,  Mr.  Beauflower,"  said  Etliel, 
getting  up  from  Amy's  side. 

The  futm-e  woman  at  Ethel's  age  has  a  Eobin 
Goodfellow  sort  of  malicious  pleasure  in  egging 
on  peoj^le  to  fall  in  love  with  each  other.  Beau- 
flower  launched  into  architecture  and  the  poetry 
of  it,  and  into  Euskinian  theories  and  fantasies,  in 
which  Amy  and  the  lively  girl  in  blue  became 
profoundly  interested,  and  got  very  soon  into  a 
pleasant,  laughing,  chatty  coterie,  in  which  each 
one  had  his  o^^^l  share,  for  the  Vicar,  though  an 
elocjuent  talker,  did  not  special  plead,  or  practise 
public  speeches  at  you,  or  preach,  but  had  mercy, 
and  let  others  have  their  say,  being  charmed  with 
Amy's  fresh,  quick  sense,  and  the  fire-fly  flash  of 
her  womanly  intelligence. 

Do  any  of  our  readers  know  (it  is  quite  pos- 
sible some  of  them  may)  the  paradise  of  sitting 
near  the  woman  for  whom  your  love  is  just 
dawning — that  happy,  primrose  time,  so  pure  and 
so  divine,  when  every  instant  the  clehcious  de- 
lusion opens  more  and  more  into  bloom,  and  the 
tender  shoots  and  young  leaves  spread  and  widen 
as  fast  as  a  wild  rose  in  a  warm  June  night? 
What  quiet  rapture  to  feel  the  soft  folds  of  her 
dress  press  against  you,  to  see  nearer  and  more 
enjoy  ably  the  pure  jewel  colour  of  her  eyes,  to 
be  conscious  of   a   breath  like   the  breeze  from 


232  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

violet  banks,  to  be  able  to  well  mark  the  coral  of 
her  lijDs,  the  pearl  of  her  teeth,  the  golden  silk  of 
the  softer  and  lighter  hair  that  grows  round  her 
temples,  where  the  veins  flow  so  blue  under  the 
pale  rose-leaf  of  the  skin  I     Headlong  down  love's 
precipice  the  first  soft  glance   of  gratitude  had 
hurled  our  helpless  hero,  and  there  he  lay  at  the 
bottom   bound   hand   and  foot,  with  a   flock  of 
fluttering  Cupids  hovering  deridingiy  round  this 
last  victim  of  the  s}T:ens.     In  vain  Miss  Harker 
came  in  her  arch,  youthful,  tripping  way,  smooth- 
ing the   extreme  bandolined  edge   of   her   sable 
hair  with  one  lean  finger,  as  if  it  was  an  actress's 
wig,  and  she  was  afraid  it  was  coming  ofi".    Odious 
struggler  for  matrimony  1    She  had  long  since  for- 
gotten how  to  be  natural.     It  was  difificult  to  say 
whether  the  insolent  and  purse-proud  father,  the 
pushing  mother,  or  the  aff'ected  daughter  making 
such  flagrant  love  to  the  young  spendthrift,  was 
the  most  detestable.     Like  some  treacherous  sea, 
''Carry"  was  almost  most  dangerous  when  appa- 
rently most  tranquil.  There  was  no  knowing  what 
bourasque,   tourmente,  or  white  squall  the  clear 
surface  of  those  cat-like  greenish-grey  eyes  con- 
cealed.    With  the  delightful  vivacity  of  an  old 
"  romp  "  at  a  fancy  ball,  she  came  tripping  up  to 
the  little  group  recently  recruited  by  Cantelupe, 
who  had  been  admitted,  under  protest  from  Ethel, 


THE    DIXNER-PARTY    AT    THE    ABBEY.  233 

to  the  charmed  circle.  It  was  that  that  had  made 
her  specially  viperish,  and  the  more  so  because  he 
had  left  her  side  to  go,  just  as  she  thought  she  had 
secured  him  to  turn  over  her  music  for  that 
"  chaaaaaarming  sweet  song/'  "I  arise  from  Dreams 
of  Thee,"  which  she  had  moreover  intended  to  bring 
directly  home  to  him  by  a  side  glance  shot  straight 
into  his  nearest  eye.  A  look  of  indignation  and 
reproach  from  Mrs.  Harker,  such  as  old  sportsmen 
cast  at  the  "  muff"  who  misses  his  partridge  with 
both  barrels,  had  stung  her  to  fury,  hard  to  be  re- 
strained. 

"Pardon  my  interrupting  this  pleasant  little 
talk,"  she  said,  in  the  honeyest  tones ;  "  but  my 
dear  Amy  (she  always  called  her  Miss  Robinson 
in  private),  I  really  must  not  allow  you  to  over- 
exert yourself  You  know,  dear,  what  I  promised 
Dr.  Briscoe.  1  was  to  be  your  guardian.  Now 
you  must  go  to  bed  at  once — mamma  wishes  it ; 
and  you  must  go  now  with  Ethel ;  it  is  time  for 
her,  too.     She  is  getting  quite  dissipated." 

Lovers  are  sad  cowards.  Beauflower  did  not 
dare  to  protest. 

"  Oh,  not  just  yet,  Carry,"  cried  Ethel,  in  the 
prettiest  despair. 

Oh,  how  early  coquetting  begins !  She  knew 
her  small  despair  was  pretty. 

Just  then  Lord  Mazagan  came  up  in  his  delight- 


284  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

fill  vivacious  way  to  say  tliat  lie  really  must  give 
the  casting  vote  for  Miss  Harker.  Miss  Eobinson 
looked  dark  under  tlie  eyes  ;  she  was  tired,  he  was 
sure,  and  he  really  must  assume  Dr.  Briscoe's 
place,  and  punish  himself  by  ordering  her  to  bed. 

It  was  in  vain  to  struggle.  Amy  rose,  and 
offered  her  hand  to  Beauflower.  Just  one  look — 
or  was  it  a  look  ?  just  one  soft  pressure — was  it  a 
pressure  ?  or  was  it  only  that  the  Yicar  thought  of 
the  look  as  he  shook  hands  with  her,  and  thought  of 
the  hand  as  he  shook  it  ?  More  shaking  of  hands. 
The  black  curtain  began  to  descend;  she  passed 
through  the  great  gilt  doorway  of  the  temple  of 
mammon — the  curtain  fell — she  was  gone. 

It  Avas  some  half-hour  afterwards  that  Beau- 
flower  and  Mr.  Goodrick  stood  in  a  little  ante- 
room opening  on  the  hall,  handing  in  the  tickets 
(for  everything  at  the  Abbey  was  done  by  the 
sharpest  machinery),  for  their  greatcoats,  goloshes, 
and  umbrellas.  Three  or  four  shillins^s  and  a 
half-crown  were  carelessly  strewed  as  decoy  ducks 
upon  the  footman's  desk. 

"What  a  splendid  active  fellow  that  head 
keeper  of  Harker's  is,  Harcourt,"  said  a  thick, 
port- winy  voice  in  the  chattering  crowd  jDushing 
immediately  behind  the  Vicar. 

"  A  g;ood  servant,"  answered  a  still  huskier 
voice,  "  but  doosedly  impudent.     I  think  it's  as 


THE    DINNER-PARTY    AT    THE    ABBEY.         235 

niiicli  as  ever  Harker  can  do  to  keep  him  in  liis 
place.  I  woukln't  stand  kis  sauce  a  week  for 
all  the  pheasants  in  Wiltshire.  Try  one  of  these 
cigars  ;  they're  from  Rodrigo's  in  Piccadilly." 

Then  Cantelupe's  loud,  hearty  voice  broke  the 
thread  of  the  two  old  fooies'  talk. 

"  Charming  ghi/'  he  said  ;  "  awfully  stunning 
girl  when  she's  in  better  form.  Talk  of  style — 
why,  she's  twice  the  style  of " 

"  Fancy  a  parson  riding  like  that/'  said  another 
voice. 

It  was  Amy  they  talked  of,  and  Beauflower 
felt  a  pang  of  jealousy  shoot  tln^ough  his  heart 
when  he  thought  of  his  own  poverty,  of  the 
carrion  crows  that  beset  him,  and  of  the  wealth 
and  title  of  his  possible  rival ;  the  next  moment 
he  passed  out  of  the  light  into  the  dark. 


236  THE    vicar's    courtship. 


CHAPTER   X. 

GOING  HOME  FROM  THE  PARTY. 

The  Vicar  went  first  between  tlie  dark  shrub- 
beries carrying  his  lantern,  that  shed  as  feeble  a 
glimmer  as  that  which  the  two  million  commen- 
tators have  cast  upon  Shakspere's  text.  The 
lantern  shed  a  sickly  yellow  light  on  a  foot  or  two 
of  the  sodden  orange  gravel,  and,  when  it  moved, 
rays  of  alternate  dim  light  and  darkness  on  the 
glossy  green  leaves  of  the  laurels  and  aucubas. 
After  a  turnino^  or  two  the  noise  of  crunchino; 
wheels,  the  clamorous  cries  of  "Lord  Mazagan's 
carriage  stops  the  way,"  ''  Colonel  Harcourt's 
carriage,"  and  other  similar  war  shouts  died 
away,  and  the  calm  soft  tranquil  darkness  of  a 
December  night  received  them  into  its  folds. 

"If  I  had  known  it  would  be  as  black  as  this," 
said  Mr.  Goodrich,  uncertain  of  the  right  turning, 
"  I  should  certainly  have  had  Tony  with  another 
lantern." 


GOING  HOME  FROM  THE  PARTY.      2'37 

"  We're  in  the  direct  road  now  ;  but  we  miglit 
as  well  have  had  two  lanterns." 

Then  the  two  friends  relapsed  again  into 
silence,  each  floating  down  the  current  of 
his  own  thouo'hts.     Beauflower  was  the  first  to 

o 

break  it. 

"What  cruel  suubs  you  gave  Bodger,  Good- 
rick,"  he  said,  as  he  plodded  on  sturdily  with  the 
lantern. 

*'  Yes ;  I  wanted  to,  the  toadying  imjDostor  ! 
I  gave  him  several  heavy  falls,  and  Harker  dared 
not  come  to  his  rescue.  I  had  my  scalping  knife 
ready  for  him  if  he  had — a  man  like  that  does 
not  want  the  truth,  he  \\ishes  to  be  deceived  and 
to  deceive." 

"Did  you  notice  how  they  drove  poor  Miss 
Eobinson  to  bed  to  keep  her  out  of  Cantelupe's 
way?" 

"  Of  course  I  did — I  see  everjdihing  !  What  a 
Tisiphone  that  woman  is.  I  should  like  to 
make  a  workhouse  nurse  of  her ;  she  has  no 
more  tenderness  than  a  grindstone.  I  don't  know 
how  it  is,  but  that  dear  girl  wins  me  more  and 
more.  She  reminds  me  of  a  wife  I  lost  many 
years  ago,  even  before  Staunton  knew  me.  Ha  ! 
she  was  a  woman  you  were  comjDelled  to  love  ; 
and  I  love  that  girl  because  she  reminds  me  of  her. 
The  vision  came  upon  me  to-night,  as  she  turned 


238  THE   VICARS    COURTSHIP. 

to  look  at  us  from  the  door,  with  a  painful  vivid- 
ness ;  but  she  is  far  less  beautiful !  Look  up  at 
the  stars,  Beauflower,  they  seem  trembling  with 
ecstasy  of  joy  at  the  glory  and  majesty  of  night ; 
do  you  think  that  the  blest  are  there  watching 
us  from  their  diamond  battlements  ?  Can  they 
see  our  miserable  struggles  still  ?  Have  they 
sympathy  with  our  insect  hopes  and  our  vermin 
fears  1  Can  they  hear  our  prayers  and  our 
groans  ?  Shall  we  join  them  there  ?  Why  is  inspi- 
ration so  mute  about  these  cravings  of  our  souls  ?  " 

Mr.  Goodrick  spoke  with  a  voice  tremulous 
with  excitement.  His  soul  was  soaring  to  those 
stars  seeking  everywhere  for  its  lost  companion. 
Beauflower  answered, — 

"  Probably  the  beings  in  those  stars  care  no 
more  for  us  than  the  stars  do  for  those  owls  that 
we  hear  now  hooting  at  them  from  the  fir- 
woods." 

"  Ah  I  young  man,  you  have  never  loved,"  said 
Mr.  Goodrick,  with  a  sigh  that  came  from  a  heart 
riven  by  an  undying  sorrow ;  "  it  Avould  come 
like  balm  to  a  wound  that  can  never  close  if  I 
only  knew  that  she  was  there,  and  that  she  knew 
that  I  still  loved  her  !  But  there,  you  will  think 
me  an  old  fool,  who  has  taken  too  much  wine,  if 
I  open  my  heart  to  you  like  this.  It  is  the  star  s 
fault — a  ray  from  one  just  as  I  first  spoke  seemed 


GOING    HOME    FROM    THE    PARTY.  239 

to  shoot  straight  to  me  as  if  bearing  some  heavenly 
message.  Perhaps  she  sent  it  to  guide  me  to 
her,  and  to  warn  me  that  we  should  soon  meet. 
— Ugh !  how  damp  the  air  is ;  I  wish  I  had 
brouo'ht  that  favourite  red  silk  handkerchief  of 
mine.  Tony  ought  to  have  reminded  me.  Beau- 
flower,  you  won  t  laugh  at  the  old  cynic  breaking 
down  like  this  ;  but  I  have  never  got  over  the 
loss  of  my  young  v\'ife — no  love  can  ever  replace 
that — and  I've  hated  t^ro-thirds  of  the  world 
ever  since.  I  believe  I  only  stop  down  here  for 
your  sake  and  to  get  glimpses  of  Amy,  and  above 
all  to  hate  those  detestable  Harkers.  Anger  acts 
like  a  tonic  on  my  nerves." 

"  I  wish  Julia  had  been  asked  to-night,"  said 
the  Vicar ;  "  ]3ut  I  know  they  always  think  she 
puts  Miss  Harker  rather  in  the  shade.  Ju's 
spirits  are  natural,  and  paste  and  diamonds  never 
did  go  well  together.'' 

"  Ah  !  yom'  sister  is  the  girl — she'd  have  soon 
rescued  Amy  from  those  old  and  young  vultures 
— torn  her  clean  away  from  their  claws.  By  the 
bye,  Beauflower,  I've  got  something  to  tell  you  ; 
I  hadn't  the  courage  before,  because  I  knew  you 
would  be  angry,  but  I  really  cannot  intrude  further 
on  your  hospitality.  I  am  a  cross  old  fellow,  a 
great  nuisance,  and  better  alone ;  and  so  is  Tony, 
for  he  is  idle  and  he  makes  other  people  idle,  so 


240  THE   VICAES    COURTSHIP. 

I  went  yesterday  and  took  some  nice  rooms  at 
the  veterinary  surgeon's  opposite  the  Harker  Arms 
at  Fontford.  There  I  am  still  close  to  you  ;  and 
I  can  run  over  and  have  a  chat  with  old  Kobinson, 
as  he  works,  any  day.  You  need  not  be  afraid  of 
Amy — I  won't  cut  you  out.  I  allow  she's  very 
nice,  but  I  don't  think  she  cares  for  me,  and  there 
are  several  objections  to  my  ever  marrying." 

"  Nonsense — stuff  !  Well,  I  must  say,  your 
leaving  us  is  rather  a  reproach  to  our  hospi- 
tality." 

Beauflower  turned  the  conversation  adroitly. 

"  By  the  bye,  did  you  see  me  pin  Harker  in 
the  corner  by  the  fire-place  ?  Can  you  guess 
what  we  were  talkino^  about  ?  " 

"  Guess — pooh !  I  know.  About  the  Chet- 
wynd  dilapidations,  to  be  sure  !  " 

"  And  what  success  did  I  have  ?  " 

"  Success  !  the  success  I  expected — none.  How 
can  a  stone  yield  anything  but  dust  ?  " 

''Oh  !  you  far-seeing  Odysseus,  you  are  right" 
(Beauflower's  voice  quickened  and  deepened  as 
he  spoke),  "  that  man  is  iron.  I  told  him  the 
whole  case — told  it  with  all  the  force  and  pathos  I 
could  throw  into  the  story  in  such  a  place,  repre- 
sented the  cruelty  of  the  tax,  the  injustice  of  the 
sum  to  be  extorted  from  the  poor  widow  and 
innocent  children ;  whether  just  or  not,  the  ter- 


GOING    HOME    FROM    THE    PARTY.  2il 

rible  sufferino;  and  deoTadation  in  store  for  them 
if  their  friends  did  not  interpose.  He  was  cold 
as  an  iceberg.  He  said  lie  made  it  a  matter  of 
principle  not  to  encourage  the  improvidence  of 
any  class  of  persons,  that  Mr.  Chetwynd  had 
written  at  him  in  the  county  papers,  and  abused 
him  for  not  improving  the  condition  of  the 
labouring  classes ;  in  fact,  after  various  sophis- 
tries and  windings,  he  flatly  refused  to  give  one 
shillins:.^' 

"  The  brute  !  "  gasped  Goodrich. 

"He  then  began  to  tell  me  complacently,  al- 
though I  was  so  disgusted  I  had  hardly  patience 
to  listen,  that  he  was  going  to  press  the  case 
hard  against  young  Brown ;  he  said  he  was  the 
pest  of  the  place,  and  encouraged  all  the  poachers 
directly  and  indirectly.  It  was  pretty  nearly 
proved,  he  said,  that  he  was  with  the  men  that 
night  in  Bagley  Wood,  although  he  could  not  be 
recognised,  as  the  fellows  all  wore  bits  of  crape 
over  their  faces.  I  interceded  for  the  foolish 
young  fellow  in  vain,  and  we  parted  angrily, 
for  he  had  made  some  rude  remarks  about  my 
profession." 

Whilst  this  conversation  was  going  on,  the  two 
friends  were  passing  under  the  great  arch  of  the 
Park  Lodge.  It  returned  a  hollow  echo  to  their 
feet  as  if  they  were  walking  over  a  vault.     Just 


242  THE   VICAE's    courtship. 

as  they  passed  it  some  one  moved  in  the  shadow, 
and  stepped  towards  them,  then  seeing  who  it 
Avas  said,  gruffly, — 
"  Good  night !  " 

Beauflower  returned  the  salutation. 
"  That  is  one  of  those  sneaking  spies  of 
keepers,''  he  said,  Avhen  they  were  out  of  earshot. 
**  That  is  their  country  cunning  —  they  only 
say  good  night  to  learn  who  you  are  by  your 
voice  when  you  reply.  Very  often  I  don  t  reply, 
to  worry  them." 

The  moon  had  not  long  risen,  and  just  as 
they  turned  the  corner  of  the  Abbey  park  wall 
towards  the  Vicarage  it  slipped  out  of  a  cloud 
and  rose  bright  as  a  silver  globe  over  the 
dark  fir  tops.  It  showed  the  old  grey  Vicarage 
moored  like  a  dismasted  ark ;  a  light  was 
moving  past  a  top  centre  window,  a  stooping 
shadow  came  against  the  blind ;  the  light  dis- 
appeared. 

"  That  is  mother  going  to  bed,"  said 
Beauflower  ;  "  she  has  got  tired  of  waiting  for 
us." 

"  Another  proof,  my  dear  boy,  that  I  am  better 
away.  We  crotchety  rich  old  fellows  get  very 
independent.  I  could  sit  up  now  over  a  book, 
or  with  you,  and  talk  half  the  night,  but  I  won't, 
even  if  you  would  let  me.     After  all,  r»erhaps. 


GOING   HOME   FROM    THE    PARTY.  243 

your  life  is  the  liealtliier.  Late  liours,  are  like 
li\dng  on  yoiir  capital." 

"Your  self-denial  is  self-imposed,  so  I  dont 
pity  you.  The  stars  certainly  are  very  glorious 
to-night.  Talk  of  each  being  a  world,  fancy 
Jordano  Bruno, — that  friend  of  Sir  Philip  Sidney, 
whom  the  church,  that  has  made  so  many  martyrs, 
burned  for  tryirig  to  push  a  little  further  into  the 
darkness, — thought  the  stars  Avere  only  animals, 
the  earth  included." 

"  The  more  fool  he  !  " 

The  Yicar  laughed,  laid  his  hand  on  the  latch 
of  his  garden  door,  lifted  it,  and  entered.  The 
moonlioiit  lay  half  across  the  lawn  like  a  cloth  of 
silver  carpet  half  rolled  back.  Something  darted 
across  the  garden  bed  and  ran  up  a  young  apple 
tree.  It  was  Zoe,  the  Vicar's  favourite  kitten, 
playing  a  thousand  graceful  antics  to  attract  his 
attention,  darting  down  the  tree  and  up  again, 
then  climbing  upon  his  shoulder  and  purring  as  it 
felt  his  fondlinsr  hand.  It  was  as  o;lad  to  see 
him  as  a  child  could  be,  and  even  the  old  cynic 
stooped  to  stroke  its  white  breast  and  squeeze 
its  little  soft  paws. 

"  By  the  bye,  why  wasn't  the  doctor  there  to- 
night ?  "  he  said,  as  they  closed  and  bolted  the 
hall  door  very  quietly. 

"  There  is  a  good  deal  of  fever  just  now  at 

R   2 


24 i  THE    VICARS    COURTSHIP. 

Stoat's  Nest,  that  cluster  of  miserable  damp 
cottages  down  at  the  further  corner  of  the  park, 
and  he's  there  almost  day  and  night.  They're 
parish  patients." 

"  Glorious   profession !      Night   and   day,   and 
chance  of  fever,  for  a  possible  two  shillings  ! '' 


THE    AVATAR    OF    MAJOR    DONOVAN.  245 


CHAPTER   XL 

THE    AVATAR    OF    MAJOR    DONOVAN. 

Christmas  was  at  hand,  with  its  pleasant  family 
parties,  that  turn  out  so  dull  and  quarrelsome,  and 
its  unpleasant  bills,  that  always  turn  out  heavier 
than  was  expected,  its  holly  with  the  few  red 
berries,  which  are  the  presents  one  receives,  and 
the  prickles,  which  are  the  Christmas  boxes  one 
has  to  give. 

It  was  the  day  before  Christmas  Day;  the  Font- 
ford  road  was  frozen  hard — the  broken  ice  lay  in 
the  cart  ruts  like  so  much  shivered  plate  glass — 
the  fi'ost  spread  in  feathers  and  curls  on  the  lattice 
panes  of  the  windows  of  Mr.  Eobinson's  lodgings. 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Eobinson  were  just  finishing  break- 
fast ;  in  fact,  Mr.  Robinson  had  already  left  his 
last  half  cup  of  tea,  and  was  standing  by  the  fire 
setting  his  palette,  for  it  was  too  cold  now  to  paint 
in  the  workshop  he  had  dignified  with  the  name  of 
studio.  He  had  put  on  his  little  black  velvet  cap, 
and  was  squeezing  out  worms  of  colour  from  his 


246  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

collapsible  tubes  witli  all  that  anticipation  of  enjoy- 
ment that  only  a  real  enthusiast  can  feel.  He 
eyed  with  infinite  satisfaction  the  magic  circle 
spread  round  the  polished  mahogany,  running 
from  flake  white  and  Naples  yellow  through  the 
siennas  (raw  sienna  and  its  inferior  brother)  to 
the  deeper  browns,  blues,  and  vermilions.  Then, 
as  a  skilful  archer  culls  his  arrows,  he  rattled  his 
sheaf  of  brushes  and  looked  out  half-a-dozen 
favourites  for  the  particular  work  of  the  morning. 
Next  he  oiled  his  yesterday's  painting  with  the 
loving  care  with  which  a  nurse  washes  a  child's 
face.  Lastly,  with  a  blunt  razor  he  scraped  cau- 
tiously a  piece  of  impasto. 

''  John,  do  finish  your  tea ;  and  what  are  we 
to  do  about  this  bill  of  ]Mr.  Pitts',  it's  mounting 
up  dreadful.  Then  there's  all  that  sherry  owing 
for." 

Mr.  Eobinson  looked  up  from  his  palette,  on 
which  he  was  bruising  some  carmine  to  a  delicious 
liquid  crimson  under  his  flat  glistening  palette 
knife.  He  was  one  of  those  child-like  men  (not 
a  sham  child  like  Harold  Skimpole),  boundlessly 
sanguine,  and  utterly  heedless  of  the  future.  Like 
most  men  of  this  class,  he  shuddered  at  being 
taken  from  the  greenhouse  of  his  own  hopefulness 
and  turned  into  the  icy  Siberia  of  the  real  outer 
world.     He  sat  and  sang  and  day-dreamed  in  his 


THE    AVATAR    OF    MAJOR    DOXOYA>;.  247 

frail  vessel,   and    cared   not    how  near  tlie   reef 
might  be  till  the  moment  of  striking  came. 

He  looked  up  now  with  a  deprecating  look  at  his 
too  anxious,  too  unimaginative,  entirely  practical 
wife.     (How  little  imagination  women  have  !) 

"  My  dear  Jane,"  he  said,  "  pray  don't  upset 
me  for  all  the  day.  Bassevi  owes  us  for  three 
weeks  now,  and  he  promised  to  be  here  to-day  or 
to-morrow;  that  will  cover  everything.  Why, 
you  re  as  fidgety  as  when  we  depended  on  lodgers, 
then  the  major  is  going  to  send  us  down  the  first 
quarter's  rent  in  advance,  and,  although  we  owe 
that,  we  could  take  it  for  the  present,  if  necessary, 
for  Mrs.  Lawson's  two  weeks.  There,  don't 
distress  me  about  such  things,  it  puts  me  out  for 
all  day." 

"  But,  my  dear  John,  you  are  so  very  thought- 
less about  money  matters,  and  you  know  we're 
launching  out  di'eadfuUy,  and  nothing  coming  in 
to  warrant  it.  You  used  to  take  your  glass  of 
toddy  after  dinner,  now  you  have  sherry  like  a 
nobleman.  We  shall  never,  never  put  by  any- 
thing for  dear  Amy  and  for  a  rainy  day  if  we 
keep  living  up  so  to  our  means.  You  know,  I 
must  remind  you  of  these  things.     It's  my  duty." 

"  What  a  disagreeable  thing  duty  is,  then,  Jane. 
You  know  it  is  not  like  old  times  now.  Tliis 
pasticcio  work  will  bring  in  a  very  considerable 


248  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

sum  —  very  considerable/'  and  tlie  little  man 
looked  as  if  lie  was  raking  tog:ether  millions. 

"  Yes,  my  dear,  so  it  will,  but  you  forget  some- 
thing might  stop  tlie  work,  a  thousand  things 
might  happen.  Only  suppose  you  were  taken 
ill?" 

"  Yes,  yes,  or  suppose  an  earthquake,  or  a  fire 
of  London,  or  a  revolution,  or  the  Last  Day  that 
Dr.  Gumming  has  made  so  much  money  by." 

*'  When  you  begin  to  talk  nonsense  and  reject 
my  advice,  I've  done,  John,"  said  Mrs.  Eobinson, 
gravely,  as  she  put  the  tea-cups  together.  "I 
never  wish  to  intrude  my  advice,  though  I  do 
think  without  it  you'd  have  been  a  beggar  in  the 
workhouse  long  ago." 

"I  really  think  I  should,  all  in  pepper  and 
salt,  and  painting  portraits  of  Mr.,  Mrs.,  and  the 
Miss  Bumbles  for  extra  gruel  and  tobacco,"  said 
Mr.  Eobinson,  in  his  cheery  volatile  way ;  then 
he  put  down  his  palette  and  brushes,  and  slipping 
his  hand  round  his  wife's  waist,  looked  at  her 
fondly  (a  tear  was  stealing  slowly  down  her  thin 
worn  cheek)  and  kissed  her  twice.  "  I  know, 
Jane,"  he  said,  "  know  well  that  Avithout  you  I 
should  have  been  a  miserable,  hopeless  man.  I 
didn't  mean  to  say  anything  to  distress  you." 

Just  then  the  door  opened,  and  Mrs.  Lawson  put 
in  her  head ;  seeing  her  arrival  was  mal  apropos, 


THE    AVATAR    UF    MAJOR    DONOVAN.  249 

she  slipped  back  again,  and  spoke  behind  the 
half  open  door  rather  tartly. 

"  I  beg  your  pardon,  Mrs.  Eobinson,  "  I  only 
came  just  to  remind  you  (it's  no  consequence  of 
course)  but  your  three  weeks  are  up  to-day." 

"  Quite  right,  vre'll  see  to  it,"  said  Mrs.  Eobin- 
son,  and  the  door  closed.  Mrs.  Kobinson  gave 
her  husband  a  look,  but  said  no  more. 

'•'  John,"  she  said,  "  I  wonder  what  brought  Mr. 
CantelujDe  here  again  yesterday  ?  " 

"  What  for  I  ^^^y,  of  com^se,  to  see  my  paint- 
ings." 

"  Nonsense,  how  vain  of  you,  my  dear  !  It  was 
not  for  that." 

"  What  was  it  for  ?  I  can't  see  into  a  mile-stone 
without  my  spectacles,  so  tell  me,  you  wiseacre." 

"  NATiat  for  ?  why,  in  hopes  of  seeing  Amy. 
Didn't  you  observe  how  he  talked  about  her  acci- 
dent, and  how  angry  he  was  about  the  Harkers 
never  letting  us  up-stairs  to  see  our  child  ?  " 

''  Well,  I  did  think  he  talked  a  good  deal  about 
Amy;  but,  bless  you,  who  could  see  her  Avithout 
loving  her  ? " 

"  But  only  fancy,  John  !  " 

John  looked  up  from  his  painting  to  see  what 
he  was  to  fancv. 

"  Why,  you  stupid  old  thing,  suj)pose  this  rich 
young  nobleman  was  to  really  propose  to  Amy. 


250  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

Fancy  lier  a  queen  at  Swallowcliff  Castle — 
carriages,  servants,  and  twenty  thousand  a  year." 

''Yes,  and  perhaps  with  a  mid,  bad  young 
fellow  (for  we  hear  he's  wild  and  reckless  with  his 
money),  who  w^ould  neglect  her  for  the  next  new 
face.  No,  not  till  we  know  more  of  my  young 
gentleman." 

Mrs.  Eobinson  was  rebuked,  and  she  bowed  to 
the  just  blow.  "  But  perhaps  he  would  grow 
steady  then,  and  be  a  blessing  to  everyone,  and 
give  up  racing  and  gambling." 

"  Yes,  and  perhaps  he  wouldn't.  No,  I  don't 
say,  Jane,  I'd  refuse  my  consent,  still  I'd  learn  a 
good  deal  more  about  him  first :  but.  Lord,  there's 
no  chance  of  the  thing.  Amy  must  not  be  given 
to  anyone." 

"  Don't  I  love  her  too  weU,  John " 

The  rest  of  the  mother's  defence  was  drowned 
by  a  shower  of  furious  blows  at  the  street  door, 
to  Avhicli  Susan,  rather  frightened,  instantly  re- 
sponded. There  was  a  gruff  mutter,  the  next 
moment  the  door  of  the  Robinsons'  room  flew 
open,  and  an  enormous  man,  w^ith  a  face  like 
Apollo  on  a  winter  morning,  burst  in,  shouting 
with  stentorian  luno^s, 

"  Then  come,  my  boys,  we'll  drink  brown  ale, 
We'll  pay  the  reck'ning-  on  the  nail. 
And  divil  a  man  shall  go  to  jail, 
From  Garryowen,  my  glory." 


THE    AVATAR    OF    MAJOR    DONOYAX.  251 

It  was  the  redoubtable  Major  Donovan  himself. 
A  slight  vaporous  reminiscence  of  Innishowen 
spread  like  a  halo  around  his  ruddy  face  and 
beard.  Wrapped  in  a  short  rugged  nor'-wester, 
with  large  horn  buttons,  and  wearing  a  broad 
peaked  blue  cloth  cap,  with  gilt  buttons  to  fasten 
the  chin  strap,  he  resembled  very  much  the  cap- 
tain of  a  small  merchant-vessel,  who  had  half  a 
mind  to  turn  pirate.  He  flourished  a  common 
very  heavy  oak  stick  in  his  Herculean  right  hand. 

''And  it's  myself  that's  mighty  glad  to  see  ye 
both,"  he  said,  shaking  hands  with  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Eobinson  alternately.  "  I've  walked  over  from 
Slobury,  preferring  to  trust  my  own  legs  to  any 
conveyance  that  ever  rowlecl  on  whales." 

"  AVell,  you  do  look  well,  major." 

"  And  we're  so  glad  to  see  you,"  echoed  Mrs. 
Eobinson,  "  and  so  will  Amy  be — she  often  talks 
of  you." 

''  The  darlint !  colleen  asthore  !  Amy  machree  ! 
Amy  mavourneen  ! 

"  Her  waist  is  taper, 

None  is  complater, 
Like  the  tuneful  tribe,  or  the  lambs  at  play, 

And  her  two  eyes  shining, 

Like  rowling-  diamonds, 
Her  breath  as  sweet  as  the  flowers  in  May." 

The  major  was  generally  rather  excitable,  but 


252  THE   VICARS    COURTSHIP. 

he  seldom  sang  so  much  so  early  in  tlie  morning. 
The  fact  was,  a  farmer,  who  had  got  in  at  Basing- 
stoke, had  passed  round  a  whisky  flask  rather  too 
freely,  and  the  spirit  had  not  yet  quite  evaporated 
from  the  giant's  brain. 

"  And  you  ve  come  down  for  a  long  stay  ?  " 
"  For  a  fortnight.  I'll  board  with  you  and  get 
a  bed  at  the  inn.  The  Charlemagne  brandy  is 
now  drunk  everywhere,  from  Buckingham  Palace 
to  Whitechapel,  and  I  am  going  to  diffuse  it  through 
all  Wiltshire  and  Dorse tshu^e. 

"  '  "^Vhen  Jove  made  the  soul  of  a  wild  Irisliman, 
He  filled  him  with  love  and  creation's  wide  span 
In  stature  he's  matchless,  an  angel  in  face, 
'Tis  mankind  that  envies  his  ilig-ant  grace, 
Philaloo : ' 

"  I  feel  like  a  young  nightingale  this  morning,  and 
all  along  of  seeing  my  old  friends,  and  walking  on 
an  empty  stomach  after  being  three  hours  boxed 
up  in  the  train." 

"  There,  how  thoughtless  of  me,  of  course  you 
want  breakfast,  major.  I'll  make  you  some  tea, 
and  order  you  a  steak  in  a  moment." 

"  Then  by  the  piper  that  played  before  Moses, 
I  won't  refuse  it." 

"  But  where's  your  luggage,  major  ? " 

The  major  dived  into  his  tail  pocket  and  pro- 
duced an  old  pair  of  carpet  slippers  and  a  shirt 


THE    AVATAR    OF    MAJOR    DOXOVAN".  233 

collar,  then  he  rummaged  in  his  waistcoat  pocket, 
pulled  out  a  little  Derringer  pistol  with  two 
barrels,  and  laid  it  on  the  table.  "  There's  my 
luororaore/'  hc  Said,  ''  I  hate  l^oderashun  with  bio^ 
trunks,  that  imjDede  the  army  and  stop  quick 
marches.  That  little  friend  of  mine  I  never  go 
without,  oh,  he's  been  with  me  in  rough  places." 

''  And  were  you  kind  enough,  major,  to  bring 
us  the  rent  from  M.  Periklodos  ?  "  said  Mrs.  Eobin- 
son  anxiously,  as  she  began  to  re-lay  the  breakfast. 

"  !Musha  !  then,"  said  the  major,  with  that  soft 
comethering  way  that  most  Irishmen  of  the 
major's  class  can  so  readily  assume,  "  there's 
good  security  for  your  money,  for  it's  not  Mr. 
Periklodos  alone  now  with  this  enormous  business, 
l)ut  four  other  partners — Baron  Jogler,  a  Hun- 
garian nobleman,  whose  breeches  pocket  is  as 
safe  as  the  Bank  of  England ;  M.  Chassepot,  a 
French  merchant,  who  has  a  \T.neyard  in  Cham- 
pagne (look  at  that  now !)  ;  Mr.  Silas  Greenway, 
who  has  a  large  agency  in  New  York  ;  and  an 
enormously  rich  Parsee  merchant,  Kamahoor 
Darkaschunder  ;  so  that,  you  say,  the  company 
now  represents  the  four  quarters  of  the  world, 
and  one  over ;  and  divilish  sharp  fellows  they 
are,  though  rather  fond  of  cards  in  business  hours. 
They've  sold  abeady  this  year,  they  tell  me, 
14,204  quart  bottles  of  the  Charlemagne  cham- 


254  THE    VICARS    COUETSHIP. 

pagne,  besides  pints  ;  and,  bedad,  a  glorious 
tipple  it  is !  Phew !  it's  almost  as  good  as 
Kinahan's/' 

"  So  you Ve  brought  the  rent  ?  " 

"  Well,  it's  coming  by  post  next  Saturday. 
The  company  has  just  had  very  heavy  payments 
to  make  to  the  French  dealers,  and  so  I  told  Mons. 
Chassepot  it  was  no  matter.  My  salary  will 
come  with  it ;  so  it's  quite  sure,  for  their  money 
is  as  good  as  the  Bank.  I  talked  of  raising  the 
rent,  and  they  made  no  objection.  Oh,  it's  the 
right  down  jintlemen  they  are,  divil  doubt  it ! 
and  bad  cess  to  all  liars  !  May  I  trouble  you, 
Mrs.  Kobinson,  for  another  cup  of  tay  ?  It's 
mighty  good,  I  can  tell  ye." 

There  came  a  rap  at  the  door.  It  was  the 
postman.  Susan,  rosy  and  smiling,  brought  in  the 
letter.  It  was  an  angry  letter  from  Bassevi.  Mr. 
Robinson  opened  it,  eagerly  expecting  to  see  a 
little  green  slip  of  a  cheque  fall  out,  l3ut  nothing 
fell  out.  He  read  it,  his  wife  looking  over  his 
shoulder. 

"Charlotte  Street,  Fitzroy  Square, 
December  24,  1860. 

"  Get  on  as  fast  as  you  like,  Robinson.  The 
sooner  the  first  lot  is  done  the  better,  and  then 
I  can  draw  the  tin  for  it.  And  now  let  me  just 
give  you  warning,  my  old  boy  (for  I'm  deuced  riled 


THE  AVATAR  OF  MAJOR  DOXOYAX.     255 

with  you),  if  you  go  blabbing  about  to  every  one 
about  those  replicas  of  Boclger's,  we  shall  get  some 
other  man.  There's  as  good  fish  in  the  sea  as  ever 
came  out  of  it.  Squeamish  people  don't  like  to 
think  when  they  buy  a  replica  that  Bodger  has  only 
just  touched  the  faces,  so  you  take  care,  or  you'll 
find  you've  quarrelled  with  your  bread  and 
cheese.  The  same  with  the  Abbey  and  Castle 
Titians.  Don't  let  young  Cantelupe  know  where 
you  live,  and  don't  put  him  up  to  things  ;  tell  any 
lie  to  stop  him.  Now,  as  to  money,  I'll  send  you 
six  pounds  to-morrow,  when  I  shall  sell  some 
pictures  ;  the  rest  will  go  to  pay  the  interest  on 
the  money  I  advanced  you  for  that  carved  oak 
drawing-room  furniture,  for  the  ebony  cabinet, 
and  buhl  chiffonier.  I  don't  think  for  the  Castle 
pictures  I  can  stand  more  than  fifteen  shillings  a 
day,  and  it  won't  pay  me  at  that.  You  have 
your  option,  of  course.  Eemember  me  to  my 
Kttle  pet.  Amy — I  hope  she  thinks  of  me  some- 
times— and  your  missus.  You  keep  a  quiet 
tongue  in  your  head,  and  we  shall  pull  on  very 
well  together  ;  but  any  more  blabbing,  and  you'll 
never  get  another  sov.  out  of  me ;  and  what's 
more,  I  won't  pay  you  what  I  owe  you  without 
you  bring  an  action,  and  perhaps  not  then.  So 
take  care  ;  mind,  I  warn  you.  I've  just  been  to 
the   ofiice  of  that   humbugging   wine   company. 


256  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

whom  you  have  been  old  fool  enough  to  trust 
your  house  to,  and  I  find  that  Donovan  is  down 
in  Wiltshire.  If  so,  tell  him  I  want  to  employ 
him  there  about  some  sporting  matter  in  which 
I  am  interested. 

^' Yours,  &c., 

"Isaac  Bassevi." 

"  Oh,  the  cruel,  cruel  man!"  said  Mrs.  Eobinson. 

"  It's  only  Bassevi's  rough  way,"  said  the 
major.  "  111  be  bail  he  means  no  harm.  You 
play  your  cards  well,  and  I  do  l)elieve  he'd  marry 
Amy." 

"  No,  never  ! "  said  Mr.  Eobinson,  getting  up 
and  waving  his  palette  knife  as  if  it  was  a  sword. 

"No,  no,"  said  Mrs.  Eobinson;  "Amy  was 
never  saved  for  that.  No,  not  if  we  starve  for  it ! 
What !  that  man  marry  my  angel  ? " 

"  Well,  you  know  your  o^\m  interest  best,"  said 
the  major  ;  "but  bedad  I'll  do  the  sporting  busi- 
ness for  him.  I  think  I  know  a  horse's  head 
from  his  tail,  or  my  father  wasn't  the  first  vet  in 
all  county  Kildare,  as  every  man  for  forty  miles 
round  the  Currao-h  still  remembers." 


WRITING   THE   ADDRESS.  257 


CHAPTER  XII. 

WRITING   THE    ADDRESS. 

Exactly  at  the  day  and  hour  named  by  Beau- 
Hower,  Cantelupe  was  for  once  punctual,  for  the 
cares  of  the  forthcoming  contest  were  heavy  upon 
a  mind  utterly  unaccustomed  to  steady,  con- 
tinuous thought.  He  looked  very  handsome  in 
liis  short  dark-green  Ne^Tnarket  -  coat,  his  white 
cords,  and  high  boots,  as  he  swning  do^vn  from 
his  dark  bay  horse  and  threw  the  reins  to  George, 
who  had  been  peculiarly  taciturn  and  contrite 
ever  since  the  celebrated  meeting  of  the  "  three 
broken  'arts." 

Mary,  rosying  very  prettily  at  the  sight  of  the 
young  and  distinguished  visitor,  informed  him  in 
her  crisp  little  voice  that  "  master  had  just  gone  to 
the  school  to  see  about  some  books  for  the  chil- 
dren, but  that  he  had  left  word  that  he  would  be 
back  directly.     Would  he  please  to  walk  in  ? " 

He  did  please  to  walk  in,  and  was  shown  wp  to 
the  Yicar  s  study.     After  a  vain  attempt  to  dis- 


"^ 


258  THE   YICAe's    courtship. 

cover  a  Kacing  Calendar,  a  copy  of  "  Silk  and 
Scarlet,"  Soapy  Sponge,  or  even  Nimrod's  "  Sport- 
ing Tour,"  Cantelupe  sank  into  a  state  of  extreme 
temporary  dejection,  with  an  unholy  desire  creep- 
ing over  him  to  light  a  cheroot  and  recklessly 
enjoy  himself,  till  the  voice  of  old  Mrs.  Beau- 
flower  in  the  shades  chiding  Mary  for  leaving  a 
dust-pan  in  the  passage,  which  might  have  broken 
the  gentleman's  leg,  awed  him  back  into  pro- 
priety. He  then  betook  himself  to  the  mantel- 
piece, and  was  just  absorbed  in  a  very  pretty 
photograph  of  Julia  Beauflower  in  her  riding- 
habit,  when  he  was  startled  by  the  door  opening 
and  Miss  Beauflower  herself  appearing,  perfectly 
self-collected.  She  was  just  a  little  embarrassed 
how  to  amuse  the  visitor  till  her  brother  came,  but, 
like  a  good  sensible  girl,  she  buckled  at  once  to 
her  work.  Cantelupe,  too,  for  a  young  fellow  of 
the  world,  was  rather  monosyllabic,  and  seemed 
to  petrify  into  one  or  two  topics,  all  revolving,  do 
what  he  could,  round  Miss  Eobinson  s  accident, 
"awfully  sorry"  he  had  been,  and  her  conva- 
lescence, about  which  he  was  "  a^\^ully  glad." 
"  It  was  very  plucky  of  her,"  he  said,  "  getting 
on  the  horse  at  all,  and  wonderful  her  sticking  to 
it,  and  awfully  plucky  of  Beauflower  taking  the 
groom's  horse  and  riding  straight  to  her."  Gra- 
dually as  he  observed  Julia  quite  at  her  ease,  and 


WEITING    THE   ADDRESS.  259 

disposed  to  be  amused  at  liis  wild,  frank  way,  he, 
too,  found  his  small  talk  begin  to  blossom  into 
conversation  of  a  perfectly  natural  but  rather 
boyish  kind. 

"Do  you  remember,"  he  said,  "  how  we  used  to 
go  flying  about  the  country  on  those  Welsh  ponies, 
and  how  you  tried  to  j)ersuade  me  not  to  charge 
at  old  Bro^^m's  hurdles,  and  then  how  awfully 
waxy  old  Brown  got  when  we  rode  over  his 
young  wheat  ? " 

"  I  know  we  were  very  wicked  then,"  said 
Julia,  laughing,  "  and  that  I  joined  in  a  great  deal 
of  mischief  I  ought  not  to  have  done.  Do  you 
remember  the  putting  the  squib  into  the  wasp's 
nest  by  the  old  manor  house,  and  how  you  teased 
me  because  I  would  not  stop  to  see  them  dug  out  ? " 

"  Of  course  I  do.  What  fun  we  had,  too,  at  the 
Abbey  that  Twelfth  Night  ball,  when  I  went  as  a 
Eobber,  you  as  a  Cinderella,  and  your  brother 
as  a  Magician.'' 

Juha  quite  Hked  him  for  his  remembrance  of 
those  thoughtless,  pleasant  young  days.  He  looked 
so  handsome,  too,  with  the  sun-bm^nt,  nut-brown 
face  of  a  young  Englishman  who  enjoys  manly 
out-of-door  sports. 

"  We  have  got  one  or  two  such  wonderful  stereo- 
scopes here,"  she  said,  "  that  some  gTcat  scientific 
friend  of  Ned's  sent  us  yesterday  from  London." 


260  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

The  word  ''  scientific "  rather  staggered  Can- 
telupe ;  but  he  rallied,  and  said  he  should  like  to 
see  them  "  awfully/' 

Julia  ran  and  got  them  with  a  charming  good 
nature ;  her  sarcasm  quite  disarmed  by  the  ex- 
pupil's  readiness  to  be  pleased.  They  were  really 
very  interesting.  One  was  a  stereoscope  of  the 
moon,  with  all  its  mountains  and  lakes,  looking, 
for  all  the  world,  like  a  phosphorescent  peeled 
orange ;  the  other  was  a  photograph  of  a  corner 
of  the  field  of  Mao-enta  the  mornino^  after  the 
battle.  There  were  heaps  of  dead  soldiers,  you 
could  distinguish  the  French  from  the  Aus- 
trians,  and  almost  guess  the  cause  of  their  death. 
Those  pierced  by  bullets  had  a  smile  on  their  lips; 
those  who  had  been  felled  by  cavalry  swords  had 
a  grim  and  bitter  frown  of  pain  on  their  faces. 

"  That  is  too  horrid,"  said  Julia ;  "  let's  look 
at  the  moon  again.  Oh,  that  is  beautiful ;  you 
can  positively  fancy  it  shines." 

la  looking  at  the  moon  their  cheeks  almost 
touched,  yet  somehow,  in  their  eagerness  to  see  it 
shine,  they  neither  of  them  seemed  aware  of  the 
propinquity.  Indeed,  they  scarcely  observed  even 
the  door  open. 

"  Well,  I'm  glad  you  haven't  found  me  very 
long,"  said  the  Vicar. 

"  Oh,  how  do  you  do,  Beauflower  ? "  said  Cante- 


WRITIXG   THE   ADDRESS.  261 

lupe,  springing  up  a  little  confused,  yet  wliy,  one 
could  hardly  imagine.  "  Oh,  not  at  all ;  Miss 
Beauflower  has  been  showino^  me  such  a  stunnino; 
view  of  the  moon.  I  am  afraid  I've  been  awfully 
boring  her  with  nonsense  about  our  old  times 
here." 

"  Has  he,  Ju  ? ''  said  the  Vicar,  Avith  a  quiet 
under  look. 

"  Oh,  no,  he  hasn't,  Ned.  I  like  talking  of  old 
times  ;  but  I'll  wish  you  two  people  good  morn- 
ing, for  I  know  you  want  to  get  to  politics,  and 
those  are  things  I  never  could  understand." 

Cantelupe  opened  the  door,  shook  Miss  Beau- 
flower's  proffered  hand,  and  closed  the  door  after 
her,  as  the  Vicar  took  ofl"  his  greatcoat  and  threw 
it,  with  his  A^dde-awake,  upon  a  chair. 

'*  My  dear  old  man,"  said  Cantelupe,  "  now 
just  you  help  me  with  this  infernal  address.  I'm 
regularly  stuck  in  it." 

"  Eespect  your  former  tutor,  Cantelupe,  and 
'  sail  in,'  as  the  Yankees  say.  Come,  here's  a 
pen.     What  is  to  be  ? — '  Gentlemen '  " 

"  That's  the  style— first-rate  !  " 

"  WeU,  what  do  you  want  to  say  ?  " 

"  Oh,  something  about  un  worthiness,  and  that 
sort  of  thing — you  know — proper  extension  of — 
of — to  meet  the  necessities  of  the  times." 

"  Yes  ;  that  is  very  lucid." 


262  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

"  Now,  don't  chaff  a  fellow.  Put  it  in  your 
own  way.  Ballot  un-English — strict  attention  to 
Parliamentary  duties.'' 

"  Orders  executed  with  diligence  and  dispatch." 

"Oh,  don't  chaff;  it's  a  serious  business.  I 
don't  know  what  to  say — promise  anything — 
strict  economy  in  every  department." 

"  Comes  very  well  from  you,  you're  such  a 
well-known  thrifty  man." 

"  Now,  that's  too  bad.  If  I  am  a  little  in- 
volved, I  shall  j)ull  it  off  with  Immenschikoff  at 
Doncaster.  I'll  bet  1000  to  1  I  pull  it  off 
there  if  I  can  ocly  get  Fordham  up.  Put  all 
your  money  on,  for  Menschy  will  be  all  there 
when  the  numbers  go  up." 

"  Thank  you,  I  don't  bet.  I've  got  a  well,  if  I 
want  to  bury  money." 

''  Oh,  you  wouldn't  lose  it ;  he's  bound  to 
Avin.     It'll  be  all  on  the  square — no  scratching." 

"  Come,  come,  this  doesn't  do,  you  scatterbrains 
— let's  go  to  work.  I  suppose  this  is  more  what 
you  want,  eh  ? " 

Here  he  wrote,  and  read  as  he  wrote, — 


a    i 


Gentlemen, 


"  'In  offering  myself  as  a  Liberal-Conservative 

candidate '  " 

"  Go  it." 

"  No  slang  interruptions,  Cantelupe. 


WRITING    THE    ADDRESS.  263 

"  '  In  offering  myself  as  a  Liberal-Conservative, 
I  feel  that  I  have  little  claims  to  your  notice,  except 
as  the  son  of  one  who  long  and  faithfully  repre- 
sented you  in  the  House  of  Commons.  It  is  for 
you  to  enable  me  to  prove  that  I  inherit  my  father's 
zeal  for  the  good  cause  of  progress,  cautiously 
and  deliberately  pursued.'  " 

"  First  class  !  Just  what  I  wanted  to  say ; 
but  they'll  all  know  it  isn't  mine." 

"  Not  they  ;  they'll  only  think  you've  got  a 
good  lawyer.     Let's  go  on. 

"  '  The  time  has  come  when  the  safety  of  our 
great  empire  demands  that  the  base  of  the  social 
pyramid  shall  be  widened.  We  will  remove 
nothing,  but  we  will  add  broad  stones  to  strenothen 
and  to  beautify.  Let  us  have  compulsory  educa- 
tion, as  they  have  in  Germany  and  America.  It 
is  no  hardship  to  any  honest  man  to  be  compelled 
to  fulfil  his  duties  as  a  citizen,  and  no  one  has  a 
right  to  bring  up  his  children  as  thieves  and 
paupers.'  " 

"  Isn't  that  rather  going  it  ?  " 

''Not  a  bit.  You  stick  to  that,  and  never 
mind  what  party  holds  the  view. 

"  '  Do  not  let  us  try  vote  by  ballot,  because  that 
will  never  make  votes  secret,  and  must,  therefore, 
fail  in  securing  the  good  intended.  If  a  man's  vote 
is  known  to  his  wife,  it  must  be  known  to  his 


^6i  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

neighbours,  nor  can  any  man's  politics  be  ever 
concealed  from  his  immediate  friends  and  com- 
panions.    As  to  the  game  laws '  '' 

"  Come,  gently  over  that." 

''  Nonsense. 

''  'As  to  the  game  laws,  I  am  of  opinion 
that  whether  mitigated  or  not,  the  evils  to  which 
they  lead  are  for  the  most  part  to  be  lessened  by 
the  self-restraint  of  landlords,  who  should  not 
breed  so  much  game  as  to  cause  injury  to  their 
servants  and  poorer  neighbours.  I  would  at  once 
abolish  the  Irish  Church,  because  it  only  serves 
the  few  at  the  expense  of  the  many.  As  to  re- 
form, I  would  certainly  render  bribery  penal,  and 
would  give  a  member  to  every  town  with  a  popu- 
lation above  a  certain  number.  Being  an  advocate 
of  universal  toleration,  I  shall  vote  for  every 
measure  calculated  to  remove  disabilities  from 
any  sect  or  persuasion.  I  shall  be  a  steady 
friend  to  all  prudent  retrenchments,  that  are  con- 
ducted in  accordance  with  large-minded  views. 
"  '  I  am.  Gentlemen, 

"  '  Your  most  obedient  servant, 

"  '  FiTZEGBERT    CaNTELUPE. 

"  'Dec.  30,  I860.'" 

''  Goloptious  !  "       (The    young    harum-scarum 
fairly   leaped   with   delight.)     "That  will  fetch 


WRITING   THE   ADDRESS.  !^65 

tliem.  AT\^ully  kind  of  you,  old  fellow  ;  but  liow 
the  deuce  shall  I  ever  be  able  to  keep  this  high 
pressure  up  ?  Well,  I  suppose  Harker  will  coach 
me,  only  he'll  think  me  a  downright  Ead.  about 
the  game  laws.  I  must  tone  that  part  down,  I 
think.     Still,  it's  jolly  kind  of  you,  old  fellow." 

"  Oh,  don't  mention  it.  But  I  must  wish  you 
good-bye  now.  There's  Dr.  Briscoe  just  coming 
up  the  walk  ;  he  wants  to  see  me  about  those 
miserable  cottages  of  Harker 's  at  Stoat's  Nest ; 
he  is  dreadfully  riled  about  them,  and  talked  of 
^^^:iting  to  the  papers,  but  I  advised  him  not." 
"  Pitch  into  the  beo-o-ar — I  would." 
"  It  won't  do,  running  your  head  against  a  wall. 
By-the-by,  what  are  you  going  to  give  me  for  the 
poor  Chetw}^nds  ?  You  got  the  private  circu- 
lar T' 

"  Oh,  put  me  down  for  50l. ;  it's  awful  hard 
upon  them.  Good-bye,  Beauflower.  Oh,  it's  not 
worth  thanking  me  for.  Thanks  very  much  for  all 
your  trouble.  So  you're  going  at  the  old  church 
at  last,  I  hear." 

"  Yes,  and  I'm  coming  down  on  you." 
"  Oh,  I'm  good  for  a  50^.  or  so,  but  you  must 
wait  till  I've  cut  down  half  a  dozen  more  oaks. 
I've  been  rather  "Dverdoing  it  lately,  to  teU  you 
the  truth  ;  and  now  there's  the  election  :  and  no 
bribery,  I  hear,  is  expensive." 


266  THE   vicar's    courtship. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

THE    VERY    GRATIFYING    PRESENTATION. 

New  Year's  Day  had  come,  mild,  sunny,  and 
smiling  at  the  prophecies  of  spring's  rough 
storms.  Nothing  was  talked  of  for  ten  miles 
round  Slobury  (a  very  self-conceited  place)  but 
the  approaching  presentation  to  Mr.  Harker. 
Only  one  or  two  county  families  had  put  down 
their  names,  still  Mr.  Pitts  took  a  very  prominent 
part  (toadyism  not  being  confined  to  royal  courts, 
by  any  means),  and  still  more  foremost  was  Mr. 
Paradise,  the  principal  brewer  of  Salisbury,  who 
had  headed  the  subscription  list  with  100/.,  his 
gratitude  being  a  lively  anticipation  of  favours 
to  come,  and  a  great  hope  of  his  beer-shops  in 
future  getting  their  licences  renewed  without 
much  wrangling  with  the  police.  Mr.  Cutbush, 
too,  a  retired  nm^sery  gardener,  who  had  recently 
bought  a  large  property  near  Compton  Chamber- 
layne,  was  also  conspicuous  in  the  subscription 
list,    being    anxious    to    know    Lord   Mazagan, 


THE    VERY    GRATIFYING    PRESEXTATIOX.      267 

through  the  Harkers'  influence.  A  few  squires  had 
given,  not  to  be  outdone  by  their  neighbours,  and 
others  for  fear  of  seeming  mean.  Such  are  the 
mean  motives  that  swell  most  subscription  lists. 

The  day  came,  as  bright  and  fine  a  New  Year's 
Day  as  ever  ushered  in  a  ridiculous  ceremonial.  The 
sky  was  cold  and  blue,  without  a  cloud,  except  an 
undefined  fine  of  white  vapour  here  and  there  to  the 
west.  The  Slobmy  road  was  wrinkled  and  hard 
as  the  hide  of  an  elephant.  A  slight  shower  in 
the  night  had  sprinkled  the  road-side  trees,  and 
the  drops,  frozen  on  the  boughs,  glistened  like 
jewelry.  The  four  vans  with  the  cold  collation  from 
Gunter's  had  just  arrived  at  the  Abbey  back-gate 
from  the  Slobury  station,  when  Paddy  Blake, 
bare-footed  as  usual,  and  in  that  inevitable  muddy 
ragged  scarlet  coat,  the  badge  of  his  ambiguous 
profession,  pushed  his  way  among  the  fussy  men 
helping  down  the  hampers  and  cases,  and  re- 
quested speech  of  Mr.  Barker.  "  Very  important 
business." 

"Important  business!  I  like  that,"  sneered  a 
hot  young  footman  (rather  irritable  at  the  un- 
usual amount  of  work,  and  more  than  usually 
self-important).     "  I  say,  Fred,  you  pal  of  mine. 

'  He's  a  pal  of  mine,  he's  a  pal  of  mine,' 

did   you   ever  hear  anything    like    this    fellow's 


268  THE    VICARS    COURTSHIP. 

cheek  ?  Go  away,  Paddy.  Call  again  to-morrow. 
Master,  I  tell  you,  is  busy  with,  a  gentleman  about 
the  decorations.  I  know  he  won't  see  any  one 
till  the  deputation  comes.  Friday  is  the  day  for 
seeing  him." 

"  If  he  won't,  all  the  worse  for  him." 

"  Now,  don't  you  hang  about :  be  off.  This  is 
not  the  Castle  stables.  Go  and  put  your  money 
on  ImmenschikoftV 

"  That  I  will,  every  penny — trust  me,  young 
bottle-washer." 

So  Paddy  slunk  away  with  his  unheeded 
warning. 

About  twelve  o'clock  the  trains  at  Slobury 
began  to  disgorge  hearty,  red-faced,  boisterous, 
burly  men,  all  very  much  alike,  in  leather  gaiters, 
several  pale,  smooth-faced,  obsequious,  low-voiced 
men  in  black,  one  or  two  of  the  old  top-boot  race 
of  farmers,  and  a  gentleman  or  two,  who  seemed  as 
uncomfortable  as  if  they  were  going  to  a  wedding. 
These  were  presently  joined  by  tradesmen  and 
farmers  from  Slobury,  who  looked  on  that  place 
as  the  end  of  all  things,  and  most  other  people  as 
outer  barbarians ;  and  all  these  persons,  taking  the 
road  or  field- way  to  Summerleas,  were  joined  at 
by-roads  and  cross-roads  by  farmers  riding  and 
driving,  who  gave  their  friends  lifts.  At  the 
Peal  of  Bells  there  was  a  crowd  assembled  of 


THE    VERY    GRATIFYING   PRESENTATION.      269 

labourers,  Avomen,  and  cliildren,  who  clieered 
every  one,  they  hardly  knew  why,  but  just  to 
give  vent  to  their  excitement,  not  really  caring 
indeed  whether  Mr.  Harker  was  born,  married, 
or  bmied,  so  bread  would  keep  down,  and  wages 
go  up. 

It  had  been  agreed  by  the  Committee  a  few 
days  before,  and  duly  advertised  in  the  Salisbury 
and  Winchester  Journal,  that  the  subscribers 
should  meet  not  at  Slobury,  but  at  the  Great 
Archway,  where  Travers  lived,  and  from  thence, 
at  one  o'clock  precisely,  move  on,  with  the  Eifle 
band  playing  before  it,  to  the  Abbey.  And  so 
they  did.  The  procession  was  gradually  got  into 
form  by  Mr.  Pitts  and  the  landlord  of  the  Harker 
Arms  at  Fontford,  who  was  an  active  sergeant  in 
the  Eifles,  and  at  a  few  minutes  past  one,  the  Com- 
mittee, with  blue  cockades  in  their  hats,  and  blue 
favours  on  their  breasts  (like  prize  turkeys),  led 
the  shambling  regiment  of  philanthropists  through 
the  great  frowning  archway  to  the  appropriate  tune 
of  "The  Young  Eecruit,"  which,  at  the  turn  to  the 
drive,  was  modified  into ''Champagne  Charley,"  and 
at  the  Abbey  door  swelled  into  "  The  Eed,  White, 
and  Blue."  The  two  cracked  bells  of  Fontford 
were  doing  their  miserable  best  to  express  sym- 
pathy in  the  universal  joy,  while  the  three  jangling 
bells  of  Summerleas  were  clanging  away  under 


270  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

charge  of  George,  whose  temperance,  to  judge  by 
the  smell  of  ale  in  the  belfry,  was  now  in  the  most 
imminent  clanger.  "  Hang  Tom  Paine,  wholl  help 
we,"  went  the  Summerleas  bells  as  old  Mr.  Beau- 
flower  used  to  say.  "  We  wool,"  answered  the  peal 
of  Fontford.  "  One,  two,  three,  four,  five — one, 
three — one,  two — five,"  carolled  the  full  and 
silvery  peal  of  Slobury. 

At  the  Abbey  an  amateur  band  from  Bi- 
bury  welcomed  them  with  "Campdown  Eaces," 
fading  into,  "  The  Giid  I  left  behind  Me."  The 
Barkers'  servants,  in  claret  and  canary,  were  all 
waiting  in  the  portico  to  usher  in  the  guests. 
The  female  servants  were  at  the  stair  windows. 
Tremendous  cheering  when  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Harker 
advanced  and  shook  hands  with  the  prize  turkeys.. 
Business  began  with  general  wine  and  cakes, 
on  which  the  great  hearty  farmers  fastened  like 
blood-hounds,  tipping  each  other's  glasses,  and 
thinking  it  ''  the  right  thing "  to  drink  each 
other's  health  and  shout  out  "  Here's  to  'ee,  Mr. 
Harker,"  or  "  I  looks  towards  ye,  marm." 

The  babble  of  chatter  and  laughter  was  hushed 
at  last  by  the  furious  blow  of  a  stick  (as  if  a  heads- 
man, had  just  cut  off  Mr.  Harker 's  head)  on  the 
table.  It  was  the  chairman  of  the  Committee 
ready  for  immediate  action. 

"  Silence  !  silence  for  the  chair,"  shouted  forty 


THE   VERY    GRATIFYING   PRESENTATION.      271 

or  fifty  eager  voices,  inured  to  shouting  to  and  at 
ploughmen  and  shepherds — the  excited  farmers 
forgetting  they  were  not  at  the  Harker  Arms,  and 
that  there  was  no  chair. 

"  Gentlemen/'  shouted  Mr.  Pitts,  "  we  all  know 
what  we  have  met  for  here  to-day ;  and  I  am  the 
unworthy  individual  delegated — if  I  may  use 
such  an  expression — delegated  to  be  your  spokes- 
man. We  have  met  here  to-day  in  such  large 
numbers  to  express  our  visible  sense  of  the 
virtue,  generosity,  high  feeling,  benevolence,  and 
public  spirit  of  a  certain  gentleman.  We  have 
known  him  now  for  many  years,  and  have 
always  found  him  kind,  hospitable,  courteous, 
and  w^ithout  pride.  I  might  say  we  do  not 
value  him  the  less,  because  he  is  true  blue  to  the 
core  (tremendous  cheering  and  laughter) ;  and  if 
I  do  say  so,  I  trust  any  Eads  or  Yellow  Boys  here 
vnR  forgive  me  (great  laughter).  I  have  not  the 
gift  of  eloquence,  gentlemen.  (Yes.)  I  will,  there- 
fore only  say  that  we,  the  gentlemen,  yeomen,  and 
tradesmen  of  South  Wiltshire,  present  this  silver 
dinner  service  to  Mr.  Harker,  of  Summerleas 
Abbey,  in  testimony  of  our  extreme  regard,  es- 
teem, and  affection  (an  earthquake  of  applause — 
one  yeoman,  who  had  taken  too  much  brandy- 
and-water  at  the  Harker  Arms,  even  threw  up 
his  hat — then  Kentish  fire,  and  what  the  Ame- 


272  THE    VICARS    COURTSHIP. 

ricans  call  a  ''tiger" — that  is,  a  wild  howl  of 
admiration). 

Mr.  Harker  rose,  like  Neptune  after  a  gale,  eyes 
downcast,  voice  tremulous  with  all  the  emotion  of 
a  fashionable  preacher.  Three  times  he  essayed 
to  begin,  three  times  his  emotion  checked  him, 
and  he  had  to  sip  the  edge  of  an  empty  tumbler, 
which  did  extremely  well.  We  need  not  report 
(though  of  course  we  shall)  his  speech,  which 
Avas  duly  kneaded  into  the  table  by  the 
speaker's  inverted  knuckles.  He  never  had  ex- 
pected to  witness  such  a  sight  as  had  just  dawned 
upon  him — a  man  without  rank  or  title,  yet  always 
zealous  to  win  his  neighbours'  esteem,  and  to 
encourage  country  sports  and  all  generous  move- 
ments. Till  the  last  throb  of  his  heart,  he  hoped 
to  show  to  his  friends  the  splendid  testimonial 
that  day  presented  to  him,  &c.,  &c.  He  would 
now,  therefore,  if  they  would  do  him  the  honour, 
lead  them  the  way  to  the  room  where  a  very- 
humble  cold  collation  had  been  laid  out  for  their 
refreshment. 

''Eefreshment"  cue  for  the  band,  which  instantly 
slewed  round  right  and  left  of  the  hall,  and  struck 
up  ''See  the  Conquering  Hero  comes,"  shortly 
to  be  modified  into  the  "  Eoast  Beef  of  Old 
England."  The  guests,  led  by  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Harker,  with  as  much  promptitude  as   if   they 


THE   VERY   GRATIFYING   PRESENTATION.      273 

had  been  drilled  for  a  Druiy  Lane  tableau, 
instantly  defiled  after  the  noble  pair — Lord  Maza- 
gan  following  with  Miss  Harker.  Cantelupe  had 
unaccountably  absented  himself;  in  fact,  to  tell  the 
plain  truth,  he  was  quietly  having  lunch  with  the 
Robinsons,  who  had  been  allowed  to  have  Amy 
home  that  whole  day.  The  tune  ceased.  The 
trumpets  struck  up  a  flourish,  as  the  folding 
doors  were  sharply  unlocked  and  pompously 
thrown  back.  The  cold  collation  was  there 
almost  intact  (two  cold  pheasants  only  were 
missing),  but  the  silver  dinner  service,  the  pre- 
sentation plate,  the  220^.  worth,  was  gone,  stolen. 
Paddy  Blake,  who  was  outside  among  the 
villagers,  heard  the  shout  of  dismay,  and  grinned 
wickedly  as  he  pushed  at  the  backs  of  the  others. 
P.  C.  Archer,  treating  virtue  more  than  ever  as  a 
thing  to  be  regarded  with  tolerance,  but  suspicion, 
burst  through  the  crowd  and  asserted  himself. 
He  examined  the  bolts  of  the  glass  windows, 
they  were  open.  He  sprang  on  to  the  lawn, 
there  were  foot-marks  of  two  men  on  the  frosty 
grass.  He  tracked  them  to  a  side  gate  where 
there  were  recent  marks  of  the  wheels  of  a 
dog-cart  on  the  Wiley  road.  Wiley  was  a  station 
of  the  Great  Western.  We  cannot  stop  to  sketch 
Mr.  Harker's  indignation,  or  the  general  rage, 
surprise,  and  vexation.     The  two  commercial  tra- 


274  THE   vicar's   COURTSHIP. 

vellers  at  the  Slobuiy  Eailway  Hotel  had  left  that 
morning  in  a  dog-cart,  with  a  square  black  chest. 
They  were  to  be  back  at  night.  They  never 
returned — their  trunks  were  found  full  of  flints 
and  brickbats,  together  with  a  copy  of  Ains- 
worth's  improving  novel,  "  Jack  Sheppard  f  a  flash 
song  book,  two  false  beards  and  a  reversible  coat. 
"They  were  the  boys,"  P.  C.  Archer  said,  grimly 
posting  it  all  up.  Major  Donovan  had  indeed 
met  them  that  very  morning  at  twelve  near  the 
side  park  gate.  Mr.  Bassevi,  who  had  arranged  the 
plate  tastefully  and  to  Mr.  Harker's  great  satisfac- 
tion, had  left  the  room  Avindows  and  door  locked 
at  twenty  minutes  to  twelve.  It  was  generally 
supposed  that  the  pseudo-commercial  travellers 
were  professional  London  thieves,  "  old  hands," 
and  that  they  had  either  got  hold  of  some  servant 
of  the  house ;  or  had  contrived  to  meet  in  the 
train,  as  he  returned,  the  jeweller's  man  who 
brought  the  service  from  Salisbury  the  night 
before,  and  worm  out  of  him  the  time  when  it 
would  be  placed,  and  other  jDarticulars.  Mr. 
Travers,  the  head-keeper,  also  threw  some  little 
light  on  the  matter,  for  he  had  met  the  two  men 
whom  he  had  seen  at  the  Eailway  Hotel,  lurking 
about  the  Abbey  Wood,  pretending  they  had  lost 
the  way.  He  warned  them  off*  civilly,  they 
thanked  him,  and  offered  him  a  cigar.     It  was 


THE    VEEY   GRATIFYING   PRESENTATION.      275 

all  "  up/'  P.  C.  Yincent  tliouglit,  and  the  London 
police  agreed  with  him. 

The  plate  had  no  doubt  been  whipped  off  to  Lon- 
don by  fast  train,  just  caught,  hammered  at  once 
into  lumjDS,  and  melted  into  white  sauce  ten 
minutes  after  it  reached  Whitechapel.  Anyhow 
this  is  certain,  it  was  never  heard  of  again,  nor  did 
a  fresh  subscription  list  spring  up,  although  Mr. 
Bassevi  privately  offered  the  Committee  as  a  great 
bargain  the  solid  silver  service,  good  as  new,  of 
Baron  Slippenback,  the  late  ambassador  from 
Oberkopfundohrindet.  A  subscription  list,  as 
Lord  Chatham  said  of  confidence,  is  a  plant  of 
slow  growth. 

Poor  Paddy  Blake  was  taken  up  on  suspicion, 
but  as  he  remained  prudently  silent  on  certain 
matters,  nothing  could  Ije  proved  against  him. 
He  had  only  come  that  morning,  he  said,  to 
present  a  begging  petition,  he  had  then  gone 
and  had  some  beer  at  the  Peal  of  Bells,  and  after 
that  had  been  in  the  crowd  the  whole  time  talking 
to  George,  Mr.  Beauflower  s  gardener,  and  Penny, 
Farmer  Brown's  carter. 


276  THE   vicar's    courtship. 


CHAPTEE  XIV. 

THE    DRIEST    OF    DREE. 

The  Harkers  went  to  town  in  February  and 
took  Amy  with  them,  much  to  the  Vicar's  regret ; 
indeed  it  made  quite  a  blank  in  the  pleasant  little 
circle  of  the  Eobinsons,  Dr.  Briscoe,  Miss  Chivers, 
and  the  Chetwynds.  They  returned  in  great 
state  about  the  middle  of  March,  to  give  a  round 
of  county  parties  before  the  election  for  Slobury, 
and  before  returninof  to  their  London  home  in 
Piccadilly  for  the  season. 

It  was  an  early  March  day ;  the  leafless  sloe, 
reckless  prodigal,  Avas  already  in  flow^er,  and  the 
buckthorn  w^ould  soon  follow  suit.  The  elder 
was  already  opening  its  yellow  green  leaves,  and 
the  sticky  chestnut  buds  were  beginning  to  throw 
off  their  dark  waterproofs.  The  little  brushwood 
round  the  old  elms  was  brio^htenins  and  Q-Hm- 
mering  with  glimpses  of  emerald  leaflets.  The 
disconsolate  leafless  yellow  jasmin  was  in  flower, 
the    almond    trees   were   in    a   glow    of   creamy 


THE    DRIEST    OF   DREE.  277 

pink,  the  crocuses  had  long  since  thrust  theii* 
golden  spear-heads  through  the  dark  earth.  The 
rooks  sat  watching  somewhat  ruefully  their  great 
bushes  of  nests  up  in  the  Abbey  trees,  as  if  the 
cares  of  the  married  state  had  somewhat  exceeded 
their  expectations.  Every  now  and  then  a  thrush 
sent  forth  a  trial  note,  and  then  relapsed  into  a 
vague  warble,  as  if  turning  up  a  little  prematurely 
for  the  great  opening  concert  of  the  May  season. 
Every^vhere,  however,  in  spite  of  the  cold  winds, 
those  last  roarinos  of  the  lion  that  usher  in  the  lamb, 
life  and  hope  began  to  assert  themselves,  and  pre- 
pare for  the  annual  resurrection  from  the  dead. 
Green  leaves  rose  like  magic  in  the  dry  withered 
brake,  just  as  hope  re\dves  in  a  frozen  heart ;  little 
fairy  plants  of  countless  forms  of  disregarded 
beauty,  came  to  pay  court  to  the  Lady  Primrose 
as  their  queen.  Even  the  ground-ivy  spread  its 
white-veined  leaves  more  rejoicingly,  and  began 
to  beheve  in  the  possibility  of  summer ;  while 
in  the  brook  the  cresses  thickened  greener,  and 
the  trout  darted  faster  between  the  long^  waverinor 
drifts  of  weed  that  rippled  like  mermaids'  hair. 

Mr.  Harker,  passing  over  the  great  arch  floor 
that  sounded  hollow  as  a  grave  under  his  heavy 
tread,  walked  slowly  up  the  road  that  turned  off  to 
the  village  of  Summerleas  and  passed  the  Vicarage. 
He  had  a  hea\y  gold-mounted  pimento  stick  in 


278  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

one  liand,  and  a  folded  newspaper  in  tlie  other. 
He  stood  for  a  moment  at  the  turning  like  a  man 
who  had  not  quite  decided  on  a  certain  line  of 
action,  and  looked  towards  the  village.  He 
sneered  as  he  saw  a  scaffolding  erected  round  the 
old  square  church  tower,  and  men  in  the  church- 
yard preparing  mortar,  and  squaring  stones  from 
the  Tisbury  quarries. 

"  Fool,"  he  said  to  himself,  "  beginning  without 
counting  the  cost,  but  he'll  suffer  for  it.  I  won't 
lift  my  finger  to  help  him,  unless  I  have  my  own 
way  in  everythiug.  He  has  thwarted  me  once 
already,  he  shan't  do  it  again." 

As  he  stood  there  the  front  door  opened,  and 
Beauflower  and  his  sister  came  out  chatting  with 
worthy  old  Miss  Chivers,  and  showing  her  a 
japonica  under  the  drawing-room  window  that 
was  in  a  mass  of  crimson  bloom.  They  saw  Harker 
and  bowed,  and  Harker  took  off  his  hat  in  return. 

He  stood  there  for  a  moment  or  two  more, 
watching  a  handful  of  dead  leaves  which  hope- 
lessly passed  him  down  the  dry  cold  road,  and 
then  turned  towards  the  lodge.  A  smart  dark 
green  dog-cart,  wheels  picked  out  with  white,  and 
drawn  by  a  good-looking  horse,  stood  at  Travers's 
door,  in  care  of  a  boy.  The  door  was  open,  and 
Mr.  Harker  stepped  in  sternly.  The  room  was 
handsomely  furnished,  new  chairs,  curtains,  look- 


THE    DRIEST    OF    DREE.  279 

ing-glass,  sofa,  all  new,  and  contrasting  strangely 
with  the  plain  rows  of  blue  plates  of  an  ordinary 
poor  man's  house.  The  keeper's  wife,  a  coarse 
timid  drudge,  was  washing  up  some  dishes  at  a 
side  dresser,  and  two  rough  neglected  looking 
children  were  playing  by  the  fire,  one  dragging 
about  a  little  cart  filled  with  sacks  of  sawdust, 
the  bigger  one  playing  with  a  dead  owl. 

"  Is  Travers  in  \ "  said  Mr.  Harker,  peremp- 
torily. 

"  He's  in  the  other  house,  sir,  cleaning  a  gun. 
Shall  I  caU  him,  sii^  ? " 

"No,  never  mind,  I'll  go  to  him." 

As  Mr.  Harker  stepped  across  the  archway  to 
the  opposite  room,  a  young  game-keeper  with  his 
o'un  under  his  arm  came  from  it,  and  a  harsh 
voice  shouted  after  him — 

"  KiU  'em  ever}'one,  I  say." 

The  man  touched  his  hat  respectfully  as  he 
passed,  and  Mr.  Harker  entered  at  the  open  door. 
Travers  was  there  with  his  back  to  the  door,  one 
foot  on  a  chair,  oiling  a  gun-barrel  that  rested  on 
his  right  knee.  He  had  on  a  new  black  velvet 
shooting  jacket  with  bronze  sporting  buttons,  and 
a  long  drab  cloth  waistcoat.  His  favourite  one- 
eyed  terrier  w^as  by  his  side  as  usual.  He  turned 
round  when  Mr.  Harker  entered,  and  greeted  him 
with  an  insolently  familiar  nod. 


280  THE    VICAe's    courtship. 

"  You  seem  to  forget  who  I  am  ? "  said  Mr. 
Harker. 

"  Oh  no,  I  don't  forget ;  but  what  use  is  it  being 
civil  ?  you  wouldn't  believe  I  mean  it,  so  I  shan't 
try.  We  understand  each  other,  that's  sufficient, 
Mr.  Harker.  I  know  well  enough  you'll  get  rid 
of  me  if  you  can,  but  you  can't,  and  that's  all 
about  it." 

"  Have  you  seen  the  letter  in  to-day's  Salisbury 
Journal  ? " 

"  No.  I  don't  get  my  jDaper  till  the  afternoon. 
AVhat's  the  letter  about — you  or  me  ?  " 

"  You  shall  hear."  Mr.  Harker  unfolded  the 
paper,  sat  down  at  the  window,  and  read  the 
following — the  Wiltshire  dialect  of  which  we 
purposely  suppress.  It  was  headed — "  A  Coin- 
cidence." 

"Salisbury,  March  14,  1861. 

"Dear  Master  Headeater, — 

"  How  odd  things  do  happen !  Last 
Friday  as  I  and  two  of  Squire  Howard's  shep- 
herds as  'ad  comed  in  to  attend  the  market  were 
passing  down  Catherine  Street  rather  the  worse 
for  dree  gallons  of  ale,  as  Farmer  Johnson  of 
Knoyle  ad  gien  us,  we  ran  just  at  the  door  of  the 
furrier's  shop  (No.  27),  full  butt  against  the  head 
kipper  of  Squire  Harker  of  Summerleas,  one  of 


THE    DRIEST    OF    DEEE.  281 

the  most  zealous  sportsmen  as  follows  tlie  hounds 
that  Mr.  Cantelupe  hunts.  We  had  always  heard 
of  Muster  Barker's  zeal  for  the  noble  sport,  and  were 
therefore  somewhat  surprised  when,  as  we  jolted 
against  kipper,  a  loose  parcel  of  foxes  skins  fell 
from  under  his  arm.  He  scrabbled  them  up  directly 
under  the  paper  and  said  they  were  rabbits,  but 
that  cock  won't  fight.  Perhaps  this  may  account, 
Mr.  Headeater,  for  Muster  Cantekipe's  hounds  so 
seldom  findinor  in  the  Summerleas  Woods. 
"  I  am,  dear  Muster  Headeater, 

"The  Driest  of  the  Dree." 

(Driest  of  the  Three.) 

"'  Do  you  know  what  rascal  vmote  that  lie  ?  " 

Travers  grinned  mischievously.  "  I  think  I 
do.  It  s  Paddy  Blake  and  his  friend  the  drunken 
schoolmaster,  at  Birdbrook.  I  saw  them  together 
last  week  at  the  Peal  of  Bells,  and  I  thought  they 
were  up  to  some  mischief." 

"  I  will  write  to-day  and  contradict  it." 

"  You'd  better  not." 

"  Why  ?  " 

"  Because,  look  here,  it's  all  true.  Paddy  Blake 
and  two  other  men  did  see  the  jDarcel  fall  last 
market  day.  If  you  write  to  contradict  it,  I 
shall  write  to  say  it's  true." 

"  You'd  better  take  care,  Travers." 


282  THE    vicar's    OOUETSHIP. 

*'  I  shan't  take  no  care  whatever.  I  warn  you, 
if  you  write  and  contradict  this,  I  will  write  and 
tell  who  gave  me  orders  to  kill  all  the  foxes." 

"  Take  care,  take  care.'' 

"  It's  you  to  take  care,  mister.  You  know  what 
I  know.  It's  you  who  have  to  be  afraid.  I  tell 
you  I  did  drop  the  skins,  I  didn't  go  to  drop 
them,  but  they  dropped  of  themselves,  and  they 
was  seen.  It  can't  be  helped,  and  it's  no  use  being 
rusty  about  it ;  but  if  you  write  and  say  it's  a 
lie,  I'll  write  and  say  it's  true,  and  that  they 
were  foxes,  killed  by  your  orders ;  so  make  the 
best  of  that." 

Mr.  Harker  slammed  the  door  behind  him,  and 
walked  away.  His  eyes  rolled  like  those  of  a 
madman,  a  cold  dew  broke  out  on  his  upper  lip. 

"  If  murder  was  only  a  little  safer,"  he  muttered 
to  himself,  raising  his  stick  as  if  it  was  an  axe, 
"  I'd  kill  that  man." 

A  shadow  moving  within  his  shadow  heard 
those  words,  and  descended  with  them  at  once 
to  the  abodes  of  the  lost. 


THE    farmer's    ordinary.  283 


CHAPTEK  XV. 

THE    farmer's    ordinary. 

Market  day  at  Bibuiy  is,  and  always  has 
])een,  a  lively,  bustling  day.  Great  trotting  of 
irregular  cavalry  from  earliest  morning ;  great 
tossing  up  of  liandfuls  of  corn  from  sample 
sacks  in  the  corn-market ;  great  exchange  of 
heavy  professional  jokes,  turning,  on  the  rotation 
of  crops,  the  price  of  oats,  and  other  playful 
matters ;  great  bawling  out  by  Cheap  Jacks  of 
the  extraordinary  merits  of  Birmingham  halter 
chains,  many-bladed  knives,  cart-whips,  boot-laces, 
and  such  articles. 

It  is  a  day  when  gaunt  horses  in  the  central 
street,  stimulated  by  Indian  spices,  strangely  ad- 
ministered, and  punched  in  the  ribs  till  they  are 
nearly  stove  in,  and  coaxed  into  wild  gambadoes 
and  ceaseless  trots — a  day  when  acrobats,  tired 
with  long  and  thirsty  pilgrimages  over  the 
Downs  rouse  themselves  once  more  with  "  sups  '' 
of  gin,  and  spit  fire,   swallow  knives,  and  spin 


284  THE    vicar's    COUETSHIP. 


brass  bowls  for  hours,  Avitli  a  well-assumed  air  of 
enjoymeDt,  urged  on  by  the  hopes  of  a  good  dinner 
for  one  day  at  least. 

All  day,  from  nine  o'clock  when  the  first  carts 
began  to  arrive,  till  four,  when  the  farmer's 
ordinary  broke  up,  and  the  farmers  began  to 
remount  for  home,  there  was  a  ceaseless  working 
in  and  out  of  the  Blue  Boar  and  the  White 
Hart.  There  was  also  much  lively  bargaining 
for  hats,  coats,  cigar  cases,  copper  kettles,  garden 
rollers,  mowing  machines,  chain  harrows,  and 
other  useful  and  ornamental  things,  to  the 
thorough  waking  up  of  the  dead-alive  old  Abbey 
town,  which  the  next  day,  exhausted  by  its 
"little  hour"  of  dissipation,  Avould  fall  into 
the  most  melancholy  collapse  that  could  well  be 
conceived. 

On  this  particular  market  day  unusual  excite- 
ment prevailed  among  the  buyers  and  sellers  of 
corn  and  sheep,  from  the  fact  that  young  Brown, 
several  times  remanded  in  order  to  obtain  fresh 
evidence,  was  to  be  brought  up  for  final  examina- 
tion. Mr.  Harker  was  present,  but  refused  to  sit 
as  a  magistrate,  he  being  personally  interested  in 
the  case.  Travers  and  the  keepers  were  all  there 
(a  mass  of  brown  velveteen  and  leggings).  To 
add  to  the  excitement  of  the  day,  every  blank 
wall  was  plastered  with  staring  blue  and  yellow, 


THE    FAEMERS    OEDINARY.  285 

addresses  from  the  several  candidates  of  the  forth- 
coming Bibury  election. 

Lord  Mazagan,  Mr.  Cantelupe,  Colonel  Har- 
court,  took  their  seats  on  the  bench  at  eleven 
precisely.  Near  them  sat  Mr.  Harker.  Dr. 
Briscoe  had  stolen  a  morning  to  hear  the  case, 
in  which  he  felt  great  interest  and  by  his  side 
was  Mr.  Goodrick,  whom  he  had  driven  over, 
as  that  gentleman  had  some  business  in  the 
town  with  a  decorator.  Beauflower,  too,  had  rid- 
den over  at  old  Brown's  particular  request,  and 
had  a  seat  on  the  bench  beside  his  friends,  and 
Major  Donovan,  who  had  come  over  in  a  light 
cart  with  the  landlord  of  the  Harker  Arms,  was 
prominent  in  the  crowd.  The  court  was  full  of 
sympathising  farmers,  townspeople,  gamekeepers, 
and  tradesmen.  There  was  a  slight  murmur  of 
kindly  feeling  when  young  Brown  appeared  in 
the  box,  rather  paler  than  usual,  but  gay  and 
careless  as  ever.  He  nodded  to  all  his  friends, 
and  bowed  to  the  Bench.  There  was  a  recent 
scar  upon  his  left  temple,  which  Travers  pointed 
out  mockingly  to  the  bystanders.  The  young- 
fellow's  bail  had  been  refused  till  the  extent  of 
the  keeper's  injuries  could  be  ascertained. 

*'  Call  in  Thomas  Archer,  police  constable," 
said  the  clerk  of  the  Court,  a  little  testy,  sharp, 
bustling,  red  whiskered  attorney.     The  impertur- 


286  THE   VICARS    COURTSHIP. 

bable  policeman  appeared,  and  deponed  that  tlie 
niglit  of  the  fight  in  Bagley  Wood  he  was  walking 
on  the  road  to  Fontford,  when  he  met  Mr.  Travers 
and  two  other  keepers  ;  they  had  just  had  a  tussle 
with  poachers  ;  one  of  the  keepers  had  had  his 
hat  shot  through  ;  another  had  had  a  stab  in  the 
shoulders.  Mr.  Travers,  too,  was  bleeding  at  the 
mouth  and  the  temple.  The  poachers  had  got 
off,  but  the  keepers  all  agreed  that  the  prisoner, 
young  Mr.  Brown,  was  one  of  the  men ;  and 
Travers  said " 

"  We  don't  want  to  hear  what  Mr.  Travers 
said,"  snapped  the  impatient  clerk,  with  an  air  of 
despair ;  "  that'll  do,  Archer,  go  down.  Call 
Eobert  Travers." 

Mr.  Travers  then  gave  his  version  of  the  story 
in  a  blustering  way.  "  The  night  was  dark,  but 
the  moon  rose  just  before  they  met  the  poachers. 
While  he  was  striking  at  one  of  the  men  who  had 
attacked  him  with  the  butt  end  of  a  gun,  the 
poacher's  crape  mask  blew  up,  and  he  saw  it  was 
the  prisoner — he  would  swear  it." 

"  Why,  man,  you  are  sv^earing  it,"  said  Lord 
Mazagan,  angrily. 

^^  How  much  of  the  fellow's  face  did  you  see  ? " 
said  Colonel  Harcourt.  "  Now,  sir,  on  your 
oath — we  must  have  this  clear." 

"  I  saw  his  mouth,  and  chin,  and  part  of  his 


THE   farmer's   ordinary.  287 

whiskers.  They  were  of  the  same  colour  as  the 
prisoner's.     He  had  on  a  brown  greatcoat." 

A  murmur  ran  through  the  court,  fiercely 
checked  by  Mr.  Brice,  the  red-whiskered  terrier. 
The  magistrates  put  their  heads  together,  and 
Cantelupe  looked  at  Beauflower,  as  much  as  to 
say, — this  won't  do,  you  know. 

The  young  fellow's  defence  was  well  made  out 
by  Mr.  Eaynard,  a  sharp  attorney  from  Salisbury. 
He  called  reliable  witnesses  to  prove  that  exactly 
a  quarter  of  an  hour  before  the  fight.  Brown  was 
playing  at  billiards  at  the  Eailway  Hotel,  Slobury, 
with  two  commercial  men,  who,  it  was  sinofular 
enough,  had  since  been  discovered  to  be  the 
members  of  the  swell  mob  who  carried  ofi"  Mr. 
Harker's  Presentation  Plate,  and  accomplices  of 
a  gang  well  known  in  Scotland  Yard  as  card- 
sharpers.  BrowTL  lost  5/.  to  them  in  the  second 
game,  then  suspecting  he  had  got  into  bad 
hands,  he  had  called  for  a  glass  of  brandy  and 
water,  and  ridden  on  to  SwallowcHfi'  to  sup  with 
the  head  groom  there.  He  left  Swallowclifi"  at 
nine  o'clock,  and  reached  home  a  little  before 
ten.     He  had  on  a  white  waterproof. 

Here  Mr.  Harker  whispered  some  suggestions 
to  ]Mr.  Ferret,  who  was  conducting  his  case.  It 
was  suggested  that  the  marker  at  the  billiard 
room,  who  deponed  to  the  time,  might  be  half-an- 


288  THE    vicar's    courtship. 


hour  wrong,  and  that  Brown,  changing  his  coat, 
had  perhaps  dashed  off  across  country  to  keep 
an  engagement  with  the  poachers  at  the  wood, 
which  w^as  on  the  Slobury  side  of  the  Abbey  pro- 
perty. The  marker,  being  cross-examined,  con- 
fessed that  the  clock  was  five  minutes  or  more  slow. 

Old  Brown  looked  very  worn  and  anxious  as 
Mr.  Harker  leaned  across  Dr.  Briscoe,  and  Avhis- 
pered  audibly  to  Beauflower — 

"  You'll  see  he'll  be  committed  at  once." 

The  magistrates  retired  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour  ; 
at  the  end  of  that  time  they  returned,  and  Lord 
Mazagan  instantly  discharged  the  prisoner.  There 
was  no  evidence,  he  said,  at  all  satisfactory  or 
sufficient  to  connect  him  with  the  assault  upon 
the  keeper. 

Young  Brown,  bowing  to  the  Bench,  instantly 
vaulted  down  among  his  friends,  who,  with  a 
tremendous  shout  of  exultation,  lifted  him  on 
their  shoulders  and  bore  him  off  in  triumph. 

"  Silence  in  the  court  1 "  barked  the  clerk.  But 
it  was  in  vain.  The  shout,  like  the  shout  when 
the  seven  bishops  were  acquitted,  spread  into  the 
street,  and  from  the  street  into  the  market-place, 
till  all  Bibury  rang  with  it.  It  was  in  vain  to 
pounce  upon  any  offender  for  contempt  of  the 
unpaid  administrators  of  justice,  for  a  hundred 
people  at  least  had  shouted,  and  they  were   all 


THE    farmer's    ordinary.  289 

scattered  now  over  the  resounding  town.  Mr. 
Barker  was  silently  furious,  his  rage  being  usually 
of  a  snakish  and  mute  kind.  Mr.  Cantelupe  offered 
consolation. 

"The  case  hadn't  really  a  leg  to  stand  on. 
Travers  said,  last  time,  he  saw  the  prisoner's 
whole  face.     Eeally  couldn't  v^'ork  it." 

"Stuff  and  nonsense,"  said  Mr.  Barker.  "If 
it  had  gone  before  the  Duke  the  rascal  would 
have  been  committed  on  the  first  hearing.  Har- 
conrt's  an  old  fool  —  always  some  ridiculous 
scruples — because  he  has  no  game  himself." 

In  the  meantime  the  Browns  and  all  their 
adherents  had  hurried  off  to  the  "Blue  Boar"  to 
be  in  time  for  the  farmer's  ordinary  at  half-past 
one.  There  was  a  great  trampling  upstairs  at 
the  "  Blue  Boar,"  and  many  were  the  noisy  and 
laughing  greetings  to  the  good-natured  landlady 
in  the  blue  ribbons. 

The  ordinary  was  held  in  a  large  first-floor 
room,  that  looked  half  like  a  billiard-room  and 
half  like  two  bedrooms  knocked  into  one.  There 
were  no  chandeliers  and  no  looking-glasses,  and, 
with  its  great  staring  wall-paper  (bunches  of  roses 
as  large  as  cabbages),  and  no  sofiis,  it  looked  very 
new,  raw,  and  uninviting.  A  long  table  stood 
at  either  side  of  the  room,  as  at  a  school, 
and  a  cross  table  at  the  top,  by  the  windows, 

VOL.    II.  U 


290  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

bracketed  these  together.  It  was  all  noise,  serious 
eating,  and  bustle.  There  were  trains  to  catch 
and  business  to  conclude  :  there  was  no  time  for 
dallying  over  side-dishes,  and  not  much  for  quiet 
comfort.  The  hearty  Wiltshire  dialect  raged  all 
over  the  room ;  hard,  dogged,  rugged,  honest 
Saxon,  spoken  with  closed  lips  to  keep  out  the 
cold,  the  D  always  standing  for  the  T,  and  the 
Z  for  the  S,  as  in  George's  story  to  the  Vicar. 
"  Noa,  I  can't  get  a  drop  mwore  down  \m ; 
drow^'t  auver  ni  veace." 

As  the  crowd  jostled  good-naturedly  to  their 
seats,  hungry  as  lions,  every  one  who  met  good 
old  Farmer  Brown  and  his  son  shook  hands  with 
them  so  heartily  that  the  tears  rose  in  the  good 
old  fellow's  eyes  as  he  sat  dowTi  between  two 
sandy  giants  from  Dorsetshire  way,  and  his  son 
took  a  chair  opposite. 

"  Well,  Farmer  Brown,  can  I  have  ten  sacks 
more  of  them  kidneys  "? "  shouted  the  stentorian 
chairman,  who  was  hewing  at  an  unctuous 
mountain  of  boiled  beef 

"  I  han't  got  narn  more.  Muster  Bletchworth  ; 
and  bezides,  I  do  want  'un  mezelf,  don't  I,  Bob  ? " 

This  favourite  and  durable  old  Wiltshire  joke 
Avas  received  with  uproarious  applause,  as  four  or 
five  joints  w^re  placed  on  the  table  simulta- 
neously.   Farmers,  when  in  society,  have  generally 


THE   farmer's    ordinary.  29l 

a  quaint  custom  of  resting  on  their  oars  after 
being  helped,  and  waiting  till  everybody  can 
begin  at  once  ;  but  now  at  the  ordinary  they  were 
too  hungry,  besides  people  kept  dropping  in 
irregularly ;  but  another  country  custom  they 
zealously  observed,  and  that  was  to  eat  in  solemn 
silence  for  the  first  ten  minutes  or  so.  For  ten 
minutes  no  noise  but  the  clatter  of  knives  and 
forks,  and  a  file  firing  of  "  Thankee,  a  little  bit 
more,"  "  I'll  thankee  for  some  more  beef,"  "  I 
say  you,  some  beer  here,"  "  Pass  the  greens,"  and 
so  on ;  but  gradually  the  fury  of  the  contest 
abated :  the  eating  grew  more  languid,  the 
carvers  had  to  coax  and  the  waiters  to  suggest. 
By  the  time  the  great  cheeses  moved  round,  the 
more  alert  men  were  getting  their  money  ready 
to  pay,  and  one  purple-faced  old  fellow  in  top  boots 
had  actually  called  three  times  for  brandy-and- 
water,  and  lit  a  long  white  pipe  at  a  side  table, 
from  whence  he  viewed  the  ebbing  battle,  as  Jove 
does  man's  puny  struggles,  with  kindly  com- 
posure, though  afar  off.  Bargain-makers  were  now 
wrano-ling;  over  the  old  hitch,  and  some  of  the  more 
excitable,  already  rather  flushed  with  beer,  were 
haranguing  on  the  general  oppression  of  land- 
lords, and  proposing  a  petition  in  the  county 
papers  against  the  cruel  destruction  caused  by 
rabbits,  hares,  and  pheasants. 

u  2 


292  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

Farmer  Brown,  glorious  as  Tarn  o'  Shanter  at 
his  recent  victory,  and  warmed  by  a  second 
mahogany-coloured  tumbler  of  brown  brandy-and- 
water,  was  brimming  over  with  geniality.  The 
chairman,  who  had  abdicated  and  come  down  near 
him,  was  insistinsf  on  one  of  his  "vamous"  stories. 

"Dang  it!  which'll  you  have,  Mr.  Bletch- 
worth.  I'm  not  going  to  spoil  the  arternoon  for 
the  sake  of  a  little  breath,  not  as  mine  is  as  good 
as  it  was,  since  I  caught  tli'  asthma,  getting  wet 
at  'Vizes  fair  six  years  last  Michaelmas." 

"  Why,  William  Little's  story,  to  be  zure,  of 
the  owld  lady  of  AVarminster,  and  the  sit-down 
chayer." 

"  Well,  here  goes,  boys — pass  the  spills — 
thank  'ee.  Bob,  lad,  call  for  what  ye  do  like, 
and  dont'ee  be  aveard  on't.  I  spose  they  won't 
allow  'ee  cigars  in  prezun.  Well,  here's  the  plain 
story,  such  as  it  is.  When  Miss  Barnzo  first 
coomed  to  Warminster,  her  went  out  a  visitin'  in 
one  o'  they  there  things  um  calls  a  zit-down  chayer. 
Zo,  when  th'  two  chaps  as  card  her  knocked  at 
the  dower  o'  Miss  Curtis's  house,  owld  Zarah,  th' 
zarvent — you  remember  owld  Zarah — aupened  un, 
and  cried  out,  '  Noa,  noa  !  gwo  away !  Missus 
doan't  encourage  none  of  them  zart  o'  wosbirds  ! ' 
By-and-by  um  knocks  again,  bold  as  brass,  and 
then  th'   owld  body  coomed  out,  this  time  in  a 


THE  farmer's  ordinary.  293 

towerin'  pashun,  hakerin'  and  zliakiu'  her  vist  at 
um.  '  'Oman,  'oman/  says  Miss  Barnzo,  putting 
her  yeaci  out  o'  tli'  thing,  '  I  dezires  you  take  up 
thick  keard  to  your  missus  (ia'ectly/  Zo,  owld 
Zarah  takes  the  keard,  and  upstairs  a  gwoes. 
*  They  won't  gwo  away,  missus,'  zays  she,  '  noa, 
that  um  won't  no  how.'  '  Who  won't,  Zarah  ? ' 
axed  Miss  Curtis.  '  The  man  as  gi'ed  I  this  here 
keard,  missus,'  says  Zarah,  a  putting  th'  keard 
upon  th'  table.  '  Punch  and  Judy !  I  told  um 
you  didn't  want  to  zee  non'  o'  them  oonder- 
ments ! '  " 

How  the  glasses  shook  with  the  Cyclopean 
laughter  that  this  sound  old  story,  and  others,  soled, 
heeled,  and  vamped,  caused.  It  seemed  to  rouse 
all  the  past  laughter  it  had  ever  caused;  even 
young  greenhorn  farmers,  Avho  had  never  been  as 
far  as  Bath,  and  who  would  not  have  known  a 
Sedan  chair  if  they  had  seen  one,  laughed  as  bois- 
terously as  the  rest;  Farmer  Brown  then  told 
his  almost  equally  famous  story  of  stingy  old 
Squire  Puddle,  "  who  used  to  bargain  wi'  owld 
Smith,  the  mole-catcher,  to  catch  all  the  moles  at 
tuppence  a  yead.  AVhen  the  traps  were  set  the 
stingy  old  oosbird  used  to  get  up  avore  zunrise, 
gwo  to  the  trap,  take  out  the  oont  (mole)  and 
steal  the  trap;  this  saved  him  the  tuppence 
to  owld  Smith,  and  got  un  a  trap  into  the  bargain. 


294.  THE    VICAH'S    COUETSHIP. 

Zo,  when  a  died,"  the  story  concluded,  "um  vound 
two  or  dree  score  o'  oont  traps  put  by  in  a  cub- 
berd  1 " 

But  perhaps  the  most  successful  hit  of  Farmer 
Brown's  was  a  retort  made  by  him  on  an  unlucky 
veterinary  surgeon,  who  ventured  to  stand  up  for 
Mr.  Harker,  and  other  game  preservers. 

"Ah,"  said  he,  "Muster  Willum,  you  be  like 
Jim  Pinnegar,  who  thought  vlies  were  sooner 
caught  with  honey  than  vinegar.  You  knaw 
what  Jim  said  one  night,  when  he  ran  agin  a- 
jackass  in  the  night,  and  thought  it  was  the  owld 
gentleman.  Why,  he  cot  un  by  th'  ear,  and  said, 
'how  zaft  your  horn  is,  zurl'  says  Jim." 

This  retort  took,  it  ran  like  fire  through  straw, 
venerable  as  it  was,  and  young  Brown,  when  the 
stamping  and  beating  of  fists  had  a  little  subsided, 
shouted  to  one  of  the  servants  who  were  waitinsf, 

"  Bring  glasses  round." 

The  indisputable  fact  was  that,  what  with 
excitement,  the  change  of  living,  and  the  in- 
discreet good -nature  of  his  friends,  young  Brown 
was  fast  getting  extremely  and  noisily  drunk. 
One  or  two  men  near  him  were  pressing  him  to 
go ;  others,  residents  of  Slobury,  were  shouting 
to  him  to  stop  and  make  a  night  of  it. 

Mr.  Bletchworth,  a  sturdy  farmer  of  the  good 
old  dogged  type,  saw  the  necessity  of  promptitude. 


THE  farmer's  ordinary.  295 

Young  Brown  was  trying  to  stand  up  and 
make  a  speech  about  the  tyi^annical  way  in  which 
he  had  been  used,  and  the  shame  of  his  bail  being 
refused.  A  red-faced,  violent,  blustering  man 
next  him  was  on  his  legs,  too,  shouting, — 

"  That  it  was  Avusser  than  a  Kooshian  or  a 
Prooshian  court,  and  that  he'd  see  justice  done 
to  his  friend  Brown." 

It  is  usual  in  most  country  discussions  to  thus 
unjustifiably  bracket  Prussia  and  Kussia. 

The  chairman,  who  had  already  paid  his  bill 
with  the  dignity  becoming  the  chairman  of  so 
august  an  assembly,  now  rose  upon  his  legs  and 
(leterminately  buttoned  his  big  coat  across  his 
enormous  chest. 

''Who's  for  my  way,"  he  shouted,  with  the 
voice  of  a  Polyphemus  'bus  conductor  who  has 
lately  dined.  "  Any  one  for  Slobury  ?  I'm  off. 
Come  along,  Brown;  mop  up.  Bob.  It  wiU  be 
dark  long  before  we  get  home." 

"  Whatsh  dark  1  who  caresh  for  dark  ?  I  say 
I  have  been  cruelly  imprishned.  I  ant  a  dog, 
am  I  ?     Bennet,  am  I  a  dog  ?  " 

Bennet,  a  smiling,  quiet,  stout  man,  placidly 
smoking  a  pipe,  next  him,  assured  him  that  to  the 
best  of  his  belief  he  was  not. 

"Come  along.  Bob,"  said  old  Brown;  "good 
even,  gentlemen  aU." 


296  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

And  young  Brown,  like  the  fisherman  in 
Goethe's  Mermaid,  half  yielding,  half  compelled, 
was  persuaded  out  of  the  room. 

*'  I  tell  you  what,  gents,"  said  young  Brown's 
evil  persuader,  "shan't  us  see  him  hum?  Let's 
give  him  music  hum,  there's  half-a-dozen  of  us 
here  in  the  town  of  the  Eifle  band,  we  can 
get  our  instruments  in  a  moment,  and  we'll  make 
a  night  of  it  at  Slobury  and  sleep  at  the  Kailway 
Hotel  if  we  can't  get  no  other  beds.  AVe'll  play 
all  through  Summerleas,  and  give  old  Harker  a 
salute  at  the  Abbey ;  that'll  teach  him  to  pull  up 
innercent  people." 

"  Ay,  that  ar  will.  Look  alive,  lads,"  cried  a 
second  of  the  mischief  makers,  and  in  less  than 
ten  minutes,  in  spite  of  all  Farmer  Brown's 
"  dont'ee ;  now,  dont'ee  ! "  a  cavalcade  of  six  or 
seven  light  carts,  gigs,  and  chaises,  set  out  for 
Slobury,  preceded  by  a  chaise  containing  two 
cornets  and  two  ophicleides,  playing  "Johnny 
comes  marching  Home"  defiantly,  loudly  cho- 
russed  by  audacious  young  Brown,  who,  as  the 
cavalcade  passed  Mr.  Harker's  barouche  with  that 
gentleman  in  it  leaning  back,  very  dark  and 
sullen,  shouted,  in  spite  of  all  his  father's  pinches 
and  pulHngs, — 

"Where's  the  plate  1  Who  stole  the  plate? 
Yah!" 


THE    FAPvMER's    OPwDIXARY.  297 

And,  indeed,  lie  even  2^ot  so  audaciouslv  out- 
rageous  that  he  tried  to  snatch  his  father  s  whip, 
and  make  a  cut  at  Mr.  Barker's  sour  and  indig- 
nant coachman. 

It  was  at  this  very  moment  that  Mr.  Beau- 
flower  overtook  the  noisy  procession ;  it  was  about 
two  miles  out  of  Bibury.  He  pulled  up  his  horse, 
and  begged  Farmer  Brown  not  to  make  any 
demonstration  in  Summerleas. 

"  I  must  confess,"  he  said,  ''  Mr.  Brown,  that  I 
think  your  son  has  been  rather  severely  used." 

"  Shameflly  ushed,"  hiccupped  young  Brown. 

''  But  he  is  free  now,  and  you  have  won  the 
victory  over  his  accusers.  Now,  take  my  ad^^ce, 
don  t  push  it  further.  It  will  only  produce  bad 
blood,  and  tend  to  no  other  earthly  result.  Kobert 
was  not  with  the  poachers " 

"  Yesh  I  wash  ;  I  wash  all  there,  and  if  Tsh 
been  there  earlier  thingsh  very  different,"  shouted 
the  incorrigible. 

"  Don't  you  listen  to  what  Bob  says.  Fve 
begged  and  prayed  him,  ^Ir.  Beauflower,"  said  old 
Brown,  "  not  to  let  his  friends  bring  their  music, 
but  they  would  have  it;  they've  most  taken  just 
a  drop  too  much,  and  they  won't  listen  to  me  no 
more  than  a  mad  bull  will  listen  to  a  butcher." 

It  was  evidently  quite  hopeless  to  preach  mode- 
ration any  further,   so   Beauflower  cantered  on, 


298  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

cheered  by  the  whole  party,  Avho  instantly  struck 
up  "  Three  cheers  for  the  Eecl,  White,  and  Blue," 
and  blared  a  drunken  chorus  on  their  brazen 
instruments. 

While  the  Vicar  had  been  speaking  to  Brown, 
Travers  had  driven  past,  and  eyed  him  maliciously, 
as  much  as  to  say, — 

"Ah!  I  thouo'ht  he  Avas  in  with  them." 


THE   WATERFALL.  299 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

THE    WATEEFALL. 

"  I  HAVE  a  great  idea,"  said  Mr.  Goodrick,  one 
morning  in  the  Vicar's  study,  it  being  his  daily 
custom  now  to  first  go  and  see  how  the  men 
got  on  with  his  improvements,  then  to  walk  on 
to  Summerleas,  and  read  the  "Times''  at  the 
Vicarage.  "  I  have  a  great  idea  of  devoting  the 
rest  of  my  life  to  a  literary  work"  of  research." 

"Indeed.     What  work?" 

"The  'History  of  Humbug,'  sh\  Humbug  in 
all  its  branches.  Humbug  of  lawyers,  humbug  of 
doctors,  humbug  of  clerg}mien.  Yes,  I  shall  not 
shirk  that  last  branch.  The  work  will  embrace 
Universal  Mythology,  Quackery,  and  Chicanery; 
and  will  include  Universal  Superstition,  and  the 
Progress  of  Luxury  from  the  Creation." 

"An  extensive  subject,"  said  Beauflower, 
smiling,  as  he  shut  an  atlas  he  was  consulting, 
and  prepared  to  listen. 

"  Yes,  its  roots  spread  wide.    By  the  bye,  Beau- 


300  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

flower,  I  met  Barker  tliis  morning.  He  was  very 
grand,  driving  over  to  Biburj,  about  young  Can- 
telupe's  election,  I  suppose ;  but  the  great  man 
deigned  to  notice  me.  He  actually  bowed,  and  in 
a  most  condescending  way.  Ugli  I  How  is  it 
that  people  who  have  carriages  always  seem  to  put 
on  tliat  manner,  as  if  nothing  outside  the  carriage 
was  or  could  be  worth  reo;ardino^  ?  Where  does 
that  come  from  ?  " 

"  From  the  pride  of  those  they  do  not  notice. 
I  dare  say  you  are  the  same  when  you're  in  your 
carriage.  Well,  what  did  you  do  in  London  ? 
JuJia  is  very  curious  to  know  if  you  went  to  buy 
pictures.  She's  becoming  quite  a  connoisseur 
under  your  instructions." 

"  Well,  I  bid  for  some  pictures  at  Christie's, 
but  they  were  going  too  high.  There  was  only 
one  thing  there  (a  Velasquez),  really  worth  having. 
I  saw  the  German  people  about  the  jewels  for 
Berlin.  They  are  to  have  some  of  mine;  but  come, 
I'll  tell  you  what  I  did  see.     I  saw  some  Divers." 

"  Divers  ?     What  are  they  ?  birds  ?  " 

"  Birds  !  no,  men.  I  have  a  sort  of  Yampyre 
theory  ;  it  is  one  of  my  eccentricities,  that  people 
never  really  die,  they  only  disappear,  dive,  that 
is,  and  come  out  again,  by  a  sort  of  metempsy- 
chosis, in  a  new  stage  of  existence.  Every  now 
and  then  I  recognise  one  of  these  divers.     There 


THE    WATERFALL.  301 

was  a  man  I  used  to  know  on  tlie  Stock  Exchange, 
a  fat  red-faced  man,  fond  of  port-wine  and  a 
coarse  joke.  He  died  (as  tliey  call  it),  three  years 
ago  I  read  his  death  in  the  '  Times.'  Well,  sir,  if 
you'll  believe  it,  I  met  that  man  last  Tuesday, 
the  driver  of  a  Brompton  'bus,  stopping  at  a 
taveru  door  in  South  Kensington,  apparently  as 
thirsty  and  as  fond  of  a  joke  as  ever." 

"  Perhaps  he  levanted.  They  have  done  such 
things  on  the  Stock  Exchange." 

"  Oh,  no  !  not  he.  He  regularly  died  ;  but  there 
he  was  driving  the  'bus,  the  same  man,  nose, 
eyes,  mouth,  manner,  habits.  A  picture-dealer  I 
once  knew  in  Wardour  Street  I  met  last  Christ- 
mas, selling  penny  papers.  No,  people  don't  die, 
they  only  dive." 

INIr.  Goodrick  had  risen  and  gone  to  the  window 
as  he  uttered  these  last  remarks,  and  he  now 
called  Beauflower. 

"  Just  come  and  see  this  fellow,"  he  said;  "  was 
there  ever  such  a  Jack  in  office  ;  there  he  goes  and 
all  his  retinue." 

The  Vicar  came  to  the  window.  It  was  Travers 
passing,  his  gun  on  his  shoulder,  his  one-eyed 
terrier  at  his  heels,  behind  him  an  obsequious 
band  of  under-keepers  and  beaters,  with  guns, 
sticks,  and  nets.  Travers  was  occasionally 
turning  round  to  give  directions  in  a  loud  voice 


302  THE   vicar's    COUETSHIP. 

to  his  attendants,  one  of  whom  would  occa- 
sionally trot  u|)  to  him,  exchange  a  remark, 
and  then  be  dismissed  to  the  rear.  As  they 
passed  over  the  bridge,  and  approached  the 
Vicarage,  Travers  looked  towards  it,  and  made 
some  remark,  at  which  the  whole  of  the  men 
burst  into  a  coarse  laugh. 

''  That  was  a  hit  at  you,  Beauflower,  I'd 
wager,"  said  Mr.  Goodrich ;  "  because  he  pointed^ 
to  the  house  when  he  spoke." 

"  Insolent  scoundrel !  ah!  hell  have  a  fall  some 
day." 

"  Why,  there's  Oantelupe,  I  declare,"  said 
Goodrich,  as  a  young  fellow  on  horseback  suddenly 
darted  round  the  corner  of  the  Lodge  road,  and 
cantered  towards  Fontford. 

It  was  ; — a  thrill  of  jealousy  shot  through  Beau- 
flower's  heart.  It  was  Amy's  half-holiday,  and 
Cantelupe  was  going  over  to  Fontford  to  see  her. 
Oh !  the  agony  of  those  moments,  when  the  in- 
visible sword  pierces,  to  the  severing  of  soul 
and  spirit ;  when  from  such  invisible  but  gaping 
wounds  life  seems  streaming  and  all  joy  and  hope 
pass  with  it.  To  the  baser  jealousy  of  mean 
natures  come  rage  and  hatred ;  but  to  the 
gentler  only  unutterable  sorrow,  regret,  and  des- 
pair, and  a  burning  eagerness  to  know  the  extreme 
of  the  hopelessness,  and  to  be  sure  that  for  them 


THE   WATERFALL.  303 

Love  has  closed  Paradise  for  ever.  Beauflower  saw 
at  once  how  hopeless  was  his  rivalr}"  with  wealth 
and  a  title.  Such  are  the  glittering  baits  that  catch 
women.  Amy  had,  no  doubt,  heard  of  his  embar- 
rassments ;  they  were,  perhaps,  the  general  talk 
of  the  place.  AMiat  right  had  he  to  hojDC  for  her  ? 
He  had  saved  her  life.  True,  but  his  savino-  her 
life  did  not  secure  her  love.  He  could  not  claim 
her  as  if  it  was  his  fee.  AAHio  would  not  have 
risked  his  life  for  her  ?  Perhaps,  suggested  a 
momentary  hope,  Cantelu23e  had  only  ridden  over 
about  the  decorations.  Perhaps  he  was  not  even 
thinking  of  Amy,  and  would  return  before  she 
came.  The  Vicar's  first  impulse  was  to  seize  his 
hat,  at  once  walk  over  to  Fontford,  and  see  by  her 
manner,  when  they  both  met  (she  and  Cantelupe), 
how  far  she  loved  him ;  but  no,  he  dreaded  that : 
to  see  their  eyes  meet,  and  exchange  glances,  that 
would  be  intolerable,  and  he  might  betray  him- 
self, he  who  had  no  right  to  claim  Amy's  love, 
and  who  had  never  even  spoken  of  love  to  her. 

"He  is  jealous,  I  am  sure  he  is.  I  am  sure  he 
is  in  love  with  Amy,"  thought  Goodrich  to  him- 
self, as  he  watched  the  Vicar  from  time  to  time 
over  the  edge  of  his  paper  ;  "  and  well  he  may 
be."     Presently  the  virtuoso  got  up  to  go. 

"  I  shall  go  and  have  a  chat  with  old  Brown," 
he  said,  taking  up  his  hat.      "  I  ■  want  to  hear 


804  THE    VICARS    COUKTSHIP. 

how  that  foolish  young  fellow  is  going  on.    G-ood- 

bye." 

"  You're  to  diijie  with  us  to-day,  of  course  ?  " 

"  No,    thank    you.     IVe    got    old    Eobinson 

comino^.     I  took  advantao:e  of  that  horrible  Irish- 
es o 

man  being  away  at  Shaftesbury,  with  his  detes- 
table champagne.  I  like  chatting  about  pictures 
with  the  old  fellow." 

Troubles  were  falling  thick  on  Beauflower. 
That  morning's  post  had  brought  him  another 
letter  from  the  Oxford  solicitor,  claiming  two 
more  sums  of  money.  One  bill  of  22l.  IO5.  Qd. 
for  scarlet  hunting  coats  and  other  folly ;  and 
another  of  1^1.  ^s.  2d.  for  books.  Both  of  these 
sums  Beauflower  distinctly  remembered  paying  ; 
he  found,  indeed,  memoranda  in  an  old  Oxford 
pocket-book  of  their  payment ;  but  for  the  re- 
ceipts he  looked  in  vain.  In  his  old  thoughtless 
days  he  had  tossed  them,  away,  or  j)laced  them 
in  a  book,  or  in  some  undiscoverable  corner  of  a 
desk,  or  writing  case.  They  could  nowhere  be 
found.  There  was  another  large  deduction  from 
the  175Z.  of  the  next  July.  This  sordid  care  was 
pressing  his  life  out,  and  now  jealousy  also  had 
come  to  rack  his  heart. 

He  would  walk  in  the  spring  woods  and  try 
to  forget  some  of  these  overwhelming  troubles. 
The  ripples  of  the  lake  would  efface  them,  the 


THE    WATERFALL.  305 

birds'  soDgs  lure  Hope  back  again  from  tlie  far 
sky.  The  widening  leaves  should  be  bis  books, 
and  there  he  would  read  of  the  joy  of  existence, 
and  of  God's  goodness. 

So  he  went,  taking  a  by-path  on  the  other 
side  of  the  lake,  straight  (as  if  a  lode  star  at- 
tracted him)  to  those  steps  where  he  had  seen 
Amy  fishing  that  October  afternoon,  when  Love 
waited  for  him  beside  the  water.  There  they 
were,  bare  and  lonely  now ;  no  red  leaves  blown 
into  one  corner ;  no  yellow  leaves  floating  on  the 
water ;  but  the  glutinous  chestnut  buds  were  open- 
ing freshly,  and  the  beech  boughs  were  tinged  with 
April  green.  Some  wood  violets,  lingering  from 
March,  bloomed  there  among  the  mossy  growth 
at  the  edge  of  the  covert.  The  water  reeds  were 
rising  with  their  green  blades  flat  and  sharp,  and 
the  wood-pigeon  was  dwelling  soothingly  on  his 
monotone  of  love.  Gradually  the  cloud  seemed  to 
lift,  the  black  roof  of  care's  tomb  in  which  he  had 
been  self-immured,  to  turn  from  marble  into 
vapour ;  his  heart  grew  lighter,  and  he  began  to 
walk  with  a  freer  and  more  vigorous  step. 

At  the  head  of  the  lake  there  was  a  path  across 
a  dam  which  had  small  Hood-gates,  that  could  be 
opened  when  the  water  rose  too  high.  It  was 
a  pretty  spot,  with  its  little  bridge  of  rustic 
wood- work,  above  an  artificial  fall  of  some  twenty 


306  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

feet ;  below  the  water  streamed  over  stonework, 
built  in  stejDS,  in  a  broad  sheet  of  sounding  foam ; 
or,  at  times  when  the  gates  were  shut,  in  a  thin 
transparent  rippling  veil,  struck  golden  here  and 
there  when  the  sunbeams  glanced  athwart  its 
woof  There  were  birch  trees  all  round  the  place, 
and  an  ash  or  two,  and  their  green  reflections  in 
summer  time  gave  the  spot  an  aspect  of  beauty, 
and  pleasantly  dappled  the  light  and  shadow  that 
chequered  it. 

Beauflower  ascended  to  the  La  Sonnambula 
sort  of  bridge,  and  looked  down.  The  water  was 
frothing  white  in  playful  anger,  and  churning  up 
the  pool  below,  over  which  some  alder  trees 
hung,  sheltering  the  stream  till  it  joined  the 
brook  that  murmured  under  the  Avoods  in  the 
little  valley  that  lay  between  Summerleas  and 
Slobury. 

Sometimes  there  would  be  a  patient  fisherman 
down  by  the  pool,  a  farmer's  boy,  an  old  man 
from  the  nearest  village,  beguiling  an  hour  while 
waiting  for  a  meal,  or  a  keeper  setting  his  night 
lines.  But  there  was  no  one  now.  In  his  present 
mood  Beauflower  seemed  to  feel  himself  alone — 
the  last  man  left  in  the  world.  He  passed  across 
the  bridge,  and  went  round  by  a  stile  into  the 
swampy  field,  down  the  lower  bank  of  which  lay 
the  stream.     The  ground  was  so  irregular  that 


THE   WATERFALL.  307 

lie  could  not  see  the  pool  till  lie  readied  the 
edge  of  the  bank.  He  looked,  and  to  his  surprise 
— almost  alarm — he  saw  a  woman  standino;  on  the 
edge  of  the  stream,  at  the  very  foot  of  the  water- 
fall, and  with  her  back  towards  him.  It  was  Amy ! 
His  heart  seemed  suddenly  to  stop.  Then  there 
had  been  no  pre-arranged  meeting  ^.  she  did  not 
know  that  Cantelupe  had  ridden  over  to  Fontford 
to  see  her.  Perhaps  then  she  might  not  altogether 
love  him.  A  ray  of  hope  darted  across  his  path, 
and  lit  the  road  as  he  ran  down  the  bank  to 
where  she  stood. 

Amy  was  so  wrapped  in  thought,  however,  and 
the  waterfall  was  so  loud,  that  she  did  not  hear 
his  steps.  She  did  not  even  turn,  but  stood  there 
watching  the  bubbles  as  they  sailed  past  and 
broke  when  they  reached  the  calmer  water.  She 
was  startled  when  he  advanced,  but  instantly 
recovered  herself,  and  offered  her  hand. 

"I  really  did  not  hear  you,''  she  said,  with  a 
voice  as  musical  as  the  birds  on  the  bough  over 
their  heads,  "the  water  is  so  loud.  Ethel  and 
Miss  Chivers  have  just  gone  to  see  a  poor  woman 
over  there  in  the  orchard;  a  wife  of  one  of  Farmer 
Brown's  men,  her  baby  is  very  ill." 

"  I  looked  down  from  the  brido;e  and  saw  no 
one,  so  when  I  came  round  and  found  you,  I  really 
thought  it  was  the  Lady  of  the  Lake.    I  expected 

X    2 


308  THE    VICAE's    courtship. 

every  moment  you  would  disappear  into  tlie 
waterfall/' 

"  I  was  thinking/'  Amy  said,  "  of  Tennyson's 
lines  about  the  Brook, — though  that  is  a  different 
sort  of  brook  ;  the  brook  of  a  more  open  country 
and  meadows,  not  a  little  stealthy  half  hidden 
stream  under  a  wood  like  this." 

**  Do  you  feel  quite  strong  again  now  ?  " 

"Yes,  thank  you,  almost.  Oh,  how  can  I 
ever  thank  you  enough  for  your  courage  in  risk- 
ing your  life  to  save  me  '? " 

"  How  '?    Why,  by  sometimes  thinking  of  me." 

"  I  do.  How  unOTateful  I  should  be  if  I  did  not !" 

There  was  a  silence. 

"I  feel,"  Amy  continued,  looking  steadily  at 
the  water,  "that  I  must  leave  clear  Wiltshire 
some  day,  so  Tm  wanting  to  draw  some  of  these 
scenes  from  memory,  and  recall  them  when  I  am 
gone." 

"  They  will  lose  half  their  beauty  when  you  go. 
Let  me  help  you  up  this  bank,  it  is  so  very 
steep."     Amy  took  his  hand  and  clambered. 

"  Papa  says  I  should  do  very  well  for  a  fore- 
ground figure  if  I  would  only  wear  more  red  and 
blue.  HeTL  be  wondering  I  didn't  come,  but  I'm 
going  to  walk  back  presently  with  Miss  Chivers 
when  we've  been  to  see  the  poor  crippled  boy  at 
the  blacksmith's." 


THE   WATERFALL. 


309 


*'  And  will  not  some  one  else  wonder  ? " 
"Some    one    else?     What,   Major  Donovan? 
Whom  do  you  mean  ?     No  one  expects  me  but 
papa  and  mamma;  the  major  is  gone  to  Shaftes- 
bmy  to-day. '* 

"  And  you  never  see  any  other  ^dsitor  1 " 
''Oh,  yes,  that   dreadful   Mr.  Bassevi,  some- 
times." 

''And  never  Mr.  Cantelupe  V 
Amy    quailed    sHghtly, — but    very    slightly; 
perhaps  she  resented  the  mode  of  interrogation. 

"Oh,  yes,  sometimes  Mr.  Cantelupe.  He  is 
very  kind  to  papa,  and  takes  a  great  interest  in 
his  pictures.  I  like  him  because  he  is  so  kind  to 
papa." 

"  And  only  for  that  V  ■ 

"  Yes,  only  for  that." 
"  You  do  not  love  him  then  1 " 
Beauflower  had  stopped,   as  he  said  this,   on 
the  ridge  over  the  waterfall,  and  still  held  Amy's 
hand,  though  his  assistance  was  no  longer  needed. 
"No." 

"  You  are  sure  ?  " 

"  Yes,  I  am  sure.  But  why  do  you  ask  ?  Does 
Julia  think  I'm  in  love  with  Mr.  Cantelupe  ? " 

Just  at  this  moment.  Miss  Chivers  and  Ethel 
appeared  at  the  door  of  the  cottage  in  the 
orchard,    and    began  to   descend    the    meadow. 


810  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

The  Vicar,  in  that  mood  of  jealousy,  was  un- 
willing to  meet  them. 

"No,  Julia  has  said  nothing  on  the  subject." 

"  Please  tell  her  from  me  that  Tm  going  on 
Monday,  the  day  we  meet  at  Miss  Chivers's,  to 
sketch  the  ruin,  if  she  will  call  for  me  about  six, 
on  her  way ;  but  won't  you  Avait  and  see  Miss 
Chivers  and  Ethel  'i  " 

"  No,  thank  you,  I  must  hurry  off.  I  have  got 
to  go  over  to  Birdbrook  with  Julia,  and  shell  be 
waiting.  Good-bye,  Amy — may  I  call  you  Amy, 
Miss  Eobinson  ? " 

"  Yes,  please  do." 

Miss  Chivers  caught  a  glimpse  of  Beauflower 
as  he  passed  over  the  stile  into  the  park,  and  her 
only  remark  was  "  So,  so."  Ethel  said,  "  How 
funny  of  Mr.  Beauflower  not  waiting  to  speak 
to  us." 

At  the  turn  into  the  park,  Beauflower  over- 
took a  pleasant,  portly,  sturdy  friend,  the  rector 
of  Birdbrook,  who  instantly  phmged  into  a  con- 
versation about  the  ChetA^ynd  dilapidations. 

Travers,  who  stood  at  the  lodge  door  as  they 
passed,  touched  his  hat  with  his  usual  half  inso- 
lent civility,  and  hoped  the  little  varmint  was  no 
worse  for  his  accident. 

"  Who  is  that  man  ?  " 

"  A  game-keeper  ?  '*  said  the  A^icar. 


THE   WATEEFALL.  311 

''  I  never  sa^v  sucli  an  unpleasing  fellow.  I 
wouldn't  keep  a  servant  like  that  two  days/' 

"  It  is  Mr.  Barker's  head-keeper,"  said  Beau- 
flower,  "  a  very  bullying,  tyrannical,  disagreeable 
fellow.  No  one  likes  him.  That  dog  he  had  the 
impudence  to  ask  after,  one  of  his  keepers  the 
other  day  shot  at  and  wounded,  by  his  orders  I 
feel  sure." 

"  If  it  had  been  my  dog,"  said  the  choleric  rector 
of  Birdbrook,  '*'  I'd  have  prosecuted  the  rascal." 


312  THE   vicar's    courtship. 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

ON    SUFFERANCE. 

Mrs.  Harker  and  lier  t^yo  daughters  had  gone 
to  dinner  and  a  child's  party  at  Lady  Mazagan  s. 
Lord  Mazagan  had  naturally  been  called  to  London 
to  attend  a  club  conspiracy  of  the  Whig  party. 
Mr.  Harker  had  Bibury  election  business  which 
detained  him  at  home,  in  other  words  he  was  not 
in  the  humour  for  society,  and  he  preferred 
brooding  over  his  darker  schemes  at  home,  the 
more  especially  as  young  Cantelupe  had  just  bor- 
rowed three  thousand  pounds  more — this  made 
the  fifth  mortgage  on  the  Swallowcliff  property — 
to  defray  the  expenses  at  what,  some  veracious 
gentleman  of  entirely  unbiassed  party  feeling — 
that  is,  the  other  party  feeling — had  called  in  the 
House  of  Commons,  "  the  purest  and  most  stain- 
less borough  in  the  whole  circuit  of  Great  Britain." 
It  is  indeed  surprising  how  expensive  disinterested 
electioneering  friends  are ;  singular,  too,  how  the 
price   of  beer   and  sandwiches  goes    up    in   the 


ON   SUFFERANCE.  313 

barometer  when  political  excitement,  and  tlie 
desire  for  legitimate  reform,  have  increased  the 
hunger  and  thirst  of  stainless,  pure,  and  enlight- 
ened voters.  "  Three  thousand,  at  so  much  a 
head,  would  just  meet  it,"  Messrs.  Fox  &  Shekell 
had  told  the  young  "  plunger "  who  calculated 
that  ImmenschikofF's  certain  victory  at  the  Slobury 
races  in  the  ensuing  season  would  recoup  him,  as 
city  men  say  in  their  expressive  English,  three 
times  over.  It  was  the  bearing  of  Cantelupe's  pro- 
bable political  victory  at  Bibury,  and  the  prospects 
of  his  ultimately  becoming  his  son-in-law,  that  Mr. 
Harker  wished  that  night  to  hammer  out  upon 
his  mental  anvil.  There  was  also  another  subject 
to  be  that  night  thrown  into  the  seething  furnace 
of  his  restless  brain,  and  that  -was  some  way,  by 
force  or  persuasion,  to  get  lid  of  that  terrible 
incubus  on  all  possible  power  and  happiness, 
Travers.  The  thought  burnt  inextinguishably  as 
Greek  fire  in  the  mind  of  that  strong  and  evil 
spirit.  In  some  way,  though  heaven  and  earth 
were  wracked,  it  must  be  done.  Harker's  iron 
Avill,  turned  to  steel  by  ceaseless  and  almost  un- 
broken success  (for,  though  a  great  speculator, 
his  bark  had  ridden  out  the  storm  when  even  the 
Eobsons  and  Redpaths  had  foundered)  made  him 
regard  an  obstacle  apparently  so  petty,  but  really 
so   insuperable,  with    the    su]3pressed  fury  of   a 


314  THE    vicar's    C0UKT8HIP. 

madman  who  broods  over  escape  either  by  his 
own  death,  or  by  that  of  those  who  detain  him. 
Sometimes,  even  in  his  dreams  lately,  by  gleams 
of  the  lower  fires,  wild  and  terrible  suggestions 
had  haunted  him,  thoughts  of  subtle  poisons,  that 
modern  science  almost  daily  discovers  and  hides 
away  in  dark  corners  of  its  laboratory,  trembling 
at  the  dark  discoveries  it  has  made  ;  strange  un- 
discovered crimes  read  of  long  ago — forgotten 
long  ago,  he  had  thought — occurred  to  him  again, 
and  passed  before  his  eyes,  written  in  letters  of 
fire.  Newspaper  paragraphs  about  strange  deaths 
never  accounted  for,  and  now  unheeded  by  pur- 
blind justice,  so  wise,  so  imbecile,  rose  into  his 
memory  as  wild,  deformed,  and  nameless  crea- 
tures show  themselves  for  a  moment  and  startle 
voyagers  in  newly  discovered  oceans.  Did  the 
men  who  perpetrated  those  crimes — for  some  of 
these  unaccounted-for  deaths  must  have  been 
crimes — were  they  haunting  the  world  with  con- 
sciences seared  as  with  a  hot  iron,  as  the  priests, 
who  live  by  the  religion  they  preach,  argue.  No, 
he  sneeringly  thought.  No ;  they  were  men 
one  daily  met,  happy  as  life's  limitations  would 
allow,  sorry  for  the  past  inevitable  violence, 
thinking  of  it  half  regretfully,  perhaps,  at  times ; 
otherwise  not  at  all ;  dangerous  logic,  stolen  from 
Satan's    theology,    and    headed    in    such   Jesuit 


ON   SUFFERANCE.  315 

codes  as  Escobar's,  "  Doing:  evil  that  g^ood  may 
come." 

Meditating  on  these  dark  subjects,  Mr.  Harker, 
about  half-an-hour  before  his  lonely  seven  o'clock 
dinner,  rode  up  the  deep  sunk  miry  lane  (deep  and 
miry  as  the  groove  of  that  one  tyrannous  thought) 
that  led  from  Farmer  Brown's  end  of  Summer- 
leas,  towards  the  Upper  Do\Yn  and  Danegrove  fir 
wood.  Harker  was  on  an  old,  safe,  ambling  cob, 
that  he  saved  for  such  pm^pose  a  few  years  longer 
from  the  hounds,  and  he  carried  before  him,  on 
his  saddle,  a  short  double-barrelled  gun,  so  that 
he  might,  when  he  got  to  the  fir  wood,  dismount, 
tie  up  his  horse,  and  get  a  few  shots  at  rabbits 
just  at  their  feeding  time.  The  ride  would  take 
his  mind  away  from  those  oppressive  thoughts,  and 
pass  the  hom^  or  so  before  dinner  very  pleasantly, 
for,  like  many  other  wiser  men,  Harker  hated  the 
fuss,  parade,  and  butchery  of  the  modern  battue. 
Two  smooth  terriers,  black  as  night,  except  for 
their  tan  feet,  ran  at  his  horse's  heels,  just  near 
enough  to  render  the  constant  escape  from  having 
their  little  brains  knocked  out,  a  ceaseless  and 
untiring  excitement  and  miracle.  Tradesmen's 
carts  had  passed  for  the  day,  carriages  were  not 
yet  preparing  to  take  their  luxurious  owners  to 
outlying  dinner-parties,  the  tired  labourers  had 
not  yet  left  the  turnip  fields  and  the  young  corn. 


316  THE   VICAE's    COUETSHIP. 

The  children  were  gathered  in  from  the  lane, 
hedges,  and  rick-yards,  to  their  noisy  tea.  There 
was  not  even  a  mouse  stirring  in  the  village. 

But  Harker  soon  passed  the  intermittent  rows 
of  lichened  stone  houses,  and  the  last  cottager  s 
garden,  and  got  into  a  part  where  the  lane  grew 
more  open,  and  the  hedges  lowei\  On  one  side 
spread  Farmer  Browns  high  fields,  on  the 
other  the  green  slopes  of  his  own.  Lonely  slopes 
they  were  now,  with  no  men  at  work  upon  them, 
mere  reaches  of  quickening  herbage,  brown 
ridges  of  fallow  and  rank  rye  grass,  on  which 
penned  sheep  were  bleating  discontentedly.  In 
one  meadow  alone  there  were  more  signs  of  life, 
for  crows  were  strutting  and  pecking,  busy  as 
gold  diggers  at  a  new  find,  and  Avaited  on  by 
a  restless  flock  of  starlings,  who  now  and  then 
rose  in  a  frightened  way,  turned  in  the  air  with 
a  glimmer  of  prismatic  colour,  and  settled  again 
to  their  fitful  evening  meal. 

Then,  by  one  of  the  pleasant  kaleidoscopic 
changes  of  a  country  ride — Wiltshire  ought  to  be 
a  county  of  centaurs  and  centauresses — the  scene 
chano-ed.  The  lono;  lane  debouched  on  the  wild 
open  down,  not  far  from  an  old  lichen-blotted 
stone  that  had  steadily  asserted  one  fact,  year  after 
year,  i.e.,  that  it  was  ninety- two  miles  from  that 
spot  to  London.     The  lane  here,  like  a  tributary 


ox   SUFFERAXCE.  317 

brook,  flowed  into  tlie  g-reat  river  of  the  lii^'li 
road  from  Salisbury  to  Warminster.  Thirty 
miles  of  down  stretched  in  the  sunset,  to  the 
right  and  to  the  left.  Old  Eoman  cattle  paths 
seamed  the  virgin  turf  with  deep  green  lines. 
Chalk}'  ruts  marked  the  by-roads  for  carts  and 
horses  to  Birdbrook,  Wiley,  and  Winterbourne. 
At  the  foot  of  Danegrove  Wood,  that  bounded  the 
near  horizon  and  cro^^Tied  the  down  northward 
with  its  serried  column  of  erect  trees  in  close  dark 
phalanx,  spread  a  rolling  lawn  of  chalk  down, 
the  old  bed  of  a  forgotten  and  nameless  primaeval 
ocean,  now  virgin  waste  land,  ignorant  of  any 
plough,  unconscious  of  any  spade.  Nature  had 
busily  scattered  over  it,  as  over  aU.  neglected 
places,  the  thistle,  Adam's  curse.  Prickly,  stub- 
born thorn  bushes  grew  there  in  surly  clumps, 
surrounded  at  the  roots  mth  dead  grass,  prim- 
roses, and  violet  plants.  The  ground  in  the 
hollows  was  rough  with  ant-hills  that  kindly 
time,  that  heals  all  wounds,  had  padded  and 
rounded  with  turf. 

Even  Harker,  as  the  plovers  uttered  their  wild 
plaintive  cries  overhead,  could  not  help  pulling  up 
his  horse  on  the  highest  ground,  where  a  chalky 
by-road  led  over  a  ridge  and  through  a  wood, 
to  Codford,  to  look  at  the  great  blue  chart 
of   enchanted    distance    spread    out   before    him 


318  THE    VICAIVS    COURTSHIP. 

There  was  here  and  there,  far  below  (for  "Wilt- 
shire Downs  are  not  flat  plains,  but  rolling 
prairies,  on  very  high  plateaus,)  a  little  village, 
so  small  that  a  giant  might  have  spread  it  like 
so  many  toy  houses  on  his  open  hand,  clus- 
tering round  a  church,  whose  little  spire  raised 
its  hand  to  heaven,  and  ceaselessly  supplicated 
for  the  inmates.  Far,  far  away,  cutting  the  pale 
blue  line  of  the  horizon,  there  rose  a  little  grey 
needle — that  was  the  beautiful  spire  of  Salisbury 
Cathedral. 

In  and  out  among  the  leafing  thorn  bushes, 
where  the  rabbits  darted,  like  truant  children  at 
the  sight  of  a  dreaded  schoolmaster,  and  between 
the  bushes,  tufted  here  and  there  with  tolls  of 
wool,  roughly  snatched  from  sheep  seeking  their 
churlish  shelter,  Mr.  Harker  rode  into  Dane- 
grove  Wood,  intending  to  tie  up  his  horse  at 
Woodbine,  a  little  cottage  where  one  of  the  married 
keepers  lived. 

The  dim  wood,  so  silent  and  so  odorous,  de- 
rived its  name  from  a  tumulus  (Danish,  the  local 
tradition  went)  that  stood  in  a  centre  opening 
among  the  trees,  and  had  been  left  when  the  firs 
had  been  planted,  some  thirty  years  before.  It 
was  a  mere  round  mamelon,  once  ten  or  twelve  feet 
high,  now  worn  almost  level  by  centuries  of  rain, 
and  frost,  and  snow.     It  was  the  grave,  the  story 


ON   SUFFERANCE.  319 

went,  of  some  Danish  champion,  who  died  in  a 
mortal  fight  with  a  giant,  one  of  whose  hands 
(now  to  \Tilgar  eyes  a  mere  block  of  stone  chapped 
into  five  deep  shapeless  clefts,)  protruded  from  the 
down  some  ten  miles  further  on,  within  sight  of 
the  rampart  of  the  great  Roman  camp  which  rises 
near  Stonehenge. 

It  would  have  been  very  silent  in  the  wood 
except  for  the  untiring  music  that  poured  from 
the  tln:obbino^  throat  of  a  thrush  some  three  ranks 
deep  in  the  firs,  and  that  would  not  cease  even 
when  Mr.  Harker  dismounted  and  loaded  his 
double-barrel  gun,  with  rattle  of  brass-bound 
ramrod,  click  of  shot-pouch,  and  snap  of  powder- 
horn.  The  bird  was  as  resolutely  happy  as  honest 
Mark  Tapley.  It  was  happy  with  the  profound 
happiness  of  innocence,  youth,  and  love,  and  it 
sang  on  heedless  of  sorrow. 

Mr.  Harker  remounted,  and  rode  up  one-  of 
the  glades  to  the  left  of  the  keeper's  cottage  and 
leading  to  that  central  ride  where  he  hoped  to 
get  half-a-dozen  chances.  He  had  trained  the  old 
shootino^  cob  to  bear  fire,  and  to  follow  him  with 
the  bridle  upon  its  neck.  It  did  so  now.  Sud- 
denly, where  the  cover  was  thick  and  dark 
with  the  pale  rags  of  last  year's  beech-leaves, 
the  two  dogs  darted  ofi",  but  gave  no  tongue  and 
started  no  game.      In  an  instant  they  returned 


320  THE   VICAE's    COUETSHIP. 

to  Mr.  Harker's  heels,  smiling  (for  dogs  can  botli 
smile  and  laugh),  and  wagging  their  tails. 

"What  is  it,  Watchbox  ^— what  is  it.  Tiny  V 
said  Mr.  Harker,  questioning,  "he's  in  there, 
have  him  out — what  is  it,  dogs  ?  " 

"  This  is  what  it  is,"  said  a  voice,  as  the  head- 
keeper  Travers  pushed  roughly  through  the  bushes, 
his  gun  under  his  arm.  "  It's  me ;  how  do  you 
do,  sir?" 

"  What  business  have  you  idling  here.  Have 
I  not  warned  you  not  to  visit  that  keejDer's 
daughter.  Her  mother  complains  to  me  of  your 
trying  to  decoy  the  girl  from  her  sweetheart. 
You'll  drive  me  to  dismiss  you  now.  Don't  you 
imagine  your  threats  alarm  me  ;  my  la^\^^er  will 
soon  dispose  of  your  claims,  if  you  were  to 
drive  me  to  recover  money  extorted  by  intimi- 
dation. Take  care,  my  fine  fellow,  you  take  care; 
your  bluster  w^on  t  go  down  with  me.  You're 
idling  here." 

The  keeper's  eyes  darted  sudden  death  at  those 
of  his  enemy,  Avhich  were  compressed  like  a  cat's 
with  rao'e,  and  suffused  with  blood. 

"  You  know  best,"  said  Travers,  insolently 
tossing  his  gun  with  careless  skill  to  the  right  from 
the  left  shoulder,  "  you  know  best,  Mr.  Harker, 
whether  my  silence  is  worth  buying.  If  I  told 
the  thing  I  should  have  pleasure,  now  I  have 


ON   SUFFERANCE.  821 

money — it's  all  one  whichever  way  the  cards 
faU." 

"  I  thought/'  said  Harker,  with  a  rage  only  re- 
strained by  some  violent  internal  efiort,  "  that  I 
had  desired  that  exactly  at  a  quarter-past  seven 
every  evening,  when  the  keepers  had  taken  their 
stations  for  the  night,  you  were  to  go  yom'  rounds, 
beo^inninor  at  the  Terraces  and  endino'  at  the  Low 
Eidge  potteries." 

'•  You  did,  and  IVe  never  broke  the  rule  twice 
before,  but  I  had  a  message  to-day  from  a  son  of 
mine  at  Lord  Portsmouth's,  who  is  lining  in  the 
same  place  where  Farmer  Brown's  shepherd's  son 
lives,  and  I  promised  to  bring  the  boy's  message 
here  to  the  old  woman ;  he  wants  to  get  the  girl, 
his  sister,  as  housemaid  in  the  village.  It  is  a  lie, 
whoever  says  it,  that  I  come  after  the  girl.  People 
only  say  so  to  make  my  wife  jealous." 

"  Now  mind  me,  Travers,  and  mind  me  with- 
out shuflBing ;  if  I  catch  you  here  again  ofi"  you 
go,  and  you  can  do  your  worst.  You  shall  rot 
away,  fellow,  if  I  once  throw  you  off." 

"  Throw  away,"  said  Travers,  with  an  aggra- 
vating horse  laugh,  "throw  away,  my  hearty. 
You'll  be  sorry  for  it.  I  know  the  checkmate,  as 
good  as  a  story-book  that.  I've  got  you  in,  my 
gentleman,  and  I'm  not  going  to  be  bounced 
out  of  the  game.     What    made    you    drop    that 

TOL.    II.  Y 


3:Z2  THE   VTCAE's   COURTSHIP. 

pheasant  business  1  Tlie  figures  weren't  quite 
square,  were  tliey  '?  " 

"  I've  given  you  warning,  mind/' 

"  Yes,  in  course  you  have,  in  course  you  have, 
and  wished,  no  doubt,  it  could  be  a  warning 
in  a  double  sense,  but  111  just  speak  plain  and  tell 
you  why  you  didn't  do  anything  disagreeable, 
and  what  is  more,  why  you  never  will !  " 

'*  Why  ?  "  asked  Harker,  with  clenched  teeth, 
his  gun  shaking  with  the  ague  of  rage  that  shook 
him.     "  Why,  d you,  why  ? " 

"For  this  very  simple  reason  among  others," 
said  the  keeper,  with  a  calmness  that  exasperated 
his  opponent  almost  into  madness,  "  for  this 
very — simple — reason — heccmse  you  are  only 
master  here  on  sufferance" 

For  a  moment  Travers  drew  back  and  seized 
his  gun.  To  judge  by  his  stare,  and  the  way  the 
cold  dew  of  passion  broke  out  upon  his  upper  lip, 
Mr.  Harker  was  going  to  either  club  his  gun  and 
rush  on  his  enemy,  or  discharge  both  barrels  in 
his  face.  His  fingers  stole  towards  the  trigger, 
they  rested  on  it,  but  by  a  great  efi"ort  he  lifted 
the  gun,  discharged  it  twice  in  the  air,  then  sprang 
upon  his  horse  and  rode  cursing  out  of  the 
wood. 

"  By  the  Lord  Harry,  that  was  as  near  as  a 
toucher,"  thought  Travers  to  himself,  as  he  burst 


ON   SUFFERANCE.  323 

into  a  neig:liino;  laug^li  that  g;oaded  liis  master  on 
liis  way  back  to  Summeiieas.  "  I  really  thonght 
for  a  moment  he  was  going  to  let  me  have  'em, 
the  fellow  is  a  cur,  and  he  was  afraid  to  fire — 
he  knows  he'd  soon  swung  for  it  if  he  had  floored 
me  ;  by  the  Lord  Harry,  if  he  had  missed  me  Td 
have  shot  one  of  his  arms  off  in  return,  by  all 
that's  sacred  I  would,  as  soon  as  looked  at  him.  If 
he'd  died  before  any  one  came  I'd  have  called  it 
a  gun  accident,  I  could  soon  have  burst  the 
barrel,  and  put  it  near  him ;  or  may  be,  when 
my  blood  was  up,  if  hadn't  been  mortal  hurt,  I'd 
have  shot  him  straightway  as  if  he'd  been  a  stoat 
or  a  wizzil — but  the  cur  was  afraid — he  always  has 
been  afraid  of  me." 

There  were  two  voices  that  spoke  to  Harker  as 
he  rode  furiously  back  to  the  Abbey.  The  one 
voice  from  the  dark  shadow  was  sneering  and 
defiant,  and  spoke  in  the  tones  of  Travers ;  "on 
sufferance,"  it  kept  chiming  like  a  peal  of  harsh 
beUs.  "You  are  only  master  of  these  lands  on 
sufferance — on  sufferance,  only  here  on  sufierance," 
and  the  bitter  words  ate  into  his  soul  as  the  etcher's 
acid  eats  into  the  copper.  The  other  lower  voice 
kept  repeating,  low  and  monotonous  as  a  passing 
bell,  only  two  words,  "  Kill  him,  kill  him  ! " 

The  sunset  was  fringing  the  western  down  with 
radiant   lights    of    crimson    and    golden   orange. 

Y   2 


824  THE  vicar's   COURTSHIP. 

Every  thorn  tree  Harker  passed  glowed  like  the 
burning  bush  that  Moses  saw  on  Horeb,  but  the 
man  with  one  thought  holding  him  in  its  death  lock 
had  no  eyes  for  nature  ;  wherever  he  rode  the  turf 
seemed  crimson;  blood  sprang  from  the  road- 
side pools  wherever  his  horse's  hoofs  struck  ;  the 
young  leaves  of  the  trees  over  his  head  were 
dripping  gore ;  the  very  plovers,  that  with  the 
selfishness  of  love  thought  every  passer-by  was 
looking  for  their  young,  gleamed  red  as  the  vul- 
tures on  an  Indian  battle-field.  The  sky  over 
Travers's  house,  as  the  rider  darted  through  the 
hollow  archway,  spread  in  one  broad  sheet  of 
crimson.  His  thoughts  were  of  blood,  and  those 
Satanic  promptings  lent  their  colour  to  all  he 
saw. 

"  Only  on  sufierance,"  still  the  one  voice  in 
his  brain  said ;  "  Kill  him,  kill  him,"  tolled  the 
other,  from  the  shadow  that  dogged  him  to  his 
own  door ;  and,  indeed,  did  not  leave  him  even 
there. 


THE   JACOBEAN    EUIN.  325 


CHAPTER  XYIIL 

THE   JACOBEAN   RUIN. 

The  Vicar's  half-year's  income  was  nearly  gone, 
it  wanted  two  months  to  the  next  payment  of  tithes, 
and  what  he  had  left  did  not  nearly  cover  the  sub- 
scriptions spent  from  the  Chetwynd  Dilapidation 
money,  that  would  have  to  be  paid  in  May,  with 
no  more  escape  from  the  demand  than  from  that 
of  any  other  exacting  debtor.  Where  to  turn  ?  no 
avenue  open,  no  hand  stretched  out  with  money, 
north,  south,  east,  or  west.  Even  to  a  case-hardened 
man,  accustomed  to  every  turn  and  winding  on 
the  way  to  the  whitewash  court  (that  covers 
but  does  not  efface  the  moral  stains,)  the  pro- 
spect would  have  looked  rather  threatening, 
but  to  a  chivalrous,  high-spirited  man,  of  Beau- 
flower's  proud  sensitiveness,  it  was  maddening. 
Yet  throw  from  him  the  Nessus  robe,  rend  the 
net,  he  could  not,  struggle  as  he  might.  The 
miserable  resource  of  living  on  credit  (as  far  as 
he  could),  availed  him  little  with  those  blood- 


326  THE   VICAe's   COUETSHIP. 

leeclies  who  drained  his  life's  blood.  And  amid 
these  storms  Love  had  to  nestle  with  its  opening 
blossoms,  to  which  summer  seemed  now  for  ever 
denied.  It  is  a  terril^le  sight  to  see  Hope 
crushed  and  lost  in  any  one,  but  ten  times  sadder 
when  Care  selects  a  young  heart  to  stab  with  its 
poisoned  arrows. 

Yet  youth  and  age  have  both  their  ways 
of  blunting  sorrow's  shaft.  Ag;e  recalls  former 
changes  of  fortune,  and  feels  the  disarming  torpor 
of  callousness.  Youth,  by  elastic  efforts,  often 
leaps  over  sorrow's  prison  walls,  and  grants  itself 
a  day  rule  brightened  by  dreams  of  blue  sky 
and  gleams  of  hopeful  light.  Love,  too,  the  great 
enchanter,  sent  the  Vicar  moments  when,  in  the 
possibility  of  Amy's  affection,  he  forgot  all  but  the 
present,  the  bliss  of  the  mere  chance  of  seeing  her. 
Such  a  hope  her  words  at  the  waterfall  had  given 
him.  His  presence  could  not  be  unpleasing  to  her, 
or  she  would  not  have  looked  so  like  one  of 
Eaphael's  saints,  when  his  face  had  assumed  an 
eao'er  desire  to  meet  her  at  the  ruin.  It  was  one  of 
the  special  charms  of  Amy,  that  it  was  impossible 
to  associate  a  thouoht  of  her  with  even  the  venial 
deceptions  of  a  girlish  coquetry,  often  only  the 
natural  armour  of  woman's  timidity  and  reserve. 
Yet  she  had  not  positively  said  she  would  be  there 
)nly  that  it  was  possible,  if  the  evening  was  fine 


THE   JACOBEAN    EUIN.  327 

— SO  clo  lovers,  over  love's  rose  leaves,  strew  tlieir 
own  beds  with  thorns. 

In  the  full  flush  of  a  brave  life's  ante-mericlian,  in 
vain  the  Vicar  struggled  to  console  himself  with  a 
thousand  palliating  and  sanguine  anticipations. 
It  was  only  to  live  a  little  closer  for  a  year  or  so, 
to  take  pupils  again,  to  write  some  great  reli- 
gious work  that  would  be  a  synopsis  of  all  the 
biblical  critics,  with  an  antidote  to  every  sceptical 
sneer,  or  small  arithmetical  quibble.  He  had 
talent  and  industry,  and  there  was  that  one  hope, 
the  lodestone  of  his  life,  his  angel  Amy  to  cheer 
him  on. 

He  and  his  mother,  and  Julia,  had  been  invited 
to  tea  at  JVIiss  Chivers',  to  meet  the  Eobinsons, 
Dr.  Briscoe,  Mr.  Goodrick,  and  the  outrageous 
major,  who,  when  properly  diluted  by  other  people, 
was  by  no  means  unbearable,  if  he  could  be  kept 
from  the  one  subject  of  the  merits  of  the  Charle- 
magne champagne.  The  Beaufiowers  had  dined 
early  at  the  Vicarage,  and  were  going  to  take  the 
field-way  to  Fontford,  pick  up  Amy,  wdio  was 
sketching  the  ruins  of  the  old  Jacobean  manor- 
house,  and  convoy  her  to  the  party. 

Tea  was  to  be  at  half-past  seven.  At  twenty 
minutes  past  six  (Miss  Chivers  had  begged  every 
one  to  come  early,  and  not  try  which  should  be 
the  most  fashionable  and  the  latest),  the  Beau- 


328  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

flowers  started ;  for  being  honest,  sincere,  and  un- 
sophisticated as  the  good  old  maid  herself,  they 
believed  what  she  said.  It  was  one  of  those  deli- 
cious days  of  early  June,  about  an  hour  before 
sunset,  when  the  year  seems  in  the  very  voluptu- 
ous meridian  of  its  charms.  The  young  leaves, 
past  their  early  callow,  half-unfolded  stage,  were 
still  so  tender  and  transparent,  that  the  sunlight 
passed  through  their  thin-veined  emerald  sur- 
faces, and  cast  fairy-like  shadows,  that  were 
only  sunlight  softly  coloured.  The  hedges,  little 
tangled  Paradises,  rich  with  every  variety  of 
form  and  colour,  were  in  the  full  flush  of  their 
luxurious  beauty,  and  on  every  bough  the  birds 
sang  their  vespers,  with  the  childish  carelessness 
of  young  choristers.  Only  darkness  could  stay 
their  singing ;  and  with  the  first  star  they  would 
sink  one  by  one  to  sleep,  like  children  tilled  of 
play.  A  delicious  balmy  summer  warmth,  com- 
pounded of  many  odours,  filled  the  air,  and  over 
all  the  tranquillity  of  evening  was  slowly  spread- 
ing as  the  shadows  lengthened  and  slowly  over- 
powered the  light.  The  only  sounds,  except  the 
rejoicing  singing  of  the  birds  from  meadow  to 
meadow,  were  the  mellow  tinklings  of  sheep-bell, 
or  the  lowing  of  the  cows,  as  shouting  boys 
drove  them  homeward.  Now  and  then  the 
children   playing   on   the   village-green    gave    a 


THE   JACOBEAN    RUIX.  329 

long  exulting  cry,  but  gradually  that  noise,  too, 
ceased. 

"Ain't  you  glad  you  came,  mamma,''  said 
Julia;  "what  a  delicious  evening.  I  do  not 
think  the  most  miserable  person  in  the  world 
could  feel  unhappy  here." 

Poor  Julia ;  she  little  kncAV  from  what  recent 
struggles  with  the  pieuvre  her  brother  had  come. 

The  Vicar  quoted  George  Herbert's  fine  lines — 

'  *  Sweet  day  !  so  cool,  so  calm,  so  bright, 
The  bridal  of  the  earth  and  sky, 
The  dews  shall  weep  thy  fall  to-night, 
For  thou  must  die." 

"It's  all  very  well,"  said  Mrs.  Beaufiower;  "but, 
Julia,  I  really  don't  think  it  safe  leaving  those 
servants.  Suppose  some  tramp  were  to  come  to 
the  door  and  ask  for  Ned,  that  JNIary  would  show 
him  into  the  drawing-room  with  the  silver  ink- 
stand, in  a  moment;  and  then,  when  we  found 
it  gone,  all  she  would  say  would  be  '  why,  who'd 
have  thought  it ! '  I  tell  you,  Julia,  there  is  not 
one  of  them  to  be  trusted.     They  are  all  alike." 

It  is  not  improbable  that  the  worthy  old  lady 
would  have  continued  this  jeremiad  over  servants 
and  their  faults  until  they  had  reached  Fontford, 
had  not  they  just  then  reached  the  labourers' 
cottages,  through  whose  gardens  ran  the  by-road 
that  led  down  to  the  moated  ruin. 


330  THE   TICAe's    COUETSHIP. 

"  I  really  cannot  go  all  that  way/'  said  Mrs. 
Beaufiower.  "  You  leave  me  here,  Julia,  at  Mrs. 
Hackers.  I  want  to  speak  to  her  about  some 
mending,  and  you  and  Ned  can  go  for  Amy,  and 
bring  her  back  to  me  here.  I  want  to  give  the 
daughter    a    speaking-to    about   that   last   darn- 

iBg." 

"  Poor  girl !"  said  the  Vicar,  laughing. 

The  path  lay  through  an  outlying  bit  of  the 
farmyard,  past  some  sheds  where  rusty  harrows 
and  ploughs  were  waiting  for  work.  Above  the 
oranged  and  mossy  tiles  of  the  sheds  rose  the 
shapeless  walls  of  the  old  manor  house,  muffled  in 
lYj,  that  alternately  bound  together  and  wrenched 
open  the  blocks  of  crumbling  stone.  In  the  old 
bed-rooms  the  bat  now  waited  for  the  darkness 
which  it  loves,  and  the  white  owl  sat  wisely  over 
its  ugly  brats,  talking  to  them  sagely  of  mice  and 
men. 

The  Vicar  unlatched  the  old  shaky  paintless 
door  that  led  into  the  farmer's  garden,  and 
approached  the  ruined  porch.  Amy  was  sitting 
before  it,  busily  sketching.  She  rose  when 
she  saw  them,  shook  them  by  the  hand  and 
greeted  them  with  her  o^Yll  sweet  smile.  Beau- 
flower  thought  he  had  never  seen  Amy  look  so 
beautiful  as  she  sat  there  beside  a  rose-bush  in  full 
flower,  that  had  shed  several  of  its  leaves,  as  if  in 


THE   JACOBEAN   EUIX.  331 

pla}'fiil  homage,  upon  her  drawing-board,  whicli 
stood  on  a  light  portable  easel  which  Mr.  Law- 
son,  under  Mr.  Eobinson's  supervision,  had  con- 
structed for  her.  The  surprise  of  their  sudden 
appearance,  or  the  w^armth  of  the  fine  evening, 
had  shghtly  flushed  her  cheek,  and  gave  it  an  in- 
describable charm  that  the  evening  light  rendered 
still  more  radiant.  She  hardly  looked  up  at  the 
Vicar,  but  instantly  resumed  her  work,  talking 
with  them,  as  her  pencil  moved  over  the  paper. 

The  porch  was  a  fine  bit  of  Jacobean  architec- 
ture, and  time  had  passed  it  by  with  a  lenient  and 
loving  hand.  The  entrance  pillars  were  still  entire 
with  all  those  "  strap  "  ornaments  that  seemed  bor- 
rowed from  embossed  leather..  The  inner  seats 
where  old  Shallows,  young  Slenders,  and  pretty 
Anne  Pages,  may  once  have  sat,  and  laughed,  and 
gossipped,  were  still  entire.  The  slanting  stone 
roof,  rising  to  a  point,  still  kept  out  the  rain  from 
the  threshold,  and  on  the  left  of  the  entrance 
there  still  remained  the  broad,  square,  mullioned 
Tudor  window,  through  which  merry  Mercutios, 
long  since  grave,  and  fuming  Benedicts  long  since 
quiet  in  the  family  vault,  had  looked  and  greeted 
Beatrices  and  Juliets  many  a  thousand  times. 

Amy  had  made  a  very  intelligent,  careful  draw- 
ing of  the  spot,  highly  realistic,  without  any 
of  those  mannered  spotty  touches  of  Prout,  or 


332  THE   VICAE's   COURTSHIP. 

tliose  conventional  mannerisms  of  Harding,  that 
drawing-masters,  who  love  mediocrity,  so  care- 
fully inculcate. 

"  Tell  me  frankly,  if  you  like  Amy's  drawing," 
said  Julia,  leaning  over  the  easel ;  "but  Tm  afraid, 
Amy,  he  will  only  flatter  you." 

"  No,  you  mustn't  flatter,"  said  Amy,  still  not 
looking  up  ;  "  but  tell  me  all  the  faults.  Papa 
is  too  lenient  with  me,  I  know,  mamma  never 
sees  any  fault  in  what  I  do,  and  as  for  the  dear 
old  major,  he  knows  nothing  about  art,  and  hardly 
distinguishes  a  straight  line  from  a  crooked  one." 

"  I  will  be  frank,"  said  Beauflower,  in  a  voice 
softer  and  deeper  than  usual,  though  he  was  not 
conscious  of  that,  "  and  call  the  window  mullions 
a  little  too  massive.  You  give  the  effect,  but  not 
the  exact  fact.  Turner  used  to  heighten  his 
mountains  purposely,  to  make  them  appear  in 
the  drawing  as  preponderating  as  they  were  in 
nature;  but  for  my  own  part,  I  think  rigid 
truth  is  the  real  principle.  Draw  truth,  and 
it  will  look  truth.  Don't  you  think  so.  Miss 
Kobinson  ? " 

"  Oh  yes,  I  do ;  but  I  assure  you,  you  have  found 
more  in  my  poor  drawing  than  I  intended.  I  see, 
too,  now,  I  have  made  the  transoms  wider  than  the 
mulHons,  and  they  are  not  so.  I  have  looked  at 
them  so  long  that  I  suppose  I  have  lost  a  sense  of 


THE   JACOBEAX   EUlX.  333 

the  relative  size.     Will  you  sliow  me  wliat  you 
think  the  true  width  ?  " 

The  Vicar  consented  instantly,  and  soon  reduced 
the  window  to  its  proper  dimensions. 

''That's  beautiful,  Xed,''  said  Julia,  '-'it  only 
wants  one  thing  now,  some  figures  sitting  in  the 
porch.*' 

"  Yes,  two  old  women,  Julia,  knitting,  and  tell- 
ing stories  of  former  days,"  said  Amy,  ''  or  some 
children  making  daisy  chains." 

"  Old  women  1  nonsense,  Amy  ;  lovers  !  Two 
lovers  watching  the  fii'st  star  rise.  Oh !  how 
curious  !  Look,  Ned  !  look.  Amy  !  there  is  the  first 
star,  I  declare,  sparkling  over  that  tall  elm ! 
WeVe  got  the  star,  now  we  only  want  the  lovers. 
Ned,  di-aw  the  major  holding  a  skein  of  silk  for 
Amy  ;  that'll  do." 

Wicked  Juha !  Was  her  o^^ii  heart  so  un- 
touched that  she  could  sport  with  the  dangerous 
deity,  perhaps  even  then  in  ambush  somewhere 
among  the  ruins. 

"The  major?  Don't  talk  nonsense,  Julia,"  said 
Amy.  Then  there  was  a  silence,  as  the  Vicar 
grew  as  intent  over  his  work  as  Amy  was  over  the 
faults  that  his  quick,  skilful  hand  corrected. 

"  Well,  as  you  two  people  are  so  stupid,  and  so 
absorbed  in  your  clra^\T.ng,  and  two  is  company, 
and  three  is  none ;  and,  moreover,  as  mamma  will 


334  THE   VICAP/S    COURTSHIP. 

be  tired  of  waiting,  Til  leave  yon  now,  Ned,  to 
bring  on  Amy.  You  know  your  way.  That  star  will 
guide  you.  What  is  the  name  of  that  star,  Ned  ?  " 

"  I  shan't  tell  you,  Ju,  you  torment.  You 
know  as  well  as  I  do.  Oh  !  I  pity  the  poor  man 
who  is  some  day  to  be  tied  to  you.  Youll  want 
a  tight  hand,  my  young  lady.  Won't  she,  Miss 
Eobinson  ? " 

"  Oh,  no  ! "  said  Amy,  rising  and  kissing  Julia, 
as  a  mother  does  a  child  that  has  been  hurt.  "  It 
will  be  easy  to  lead  her  by  love,  but  she 
wouldn't  be  driven." 

"  Beatrice  with  her  wits  gone.  Amy,  that  is 
what  this  gallant  brother  of  mine  is  polite  enough 
to  sometimes,  call  me,  and  I  call  him  Eomeo  in 
orders ;  because  he  is  always  in  love  with  some 
one  or  other." 

"  Now,  that  is  a  gross  slander.  I  don't  fall  in 
love  at  all ;  and  when  I  do,  I  shall  never  change. 
It  is  Juliet  is  the  weathercock,  always  seeing  some 
wonderful  fairy  prince  ride  by ;  but  the  prince 
never  stops  for  his  princess." 

"  Now,  that  is  a  wicked  story,  Amy.  I  never 
think  about  fairy  princes  at  all.  I  never  mean  to 
marry." 

"  Not  till  you  are  asked.'^ 

"  Impertinence !  Isn't  he  rude.  Amy.  You 
wouldn't  have  thous^ht  he  could  be  so  rude ;  so 


THE   JACOBEAX    RUIN.  335 

soft  as  lie  can  speak  to  some  people.  Well,  good- 
bye, Amy.  I  must  be  off.  You'll  be  there  nearly 
as  soon  as  we  are,  I  dare  say.  We  shall  walk 
slow ;  but  don't  you  hurry  till  you  have  settled 
that  interesting  rjuestion  of  the  exact  mdth  of 
the  ^dndow  sills." 

"  Well,  it  is  very  important,  Ju.  Oh  !  do,  do 
wait  for  us.  It'll  be  done  directly.  It  A^ill  l^e  so 
much  pleasanter  walking  aU  together,  and  I  want 
to  consult  about  that  new  dress  of  mine.  Oh, 
how  cruel  you  are,  Ju.     Don't  go.'^ 

"  A  summer  eveninQ;'s  walk  is  much  better  with 
two  than  four,  Ned  says.  Amy,  good-bye.  I'm 
gone." 

A  ringing  silvery  laugh,  and  the  garden  door 
closed  upon  the  mischievous,  girl.  How  con- 
strained they  both  grew  at  once,  as  Ned  com- 
pleted the  drawing,  as  he  thought,  and  then 
laughed  at  himself  for  ha^dng  forgotten  the  left- 
hand  mullion.  The  sun  had  set  some  Httle  time, 
when  there  came  the  sound  of  a  gun  tmce  from 
the  Terraces  at  a  spot  almost  in  a  straight  hne, 
half  a  mile  away  from  them.  The  echoes  roUed 
crashing  through  the  woods.  Five  minutes  later 
two  quick  sharp  shots,  almost  together,  renewed 
the  echoes ;  then  there  was  a  deep  silence. 
"  What  a  grand  echo  !  "  said  Amy. 
"  That's  Travers  on  his  rounds,  he  generally 


336  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

gets  a  shot  or  two  at  the  woocl-pigeons  as  they're 
going  to  roost.     They  are  his  perquisites.'' 

Then  Beauflo^Yer  alertly  folded  up  the  easel, 
and  collected  the  drawing  things,  placed  the 
drawing  slanting  against  the  porch,  so  that  he 
might  judge  of  the  effect. 

"  How  beautiful  that  star  over  the  elm  tree  is 
now,"  said  Amy,  as  they  prepared  to  go. 

Beauflower  looked.  Yes,  there  was  Venus,  slily 
peeping  forth,  with  a  clear  keen  sparkle,  as  if 
almost  unconscious  of  her  name. 

''  It  is  the  star,"  he  said,  with  a  tremulous  voice, 
"that  guards  true  lovers,  it  looks  on  one  now,"  then 
he  turned  to  her  suddenly,  drew  closer,  his  hand 
stole,  unreproved,  around  her  waist,  his  passion 
burst  forth.  "  Amy,"  he  said,  "  I  love  you  with  the 
purest  and  deepest  love.  You  are  my  thought  now, 
night  and  day,  Amy.     Will  you  love  me  ? " 

Amy  made  no  answer,  but  her  head  drooped  a 
little  ;  she  drew  closer  and  pressed  his  hand,  only 
very  gently ;  but  the  touch  thrilled  his  blood. 

"  You  do  not  love  another  ;  don't  kill  me  by 
telling  me  that.  You  do  not  love  Cantelupe  ?  Oh  ! 
tell  me,  Amy." 

"  No.     I  love  you." 

"  Then  you  will  be  mine  ?  " 

"  I  have  promised  to  myself  never  to  marry  till 
my  father's  death,  llr.  Beauflower." 


THE   JACOBEAX   RUI^^  337 

"  Call  me  Ned,  clearest." 

"  He  is  getting  old,  and  he  lias  had  s}Tiiptoms 
of  paralysis,  and  if  he  vreve  to  die,  or  be  unable  to 
paint,  mamma  would  only  have  her  lodgings  to 
depend  upon.  You  must  not  ask  me  to  break 
this  sacred  promise  ;  but  I  will  love  you  for  ever, 
and  truly,  Edward." 

Oh  !  misery,  to  be  shown  Paradise,  and  then 
to  have  its  golden  gates  barred  upon  you. 

"You  do  not  love  me.  Amy,"  he  said,  "  or  you 
would  love  me  better  than  father  or  mother."  Love 
is  so  selfish. 

*'Yes,  I  do  love  you  dearly, — Ned.  I  have  loved 
you  ever  since  I  awoke  in  the  carriage  after  that 
terrible  accident,  and  saw  your  sorrowful  look  as 
you  bent  over  me,  doubting  whether  life  was  not 
gone  ;  but  you  must  not  ask  me  to  break  my 
sacred  vow,  Edward.  We  can  be  all  in  all  to 
each  other,  but  not  husband  and  wife  yet." 

"  But  I  will  maintain  your  father  and  mother 
if  the  need  come,"  Beauflower  was  about  to  say, 
when  he  thought  of  the  debt  that  was  spreading 
its  rank  gro^vi:h  around  him,  and  he  was  silent. 

Then  their  lips  met  in  the  first  long  kiss  of 
confessed  love.  That  fair  evening:  star  never 
shone  on  truer  lovers  than  those  that  then  plighted 
troth  ;  but  Amy  held  inexorably  to  her  vow. 

VOL.  II.  Z 


33S  THE   VICAPv's    COURTSHIP. 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

THE   -MAN   WITH  THE   BEARD. 

It  was  exactly  ten  minutes  to  seven  of  tliat 
very  June  evening  that  the  Vicar  and  Amy 
learned  the  secret  of  each  other  s  hearts  beside  the 
porch  of  the  old  Jacobean  ruin,  that  one  of  Traverses 
children,  a  little  girl  of  ten,  with  a  basket  on  her 
arm,  sent  on  a  hurried  errand  to  Birdbrook,  in 
taking  a  short  cut  through  the  Abbey  Woods, 
at  the  foot  of  the  Terraces,  saw,  as  she  stopped 
for  a  moment  and  looked  back  through  the 
bushes,  a  man,  with  a  dark  green  coat  and 
slouched  dark  Avide-awake,  steal  up  across  a 
by-path  in  the  direction  of  a  small  hut  which 
the  keepers,  when  on  the  watch,  were  in  the  habit 
of  using  at  night,  sleeping  by  turns  there  by  the 
fire,  and  relieving  each  other  like  sentinels.  The 
man  did  not  see  her,  and  she  only  saw  him 
for  a  moment,  but  in  that  moment  she  observed 
that  he  had  a  long  thick  black  beard,  which  hid 
all  the  lower  part  of  his  face,  and  that  he  carried 


THE   MAN   WITH   THE   BEAED.  339 

what  seemed  a  sliort  gun  under  liis  arm.  The 
thought  that  he  was  a  poacher  struck  her  for  a 
moment,  and  she  felt  rather  frightened ;  but  she 
was  too  young  to  think  about  it  for  more  than 
the  instant,  and  only  ran  the  faster  along  the 
little  by-path,  where  the  dry  cones  crackled  under 
her  feet,  and  the  rabbits  fled  before  her,  more 
frightened  than  herself.  Before  she  had  got  a 
hundred  yards  further,  the  cry  of  a  white  owl, 
mouse  hunting  in  the  twilight,  occupied  all  her 
thoughts,  and  she  forgot  all  about  the  man  with 
the  beard  in  her  wonder  whether  the  old  woman 
at  the  Birdbrook  general  shop  would  give  her 
more  than  fom'  sweeties  for  a  halfpenny,  and  on 
she  ran,  singing  a  little  song,  happy  in  the 
boundless  delights  of  the  true  golden  age  of  life. 

In  the  mean  time  the  man  with  the  beard, 
(the  poacher  rash  and  daring  enough  to  brave  j\Ir. 
Barker's  keepers  even  before  dark,  or  whatever 
the  mysterious  man  might  be,)  stole  cautiously 
— for  his  feet  seemed  to  give  no  sound,  except 
when  a  dry  stick  crackled  under  them — through 
the  bushes,  threading  in  and  out  between  the 
hazels,  brambles,  and  other  underwood.  He  avoided 
any  beaten  track,  however  small,  but  threaded 
his  way  between  the  old  birch  trees  and  the 
sapHng  firs,  and  made  with  the  certainty  of 
one    who    knew    every   inch  of  the  covert,  for 

z  2 


840  THE  YICAPJs   COURTSHIP. 

that  particular  part  of  tlie  Terraces  about  three 
quarters  of  a  mile  from  Travers's  lodge,  where 
just  inside  the  broken  park  wall,  and  looking 
down  on  the  Fontford  road,  stood  that  round 
thatched  hut  of  the  keepers  that  we  have  before 
described.  The  narrow  but  Avell  trodden  path, 
along  which  Travers  made  his  morning  and 
nightly  rounds,  passed  it  at  about  twelve  feet  off. 
There  was  no  door  to  the  hut,  but  only  a  hurdle 
bound  with  furze  bushes,  which  could  be  used 
as  a  temporary  shelter  from  the  Avind  without 
interrupting  the  passage  of  warning  sounds. 
Some  old  straw  lay  in  one  corner  of  the  hut — it 
had  served  for  the  keepers'  bed ;  the  ashes  of 
a  fire  remained  still  in  the  small  calcined  grate, 
there  was  a  torn  card  or  two,  a  broken  pipe,  the 
case  of  a  breech-loading  cartridge,  and  some  fluff 
from  a  rabbit  skin,  on  the  earth  floor.  The  sun  had 
just  set ;  the  June  twilight  had  still  that  warm 
afterglow  that  twilights  in  June  often  have.  The 
man  with  the  beard  cowered  in  the  darkness 
inside  the  doorway  of  the  hut,  and  waited  as 
deerstalkers  wait  for  the  deer,  in  a  defile.  It 
was  seven  now,  for  as  he  listened  and  his  eyes 
glared  to  himself  in  the  twilight,  he  could  hear 
the  Abbey  clock  strike  the  hour  with  its  sharp  alert 
stroke.  He  took  his  double-barrelled  gun,  removed 
the  caps,  struck  the  breech  to  bring  the  powder 


THE    MAN   WITH    THE   BEARD.  341 

well  forward,  primed  the  nipples  freely  from  a 
small  powder-flask  lie  drew  from  a  side-pocket, 
tlien  replaced  the  caps,  pressed  them  home  with 
his  thumb,  let  down  the  hammers  and  re-cocked 
both  barrels.  There  was  all  the  thievish  care 
of  a  poacher  about  the  man,  yet  how  could  he 
expect  to  shoot  pheasants  at  an  hour  past  their 
feedino^  time  and  from  inside  a  hut  ?  He  should 
look  for  them  in  their  roosting  places.  Per- 
haps he  was  only  waiting  for  his  companions 
who  had  the  nets  and  the  sulphur. 

Minutes  seem  hours,  hours  days,  when  one  is 
waiting  in  fear  or  anxiety.  Dozens  of  times  the 
man  with  the  beard  looked  at  his  watch ;  there 
was  just  light  enough  to  see  the  figures  dark 
against  the  glimmer  of  the  dial..  The  sharp 
discharge  of  a  gun,  that  sounded  like  the  sudden 
blows  of  a  hammer  on  an  iron  gate,  aroused  the 
watcher.  It  was  Travers  on  his  rounds.  He  had 
just  seen  the  ivy  rustle  at  the  top  of  a  tree,  and 
knowing  that  that  movement  indicated  a  wood- 
pigeon,  had  fired  and  killed.  Wood-pigeons 
were  his  perquisites.  He  was  in  the  habit  of 
killino;  them  nig;ht  and  mornins^  as  he  went  his 
rounds.  It  was  amusement  combined  with 
business.  The  shot  had  been  discharged  when 
he  was  not  very  far  from  the  lodge.  The 
watcher  clutched  his  gun,  and  strained  his  eyes 


342  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

to  pierce  the  twilight.  Was  he  afraid  of  being 
surprised  before  his  companions  could  join  him  ? 
Another  five  minutes,  and  a  second  gun  went  off, 
this  time  several  hundred  yards  nearer,  and  a 
dog  barked.     That  was  a  second  pigeon  shot. 

Presently  there  came  the  sound  of  footsteps, 
and  a  tall  gaunt  form  strode  out  of  the  dim 
wood,  not  a  hundred  yards  from  the  hut,  a  dog 
preceding  it.  It  was  Travers,  with  his  gun  on 
his  shoulder.  He  came  walking  sturdily  and  fast, 
with  a  swinging  stride.  He  was  muttering  to 
himself  and  laughing. 

"  He  was  here  on  sufferance,''  he  said,  "  I  told 
him  so.  He  found  me  too  much  for  him. 
Threaten  me  ? — I  like  that.  He  is  my  servant 
now.  I'm  the  real  master,  he's  only  here  on 
sufferance  ;  he  didn't  like  that.  Ha !  ha  !  What's 
the  matter,  Joe ;  come  to  heel,  you  beast." 

But  the  old  one  eyed  terrier  was  not  to  be 
pacified ;  growling  and  fretting,  it  had  stopped 
sniffing  within  six  feet  of  the  hut,  and  now,  with 
his  nose  down,  was  approaching  the  doorway 
with  a  short  frightened  bark. 

^*  Come  to  heel,  Joe,"  Travers  cried,  with  a 
curse.  "  It's  only  a  rabbit,  I  suppose.  Come  to 
heel,  sir,  or  I'll  teach  you,  my  boy." 

But  the  dog  was  barking  very  furiously.  Travers 
stepped  towards  the  hut,  wondering  what  could 


THE   MAX   WITH   THE   BEARD.  343 

SO  disturb  the  cloo\  That  moment  a  dark  fiorire 
stepped  forward  and  presented  his  gun.  There 
were  two  jets  of  fire,  and  Travers  fell,  dashed 
back  to  the  earth.  Two  heavy  loads  of  buck 
shot  had  struck  him  full  in  the  right  side,  his 
right  lung  was  almost  carried  away.  Another 
moment,  the  dark  figure  leaped  forward,  killed 
the  dog  that  flew  at  him  with  a  blow  of  the  butt 
end  of  his  gun,  and  stamped  upon  the  dpng  man. 
Then,  striking  a  fusee,  he  showed  his  face  to  the 
groaning  wretch,  who  had  but  a  moment  to  live. 

"You  know  me  now,''  he  muttered,  between  his 
teeth ;  "  don  t  die  and  tell  them  below  it  was  a 
poacher  who  killed  you.  I  told  you  to  take  care. 
You  despised  the  warning." 

Travers  saw  the  face  ;  stared  at  the  distorted 
features  lit  up  by  the  momentary  flame  ;  tried  to 
speak  ;  stretched  his  hand  towards  his  gun  ;  gave 
a  deep  gasping  groan. — He  was  dead,  in  the  very 
flush  of  his  sins.  The  murderer  stooped  and 
touched  the  keeper's  heart;  it  had  stopped  for 
ever.  The  murderer  gave  one  wild  look  round, 
listened,  and  then  leaj^ed  down  among  the  bushes. 
The  dead  man  was  left  alone  in  the  darkness. 

But  only  for  a  moment.  The  bushes  had 
scarcely  closed,  like  parting  waves,  upon  the 
murderer,  before  they  reopened  before  him. 

"Fool  that  I  was,"  he  muttered,  "I  had  for- 


844  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

gotten/' — and  stooping  clown  by  tlie  dead  man, 
he  tore  open  his  shooting  jacket  and  felt  in  the 
breast  pockets.  He  looked  in  three  in  vain  ; 
there  was  nothing  but  some  cartridges  and  a 
brandy  flask.  In  the  last  he  found  a  flat  packet 
of  letters,  tied  round  with  string.  He  stiuck  a 
fusee  with  savage  haste,  tore  ofi"  the  string  and 
looked  at  the  letters.  They  were  all  there,  all 
the  damning  testimony.  The  man  was  no 
j)oacher  bent  on  revenge — it  was  Harker  !  Now 
he  was  no  longer  master  on  sufl'erance ;  the 
only  possessor  of  his  original  secret  was  dead ; 
the  doctor  to  whom  it  had  been  confided  was 
dead  ;  and  the  villain  who  had  used  it  as  a 
means  of  extortion  was  dead.  The  master  of 
Summerleas  was  safe  for  ever. 

As  he  thrust  the  letters  into  his  pocket,  one  of 
them  fell ;  he  groped  for  it  round  the  body  in 
a  delirium  of  fear,  for  that  had  come  upon  him 
now  ;  he  coukl  not  find  it.  x\ll  at  once  his  hand 
came  upon  it,  wet  with  blood ;  he  seized  it  and  fled. 
He  took  a  well  trod  path  this  time,  that  would 
not  betray  his  footsteps,  avoided  the  dewy  grass, 
struck  into  another  part  of  the  wood,  w^here  the 
owls  were  hooting  as  if  to  betray  him,  and  stole 
do^^Ti  by  a  circuit  of  a  mile  into  the  shrubberies  at 
the  back  of  the  Abbey.  Then  through  them,  quietly 
peering  to  see  if  any  one  was  near  or  any  sound 


THE   MAN   WITH   THE   BEARD.  345 

could  be  heard,  lie  got  into  the  gravel  walk  at 
the  back  of  the  house,  close  to  the  broad  lighted 
window.  All  was  still  as  death.  He  listened. 
He  looked  in — it  was  his  study  window.  He 
could  see  at  the  edge  of  the  blind  the  fire  brightly- 
burning  just  as  he  had  left  it ;  the  chair  as  when  he 
rose  from  it  to  bolt  the  door  and  stop  the  key 
hole  only  one  short  half  hour  ago.  Then  he  softly 
pressed  the  tall  French  windows  that  opened  on 
the  lawn.  They  were  open  as  he  had  left  them. 
He  entered,  closed  them,  softly  shot  the  bolts, 
and  drew  the  curtains. 

He  recoiled  horrified  at  the  face  that  met  him  in 
the  old-fashioned  mirror  over  the  mantlepiece :  it 
was  white,  and  wan,  and  wild.  Then  he  threw  open 
a  cupboard,  and  drew  out  the"  suit  of  clothes  he 
had  taken  ofi"  before  he  left.  With  the  haste  of  a 
madman  he  tore  off  his  false  beard,  his  wideawake, 
his  long  paletot,  his  trowsers,  and  his  boots, 
dropped  them  into  the  long  enamelled  tank  of 
sulphuric  acid  that  he  had  before  thought  of  for 
this  purpose,  and  resumed  his  usual  dress.  Then 
he  cleaned  his  gun,  put  it  up  in  its  usual 
locked-up  case,  and  covered  the  tank  with  its 
metal  lid,  which  he  also  padlocked.  In  twelve 
hours  those  clothes  would  be  reduced  to  a  pulp. 
The  fever  of  excitement  carried  him  through  all 
this  with  incredible   speed.     There  is  a  sort  of 


346  THE   vicar's   COURTSHIP. 

liorrible  genius  that  crime  gives  a  man  for  the 
moment,  to  enable  him  to  do  the  works  of  hell 
more  readily.  Then  he  arranged  his  writing 
things  at  a  desk,  so  that  his  back  should  be  to 
the  door  when  anyone  should  enter,  took  down  a 
file  of  reference  books,  and  arranged  his  lamp. 
It  seemed  like  a  dream  already.  Was  he,  the 
man  in  that  quiet,  meditative,  luxurious  room, 
with  busts  and  pictures,  the  man  who  lurked  in 
the  hut  and  took  that  man's  life,  who  knelt  beside 
the  shattered  body,  Avho  drew  out  those  papers, 
and  who  searched,  in  that  moment  of  agonising 
fear,  for  the  missing  letter  that  might  have  betrayed 
all  ?  He  was  faint  now  with  the  reaction  from 
the  excitement.  He  would  unbolt  the  door  and 
ring  for  some  wine  ;  he  need  only  speak  two  or 
three  words,  and  scarcely  show  his  face.  The 
sooner  he  was  seen  the  better.  But  he  would 
first  peruse  those  letters  before  he  burnt  them.  He 
lifted  the  parafiin  candles  on  to  the  mantlepiece 
and  stood  up  to  read.  As  he  was  reading  the 
first  words  of  the  old  butler's  confession,  his  eye 
glanced  up  at  the  mirror,  and  to  his  horror  he 
saw  that  his  right  hand  and  one  of  the  letters 
were  stained  dark  with  blood.  He  instantly  thrust 
the  papers  into  the  fire,  driving  them  deep  among 
the  hottest  coals  with  the  poker,  then  going  to 
the   washstand    in   his   cupboard,   one   of   those 


THE   MAN   WITH   THE   BEARD.  347 

basins  witli  a  tap  and  a  plugged  liole  in  tlie 
centre,  washed  off  carefally  every  stain  of  ac- 
cusing blood,  and  swilled  tlie  basin  twenty  or 
thirty  times  with  water,  examining  every  part 
where  a  stain  could  rest,  either  on  the  china 
or  metal,  with  the  intensest  care.  There  was 
fear  of  man  in  this  man's  mind,  but  no  remorse, 
no  belief  in  God,  no  fear  of  the  all-seeing 
Deity.  "  No,"  he  said,  "  the  man  was  my 
enemy  as  much  as  if  he  had  tried  to  blow  out 
my  brains  in  open  battle.  He  was  always  plan- 
ning evil.  There  Avas  no  escape  from  him  but 
by  killing  him,  and  I've  done  so,  done  it 
secretly  and  well,  and  I  would  do  it  again.  I 
shall  feel  no  remorse,  for  I'm  safe  now,  safe 
and  free,  and  no  longer  a"  master  here  on 
sufferance.'' 

Then  he  went  on  with  the  acting  of  his  dread- 
ful part.  He  drew  his  chair  to  his  desk, 
wrote  a  few  incoherent  lines,  then  unlocked  the 
door,  and  rang  the  bell  sharply.  The  butler 
came  in  a  few  minutes. 

"Bring  me  some  of  the  best  Bm-gundy,"  he 
said,  without  looking  round,  and  still  poring  over 
his  writing,  "  and  send  me  tea  in  here  at  half- 
past  eight." 

What  he  waited  for  and  what  he  dreaded  now 
w^as  the  first  alarm  of  the  murder.   But  wine  would 


348  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

give  him  nerve  to  bear  it.  Those  clothes  once 
destroyed,  he  was  safe  for  ever.  Everyone  would 
think  that  Travers  had  been  shot  by  some 
poachers  in  revenge.  No  possible  clue  could  ever 
lead  to  him.  No  one  knew  of  any  disagreement 
between  them,  or  any  reason  that  he  had  to  wish 
for  his  death. 

It  was  still  several  hours  before  his  wife  and 
daughters  could  return,  and  every  moment 
brought  back  more  of  his  self-possession.  He 
was  still  drinking  his  wine  in  quick  deep  draughts, 
that  roused  but  did  not  oppress  his  brain,  when 
there  came  a  long,  shrill,  agonising  scream  from 
the  kitchen,  another,  and  another,  then  there 
was  a  rush  of  frightened  servants  along  the  pas- 
sage. The  moment  had  come.  He  thrcAv  him- 
self into  his  chau^  and  resumed  his  pretended 
writing.  The  door  flew  open,  and  the  butler, 
and  two  or  two  or  three  footmen  and  grooms 
rushed  in. 

"  Oh  sir,  oh  master,  oh  Mr.  Harker,"  they  cried, 
"  Travers  has  been  found  dead  on  the  Terrace,  and 
they  think  he's  been  murdered  by  a  poacher." 

"  Murdered  !  Good  God,  it  is  impossible,"  said 
Mr.  Harker,  ''who  found  him?  Gracious  heavens, 
not  murdered '?  " 

"  Paddy  Blake  found  him,  sir,"  said  the  butler, 
"  he  had  brought  some  gin  for  one  of  the  keepers. 


THE   MAX   WITH   THE   BEARD.  849 

and  was  going  to  wait  for  liim  in  the  hut,  when 
he  stumbled  over  the  body.  He  ran  to  the  stables 
and  called  the  grooms  out.'' 

"This  is  indeed  terrible.  Poor  Travers  !  Where 
is  the  body  \  I  must  see  it.  Get  me  my  coat 
and  hat,  and  a  lantern,  and  come  with  me, 
Eoberts." 

"  It's  at  the  lodge,  sir,"  said  the  butler,  pale  as 
a  sheet.  ''  Mrs.  Travers  has  gone  out  of  her 
mind,  they  think.  She  says  she's  sure  it  is  a 
poacher.  They  had  a  grudge  to  him  because  he 
was  so  faithful  to  you." 

"  He  was  faithful.  I  told  him  not  to  be  too 
rash,  or  to  go  about  at  night  alone.  Are  the 
police  sent  for  ? " 

"  Yes,  sir.     Vincent  is  there  by  this  time." 

"And  Dr.  Briscoe?" 

"  Yes.  We  sent  off  one  of  the  grooms  directly 
the  news  came." 

"  Was  anything  stolen  from  the  body  %  " 

"  Yes,  the  watch  was  gone,  and  the  coat  was 
torn  open,  and  the  breast  pockets  turned  inside 
out.     They've  killed  the  dog,  too." 

"  That  looks  like  thieves ;  but  poachers 
might  rob  him.  Come,  we  must  see  the  2:)oor 
fellow,  Eoberts.  This  is  a  most  horrible  affair. 
Faithful  fellow,  and  in  my  service.  Wretches  ! 
I   always  said,  have  you  not  all  heard  me  often 


350  THE   vicar's   COUETSHIP. 

say,  that  any  poacher  would  murder  a  man  for 
half-a-crown." 

"Ay,  that  I  have,  sir,  many  a  time,''  said 
Eoberts,  and  two-under  footmen  said  also  that 
they  had. 

"  other  sins  only  speak  ;  murder  shrieks  out. 
The  element  of  water  moistens  the  earth, 
But  blood  flies  upwards  and  bedews  the  heavens." 

The  village  was  already  aroused,  as  one  sliriek 
arouses  a  sleeping  house.  From  every  door  men, 
women,  and  children  were  hurrying  to  the  lodge, 
where  Dr.  Briscoe  had  just  arrived,  driving  at 
his  utmost  speed.  The  door,  as  Mr.  Harker  and 
the  servants  with  lanterns  approached  it,  was 
crowded  by  keepers,  grooms,  and  villagers,  all 
white  and  trembling.  Travers's  children  were 
crying  around  their  mother,  who  had  swooned 
in  the  arms  of  some  friend.  Paddy  Blake, 
wild  and  dishevelled  as  usual,  stood  outside 
the  door,  relating  the  discovery  to  Archer, 
Farmer  Brown,  and  a  crowd  of  open  mouthed 
villao^ers. 

As  Mr.  Harker  entered,  and  every  one  respect- 
fully made  way  for  him,  struck,  even  in  their 
excitement,  by  his  pale  and  troubled  face,  Dr. 
Briscoe  met  him,  closing  the  door  of  the  bed- 
room behind  him  as  he  spoke. 

"  This  is  a  dreadful,  dreadful  affair,  Mr.  Harker,' 


THE    MAX   WITH    THE    BEARD.  351 

he  said,  "the  poor  fellow  has  iDeen  murdered, 
there  is  no  doubt  about  it,  murdered  by  poachers. 
His  right  lung  is  almost  entirely  shot  away,  he 
could  not  have  lived  three  minutes.  You  had 
better  not  see  the  body  ;  it  would  do  no  good  ;  it 
would  only  very  much  shock  you.  No  one  had 
better  see  it.  Mrs.  Brown  is  going  to  take  the 
poor  widow  home  with  her  after  she  recovers, 
and  the  children  too." 

"  I  suppose,  doctor,''  whispered  Harker,  "  that 
this  vagabond  Paddy  had  no  hand  in  it  1 " 

"Oh  no,"  said  the  doctor,  "just  look  at  him. 
Why,  he's  more  sorry  and  more  frightened  than 
any  one.  No,  it's  one  of  those  infernal  poachers 
who  have  owed  Travers  a  grudge.  He  was  always 
a  hard  man." 

"  I  suppose  it  must  have  been  a  poacher,"  said 
Mr.  Harker,  with  a  deep  sigh,  "  and  ]\Ir.  Archer 
here  must  spare  no  effort  to  bring  the  miscreant 
to  justice." 

"There  shan't  be  none  spared,  sir,"  said 
P.  C.  Archer,  "  and  I'll  let  the  coroner 
know.  I'LL  send  directly  to  all  the  railway 
stations  ten  miles  round,  and  have  the  wood 
searched  all  the  way  to  Swallowcliff.  ^^^len  day- 
light comes,  we  shall  see  better  if  there  was 
any  struggle.  I  thought  them  poachers  here 
were    carr}ing   on  a  little  too  fast,    and  I  told 


352  THE   VICAE's    courtship. 

Travers  only  last  week  not  to  go  about  on  the 
Terrace  alone." 

"  I  wish  now/'  said  Mr.  Harker,  "  I  had  in- 
sisted on  his  having  more  men  to  watch,  but  it  is 
too  late  now.  Oh,  this  is  a  dreadful,  dreadful 
affair  indeed.'' 


END    OF   VOL.    II. 


BRALBURY,   EVA^•S,    AND   CO.,   PRINTERS,   WHITEyKlARS. 


■  L, 



THE    VICAR'S    COURTSHIP. 


CHAPTEE  I. 

TEA   AT   MISS   CHIVERS's. 


Perhaps  under  the  circumstances,  Beauflower 
and  Amy  miglit  be  pardoned  for  walking  rather 
slowly  across  the  meadows  to  Fontford.  Love 
had  given  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth  to  them; 
the  stars  shone  larger,  the  balmy  odours  of  the 
summer  evening  blew  sweeter,  the  nightingale's 
song  now  fell  upon  their  ears  more  sup ernatur ally 
beautiful  and  human.  Their  great  happiness 
transformed  all  they  heard  and  saw  to  still  more 
beautiful  forms  and  sounds. 

Julia,  who  met  them  at  the  gate  with  Miss 
Chivers,  was  rather  cruel  when  they  first  arrived, 
about  the  exactitude  necessary  in  architectural 
drawing,  and  grew  still  more  terribly  like  Beatrice 
when,  rather  to  Beauflower's  dismay,  and  much  to 

VOL.    III.  B 


THE   vicar's    courtship. 


Amy's  horror,  it  was  found  tliat  the  drawing  had 
actually  after  all  been  left  behind  in  the  porch. 
The  Vicar  took  the  matter,  however,  bravely 
upon  himself,  rallied  himself  for  his  carelessness, 
and  his  love  of  talking  and  ''  spouting "  poetry, 
and  gallantly  offered  to  run  at  once  for  it ;  but 
no  one  would  listen  to  him,  and  the  matter  was 
at  last  compromised  by  the  doctor's  boy,  who 
had  medicine  to  take  to  Stoat's  Nest,  being  told 
to  bring  it  as  he  came  back,  for  as  the  moon  by 
that  time  would  have  arisen  it  would  not  be  diffi- 
cult for  him  to  find  it. 

"  Don't  you  think,  Ned,"  said  Julia,  "  the  ruin 
by  moonlight  would  make  a  beautiful  sketch? 
Pity  you  and  Amy  didn't  wait  for  the  moon." 

"You  be  quiet,  you  mischief!  You  can't  draw 
yourself,  and  you  don't  understand  other  people's 
enthusiasm,"  said  Miss  Chivers.  "  Well,  I'm  so 
glad  to  see  you,  Amy  darling,  and  even  Mr.  Beau- 
flower  too,  though  he  did  run  away  from  me  the 
other  day  at  the  waterfall.  Oh  !  that  dreadful 
damp  meadow,  Amy  dear,  I've  had  the  rheuma- 
tism ever  since,  been  hardly  able  to  move ;  but 
Mary's  nursed  me  so  kindly  that  I  began  to  get 
about  yesterday." 

"  Now  you  two  hardy  people  must  come  and 
help  us  with  the  hay  before  you  have  one  drop 
of  tea,"  said  Julia,  despotically  ;  "  Ave  are  all  hard 


TEA   AT   MISS    CHTVERS's. 


at  work,  ain't  we,  Miss  Chivers  ?  getting  it  in  in 
case  of  rain  to-niglit,  for  tlie  glass  is  falling,  the 
doctor  says." 

"  Yes  ;  and  Tm  sure  it  is,  by  my  rheumatism, 
Julia,"  said  Miss  Chivers. 

''Oh!  it's  such  fun.  Amy;  that  wonderful  major 
is  loading  the  cart,  and  telling  us  how  they  cut 
grass  in  South  America,  and  how  he  once  mowed 
a  prairie  of  ten  thousand  acres  for  a  wager  with 
an  Indian  chief ;  and  your  papa  and  mamma  are 
both  helping,  and  the  doctor  and  Mr.  Goodrick, 
— and  laughing — ^just  hear  them  now  !  They're 
all  mad  together,  Fm  cj^uite  ill  with  laughing." 

Just  as  Julia  spoke  there  came  a  roar  of 
laughter  from  the  meadow,  the  major  shouting 
some  wild  Irish  song,  was  tossing  about  the  hay 
like  a  madman,  the  self-elected  monarch  of  the 
whole  business.  There  he  was  in  his  shirt  sleeves 
on  the  top  of  a  waggon,  a  colossal  genius  of  agri- 
cultm^e,  heedless  for  the  time  of  all  lesser  troubles, 
and  even  of  the  Charlemagne  Champagne. 

"  We  are  tlie  boys  for  bewitching  them, 
WTiether  good-humoured  or  coy." 

he  cried.  "  Fork  up  some  more  hay,  doctor  ; 
more  power  to  your  elbow.  Don't  give  me  as 
little  at  a  time  as  if  you  were  sorting  simples. 
Good  evening,  Miss  Amy,  you're  welcome  as  the 

B  2 


4  THE   VICARS    COURTSHIP. 

flowers  in  May;  and  good  evening,  Mr.  Beau- 
flower,  we  want  the  strong  arm  of  the  Church  here 
to  give  us  a  blessins^  for  the  stack  !  But,  look 
there,  that's  what  ruins  us.  It  is  the  full  of  the 
moon,  I  suppose."  (Here  the  incorrigible  major 
drew  attention  to  a  distant  hay-cock  near  which 
pretty  Httle  Susan,  the  Kobinsons'  maid-servant, 
was  talking  very  earnestly  to  Mr.  Bassevi's  smart 
young  man,  who,  having  brought  some  picture- 
frames  down  for  Mr.  Kobinson,  had  been  pressed 
into  the  service  of  the  energetic  major.)  "  Look 
sharp  there,  or  we  shan't  get  tea  this  side  twelve 
o'clock.  Some  more  hay  if  you  please,  Mr. 
Eobinson.  Doctor,  be  kind  enough  to  drive  the 
cart  on  a  little  further  ;  somebody  hurry  those 
lazy  spalpeens  with  the  tarpaulin  ;  and  Miss 
Chivers  will  put  the  kettle  on  for  us,  and  get 
us  some  tay  hissing  hot,  for  tay's  the  coolest 
thing  out  when  a  man's  tired.  Jee-up,  Dobbin ! 
You  boy,  go  to  that  horse's  head." 

It  was  a  pretty  sight,  the  little  comedy  of 
work,  with  the  amateur  hay-makers  raking 
away  at  the  odorous  meadow  as  if  they  were 
combing  a  giant's  hair.  The  major  was  shouting 
directions  like  a  generalissimo,  at  once  Stentor 
and  Bombastes,  and  everybody  was  as  busy  under 
the  rising  moon  as  if  life  depended  upon  it,  while 
Mr.  Goodrick,  Miss  Beauflower,  Miss  Eobinson, 


TEA    AT    MISS    CHIVERS  S.  5 

and  the  Misses  Chivers,  whilst  tea  was  steeping 
and  muffins  jDreparing,  surveyed  them  from  the 
open  glass  doors  of  the  drawing-room,  round 
which  countless  roses  crowded  as  if  claiming  a 
right  to  admission  to  the  snug  little  party.  The 
trees  were  still  as  if  they  were  asleep,  and  a  deep- 
toned  after-glow  rested  on  the  Terrace,  where  the 
keeper's  hut  could  be  seen,  a  dark  speck  against 
the  serried  lines  of  fir  trees. 

Julia  was  still  remorseless.  She  had  no  idea 
of  love  being  a  secret  and  sacred  thing. 

"  You  and  Amy,"  she  said  to  her  brother,  who 
kept  near  to  Amy's  side,  and  raked  back  all  the 
hay  she  was  trying  to  bring  nearer  to  the  waggon, 
"  are  so  slow  ;  you  are  always  lingering  behind. 
You  have  got  some  secret  between  you  you  won't 
tell  me,  and  I  insist  on  knowing  it.  Please, 
major,  tell  these  lazy  people  to  d-o  their  work 
quicker." 

"We  can't  expect  every  one  to  earn  their 
wages  like  you.  Miss  Beauflower,"  said  the  major, 
descending  from  his  altitude. 

In  about  half  an  hour  the  hay  was  fairly  got 
into  one  rough  stack,  and  the  tarpaulin  dra^vn 
over  it  like  a  night-cap.  The  major  thereupon  sang 
"  Limerick  Eaces,"  with  a  chorus  which  he  in- 
sisted every  one  should  join  in,  personally  distri- 
buted cyder,  furnished  by  Miss  Chivers,  and  then 


6  THE   VICAE's    COUETSHIP. 

everyone  adjourned  to  tea.  While  Amy  and 
Julia  were  taking  off  their  things,  the  good- 
natured  doctor,  putting  on  his  coat  with  the  air 
of  a  satisfied  workman,  took  the  Vicar's  arm  and 
walked  towards  the  house. 

"  It's  worse  and  worse  at  Stoat's  Nest,"  he  said, 
"two  more  people  and  another  child  dead  last 
night ;  yet  Travers  will  do  nothing,  not  even  white- 
wash, and  Harker  won't  remove  the  pig-sties  or 
do  anything  for  them.  He  was  too  busy  about 
the  election  to  see  me  when  I  called  this  morn- 
ing, and  he  says,  I  hear,  that  if  he  pulls  down 
the  houses  he  won't  build  them  up  again,  not  if 
his  men  have  to  walk  six  miles  to  their  work. 
He  Avill  not  increase  the  rates  another  penny. 
Oh !  he's  as  hard  as  a  grindstone.'^ 

"  It's  too  bad,"  said  the  Vicar,  with  generous 
warmth.  "  Oh,  these  landlords  !  they'll  have  a 
cruel  account  to  render  for  all  these  things.  They 
will  not  see  that  property  has  other  duties  than 
merely  to  receive  rents  and  breed  game." 

''  Now,  I  think.  Miss  Chivers,"  said  the  major, 
as  he  helped  to  hand  round  the  tea  and  cake  in  a 
grand  manner,  aided  by  the  other  gentlemen, 
"  that  we  have  done  a  very  fair  afternoon's  work. 
I  don't  think  I  have  worked  steadier  since  I  went 
up  Chimborazo  with  a  scientific  party  sent  by 
the  Nicaragua  government." 


TEA   AT   MISS    CHIVERS  S.  7 

^Tm  sure  I  and  my  sister  are  extremely- 
obliged  to  you,  major.  Amy,  darling,  do  try 
some  of  these  arrowroot  cakes.  Mary  prides  her- 
self on  her  arrowroot  cakes." 

"  I  can  highly  recommend  them,"  said  Mr. 
Goodrick. 

"Mr.  Eobinson,  I  beg  your  pardon,  tea  or 
coffee  ? "  said  Miss  Chivers  ;  for  Eobinson  was 
intent  on  admiring  a  fine  bit  of  Wedgewood  on 
the  mantelpiece  to  Avhich  Mr.  Goodrick  had  drawn 
his  and  Julia  Beauflower's  attention. 

"  Oh  !  it  is  so  beautiful,''  said  Julia ;  "  do  look 
Amy.  Miss  Chivers  is  so  kind,  she's  put  out  all 
her  treasures.  But  I  must  first  ask  Mr.  Good- 
rick if  I  ought  to  admire  it.  "We  daren't  admire 
anything  at  home  now.  Amy,  you  know,  mthout 
permission." 

Amy  thought  it  very  beautiful.  . 

"  It  is  so  crisp,"  she  said,  "  and  the  little 
cameos  are  finished  with  such  exquisite  purity 
of  taste." 

"  Now,  that  is  sensible  criticism,  Miss  Julia  !  " 
said  Mr.  Goodrick,  smiling  approval  at  Amy,  and 
glancing  with  good-natured  sarcasm  at  his  fair 
persecutor  from  the  Vicarage. 

"  That  is  to  make  me  jealous  and  hate  Amy. 
He  is  always,  Mrs.  Eobinson,  asking  me  to  join 
in  praising  Amy,  to  try  and  rouse  me  to  some 


8  THE   VICARS    COURTSHIP. 

malicious  detraction ;  but  I  always  cany  it  fur- 
ther, and  that  enrages  Mr.  Goodrick." 

"  Now,  I  appeal  to  Miss  Chi  vers — Miss  Eliza- 
beth and  Miss  Mary  Chivers — if  that  isn't  the 
very  essence  of  the  feminine  malice  of  a  girl  of 
the  period,"  protested  Mr.  Goodrick  ;  "  that  is  this 
clever  young  lady's  way  of  confessing  that  hear- 
ing a  friend  praised  gives  her  pain." 

"  Oh  !  I'm  sure  it  does  not,"  said  Amy,  with 
sweet  and  unaffected  generosity. 

''And  I'm  sure  it  does  not,"  said  Mrs.  Eobinson. 

"Oh!  they  will  always  be  sparring — those  two," 
said  Dr.  Briscoe.  "  May  I  ask  for  one  more  cup 
of  tea,  without  robbing  any  one  ?  I'm  rather 
tired  with  my  work  ;   ain't  you,  Mr.  Eobinson  ?  " 

''  Well,  I  must  confess,  Dr.  Briscoe,  I  am,"  said 
the  artist,  rubbing  his  flaccid  little  arm  ;  "  I'm 
not  much  accustomed  to  hard  work.  I  had  a 
pair  of  dumb-bells  once,  but  a  servant  we  hii^ed 
stole  them.  You  remember  that  horrid  Irish 
woman,  Flaherty?" 

Mrs.  Eobinson  said  she  did.  The  WTctch  was 
recommended  by  the  major. 

"Devil  a  bit,  Mrs.  Eobinson!  Ma'am,"  said 
the  major,  "she  was  the  wife  of  a  compositor 
who  lodged  over  me  in  the  Blackfriars  Eoad — a 
drunken  baste  who  beat  her,  and  at  last  ran 
away.     I  told  her  name  to  you  out  of  compas- 


TEA    AT    MISS    CHTVERS's.  9 

sion,  because  she  was  from  Gal  way,  like  myself. 
Eecommended  her,  is  it  ? — get  out  of  that. 
That's  all  one  gets  for  doing  a  kind  action. 
Many's  the  time  I've  sworn  never  to  do 
another." 

"  Some  more  tea,  Mr.  Beauflower  ?  And  will 
you  pass  Amy's  cup  ?  " 

"No  more  for  me,  Miss  Chivers,  thank  you. 
Miss  Eobinson,  shall  I  pass  your  cup  ?  Miss 
Chivers,  half  a  cup  for  Miss  Eobinson,  please." 

"  And  when  does  this  much  talked-of  election 
take  place  at  Bibury  ? "  said  Mrs.  Beauflower, 
who  had  been  relating  to  Mrs.  Eobinson  thirty 
years'  experience  of  Wiltshire  servants.  Mrs. 
Eobinson  was  a  good  Hstener,  and  Mrs.  Beau- 
flower secretly  pronounced  her  "  a  delightful  and 
well-bred  person," — considering  her  station. 

"On  Thursday,"  said  Dr.  Briscoe.  "Mr.  Para- 
dise, a  rich  brewer,  of  Salisbury,  is  the  Eadical 
candidate ;  but  he  has  no  great  chance  if  young 
Cantelupe  plays  his  cards  as  well  as  he  has  begun 
to  do.  His  address  was  so  excellent  that  I  very 
much  suspect  some  one,  not  a  thousand  miles 
from  here,  had  some  hand  in  that." 

Beauflower  slightly  coloured  at  this  lunge,  but 
made  no  reply ;  and  Julia  also  slightly  coloured, 
for  which  latter  rosyness  there  was  certainly  no 
necessity. 


10  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

"  Am  I  right  ? ''  said  the  doctor.  "  Ah !  you 
don't  deny  it.  The  prisoner  at  the  bar  is  guilty. 
Well,  Beauflower,  it  was  a  first-class  address — no 
clap-trap  or  flummery.  I  don't  go  quite  so  far, 
you  know,  as  you  do,  but  still  I  admire  the  tone. 
No  sneaking  evasions — all  clear  as  day  1 " 

"  But,  after  all,  I  suppose,"  said  Mr.  Good- 
rick,  "  money  is  the  best  argument.  Most  sove- 
reigns, most  votes,  swill  the  brave  enlightened 
voters  with  perpetual  beer,  buy  them  at  their 
own  price,  flatter  them  with  fulsome  praise, 
cringe  and  bow  and  scrape,  prove  to  them  you'll 
support  the  abuses  by  which  they  live,  and  vote 
for  taxes  that  will  not  touch  them,  and  they'll 
lift  you  on  their  greasy  shoulders  and  hail  you 
Member  for  Bibury — is  that  the  way  ?  " 

There  was  a  moment's  silence,  and  a  piece  of 
gaseous  coal  gave  a  sort  of  deprecating  whiffling 
answer,  like  the  feeble  voice  of  an  old  man,  which 
created  a  laugh. 

"You  are  too  hard  on  our  glorious  Constitu- 
tion, with  its  many  conventions,  compromises, 
and  imperfections,"  said  the  Vicar  ;  "  increased 
education  will  give  poor  men  in  time  a  higher 
sense  of  their  duties  as  voters,  especially  when 
they  shall  have  the  ballot  to  protect  them." 

"  Never !  Education  never  will  properly  ex- 
tend till  it  is  made  compulsory." 


TEA   AT   MISS   CHIVERS's.  11 

"  Now,  gentlemen,"  said  Miss  Cliivers,  you 
must  not — ^you  must  not — begin  politics,  or  we'll 
discuss  women's  rights  to  vote,  won't  we,  Julia  ? " 

"  It  seems,  at  present,"  said  Goodrick,  "  tlie 
English  woman's  very  laudable  desire  to  unsex 
herself,  and  to  become  a  third-rate  sort  of  man. 
Women  were  not  sent  to  be  kings  and  doctors, 
Shaksperes,  Newtons,  or  Beethovens,  even  if  they 
could  be — they  were  sent  to  love  and  to  be  loved." 

"  Yes,  we  want  to  be  wise  and  to  govern,"  said 
Julia,  proudly  ;  "  don't  we  Amy  1 " 

"You  do  Avant  to  be  wise — you  do  want  to 
govern  I  "  said  Goodrick,  bitterly. 

"For  Heaven's  sake  become  anything  but  Dr. 
Mary  Walkers  !  "  said  Dr.  Briscoe. 

"  Doctor,  that  is  professional  jealousy,"  said 
Julia,  battling  her  best. 

"We  will  not  have  politics  or  philosophy  here," 
said  Miss  Chivers.  "Look  here,  dears — look  here, 
Julia :  suppose  you  were  king  to-day,  to-morrow 
you'd  fall  in  love  with  your  prime  minister,  and 
give  up  the  crown  as  a  betrothal  present,  wouldn't 
she,  Mr.  Beaufiower  ?  But  we  mustn't  have  any 
more  grand  talk.  Look  here,  Mary's  got  a  beau- 
tiful piece  of  work  here  to  show  you — a  Kzard  all 
made  in  ten-stitch  by  one  of  my  gxeat  aunts,  who 
was  a  nun  in  France." 

Amy  and  Julia  were  in  a  moment  absorbed  in 


12  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

this  masterpiece  of  useless  industry — the  strongest 
testimony  possible  of  the  wasted,  wearisome,  re- 
gretful life  those  poor  involuntary  vestals  fret  away 
in  convents.  Poor  Mary,  who  was  so  deaf  that  it 
was  impossible  for  her  to  join  in  general  conversa- 
tion, was  delighted  at  the  pleasure  the  work  caused, 
and  produced,  to  reward  the  spectators,  some  fine 
coffee-coloured  old  rose  point  lace,  and  some 
curious  formal  houses  and  landscapes  in  old  Dutch 
needlework,  with  little  flesh-coloured  Cupids  play- 
ing in  the  foreground  with  peacocks,  whose  plumes 
shone  with  golden,  green,  and  purple  lustres,  not 
even  yet  faded.  The  gentlemen  soon  got  tired  of 
these,  and  to  amuse  them  Mr.  Goodrick  very  op- 
portunely produced  a  very  fine  microscope,  with 
specimens  of  almost  invisible  sea  shells, — mere 
pointed  and  circled  dust, — but  which,  magnified, 
turned  into  enamelled  cones  of  ivory  and  porce- 
lain, jewelled  in  bars  and  stripes  and  zones  of 
varying  and  endless  beauty. 

"  And  all  this  to  rest  in  miles  of  sand,"  said 
Beauflower,  "  fathoms  under  the  waves !  How 
generous  Nature  is  !  " 

Then,  at  Amy's  desire,  Mr.  Goodrick,  who  treated 
her  with  the  love  of  a  father  and  the  devotion 
of  a  lover,  both  softened  by  the  high  courtesy 
of  the  old  school,  but  a  courtesy  in  him  neither 
cold    nor    angular,    produced    several    of    those 


TEA  AT   MISS   CHIVERS'S.  13 

special  treasures,  which  he  generally  carried  with 
him  ;  the  great  blue  diamond  that  shone  with  such 
matchless  lustre,  and  the  opal,  that  was  all  in  a 
flicker  with  green  and  orange  fire,  and  cloudy 
gleams  of  summer  daybreak. 

"Oh,  they  are  too  valuable  to  carry  about," 
said  Miss  Chivers,  and  everyone  agreed  with  her. 

"  If  I  had  such  things,  Td  have  a  whole  regi- 
ment round  me,  bedad,"  said  the  major  ;  "  there 
are  thousands  of  fellows  in  London  who'd  cut  a 
man's  throat  for  the  mere  filings  of  such  sparklers. 
I  wouldn't  undertake  to  carry  those  gems  through 
A^^itechapel  unless  I  had  them  in  an  iron  safe, 
and  sat  upon  it  with  a  blunderbuss  in  each  hand. 
Talk  of  Italy,  why  there's  plenty  of  boys  in 
London  would  kill  a  man  for  a  penny  roll." 

"Now,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  it  is  half-past 
nine,"  said  Miss  Chivers,  who,  when  she  forgot 
her  personal  aches  and  pains  (which  with  persons, 
however  unselfish,  who  live  too  much  alone  be- 
come matters  that  occupy  far  too  much  of  their 
conversation)  was  delightfully  alert,  vivacious,  and 
social,  "  I  propose  we  have  a  rubber ;  we  can  have 
two  tables.  Doctor,  I  know  you  like  a  rubber, 
and  so  does  Mr.  Beauflower.  We'll  cut  for  part- 
ners. Julia,  if  you're  my  partner,  don't  talk  to 
Mr.  Goodrick.  Come,  come  ;  Amy,  dear,  ring  the 
bell,  please,  for  the  cards." 


14  THE   VICAE's   COUETSHIP. 

The  pretty  little  buhl  tables  were  brought  and 
opened ;  the  bright  speckled  cards,  with  their 
inviting  red,  black,  and  white  pips,  were  strewn 
on  the  bright  green  cloth,  shuffled  and  made. 
Mr.  Goodrich  at  one  table,  and  Dr.  Briscoe  at  the 
other,  were  just  solemnly  lifting  their  cards,  when 
there  came  a  clashing,  tearing,  frantic  ring  at  the 
garden  bell,  that  almost  tore  it  out  by  the  roots, 
a  shout  for  Dr.  Briscoe,  and  a  scream  from  the 
servant  girl.  The  next  moment  G-eorge  rushed 
in,  pale  and  gaunt. 

"  Dr.  Briscoe !  Master,  sir !  There's  been  murder 
done,  sir.  Come  over  to  Summerleas.  Mr.  Travers 
has  been  shot  by  poachers  on  the  Terrace.  It's 
murder.  They  want  you  to  see  the  body.  It's 
murder.  Oh,  gracious  God,  sir,  make  haste  !  You 
can  take  my  horse  I've  ridden  over.  Oh,  dear, 
dear ! " 

The  doctor  hurried  from  the  room  without  a 
word.  The  next  moment  his  horse's  hoofs  Avere 
heard  ringing  fast  down  the  road. 

The  Vicar,  with  one  whisper  to  Amy  to  wait 
till  he  returned  for  her,  and  just  a  word  to  his 
mother  and  Julia  to  quiet  their  fears,  also  hurried 
off  to  run  over  and  see  if  he  could  be  of  any  ser- 
vice to  the  poor  widow. 


THE   INQUEST.  15 


CHAPTEE    11. 

THE   INQUEST. 

A  CROWD  of  scared  looking  people  had  gathered 
round  the  door  of  the  Peal  of  Bells, — farmers, 
keepers,  shepherds,   grooms,  ostlers,  and  gentle- 
men's servants, — all  discussing  the  one  topic  that 
had  convulsed  full  one-half  of  Wiltshire,  and  had 
for  the  time  effaced   all   thoughts  even  of  the 
Bibury  election.     Most  of  them  were  surrounding 
Paddy  Blake,  who  was  the  Hon  of  the  day,  and 
upon  whom  P.O.  Archer,  with  more  suspicion  of 
virtue  than  ever,  kept  a  steady  and  mistrustful 
eye.     There  were  wild  stories  current  that  Travers 
had  shot  himself,  having   lost   money  by  some 
bank ;   that  he  had  been  killed  by  a  discharged 
keeper  ;  that  he  had  been  murdered  by  a  footman 
whom  he  had  induced  Mr.  Harker  to  turn  away  for 
gambling  with  the  grooms.     There  were  rumom"s 
of  tramps  pedlars,  gipsies,  and  rat-catchers,  all  of 
whom  were  alternately  mixed  up  in  the  horrible 
affair   by   the   lively   imagination   of   people   of 


16  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

shallow  brains  little  accustomed  to  analyse  the 
laws  of  evidence.  Everyone  had  a  different  ver- 
sion of  the  event ;  one  said  Travers  lived  an  hour 
after  he  was  shot,  and  had  disclosed  the  mui*- 
derer  ;  another,  that  when  found  he  had  been  dead 
hours ;  a  third,  that  six  guns  were  heard  on  the 
Terrace ;  a  fourth,  that  three  men  had  been  seen 
lurking  near  the  hut.  The  murderer  was  arrested, 
said  some ;  others  declared  he  had  been  seen  at  the 
Slobury  station;  and  one  carter  boldly  asserted  he 
had  been  found  hanging  in  Swallowcliff  Woods 
that  very  morning.  P.O.  Vincent  smiled  grimly 
at  some  of  these  assertions,  sneered  at  others  ; 
but  expressed  no  opinion  himself  He  was  close 
as  an  iron  safe  and  silent  as  death. 

At  every  door  in  the  village  there  stood  women 
talking  and  staring,  with  wondering  children 
holding  their  hands  or  clinging  to  their  aprons. 
Nature  at  Summerleas  was  decidedly  anti-Mal- 
thusian,  and  defiant  of  all  laws  of  political 
economy.  Twelve  shillings  a  week  and  damp 
cottages  notwithstanding,  children  came  and 
thrived ;  yet  the  un elastic  world  grew  not  one 
whit  the  bigger,  and  jDhilosophy  stood  protesting 
and  aghast.  The  jury  in  posse,  Mr.  Pitts,  the 
butcher,  Mr.  Wilkins,  the  gunmaker,  old  Payne, 
the  parish  clerk,  George's  father,  Mr.  Gatteril,  the 
exciseman,  Farmer  Brown,  Mr.  Hacker,  the  carrier. 


THE    INQUEST.  17 

Mr.  Newbury,  the  head  carter  at  the  Abbey,  Mr. 
Benson,  the  head  groom,  Mr.  Target,  the  net 
maker,  Mr.  Penny,  of  the  general  shop,  stood  in  a 
ckister  round  the  door,  waiting  for  the  coroner, 
the  Vicar,  and  their  foreman,  Mr.  Harker.  The 
crowd  watched  the  cluster  of  favoured  and  re- 
sponsible men  with  wonder  and  aw^e.  There  was 
much  mysterious  movement  in  the  Peal  of 
Bells,  preparing  the  parlour  for  the  coroner, 
arranging  paper  and  pens  and  ink,  and  chairs 
and  benches. 

As  the  hour  appointed — half-past  eleven — 
drew  near,  the  excitement  increased.  The  crowd 
increased  till  it  spread  far  into  the  street.  Work 
was  stopped,  and  a  few  men  who  had  been  left 
to  look  after  the  sheep,  and  do  indispensable 
ploughing  or  hoeing,  got  as  near  the  village  as 
they  could,  to  look  on  at  a  distance.  Wonder 
and  fear  were  working  in  every  face. 

Presently  a  fly  drove  up  to  the  Vicar's  garden 
Sfate,  and  the  rumour  ran  that  the  Coroner  had 
arrived.  After  that,  every  time  the  Vicarage  gate 
opened  or  shut,  or  even  when  poor  Wasp  ran 
out  and  barked  bravely  at  the  unusual  crowd,  all 
eyes  turned  that  way.  A  few  minutes  after,  Mr. 
Barker's  barouche  swept  round  the  park  drive. 
The  servant  ran  in  with  a  message  to  the  Coro- 
ner, an  anxious-looking,  worn  man,  with  papers 


18  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

under  liis  arm,  wlio  came  out,  folloTved  by  tlie 
Vicar,  and  walked  towards  the  Peal  of  Bells.  At 
the  same  moment,  the  barouche  drove  back 
sharply  towards  the  Abbey,  as  it  was  supposed  to 
bring  the  widow  and  some  other  important 
witnesses. 

The  Coroner  bowed  to  the  jury,  who  took  off 
their  hats  as  he  came  up ;  then  all  immediately 
concerned  in  the  inquest  crowded  into  the  -vollage 
public-house  parlom-,  a  long  low-roofed  sanded 
room,  with  boughs  in  the  fireplace,  and  a  showy 
tea-tray,  a  Bible,  and  two  bright  brass  candle- 
sticks on  the  side  table  in  the  corner.  Mr. 
Harker,  who  Avore  crape  round  his  hat,  and 
appeared  pale  and  much  afi'ected  (as  the  county 
paper  afterwards  said,  in  its  very  graphic  report), 
sat  near  the  Coroner,  and  conversed  with  him  in 
whispers  for  a  moment  or  two  while  the  jury 
answered  to  their  names  and  were  duly  sworn, 
two  at  a  time,  holding  a  Testament  between 
them,  and  looking  as  uncomfortable  as  if  they 
had  been  accomplices  in  the  crime. 

P.  C.  Archer  stood,  stolid  and  stern,  by  the 
open  door. 

The  Coroner  stated  the  case  in  a  brief  business- 
like way,  without  affecting  emotion  that  habit 
had  long  since  overpowered.  The  deceased,  head 
keeper  to   Jabez   Harker,    Esq.,  of  Summerleas 


THE    INQUEST.  19 

Abbey,  on  Friday,  the  3rd  of  June,  had  started 
at  twenty  minutes  past  seven  on  his  usual  round 
of  inspection,  beginning  at  the  Terraces.  He  was 
heard  to  discharg;e  his  gun  t^ice  soon  after  he 
left  his  own  house,  and  about  twenty  minutes 
after  he  left  it,  two  more  almost  simultaneous 
discharo'es  were  heard.  Nothinor  more  was  seen 
or  heard  of  him  till  a  quarter  to  nine,  when  a 
man  named  Blake,  a  hanger-on  at  the  stables  of 
Swallowcliff  Castle,  being  out  for  poaching  pur- 
poses, stumbled  in  the  dusk  over  a  body  close  to 
a  hut  built  for  keepers  to  watch  in  at  night.  He 
instantly  gave  an  alarm,  and  the  body  was  found 
to  be  that  of  Travers.  He  had  been  shot  dead 
by  two  discharges  of  a  gun.  His  watch  was 
missing.  The  only  evidence  bearing  on  the 
murder  was  that  of  a  little  girl,  daughter  of  the 
deceased,  who  would  depose  that  about  a  quarter 
to  seven,  while  going  on  an  errand  to  Bird- 
brook,  she  saw  a  man  with  a  beard,  and  wearing 
a  felt  wide-awake,  stealing  up  through  the  Imshes 
near  the  hut.  No  trace  of  that  man  had  yet  been 
found.     They  would  now  view  the  body. 

Only  a  moment  the  jury  staid  in  the  room  to 
the  left  of  the  Lodge,  and  came  out  with  awe- 
struck faces,  ghastly  white.  One  or  two  shed 
tears.     Mr.  Harker  scarcely  glanced  at  the  corpse 

and  then  hid  his  face  in  his  handkerchief.     The 

c  2 


20  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

jury  tlien  returned  to  the  inn,  talking  together  in 
a  low  and  hushed  way,  and  resumed  their  seats, 
congratulating  themselves  at  having  got  over  so 
horrible  a  duty.  Only  the  Coroner  and  one  or 
two  of  the  hardiest  and  most  conscientious  gave 
more  than  a  frightened  glance  at  the  waxen  face 
and  the  shattered  body. 

"  The  first  witness,''  said  the  Coroner,  peering 
at  a  hastily- written  paper,  "is,  I  think,  Mary 
Anne  Tanner." 

"  Travers,"  suggested  Archer,  "  daughter  of  the 
deceased.  "  Mary  Anne  Travers  !  "  he  shouted, 
as  a  mere  form,  and  then  led  into  the  room  a 
pretty  little  frightened  girl  of  twelve,  dressed  in 
black,  Avhose  eyes  were  red  with  crying.  There 
was  a  murmur  of  sympathy  in  the  room  as  she 
stood  at  the  table,  with  her  hand  on  the  head  of 
an  old  brown  pointer  that  would  follow  her  in. 
Her  story  was  very  simple,  and  told  with  sobs 
and  many  interruptions. 

"  My  name  is  Mary  Anne  Travers,"  she  said, 
understanding  the  nature  of  an  oath,  and  being 
duly  sworn.  "  I  was  sent  on  Friday  evening,  at 
a  quarter  to  seven,  please,  sir,  by  mother,  to  get 
some  cough  medicine  for  my  little  brother  Tom 
at  Mr.  Curtis's  at  Birdbrook.  As  I  was  going 
over  the  viaduct,  just  beyond  the  hut  on  the 
Terrace,  I  turned  and  saw  a  man  with  a  beard 


THE    IXQUEST.  2l 

stealing  up  through  the  wood.  I  thought  he  was  a 
poacher,  and  I  was  frightened,  and  ran  on  faster. 
I  think  he  had  a  gam  under  his  arm.  I  did  not 
see  him  again.  He  was  not  a  man  I  had  ever 
seen  before.  He  had  on  a  dark  loose  coat  and  a 
Avide-awake.  I  don't  think  he  saw  me.  I  went 
home  by  Fontford,  and  got  home  about  eight." 

"  That'll  do,  my  dear ;  you  may  go,"  said  the 
Coroner.  "  This  is  not  the  first  witness,  Davis  " 
(to  his  clerk).  ""Wliy  don't  you  put  them  in 
proper  order?  That  deposition  can  stand,  but 
the  first  witness  is  Paddy  Blake.  Call  Isaac 
Blake  ;  and  do  be  more  particular,  and  not  waste 
our  time  in  this  way." 

The  contrite  clerk  turned  very  red,  and  whis- 
pered something  as  Paddy  Blake  entered,  wild 
and  ragged  as  usual,  but  his  coat  brushed,  shoes 
for  once  on  his  feet,  and  his  hair  in  some  slight 
form.  He  grinned  idiotically  as  he  pulled  his 
forelock,  and  said  that  his  name  was  really  Isaac 
Blake,  but  he  was  generally  known  among  sport- 
ing gents  as  Paddy  Blake. 

He  required  no  questioning,  but  having  been 
sworn,  told  his  story  with  gxeat  volubility  and  in 
his  OAvn  eccentric  way. 

"He  had  been  taking  a  go  of  gin,"  he  said,  "with 
a  friend  of  mine,  a  rat-catcher,  at  the  Harker 
Arms,  in   Fontford,  and   left   there   about   half- 


22  THE   vicar's    COUETSHIP. 

past  eight,  intending  to  work  home  to  the  Swallow- 
cliff  stables,  by  theJAbbey  woods,  when  just  by 
the  hut  on  the  Terraces,  as  he  was  looking  for  a 
wire  noose  he  had  seen  there  the  day  before,  he 
stumbled  over  a  body.  He  felt  the  face — it  was 
cold;  and  the  breast,  which  was  wet  and- torn. 
He  was  so  frightened  that  he  could  not  move  for 
a  moment,  but  then  he  got  up  and  ran  like 
a  madman  to  the  Lodge,  over  bush,  through 
everything,  and  called  four  keepers,  who  got 
lanterns,  and  went  and  found  the  body ;  he  did 
not  remove  anything  from  the  body;  so  help  him 
God  !     The  coat  was  open  when  he  found  him. 

The  Coroner  and  Mr.  Harker  were  pressing  this 
point  by  several  questions,  when  Archer  stejDped 
forward  and  said  that  the  watch  of  deceased  had 
since  been  found  under  the  pillow  of  his  bed.  He 
had  not  worn  it  that  day.  His  purse  with  two  or 
three  sovereigns  was  found  in  his  pocket. 

P.  C.  Archer,  next  called,  stepped  forward  vdth 
a  brisk  soldierly  alertness,  as  much  as  to  say,  "Now 
ril  show  you  the  way  to  give  evidence,"  and 
delivered  his  story  clean  and  crisply  off  the  reel. 
On  Friday  night,  at  a  quarter  to  nine,  he  was  on 
duty  at  the  corner  of  Fontford,  just  beyond  the 
Harker  Arms,  waiting  for  a  tramp  who  had  stolen 
some  cart  harness  beyond  Knoyle,  and  ayIio  he 
thought  might  come  that  way,  when  a  man  of 


THE    IXQUEST.  23 

Summerleas,  named  "William  Penny,  one  of  Mr. 
Barkers  keepers,  came  running  up  to  him,  and 
told  him  that  there  had  been  murder  done,  and 
that  Mr.  Travers  had  just  been  found  shot  by  the 
hut  on  the  Terraces.  He  went  with  him  by  a  short 
cut  straight  to  the  Terraces,  and  helped  to  carry 
the  body  to  the  Lodge.  There  were  no  signs  of  a 
struggle  where  the  body  was  found,  and  no  papers 
strewn  about. 

Papers!  Mr.  Harker  trembled,  and  the  jury 
looked  at  each  other. 

No  papers  strewn  about  and  there  were  no  foot- 
steps. It  rained  heavily  that  same  night,  how- 
ever, and  that  might  have  washed  the  prints  away. 
Every  search  had  been  made  for  the  man  the  little 
ghi  saw,  but  as  yet  without  success.  Handbills 
had  been  issued,  and  telegrams  sent  to  all  the 
police-stations  between  Slobury  and  the  coast,  and 
Salisbury  and  London.  If  the  man  was  to  be 
found,  he  would  be,  no  doubt,  found  before  long. 

]\Ir.  Harker  wished  to  know  if  there  was  blood 
on  the  face  of  deceased. 

"Yes,  in  the  mouth;  a  good  deal.'' 

"  Was  the  coat  torn  by  the  shot '? " 

"  Yes ;  and  large  pieces  carried  into  the 
wound." 

"  Call  Mary  Travers,"  said  the  Coroner. 

A  shudder  ran  throuo^h  the  room  :  this  was  the 


24  THE   vicar's   COURTSHIP. 

widow.  The  poor  woman,  dressed  in  black,  and 
with  her  face  hidden  with  a  thick  crape  veil,  en- 
tered the  room  leaning  on  Mrs.  Brown's  arm.  She 
was  sobbing  hysterically,  and  Mr.  Harker  begged 
Archer  to  put  a  chair  for  the  poor  woman. 

"  I  am  very  sorry,  Mrs.  Travers,"  said  the 
Coroner,  with  more  feeling  than  he  had  shown 
before,  ^'to  have  to  ask  you  several  questions 
about  this  most  unhappy  affair,  but  it  is  indis- 
pensable for  the  ends  of  justice." 

The  poor  woman's  answers,  made  in  a  low  voice 
and  broken  by  tears  and  sobs,  were  difficult  to 
put  together,  but  it  was  gathered  that  she  deposed 
that  her  husband  had  shown  no  depression  of 
spirits  latterly,  nor  had  he  expressed  any  fear  of 
poachers.  He  went  out  at  the  usual  hour,  first 
loading  his  gun,  as  usual.  He  had  been  heard  to 
fire  twice,  and  two  wood-pigeons  were  found  in 
his  pockets.  The  only  thing  stolen  had  been  a 
packet  of  letters,  which  he  always  carried  in  his 
breast-pocket.  What  they  were  she  did  not 
know,  but  he  had  often  told  her  they  were  worth 
money. 

Mr.  Harker  had  a  question  to  23ut.  He  wanted 
to  ask  Mrs.  Travers  if  the  deceased  had  had  a 
quarrel  lately  with  anyone  ?  was  there  any  reason 
to  suppose  that  there  was  ill  blood  between  him 
and  anyone  in  the  village  or^neighbourhood  ? 


THE    IXQUEST.  25 

The  Coroner  bit  his  pen  and  nodded  his  head  in 
aj^proval,  as  much  as  to  say  that  that  ^Yas  a  very 
sagacious  and  important  cpiestion. 

"Bring  the  poor  woman  a  little  water/'  said 
Mr.  Harker  to  Georw,  who  was  standino^  near 
the  door. 

The  water  brought,  and  Mrs.  Travers  having 
taken  some,  she  replied — 

"  Yes,  sir ;  he  had  had  words  with  young  Mr. 
BrowTi  about  his  being  arrested  for  poaching,  and 
Mr.  Bro^^Ti  had  threatened  to  knock  him  down. 
That  was  at  the  public-house  two  nights  before 
the  murder." 

The  jury  looked  at  each  other  and  at  Farmer 
Brown. 

Youno'  Brown,  at  hearino;  this,  broke  throuo;h  the 
crowd,  his  hair  ruffled,  his  eyes  wild  with  anger. 

"Mr.  Coroner,"  said  he,  "this  has  been  going 
about  the  parish  abeady.  It  is  a  lie.  Ill  not  live 
here  to  be  accused  as  a  murderer.  Take  me  up 
at  once.  I've  got  ^vitnesses  here  to  prove  that 
the  day  of  the  murder  (it  was  the  day  of  Salisbury 
market)  I  came  back  to  Slobury  by  the  5.15 
and  was  playing  at  billiards  with  Mr.  Winter  of 
SwaUowcliff  and  young  Jones  of  Knoyle  from 
half-past  five  till  seven  ;  so  that  settles  that.  As 
to  quarrelling  with  Travers,  I  had  no  great  reason 
to  like  him,  and  I  own  it ;  but  quarrelling  and 


26  THE   vicar's    COUKTSHIP. 

murdering  are  two  different  things.  Give  a  dog 
a  bad  name,  and  liang  him.  I'd  better  get  away 
from  this  place.  Everything  is  laid  to  my 
charge." 

"  Young  man,"  said  the  Coroner,  "  all  this  is 
quite  informal ;  there  is  no  accusation  against 
you  yet." 

"  Keep  quiet,  Bob,"  said  the  old  farmer  ;  "  keep 
your  tongue  between  your  teeth,  cant'ee;  there  is 
plenty  of  time  for  you  to  clear  yourself,  and  you 
can  do  it.  None  of  my  name  will  ever  commit 
murder." 

"  I  must  ask  you,  Mrs.  Travers,  one  more  ques- 
tion," said  the  Coroner,  when  irrepressible  young 
Brown  was  coaxed  and  jostled  out  of  the  room. 
"Was  there  any  other  person  with  whom  the 
deceased  had  had  any  serious  difference  ?  " 

"Yes,  sir ;  he  had  had  very  angry  words  with 
Mr.  Beauflower  there  about  a  favourite  dos:  of  his 
that  got  hurt  in  the  w^oods.  They  had  very  high 
words  in  my  hearing  at  the  lodge  door  some  weeks 
ago,  and  Mr.  Beauflower  threatened  that  he  should 
repent  of  it." 

A  voice  in  the  crowd  said,  "  I  can  testify  Mr. 
Beauflower  was  with  me  till  four  o'clock  on  the 
day  of  the  murder,  and  that  at  a  quarter  to  eight 
he  arrived  at  Miss  Chivers's  to  tea  with  Miss 
Amy  Eobinson ;  and  there  I  met  him  again." 


THE    INQUEST.  27 

It  was  Mr.  Goodrick  who  turned  to  the  Coroner 
and  said  this. 

"  This,  again,  sir,  is  totally  informal.  No  one 
dreams  of  accusino-  Mr.  BeaufloAver,  a  erentleman 
and  a  minister  of  God,  of  such  a  horrible  crime  ; 
but  ril  make  a  note  of  your  testimony,  sir.  It 
wiU  prevent  the  necessity  of  further  inquiry  in 
that  direction.'' 

Oh,  wealth  and  power  !  Poor  Brown  s  volunteer 
statement  had  been  received  far  less  gently. 

"  Call  in  Dr.  Briscoe ;  we  must  now  have  his 
evidence." 

Dr.  Briscoe  came,  professionally  calm  and 
bluntly  honest,  and,  as  conscious  as  ever  under 
his  grizzly  brows  of  holding  many  secrets ;  he 
disdained  all  professional  technicality  and  sham. 
What  he  had  to  say  was  very  simple. 

"  I  was  called  in  on  the  night  of  Friday,  June  3, 
to  examine  the  body  of  the  deceased.  He  was 
stone  dead  and  cold.  There  had  been  two  dis- 
charges of  a  gun  loaded  mth  buck-shot,  which 
had  torn  away  nearly  the  whole  of  the  right 
luno^,  and  must  have  caused  almost  instant  death. 
Several  shots  had  penetrated  the  heart,  and  all 
the  neighbouring  organs  were  also  more  or  less 
injured.  There  was  a  mark  of  a  boot  that  had 
trod  with  blood  on  the  left  side  of  the  white 
moleskin  waistcoat  worn  by  deceased.'' 


28  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

Mr.  Harker  here  turned  rather  faint  with  the 
extreme  heat  of  the  room,  and  the  Coroner  begged 
that  some  one  would  throw  open  the  window. 

The  red  curtain  was  furled  up  and  the  window 
thrown  open.  It  disclosed  a  wall  of  rough,  honest 
Wiltshire  faces,  all  staring  with  as  much  wonder 
and  expectancy  as  if  the  murder  was  re-enacting 
by  the  jury  before  their  eyes.  A  story  had  already 
got  about  that  the  Vicar  had  been  taken  up  and 
was  being  tried  for  the  murder. 

"  What  sort  of  foot-print  Avas  this  you  saw.  Dr. 
Briscoe?"  said  the  Coroner.  "The  police  must 
have  that  waistcoat." 

"  It  was  the  print  of  an  ordinary  boot,  with 
nothing  special  about  it  ;  but  it  was  not  a 
labourers.  Poachers  about  here  are  often  me- 
chanics from  Salisbury." 

"  It  might  have  been,  then,  a  mechanic's 
boot?" 

"  Yes." 

"  That  will  do,  Dr.  Briscoe.  Thank  you.  Was 
any  of  the  wadding  found,  police  constable  ?  " 

"  Yes,  sir,"  said  Vincent ;  "it  was  a  piece  of 
the  Times" 

"  Any  name  or  direction  upon  it  ? " 

Mr.  Harker  was  again  faint,  and  some  water 
was  brous^ht  him,  while  the  Avaddino-  was  brouo^ht 
into  court,  and  flattened  and   examined  by  the 


THE    IXQUEST.  29 

jury.  There  was  nothing,  hoAvever,  about  it  to 
furnish  any  clue. 

Mr.  Harker  changed  seats  with  obsequious  ]\Ir. 
Pitt,  who  was  nearer  the  door. 

'•'  Gentlemen  of  the  Jury,  there  is  one  more 
^ntness  to  examine — Eobert  Travers,  son  of  the 
deceased.  He  is  only  called  to  show  that  his 
father  had  for  some  reason  or  other  (perhaps  fear 
of  murder)  an  intention  of  surrendering  the 
head  keepership  at  the  Abbey ;  and  he  will  also 
prove  that  there  was  no  despondency  about  the 
deceased.     Call  in  Robert  Travers." 

The  murderer's  blood  froze  to  the  centre,  when 
a  fine  stalwart  young  fellow,  with  clear,  keen, 
frank  eyes,  and  an  intelligent,  manly  manner, 
stepped  in,  and  bowed  to  the  Coroner  and  jury, 
and  then  specially  to  him  (Harker.)  The  youth 
was  the  very  image  of  his  father,  but  thirty-five 
years  younger,  and  without  the  hard  lines  of 
overbearing  effrontery  and  selfish  impudent  cun- 
ning, that  had  defaced  the  murdered  man. 

"  I  am  under-keejDer  at  Lord  Portsmouth's,'' 
said  the  witness.  "  I  ran  away  from  my  father 
when  I  was  fourteen  and  went  to  sea.  For  the 
last  six  years  I  have  been  in  my  present  place.  I 
was  to  be  married  last  month,  and  at  my  wife's 
wish  I  wrote  and  made  it  up  with  my  father. 
He  came  to  tea  this  very  day  tln-ee  weeks,  and 


30  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

dined  and  spent  the  night  witli  us.  He  ^vas  in 
liigh  sjDirits,  and  once  or  twice  during  the 
evening  took  a  packet  of  letters  from  his  breast- 
pocket, and  tokl  me  they  were  worth  a  fortune  to 
him.  I  was  to  have  come  over  to-day  to  have 
some  rabbit-shooting  with  him,  and  to  see  if  I 
shoukl  like  to  have  the  place  when  he  gave  it  up. 
He  said  he  could  make  all  that  right  with  Mr. 
Harker.  He  talked  to  me  of  the  poachers  having 
been  troublesome,  but  said  he  had  found  out  a 
clue  to  them,  and  expressed  no  fear." 

"That  wdll  do;  thank  you,  young  man,"  said 
the  Coroner.  ''And  a — Vincent,  clear  the  room." 
The  spectators  jostled  out,  and  the  -wdndow  was 
closed.     Mr.  Harker  requested  a  glass  of  water. 

The  Coroner's  remarks  were  few.  That  the 
deceased  had  been  mmxlered  by  poachers  or  some 
footpad,  was  certain.  There  seemed  at  present  to 
be  no  clue  to  the  murderer  ;  but  heaven  was  very 
watchful,  and  no  doubt  the  man,  branded  by 
remorse  and  the  conscience  that  Cod  never  per- 
mitted to  sleep,  w^ould  soon  be  in  the  hands  of  the 
pohce.  There  could  not  be  a  doubt  the  man 
with  the  beard  seen  by  the  little  girl  was  the 
murderer."     Their  verdict  was  an  obvious  one. 

There  was  a  moment's  hush.  Then  a  cluster- 
ing of  heads  round  Mr.  Harker,  one  or  two 
totally  irrelevant  doubts  from  Mr.  Pitt  and  one 


THE    INQUEST.  31 

otlier  of  tlie  jury,  wliicli  were  quietly  ignored ; 
tlie  jury  returned  to  tlieir  seats,  and  the  foreman 
stood  up.  To  tlie  usual  question  lie  replied,  in  a 
low  voice — 

"We  find  a  verdict  that  the  deceased  was 
murdered  by  some  person  or  persons  unknown." 

The  Coroner  nodded  approval  of  the  verdict, 
and  shook  hands  w^armly  with  Mr.  Harker,  as  if 
everything  had  gone  off  very  pleasantly,  and 
he  hoped  to  get  back  in  good  time  to  dinner. 
The  jury  put  their  signatures  awkwardly  to  the 
usual  paper,  and  the  inquest  was  over. 

"  I  suppose  you'll  take  that  fine  young  fellow 
into  your  service,  Mr.  Harker  ? ''  said  the  Coroner, 
as  he  stood  waiting  for  his  fly. 

"  No,"  said  Mr.  Harker ;  "  I  could  not  really 
bear  to  be  so  constantly  reminded  of  the  horrible 
affair;  but  I  shall  pension  the  widow -and  children, 
and  protect  them  for  life.  The  gentlemen  of  the 
jury  have  been  expressing  a  wish  to  start  a  sub- 
scription, but  I  shall  not  allow  that." 


3^  THE    vicar's    COUETSHIP. 


CHAPTEE  in. 

A   PLOT. 

Mr.  Harker's  barouche  was  waiting  for  him 
at  the  door  of  the  Peal  of  Bells.  It  contained 
his  wife  and  eldest  daughter,  both  very  anxious  to 
know  the  verdict,  but  neither  betraying  much 
real  feeling,  except  a  certain  selfish  alarm  of 
murderers  in  general.  Harker  was  in  no  mood  to 
discuss  the  inquest. 

"  Shall  you  and  Carry,''  he  said  to  his  wife, 
''  want  the  carriage  before  dinner  ?  It  is  to-night, 
is  it  not,  we  go  to  the  ball  at  the  Harcourts'  ?  " 

"  Yes,  to-night.  No,  it  is  far  too  hot  to  drive 
further.'^ 

"Then,  Thomas,"  said  Mr.  Harker  to  the  driver, 
"you  drive  home  quick  with  your  mistress,  and 
bring  back  a  gentleman,  Mr.  Bassevi ;  you  will  find 
him  waitino^  for  me.  You  will  overtake  me  on 
the  road  to  Knoyle.  Til  walk  on.  Mind  you're 
quick.     Good-bye,  good-bye.     I  and  Bassevi  are 


A    PLOT.  33 

going  to  the  marquis's  to  see  some  pictures — back 
by  six.     Have  dinner  at  seven,  sliarjD." 

Mr.  Harker,  as  the  carriage  drove  off,  shook 
hands  coldly  with  Mr.  Beauflower,  who  asked 
him  in  to  lunch,  shook  hands  with  Dr.  Briscoe  and 
^h\  Goodrick,  who  were  going  to  the  Vicarage  ; 
and  touching  his  hat  in  a  general  way  to  the  crowd 
(not  obsequious,  for  the  Wiltshire  poor  man  is 
upright  and  independent  as  a  farmer,  and  is  never 
slavishly  civil),  took  the  road  to  Knoyle  alone. 

He  stopped  a  moment  at  the  churchyard 
stile,  where  twenty-four  hours  hence  they  would 
rest  the  murdered  man's  coffin,  and  looked  up 
sneeringly  at  the  scaffold  round  the  scjuare 
grey  tower  that  seemed  to  no  more  need  prop- 
ping than  a  giant  in  his  prime  needs  a  Bath 
chair.  There  was  stone  sawing,  and  shedding  a 
gingery  dust  on  the  rank  churchyard  grass. 
There  were  hearty  sailor-looking  men  (why  do 
masons  always  look  nautical  ? )  dabbing  at  heaps 
of  mortar ;  there  were  men  carrying  beams  in  at 
the  church  door,  and  shouting  up  into  the  belfry. 
The  rumour  at  Summer]  eas  was  that  the  repairs 
were  to  cost  600^.,  and  the  Vicar  had  not  got 
together  yet  more  than  150^.,  and  that  some  even 
of  that  was  promises.  It  was  supposed  that  Mr. 
Harker  was  to  give  all  the  rest,  but  what  he 
would  give  was  still  uncertain. 

VOL.    III.  D 


34  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

"  These  fools  ! "  said  Harker  to  himself,  as  a 
builder  came  out,  pencil  in  hand,  called  to 
one  of  the  men,  and  seeing  Mr.  Harker,  smiled, 
as  much  as  to  say,  "  Here  is  our  milch  cow,''  then 
bowed,  and  pulled  down  his  hat,  which  was 
peppered  with  whitewash  slightly  dashed  mth 
brick  dust, — "these  fools  plunge  into  these 
things  just  to  be  called  zealous  ;  headlong  they 
go ;  trust  to  Providence  to  get  them  out  of  it ; 
pack  of  children ;  set  of  plausible  mischief 
makers,  putting  mischievous  notions  into  poor 
peoj)le's  heads,  and  proud  as  the  devil.'' 

The  road  was  hot  and  dusty,  the  an-  burning, 
the  skylarks,  who  never  tire  of  praising  God,  and 
waste  no  time  in  wrangling  about  church  clothes 
and  peppermint- coloured  decorations,  were  carol- 
ling in  the  burning  azure  air.  The  great  elms  were 
still  transparent  to  the  sun,  as  if  their  leaves  had 
been  of  green  silk.  Under  one  of  these  trees,  not 
far  from  the  road-side  house,  in  front  of  the  ruin, 
Mr.  Harker  stood,  angry  and  lowering,  waiting 
for  his  carriage.  He  lit  a  cigar  to  pass  the  time, 
and  cursed  every  time  he  stopped  to  spit.  He 
never  once,  whatever  Avay  he  looked,  allowed  his 
head  to  turn  towards  the  terraces  which  v/ere 
opposite,  the  hut  glowing  in  the  sunlight  at  the 
edge  of  the  long  line  of  firs. 

Presently  he  heard  wheels,  and  the  carriage 


A   PLOT.  85 

emerged  at  the  corner  of  tlie  Abbey  road  from  a 
cloud  of  hot  brown  dust.  The  splendid  horses, 
churning  white  lather,  stopped  reluctantly  for  him. 
]Mr.  Bassevi  was  in  it,  his  white  hat  stuck  on  one 
side  of  a  head  of  coarse  black  hair,  his  face 
bistrous  as  usual,  his  coarse  suspicious  purgatorial 
eyes  looked  sunken  and  dissipated.  He  wore  a 
vulgarly  made  white  Chesterfield,  a  white  waistcoat 
and  ginger-colom^ed  trousers,  with  black  stripes 
down  the  sides,  and  he  carried  a  great  second- 
hand silver-mounted  Malacca  cane,  with  a  heavy 
rhinoceros-horn  handle.  His  scarf  was  the  bluest 
satin  :  his  scarf  rino-  hideous  with  laro-e  emeralds. 
A  gilt  horse-shoe  fusee-box  was  conspicuous  among 
the  spade  guineas  that  dangled  at  his  Albert 
chain.  ]\Ir.  Harker  greeted  him  curtly  as  he  got 
in,  and  told  the  coachman  to  drive  to  Longieat, 
Fontford  way. 

"  I've  something  to  say  to  you,"  he  said  to 
Bassevi,  ofi^erino-  the  low  bloodsuckino;  Avretch  a 
cig;ar.  "  I  want  you  to  do  somethino;  for  me.  It 
is  just  in  your  way." 

''  What  way  ?— what  way  ?  " 

"  The  sporting  way/' 

"  Oh,  sporting  way  ! ''  Bassevi  leered  at  this, 
and  licked  his  cigar  all  over  as  a  boa  constrictor 
licks  the  victim  he  is  about  to  swaUow.  "Oh, 
some  little  game  with  a  prad,  I  suppose,  to  keep 

D   2 


36  THE   vicar's   courtship. 


down  tlie  betting,  and  leave  it  for  you  ?  All 
right ;  I'm  game.  Art  is  not  doing  much  now. 
Oh  !  those  little  prads,  they  ought  to  be  shod  with 
gold." 

"  No  chattering — Fm  not  in  the  humour"  (and 
Harker  looked  so  savagely  intent  on  one  purpose, 
that  Bassevi  felt  almost  inclined  to  get  out  of  the 
carriage.)  Harker  had  grown  prompt  as  a  Csesar 
now,  and  nothing  should  stand  before  his  will.  That 
was  the  Providence,  the  Fate  he  worshipped,  the 
Euler  of  all  things,  and  the  maker  of  Destiny. 
"You  have  had  your  pickings  of  this  gull  at 
Swallowcliff?" 

"  Well,  I  ain't  done  so  bad,  except  he  made  me 

take  back  the  Eubenses.     Thanks  to  that  d 

little  nincompoop)  of  an  artist.  Oh,  it's  a  horse  I'm 
to  be  doAvn  on." 

^'  Fool,  listen  ;  you  do  nothing  but  chatter." 

"  Mightn't  the  coachman  hear  ?  " 

"  No,  he's  deaf,  and  we  can  talk  low." 

"Oh,  you  are  learyl"  said  Bassevi,  with  pro- 
found admiration. 

*'  Listen,  and  don't  chatter  and  mag  so.  The 
fool  owes  me  many  thousands.  Now,  for  reasons 
of  my  own,  I  want  that  race-horse  he  is  so  proud 
of " 


"  Oh,  he  is  hot  on  it.   He'd  bet  anything  on  it, 
from  Lombard  Street  to  a  China  orange." 


A    PLOT.  37 

''Be  quiet.  It  is  enougli  that  I  require  that 
horse  to  lose  the  race." 

''  I  see  ;  and  you  sweep  the  table." 
"  You're  ^^Tong.  I  shall  clear  500?.,  and  only 
that  to  colour  the  thing.  But  I  have  secret  reasons 
for  it.  I  don't  tell  you,  mind,  how  to  get  hold  of 
the  horse.  You Ve  done  this  sort  of  thing  before. 
You  remember  Madcap,  and  his  being  found  dead 
in  the  railway  horse-box.  Try  that  same  stuff  again, 
only  let  him  live  a  little  longer.  Dilute  the  dose." 
"  Good,"  said  Bassevi,  with  eyes  half  shut  and 
a  malign  squinting  smile,  as  if  it  came  from  an 
oblique  conscience  ;  "  and  the  mopuses — the 
swagr  ?     Com  biono^  ? " 

"Don't  attempt  to  push  up  the  price,  for  I 
never  make  more  than  one  offer.  There  are 
plenty  other  people  can  do  it,  and  I  know  a  few 
of  your  secrets.  You  daren't  blab  much  of  me — 
250/." 

"  Oh,  come,  give  us  the  whole  500/." 
"  250/.  I  shan't  offer  it  a  third  time." 
"  Very  well.  There's  no  moving  you  to-day. 
You  are  dangerous.  I  can  see  at  a  grlance.  Shake 
hands — it's  a  bargain ;  and  Immenschikoff,  you 
look  out.  Lord,  what  a  man  it  is  !  There  never 
was  a  man  so  fly.  I've  money  on  though. 
I  must  hedge.  Well,  I  dare  say  I  can  make 
50/.    more    easy.      ITL   do   the  trick  clean  as  a 


38  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

whistle.  There's  only  a  big  Irishman  going  with 
the  horse  and  a  vagabond  fellow  yon  see  about 
here,  that  runs  with  the  hounds.  I  know  both 
their  blind  sides." 

The  carriage  was  just  then  passing  through 
Fontford.  A  drag  had  just  drawn  up  at  Mr. 
Lawson's  door,  and  young  Cantelupe  swung 
himself  lightly  down,  tapped  at  the  window, 
then  opened  the  door,  and  entered  just  as  the 
barouche  came  down  the  street.  It  almost  seemed 
as  if  he  saw  who  was  in  the  carriao:e,  but  did  not 
choose  to  notice.  The  Harker  barouche  darted 
through  Fontford  into  the  road  that  traversed  the 
Downs  and  led  to  Knoyle. 

"  Oh,  I  see  what  brings  him  so  often  this  way," 
said  Mr.  Harker. 

There  are  moments  when  the  thoughts  of  years 
seem  suddenly  to  turn  from  vapour  and  to  crys- 
tallise into  solid  irrefutable  facts.  In  his  state 
of  mind,  electric  with  internal  storm  and  the 
ground-swell  of  an  excitement  that  had  been  like 
concealed  madness,  Harker's  judgment  struck 
down  like  lightning  at  its  mark.  He  saw  at  once, 
felt  at  once,  that  the  young  heir  was  in  love  with 
his  governess  and  cared  nothing  for  his  daughter 
— ^probably  never  would ;  that  there  was  only 
one  way  to  win  his  title,  and  that  was  to  so  crush 
and  humiliate  him  as  to  compel  him  to  the  mar- 


A   PLOT.  39 

riage  ;  and  that  plan  exactly  suited  Mr.  Barker's 
iron  -will  and  not  very  gentle  and  conciliatory 
nature.  Step  by  step,  if  not  at  once,  lie  would 
contract  his  nets,  and  drive  Cantelupe  toAvards 
the  only  corner  of  escape — marriage  with  Miss 
Caroline  Harker,  of  Summerleas  Abbey. 

"  I  know  what  he  comes  after,''  said  Mr. 
Bassevi,  after  a  pause,  as  if  answering  Mr. 
Harker's  thoughts  rather  than  his  spoken  words. 
"  I  know,  but  he  shan't  have  her.  I  mean  to  have 
the  girl  though  she  sneers  at  me.  I've  taken  a 
fancy  to  her,  and  I  mean  to  have  her." 

"  I  should  like  to  see  the  old  father.  Let  us 
stop  as  we  return." 

"  No,  don't,  pray  don't ;  the  man  is  conceited 
enough  now;  he'll  raise  his  prices." 

"  Oh,  I  see.  You  don't  want  me  to  know 
what  you  gTind  the  fellow  down  to.  Very  well. 
It's  nothing  to  me,  as  long  as  you  fulfil  your  con- 
tract, and  give  me  good  work.  So  you  want  this 
intriguing  little  minx,  do  you  ?  I'm  glad  of 
it.  It  suits  me  as  well  as  it  does  you.  Marr}^ 
her  soon,  the  sooner  the  better.  If  the  old  fools 
won't  consent,  and  are  trying  to  trap  the  gull  at 
SwallowcHfie,  run  away  with  her.  She'll  be 
useful  in  some  of  your  nice  little  schemes." 

"There's  that  young  parson  at  Summerleas. 
Plaooie  seize  him,  he's  after  her  too  ;  and  I  think 


40  THE   vicar's   COURTSHIP. 

she  does  not  dislike  the  fellow,  but  the  old  people 
are  taken  with  the  Castle  and  the  title." 

"  I  hate  that  Beauflower ;  that's  the  man  sets 
the  poor  people  against  me ;  and  they  say  he 
wrote  that  impertinent  petition  about  the  game 
for  the  Bibury  farmers.  But  111  be  even  with 
him.  Ill  break  in  two  every  one  that  crosses  my 
plans.  I  have  broken  some,  and  111  break  the 
rest.  Take  care,  Mr.  Basse vi,  you  do  not  cross 
them,  for  I  never  forgive — mind  that.  But  here's 
Longleat ;  it's  a  fine  place." 

As  they  got  out  of  the  carriage,  and  silently 
walked  towards  the  house  from  that  beautiful 
spot  called  not  unadvisedly  "  Heaven's  Gate," 
Harker  thought  within  himself,  "  This  fool  of  a 
girl  married,  I  shall  have  one  more  rope  round 
that  young  scatterbrain,  and  I  shall  be  one  step 
nearer  to  the  title  and  the  Castle,  which  I  have  so 
long  coveted." 


THE  UNEXPECTED  CANDIDATE.        41 


CHAPTER  IV. 

THE    UNEXPECTED   CANDIDATE. 

The  Yellow  address  of  Mr.  Paradise,  the 
Radical  candidate  for  Bibiuy,  was  rather  violent 
and  aggressive,  but  by  no  means  badly  done. 
Mr.  Paradise  was  a  self-made  man.  He  had  come 
into  Warminster  thirty  years  before  with  the 
usual  half-croAvn  in  the  usual  right-hand  breeches 
pocket.  A  very  agreeable  form  of  poison. 
Paradise  now  advertised  everywhere,  with  me- 
dical puffs  upon  it.  What  could  not  one  get 
testimonials  for,  if  one  paid  the  price  ?  Paradise 
lectured  at  Mechanics'  Institutes,  on  self-made 
men,  and  had  ground  himself  to  a  very  fair  edge 
by  dint  of  hard  reading  and  converse  with  other 
Paradises  who  had  also  entered  towns  on  the 
half-crown  principle,  and  ignored  all  early  help 
and  accidents  of  good  fortune,  with  a  frank  blunt 
dishonesty,  the  usual  prerogative  of  the  self-made 
man  and  the  selfish  made  man  also. 

Mr.  Paradise,  with  a  slap  at  the  accident  of 


42  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

race,  and  tlie  small  merit  of  a  good  inheritance, 
dashed  oflf  with  a  protest  against  government 
expenditm'e — ^AYhig  or  Tory — (it  was  only  the 
difference  of  ten  pounds  in  silver  and  ten  pounds 
in  gold).  He  was  for  selling  all  the  dockyards 
at  once,  and  building  ships  and  everything  else 
by  private  contract — not  necessarily  the  lowest 
bidder — ^the  competition  to  be  always  kept  going 
— the  inspection  before  approval  to  be  incessant 
and  severe.  As  for  standing  armies,  he  quoted 
Cobbett,  and  proposed  that  wars,  too,  should 
be  done  by  contract.  Some  contractors  he  knew 
would  have  taken  Sebastopol  in  six  months, 
and  for  half  the  money.  As  for  the  government 
offices,  with  the  hundred  thousand  young  gentle- 
men wondering  what  they  would  do  when  they'd 
finished  the  day's  paper,  he  could  get  all  thek  work 
put  up  to  contract  and  done  by  actuaries  quicker 
and  better  for  one-third  the  money.  As  for  war,  he 
was  not  for  peace  at  all  prices,  but  always  for  peace, 
if  possible  ;  mainly  insuring  it  by  not  meddling 
with  other  nations,  by  resisting  commercial 
aggressions  and  compulsory  trade  wdth  either 
China  or  Africa,  and  by  granting  the  colonies 
perfect  independence  directly  they  consented  to 
pay  the  expenses  of  their  own  defence. 

The  Ballot  ?     Well,  that  was  a  very  natural 
question  for  Eeformers  to  ask.      He  was  for  it 


THE   UXEXPECTED    CAXDIDATE.  43 

heart  and  soul  as  long  as  landlords  and  em- 
ployers, directly  and  indirectly,  everywhere  pre- 
vented free,  honest,  and  conscientious  voting. 
Ballot-box  or  no,  most  men's  votes  would  be  known 
by  their  neighbours,  but  to  the  timid  the  ballot 
would  be  in  many  places  a  protection.  The 
Tories  had  the  face  to  condemn  the  ballot-box  on 
the  hustings,  while  they  used  it  in  their  own  clubs. 

Should  trade  unions  be  put  down  ?  How 
could  men  dare  to  ask  him  whether  working  men 
should  not  be  allowed  to  protect  themselves  by 
combination  ag;ainst  the  universal  combination  of 
rich  employers,  who,  without  trade  unions,  would 
be  cruel  and  remorseless  as  slave  drivers  \ 

The  Game  Laws  ?  Down  with  them.  They 
were  ^^^itten  in  blood,  and  blood  they  still  daily 
shed.  Eabbits  should  be  treated  as  wild  animals, 
and  of  no  more  value  than  crows  or  daws.  There 
should  be  no  special  laws  to  protect  game,  except 
the  ordinary  laws  against  felony.  There  had 
been  more  murders  in  England  for  the  sake  of  a 
few  miserable  pheasants  than  there  had  been 
agrarian  homicides  in  Ireland.  The  accursed 
system  would  go  on  just  as  long  as  two-thirds  of 
the  House  of  Commons  were  game-preserving 
country  gentlemen,  those  hereditary  legislators 
whose  money  sends  them  to  Parliament,  and  who 
regard  a  dead  hare  as  of  more  value  than  a  brave 


44  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

man's  life.     Down  with  the  Game  Laws,  for  they 
were  written  in  blood. 

"  The  electors  of  Bibury  would  see  from  these 
opinions/'  the  address  Avent  on,  "that  he  (Paradise) 
was  no  mealy-mouthed  time-server,  but  a  Eadical 
of  Eadicals,  willing  to  serve  them  honestly  and 
well,  but  not  to  be  their  mere  mouth-piece,  nor 
willing  to  gain  his  seat  by  flattering  pliability  like 
the  young  dabbler  in  troubled  waters,  who  wanted 
a  seat  as  another  ornament  at  his  watch-chain,  and 
who  could  be  coaxed  over  to  any  camp,  so  vague 
and  undecided  were  his  irrational  tenets. 

"  Signed 

''John  Paradise." 

Paradise  could  indeed  aff"ord  to  be  frank,  violent, 
and  outspoken,  for  Bibury  was  a  Tory  place,  and  his 
chances  were  very  small.  His  customers  in  the 
place  were,  moreover,  few,  and  his  loss  would  end 
with  the  first  outlay. 

The  nomination  day  had  arrived,  and  so  had  the 
two  candidates,  with  brazen  bands,  and  banners, 
and  much  Maltese  enthusiasm.  The  dead  walls 
of  the  not  too  lively  town  Avere  glowing  with  blue 
and  yellow  addresses.  Everybody  was  walking 
about  with  yellow  or  blue  rosettes,  as  if  Coventry 
had  just  started  a  new  order  of  knighthood. 

Englishmen   don't   generally  look   very   com- 


THE    UNEXPECTED    CAXDIDATE.  45 

fortable  in  artificial  dress,  but  tliey  glory  iu 
election  colours,  and  wear  them  with  as  much 
unction  as  university  men  their  blue  ribbons  at  the 
great  boat-race.  There  were  Tories  here  who,  in 
their  zeal  for  their  own  opinions,  would  have 
painted  4he  town  steeple  blue ;  A^^ligs  who, 
in  their  ardour  for  oligarchy,  would  have  painted 
the  ToT^-n  Hall  yellow.  But  alas !  the  days 
when  stubborn  old  Tory  farmers  insisted  on  being 
buried  in  true  blue  coffins,  and  Tory  election 
agents  waylaid  bags  of  money  on  the  way  to 
Shaftesbury,  had  passed  with  the  greatness  of 
precious  old  Sarum,  and  the  glory  of  that  pot 
pourri  of  honesty — Grampound. 

Bibury,  blossomed  into  colour,  looked  more 
animated  and  alert  than  usual.  It  really  looked 
as  if  King  Alfred  might  just  have  marched  out 
of  it  to  meet  the  Danes  in  Dorsetshire.  The 
streets  were  full  of  Blue  and  Yellow  dressed 
people,  laughing  and  bantering  each  other  with 
the  utmost  good  nature.  Carriages  and  ffies  were 
every  moment  arriving  from  the  subm'bs  and 
outlying  districts,  and  were  received  with  Blue 
and  Yellow  shouts  and  waving-  of  hats  and 
handkerchiefs.  The  political  zeal  of  everybody, 
unstimulated  by  Blue  or  Yellow  gold,  would  have 
cheered  the  heart  of  Cato,  that  noblest  Eoman  of 
them  all. 


46  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

The  Sheriflf,  a  cousin  of  the  Duke  of  Devon- 
shire, and  a  tremendous  person  in  his  own  esti- 
mation, had  just  driven  in.  Lord  Mazagan,  too, 
had  ahoiited  at  the  door  of  the  Blue  Hotel — the 
Cantelupe  Arms,  and  was  talking  gaily  to  Colonel 
Harcourt,  Dr.  Briscoe,  and  Mr.  Beauflower,  as 
he  flajDped  his  jaunty  leg  with  his  whip. 

''  I'm  like  yourself,  my  lord,"  said  Colonel  Har- 
court, a  gentlemanlike  old  dragoon  officer,  bland, 
courteous,  and  a  little  choleric,  "I  can't  go  all 
the  lengths  of  these  young  men ;  but  I  mean  to 
support  him  with  all  my  heart,  because  he's  of 
the  good  old  stock,  and  our  families  have  held 
together  these  tvv^o  centuries,  indeed  ever  since 
Lady  Blanche  held  Wardour  for  King  Charles, 
and  defied  those  canting  psalm-singers." 

"  I  told  Fitz  he  was  foolish  to  go  to  the  infernal 
expense,"  said  Lord  Mazagan,  who  was  thrifty ; 
^'but  young  fellows  will  have  these  parliamenl&ry 
honours ;  it's  very  natural,  and  after  all  it  can't  be 
denied  that,  as  somebody  said,  '  the  House  is  the 
best  club  in  Christendom.'  Perhaps  it'll  tame  him 
a  bit." 

"  May  I  ask,  my  lord,"  said  the  colonel,  with 
the  most  apologetic  cmiosity, — "  don't  think  me 
intrusive, — but  is  it  true,  this  rumour  about  the 
county  that  your  nephew  is  going  to  marry  Miss 
Harker  ?     She's  a  fine  girL" 


THE   UNEXPECTED   CANDIDATE.  47 

"  Well,  well,  they  do  say  so,  but  I  don't  know," 
said  Lord  Mazagan,  smiling  in  the  most  knowing 
way ;  "  young  fellows  now  are  hard  to  pin  down, 
they  don't  much  like  settling.  Fitz  hardly  knows 
his  own  mind  two  hours  together.  He's  full  now 
of  this  race  of  his,  and  talks  of  sweeping  the 
board." 

"DeUr!  dear!  Tut,  tut!  Well,  we  were  young 
once.  We  don't  know  the  world  till  just  as  we 
get  notice  to  quit." 

In  the  meantime,  just  inside  the  door,  in  sight 
of  the  surging  Yellow  crowd  round  the  "Holly 
Tree,"  stood  Dr.  Briscoe,  Mr.  Beauflower,  and 
Mr.  Goodrick,  discussing  the  murder. 

^'Can  you  tell  me,  gentlemen,  if  Mr.  Harker 
has  arrived  ? "  said  an  excited  waiter,  who  had 
been  looking  in  every  room.  *'Mr.  Cantelupe 
particularly  wants  to  speak  to  him."" 

"  Not  seen  him,"  said  the  doctor,  sharply.  "  It 
was  the  most  horrid  sight  I  think  I  ever  saw  in 
aU  my  professional  experience,"  he  continued, 
''the  body  was  more  like  that  of  a  man  who's 
been  struck  by  a  cannon  point  blank.  That  gun 
must  have  been  fired  about  eight  yards  off,  but  not 
near'fer,  or  tEe  clothes  would  have  been  scorched." 

"  Ko  news  of  any  arrest.     Seen  the  j)aper  1 " 

"  No,"  said  Goodrick ;  "  they  took  up  a  tramp 
at  Exeter,  but  he  proved   to  be  insane.     It  is 


t' 


48  THE    vicar's    COUETSHIP. 

my  opinion  the  fellow  got  to  Southampton  and 
escaped.  Mmxler  Avill  out.  Stuff !  Four  out  of  six 
murders  remain  undiscovered ;  we  meet  murderers 
daily,  and  do  not  know  them.  They  sell  us  tea, 
they  drive  us,  they  dine  with  us,  they  shake  our 
hands." 

"  Did  you  ever  see  such  a  pack  of  leeches  and 
toadies  as  that  poor  young  fellow  has  got  about 
him?"  said  Dr.  Briscoe.  "I  do  pity  him;  for 
there's  really  good  in  him.  He  is  generous  and 
honourable.  If  he  plunges  he'll  pay,  not  sneak 
tln^ough  the  court  like  a  cheating  cheesemonger." 

Just  then  Mr.  Harker's  carriage  dashed  up  in 
royal  style,  and  the  gentlemen  saluted  him.  He 
had  Mr.  Shekell,  an  attorney,  with  him,  a  sus- 
picious, cadaverous,  ferret-eyed  man,  carrying  a 
black  carpet  bag.  The  footman  lifted  an  enormous 
square  parcel  out  of  the  barouche. 

"  Cantelupe,"  said  Lord  Mazagan,  "  is  dying  to 
see  you,  Harker ;  I'll  go  and  tell  him  you're 
coming." 

"  My  lord,  pray  don't  trouble ;  I'll  go  my- 
self. Just  one  word  with  my  man  of  business 
here." 

''Oh,  yes;  but  I  wdL" 

"  You're  going  too  fast  for  us  old  Blues,"  said 
Colonel  Harcourt,  laughing. 

"No,"  said  Mr.  Harker,  gravely,  "I  don't  hurry 


THE  UNEXPECTED  CANDIDATE.        49 

at  all.  What  I  do  here  is  from  pure  friendsliip 
and  somewhat  against  my  conscience." 

"By-the-by,  Harker,  I  told  my  man  to  take 
back  that  air-gun  of  yours  to-day ;  thousand 
thanks.  The  boy  was  delighted  with  it  for  four 
days,  then  he  took  to  a  boomerang." 

**  Oh,  it  was  of  no  consequence,  colonel.  I'm 
glad  it  pleased  him.  It  reminds  me  of  my  poor 
boy.  Good-bye  ;  we  shall  meet  on  the  hustings. 
I  must  be  off  to  see  my  young  friend.  Mr. 
Shekell,  let  me  show  you  the  committee-room. 
We  shall  have  a  hard  tussle  now ;  the  radicals  are 
taking  advantage  of  our  candidate  not  being  so 
Tory  as  the  Bibury  people  could  wish,  and  they're 
^Dressing  us.     We  may  lose  it  even  now." 

"I  hope  not,"  said  the  colonel;  "but  I  never 
could  understand  what  sort  of  magpie  a  Liberal - 
Conservative  was." 

"From  a  little  I've  seen,"  said  Goodrick  to 
Beauflower,  as  the  doctor  left  them  and  followed 
Harker  up-stairs  ushered  by  eager  waiters,  ''I 
really  believe  that  wild  young  scapegTace  has  a 
hankering  for  Amy;  he's  so  often  there,  and  he 
always  brings  her  presents." 

"He  may  fool  away  his  money  as  he  likes," 
said  Beauflower,  somewhat  angrily,  and  looking 
at  the  Yellow  mob  opposite  as  if  he  longed  to  fall 
upon  them  sword  in  hand. 


50  THE   vicar's   courtship 

Mr.  Goodrick  turned  round  to  him,  and  looked 
into  his  eyes  with  the  searching  gaze  of  an 
oculist  intent  on  finally  assuring  himself  that 
there  Avas  or  was  not  disease.  "  What  ? "  he 
said  ;  "  no,  is  that  true  ?  How  glad  I  should  be 
if  it  was,  for  I  really  love  that  girl  as  if  I  was  her 
father.  I  am  irresistibly  and  magnetically  led  to 
her  side.  There,  no  confession ;  I  expect  none. 
Silence  is  one  of  the  symptoms  in  these  cases." 

"  Well,  it  is  so,"  said  the  Vicar.  "  Yes,  I  love 
her.  I  love  her  dearly,  and  for  ever,  but  our 
marriage " 

"  Oh,  so  she's  caught  the  fever  too  ? "  Good- 
rick smiled  benevolently,  and  his  eyes  quite 
sparkled  with  pleasure. 

"  Yes,  she  loves  m%  but  when  we  shall  marry 
is  imcertain.  There  are  many  lions  in  the  path. 
I  haven't  told  the  father  and  mother  yet ;  they  may 
disapprove.     I  fear  they  incline  to  Cantelupe." 

"  Oh,  they'?  they're  nothing.  Love  against  two 
old  people.  Love  for  ever.  Ah !  it  makes  me 
look  back  and  sigh  !  I  loved  once.  Well,  there 
is  still  one  place  where  we  shall  meet.  Come, 
no  more  of  that ;  but  I  am  so  glad.  Let's  go  and 
see  if  the  hustings  are  ready  for  this  tomfoolery." 

In  the  meantime  Harker  had  sought  the  can- 
didate, who  was  in  a  state  of  extreme  nervous 
excitement  and  misery,  being  button-holed  in  one 


THE   UNEXPECTED   CANDIDATE.  51 

corner  of  a  hot,  noisy,  smoky  room  by  two  fat 
tradesmen,  and  coached  as  to  present  condition  of 
the  floorcloth  trade  of  Bibury,  and  the  necessity 
of  a  branch  railway  to  Warminster.  The  air 
reeked  with  the  offensive  steam  of  bad  brown 
brandy,  and  the  smoke  of  bad  cigars.  Every  now 
and  then  there  was  the  bang  of  a  soda  water 
bottle  cork,  which  sounded  like  an  attempt  at 
assassination.  Bibary  was  a  Pandemonium  of 
corrupt  voters. 

The  moment  Cantelupe  saw  Harker  he  tore 
himself  from  the  fat  tradesmen,  and  shook  him 
by  the  hand. 

"  Come  in  here,"  he  said,  "  to  my  sanctum ; 
there  is  only  Jack  Talbot  there  writing  out  my 
speech  for  me  to  put  into  my  hat  in  case  of  any- 
thing breaking  down  in  my  memory." 

He  opened  the  door  of  a  small  parlour  where 
Jack  sat,  Avith  a  bottle  of  champagne  before  him, 
smoking  cigarettes. 

"Jack,"  said  he,  "get  out  just  for  a  moment,  I 
want  to  have  a  word  with  Harker.  You  know  ]\Ir. 
Harker?  Mr.  Harker,  Talbot:  Talbot,  Harker. 
Go  and  see  if  they've  got  the  pink  calico  on  the 
hustings  yet." 

"Harker,"  said  the  candidate,  arranging  his 
collar  nervously,  "I  want  another  thou. ;  Fox  tells 
me  we  must  have  it,  that  infernal  Paradise  is  bupng 


LIBRARY 

UNIVERSiry  OF  ILLINOIS 


52  THE    vicar's    COUKTSHIP. 

up  half  the  men  who've  been  holding  back,  and  the 
rest  want  £30  each,  the  cormorants  !  It's  too  bad, 
pon  my  soul  there  ought  to  be  reform  somewhere. 
Now,  don't  look  black,  old  fellow ;  you've  got  the 
mortgages  all  safe.  I  shall  pull  it  off  with  Im- 
menschikoff.  It  will  be  all  right,  you  know;  we 
understand  each  other." 

"  We  may  understand  each  other,  but  I  cannot 
conceal  from  you  the  fact  that  you  are  very 
much  encumbered.  You've  borrowed  of  me  now 
more  than  8000/.,  and  the  last  interest  is  still 
owing.  I  really  cannot  make  this  advance  just 
now ;  money  is  very  tight." 

Cantelupe,  not  having  expected  resistance, 
hardly  knew  what  to  say. 

"  I  must  have  it,  or  I  shall  fall  through,  sure  as 
fate.  I  really  want  it  to  go  on  with,  too,  till  my 
next  rents  come  in.  Oh,  nonsense,  old  fellow,  let's 
have  it  at  once.  It's  deuced  kind  of  you,  I  know, 
when  I  should  have  to  pay  those  Jew  fellows  in 
Poland  Street  60  or  80  per  cent.  I  tell  you  fairly, 
I'm  up  a  tree  if  you  don't  give  me  time." 

Harker  sat  down  and  thought  for  a  moment, 
then  he  rose  and  went  to  the  window,  below 
which  a  Blue  mob  had  assembled  and  was  shout- 
ing, "  Cantelupe  for  ever.  No  swipe  sellers  !  " 
When  he  turned  again,  his  face  looked  very  stern. 

"Cantelupe,"  he  said,  "I  and  my  family  regard 


THE    UNEXPECTED    CANDIDATE.  53 

you  almost  as  a  son,  but  I  should  not  be  doing 
my  duty  if  I  encouraged  you  to  throw  away 
more  money  in  the  mad,  reckless  way  you're 
doing.  I  will  not  give  you  this  money,  moreover 
there  is  no  use  my  disguising  from  you  the  fact, 
that  I  have  conscientious  scruples  against  deserting 
my  cause,  and  advocating  tenets  in  which  I  do 
not  agree.  I  am  of  the  old  school,  and  I  have  a 
conscience.  Tou  will  want  money  for  Ascot  and 
Longchamp." 

"  Yes,  rather ;  Paris  is  an  awful  place  for 
spending  money  in." 

"Til  lend  you  two  thousand  if  you'll  sur- 
render this  contest." 

"  In  whose  favour." 

"  Mine  ! " 

"  That's  cool." 

"  Well,  I  mean  it.  My  friends  here  urge  me  to 
put  myself  forward,  now  that  you  are  likely  to  be 
beaten  from  not  being  Tory  enough.  They  grow  so 
clamorous  for  me  that  I  cannot  refuse,  and  indeed 
my  address  and  bills  are  abeady  posted.  Eefuse 
to  do  this  and  I  at  once  foreclose  every  mortgage." 

"  I  feel  as  if  I  was  knocked  silly,"  said  Cante- 
lupe,  pouring  himself  out  a  tumbler  full  of  cham- 
pagne, and  drinking  it  at  a  draught. 

"My  la^v}^er  tells  me  you  are  desperately 
crippled,  and  entreats  me  to  lend  you  no  more. 


54  THE  vicar's   courtship. 

Come,  it  is  for  your  good.  Do  you  accept  my 
terms?     Shall  I  sign  tlie  cheque  1 " 

He  sat  down,  and  drew  out  a  long,  flappy 
book. 

"  You  have  me  in  a  cleft  stick,  there's  no  doubt 
about  that,"  said  Cantelupe  bitterly.  "  Fm  hard 
hit.  Fm  a  fool,  I  know,  but  still  I  must  have 
money.  Will  you  keep  the  Jews  off  me  for  a 
month,  till  I  can  run  Immenschikoff?" 

"  I  promise,  but  not  longer.  You  must  give 
me  50  per  cent,  this  time.  I  must  not  drag  my 
family  down  in  your  ruin.  Give  up  the  turf,  pull 
in,  and  you'll  soon  get  round ;  above  all,  marry, 
and  marry  prudently." 

"  Clash  !  bang  !  Cantelupe  for  ever!"  began  the 
people  under  the  window.     "Where's  Cantelupe  1 " 

"  If  you  mean  what  you  say  step  out  into  that 
balcony,  and  tell  those  fools  that  circumstances 
have  arisen,  and  that  the  tendency  of  the  promises 
is  such,  as  to  induce  you  to  at  once  resign  in  my 
favour." 

"It's  devilish  hard.  I  don't  think  its  doing 
quite  the  handsome  thing  by  me.  Let  a  fellow — 
make  it  three  thou.  ?  You're  hard  as  flint.  Well, 
I  suppose  I  must.  Here  goes."  And  Cantelupe, 
with  a  melancholy  gulp,  as  if  he  was  swallowing 
a  very  large  and  bitter  pill,  jerked  open  the  glass 
folding  doors,  and  waved  his  hat  to  the  crowd. 


THE   UNEXPECTED    CANDIDATE.  55 

There  ^Yas  a  whirlwind  of  cheering  as  Cantelupe 
waved  his  hat  for  silence.  He  expressed  in  a  few 
stammered  words,  to  their  intense  astonishment, 
liis  intention  of  retiring. 

"  Cantelupe  for  ever !  Keep  up  your  pecker. 
Never  say  die,  young  'un ! "  shouted  several  enthu- 
siasts ;  then  gradually,  as  he  retired  bowing,  the 
cries  of  the  fickle  Blues  changed  slowly  but  surely 
to,  "  Harker  for  ever  !  True  blue  for  ever !  No 
Trimmers !  No  half  measures  !  "  And  certainly 
the  full,  very  full  quart  measure  had  not  been 
neglected  on  that  glorious  day. 

"  There,''  said  Cantelupe,  returning,  and  slam- 
ming the  window  angrily,  ''  now  youVe  got  what 
you  want,  give  me  the  cheque  ;  here's  my  I  0  U. 
Thanks.  You  can  be  my  money-lender  again, 
but  you  shall  never  be  my  friend,  Mr.  Harker. 
I  may  be  a  poor  fool  and  a  dupe,  but  I  have  at 
least  the  traditions  of  a  gentleman,  and  I  will 
not  disgrace  them,  however  hard  up  I  get. 
Good  morning,  sir;  our  acquaintance  is  at  an 
end." 

"A  most  disgraceful  plant,  Fitz,"  said  Jack 
Talbot  afterwards  ;  "by  gad,  I'd  shoot  the  fellow." 

"  A  most  shameful  and  shabby  trick,"  said  Lord 
Mazagan,  to  a  circle  of  county  gentlemen ;  "no 
doubt  he  has  involved  the  poor  lad  in  debts,  but 
he  shan't  get  much  by  it,  for  we'll  start  Colonel 


56  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

Harcourt's  son,  and  the  Liberals  and  Tories  shall 
coalesce/' 

"  Shameful  bit  of  sharp  practice  ! "  said  Talbot. 
In  the  old  time  Td  have  called  him  out,  by  Gad !'' 

"The  fool  struggles/'  said  Harker  to  himself, 
as  he  headed  a  procession  to  the  hustings,  "but 
after  all,  he  can't  go  further  than  his  chain." 


THE    LOTEES'    MEETING.  57 


CHAPTER  V. 

THE    lovers'   meeting. 

It  Tvas  a  few  days  after  the  nomination  at 
Bibuiy,  at  which  Mr.  Harker  stood  only  third,  that 
the  unhappy  Vicar  of  Summerleas  was  pressed  closer 
and  closer  by  debts  that  grew  nearer  and  nearer, 
like  the  walls  of  that  dreadful  room  in  the  inquisi- 
tion that  slowly  crushed  life  out  of  its  victims. 
The  leaky  boat  had  to  be  baled  incessantly  or  it 
would  sink.  It  was  a  heart-breaking  trial,  and 
only  Hope  and  Love,  and  Faith  in  God  could 
have  kept  him  from  despair.  Time,  time  was 
aU  he  asked  of  his  pitiless  pursuers.  Time  to 
sell  his  father's  library  to  advantage,  time  to 
finish  his  theological  work,  time  to  get  pupils. 
For  time,  Mr.  Fairfield,  his  solicitor,  was  pleading, 
but  promises  were  only  sops  that  delayed  these 
blood  hounds  but  for  a  moment. 

Beauflower  had  at  last  resolved  to  see  Amy's 
father  and  mother.     Julia  was  eager  that  he  should 


58  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

do  this  ;  she,  in  her  frank,  generous,  outspoken 
way,  saw  no  reason  for  further  delay.  She  knew 
nothing  or  but  little  of  her  brother's  struggles 
with  the  Pieuvre,  and  what  difficulties  she  did 
see  she  looked  at  in  a  woman's  sanguine  way, 
and  treated  as  mere  cobwebs  in  the  path  of 
Love.  She  was  so  fond  of  Amy,  so  longing  to 
call  her  sister,  so  desirous  to  see  her  brother's  life 
cheered  by  a  loving,  tender  wife.  Somehow  or 
other  Julia  had  shown  more  sympathy  lately  with 
the  married  state,  and  had  grown  more  silent, 
gentle,  and  meditative.  As  for  the  excellent  but 
over-anxious  old  lady,  she  received  the  news  with 
reasonable  composure,  but  still  not  altogether 
with  quite  unruffled  pride. 

''  My  dear  Edward,"  she  said  solemnly,  smooth- 
ing out  her  broad  lavender  satin  pink  ribbons  as 
she  addressed  the  Yicar.  "  I  confess  that  I  had 
hoped  you  would  have  aimed  somewhat  higher ; 
artists  are,  I'm  afraid,  an  ambiguous,  careless  sort 
of  people,  generally  of  no  family,  and  not  always 
quite  presentable  ;  but  Amy  is  a  dear  good  girl, 
and  I  think  she  will  make  you  happy,  and  if  you 
can  only  avoid  being  overwhelmed  by  her  friends, 
such  people  as  that  wild  Irish  major  for  instance, 
and  are  not  perpetually  being  worried  for  money 
by  that  hopeless,  weak  creature,  her  father,  I 
have   no    doubt   that   you   will  not  regret  your 


THE  lovers'  meeting.  59 

marriage  ;  but  now  if  you  only  could  have  liked 
•Canon  Wilson's  daughter  for  instance." 

"  Thirty-two,  and  a  moustache  ;  no  thank  you, 
mother,  I  am  afraid  our  notions  of  a  wife  differ." 

"  Well,  but  she  is  so  worthy." 

''  Worthy,  yes,  but  not  lovable  ;  reads  books 
on  the  plurality  of  worlds,  and,  what  is  worse, 
misquotes  them." 

"Yes,  she  is  a  little  of  the  blue-stocking. 
Well,  then,  there  were  the  Hector's  sisters  at 
Poynton." 

"  Three  rank  old  maids,  ugly  as  the  Fates — 
one  squints  interestingly,  another  laughs  like  a 
hyaena,  and  the  third  limps.  True,  they  have 
300^.  a  year  each." 

"  Ha,  Edward,  you  are  hard  to  please.  I  am 
afraid  you  look  too  much  for  mere  perishable 
beauty." 

"  Perishable  ?  Why,  beauty  is  the  most  lasting 
of  all  things.     Ugliness  only  gets  more  hideous." 

''  I  only  hope  Amy  will  make  a  good  house- 
keeper, l)ut  I  fear  she  has  much  to  leam.  She  is 
totally  ignorant  of  the  management  of  servants, 
and  is  far  too  disposed  to  be  indulgent." 

"  So  much  the  better.  Suspected  people  soon 
become  worthy  of  suspicion.  Amy  is  young, 
mother,  she'll  learn  all  these  things  quickly  under 
good  tuition  like  yours." 


60  THE   VTCAr's   courtship. 

"  Well,  1  hope  she  will.  It  took  me  many 
years  to  learn  what  I  now  know.  Look  at  Julia 
now,  she  actually  did  not  know  yesterday  how 
much  bread  we  ate  a  week,  and  asked  me  Avhat 
an  aitch  bone  was.  Ah  !  girls  are  not  what  they 
used  to  be,  they  are  so  forward  now,  and  they 
expect  ever}i:hing  to  be  done  for  them.  I  was 
brought  up  to  call  my  father  '  sir,'  and  never 
was  allowed  to  speak  till  I  was  spoken  to." 

"  Well,  my  dear  mother,  we  cannot  turn  the 
world  back.  Girls  now  are  more  independent,  and 
as  a  great  many  never  can  marry  at  all,  perhaps 
it  is  better  they  should  be." 

"  Ah  !  everything  is  changed.  Give  me  the 
girls  of  my  young  days." 

"They  were  no  doubt  charming,  but  I  am 
quite  satisfied  with  those  of  the  present.  Amy  is 
perfect.  There  is  none  of  the  modern  masculine 
defiance  about  her,  she  is  not  fast." 

"  She  is  very  nice,  but  if  you  could  only  have 
seen  a  Miss  Hudson  I  went  to  school  with.  She 
married  the  Consul  at — dear  me,  where  was  it  ? 
— oh,  at  Labrador,  and  her  husband  used  to  beat 
her.  Poor  creature,  she  took  to  cbinking,  and  ran 
away  with  a  merchant  captain,  who  was  never 
heard  of  afterwards." 

From  many  other  rather  incoherent  youthful 
experiences,  Beauflower  was  preserved,  just  as  he 


THE    lovers'   meeting.  61 

had  tlirown  on  his  zephyr  and  seized  his  wide- 
awake, by  the  entrance  of  Julia,  who  wanted 
some  tickets  for  mutton  for  a  sick  woman  at 
Stoat's  Nest.  As  the  Vicar  whistled  for  Wasp, 
now  in  pristine  health  and  only  limping  genteelly, 
and  deposited  Zoe,  his  pet  kitten,  in  a  snug 
corner  of  his  easy  chair,  Julia  followed  him  to 
the  door  and  threw  her  arms  round  his  neck. 

"  God  speed  you,  Ned  1 " 

"  Suppose  they  won't  give  me  their  consent, 
Ju?" 

"  Won't  give  !  you  stupid  old  thing  ;  but  they 
must,  and  they  shall.  If  they  don't,  it's  mere  selfish- 
ness, and  I'd  run  away  with  Amy  if  I  was  a  man." 

"  A  nice  scapegrace  you'd  be." 

"  No  worse  than  men  in  general.  Wave  your 
handkerchief  on  the  bridg-e  if  all  ffoes  well." 

"  I  will." 

"  Do  you  know,  Ned,"  said  Julia,  picking  at  a 
rose  that  hung  over  the  trellis  of  the  porch,  "  it's 
very  silly,  I  know,  when  I  feel  that  you  and 
Amy  were  made  for  each  other,  but  I  almost  pity 
poor  Mr.  Cantelupe  ;  I  think  he  is  rather  smitten 
with  her." 

"  Pooh !  he'U  be  easily  consoled.  There  are 
plenty  of  girls  more  suitable  for  him  than  Amy. 
There's  that  dashing  girl  with  the  great  eyes 
whom  we  saw  at  the  Harcourt's  croquet  party." 


62  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

"Oh!  the  most  horrible  flirt;  why  everyone 
noticed  her.     Oh  !  she's  a  horror  of  mine.'' 

"  Then  there  was  that  girl  with  the  blue  eyes 
we  met  at  dinner  at  the  Harkers'.  Vulgar,  red- 
faced  mother  !  " 

"  What,  that  stupid  little  thing,  without  two 
ideas,  and  hair  like  tow  ? " 

"  You  seem  very  particular  in  your  selection 
for  him,  Ju.  I  think  you've  a  sneaking  likeness 
for  Cantelupe  ? " 

"  Wliat,  I  !     Nonsense.     The  last  man." 

"  Ah  !  girls  often  say  that  of  the  first  man." 

"  Don't  talk  nonsense,  sir,  or  I  shall  be  angry." 

The  Vicar  laughed,  picked  a  scarlet  geranium 
that  grew  by  the  door,  and  held  it  up  to  Juha's 
reddened  cheek.  "  Look,"  he  said,  drily  ;  "  it 
just  matches.  Good-bye,  Ju ;  don't  be  angry  with 
me — wish  me  luck.  If  I  fail  I  shall  be  the  most 
miserable  wretch  on  earth.     Ju,  you  aint  angry  ? " 

But  Julia  had  swept  round  and  closed  the  door. 
There  were  tears  in  her  eyes,  and  she  was  too 
proud  to  show  them. 

The  Vicar  took  the  path  up  by  Travers's  on  to 
the  high  level  of  the  terraces.  There  was  a 
waggon  at  the  door  of  the  lodge  removing  fm^ni- 
ture.  The  widow  was  going  into  Hampshire  to 
live  with  her  son.  The  children  were  crying  in 
the  garden.     The  Vicar  passed  up  over  the  dead 


THE   LOYEES     MEETING.  63 

leaves  and  under  the  bcecli  trees  till  lie  got  into 
tlie  upper  plantation,  and  out  between  the  juniper 
bushes  and  laurels  on  to  the  broad  turf  walk. 
It  was  a  part  of  the  Abbey  wood  now,  that  even 
the  keepers  shunned  at  night,  for  there  was  a 
rumour  that  the  ghost  of  the  murdered  man  had 
been  once  or  t^sdce  seen  in  the  dusk  of  moonlight 
going  into  or  emerging  from  the  hut.  Beauflower 
did  not  care  to  awaken  painful  recollections  by 
passing  the  exact  spot,  but  he  cast  a  look  to- 
wards it.  The  sunshine  was  upon  the  hut,  now 
the  fir  wood  rang  mth  the  thrushes'  songs,  and 
beyond,  over  the  wheat  fields,  he  could  hear  the 
larks  singing  their  ceaseless  hymns  of  praise.  It 
seemed  impossible  that  human  blood  could  ever 
have  been  shed  there,  for  it  seemed  the  very 
playgTOund  of  innocence  and  happiness. 

The  wood  in  which  the  hut  lay  ambushed  was 
on  the  Vicar's  right  hand ;  on  his  left  the  terrace 
plateau  sank  away  like  the  wall  of  a  fortification 
some  fifty  or  sixty  feet  down  into  the  vaUey, 
towards  the  Abbey  stables  and  kitchen  gardens. 
Beyond,  towards  Fontford,  spread  fields  and 
ploughed  lands,  and  above  rose  further  portions 
of  the  Abbey  wood.  By-and-by,  after  crossing 
one  or  two  lanes,  the  Vicar  came  into  wilder  por- 
tions of  the  terraces,  where  the  ground  undulated. 
The  right  hand  plantations  grew  wider  and  more 


64  THE   VICARS  COURTSHIP. 

like  forest.  Great  silver  firs,  fifty  feet  high,  that 
had  been  the  special  glory  of  old  Mr.  Staunton, 
who  was  a  connoisseur  of  trees,  stretched  out 
their  huge  masts  and  vast  drooping  limbs  like 
giants,  extending  the  right  hand  of  fellowship. 
One  huge  fellow  that  looked  a  hundred  feet  long 
had  been  smitten  by  the  lion  winds  of  early 
March,  its  roots  having  no  deep  hold  in  the  chalk 
which  they  had  reached.  It  lay  a  vast  ruin 
across  the  edge  of  the  wood,  just  where  the 
terrace  sank  into  a  sudden  hollow,  its  dusky 
growth  of  some  fifty  summers  destroying  many  a 
track  of  violet,  primrose,  and  hyacinth, — innocents 
which  had  shared  its  ruin  as  unofi*ending  courtiers 
sometimes  share  the  doAvnfall  of  tyrants  they 
have  been  unlucky  enough  to  serve  too  faith- 
fully. Still  deriving  some  little  nourishment  from 
the  vast  lump  of  earth  that  clung  to  them  ;  even 
in  misfortune  the  great  dark  branches  yet  retained 
that  dewy  bloom  from  whence  the  tree  derives  its 
name.  Deep  in  the  wood,  beyond  a  small  square 
woodman's  hut,  an  axe  could  be  heard  chipping 
and  cleavino'  at  some  fallen  Dao;on,  and  a  wood- 
man  s  boy  was  singing  and  shouting  from  pure 
enjoyment  of  life  as  he  piled  billets  of  wood  into 
a  tall  square  sacrificial  altar  as  if  preparing  for 
some  Hindoo  widow.  On  the  other  side  of  the 
terrace  a  great  horse  chestnut,  late  in  flowering, 


THE    lovers'   meeting.  65 


spread  its  huge  fans  of  leaves,  on  which  the 
balanced  cones  of  creamy  and  pink  blossom  had 
now  faded  off,  and  everywhere  in  the  open  parts 
of  the  covert  the  dog-roses  were  opening  their 
fragile  pearly  cnps  that  diffused  the  most  delicious 
of  summer  odours.  On  one  hug^  fir,  dark  as  a 
churchyard  yew,  an  invisible  raven  croaked  in 
c}Tiical  protest  against  the  universal  happiness 
of  earth  and  heaven. 

Treadino'  the  Pieuvre  under  foot,  careless  of  all 
trouble  now  that  he  was  on  his  way  to  meet  his 
betrothed,  the  joy  of  his  heart,  the  hope  of  his 
life,  the  light  of  his  eyes,  the  young  Vicar  sprang 
do^^TL  the  hollow  and  up  the  other  side,  the 
springy  mossy  turf  soft  under  his  cpick  phant 
foot.  Quick  as  a  young  Indian-brave  on  the  war 
trail,  he  dashed  through  the  ranks  of  firs,  and 
stood  at  the  very  end  of  the  terraces.  It  was  the 
head  of  a  long  ridge  of  chalk,  that,  rising  like  a 
Titanic  pier  above  this  part  of  the  Wiltshire  Downs, 
suddenly  came  to  a  "fault,"  as  Cornish  miners  call 
such  abrupt  geological  changes,  and  broke  precipi- 
tously by  a  clifi"-Hke  descent  into  the  huge  plain, 
that,  stretching  across  the  frontier  of  Dorsetshire, 
runs  level  till  it  meets  those  hills  that  bound  the 
Dorsetshire  coast  beyond  We}Tiiouth.  From  this 
terrace  bank  of  dry  turf,  bordered  by  beech  trees, 
you  descended  to  the  open  Down  on  the  right,  and 

VOL.    III.  F 


66  THE  vicar's   COURTSHIP. 

on  tlie  left  to  a  narrow  slanting  lane  that  passed 
a  chalk  pit  and  a  wood  and  ran  between  deep 
banks,  where  the  fern  and  foxglove  met  in  nod- 
ding fellowship. 

Beauflower,  sitting  down  on  the  bank,  where  the 
small  moss  was  scorched  brown,  Avhere  blue  and 
yellow  flowers  enamelled  the  sod,  and  Avhere  the 
beech  roots  were  not  too  near  the  surface,  looked 
down  on  the  village  of  Birdbrook,  whose  little 
grey  church  lay  half  a  mile  off  among  the  mea- 
dows somewhat  above  the  village.  To  the  right, 
where  the  Downs  again  rose  into  high  ridges, 
there  was  a  windmill  tossing  its  telegraphic  arms 
in  unheeded  messages  about  the  price  of  flour. 
In  the  valley  immediately  below,  under  Bird- 
brook  wood,  there  was  a  woodman  at  work  cutting 
brush  with  his  shining  billhook,  and  beyond  a^ 
man  lazily  ploughing  and  plodding  after  his  team 
of  strong  grey  horses. 

The  Vicar  sat  with  his  back  to  a  beech  tree  mus- 
ing over  the  scene  of  fairy  land  now  bathed  in  the 
clear  warm  air  of  June.  Love,  too,  threw  its  sun- 
light upon  the  scene,  making  the  blue  sky  a  deeper 
sapphire,  the  white  rolling  clouds  more  snowy,  the 
very  breath  of  the  roses  more  like  the  breath  of 
angels.  Then  all  at  once  the  dream-land  vanished  at 
the  yelp  of  a  keeper  s  dog  and  a  croak  of  the  mis- 
anthropic raven,  and  the  lover's  thoughts  turned 


THE   lovers'    meeting.  67 

irresistibly  to  Harker.    Since  tlie  keeper's  murder, 
and  since  his  defeat  at  Bibury  by  young  Harcourt, 
lie  had   grown   reserved,  silent,   and  difficult  of 
access.     There  was  a  report  that  he  had  been  ill, 
but  Dr.  Briscoe  had  not  attended  him.     He  had 
appointed  another  keeper,  a  Scotchman,  a  sleek, 
quiet,  subservient  fellow,  who  was  as  hard  and 
relentless  as  Travers,  but  easier  to  manage  and 
less  offensive  in  manner.    The  death  of  the  keeper 
seemed  to  have  roused  Mr.  Barker's  fears,  for  it 
was  reported  in  the  village  that  he  considered  his 
own  life  not  safe,  and  carried  a  small  revolver 
always  with  him.     He  would  be  softened  now, 
Beauflower  thought,  and  then  a  means  of  escape 
from  the  pursuing  Pieu^nre  struck  him.     It  would 
be  easy,  under  the  very  legitimate  pretext  of  ask- 
ing money  for  the   church,  to  meet  the  terrible 
and  oppressive  exaction  of  lOl.  that  the  builder  re- 
quired every  week,  and  to  get  sufficient  to  pay  also 
the  dreaded  dilapidations  that  the  committee  now 
wished  settled.     There  would  be  no  compromise 
of  self-respect  in  such  a  request,  nor  would  Mr. 
Harker  be  likely  to  refuse  it.     What  was  200^.  to 
a  millionaire  ?     Even  Beauflower's  jealous  pride 
did  not  very  much  shrink  from  the  request,  for 
in  July  the  second  payment  of  tithes  w^ould  clear 
all,  and  give  him  money  enough  for  a  honeymoon 
tour  on  the  Ehine  or  in  Italy.     He  had  paid  his 

F   2 


68  THE   vicar's   COURTSHIP. 

47Z.  insurance  by  a  great  effort  just  in  time  ;  tlie 
rest  was  not  pressing.  As  for  the  cheating  Oxford 
attorney,  who  took  a  mean  advantage  of  a  mislaid 
receipt,  he  could  wait.  So  it  should  be  ;  and  this 
Harpy  care  driven  off,  Beauflower  soon  gave  way 
again  to  the  delights  of  a  lover's  expectancy,  and 
thought  only  of  Amy,  of  her  sweet  little  face  as 
she  put  back  her  hair,  to  dress  to  come  out,  of 
her  look  when  they  should  meet. 

But  there  was  first  the  somewhat  dreaded  visit 
to  Fontford  to  make.  Procrastination,  half  asleep 
beside  him  on  the  moss,  that  Lazy  Lawrence  that 
turns  half  our  resolutions  into  wishes  and  half  our 
deeds  into  dreams,  the  softest,  demurest,  but  not 
least  dangerous  of  the  evil  angels  that  mislead 
man,  whispered,  "Not  to-day,  to-morrow;  they 
might  say  no,  and  that  would  spoil  all  the  plea- 
sure of  seeing  Amy.  My  dear  fellow,  never  hurry; 
no,  do  it  to-morrow." 

Beauflower  turned  and  listened.  The  subtle 
fiend  chuckled  silently;  but  the  clear  clarion 
voice  of  duty,  ever  a  sentinel  in  his  heart,  rang 
out  the  words  "To-day,  to-day,"  and  sounded  the 
"monte  cheval"  that  true  spirits  never  disobey. 
So  up  he  sprang  like  a  soldier  who  hears  the 
"  dress  bugle,"  and  darted  off  on  foot  for  Font- 
ford,  straight  as  an  arroAv  across  the  "  crop-eared  " 
Down. 


THE   LOVERS     MEETING.  69 

A  ten  minutes'  run  brought  him  to  a  point  in 
the  road  ^vhere  he  could  see  the  smoking  chimneys 
of  Fontford;  another  three  minutes,  and  he  was 
down  past  the  police  station  and  in  the  chief 
street  close  to  the  Eobinsons'  lodgings.  The  great 
black  clock  with  the  gilt  letters  on  the  church 
tower  at  the  top  of  the  street  on  the  Bibury  road 
struck  one  as  he  entered  Fontford.  He  was  to 
meet  Amy  at  the  stile  at  the  end  of  the  terraces 
at  two. 

Poor  human  nature  !  It  is  for  all  the  world  like 
a  handful  of  sand,  the  moment  you  close  it  up  at 
one  finger  it  runs  out  at  the  other.  Gallant 
heroes,  who,  having  the  toothache,  have  put  on 
their  hats  and  started  bravely  for  the  nearest 
dentist,  have  ere  this  been  known  to  entirely 
recover  on  the  very  doorstep ;  so  it  was  that  the 
Vicar,  at  the  very  next  door  to  Lawson  the  car- 
penter's recoiled  at  the  sight  of  Cantelupe's  drag 
at  the  Harker  Arms,  and  felt  all  his  courage  melt 
in  a  moment,  as  snow  melts  on  the  hot  pavement 
over  a  baker's  workshop.  He  did  not  feel  jealous, 
but  he  saw  great  obstacles  rising  like  the  black 
teeth  of  a  reef  out  of  a  foaming  sea  of  trouble. 
He  dared  not  face  the  Eobinsons  just  then,  so  he 
passed  the  window  quickly,  and  gave  one  glance 
in  unobserved.  There  was  the  major,  with  his 
back  to  the  window,  holding  up  a  huge  Jan  Steen 


70  THE    VTCAE's    courtship. 

glass,  probably  creaming  witli  the  Charlemagne 
Champagne.  His  scarlet  Fez  cap  was  on  his  head, 
and  he  was  roaring  the  refrain  of  his  favourite 


song- 


"  And  devil  a  man  shall  go  to  jail, 
From  Garryowen,  my  glory." 

Exactly  opposite  him  sat  Cantelupe,  his  head  be- 
tween his  hands,  his  elbows  on  the  table,  laughingly 
lighting  a  huge  cigar.  That  smart  dog-cart  in 
Lawson's  yard  was  no  doubt  waiting  to  bear  the 
major  to  fresh  commercial  triumphs.  Beauflower 
turned  and  fled — it  was  cowardly,  but  it  was 
natural — and  sought  solace  in  the  dear  hope  of 
the  blessed  hour  that  was  approaching.  He  walked 
slowly  back  across  the  Downs  to  the  end  of  the 
Abbey  terraces. 

It  was  a  perfect  day — a  prize  day.  The  sheep 
were  feeding  happily,  as  if  rejoicing  in  their  speedy 
change  into  legs  and  quarters ;  the  white  butter- 
flies were  trading  in  short  voyages  from  flower 
to  flower ;  the  flowers  were  blowing  fickly  about, 
as  if  coquetting  with  their  fretful  lovers,  the 
bees,  who  kissed  and  quarrelled,  and  then  kissed 
again.  It  was  a  day  made  for  lovers  and  for  youth. 
Out  upon  the  lagging  sun,  that  seemed  stand- 
ing still  above  Birdbrook  as  if  suddenly  striking- 
work,  overpowered  with  his  own  heat.  Half-past 
one  at  last,  after  waiting  two  hours  as  it  seemed. 


THE   LOVEBS'   MEETING.  71 

The  shadows  short  now,  and  the  sun  almost  too 
powerful.  The  birds  struck  work,  also,  except  in 
the  cool  green  dimness  of  the  inner  wood ;  the 
big  white  butterflies  were  languid  with  the  heat ; 
the  raven  was  silent,  therefore  probably  asleep  in 
a  melancholy  way,  and  sullenly  forgetful  for  a 
time  of  his  grievances. 

Amy  was  not  to  come  over  the  terraces,  but 
by  a  cross  path  that  led  into  the  plain  below 
round  by  Swallowclifi*.  She  had  to  leave  Ethel 
at  a  croquet  party  at  the  Fosters'  at  ToUard 
Magna.  So  the  Vicar  dashed  down  the  steep 
lane  between  the  high  banks,  and  passed  through 
the  gate  at  the  bottom  to  the  right  of  a  little 
sand  pit.  He  emerged  in  a  large  tract  of  flat 
pasture-land,  broken  here  and  there  by  high 
ground,  and  running  at  the  bottom  of  a  sloping 
wood  all  musical  with  birds.  A  few  C[uick  steps 
iDrouoiit  him  to  the  summit  of  a  knoll  from 
whence  he  could  see  half  Dorsetshire,  with  its 
orchards,  plough-lands,  and  wooded  pastures, 
spreading  out  like  a  vast  outspread  map.  A  mile 
or  two  ofl"  rose  the  hills  of  Kingsettle  and  Dane- 
bury ;  from  the  former  King  Alfred  was  said  to 
have  watched  his  Saxons  hewing  back  the  Danish 
robbers  from  Wiltshire,  and  on  the  latter  there 
were  the  trenches  of  a  Eoman  camp.  Far,  far 
spread  the  blue  distance,  dimming  as  it  receded 


72  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

till  it  reached  that  faint  waving  line  of  blue 
cloudy  hill  towards  the  sea.  Along  the  edge 
of  Everley  copse,  fragrant  with  clustering  and 
scrambling  honeysuckle,  the  rabbits  were  bound- 
ing into  the  air  and  gambolling  like  lambs  at  play. 
Then  he  went  back  to  the  stile,  and  waited  for 
the  apparition  of  that  sweet  face,  and  the  soft 
fall  of  the  little  foot  that  was  well-known  music 
to  his  ear. 

There  was  no  sound  but  the  occasional  melan- 
choly lowing  of  one  of  the  reel  Devons  in  the 
pasture,  now  and  then  the  shout  of  some  Irish 
haymakers  in  a  far-off  field,  and  the  ceaseless  carol 
of  a  blackbird  in  the  copse  to  the  left  of  where 
he  stood.  A  supreme  happiness  brooded  in  his 
heart  like  a  wild  dove  in  her  nest,  for  who  could 
have  imagined  that  there  was  thunder  in  that 
great  white  cloud  that  "  toppled  "  overhead  like 
a  half  melted  iceberg  in  a  summer  sea.  But, 
yes !  there  was  one  omnipresent  murmur  when 
he  listened  quietly — that  civilizing  sound  which 
has  now  penetrated  almost  every  nook  of  Great 
Britain — the  battling  sound  of  passing  trains,  that 
in  some  distant  valley  shot  past  on  their  swift 
way  to  Exeter. 

The  Vicar  could  only  see  about  a  hundred  yards 
up  the  lane,  for  at  that  distance  it  took  a  sharp  turn, 
and  the  fern  sprays  and  the  hazel  boughs,  with 


THE    LOVERS     MEETING.  73 

their  broad  blots  of  leaves,  threw  a  green  dark- 
ness over  the  path.  All  at  once  a  great  sooty 
blackbird  came  whistling  in  terror  towards  him 
down  the  path,  and  seeing  him  darted  into  the 
side  wood.  Soon  a  glimmer  of  a  white  parasol 
appeared,  then  the  rustle  of  a  grey  silk  dress, 
and  lastly,  a  pretty  smiling  face,  brighter  with 
the  quick  walk.  It  was  Amy :  quick  as  light, 
Beauflower  vaulted  over  the  gate,  and  in  a  mo- 
ment his  strong  arm  was  round  her  little  trim 
waist,  her  little  neatly-gloved  hand,  exquisitely 
small  as  Titania's,  clasped  in  his,  and  then  their 
lips  met  in  one  long,  loving,  insatiable  kiss,  and 
then  came  fondlino-  words  of  delio^ht. 

''  I  m  afraid,  Edward,  I  m  late.  Oh  !  I  am  so 
glad  to  see  you." 

"  It  seemed  years,  dearest,  but  it  is  only  ten 
minutes  past  two,  so  you're  very  good  !  " 

"  What  a  lovely  day  !  isn't  the  air  balmy  ?  I 
did  so  enjoy  the  walk  through  the  hay-field;  but 
then  I  always  enjoy  the  walk  that  brings  me  to 
you.  I've  got  to  go  into  Birdbrook,  dear,  to  take 
some  music  to  Miss  Burcombe.  Oh,  dear !  Mrs. 
Harker  is  so  cross  and  cruel;  if  it  wasn't  for 
Ethel,  I  don't  think  I  could  bear  it." 

"  My  own  sweet !  "  said  Beauflower,  punctuat- 
ing his  remarks  with  kisses  on  Amy's  eyes,  lips, 
and  temples,  just  where  the  hair  was  so  ^ale  and 


74  THE   VICAH'S   COURTSHIP. 

golden  ;  ''  it  is  not  for  long,  you  sliall  soon  leave 
those  purse-proud  people.'^ 

"Oh,  how  happy,  happy  we  shall  be!"  said  Amy. 

The  Vicar  looked  at  her.  She  wore  a  silvery 
grey  silk  dress,  made  with  almost  French  purity 
of  taste,  and  above  it  a  little  tight-fitting  black 
silk  mantle  (we  question  if  that  was  the  exact 
name  for  it),  and  a  little  straw  hat  with  two  pop- 
pies cockaded  on  the  left  side,  and  pale  fawn- 
coloured  gloves  that  fitted  to  perfection. 

"  Why,  Amy,  my  own,"  he  said,  holding  both 
her  hands,  "  I  never  saw  you  look  so  bewitching. 
That  dress  is  perfection  !  " 

"  Oh !  don't  make  me  vain,  Ned ;  you  really 
mustn't.  You  know  a  poor  governess  is  obliged  to 
dress  like  a  Quaker ;  but  you  like  grey."  Then  Amy 
leaned  against  her  lover's  shoulder,  and  looked  up 
into  his  eyes  with  such  serene  happiness  and  such 
tranquil  and  perfect  reliance,  that  Pluto  himself 
must  have  softened  at  such  a  look,  and  have 
instantly  thrown  open  his  iron  doors  to  the  Eury- 
dice  who  gave  it. 

They  sat  down  together  as  by  one  impulse  on 
a  dry  mossy  bank  under  the  shade  of  a  silvery 
rinded  beech  tree,  whose  shade  is  always  so  light, 
playful,  and  transparent ;  presently  Beauflower 
ran  down  into  the  meadow  like  a  delighted  boy 
chasing  the  cows  and  ponies  that  were  feeding 


THE    LOVEES'    MEETING.  75 

tlierc,  and  gathered  Amy  a  great  bnncli  of  orange 
spotted  cowslips,  that,  with  no  special  odour,  were 
fragrant  of  summer  and  its  delights,  and  a  tossing 
plume  of  delicious  meadow-sweet,  and  then  came 
laughing  back  to  brush  them  lightly  over  her 
mouth. 

"  Oh,  don  t,  Ned  1  "  she  said,  wdth  the  prettiest 
petulance,  "  you  scatter  my  hair  so." 

*'  Then  he  shan't ! "  said  Beauflower,  sitting 
down  quite  close  to  her,  and  his  arm  stole  irre- 
sistibly round  her  waist ;  "he  won't  be  cruel  any 
more."  Soon  relapsing  into  gravity,  "  Oh  !  Amy, 
darling,  he  said,  "  I  had  quite  forgot  I  have  a 
little  present  for  you,  I  brought  from  Salisbury 
on  Monday.  It  isn't  worth  your  having,  except 
that  it  may  remind  you  of  me  when  we  part." 

"  Which  Avill  be  never,"  said  Amy^  locking  her 
hands  round  his  big  sturdy  arm,  and  she  said  it 
T\ath  such  pla}rful  tenderness  that  St.  Anthony 
himself  would  have  instantly  proposed  marriage. 
"Oh,  it's  something  very  beautiful,  I  know  !  " 

Beauflower  drew  a  little  horseshoe-shaped  case 
of  green  morocco  from  his  pocket  and  opened  it. 
It  contained  a  little  plain  gold  betrothal  ring,  with 
a  brilliant  in  the  centre,  and  two  little  rubies,  red 
as  a  snake's  eyes,  guarding  it,  one  on  each  side. 
He  took  it  from  its  soft  white  satin  bed,  and 
taking  ofi*  her  glove   slipped  it,  as    skilfully  as 


76  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

if  he  was  always  doing  such  things,  on  the  little 
white  second  fino-er  of  her  rig^ht  hand. 

A  beautiful  flush  of  rose  colour  spread  into  her 
cheeks,  and  from  there  to  her  forehead,  while 
tears  gathered  like  rival  diamonds  in  her  beautiful 
brown  eyes  as  she  kissed  him  and  said, — 

"Oil  !  it  is  so  lovely ;  but  you  ought  not  to 
have  gone  to  such  expense  for  poor  little  me. 
But,  dearest,  I  mustn't  wear  it,  you  know,  till  you 
get  papa's  consent.     Ask  him  to-day — do  !  " 

"  They  should  have  been  emeralds,"  said  Beau- 
flower;  "but  the  jeweller  thought  the  rubies 
looked  so  far  better.  You  know  in  old  times 
people  thought  rubies  turned  pale  if  the  giver's 
love  grew  colder." 

"  But  your  love  never  will — will  it  ?  " 

''  Never — xevee  ! " 

Then  there  was  more  kissing,  every  kiss  seem- 
ing to  the  lover  sweeter  than  the  last,  and  of  a 
rarer  honey. 

"  What  bird  is  that,  Edward  ? "  said  Amy,  as 
there  came  from  the  near  copse  just  behind  them 
a  smothering,  half  human  sound,  tremulous  as 
with  love  and  sorrow,  and  full  of  a  deep  rich 
melody  that  seemed  suppressed. 

"  That  is  a  nightingale.  Amy  !  " 

Then  they  Hstened,  their  faces  quite  close  to  each 
other,  and  the  bird  sung  to  them  tidings  of  great 


THE  lovers'  meeting.  77 

hope  and  joy,  till  it  became  time  for  Amy  to  rmi 
with  the  music.    Beauflower  o-ave  her  his  hand  and 
lifted  her  up  as  easily  as  if  she  had  been  a  child, 
and  they  walked  together   across  the  four  hay- 
fields,  where  the  grass  j)hn^es  tossed  bro^vTi  and 
purple  among  ebbing  and  flowing  tides  of  float- 
ing golden  blossom,  till  they   reached   the  stile 
that  led  into  Birdbrook,   then  they  kissed  and 
kissed  again,  and  looked  into  each  other's  eyes 
and  stole  one  more  kiss,  and  at  last  parted,  he 
watching  her  till  she  turned  the   corner  of  the 
road,  she  turning  now  and  then  to  nod  him  a 
kiss.     They  were  to  meet  in  half  an  hour  at  the 
other  side  of  the  wood,  and  till  then  he  would 
lie  down  and  read  Keats's  "Endymion,"  or  sketch 
a  grouj)  of  cattle,  he  was  not  resolved  which.     If 
he  was  asleep  she  had  j^romised  to  wake  him,  as 
End}Tiiion  was  awoke,  with  a  kiss.     It  was  no 
wonder,  therefore,  that  he  went  up  on  the  knoll, 
threw  his  handkerchief  over  his  eyes,  and  almost 
instantly  feU  asleep.    The  blue  sky  rolled  on  over- 
head, the  summer  wind  bent  the  flowers  that  dtcw 
beside  him,  a  yellow  butterfly  fluttered  over  his 
head,  but  he  slept  calmly   on   and   dreamed  of 
Amy. 


78  THE    vicar's    courtship. 


CHAPTEE  YL 

THE  BATTLE  WITH  THE  CYCLOPS. 

It  was  rather  more  tlian  an  hour  after  that 
Amy,  with  the  bunch  of  cowslips  still  in  her  hand, 
tripped  lightly  over  the  stile  at  Birdbrook  and 
came  singing  to  herself  across  the  meadows  at 
the  foot  of  Squire  Everley's  Avoods.  At  the  second 
field  towards  the  knoll,  she  saw  with  alarm,  some 
fifty  yards  before  her,  two  gigantic  tipsy  Irish 
haymakers,  half-crazed  with  cyder,  on  their  way, 
with  two  big  stone  jars,  to  the  Jolly  Waggoner  at 
Birdbrook.  They  were  huge,  navigator-looking 
monsters,  without  their  coats,  and  in  dirty  shirt 
sleeves,  then-  braces  hanging  down,  and  their 
gleaming  scythes  trailing  at  their  backs.  The 
one  was  a  wicked-looking  black-haired  fellow  of 
the  lowest  Celtic  type — bad  forehead,  piggish 
eyes,  and  staring  cheek  bones  ;  the  other  a  red- 
bearded,  one-eyed  giant,  Avith  coarse  large  fea- 
tures, bony  forehead,  and  a  rather  savage  mouth. 
They  were  singing,  wrangling,  and  denouncing  the 


THE    BATTLE    WITH    THE    CYCLOPS.  79 

low  wages,  when,  to  Amy's  utter  horror,  they 
caught  sight  of  her  as  she  tried  to  glide  past 
them,  and  both  stopped  and,  taking  a  cruel  plea- 
sure in  her  terror,  held  out  their  arms  like  men 
dri^^g  cattle.  One  flourished  his  scythe  to  bar 
the  road,  while  the  other  advanced  in  a  half 
maudlin,  half  coaxing  way,  that  was  even  more 
terrible  than  the  anger  of  the  other. 

"  Tattheration  to  me,"  roared  the  red-haired, 
one-eyed  ogre,  "but  here's  the  purtiest  Kttle 
Orange  gurleen  as  ever  I  set  eyes  on  since  I've 
been  in  this  God-forsaken  counthry.  Make  her 
stop  and  give  us  a  kiss  each,  ]Mike  O'Kelly,  or 
bedad,  by  the  Seven  Shrines  at  Clonmacnoise, 
I'll  mow  her  down." 

"Put  a  dacent  tongue  in  your  head,  Dennis 
O'Eeilly,"  said  the  other  plausible  villain,  stealing 
nearer  to  Amy,  who  felt  her  blood  turn  cold,  and 
was  lookino;  in  vain  for  Edward.  "That's  not 
the  way,  you  gommoch,  to  put  the  comether 
on  a  dacent  little  Protestant  Colleen  dhas  with 
the  golden  hair ;  come  here,  my  purty  little 
colleen ;  come  here,  acushla  :  come  here,  ma- 
vourneen,   and  love  the  man  who   is   dying  for 

ye." 

"  Come  out  of  that,  you  spalpeen  ;  none  of 
your  blarneying  ways.  Fair  play  with  the  girl. 
I'U  have  the  first  kiss,  or  I'll  cut  the  liver  out  of 


80  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

ye.  Bad  scran  to  you  if  I  lay  a  finger  on  you  ! 
Only  just  wait  till  I  can  give  you  a  polthouge, 
you  carnying  sj^alpeen.  Til  dig  your  grave  for 
you,  bedad,  with  this  hand." 

The  black-haired  scoundrel  had  just  gripped  the 
wrist  of  Amy,  when  the  red-haired  giant,  stag- 
gering up,  threw  down  his  scythe,  and  dragged 
his  companion  from  the  screaming  and  almost 
swooning  girl.  The  next  moment,  butting  like 
mad  bulls,  the  two  drunken  men,  with  howls  of 
rage,  flew  at  each  other  and  grappled  foot  to  foot. 

The  prospect  of  esca]3e,  so  mercifully  sent  by 
Heaven,  recalled  Amy  to  her  senses.  With  one 
wild  look  round  for  her  lover,  she  fled,  swift  as 
Daphne,  down  the  meadow  back  towards  Bird- 
brook,  the  other  path  being  blocked  by  the  com- 
batants, and  the  high  grass  beyond  im23eding  her 
flight. 

The  wrestlers,  bleeding  and  hot,  coalesced  on 
seeing  her  escape,  and,  sobered  by  the  loss  of 
blood — for  they  had  cut  themselves  severely 
against  the  scythes — pursued  her  with  waving 
arms  and  frantic  cries.  There  was  the  Celt  in 
perfection — the  sober,  civilized,  warHke,  generous, 
tractable  Celt,  to  whom  the  Saxon  is  but  a  clod 
of  earth !  It  was  the  last  frightened  shriek  of 
Amy,  as  she  sunk  fainting  to  the  ground,  that 
awoke  the  sleeper  on  the  knoll.     Heaven-roused, 


THE  BATTLE  WITH  THE  CYCLOPS.      81 

lie  leaped  up  startled,  and  saw  in  a  moment  the 
great  horror  and  the  danger.  Quick  as  an  Indian 
warrior  he  leaped  down  upon  the  foe,  his  short 
blackthorn  stick  in  his  hand,  and  fire  of  generous 
rage  burning  in  his  eye.  The  two  wretches  had 
again  closed  in  fight  over  their  victim,  but  they 
drew  apart  and  closed  on  the  enemy  as  he  came 
near  and  shouted  : 

"You  murderers,  dare  to  touch  a  hair  of  her 
head,  and,  God  helping,  I'll  kill  you  both  ! " 

"  Hear  him,  Dennis !  hear  the  Protestant 
omadhaun !  Hit  round  at  him ! "  cried  the 
black  fellow,  now  no  longer  bland  and  plausible. 

"  Keep  him  back  while  I  go  and  get  my  d 

scythe  and  cut  his  Saxon  head  ojff.  Give  him  a 
quieter  between  the  eyes,  that'll  show  him  he's 
met  an  O'Kelly." 

"  Lave  him  to  me,  ma  bouchal,"  cried  the  red 
ogre. 

Grinning  ^\dth  all  his  yellow  horse  teeth  in 
horrible  delio'ht  at  the  murderous  blows  he 
planned,  "  Come  on  now  you,  you  black  sarpint ! " 
he  cried.  "  What's  the  gui  to  you  ?  She's  promised 
us  a  kiss,  and  we  mane  to  have  it,  plase  the  pigs. 
I've  been  wanting  a  fight  these  ten  days.  I'm 
getting  quite  mouldy  in  this  cursed  counthry. 
Come  on  if  you  ain't  one  of  the  white  horse 
spacies,  and  I'll  give  you  a  pot-walloping.     Look 

VOL.    III.  G 


82  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

alive  there,  Mike,  with  the  sc3i^hes ;  we  may 
want  'em." 

The  giant  squared  his  tremendous  hairy  arms 
and  advanced  scornfully,  like  Goliath  upon  David  ; 
but  the  rage  of  Achilles  was  burning  in  Beau- 
flower  s  heart.  He  parried  no  blow,  he  thought 
of  no  science,  but  rushing  straight  as  a  thunder- 
bolt on  the  Cyclops,  beat  him  to  the  ground  with 
a  smashing  blow^  upon  the  right  temple.  The 
fellow  arose,  furious,  but  half  stunned. 

A  roar  of  defiance,  as  from  a  mammoth  rather 
than  a  man,  arrested  the  combatants,  towards 
whom  the  other  mower  was  now  bearing  down 
fast,  screaming,  '^  The  O'Eeillys  for  ever,  and  down 
with  the  Orangemen  !  "  The  new-comer  was  the 
major,  who,  driving  past  the  Birdbrook  stiles, 
had  recognised  Amy  as  she  ran  and  fainted,  and 
had  run  to  her  assistance  as  fast  as  rather  too 
much  champagne  would  let  him,  waving  an  oak 
stick  nearly  as  thick  as  a  bedpost.  The  O'Kelly 
seeing  this  Blticher  arrive  on  the  field  of  Water- 
loo, at  once  dashed  at  him,  scythe  in  hand. 

"  Man  a  pike  "  against  a  rhinoceros,  throw  a  net 
over  a  whale,  but  don't  run  your  head  against  an 
O'Donovan,  armed  to  rescue  innocence.  There 
was  a  moment's  parley. 

"  Who  are  you,  you  murthering  \aLlains  ? 
How  dare  you  touch  that  lady  ? " 


THE  BATTLE  WITH  THE  CYCLOPS.      83 

"  Who  am  I,  is  it  ?  I'm  Mike  O'KeUy,  and 
ril  cut  you  into  pound  pieces !  " 

"And  I,"  said  the  major,  ''am  a  Flaming 
OTlannigan,  and  if  you  don't  drop  that  scythe 
111  beat  your  skull  into  mincemeat." 

The  rascal  made  one  savage  sweep  at  the 
major's  legs,  but  faUing  rather  short,  and  carried 
a  little  past  Donovan  by  the  force  of  the  stroke, 
he  received  a  killing  blow  on  the  back  of  his 
head  from  the  major  s  tremendous  weapon.  He 
recovered  in  a  moment — the  bull-headed  scoun- 
drel ! — sufficiently  to  put  out  his  hand  and  feebly 
grasp  the  scythe,  but  a  furious  rap  of  the  major's 
stick  nearly  broke  his  arm,  and  he  dropped  the 
handle  instantly.  Nor  was  the  major's  help  in- 
opportune to  Beauflower,  for  the  red  man  had 
closed  on  him  in  despair  at  the  cruel  blows  he 
received  in  the  face,  and  had  twisted  round  him 
his  sine^^y,  .bleeding,  hairy  arms.  Had  he  not 
been  drunk,  he  would  have  killed  Beauflower  long 
before.  One  savage  stroke  of  the  major's  stick 
on  the  loins  soon  loosened  him,  but  before  he 
could  rush  at  his  new  assailant,  the  major  had 
bent  his  head,  and  dashing  at  O'Eeilly  like  a  wild 
ox,  drove  him,  stunned  and  breathless,  ten  feet 
from  where  he  had  stood. 

"  Quick,"  he  said,  "  Beauflower,  lend  me  your 
handkerchief,  that  I  may  tie  this  fellow's  arms 

G    2 


84  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

and  legs  before  he  recovers ;  you  bind  the  other  s 
with  his  own  handkerchief,  and  guard  them 
both  while  I  run  for  the  police.  I  saw  Vincent 
as  I  passed  the  Everley  Arms.  The  dirty  black- 
guards !     I  wonder  how  they  like  it." 

The  Vicar  did  as  required,  then  ran  and  knelt 
by  Amy,  and  took  her  in  his  arms  and  felt  her 
heart,  and  loosened  her  collar  and  kissed  her  pas- 
sionately. Presently  she  opened  her  eyes,  smiled 
at  him  as  if  in  a  dream,  and  fainted  again.  The 
major,  who  had  tied  the  two  men,  with  a  good 
sharp  kick  each, — indeed,  to  tell  the  truth,  rather 
more  than  one, — came  up  just  as  the  Vicar's  lips 
were  pressed  to  Amy's. 

"  Musha  !  "  he  said  to  himself,  "  and  so  it's 
come  to  that,  has  it  ?  There  goes  the  last  hope 
of  Dominick  Donovan.  Well,  must  be  must  be, 
bad  luck  to  it !  " 

"  We'll  make  a  lady's  chair  and  carry  lier 
to  the  gig,"  said  the  Vicar ;  "  we  must  take  her 
home  as  soon  as  possible.  Poor  little  bird,  it  has 
nearly  frightened  her  to  death." 

''  The  little  colleen  I  the  little  darlint !  "  said 
the  major,  as  they  bore  her  to  the  stile,  still  insen- 
sible. "  If  it  had  been  in  America,  I'd  have  been 
sudden  death  on  our  two  friends  there.  I'd  have 
shot  those  fellows  as  if  they  had  been  mad  dogs ; 
hanging's   too    good  for  them.     Bedad,  the    soil 


THE  BATTLE  WITH  THE  CYCLOPS.      85 

here  seems  good  for  murder.  Lord,  how  light 
this  little  creature  is  to  carry !  Bless  her  little 
heart !  " 

They  had  lifted  iVmy  into  the  dog-cart  and  were 
just  starting,  when  Dr.  Briscoe  and  Mr.  Goodrick 
drove  up.  They  were  told  the  story,  to  which 
they  listened  with  profound  attention.  In  a 
moment  the  worthy  doctor  was  in  the  dog-cart, 
feeling  Amy's  pulse  and  heart,  and  assuring  them 
of  her  speedy  recovery.  Mr.  Goodrich's  alarm 
was  that  of  a  father  rather  than  a  friend.  The 
colour  forsook  his  face  as  he  helped  the  doctor  to 
bear  her  to  their  brougham,  where  she  could  lean 
back  against  the  cushions,  till  they  could  get 
restoratives.  "  I  think  it  would  kill  me.  Beau- 
flower,"  he  said,  suddenly,  "  if  anything  was  to 
happen  to  this  girl ;  she  has  become  almost 
necessary  to  my  existence  now." 

"  You  get  on  the  box  of  the  doctor's 
brougham,"  said  the  major,  "  and  I'll  drive  off  like 
a  tearing  fury  till  I  can  find  that  Vincent,  and 
then  we'll  look  up  our  two  friends  and  clap  the 
bilboes  on  them,  the  dirty  spalpeens.  I  wonder, 
now,  I  didn't  kill  one  of  them,  bad  cess  to  'em ! 
St.  Patrick,  the  good  man — bless  his  name  to 
glory — didn't  do  half  his  work  in  clearing  out  the 
Irish  vermin,  but  I  suppose  he'll  draw  them  all  off 
into  fort'nate  Amerikay  one  of  these  fine  days. 


86  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

Doctor,  take  care  of  the  dear  little  colleen.  I'll 
be  back  at  tea-time  to  look  after  lier." 

The  major  was  a  Bohemian,  a  sponge,  and  a 
shifty,  reckless  fellow,  but  he  was  brave  as  a  lion, 
and  had  a  heart  of  gold.  He  kissed  the  little 
cold  hand  that  hunoj  down  on  the  carriao;e  seat 
with  a  chivalrous  gallantry  one  could  scarcely 
have  expected  from  him,  and  then  leaped  up  into 
his  dog-cart. 

''  T  must  be  off,"  he  said, ''  or  those  blackguards 
will  get  away,  and  we  shall  have  to  chase  them 
half  over  the  county."  Then  lashing  his  smart 
little  mare,  and  shouting  a  verse  of  "Garryowen," 
he  drove  off  at  a  furious  pace  in  search  of  P.-C. 
Vincent. 


THE    SERMOX   OF   THE   UNJUST   STEWARD.       87 


CHAPTEE  A'lL 

THE   SERMOX    OF    THE    UXJUST    STEWARD. 

A  DELICIOUS  and  serene  tranquillity  as  of  tlie 
golden  age  reigned  over  Summerleas  on  a  Sunday. 
One  would  really  liave  tliouglit  that  Apollyon 
had  never  set  his  foot  within  twenty  miles  of 
it,  and  that  even  slander  and  petty  larceny  were 
unknown.  Those  persons  who,  as  an  old  writer 
quaintly  puts  it,  make  Sunday  a  scraper  to  remove 
the  diit  of  the  week,  certainly  did  not  contract 
any  more  very  perceptible  encrustation  on  that 
day.  Calmly  the  day  passed  from  the  rose  of  dawn 
to  the  crimson  of  eve,  calmly  the  hours  flowed 
on  like  a  silent  river,  till  the  to-day  became 
yesterday,  and  passed  out  of  sight.  No  jingle 
of  waggon-horses  going  to  water;  no  thronging 
crowd  of  smoking  sheep  driven  through  brown 
clouds  of  dust,  to  drink  at  the  brook  where  it  was 
Avidest,  by  the  little  grey  bridge  ;  no  grind  or  jar 
of  passing  wain  ;  no  one,  indeed,  visible,  except, 
perhaps,    the    carrier,   weary  of  rest,  trying   his 


88  THE   vicar's    COUETSHIP. 

terrier  deprecatingly  at  a  water-rat,  or  moodily 
watching  the  still  water  as  if  looking  for  a  lost 
parcel.  A  little  later,  two  or  three  hobbledehoys, 
stiff  and  awkward  in  their  Sunday  clothes,  would 
be  seen  lounging  on  the  bridge  parapet,  looking 
at  a  trout  half  hid  in  the  lons^  floatino^  weeds,  that 
occasionally  rewarded  the  spectators  by  a  glimpse 
of  the  extreme  tip  of  his  suspicious  nose.  As  for 
the  fresh-coloured  children,  deliciously  clean  in 
Sunday  collar  and  caj)e,  the  school  swallowed 
them  after  an  early  hour,  and  only  released  them 
to  decanter  them  carefully  into  the  church. 

On  the  particular  June  Sunday  we  are  humbly 
attempting  to  describe,  the  congregation  had  begun 
to  collect  early  from  the  outlying  farmers'  cot- 
tages, chiefly  in  order  to  criticise  the  rather  grand 
new  headstone  just  erected  by  Mr.  Harker  to  the 
memory  of  his  faithful  steward.  It  was  a  hand- 
some slab  of  the  best  Tisbury  stone,  with  a 
floriated  cross  on  the  top,  filled  with  a  text  in  red 
and  black  letters,  of  a  totally  unreadable  shape, 
and  it  recorded  the  fifteen  years'  service  and 
untiring  energy  of  Mr.  Travers,  murdered  by 
poachers,  June  1,  1861.  The  sods  over  the 
barrel-shaped  gTave  still  showed  the  seams  where 
they  had  been  joined,  and  the  flowers  that  the 
widow  and  children  had  stuck  upon  the  still 
brownish  turf,  were  scarcely  faded.    On  the  whole, 


THE    SERMON    OF    THE    UNJUST    STEWARD.        89 

the  stone  was  pronounced  a  downright  handsome 
thing,  that  must  have  cost  a  tidy  sight  of  money. 
Others,  less  easily  pleased,  did  not  care  so  much 
for  the  tombstone,  but  would  rather  have  seen  the 
squire  take  young  Travers  in  his  father's  place, 
and  have  had  less  talked  about  and  more  done 
for  the  widow  and  children. 

It  was  a  sacred  custom  at  Summerleas  that  the 
moment  the  first  flutter  of  the  parson's  surplice 
was  seen  emerging  from  the  Vicarage  towards  the 
path  across  the  glebe,  that  that  instant  (like 
rabbits  in  a  warren  at  the  sight  of  a  terrier), 
every  smock-frock  gathered  in  the  churchyard,  at 
the  stile,  or  at  the  church  doors,  should  instantly 
make  a  dive  at  the  porch.  Whether  the  object 
was  to  conceal  the  pre^dous  gossip,  or  to  secure  a 
good  seat,  is  unknown,  but  such  vras  the  primeval 
custom.  It  had  never  been  deviated  from.  The 
labouring  men  wore  chiefly  that  national  but 
irrational  dress,  the  white  smock,  which,  cold, 
easily  dirtied,  and  perishable,  has  only  one  recom- 
mendation, i.e.,  its  exquisite  and  even  ostentatious 
cleanliness.  But,  alas !  the  white  smock  is  jDassing 
like  the  old  woman's  witch-like  scarlet  cloak  of 
twenty  years  ago  ;  and  even  its  illegitimate  suc- 
cessor, the  leaden-coloured  smock,  with  the  elabo- 
rate pleated  throat-piece,  is  growing  obsolete  too ; 
and  after  that,  what  is  left  for  the  rightly-consti- 


90  THE    VICAE's    courtship. 

tuted  Conservative  mind  but  universal  suffrage 
and  the  Deluge  ?  The  special  pride  at  Summer- 
leas  consisted  of  a  sort  of  short  shooting  jacket, 
coat  and  gaiters.  The  last  old  farmer  who  held 
to  top-boots,  as  a  Trojan  to  his  Palladium,  had 
died  some  ten  years  before,  and  about  the  same 
time  had  died  out  the  maid-servant's  custom 
of  always  carrying  the  prayer-book  carefully 
wrapped  up  in  the  clean  square-folded  pocket- 
handkerchief.  So  the  times  change,  and  we 
change  with  them. 

There  had  been  thunder  in  the  night,  but  the 
heat  was  not  less  intense  for  that  relief.  The 
moss-rose  over  the  Vicarage  porch,  stripped  of 
some  of  its  blossoms  by  the  thunder  and  rain, 
had  already  revived,  and  was  opening  exquisite 
flowers  that  scattered  the  odours  of  paradise  to 
the  passing  zephyr.  The  bees,  tipsy  with  honey, 
were  reeling  over  the  beds  of  mignonette,  from 
which  the  warm  rain  had  scarcely  yet  exhaled.  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Eobinson,  who  had  walked  over  to  Sum- 
merleas  with  the  Vicar  of  Birdbrook,  Bessie  Chet- 
wynd  (the  eldest),  and  Miss  Chivers,  to  inquire 
for  Amy,  whose  night's  rest  had  nearly  restored 
her,  were  enraptured  with  the  Vicar's  garden, 
which,  rejoicing  in  the  glory  of  summer,  was  now 
a  jungle  of  blossom  and  a  wilderness  of  sweets. 
"Such  an  effect  of  colour,"  Mr.  Eobinson  said,  "as 


THE    SERMON    OF   THE    UNJUST    STEWARD.        91 

a  bed  of  scarlet  geraniums  presented  in  tlie  full 
sunshine,  lie  had  never  before  witnessed."  Mrs. 
Robinson  was  placidly,  Bessie  Chetwynd  girlishly, 
and  Miss  Chivers  amiably,  delighted. 

They  all  moved  on  to  the  church  exactly  as  the 
chiding  "  parson's  bell"  began  to  ring,  sharply  and 
petulantly.  In  went  the  white  smocks,  in  scuffling 
haste ;  in  ran  the  boys,  ducking  under  the  arms 
of  the  graver  seniors ;  in  tripped  the  pretty,  neat, 
fresh-coloured  servant  girls.  There  were  open 
benches  at  Summerleas,  the  ends  rudely  carved 
in  the  Hottentot  taste  of  the  Georoian  era. 
According  to  some  extraordinary  and  unmeaning 
tradition  of  the  same  dark  age,  the  women  sat 
on  one  side  of  the  church,  the  men  on  the  other. 
George's  uncle,  old  Payne,  the  clerk,  had  already 
helped  on  the  Vicar  with  his  snowy- white  starched 
surplice,  and,  heavily  spectacled,  placed  himself  in 
the  official  pew  from  whence  he  organized  the  ser- 
vice. The  pretty,  but  affected,  schoolmistress  was 
seated  at  the  harmonium.  The  squire's  gallery  was 
alone  empty.  The  Barkers'  gallery  was  situated 
in  the  chancel,  on  the  side  facing  the  pulpit.  It  was 
a  long  carpeted  pew,  with  two  rows  of  seats,  and  a 
stove  at  the  end  of  it.  Five  of  the  commandments, 
written  in  gilt  letters,  on  a  large  black  board,  were 
hung  immediately  over  Mr.  Harker's  royal  seat, 
whose  back  was  parallel  to  the  pulpit.     The  pride 


92  THE   VTCAe's    COUETSHIP. 

of  class  and  wealth  was  as  palpable  in  that  little 
village  church,  as  it  is  (more's  the  pity)  in  most 
things  English. 

It  had  been  the  custom  fifteen  years  before,  or 
less,  for  a  rude  sort  of  village  band  to  occupy  the 
organ  loft  (the  organ  was  a  grinder,  horrible  to 
musical  ears,  and  never  in  tune).  The  rude  fore- 
fathers of  the  hamlet  at  that  time  scraped  and 
trumpeted  the  rough  doggerel  of  Tate  and  Brady, 
with  dreadful  emj^hasis,  claiming  for  themselves  the 
chief  control  of  the  whole  sersdce,  and  working  out 
the  anthem  on  an  intolerable  trombone,  screech- 
ing clarionet,  shrill  flute,  and  growling  bass  viol, 
that  would  have  sent  Handel  to  Bedlam  in  half- 
an-hour.  All  this,  Beauflower,  by  more  tact  and 
generalship  than  his  somewhat  impulsive  nature 
generally  displayed,  had  quietly  and  gradually 
reformed  away,  and  a  quiet,  somewhat  wheezy 
and  nasal  harmonium  now  reigned  in  their  stead. 
Those  conceited  and  overpowering  musicians  were 
relics  of  the  pagan  Georgian  age,  when  a  cracked 
slo]3  basin  was  used  for  a  font ;  when  brown  fungi 
grew  between  the  chancel  stones;  when  a  poor  hen 
had  been  found  sitting  on  her  eggs  in  the  pulpit; 
and  when  old  Pa}Tie's  father,  then  a  half  paralyzed 
man,  still  proud  of  his  authority,  used  to  l3e  carried 
on  his  son's  back  once  in  every  service  from  the 
organ  loft  to  his  desk,  and,  if  necessary,  sounding 


THE    SERMON    OF    THE    UNJUST    STEWARD.        93 

a  loud  "amen"  during  his  brief  Ancliises journey, 
while  the  rector,  on  dark  days,  had  been  known 
to  get  down  from  the  pulpit  and  stand  up  at  a 
chancel  window  to  finish  his  sermon. 

Things  now  were  more  severe  and  more  deco- 
rous. Beauflower  read  the  prayers  neither  coldly 
nor  theatrically,  but  in  a  fine  sonorous  voice,  and 
with  the  earnestness  of  a  man  who  felt  he  was 
addressing  Deity  itself.  There  was  no  fantastic 
shifting  of  dresses  or  places ;  no  superstitious 
boT\'ings  and  candle  lightings  ;  no  popish  genu- 
flexions ;  no  assumption  of  the  follies  of  the  by- 
gone idolatrous  priestcraft. 

On  this  particular  Sunday  the  Yicar  felt  a  little 
nervous,  because  all  eyes  were  fixed  on  him  with 
special  admiration  and  curiosity,  and  there  were 
strangers  from  outlying  tillages  who  had  come 
purposely  to  see  the  man  who  had  so  bravely 
rescued  Miss  Eobinson  from  the  drunken  and 
savage  Irishmen,  who  were  on  the  Monday  to  be 
brouo;ht  before  the  Fontford  mas^istrates.  With 
the  recital  of  this  adventure  had  somehow  oozed 
out  a  rumour  that  the  Yicar  was  courtino;  ]\Iiss 
Eobinson,  and  that  lent  a  romantic  zest  to  the 
story  which  would  otherwise  have  been  wanting. 

So  it  was  that  the  service  to  the  Summerleas 
people  had  that  day  a  peculiar  and  dramatic  inte- 
rest, and  every  one,  even  before  the  "  Dearly  be- 


94  THE   VICAE's    courtship. 

loved  brethren"  sounded  forth,  was  very  silent  and 
stared  very  hard,  longing  for  the  Harkers  and  the 
rescued  damsel  to  arrive.  The  harmonium  had 
already  begun  a  low  breathing  voluntary  in  a 
minor  key,  when  the  Vicar  ruffled  in,  took  his 
seat  in  the  reading-desk,  and  buried  his  face  in 
his  hands  to  implore  Grod's  blessing  on  his  prayers 
and  exhortations.  He  had  just  raised  his  head, 
and  was  looking  over  the  Psalms,  when  there  was 
a  sound  of  quick  wheels  at  the  churchyard  gate, 
and  a  minute  or  two  afterwards  the  gallery  door 
was  opened,  and  Mrs.  Harker,  Miss  Harker,  and 
Ethel  entered,  followed  by  Mr.  Harker  and  a 
footman,  who  carried  some  costly-looking  books. 

The  Vicar  cast  one  look  at  the  pew,  which 
everyone  observed,  and  coloured  slightly  when  he 
saw  that  Amy  had  been  evidently  too  weak  to 
come.  The  Robinsons  whispered :  the  Vicar  gave 
one  glance  round  the  church. 

He  had  somewhat  of  an  artist's  eye,  and  it 
dwelt  with  pleasure  on  one  or  two  fine  old  bald- 
headed,  grey -haired  patriarchs,  whose  hard,  shrewd 
old  visages  came  out  well  against  the  grey  wall 
of  the  side  aisle,  and  contrasted  with  the  fresh 
boyish  faces,  and  pretty  little  bonneted  heads, 
gay  with  broad  streaming  ribbons,  that  glowed 
like  flowers  amid  the  general  blankness  and  nega- 
tion of  colour.     Good  old  Brown,  who  generally 


THE   SERMON    OF    THE    UNJUST    STEWARD.       05 

made  it  a  practice  to  stand  during  tlie  wliole  of 
the  sermon,  was  conspicuous  beside  Mr.  Pitts  in 
the  front  row,  behind  the  clerk,  looking  very 
respectable  in  his  Sunday  dress  ;  his  rosy  good- 
natured  face,  serene,  shrewd,  and  untroubled  as 
ever.  Beside  him  sat  his  handsome  scapegrace  of 
a  son,  looking  rather  worn  and  dissipated,  his  eyes 
rather  sodden,  and  with  a  suspicious  red  mark  on 
his  left  collar-bone,  which  might  have  occurred 
from  a  scuffle  at  the  skittle  ground,  or  The  Peal 
of  Bells,  the  night  before ;  but  was  charitably 
considered  at  home  to  be  "  a  fall." 

The  Vicar  was  just  repeating  that  fine  prayer — 

''  Almighty  and  most  merciful  Father,  we  have 
erred  and  strayed  from  Thy  ways  like  lost  sheep. 
We  have  followed  too  much  the  devices  and 
desires  of  our  own  hearts, — " 

AVhen  Mr.  Goodrich  entered  by  a  little  postern 
door  in  the  chancel,  stepping  softly,  reverentially, 
and  deprecatingly  ;  standing  a  moment  with  his 
face  hidden  l)y  his  hat,  he  took  out  his  prayer- 
book,  and  knelt  beside  Mrs.  and  Miss  Beauflower. 
The  lessons  were  well  read  by  the  Vicar  of  Bird- 
brook,  a  portly,  good-natured  looking  man,  in  a 
colloquial,  but  sensible  manner. 

How  seldom  clergymen  read  well,  and  how 
ignorant  they  are,  of  that  management  of  breath 
that  the  actor  and  the  barrister  so  thoroughly 


96  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

acquire.  The  first  lesson  was  that  fine  dramatic 
chapter  about  Gehazi,  and  the  only  interruptions 
were  those  of  an  old  man,  near  the  pulpit,  who 
commented  upon  Gehazi's  conduct  in  an  audible 
way,  as  for  instance,  when  the  prophet's  greedy 
servant  answered,  "  I  went  no  whither,"  the  old 
man  would  say,  ''that's  a  lie,"  but  very  few 
smiled,  as  they  were  accustomed  to  the  com- 
mentator. 

Old  Payne  was  not  a  bad  specimen  of  the 
village  clerk  ;  but,  still,  at  every  response  he  Avent 
ofi",  like  wound-up  clockwork,  with  a  sort  of 
nasal  whiz,  and  in  a  high  entirely  artificial  voice, 
and  his 

A-R-R-R — MEN  ! 

was  a  recitative  dangerously  ludicrous  to  strangers 
at  all  susceptible  of  the  ludicrous.  The  first  hymn 
was  given  out. 

"  Let  us  sing  to  the  praise  and  glory  of  God, 
the  Thirty-Seventh  Psalm,"  (Tate  and  Brady  ;— 
wonderful  Tate  and  Brady  !) 

"  Though  wicked  men  grow  rich  and  great, 
Yet  let  not  their  successful  state 

Thy  anger  or  thy  envy  raise  : 
For  they,  cut  down  like  tender  grass, 
Or  like  young  flowers  away  shall  pass, 

Whose  blooming  beauty  soon  decays. 

"  Depend  on  God,  and  him  obey  ; 
So  thou  within  the  land  shalt  stay, 

Secure  from  danger  and  from  want 


THE   SERMON   OF   THE   UNJUST    STEWARD.       97 

Make  h.is  commands  thy  chief  delig-ht : 
And  He,  thy  duty  to  requite, 

Shall  all  thy  earnest  wishes  grant." 

As  the  Vicar  stood  up  and  joined  in  the  psalm, 
which  was  sung  with,  perhaps,  rather  more  vigour 
than  taste,  his  eye  slightly  quailed  before  the  fishy 
glare  of  that  of  Mr.  Pitts,  who,  glossy  in  a  suit  of 
shoddy  black,  bought  ready  made  from  some 
Jew^ish  advertising  tailor  (he  was  a  distant  rela- 
tive of  Travers),  and  with  a  large  rose  in  his 
button-hole,  eyed  Beauflower,  as  much  as  to  say, — 

"All  this  is  very  well,  you  are  good,  and  you  are 
plucky,  but  still  you  owe  me  111.  95.  4-|cZ.  for  the 
last  quarter's  meat,  since  Lady  Day." 

The  Vicar  felt  the  chain  Pitts  held  and  pulled, 
and  lamented  the  degradation  and  slavery  of  debt. 
Even  at  God's  altar  the  horrible  pieuvre  was 
clasping  him  closer  wdth  a  more  deadly  grip. 

An  impression  had  spread  tln^ough  the  parish, 
and  reports  spread  quickly  in  small  places,  that  the 
Vicar  w^as  going  to  preach,  that  last  Sunday  in 
June,  a  sort  of  funeral  sermon  upon  Travers; 
that  report  had  filled  the  church,  and  roused  the 
utmost  curiosity,  for  the  spot  of  the  murder  had 
already  become  a  place  of  Sunday  pilgrimage  for 
the  people  of  Summerleas  and  the  neighbourhood, 
and  the  hope  of  discovering  the  murderer  was  now 
all   but   abandoned.     The   hush,   therefore,    ^vas 


98  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

very  deep  when  old  Payne  assisted  the  Vicar  in 
the  chancel,  with  his  black  silk  gown  and  the 
crimson  Oxford  M.A.  scarf  that  heraldically  barred 
it  behind,  and  deeper  when  the  clerk  gave  out, 
in  a  high  quavering  voice,  the  Thirty-Sixth  Psalm. 

"  My  crafty  foe,  with  flatt'ring  art. 

His  wicked  purpose  would  disguise  ; 
But  reason  whispers  to  my  heart, 
He  ne'er  sets  God  before  his  eyes. 

"  He  soothes  himself,  retir'd  from  sight, 
Secure  he  thinks  his  treach'rous  game  ; 
Till  his  dark  plots,  expos'd  to  light, 
Their  false  contriver  brand  with  shame." 

Just  as  the  full  body  of  praise  began  to  swell 
forth  under  the  old  roof,  the  Vicar  gravely  mounted 
the  creaking  pulpit  stairs,  and  knelt  down  in 
prayer.  In  the  moment's  lull  when  the  psalm 
ended,  and  every  one  subsided  into  his  seat,  the 
sw^allows  could  be  heard  under  the  eaves  of  the 
porch,  the  starlings  on  the  roof,  and  the  thrush 
singing  on  the  larch  tree  in  the  glebe. 

The  Vicar  gave  out  his  text,  with  unaffected 
solemnity,  and  as  if  he  was  really  repeating  the 
inspired  words  of  Christ  himself 

"  The  sixteenth  chapter  of  Saint  Luke,  and  the 
eighth  verse. 

"  'And  the  Lord  commended  the  unjust  steward, 
because  he  had  done  wisely ;  for  the  children  of 


THE    SEPtMOX    OF    THE    UXJUST    STEWARD.        99 

this  world  are  in  their  o-eneration  wiser  than  the 

o 

children  of  light/  " 

Mrs.  Harker  gave  the  Vicar  a  searching  and  vin- 
dictive glance,  of  which  the  earnest  speaker  was 
entirely  unconscious. 

The  Vicar  began  by  drawing  a  picture  of  the 
unjust  steward,  whose  commendation  seemed  to 
come  so  strangely  from  the  lips  of  Christ. 

"Let  us  picture  this  man,''  he  said,  ''who 
grinds  the  faces  of  the  poor,  and  is  flinty-hearted 
to  the  widow  and  the  orphan,  rejoicing  over  his 
bales  of  S}"Tian  silks,  his  stores  of  pearls  from 
Ormuz,  and  frankincense  from  Arabia,  as  he 
paces  his  marble  comi:,  where  the  fountain  plays 
among  the  flowering  pomegranate  trees;  proud 
and  defiant,  he  is  waiting  till  twilight  come,  and 
brings  the  guests  who  are  to  share  his  splendour, 
and  minister  to  his  vanity.  His  granaries  brim 
mth  corn,  his  cellars  with  oil  and  ^vine  ;  he  has 
treasure  laid  up  for  many  years  ;  the  Eoman 
Consul  seats  him  by  his  side  in  the  amphitheatre, 
at  the  solemn  sacrifices  in  which  renegades  share, 
in  order  to  win  favour  with  the  oppressors  of  his 
country.  He  sates  his  every  fancy.  Care  and 
trouble  glower  at  his  gilded  gate,  but  cannot 
enter.  He  wastes  his  master's  goods,  and  there  is 
no  one  to  say  *nay.'  He  is  swollen  with  pros- 
perity and  gluttony.     Whatever  he  touches  tm'ns 

H    2 


100  THE   vicar's    COURTSHIP. 

to  gold.  He  sleeps  on  rose-leaves  while  liis 
ministers,  Cunning,  Fraud,  Double-Dealing,  and 
Oppression,  torture  liis  master's  tenants,  and  drag 
them  to  lower  and  lower  misery,  want  and  death. 
But  God  does  not  sleep,  his  sword,  the  lightning, 
rests  not  ever  in  its  scabbard.  His  angels  do 
neither  slumber  nor  sleep.  A  chariot  suddenly  rolls 
up  to  the  gate,  and  a  clear  stern  voice  cries, — 

*^ '  How  is  it  that  I  hear  this  of  thee  ?  Give  an 
account  of  thy  stewardship  :  for  thou  mayest  be 
no  longer  steward.' 

"  The  enchanted  world  of  self-delusion  in  which 
he  has  been  living,  melts  in  a  moment  into  air. 
Escaping,  perhaps,  the  blood  red  rods  and  the 
terrible  cross,  he  finds  himself  a  disgraced  beggar, 
who  will  have  to  supplicate  the  leper  at  the 
gate  and  the  madman  among  the  tombs  for  a 
handful  of  dates  or  a  shred  of  meat.  He  will  be 
driven  into  the  desert  among  the  hyaenas  and  the 
sand-asps.  "What  does  this  bad  man  do  1  Does 
he  destroy  himself  in  wild  despair  and  revenge, 
making  a  vast  funeral  pile  of  the  wealth  on  which 
he  has  been  ravening  ?  No  ;  Self  is  still  his 
god,  Satan  furnishes  him  with  new  wiles  and 
stratao^ems.  He  calls  toorether  the  alarmed  debtors, 
and  propitiates  them  so  as  to  earn  shelter  and 
patronage  now  the  storm  bursts.  The  debt  of 
one  hundred  measures  of  oil  he  reduces  to  fifty, 


THE    SERMOX    OF    THE    UNJUST    STEWARD.     lOl 

the  hundred  measures  of  ^\'heat  to  fourscore.  The 
lord,  discoverino:  the  strata oem  which  had  crowned 
dishonest}^  by  dishonesty,  commended  the  unjust 
steward  because  in  his  generation  he  had  made 
friends  of  the  mammon  of  unrighteousness,  and 
had  been  wiser  than  the  children  of  light.  AVe  do 
not,  however,  hear  that  the  rascal  escaped  com- 
panionship with  the  thief,  the  leper,  and  the 
dweller  among  the  tombs  ;  we  only  know  his 
master  praised  his  promptitude  and  energy  in 
the  emergency. 

"  How  like  the  world—" 

]\Ir.  Goodrich,  who  sat  opposite  the  royal  pew, 
had  kept  his  eyes  steadily  fixed  on  Mr.  Harker. 
At  the  first  ori-^-ino-  out  of  the  text  his  face  had 

o  o 

become  suffused  with  red,  which  deepened  and 
deepened  as  the  sermon  proceeded.  Several  times 
he  had  uneasily  changed  his  position ;  now, 
with  his  hand  over  his  eyes  ;  now,  with  his  head 
resting  on  his  hand,  so  as  to  shut  himself  out  from 
the  more  curious  of  the  conoTco^ation.  At  this 
part  of  the  sermon  his  face  had  suddenly  assumed 
a  death-like  pallor,  and  Mrs.  Harker,  alarmed  at 
his  appearance,  had  violently  awoke  her  elder 
daughter,  who  Avas  in  her  first  sleep  and  looked 
peculiarly  bony  and  very  red  about  the  nose,  and 
had  passed  a  large  double  smelling-bottle  to  her 
husband,  who  had  angrily  repelled  it. 


102  THE   vicar's    COUETSHIP. 

"How  like  the  world,"  continued  the  uncon- 
scious Vicar,  resolute  in  his  conscious  rectitude, 
"prompt  to  evil,  slow  to  good.  How  soon  the 
tradesman  learns  to  dilute  and  adulterate.  How 
soon  the  buyer  learns  to  take  advantage  of  the 
ignorance  or  haste  of  the  seller.  How  soon  the 
seller  learns  to  watch  for  the  unpractised  or  care- 
less buyer  1  How  the  man  of  the  world  tries  to 
profit  by  the  passions  or  weaknesses  of  his  neigh- 
bour, and  to  trade  on  his  fear,  anger,  pride,  extra- 
vagance, or  vice  ?  Do  not  honesty,  good  faith, 
generosity,  honour,  seem  to  have  abandoned  the 
world  in  disgust  1  Everywhere  we  see  the  same 
greedy,  insane,  selfish  race  for  wealth,  one  by  one, 
the  brutal,  trampling,  rushing  crowd,  attracts  us, 
and  crushing  and  goring  we  hurry  on,  without  a 
thought  for  the  dying  under  our  feet,  all  jost- 
ling and  tearing  each  other  down  for  the  golden 
prize.  The  greed  for  hasty  w^ealth  maddens  us 
all,  we  still  hm^y  onward,  demon-led,  and  the 
weak  and  the  noble  perish  first. 

"We  are  all  stcAvards  of  God's  goods;  of  health, 
of  wisdom,  of  time,  of  life.  Our  Lord  will  come 
at  midnight,  suddenly,  and  demand  an  account  of 
those  gifts.  Who  is  the  unjust  steward  ?  Each 
one  thinks  he  has  had  so  little  entrusted  to  him. 
I  will  tell  you  who  the  unjust  steward  is.  He  is 
the  ploughman  who  ploughs  half  an  acre  a  day, 


THE    SEEMOX    OF    THE    rXJUST    STEWARD.     103 

when  he  could  easily  plough  a  whole  acre.  He  is 
the  blacksmith,  who  consciously  leaves  a  flaw  in 
the  horse-shoe  he  sells.  He  is  the  shepherd  who 
lets  a  lamb  die  from  cold,  when  he  could  have 
saved  it  by  conscientious  care.  He  is  the 
carter  who  lets  a  horse  fall  ill  fr^om  not  covering 
it  when  it  is  hot.  Nor  should  I  be  doing  my  duty 
as  a  minister  of  God  if  I  did  not  tell  you  who  was 
the  unjust  steward  among  the  wealthy  also  and 
the  powerful.  The  unjust  steward  is  the  employer 
who  has  no  sympathies  \Yith  his  workmen,  and 
does  not  guard  their  interests  as  his  own;  the 
clergyman  who  lets  his  people  die  unpitied  and 
without  prayer;  the  landlord  who  treats  his  tenants 
merely  as  brute  beasts,  serfs  to  toil  and  then  to 
die,  he  who,  gi^^ing  them  only  just  enough  to 
support  life,  surrounds  them  with  the  temptations 
of  stealable  food,  and  then  drives  them  to  gaol 
and  the  hulks  if  poor  human  natm^e  succumb,  in 
a  weak  moment,  to  the  almost  irresistible  allure- 
ment ;  the  landlord  who  leaves  his  labourers  to 
end  a  toilsome  life  in  the  stone-yard  of  the  work- 
house ;  who " 

Here  the  sermon  was  for  a  moment  interrupted 
by  a  door  slamming  violently.  It  was  the  door 
of  the  Harker  galleiy.  Mr.  Harker  had  left  the 
church.  Mr.  Goodrick  smiled.  Mrs.  Beauflower 
and  Julia  looked  alarmed. 


104  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

The  Vicar  went  on  boldly,  and  sketched  the  bad 
landlord  to  his  remorseful  and  unpitied  end.  But 
it  is  alien  to  our  purpose  to  follow  the  Vicar  further 
in  his  sermon.  It  ended  with  an  exhortation  to  all 
to  be  as  prompt  for  good,  as  the  unjust  steward 
was  for  evil,  and,  despising  the  world's  cross,  to 
strive  hard  for  the  eternal  crown. 

The  prayer  was  said  ;  slowly  the  usual  scuffling 
noise  of  exit  began,  and  the  congregation  left  the 
church. 

"  Thank  you,  Muster  Beauflour,  for  very  good 
doctrine,"  said  Farmer  Brown,  according  to  his 
invariable  custom,  with  a  gentle  slap  on  the 
Vicar's  back. 

"A  very  searching  and  uncomj)romising  ser- 
mon,'' said  the  rector  of  Birdbrook  to  Beauflower, 
in  his  hearty  frank  way,  as  they  walked  to  the 
Vicarage  across  the  glebe  meadow.  "  Did  you 
observe  Mr.  Harker  leave  his  pew  %  I'm  afraid 
he  was  taken  ill." 

"  No  doubt  he  was  ;  he  has  not  looked  himself 
lately.  Ill  send  George,  after  evening  church,  to 
inquire  for  him." 

"  By  the  bye,  Beauflower,"  said  the  rector,  "we 
had  a  committee  meeting  at  my  place  on  Thurs- 
day, the  day  you  went  to  London.  I  had  almost 
forgotten  to  tell  you  that  the  archdeacon  and  all 
of  us  decided  that  as  aU  the  subscriptions  are 


THE    SEPvMOX    OF    THE    UNJUST    STEWARD.     105 

now  in  we  liad  better  meet  to-morrow  week,  and 
send  Mrs.  Chetwynd's  lawyer  tlie  whole  sum,  the 
whole  £180;  and  now  I  am  gomg  to  surprise 
you.  You  know  that  Ave  wanted  to  try  and  pay 
that  extra  £80  demanded  for  the  useless  old  barn 
that  j\Ir.  Chetwynd  pulled  down  % " 

"  Yes.  I  was  wonderino-  how  we  could  wind 
up  so  soon." 

"  As  you  might  naturally  do.  But  while  the 
committee  was  sitting,  in  came  an  anonymous 
letter,  enclosing  the  £80,  so  we  are  now  all  square, 
and  the  poor  widow  will  be  free  of  this  cruel 
burden.'' 

Beauflower  expressed  his  delight  and  liis  as- 
tonishment. Who  could  be  the  unknown  bene- 
factor ?  Surely  not  Mr.  Harker,  who  had  always 
set  his  face  like  a  flint  against  this  work  of  mercy, 
not  Mr.  Goodrick,  surely,  for  there  he  walked  in 
front  of  them,  unconscious  and  indifferent,  though 
he  could  not  fail  hearing  scraps  of  their  conver- 
sation. 

"  Well,"  said  Julia  Beauflower  to  her  old  enemy, 
"  and  is  the  wonderful  house  any  nearer  comple- 
tion than  it  has  been  these  last  two  months  ?" 

*'My  dear  Julia,"  said  her  mother,  "don't  be  so 
rude  to  Mr.  Goodrick.  I  am  sure  he  is  ver}^ 
good-natured  to  bear  it." 

"  Bear  it,  my  dear  madam?     I  like  it ;  it  is  as 


106  THE   VICAe's    COUPvTSHIP. 

ref resiling  as  liail,  and  it  falls  off  me  with  equal  ra- 
pidity.— Yes,  my  dear  Miss  Beatrice,  the  wonderful 
house,  it  will  comfort  you  to  know,  was  reported 
finished  yesterday,  and  I  go  in  in  a  fortnight.  It 
is  to  be  full  of  books,  and  pictures,  and  curio- 
sities, and  is  to  be  very  comfortable,  as  you  will 
see  when  you  and  Mrs.  Beauflower  do  me  the 
honour  of  visiting  me  there.  I  wish  to  consult 
your  taste,  Mrs.  Beauflower,  about  my  curtains, 
and  one  or  two  other  material  things.^' 

"  I  suppose  those  horrid  rascals  will  get  three 
months'  hard  labour  V  said  the  rector  of  Bird- 
brook. 

"  They  ought  to  be  hung,"  said  Beauflower. 

"  Yes,  that  they  ought,"  said  Julia,  her  eye 
flashing  soft  lightning. 

"  By  the  bye,"  said  Mr.  Goodrick,  turning  round 
abruptly  to  the  Vicar,  (the  ladies  had  gone  on,  only 
hearing,)  ''  wern't  you  talking  about  the  Chet- 
Avynds  V 

"  Yes,  we  were." 

"  I  wish  I  could  have  given  more.  But,  upon 
my  word,  I'm  for  once  rather  with  Harker, — I 
object  on  principle  to  sympathy  with  such 
shameful  improvidence.  Here's  a  man  going  on 
for  years  with  a  fair  but  unimproveable  income 
of  £300  a  year.  He  pockets  all  the  money  he 
receives    for   dilapidations,  wastes   it   on  expen- 


THE    SERMOX    OF    THE    UXJUST    STEWARD.     107 

sive  old  books,  and  such  nonsense,  does  not 
lay  by  one  farthing,  casts  away  all  thought  of 
the  uncertainty  of  life — though  every  day  called 
to  some  death-bed  or  another — makes  no  pro- 
vision for  his  wife  and  two  children,  except  a 
trumpery  little  insurance,  then  dies,  and  leaves 
them  to  beg  about  the  country.  Ugh !  I  have  no 
patience  ^dth  such  men." 

"  I  think  you're  a  Httle  too  hard  on  poor  Chet- 
wynd,"  said  Beauflower,  with  a  guilty  toleration 
for  his  own  sins.  "  Some  men  are  so  child- 
like, and  sanguine,  so  hopeful,  and  so  incapable 
of  business  method  and  foresight,  that  sometimes 
from  early  habits  of  lavishness,  sometimes  from 
not  resisting  impulses,  still  oftener  from  sheer 
want  of  a  certain  faculty,  they  can  never  learn 
providence  or  economy." 

"  Small  weeds,  in  fact,"  said  Goodrich,  bitterly; 
"  why,  my  dear  fellow,  you're  begging  the  ques- 
tion. It  is  exactly  the  habit  of  not  checking  bad 
impulses,  and  not  encouraging  good  ones,  that  I 
condemn.  If  man  is  unimproveable,  he  is  not 
better  than  ^Ir.  Darwin's  great-grandfather  — 
the  gorilla.  If  he  is  improveable,  he  can  fight 
his  way  to  the  angels." 

"  I  would  rather  starve,"  thought  the  Vicar, 
angrily,  "  than  ask  that  man  for  an}i:hing ;  he  is 
flint  to  the  back  bone." 


108  THE   vicar's    COUETSHIP. 

"  T  tliink  you  said  you  were  going  to  London, 
teauflower,  on  Friday  week  V  said  Mr.  Goodrick, 
as  tkey  parted  at  the  Vicarage  gate,  where  Wasp 
awaited  them  with  all  sorts  of  pretty  cringing 
flattery  and  yelping  delight. 

"  Yes,  I  am — if  all  goes  well.  I  am  going  to 
spend  two  days  with  Fairfield." 

''  Then  would  you  take  up  those  jewels  of  mine 
to  Mr.  Albert  Hoffman,  the  agent  for  the  Prussian 
Exhibition,  in  Austin  Friars.  They  are  too  valu- 
able to  trust  to  any  one  but  a  friend.  They  must 
be  with  him  by  the  twentieth." 

"  With  the  greatest  pleasure." 


THE    devil's    snuff-box.  109 


CHAPTEE  YIIL 

THE    devil's    snuff-box. 

It  was  the  day  before  Cottenliam  races,  and 
three  days  before  Slobury  races,  and  there  was  the 
din  of  great  preparation  in  the  stable  yard  at 
Swallowcliff  Castle,  for  Immenschikoff  was  just 
starting  for  the  Warminster  station,  under  convoy 
of  Mr.  Basse\d,  the  major,  and  Paddy  Blake,  now 
promoted,  to  his  infinite  pride  and  delight,  to  be 
odd  man  at  the  Cantelupe  stables.  Immenschikofi' 
having  run  "  a  good  horse ''  at  Salisbmy,  his 
enraptured  owner  (poor  boy!)  mad  about  him, 
had  him  guarded  like  a  queen  of  the  harem. 
No  touts  were  admitted  to  see  him,  even  at  his 
gallop  ;  no  photographs  were  allowed  to  be  taken 
of  him  for  fear  of  drugging.  Paddy,  indeed, 
mounted  guard  day  and  night,  and  would  almost 
have  shot  any  suspicious  interloper.  Cantelupe 
had  forgiven  Harker  his  sharp  practice  at  Bibury 
directly  because  it  had  been  unsuccessful ;  and 
Mrs.    Harker   still   had    matrimonial    hopes   for 


110  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

Cany,  when  time  liad  taught  the  young  gentleman 
humility.  Ah  !  clever,  pushing,  hopeful,  energetic 
Mrs.  Harker,  you  little  knew  where  his  first 
thoughts  had  wandered,  and  still  less  did  you 
know  the  path  taken  by  his  second.  The  schemer 
was  too  intent  on  her  own  narrow  aims  to  look  at 
the  outer  circles  of  the  taro-et.  A  taro-et  is  not 
all  gold  ;  and  those  who  don  t  touch  the  red  may 
sometimes  hit  the  white. 

The  major,  though  commander-in-chief  for 
Bassevi,  who  was  intent  on  purchasing  some  of 
Cantelupe's  family  Vandykes,  was  ignorant  of  the 
plot  he  was  brewing,  and  was  only  an  unconscious 
accent  in  the  racino;  business. 

The  major,  we  again  assert,  was  tremendous. 
There  he  was  in  the  great  paved  square  stable- 
yard  of  Swallowcliff  Castle,  shouting  to  the 
grooms  who,  in  the  absence  of  old  Mr.  Dawson, 
the  head  groom, — who  was  confined  to  his  bed 
with  gout,  (the  old  family  port  was  far  too  easily 
accessible  at  the  castle,) — were  now  as  well  disci- 
plined and  orderly  as  usual.  There  was  Paddy,  too, 
still  in  his  scarlet  coat  (that  he  would  no  more  23art 
with  than  a  king  with  his  coronation  robe,)  but 
with  decent  trowsers  and  shoes  on,  and  a  bran 
new  black  velvet  hunting-cap,  that  had  been 
rather  too  tight  for  Mr.  Cantelupe. 

There  were  grooms  scouring  bits  and  snafiles 


THE    devil's    snuff-box.  Ill 

boys  rubbing  bridoons  and  cheek  straps ;  men  npon 
all  fours  washing  the  wheels  and  rubbing  the 
23anels  of  a  dark-blue  and  a  bright-yellow  drag, 
two  vehicles  whi-eh  were  to  be  raced  to  Salisbury 
that  very  afternoon.  The  eight  horses  were  to  be 
put  to  at  half-past  three,  and  it  wanted  already 
only  a  quarter  to  the  hour. 

It  was  o^sdng-  to  the  exao-aerated  nature  of  the 

o  oo 

major,  and  not  arising  from  any  natural  or  national 
diffidence,  that  whatever  he  had  to  do  he  as- 
sumed a  power  above  and  below  his  commission. 
If  he  had  had  an  artillery  waggon  to  drive, 
he  would  instantly  have  ordered  a  general  charge 
of  cavalry  up  the  Pyrenees ;  if  he  had  been 
appointed  head  bottle-washer  at  the  Board  of 
Trade,  he  would  instantly  have  declared  war  on 
the  United  States.  So  it  was  now,  that  although 
chosen  only  to  superintend  the  journeys  of  Im- 
menschikofi",  till  after  he  had  run  for  the  Bibury 
races,  the  major  assumed  all  the  airs  of  a  master 
of  a  stud  ;  an  Osbaldiston,  Gully,  Lord  Glasgow, 
and  Mr.  M'George,  rolled  into  one.  If  bawling 
and  railing  was  to  earn  his  money,  he  certainly  was 
earning  it.  The  grooms,  though  secretly  cursing 
and  revihng  him,  openly  trembled  ;  Paddy  eyed 
him  Tvdth  humorous  approval  and  awe  ineffable. 

"  Look  alive  there,  you  impident  shtrap,"  he 
called  out  to  one  of  the  boy  helpers,  ''  or  FU  rub 


112  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

you  clown  with  this  oak  towel.  AVhy,  the  horses 
won't  be  ready  this  twelvemonth  ?  I'll  show  you 
who  I  am,  Tam  Johnson,  though  ye  do  keep  wink- 
ing at  Paddy  there  enough  to  knock  an  omnibus 
over.  There's  you  and  that  other  devil's  limb  of  a 
boy  you're  only  fit  to  keep  each  other  company  on 
the  treadmill  for  stealing  oats,  and  then  there'd  be 
a  pair  of  ye,  as  the  devil  said  to  his  knee-buckles. 
You're  afraid  of  work,  Tam,  and  work's  afraid  of 
you,  that's  what  it  is,  you  omadhaun.  Here,  let 
me  have  a  rub  at  the  panels,  you  only  keep  look- 
ing at  your  ow^n  ugly  gallows-bird  face  in  them." 
Then  the  major  fell  to  at  the  dark  blue  panels, 
singing  as  he  rubbed,  till  his  face  grew  as  red  as 
beet-root. 

"  In  beauteous  spring  birds  do  sing, 

And  cheer  each,  myrtle  shade, 
And  shepherd  swains  serenade  the  plains, 

To  find  their  lambs  that  strayed. 
Nigh  Roden's  grove  I  chanced  to  rove, 

To  take  a  rurial  walk, 
When  to  my  sight  appeared  in  white 

The  star  of  sweet  Dundalk." 

The  major  all  at  once  stopped  to  rate  the 
sharp  boy  who,  thinking  singing  the  order  of  the 
day,  had,  during  this  Dublin  street  ditty,  com- 
menced on  his  own  responsibility  to  hum, 

"  My  love  he  was  a  carpenter,  only  nineteen  years  old," 

"  Musha,  bad  luck  to  your  impidence.     If  yir 


THE    devil's    snuff-box.  113 

don't  stop  that  caterwaulin,  saltpetre  ^^ont  save 
you,  and  that's  a  shtrong  pickle.  You  boys  there, 
come  put  the  horses  to  smartly,  the  master  will  be 
here  directly,  he's  only  giving  out  some  champagne 
to  mix  with  his  boot  blacking,  and  'deed  there's 
nothino'  comes  near  it  for  mixino;  for  it's  a  sociable 
liquor ; — Here,  somebody  teU  the  lads  who're  going 
behind  in  the  dicky  to  get  their  boots  on.  You 
Paddy,  run,  you're  the  nimblest  after  all.  Jack, 
my  lad,  lend  us  a  puff  of  your  dudheen  out  here,  it's 
dangerous  smoking  in  a  stable  full  of  straw,  though 
it  may  be  insured.  Hand  it  over,  you  ^dllain, 
and  then  bring  out  the  two  greys,  the  darlints. 

" '  Then  the  mortal  gods  dhrink  their  nectar  wine, 
And  they  tell  me  claret  is  very  fine, 
But  I'd  give  them  all,  just  in  a  bunch, 
For  one  big  pull  at  a  jug  of  punch. 

Toor-a-loo,  toor-a-loo,  toor-a-loo,  fol-lol-de-rholl, 

A  jug  of  punch  !  a  jug  of  punch  ! 
Oh  !  more  power  to  your  elbow,  my  jug  of  punch ! ! ' 

"  Pull  that  leg  after  you  cpiicker,  Tom.  One 
would  think  you'd  been  in  irons,  and  could  not 
forget  it.  You  are  like  all  your  Wiltshire  people, 
they  all  walk  like  flies  in  honey.  They  always 
fancy  they've  got  a  hundredweight  of  clay  on 
their  shoes,  bad  cess  to  'em,  but  whisht,  boys, 
here's  the  master,  and  I  mustn't  be  seen  deman- 
ing  myself  any  longer  with  hard  work." 

Swallowcliff  Castle  was  a  large,  grand,   dull- 


114  THE   VICAe's   courtship. 

looking  stone  building,  the  work  of  Inigo  Jones. 
The  stables  lay  in  the  direction  of  the  gardens,  to 
the  left  of  the  main  building,  and  were  approached 
by  a  covered  passage  leading  past  the  kitchens. 
Down  this  passage,  Cantelupe  and  half-a-dozen  of 
his    sponging   sporting   friends   appeared,   a  few 
minutes  after  the  court-yard  clock  had  struck  three. 
They  looked  rather  flushed  and  excited,  and  two 
or  three  of  them  held  billiard  cues  in  their  hands, 
whose   tips    ever   and    anon   they  screwed   into 
pieces  of  squeaking  chalk.     There  was  old  puffy 
Major  Filby,  very  red  in  the  face,  and  with  very 
stiff  knees.    There  was  Jack  Talbot  imperturbably 
cold  and  crafty,    pricking  with    his  penknife    a 
cigar  that  would  not  draw.     There  was  Captain 
Monsoon,  a  thirsty,   crusty  old    Indian,   a  dead 
hand  at  cards,  and  young  Chipway  of  the  Guards, 
who  had  stood  very  heavily  against  Immenschi- 
koff  at  Bibury.     One  or  two  trainers,  very  horsey 
and  livery-stably  in  dress  and  manners,  Bassevi, 
and  a  young  friend. of  Basse vi's,  who  had  also  come 
down  to  lend  money,  completed  the  party  of  hawks, 
vultures,  and  crows,  encircling  the  one  big  gull. 
Cantelupe,  who  carried   a  cue  over  his  shoulder, 
and  was  smoking  a  cigar  as  large  as  a  small  fife, 
began  directly  talking  to  the  major  in  a  pleasant 
and  affable  way,  but  with  an  occasional  hiccup. 
"  Well,  major,'^  he  said,  "  and  how's  Immen- 


THE    devil's    snuff-box.  115 

schikofF  looking  ?  Will  lie  run  a  good  horse.  Will 
hepuUitofff" 

"  Divil  doubt  him/'  replied  the  major,  with  the 
confidence  of  a  tried  warrior.  "  See  him  strike 
out  with  the  ofi"  hind  leg  in  yesterday's  gallop, 
and  you'd  lay  your  life  on  him.  '  Yellow  jacket's 
sure  to  win.'  Three  cheers,  boys  !  I'll  put  all  I 
got  on  him.  Would  I  do  that  if  1  hadn't  faith  in 
him  '?     Tom,  gently  there  with  those  horses." 

"  And  as  quick  as  you  like,"  said  Cantelupe. 
"  We've  got  a  match  on,  major,  I  and  Major 
Filby,  which  will  drive  to  Salisbury  market-place 
and  back  in  the  fewest  minutes.  There's  a  good 
deal  on,  so  mind  the  fellows  have  the  traces  all 
snug,  and  everything  up  to  the  right  hole." 

"  Any  touts  been  sneaking  about,  major?  "  said 
Talbot,  looking  inconceivably  knowing  and  cun- 
ning, as  he  held  his  head  aside  to  Avatch  the 
major,  who  was  waving  his  hand  to  the  men  who 
were  haulino;  at  the  second  drao-  and  brinejino; 
out  the  bays  to  harness. 

"  If  any  come,  pump  on  them,  my  boy,"  said 
Filby,  "  I  always  told  them  to  at  Lord  Bogmire's, 
it  benefits  touts  morally,  and,  by  Gad,  physically 
too,  for  they  generally  want  washing." 

"  There  was  one  of  those  Yorkshire  rascals  from 
Barker's  here  this  morning,  almost  before  we 
were  up,"  said  the  major,  addressing  himself  more 

I  2 


116  THE   VICAE's    courtship. 

especially  to  Bassevi  and  Cantelupe,  and  rather 
ignoring  Filby,  who,  when  not  fulsome  was  offen- 
sive, and  who  was  eyeing  the  canary-coloured 
drag  rather  contemptuously;  "he  wanted  to  see 
Immenschikoif." 

"But  he  didn't '? "  said  Cantelupe  eagerly,  and 
for  him  rather  suspiciously. 

"  Not  he  ;  not  for  Joseph,  oh  no,  no,  not  if  he 
knows  it.  No,  we  wouldn't  let  even  the  tip  of 
his  nose  into  the  yard,  so  then  he  got  riled  and 
wanted  to  fight  Paddy,  who,  he  said,  was  a  spy, 
and  had  told  us  all  the  secrets  of  his  masters 
stables,  and  he  called  me  a  bagman,  and  if  he 
hadn't  backed  out  directly,  begor  I'd  have 
knocked  the  head  off  him.  The  dirty  blackgyard, 
he  was  up  to  no  good,  I  take  it,  but  he  won't 
come  here  again." 

*•  Would  yoa  fellows  who've  laid  me  odds  like 
to  see  the  animal  ? "  said  Cantelupe,  speaking 
loud  and  firmly  by  a  great  effort,  his  usual  tone 
of  voice  being  that  of  a  sick  lion. 

"  Immensely,"  said  Filby.  Then  all  the  rest 
said,  "  Yes,  by  Jove,"  or  ''  thanks,  very  much  ; 
trot  him  out,  Fitz." 

"  Bring  out  Immenschikoff,  d'ye  hear  there," 
shouted  the  major,  in  his  commander-in-chief 
manner,  and  two  grooms  instantly  ran  into  the 
stable  to  bring  out  the  favourite. 


THE   devil's    snuff-box.  117 

"By  the  bye,"  said  Cantelupe  to  one  of  tlie 
grooms  who  was  busy  at  the  yellow  drag,  "  did 
you  ride  over  early  to  the  Abbey,  as  I  told  you, 
to  ask  for  Miss  Eobinson  ?  " 

''  Yes,  sir,"  said  the  man,  touching  his  hat. 
''  I  went,  sir,  and  Miss  Eobinson  is  much  better 
to-day.^' 

"  Jack,"  said  Cantelupe  to  Talbot  aside,  "  Td 
take  that  girl  now  with  only  a  thousand,  by 
George  I  would,  and  think  myself  lucky  too." 

"  I  couldn't  do  it  at  the  figure,  Fitz,"  said 
Talbot,  "  but  I  think  I  might  sacrifice  myself 
to  the  Harker  girl  for  ten." 

''I  was  just  saying  to  Monsoon,  old  fellow," 
said  Filby  to  Cantelupe,  in  his  most  gushing 
manner,  "  that,  by  Jove,  I  didn't  think  there  was 
a  fellow  in  all  the  mortal  world  knew  as  much 
about  horses  as  you  do.  There's  no  getting  to 
windward  of  you.  There's  no  putting  you  in  the 
hole,  as  I  told  Lord  Mazagan  the  other  day,  when 
I  met  him  at  Trotterley's." 

"  Come  none  of  that,  Fil,"  said  Cantelupe,  "  you 
are  going  to  let  me  in,  you  know  you  are." 

"  No,  'pon  my  soul,  I'm  not.  I  wdsh  I  could, 
eh,  Shivy.  You're  a  deuced  deal  too  doclgey 
for  me." 

"  And  how  are  you,  Paddy  "?  "  said  Cantelupe, 
going  up  in  a  pleasant  sort  of  way  to  Pat,  who 


118  THE    VICAPv's    COURTSHIP. 

was  stroking  down  one  of  the  four  greys  in  tlie 
blue  drag,  "why,  you  look  something  like  a 
sportsman  now.  Put  any  money  on  Immen- 
schikoff?" 

"  Put  money  on,  sir,  why  Fd  put  a  hatful  if  I 
had  it.  I  know  you  always  run  your  horses  on  the 
square,  and  this  is  a  topj^er.  I  shall  put  the  pot 
on  him,  your  honour.  There  never  was  such  a 
horse,  and  I'll  risk  fifteen  crowns  on  him.'' 

"  Then  put  that  too,  Paddy,"  said  Cantelupe, 
handing  the  enthusiast  a  five  pound  note  out  of 
his  portmonnaie,  "  and  mind  you  keep  a  good 
guard  over  him.'' 

"  Lord  bless  your  kind  heart !"  said  Paddy,  his 
eyes  kindling  with  delight  as  he  made  half  a 
hundred  bows,  "  no  tout  shall  get  near  him, 
unless  he  hides  in  a  cobweb,  or  comes  down  in 
the  small  rain.  Ah  !  here's  the  beauty.  A  pound 
to  a  shilling  on  the  pet  of  the  Cantelupe  stables. 
Any  one  bet  ? " 

"  Do  you  think  Fitz  is  run  hard  ?  "  said  Filby, 
aside  to  Bassevi,  who  was  Avatching  the  scene  as 
a  carrion  crow  watches  a  sick  lamlj.  "  They  say 
he's  positively  head  over  ears." 

"  Well,  he's  going  the  pace,"  answered  Bassevi, 
cautiously,  "  but  the  estate  is  a  good  estate,  and 
if  he  marries  Miss  Harker,  he'll  pull  in." 

The  appearance  of  Immenschikoff  stopped  the 


THE   devil's   snuff-box.  119 

conversation.  The  favourite  was  a  slio^^y,  rather 
leggy  golden  chestnut,  with  three  white  stockings, 
light  below  the  knee,  and  tapering  far  too  much 
from  his  arm  to  the  ground ;  his  hocks  were  rather 
straight  and  weak,  and  his  high  withers  denoted 
an  inability  to  stay. 

"  Good  for  a  short  distance,"  whispered  Filby 
to  Bassevi. 

"Very  short,''  whispered  Bassevi  back,  "not 
my  style — but  still  he  can  go." 

"  Too  heavy  in  the  shoulder,"  whispered  Mon- 
soon to  Talbot. 

"  Back  ribs  too  light,"  whispered  Chipway. 

''  Turns  out  his  toes,"  said  one  dealer  to  the 
other. 

Then  aloud.  "Ten  pounds  better  than  when  I 
saw  him  last,"  said  Filby. 

"  Very  game  horse,"  said  Monsoon. 

"  Immense,"  observed  Talbot. 

"  Beat  ever}'i;liing,"  cried  Bassevi. 

"  Jimmy  Jackson  says  he  never  crossed  such  a 
horse,"  said  Cantelupe,  much  pleased  at  the  unani- 
mous outburst  of  admiration.  *'  He's  immensely 
fast,  and  he's  got  the  pluck  of  a  lion  when  he's 
called  on.  If  he  was  a  little  closer  knit  I  would 
not  part  with  him  for  four  thousand  guineas." 

"  Isn't  his  shoulder  a  trifle  loaded,  Fitz  ? "  said 
Filby,  thoughtfully. 


120  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

"I  don't  see  it,  Fil,  but  tlien  love  is  blind. 
What  do  you  say,  Jack  ?  " 

"  Not  a  bit — fine  animal,  cut  them  all  down. 
Still,  Fitz,  I  shall  go  in  for  the  field,  just  for 
variety." 

"And  so  will  I,"  said  Filby,  "but  I  tell  you 
all  frankly,  it  is  an  A  1  horse,  and  I  don't  think 
anything  can  stop  him  winning ;  but  there  would 
be  no  sport  if  we  are  all  on  one  side." 

"That's  what  I  say,"  remarked  Chip  way,  "and 
how  we  shall  be  put  in  the  hole  if  he  goes  the 
tremendous  bat  he  did  at  Salisbury." 

These  birds  of  prey  had  their  claws  deep  in  the 
wool  of  this  sick  sheep,  and  the  moment  the 
destined  time  came  for  him  to  roll  on  his  back, 
they  would  all  be  at  his  eyes  at  once. 

"  I  tell  you  what,  Fitz,"  said  Filby,  his  eyes 
red  and  projecting  with  a  good  deal  too  much 
smoking,  and  rather  too  much  of  the  eau-de-vie 
(or  eau-de-mort,  the  esoteric  name  it  goes  by  in 
its  own  place),  "  I  tell  you  what,  Fitz,  my  boy, 
the  ladies  will  never  forgive  us  if  we  send  off 
this  superb  animal  without  their  seeing  it." 

"A  good  idea,"  said  Cantelupe.  "Major,  be 
kind  enough  to  have  Immenschikoff  brought  round 
to  the  drawing-room  windows  before  his  body 
clothes  are  put  on.  The  ladies  will  want  to  see 
him." 


THE    devil's    snuff-box.  121 

"Bless  their  hearts/'  said  the  gallant  major. 
''  Paddy,  you  and  I  will  take  him  round ;  mind 
he  doesn't  slip  on  the  stones,  or  you'd  better  be 
under  the  daisy  carpet  at  once  ma  bouchal." 

"  Eight  you  are,  sir,"  said  Paddy,  proud  of  the 
responsibility. 

"  I  really  believe.  Jack,"  said  Cantelupe  to 
Talbot,  as  they  trooped  back  to  the  house,  "  that 
that  Paddy  fellow  would  lay  down  his  life  for  me 
or  Immenschikoff." 

'•'  Decent  sort  of  a  blackguard,"  said  Jack.  "But 
I  dare  say  he'd  sell  you  and  the  horse,  and  his 
own  mother,  for  another  fiver." 

"  Well,  I  haven't  such  a  bad  opinion  of  people. 
It  is  very  easy  to  get  a  reputation  for  learyness  by 
suspecting  every  one,  but  I  really  don't  seem  to 
see  things  in  that  lio-ht." 

"But  you  will  when  you've  cut  down  the  last 
oak  in  the  avenue,"  thought  Talbot. 

A  few  minutes  after  Immenschikoff  came  round. 
He  really  looked  well  when  stripped — muscular, 
alert,  and  reasonably  well  bred,  but  his  eyes  were 
small  and  distrustful,  and  it  was  as  much  as 
Paddy  could  do  to  lead  him,  even  with  the  major 
as  commander-in-chief. 

The  owner,  Filby,  Bassevi,  and  the  other 
sponges,  toadies,  and  sharks,  were  aU  gathered  at 
the   window,  with  here   and   there   some   bold, 


122  THE   VICAH'S    COURTSHIP. 

pretty,  shameless  faces,  amongst  wliom  a  pink 
bonnet  and  a  little  black  hat,  Ayith  a  scarlet  tuft 
of  feathers,  were  not  least  conspicuous.  They  were 
all  laughing,  nodding,  and  "carrying  on,''  and 
every  one  held  aloft  a  broad-mouthed  glass  of 
creaming  champagne,  which  they  tossed  off  to 
the  health  and  success  of  Immenschikoff,  while 
Bassevi's  lurid,  wicked,  and  melancholy  eyes 
gloated  silently  on  the  scene. 

Cantelupe  suddenly  threw  up  the  window  and 
handed  the  major  and  Paddy  each  a  foaming 
glass. 

''Drink  this  fizz,''  he  said,  "major,  and 
then  please  be  off  at  once,  or  you'll  miss  the  5.30 
at  Warminster.  Immenschikoff  must  o^et  to  Cot- 
tenham  to-night.  Walk  him  quietly,  and  look 
out  for  the  touts — I  hear  they're  after  him.  Mr. 
Bassevi  will  ride  Avith  you.  Now,  then,  you 
fellows,  let's  toss  for  the  choice  of  drags." 

The  major  drank  the  champagne,  bowed  to  the 

ladies  with  the  gallantry  of  a  stage   nobleman, 

Paddy   gave    a   scream    of    triumph,   everybody 

cheered,  and  Immenschikoff  started  off. 

*  *  #  # 

Immenschikoff  reached  Warminster  a  little 
before  5  p.m.  He  was  immured  safely  in  a  horse 
box,  not  without  some  vicissitudes  of  temper,  and 
a  lively,  but  ineffectual,  attempt  to  dispose  of  the 


THE    devil's    SXUFF-BOX.  123 

major  and  to  kill  Paddy.  The  van  was  sliimted 
to  a  siding,  attached  to  some  empty  second-class 
carriages,  and  left  nearly  opposite  the  open  door  of 
the  time-keeper  s  shed.  There  was  no  one  at  the 
station  but  the  newspaper  boy  at  the  book  stall, 
a  railway  porter,  and  two  countr}Tiien.  One  of 
these  two  was  a  gamekeeper,  not  a  tawny,  frosty 
gamekeeper,  reddened  by  weather,  but  a  pale- 
looking,  dissipated  keeper,  with  a  rough  red  beard, 
and  a  wide-a-wake  low  over  his  eyes.  He  wore 
the  usual  stained  brown  velveteen  jacket  and 
rusty  leggings,  and  held  a  long  ash  stick  in  his 
hand,  like  a  spear  rather  than  a  walking  stick. 
The  man  with  him,  also  rather  pale,  had  big  black 
whiskers,  wore  a  dirty,  leaden-coloured  smock, 
and  had  a  flag  basket,  like  a  carpenter's,  on  his 
shoulder.  They  were  pacing  mopily  up  and  down, 
waiting  for  the  Bath  train. 

"  Don't  let  him  be  a  moment  out  of  sight, 
major,"  said  Basse vi,  as  the  two  men  turned  into 
the  refreshment-room,  '"  and  Til  g;o  and  have  a 
drain ;  Tm  parched  up  with  all  that  infernal 
pop." 

"  Ah !  it  can  t  put  a  patch  on  the  Charle- 
magne," said  the  major,  "you  should  taste  that, 
my  boy,  that's  the  stufl';  Ijy  the  piper  that  played 
before  Moses,  it  bano-s  Banna o-her.  It  is  some- 
thin  or  to  remember,  Shiv." 


124  THE   VICARS    COUETSHIP. 

Bassevi,  the  moment  lie  entered  the  refresh- 
ment-room, turned  round,  gave  a  look  down  the 
platform  and  a  look  up,  then  walked  straight  to 
the  counter  where  the  two  men  stood,  and  winked 
with  a  look  of  diabolical  cunning.  The  conver- 
sation was  curt. 

"  Got  the  stuff  ?  "  said  the  pseudo  keeper. 

"  All  right — here  in  this  wiper,''  and  Bassevi 
pulled  out  a  red  handkerchief,  containing  two  of 
those  dry,  brown,  puff  fungi  that  the  Wiltshire 
gipsies  call  "  the  devil's  snuff-boxes."  Their  seed 
is  a  fine  snuff-coloured  pungent  dust,  highly 
poisonous,  and  capable  of  growing  inside  the 
person  or  animal  who  swallows  it,  doing  no  harm 
for  some  days,  but  shortly  swelling  and  spreading 
its  fibres  into  all  the  chief  vessels  till  death 
ensues  in  about  a  week,  unless  aromatic  vinegar 
(the  only  antidote)  is  given  in  time. 

Bassevi  shook  out  a  little  of  the  subtle  dust, 
to  show  that  it  was  there,  then  knotted  up  the 
handkerchief  and  thrust  it  into  the  second  man's 
ready  basket. 

''That'll  do  the  trick,  Monty,"  he  said. 
"  Keep  your  eyes  open.  When  are  the  niggers 
coming  '? " 

''They're  due  now,  Shiv.  We'll  be  all  there 
when  they  come.  Draw  your  two  fellows  off  to 
them  directly,  and  keep  between  them  and  the 


THE   devil's   SXUFF-BOX.  125 

horse-box.  Mind,  Shiv,  you  sliare  the  swag  square 
as  we  did  mth  the  Avhite  sauce." 

"  Good — come  let  me  shout.  Here,  Mary,  three 
sixes  of  pale  brandy,  and  smart,  my  girl." 

The  brandy  was  served — the  best  and  firiest 
potato  spirit — the  tlu'ee  men  tossed  it  down ; 
at  that  moment  a  fellow  with  a  painted  face, 
large  false  nose,  conical  hump,  and  dirty-striped 
red  and  white  Punch  dress,  entered  from  the  street 
by  the  glass-door,  followed  by  four  other  men, 
dressed  as  nigger  minstrels,  with  banjos,  bones, 
and  tambourines.  They  came  in  chattering  their 
sham  talk,  the  Irishman  asserting  himself  strongly 
through  the  lamp  black  ;  their  coarse  lips  very 
red,  their  eyes  very  white,  their  wigs  very- 
woolly. 

"  Here  we  are  again.  How  do,  jebblemen — 
how  are  you  to-morrow.  Here,  my  lovely  Loosy, 
five  threes  neat  of  gin,  and  here's  the  ready. 

The  two  first  men  exchanged  looks,  and 
whispered  to  Punch. 

"  Om^  little  game  is  on  the  far  right  end  of 
the  platform,  keep  'em  going  while  we  do  the 
doctoring." 

"  Eight  ye  are,"  screamed  Punch.  "  Darkies, 
are  you  all  outside  your  liquor  1  Well  then, 
strike  up.  '  I  once  knew  a  nigger,  and  his  name 
was  Uncle  Ned.'     I'll  do  the  patter.     Now  alto- 


126  THE   vicar's    COUETSHIP. 

getlier.  Eootle,  tootle,  rottle,  rooooootle.  Take 
your  seats,  jebblemen,  here's  the  limited  express  ; 
take  your  seats,  darkies,  in  the  night  mail  north/' 

As  they  moved  to  the  platform,  singing  and 
playing,  preceded  by  the  ribald  grimacing  fellow 
in  the  Punch  dress,  who  cut  the  strangest  capers 
and  fandangoed  about  like  a  musical  conductor 
gone  mad  on  the  subject  of  dancing,  at  the 
end  of  every  verse.  Bones,  a  man  with  a  melan- 
choly serious  face,  and  enormous  large  sharp  shirt 
collars,  executed  a  sort  of  fantastic  waltz  oppo- 
site the  signal  shed,  where  the  points  were.  The 
tambourine  player  beat  his  head,  elbow,  knees, 
and  toes,  with  his  instrument ;  Bones  rioted  in 
rattling  ecstasies. 

'^  Now  then.  Jack  the  Giant  Collar,''  screamed 
Punch,  ''  give  us  the  last  kick  out  as  patronised 
by  the  royal  family.  The  jebblemen  of  the  long 
robe  object  to  the  short  dresses  of  the  ballet 
dancers,  but  they  can't  get  hold  of  us,  Mr. 
Bones,  that's  a  consolation.  I  say,  Bones,  do 
you  know  the  best   motto  for  a  bottle  of  hair 

dyer; 

"  Give  it  up,  Mr.  Punch,"  said  Bones,  after 
rolling  his  eyes  horribly. 

''Now  don't  you  tell — the  best  motto  for  a 
bottle  of  hair  dye,  Bones,  is — Keep  it  dark! 
Yah,  yah,  yah,  rootle,  tootle,  rooooootle.     Now 


THE    devil's    SXUFF-BOX.  127 

then,  darkies,  let's  have  a  sentimental  chant. 
Bones,  you've  got  a  beautiful  tenor,  please  to  take 
round  the  hat,  and  then  give  us 

"  Come  where  my  love  lies  dreaming, 
Dreaming  the  happy  hours  away  ; " 

or,  if  the  musical  pitch  is  so  altered  that  you 
can't  pitch  into  it  no  how,  and  the  key  of  the 
front  door  is  lost  by  Mr.  Sims  Eeeves,  please  to 
oblige  us.  Bones,  with  that  high  feinting,  and  very 
charming  song — 

"  The  mocking  bird  sits  singing  on  the  tree, 
The  mocking  bird  :  hark  !  'tis  the  mocking  bird, 
0  the  mocking  bird  sits  singing  on  the  tree." 

By  this  time,  by  a  sure  and  irresistible  mag- 
netism, the  major  and  Paddy  had  been  drawn 
almost  imperceptibly  to  Bassevi's  side,  with  their 
backs  to  the  horse-box,  towards  -which  the  keeper 
and  his  man  had  gradually  and  quite  as  imper- 
ceptibly sidled. 

"Now  then,  my  jolly  blackbirds,  sing  me  'the 
Eakes  of  Mallow,'"  shouted  the  major,  "and, 
bedad,  I'll  stand  glasses  round  to  the  health  of 
ould  Ireland." 

There  was  a  moment's  pause.  Punch  whispered 
to  Bones,  and  then  to  one  of  the  banjo  players, 
who  instantly  began  the  song,  with  an  irrestrain- 
able  Cork  brogue,  the  rest  chiming  in  in  rather  a 


128  THE   VICAE's    COUETSHIP. 

lame  chorus,  for  they  scarcely  knew  the  tune, 
and  certainly  not  the  words.  The  major  was 
delighted,  Paddy  was  in  ecstasies.  Bassevi  turned 
and  gave  the  signal,  three  coughs.  The  audience 
had  no  eyes  or  ears  but  for  the  singers,  even  the 
pointsman  had  joined  the  crowd. 

That  moment  the  keeper  s  man  leaped  lightly 
up  on  the  horse-box,  rested  on  the  wheel,  cried 
out,  for  fear  he  should  be  seen,  "AVhy,  Jack, 
look  here's  Immenschikoff,  you  never  saw  him 
before;" — and  thrust  a  bit  of  hay,  filled  with  the 
deadly  gipsy  powder,  into  the  snapping  and 
ready  jaws  of  the  heedless  horse. 

As  the  two  men  again  joined  the  crowd,  care- 
lessly joining  in  the  chorus,  the  major  called  out 
to  Paddy, — 

"  Eun  and  order  glasses  round.  111  pay  the 
piper.  It's  ten  minutes  now  to  the  train,  and  I'll 
go  back  and  keep  guard  on  Immenschikoff.  He's 
not  safe  for  a  moment.  I  know  these  tout  fel- 
lows and  there  may  be  some  here.  Put  your 
best  leg  forward,  Paddy,  ma  bouchal,  and  I'll  be 
sentinel." 

Ah !  Argus,  Argus.  Mercury's  lyre  closed  all 
thy  hundred  eyes  and  thou  awoke  too  late,  and 
only  to  find  the  Thessalian  sword  trembling  above 
thy  shuddering  heart. 

When  the   major  went  to    Immenschikofi"  to 


THE    devil's    snuff-box.  ]29 

stroke  him  do^^Ti,  and  give  him  a  bit  of  hay,  there 
was  froth  about  his  mouth,  his  eyes  glared,  and 
he  kicked  savagely  at  the  padded  sides  of  the 
horse-box. 

"  He's  a  good  un  to  go,  Paddy,"  said  the  major, 
"  but  Job's  own  wife  hadn't  half  such  a  divil  of  a 
temper." 

Five  minutes  later,  the  London  train  glided  in 
with  a  boding  scream ;  Punch  gave  a  farewell 
"tootle,  tootle,"  took  off  his  dirty  striped  head- 
dress to  the  major,  nodded  to  Basse vi,  and  while 
his  companions  struck  up — 

"Campdo-vvn  race-coorse,  two  mile  long-, 
With,  a  Dood-da,  Doo-da" 

went  off  with  the  keeper  and  his  man  ;  the 
major  and  Bassevi  took  their  seats  for  Cotten- 
ham,  while  Paddy  vaulted  into  the  safe  side  of 
the  box  that  held  Immenschikoff  and  the  hopes  of 
Fitzegbert  Cantelupe. 


VOL.   III. 


180  THE   vicar's   courtship. 


CHAPTEE  IX. 

THE   ROUGH   RECEPTION. 

In  the  good  old  stories  of  mythology,  the  hero's 
danger  generally  implies  the  hero's  deliverance. 
The  inventor,  who  seems  to  have  been  too  good- 
hearted  or  too  fond  of  his  creations  to  destroy 
them  in  the  modern  sensational  way,  generally 
provides  a  Deus  strong  enough  to  unloose  the 
Gordian  knot  that  the  poet's  art  has  woven.  But, 
alas  !  in  real  life  when  Andromeda  is  bound  naked 
to  the  rock  the  sharp  biting  cords  of  fate  eat  into 
her  soft  pliant  limbs  ;  slowly  or  swiftly  upheaving 
out  of  the  blind  waste  of  surging  waters,  emerges 
the  greedy  and  ruthless  monster  with  glittering 
crimson  teeth  and  fiery  dilating  eyes ;  and  too 
often,  alas  !  from  no  white  cloud  poised  over  the 
setting  sun  descends  Perseus,  glittering  in  magic 
mail,  and  upborne  on  the  azure  wings  of  a  heaven- 
stabled  Hippogriif. 

Guilty  or  repentant,  time  brings  to  many  a 
miserable,  erring,  wretched  son  of  Adam,  at  the 


THE   ROUGH   RECEPTION.  131 

destined  hour,  the  drop  that  is  to  fall  under  his 
feet,  the  balanced  axe  that  is  to  descend  on  his 
strained  neck.     Pitiless  are  Time  and  Fate,  and 
we  sow  that  we  do  reap.     The  deluge  was  fast 
rising  to  the  Vicarage  door ;  already,  indeed,  it 
was  washing:  over  the  threshold.     The  avalanche 
trembled  to  its  fall ;  the  fire  smouldered  that  was 
soon  to   sweep   all   before  it.     Faster  and  faster 
grew  the  iU  weeds  of  debt ;  quick  as  the  fairy  bean- 
stalk they  spread  and  tangled,   till    Beauflower 
fairly  lost  his  way  in  the  dark  forest  of  them. 
There  was  another  Oxford  tailor's  bill,  30Z. ;  the 
Ohetwynd  Dilapidation  Fund,  120^.   to  replace; 
25?.  of  Charity  Funds  dnxwn  to  pay  the  builder  s 
weekly  demand,  to  be  restored;    the  insurance 
was  comino'  on  ao^ain  ;  and  there  was  Pitts's  bill, 
and   the   bill   of    the   Slobury   grocer,    together 
19?.   105.  2cL     In  fact,  to  secure  money  for  in- 
dispensable current  expenses, — to  provide  501.  for 
a  marriage  tour,  and  to  preserve  his  credit  and 
honour,  and  happiness,  the  Vicar  could  not  do  with 
less  than  300?.,  and  that  would  still  leave  arrears. 
"What  was  to  be  done  ?     "Where  to  look  for  help  '? 
Heaven  was  dark  and  lowering ;  Earth  shut  her 
ears.     Friends  there  were  none  available.     How 
could  he  ask  Goodrick,  with   his  hard,  cynical 
opinions  on   debt   and   improvidence '?     Besides, 
why  lose  friends  by  the  old  miserable  way  of 

K   2 


132  THE   vicar's   COUETSHIP. 

borrowing  money  1  lie  remembered  the  hurt  pride, 
and  over  exigent  demands  for  gratitude  usual  with 
poor  humanity  in  such  cases.  No  !  Beauflower  was 
at  that  age  when  opinions  sometimes  crystallise  in 
a  moment  into  determinations.  He  would  never 
ask  friends  for  money  whatever  his  necessities. 
Come  prison,  workhouse,  starvation,  better  than 
that  torture.  No  !  he  would  apply  only  to  money 
lenders,  or  comparative  strangers,  whom  he  could 
repay  with  interest  at  whatever  sacrifice,  at  the  next 
tithe  day.  There  was  but  one  other  resource,  and 
that  was  the  sure,  but  disagreeable  one,  of  apply- 
ing to  Mr.  Harker.  The  plea  to  be  used  was 
obvious.  The  constant  drain  of  money  for  the 
church  before  all  the  subscriptions  could  be  got 
in.  It  was  merely  to  ask  the  loan  of  300^.  till 
the  next  January,  when  his  tithes  came  in,  and 
that  would  give  him  two  more  payments  before 
he  need  restore  the  money.  He  should  offer  inte- 
rest, and  that  of  course  (graciously  or  ungraciously 
it  really  did  not  much  matter)  would  be  refused. 
One  gulp  and  hurt  pride  Avould  be  got  down. 

His  mother  and  sister  had  gone  out  to  tea  at  the 
Chetwynds,  and  the  Vicar  had  dined  late  on  his 
return  from  Fontford,  where  the  two  Irish  ruffians 
had  been  sent  to  Salisbury  gaol  for  three  months' 
hard  labour  and  to  be  twice  whipped.  It  was 
two  hours  after  his  six  o'clock  dinner  that,  sit- 


THE    ROUGH   RECEPTION.  133 

ting  by  his  fire,  (for  it  was  a  wet  niglit)  Beau- 
flower  suddenly  resolved  on  instant  action.  He 
seized  his  hat,  umbrella,  and  gloves,  screwed  down 
his  moderator  lamp,  locked  up  these  detestable 
truth-telling-  account  books  that  he  had  been 
consulting,  put  up  Zoe,  his  favourite  kitten,  in  the 
snuggest  cushioned  corner  of  his  easy  chair,  and 
pressed  its  soft  little  head  between  its  white 
front  paws,  till  it  purred  in  soothing  gratitude. 

As  the  Vicar  descended  into  the  hall,  he  opened 
the  kitchen  door,  where  Mary  was  singing  like 
a  sleepy  thrush  while  George  cleaned  the  knives 
in  the  outhouse,  and  the  placid  cook  darned  a 
stocking,  and  told  her  to  get  tea  ready  at 
nine.  He  was  going  to  the  Abbey  on  business, 
and  he  should  not  stop  longer  than  that. 

As  he  opened  the  hall  door,,  the  petulant 
driving  rain  darted  in  his  face  in  sharp  flying 
lines,  and  a  splash  of  wet  came  down  on  his 
patient  umbrella  from  the  \ine  and  roses  over  the 
porch.  The  rain  sounded  loud  upon  the  leaden 
roof  of  the  porch,  and  pattered  loud  on  the  broad 
glazed  leaves  of  the  laurels  and  aucubas.  He 
went  back  and  got  his  great  brown  driving  coat, 
then,  equipped  in  stout  armom% 

"Broadclotli  "without,  an  honest  heart  within," 

sallied  forth  defiant  of  the  elements,  and  master 


134  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

of  all  skyey  influences  tliat  a  fickle  English 
summer  could  summon.  Pluck  always  meets 
its  own  reward ;  before  he  had  well  passed  the 
great  echoing  arch,  the  rain  beat  slower,  and 
gradually  died  away.  Few  sounds  greeted  the 
Vicar  in  that  sombre  walk  except  now  and  then 
the  scream  and  flutter  of  some  water  bird  on  the 
lake;  but  his  lode-star  was  the  great  shining 
house  yonder,  the  temple  of  his  goddess.  It  was 
for  her  he  had  trampled  on  his  pride.  The  great 
pretentious  ugly  house  was  sacred  to  him  now. 
It  was  the  casket  that  held  his  treasure,  he 
loved  it  for  her  sake,  and  having  a  deep  and 
earnest  belief  in  an  all-ruling  Deity,  he  prayed  to 
God  to  bless  her  and  also  the  house  that  sheltered 
her.  Half  that  prayer  was  heard,  the  rest  the 
night  wind  from  the  terraces  swept  away  into 
the  darkness,  which  as  yet  spread  unredeemed  by 
any  star. 

As  Beauflower  pulled  the  bell,  the  thought  that 
he  might  catch  some  glimpse  of  Amy  thrilled 
through  his  heart.  The  servants  showed  no  great 
alacrity  in  coming  to  the  door,  which,  after  some 
minutes,  was  opened  by  Eoberts  the  butler,  who 
looked  pale  and  bullied,  (he  had  that  morning 
had  to  produce  his  half-year's  wine  account, 
which  had  not  been  altogether  so  satisfactory  as 
could  have  been  wished)  and  he  limped  with  a 


THE   ROUGH   RECEPTION.  135 

slight  attack  of  gout — a  disease  of  the  old  school, 
which  has  a  partiality  for  butlers.  He  looked 
rather  hurt  and  distressed  at  the  apparition  of 
a  visitor.  Yes,  Mr.  Harker  was  at  home,  just 
gone  into  his  study  after  dinner — not  very  well ; 
not  very^  usual  to  disturb  him  at  that  time,  but 
he  would  certainly  see.  Would  Mr.  Beauflower 
walk  into  the  drawing-room  ? 

It  was  not  the  first  time  the  Vicar  had  called 
after  dinner  on  parish  business,  but  latterly  the 
two  families  had  been  on  less  friendly  terms. 
Beauflower  said  he  would  not  walk  in,  but 
preferred  waiting  at  the  door.  AVhile  he  stood 
there  with  Wasp  scratching  at  the  door-mat,  he 
heard  Ethel,  on  some  upper  landing,  laughing 
and  calling  Amy ;  but  no  glimpse  of  "  the 
beatific  ^dsion  "  was  vouchsafed  to  him.  Eoberts 
returned  in  about  five  minutes  with  rather  an 
alarmed  manner,  and  said,  in  rather  a  deprecating 
way,  if  ]\Ir.  Beauflower  would  walk  in  ]\Ir.  Harker 
could  give  him  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  but  at  a 
quarter  past  eight  he  expected  one  of  his  bailifis 
on  particular  business. 

This  did  not  augur  a  very  pleasant  or  apropos 
visit ;  but  the  Vicar,  with  his  foot  once  on  the 
ladder,  had  determined  to  try  and  scale  the  wall. 
The  excuse  he  had  planned  so  shielded  his  pride, 
that  he  felt  no  distrust  and  no  uneasiness.    When 


136  THE   VICAe's    courtship. 

Eoberts  threw  open  tlie  study  door,  Mr.  Harker 
was  standing  with  one  foot  on  the  iron  lid  of  the 
tank  which  we  have  before  described,  and  had 
one  hand  on  the  small  key  of  the  padlock  that 
fastened  it.  He  looked  round  rather  angrily  at 
his  evidently  unwelcome  visitor,  but  did  not 
invite  him  to  take  a  chair,  nor  did  he  sit  down 
himself. 

Beauflower  apologised  for  the  intrusion  at  so 
unusual  an  hour,  to  which  Mr.  Harker  made  no 
reply,  but  began  abruptly  discussing  the  restor- 
ation of  the  church. 

"I  see  your  fellows  are  getting  on,"  he  said, 
"but  I  sup|)ose,  as  usual,  they'll  run  it  up  to 
twice  the  amount  of  the  contract.  They'll  make 
you  suggest  alterations,  and  then  double  the 
estimate." 

"  I  hope  not  and  I  think  not,"  said  the  Vicar, 
rather  drily,  for  he  did  not  like  Mr.  Harker 's 
sneering  manner. 

"  You  clergymen  are  not  men  of  business,  and 
they  do  what  they  like  with  you ;  by  the  bye, 
I  have  been  thinking  I  ought  not  to  let  you  go 
on  with  the  supposition  that  I'm  going  to  make 
up  all  the  deficiencies ;  there  is  too  much  ex- 
pected of  us  rich  people.  I  shall  not  give  a 
farthing  more  than  the  fifty  pounds  I  first  sent. 
You  must  not  rely  on  me  for  any  more.    You  must 


THE   ROUGH   RECEPTION.  137 

remember  I  never  approved  of  the  restoration, 
never  saw  the  necessity  for  it,  and  being  a 
ritualist,  I  object  in  toto  to  the  style  in  which  it 
is  being  done." 

The  Vicar  looked  disappointed. 

''  I  strongly  condemn  the  way  in  which  you 
country  clergymen  always  do  these  things.  You 
resolve  to  raise  five  or  six  hundred  pounds.  Then 
without  the  least  clear  notion  of  how  the  money 
is  to  be  got — from  the  one  squire  or  two  or  three 
dogged  farmers — you  begin  the  building,  and 
saddle  yourself  with  a  heavy  debt.  Half  of  you 
embarrass  yourselves  for  life  in  this  absurd  way, 
out  of  mere  vanity  and  the  desire  to  have  a 
handsome  church." 

Beauflower's  spirit  rose.  ''In  this  case,  Mr. 
Harker,"  he  said,  "  though  I  may  not  altogether 
have  counted  the  cost,  there  was  no  vanity  in  the 
case.  The  old  tower  was  dangerous ;  the  archi- 
tect told  me  if  that  chief  clamp  once  loosened,  the 
tower  might  fall  any  time  the  bells  rang.  The 
mouldy  seats,  the  uneven  pavement,  the  green 
walls,  were  not  becoming  God's  house.  I  will 
never  submit  to  have  a  place  of  worship  a  ruin, 
while  my  own  house  is  luxurious." 

"  I'm  iron  on  these  subjects  ;  but  if  you  get  the 
money,  of  course  it  is  no  business  of  mine.  I  con- 
sented to  the  restoration,  you  can  now  do  as  you 


138  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

like.  By  the  bye,  Mr.  Beauflower/'  he  said,  "  take 
a  chair ;  I  wanted  to  speak  to  you  on  a  matter 
that  more  nearly  concerns  me.  (Harker  s  face 
reddened  with  anger  as  he  sat  down,  and  clutched 
a  torn  newspaper  which  lay  on  the  floor.)  I  want 
to  ask  you  whether  you  are  the  author  of  that 
letter  in  the  last  Salisbury  paper  signed  '  Draco.' '' 

"  I  did  not  write  it.'' 

"  Pray  did  you  suggest  to  the  writer  that  para- 
graph in  which,  after  alluding  to  the  murder  of 
Mr.  Travers  by  poachers,  the  writer  says,  *  I 
do  boldly  say  that  the  man  who  bred  game  in 
such  wanton  profusion,  was  as  much  guilty  of  the 
blood  of  the  murdered  man,  as  if  he  had  shot  him 
down  with  his  own  hand.'  Now  I  ask  you,  sir, 
on  your  honour  as  a  clergyman  and  a  gentleman, 
did  you  or  did  you  not  suggest  that  paragraph  "l " 
As  he  said  this,  in  a  furious  voice,  Mr.  Harker 
tore  the  paper  into  twenty  pieces,  and  stamped 
on  the  fragments. 

"Your  voice  and  manner,  Mr.  Harker,"  said 
Beauflower,  "are  such,  that  I  do  not  know  that 
I  am  bound  to  answer  questions  so  rudely  en- 
forced;  but,  as  your  minister  and  neighbour,  I 
will  forget  these  circumstances  and  answer  you 
frankly.  I  did  not  write  the  letter ;  I  did  not 
suggest  any  part  of  it,  and  I  do  not  know  who 
did.    I  am,  as  you  know,  an  enemy  to  the  present 


THE   ROUGH   RECEPTION.  139 

game  laws,  wMcli  I  think  are  cruelly  oppressive 
to  the  farmer,  and  utterly  demoralising  to  the 
poor ;  but  I  do  not  publish  these  opinions,  least 
of  all  anonymously/' 

"  Oh  no,"  said  Harker,  with  a  sardonic  sneer ; 
"  you  are  too  bold  and  blunt  to  wear  a  mask  ; 
you  strike  openly.  I  have  to  thank  you,  remem- 
ber, for  that  admirable  sermon  yesterday,  in  which 
you  mocked  at  my  origin,  and  held  me  up  to  my 
tenants'  contempt  as  a  landlord  who  sent  his 
tenants  in  their  old  age  to  pine  to  death  in 
the  workhouse.  Sir,  I  thank  you  for  the  very 
admirable  lesson  of  respect  and  obedience  that 
you  taught  the  poor.  I  now  understand  why 
my  faithful  servants  are  assassinated,  and  why 
my  own  life  is  in  hourly  danger.'' 

The  Vicar  was  thunderstruck.  "I  sketched," 
he  said,  ''the  men  of  all  classes  who  neglect  their 
duties,  without  any  thought  of  you." 

"  AVithout  thought  of  me,  sir !  Was  not  my 
father  a  steward  ?     Answer  me  that." 

"  I  did  not  remember  that  he  was  when  I  wrote 
my  sermon." 

"  A  likely  story.  You  shoot  a  man  from  behind 
a  wall,  and  then  say  you  did  not  think  he  was 
passing  by.  You  cannot  think  me  an  idiot.  It 
was  all  aimed  at  me.  My  cottages,  my  severity 
against    poachers,   my   cruelty,    as    you   call   it, 


140  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

against  lazy,  bad,  insolent,  and  dislionest  tenants. 
Everyone,  even  my  own  wife  and  children,  knew 
tlie  target  at  wliicli  you  aimed  your  poisonous 
darts." 

"  Mr.  Harker,  I  am  astonished  that  you  do  not 
know  me  better.  No  thought  of  you  entered 
my  mind.  If  I  differ  from  your  views  about 
the  poor,  I  should  not  use  such  a  method  of 
assailing  them.  I  animadverted  on  the  short- 
comings of  many  classes,  and  even  on  those  of  my 
own  profession." 

"  I  have  long  seen  your  ways,"  stormed  on  the 
unappeasable  man,  whom  no  calm  words  could 
soften.  *'  You  brought  that  friend  of  yours  here 
to  hold  me  up  to  ridicule  before  my  guests.  I 
never  forget  an  injury.  Neglect  of  duties,  indeed  ! 
And  who  are  you  '?  A  man  whom  all  the  parish 
know  to  be  plunged  in  a  slough  of  debt.  Perhaps 
even  now  you  have  come  about  some  loan;  but 
I  do  not  lend  to  mere  acquaintances — you  have 
wasted  your  time." 

"  Sir,"  said  Beauflower,  his  blood  boiling,  ''  I 
will  not  stay  here  to  submit  to  such  insults.  You 
cannot  be  aware  of  what  you  are  saying." 

"I  shall  come  no  more  to  your  church,  nor 
shall  any  one  of  my  servants.  You  shall  preach 
to  empty  walls.  I  shall  stop  all  my  subscriptions. 
Ill  not  be  preached  at  by  anyone." 


THE   ROUGH   RECEPTION.  141 

"  In  your  present  state  of  irritation,  and  as  my 
own  temper  is  fast  going,  I  will  wish  you  good 
night,"  said  the  Vicar,  putting  on  his  hat. 
"  Whether  I  again  set  foot  under  your  roof,  will  be 
a  subject  for  after  consideration.    Good  night,  su\'' 

The  Vicar  walked  out  of  the  study,  and  closed 
the  door  after  him.  As  he  passed  across  the  hall 
a  page-boy,  who  had  been  waiting,  and  not  im- 
probably listening,  ran  i\p  to  him  and  said — 

"  If  you  please,  Mr.  Beauflower,  Mrs.  Harker 
would  be  glad  to  see  you  in  the  dining-room,  for 
a  moment,  before  you  go." 

As  the  pert  little  rascal  preceded  him  through  a 
turning  leading  from  the  hall,  they  met  Amy,  who 
in  a  white  Garibaldi  and  blue  silk  skirts,  looked 
more  a  fairy  ]3rincess  than  ever.  There  was  only 
time  for  one  fond  longing  look,  one  loving  grasp 
of  the  little  hand,  and  they  parted.  Short  as  the 
interview  was,  the  page-boy  took  in  its  details 
very  fairly,  for  he  presently  reported  in  the  ser- 
vants' hall  that — 

"  My  eye,  didn't  he  squeeze  her  hand  ?  and 
didn't  she  give  him  a  look,  neither  ?  It's  all  right 
in  that  quarter." 

Miss  Caroline  Harker  was  playing  a  showy, 
difficult,  artless  piece  of  Moschelles,  when  the 
Vicar  entered,  but  at  a  look  of  her  worthy  mother 
she  instantly  got  up,  shook  hands  coldly  with  the 


142  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

visitor,  and  sailed  out  of  the  room  in  her  smirking 
artful  way.  Mrs.  Harker,  risiug  from  a  buhl  Da- 
venport at  which  she  was  writing  notes,  flounced 
down  gracefully  and  diplomatically  with  the 
frankest  and  most  winning  manner  in  her  pattern- 
book,  upon  a  round  topaz-coloured  damask  settee, 
and  invited  Beauflower  to  a  seat  beside  her. 

"  I  am  afraid,  my  dear  Mr.  Beauflower,"  she 
began  (her  first  parallel — the  old  soldier),  "that 
you  and  ]\Ir.  Harker  have  been  having  words.  I 
was  passing  through  the  hall,  and  I  could  hardly 
help  hearing  you.  You  are  both  too  impetuous. 
That  unfortunate  sermon  seems  to  have  very 
much  hurt  my  husband's  feelings.  You  clever 
young  men  are  often  so  wanting  in  tact." 

"I  assured  Mr.  Harker  that  I  had  no  thought  of 
him.  I  did  not  even  remember  at  the  time  I 
wrote  the  sermon,  that  his  father  had  ever  been 
a  steward,  nor  do  I  indeed  see  anything  to  be 
ashamed  of  in  a  humble  origin.  All  famihes 
sprung  from  the  earth.  My  great-grandfather  was 
a  Dutch  shipbuilder,  and  I  like  to  think  of  it." 

"  My  dear  young  man,"  said  Mrs.  Harker, 
smiling,  till  her  golden  ogress  tooth  glistened  in 
the  light  of  the  solar  lamp,  "  every  one  has  his 
weakness.  Some  people,  you  see,  like  to  forget  these 
things.  When  you  have  lived  longer  and  learned 
the  value  of  tact,  you  will  discover  this.  A]yropos 


THE   ROUGH   EECEPTION.  ]43 

de  hottes,  I  wanted  just  a  moment's  private  conver- 
sation witli  you,  my  dear  Mr.  Beauflower,  about 
our  pretty  little  governess,  Miss  Kobinson/' 

The  colour  rose  to  the  Vicar's  cheeks.  Was  his 
love  known,  too  ?  "WTiat  could  she  be  aiming  at  ? 
He  bowed  assent  and  readiness  to  listen,  and 
armed  for  the  defensive,  every  rivet  closed  and 
his  visor  down,  as  far  as  it  would  go. 

''  It  has  come  under  my  observation,  as  the 
natural  guardian  of  ]\Iiss  Eobinson  (we  women,  you 
know,  can  see  these  things  even  in  the  dark),  and 
it  has  also  been  reported  to  me  by  various  persons, 
whose  names  I  need  not  mention,  that  you  and 
Miss  Eobinson  are  in  love  with  each  other,  and 
constantly  meet  in  secret.'' 

"We  do  not  meet  in  secret.  Your  spies  are 
liars,"  said  Beauflower,  fmiously,  -and  storming 
in  on  the  only  half-completed  trenches  of  the 
artful  enemy.  "  We  meet  openly.  I  do  not  dis- 
guise that  I  am  in  love  with  Miss  Robinson.  I 
have  no  reason  to  be  ashamed  of  such  an  attach- 
ment." 

"  Far  from  it ;  far  from  it.  Be  j)atient.  I  only 
wish  to  help  forward  so  fitting  a  match — however 
much  I  may  regret  the  loss  of  Miss  Robinson's 
services  —  and  to  silence  the  busy  scandalous 
tono'ues  that — " 

''  Mrs.   Barker,"  said  Beauflower,    starting  up 


144  THE   vicar's    COUETSHIP. 

like  Satan  at  tlie  touch  of  Itliiiriers  spear,  though 
with  far  different  impulses,  "  I  will  not  sit  here  to 
listen  to  these  words.  No  one  but  yourself  and 
the  fawning  tale-bearers  that  surround  you,  and 
shape  their  reports  to  please  you,  would  dare  utter 
them.  I  make  no  secret  of  my  love  for  Miss 
Eobinson  ;  my  own  family  know  it." 

"And  her  family'?''  said  Mrs.  Harker,  softly. 
It  was  a  palpable  hit,  and  shook  the  head  of  the 
enemy's  column. 

"  They  ivill  know  it  to-morrow.  The  fainting 
state  Amy  was  in  when  I  rescued  her  from  those 
Irish  villains  the  other  day,  prevented  my  then 
speaking  as  I  had  intended." 

"  Then  you  really  intend  to  marry,  and  it  is  not  a 
mere  flirtation  ;  for  you  young  bachelor  clergymen 
are  such  terrible  wicked  flirts,  as  Carry  says." 

"  It  is  no  flirtation." 

"Is  the  day  fixed?" 

"  That  day,  Mrs.  Harker,  you  will  knoAV  in  due 
time." 

"  Now  you  are  not  angry?"  said  the  dehghted 
manoeuverer,  who  still  saw  hopes  of  landing  the 
coronetted  fish  that  hitherto  had  evaded  her  net, 
and  carried  off"  her  strongest  hooks. 

Beauflower  made  no  reply,  but  took  Mrs. 
Harker's  profl'ered  hand  coldly,  and  bowed  him- 
self out. 


THE   ROUGH   EECEPTION.  145 

It  was  then  that  Beauflower  felt  the  deep  abyss 
of  degradation  into  which  the  imprudence  of  two 
reckless  years  had  sunk  him.  Then  the  torture 
of  the  self-built  purgatory  began  in  very  deed, 
with  its  icy  darkness  and  mental  agony.  To  be 
talked  of  and  sneered  at  by  his  own  parishioners; 
pitied  by  some,  derided  by  others.  To  be  offered 
money  by  one  of  his  own  tithe-payers  ;  to  be 
despised  by  people  like  Pitts ;  to  be  netted  round 
and  dogged  by  money-lenders ;  to  be  driven 
to  seek  aid  of  an  ignoble  man  like  Harker ;  last 
of  all,  to  have  to  lay  open  his  shame  and  misery 
to  his  own  mother  and  sister;  and,  oh,  worst — ■ 
worst  of  all,  to  Amy,  Avho  hitherto  had  regarded 
him  as  so  pure  and  perfect.  "  I  will  never,^'  he  said 
to  himself,  ''  set  foot  in  that  house  again; — never." 

"  No  hope  from  that  den  of  vulgarity,  pride, 
and  tiickeij,"  he  thought  to  himself,  as  he  closed 
the  hall  door  behind  him,  stepped  out  into  the 
clear  summer  moonlight,  and  whistled  Wasp,  who 
darted  before  him,  after  a  moor-hen  he  had  put 
up  at  the  edge  of  the  lake.  "  There  is  only  one 
hope  now.  That  grinding  task-master  of  Amy's 
father,  Bassevi.  He  will  exact  to  the  utmost,  but 
he  is  sure.  I  can  sell  my  Cuyps,  and  the  carving, 
and  some  plate,  or  worst  come  to  the  worst,  dis- 
pose of  my  mother's  policy,  and  re-insure  her  life 
when  my  means  improve." 

VOL.  III.  L 


]46  THE    vicar's   courtship. 

Beauflower  was  about  lialf-way  towards  the  lodge, 
wlien  lie  heard  two  of  the  keepers  approaching. 
They  were  talking  in  a  loud  voice,  and  laughing 
about  some  recent  stroke  of  professional  business. 

"  That's  the  style,''  said  one.  "  The  governor 
wants  'em  all  killed  ;  why  he's  sharper  after  it 
than  Travers  was." 

"That  first  cut  did  it.  That's  quicker  than 
strychnine,"  said  the  other. 

"  Yes  ;  he  didn't  want  another." 

As  they  passed  the  Vicar  the  first  man  said 
"  Good  night,"  in  the  artful  gamekeeper's  way,  to 
see  who  it  was. 

"  Good  night,"  replied  the  Vicar,  frankly. 

The  moment  they  had  passed,  one  of  the  men 
broke  out  into  a  coarse  vulgar  laugh. 

The  arch  sent  up  its  hollow  tomb-like  echo,  that 
had  so  often  warned  Travers,  and  thoughts  of  the 
dead  man,  of  his  tyranny  and  rapacity,  flashed 
through  the  Vicar's  mind. 

"  De  mortuis  nil  nisi  bonum,"  says  the  generous 
Latin  proverb ;  but  does  not  this  mean,  "  De 
mortuis  nil,''  in  many  cases  ;  or  as  biographers  say, 
"  De  mortuis  nulla  Veritas."  The  Vicar  rounded 
the  corner ;  the  Vicarage  was  dark  :  his  mother 
and  sister  were  not  back.  Just  as  he  slammed 
the  garden  door  behind  himself  and  Wasp,  some- 
thing  dark   came    crawling    feebly   and   slowly 


THE   ROUGH   EECEPTION.  147 

towards  him,  moaning  piteously,  like  a  dying 
child.  Wasp  began  to  bark  and  whimper,  not 
being  since  his  accident  a  dog  of  much  courage. 

At  this  moment  the  moon  slipped  out  from 
behind  a  cloud,  its  light  showed  the  Vicar  poor 
Httle  Zoe,  his  favourite  kitten,  the  archest, 
brightest,  gayest  little  form  that  feline  life  could 
assume,  cruelly  paralysed  by  a  blow  of  a  keeper's 
ash  stick  across  the  loins.  It  dragged  its  hind 
legs  behind  it — they  were  dead.  That  one  blow 
had  changed  the  merry  Httle  creature  from  youth 
to  age,  from  health  to  pain  and  misery. 

"A  curse!"  cried  the  Vicar,  as  he  gently 
lifted  the  wounded  creatm^e,  who  had  but  a  few 
aD-onisino'  hours  to  live,  "  a  cm^se  on  the  hand 
that  did  this,  and  on  the  head  that  willed  it. 
Would  to  God  a  whirlwind  could  come  and 
sweep  to  the  sea  these  detestable  pampered  birds 
that  are  fed  with  English  blood ;  that  bring  death, 
want,  temptation,  and  devastation  to  all  animated 
things  wherever  they  come." 

There  is  a  churchyard  and  a  prison  behind 
every  pheasants'  cover. 


L  2 


148  THE   vicar's   courtship. 


CHAPTEE  X. 

IMMEXSCHIKOFF. 

BiBURY  races  were  held  not  exactly  at  Bibury, 
but  at  an  old  Eoman  camp  on  the  Downs,  about  a 
mile  and  a  half  from  the  town.  Taking  place  about 
a  week  after  the  Newmarket  July  stakes,  and 
nearly  two  months  later  than  Salisbmy  races, 
they  interfered  with  no  other  sporting  engage- 
ment, and  were  usually  well  patronised  in  the 
county. 

"The  names  of  fortified  Eoman,  British,  or  Danish 
camps,"  as  my  learned  friend,  the  Eev.  Isaac 
Taylor,  says,  "  are  very  commonly  marked  by  the 
suffix  huryr  Like  that  fine  camp,  Yarnbury, 
not  far  from  Stonehenge,  was  Danebury,  large 
enough  to  hold  a  legion,  and  boasting  two  banks 
and  two  ditches,  the  inner  one  fifty  feet  deep. 
Danebury  resembles  Yarnbury  also  in  this,  that 
in  October  there  is  a  fair  held  at  both  places 
for  the  sale  of  sheep  and  colts.  It  was  a  pretty, 
wild,   thoroughly  Wiltshire    spot,    and  a   better 


IMxMENSCHIKOFF.  149 

place  for  a  two  mile  course  could  not  have  been 
selected,  for  the  thin  hide  of  turf  covering  the  chalk 
became  soon  dry  after  rain,  and  was  springy  enough 
after  any  weather  except  a  long  drought.  The 
camp  itself,  like  a  great  cup,  held  many  hundred 
spectators  on  its  turfen  rim,  and  for  Grand  Stands 
the  barouches  and  the  roofs  of  the  drags  sufficed. 

It  was  "a  mighty  pretty  sight"  that  July 
morning,  when  the  broad  blue  sky  hung  like  a 
great  azm^e  ocean  overhead,  and  the  little  world 
of  busy  pigmies  beneath  looked  like  so  many 
mo^dno;  little  toilino;  creatures  at  the  bottom  of 
the  sea.  A  soft  rufflino;  breeze  blew  over  the 
golden  furze  bushes  of  the  Down,  trifling  with 
the  pretty  parti-coloured  ribbons  of  the  ladies  in 
the  barouches  and  those  of  the  strong-armed,  rosy, 
bouncing  farmers'  daughters  in  the  light  carts 
anchored  up  and  down  the  bounding  lines  of  the 
course,  and  it  blew  in  and  out  like  sails  the 
dirty  canvas  walls,  put  up  to  prevent  more 
homicide  than  necessary  where  the  hairy  cocoa 
nuts  were  poised  on  the  tall  slender  sticks  that 
rose  from  the  receptive  baskets  of  sand  in  the 
"  Knock  me  Down ''  and  "  Aunt  Sally  "  districts. 

By  eleven  o'clock,  the  hour  of  the  first  race  for 
"the  Farmer's  Plate,"  which  was  won  by  Mr. 
Bennett's  "  Apple-Pie,"  and  was  a  very  hollow 
affair,  all  the   roads,  ox-drives,  and  old  Koman 


150  THE   vicar's   COUETSHIP. 

paths,  leading  to  Danebury,  nortli,  south,  east, 
and  west,  were  alive  with  carts,  carriages,  horse- 
men, and  sturdily  trudging  pedestrians.  Far  away 
across  the  rolling  Down  you  could  pick  out  the 
spot  destined  for  the  races  by  the  white  booths 
that  had  sprung  up  quick  as  mushrooms  after  a 
warm  rain.  Cantelupe's  two  drags,  from  the  old 
camp  were  welcomed  a  quarter  of  a  mile  by 
vendors  of  new  guineas,  (two  a  penny),  and  by 
vendors  holding  up  fans  of  little  wax  dolls. 

"Large  families  of  babbies  for  one  shilling, 
three  on  'em  for  sixpence — who'U  have  a  babby 
for  tuppence  ? "  There  was  also  the  successor  of 
the  celebrated  "  Jerry,"  the  usual  low  comedian, 
with  a  gilt  cocked  hat,  red  coat,  enormous  tin 
eye-glass,  and  those  admirable  truisms  that  never 
grow  stale. 

"  Flint  stones  are  hard  for  the  feet,  ladies ; 
it's  a  hard  thing,  ladies,  to  be  hungry,  and  have 
nothing  to  eat." 

There  was  "  Donkey  Jimmy,"  too,  in  his  huge 
yeUow  wig  and  long  false  nose,  braying  to 
*^  please  the  haristocracy,  not  the  common  people," 
at  sixpence  a  bray,  and  selling  red  cards. 

"  'Krek  carts  of  the  races ;  here's  a  full  list  of  the 
terrible,  terrible  high-bred  cattle,  together  with  all 
the  names,  weights,  and  colours  of — the — riders." 

Next   came    a  bawding  feUow,  abeady  rather 


IMMENSCHIKOFF.  151 

drunk,  with  recruit  ribbons  in  his  hat,  who 
approached  the  carriage,  tried  to  get  run  over, 
and  evidently  suffering  from  Bell's  Life  on  the 
brain,  shouted  out — 

"  Here  are  no  ifs,  or  shoulds,  or  doubts.  The 
Mouse  boldly  says,  '  Immenschikoff,  first ;  Match- 
Box,  second ;  Eattletrap,  third,' — all  the  rest 
nowhere.  What  did  Mouse  do  for  the  Spring 
Epsom  ?  Didn't  he  name  Mincemeat,  and  who 
won?  Hoorah!  three  cheers  then  for  the  owner  of 
the  winner !     Three  cheers  for  Muster  Cantelupe ! " 

"Three  cheers  for  Immenschikoff!"  said  that 
terrible  wild  young  Brown,  as  he  darted  by 
Cantelupe's  drag,  driving  his  father  and  a  pretty 
blue-eyed  plump  cousin  the  old  people  were 
trying  to  coax  him  to  marry. 

Cantelupe  waved  his  hat,  he  was  in  brilliant 
spirits  ;  chaffed  everyone  he  met,  and  flung  a 
sovereign  to  Donkey  Jimmy  for  a  card.  He  had 
already  furnished  Talbot,  Filby,  and  all  his  other 
toadies  and  sponges,  with  wooden  vertebrated 
dolls.  He  had  thrown  half-a-crown  to  a  fat 
acrobat,  who  had  picked  up  a  needle  with  his  eye- 
lid, and  spit  ^q,  at  the  Slobmy  gate;  a  shilling  to 
a  fellow  who  stood  on  his  head,  and  sang  "  The  Old 
Arm  Cheer  ; "  and  a  half-sovereign  to  a  bony 
acrobat  and  a  pretty  black-eyed  boy  in  dirty 
fleshiness  and  a  tinsel  band  round  his  forehead, 


152  THE   VICARS    COURTSHIP. 

wlio  had  done  "  La  Perche  "  at  the  turning  to 
Chicklade. 

"Never  be  afraid  of  humbugs/'  Paley  once 
said  when  somebody  expressed  his  surprise  at 
seeing  the  shrewd  old  divine,  w^ho  thought  ready 
money  such  a  useful  check  to  the  imagination, 
a  spectator  at  a  whist  party.  The  Vicar  was  a 
man  whose  mind  demanded  honest  amusement, 
and  though  disapproving  of  the  sordid  modern 
gambling  spirit  that  has  spoiled  racing,  and  no 
great  admirer  of  the  blustering  "  Licensed 
Victualler  "  interest  that  has  elbowed  out  nearly 
all  the  true  gentlemen,  he  still  felt  a  true  young 
Englishman's  delight  in  a  well-bred  horse,  and  in 
the  keen  struo'Qie  of  half-a-dozen  lioiitnino'-wino^ed 
racers.  Trying  to  act  according  to  his  own  high 
standard,  he  seldom  went  to  races,  merely,  as  he 
avoided  hunting  or  cricket,  as  a  matter  of  time, 
his  parish  leaving  him  but  little,  and  his  reading 
and  society  demanding  all  that.  Yes,  man  in 
full  vigour  of  health,  bodily  and  mentally,  craves 
for  violent  exercise ;  and  when  a  man  has  no 
time  to  be  a  Eed  Indian,  it  does  him  good  to  see  a 
race,  a  wrestle,  or  a  cricket  match. 

The  race  course  was  roped  round  in  a  rough 
and  ready  way.  There  was  just  a  bell  on  the 
top  of  a  strong  post  to  clear  the  course,  and  give 
the  signal  for  saddling,  and  a  raised  box  for  the 


IMMENSCHIKOFF.  153 

judges.  The  drags  and  barouches  vreie  drawn 
up  in  a  line  near  the  booths ;  the  greater 
number  of  them  towards  the  winning-post  end. 
Cantelupe  having  won  2001.  on  the  Farmer's 
Plate,  was  now  in  as  high  spirits  as  if  he  had  re- 
trieved all  his  losses  on  that  treacherous  green  turf, 
and  the  still  more  treacherous  green  cloth.  There 
he  stood  for  all  the  world  like  Mr.  Frith's  less 
gentlemanlike  swell,  his  light  grey  dust  coat 
flutterino'  in  the  wind  as  he  caroused  on  the  roof 
of  the  blue  drag,  waving  a  champagne  bottle,  as 
a  token  of  restored  friendship,  to  the  starters,  or 
rather,  it  must  honestly  be  confessed,  to  Amy 
Eobinson,  who,  looking  still  somewhat  pale,  was 
standing  up  in  the  Harker  barouche  holding 
laughing  Ethel  of  the  golden  main  before  her, 
and  enjoying  the  scene  with  all  the  fresh,  frank, 
unrestrained  delight  of  an  intelligent  open-hearted 
girl,  to  whom  everything  was  new.  ]\Irs.  Harker 
was  busy,  dispensing  her  graduated  smiles  to  the 
best  diplomatic  advantage;  while  Miss  Caroline 
Harker  was  using  her  opera  glass  with  the  most 
exquisite  gTace,  and  asking  absurd  questions 
vdth  the  most  unconscious  naivete.  Beauflower 
dared  not  trust  himself  near  the  Harkers'  car- 
riage, so  bowed  from  a  distance  as  he  drove 
over  the  course  with  Julia,  eyeing  Amy  (who  saw 
him,    and   knew   his   heart)    with   that   sort    of 


154  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

longing  despair  witli  which  the  souls  in  Dante's 
Purgatory  (we  can  hardly  fancy  a  Purgatory  before 
Dante)  watch  afar  off  the  opening  of  the  golden 
gates  of  Paradise,  sometimes  catch  a  glimpse  of 
the  white  robes  of  the  elect.  Nor  did  the  Vicar  dare 
stop  for  more  than  a  moment  near  Cantelupe's 
noisy  party,  to  see  a  spendthrift  run  laughing 
down  the  primrose  path.  Once,  and  once  only, 
Cantelupe  passed,  on  his  way  to  see  his  jockey  don 
his  black  and  yellow  and  go  into  the  scale.  He 
stopped  and  shook  hands  with  Beauflower  and  his 
sister,  being  singularly  gallant  to  the  latter,  who 
was,  however,  for  her,  unusually  silent  and  reserved. 
Beauflower  who,  even  when  miserable  to  the 
outer  world,  seemed  always  in  high  spirits,  was 
cruel  enough  to  banter  Julia  on  her  unusual  mute- 
ness. The  young  prodigal,  it  must  be  confessed, 
looked  very  handsome  on  that  eventful  day;  his 
face  tanned  of  that  ruddy  brown  that  becomes  an 
athletic  young  English  gentleman,  who  does  not 
care  to  bleach  himself  blind  over  other  people's 
ideas.  His  broad  chest  and  elastic  limbs  looked 
all  the  more  stalwart  for  the  gauzy  coat,  and  the 
blue  veil,  twisted  with  a  certain  indescribable 
chic  round  his  hat.  The  brains  might  be  rather 
fallow,  but  the  heart  was  in  the  right  place,  and 
there  was  a  superabundance  of  life,  hope,  and 
energy.     Nor   did  Cantelupe,  with  all  a  young 


IMMENSCHIKOFF.  155 

man's  instinct  for  grace  and  beauty,  fail  to  observe 
that  Julia's  rather  defiant  face  looked  singularly 
handsome  now  when  lighted  up  by  excitement 
and  vivified  by  the  ardour  of  observation.  Amy, 
who  seemed  rather  chilled  and  depressed, — she 
might,  her  lover  thought,  have  had  some  faint 
inkling  of  his  recent  visit, — appeared  as  tender 
and  graceful  as  ever,  but  perhaps  rather  below 
her  usual  standard  of  loveliness. 

"What  do  you  really  think,  Ned,  of  Mr. 
Cantelupe's  horse  ?     I  do  so  hope  hell  win." 

"Those  fellows  who  are  preying  on  him  tell 
him  the  horse  has  ten  pounds  in  hand,  that  is  Ju, 
that  he  could  carry  ten  pounds  more  than  he  will 
be  obliged  to  carry ;  but  then  they'll  say  anything; 
Immenschikofi'  is  a  showy,  overgrown  sort  of  horse, 
not  half  so  much  to  my  taste  as  Lord  Mazagan's 
black  brown  Spitfire  (cherry  and  white).  They  tell 
me  that  the  young  idiot  has  actually  got  92,000?. 
depending  on  this  race,  and  is  ready  to  take 
AOOOl.  to  2000Z.  about  the  animal  now,  but  that 
is  all  gibberish  to  you,  I  forgot." 

"  I  suppose  there  is  no  great  art  in  riding  a 
race,  dear,  if  it's  all  fair,  and  among  gentlemen ; 
you  just  ride  as  hard  as  you  can  pelt,  and  try  and 
get  in  first." 

"  That's  all  you  know  about  it  then,  you  little 
ignoramus ;  why  there's  all  the  art  in  the  world — 


156  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

(No,  I've  got  no  money  for  you,  my  good  woman. 
I  don't  "want  my  fortune  told,  and  I  know  I  shall 
win  money  on  the  dark  liorse) — all  the  art,  Ju; 
you  want  power,  seat,  and  science.  You  may  cut 
down  the  field  from  end  to  end,  that  is  what,  I 
believe,  ImmenschikofF  is  to  do  ;  or  you  may  get 
in  front,  and  stop  the  pace  ;  you  may  let  yourself 
be  headed  and  come  again ;  or  if  your  horse 
mustn't  be  hurried,  you  may  lie  away  from  your 
horses,  and  creep  up,  inch  by  inch,  before  the  pace 
is  too  great ;  or  you  may  wait  till  you  get  the 
pull,  and  catch  the  apparent  winner,  with  a 
Chifney  rush  on  the  post ;  then  you  may  nurse  a 
sinking  horse  in,  or  screw  him  in,  or  dodgily  lift 
him  in  by  a  nose.  Oh  !  there's  all  the  art  in  the 
world,  Ju." 

"  Well,  Ned,  I  never  thought  there  was  so  much 
in  it.     How  I  do  wish  we  could  get  near  Amy ! " 

The  betting  was  going  on  very  hotly  among  the 
farmers  and  tradesmen  of  Slobury,  as  the  black 
and  yellow  jacket  darted  by  for  a  trial  canter, 
just  feeling  the  turf 

"  Eh,  but  he's  in  grand  fettle,"  said  one  of 
Harker's  Yorkshire  grooms,  the  one  who  fought 
Paddy,  as  Immenschikoff  lilted  by  with  grand 
free  action,  dilated  nostril,  and  full  proud  eye. 
"  I  doubt,  man,  whether  I  shall  pull  off  my  three 
crowns  with  Spitfire." 


IMMENSCHIKOFF.  157 

The  Down  rang  vrith  cries  of  20  to  1  on  tlie 
Field ;  33  to  1  on  Champagne,  (Colonel  Harcourt, 
mauve)  ;  7  to  2  on  Baronet ;  8  to  1  on  Spitfire, 
(Lord  Mazagan,  cherry  and  white)  ;  40  to  1  on 
Daring  Dick  (Major  Filby,  chocolate  and  green) ; 
Zingari  (Sir  Edmund  Antrobus,  white  and  blue). 
In  gleams  of  pretty  kaleidoscopic  colour  the 
seven  horses  that  were  going  to  run  for  the 
Cantelupe  Plate  cantered  past ;  boys,  dogs,  and 
men,  scattering  before  them. 

The  general  admiration  went  for  Immenschikoflf, 
to  whom  recent  victory  at  York  had  given  prestige, 
but  the  select  few  w^ere  all  unanimous  for  Harle- 
quin, (Mr.  Harker,  green  and  orange),  a  small 
compact  and  blood-like  whole  coloured  bay. 

"  A  horse  with  more  stay  in  him  than  Cante- 
lupe's,  but  not  so  smart  for  a  short  burst,"  was 
Lord  Mazagan's  verdict. 

As  Jimmy  Jackson,  the  smart  cool  old  man 
boy  (a  changeling  if  ever  there  was  one),  swept 
by  the  ropes  where  Beauflower's  steady-going  pony 
carriage  was  moored,  his  thin  black  and  yellow 
silk  puffing  out  with  the  wind,  the  Vicar  eyed 
the  horse  and  the  rider  with  great  earnestness. 

*'  How  much  would  you  think,  Ju,"  he  said, 
turning  round  to  his  sister,  "that  little  fellow 
in  the  black  and  yellow  gets  for  this  day's 
work  ? " 


158  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

"I  don't  know,  Ned,  but  I  should  think 
about  10^." 

"  One  hundred  pounds  ;  as  much,  dear,  as  many- 
curates  earn  for  three  hundred  and  sixty-five  days' 
bodily  and  mental  toil." 

"  What  a  shame  !  but  oh,  do  look  here,  he  is  back 
again ;  what  an  enormous  stride,  it  seems  flying 
to  the  other's  gallopping.     Oh!  he  must  win." 

"  He  is  certainly  very  fast,  but  his  eyes  are 
rather  wild.  I  think  he  is  too  powerful  for  that 
little  man  in  the  black  and  yellow." 

"  Lord  bless  yer,  not  one  of  them  can  touch 
him,"  said  Paddy  to  the  major,  as  the  jockeys,  led 
by  Jimmy  Jackson,  rode  in  irregular  procession 
to  the  starting  place. 

"  Bedad,  you  can't  lose,  my  darlint,  even  if  the 
bridle  breaks,"  said  the  major  to  the  immoveable 
jockey. 

"  He  went  very  oddly  in  his  gallop  yesterday, 
Mr.  Cantelupe,"  said  the  trainer ;  "but  I  suppose 
the  railway  fretted  him." 

"Very  likely,"  said  Bassevi,  who  never  left 
Cantelupe's  side,  and  had  just  laid  300Z.  on  the 
field. 

"  He's  the  best  horse,  Mr.  Bassevi,  at  all  dis- 
tances when  he's  not  put  out,"  said  the  Codford 
trainer ;  "  at  all  distances,  sir,  from  half  a  mile  to 
four  miles,  that  I  ever  trained.     He's  an  honour 


IMMENSCHIKOFF.  159 

to  Wiltshire.  Fd  back  Mm  against  a  field  of 
sixty.  I  believe  there  are  men  at  Tattersalls' 
who,  before  night,  would  give  three  thousand 
guineas  for  that  ere  hoss." 

Lord  Mazagan,  (cautious  old  bird),  plucked 
long  ago,  but  with  feathers  regrown,  had  only 
200^.  depending  on  the  event,  but  he  was  taking 
good  care  to  secure  that  if  possible. 

"  Immenschikoff  seems  in  his  tantrums  to-day," 
he  said  to  the  jockey,  who  stooped  to  listen  to 
his  last  instructions  ;  "  your  only  chance  is  to 
get  Spitfire  well  ofi"  and  try  to  cut  the  whole  lot 
down;  fight  it  out  till  the  last  stride;  but  if 
that  long-legged  brute  once  gets  three  lengths 
a-head,  slacken  the  running,  and  screw  in  for 
second.  If  it  was  only  a  wet  day  I  believe  the 
brute  would  not  be  even  placed." 

The  coloured  silks  drew  in  a  line,  but  Immen- 
schikofi"  was  difficult  to  start.  He  neighed,  he 
reared,  he  even  kicked. 

Two  men  dressed  like  countrymen  pushed  up 
close  and  got  next  Bassevi,  who  stood  under  the 
Cantelupe  drag  in  a  waggon,  and  next  Farmer 
Brown's  cart.  One  of  the  men  nudged  Bassevi 
and  said — "  It's  aU  up  with — Men.''  Immens- 
chikoff made  three  false  starts,  and  at  last  got  off 
badly.  Spitfire  was  first,  Baronet  second,  and  the 
rest  pretty  well  together.  Then  Spitfire  came  away 


160  THE   vicar's   COUETSHIP. 

several  lengths  a-head,  keeping  a  bold  front. 
Champagne  was  stubborn,  and  Zingari  ran 
ungenerously,  but  short  lived  success.  This  was 
only  for  a  moment.  Presently  Immenschikoflf 
put  himself  together,  got  his  stride,  and  tore 
away  like  a  great  brown  billow.  One  by  one  he 
collared  them,  cherry  and  white,  mauve  and  cho- 
colate and  green,  white  and  blue.  Then  it  was 
neck  to  neck  with  the  green  and  orange  alone 
for  the  last  mile  with  a  slight  ascent.  The  brave 
bay  did  all  he  knew,  and  fought  bravely  for  every 
inch  of  ground,  but  nothing  could  resist  the  fury 
of  the  chestnut,  who  went  raking  along  as  if 
winged  by  the  rolling  shout  that  ran  along  the 
course  from  the  excited  country  people.  The 
Cantelupe  drag  was  in  a  ferment  of  waving  hats, 
the  major  and  Paddy  were  black  in  the  face  with 
bawling  ''Black  and  yellow,"  and  "2  to  1  on 
black  and  yellow." 

The  struggle  was  entirely  between  those  two, 
one  sounding  whack  of  the  whalebone  in  less 
skilled  hands  than  those  of  young  "  Bob  Bland," 
Mr.  Barker's  jockey,  had  many  a  time  shot  a 
horse  into  the  winning  post.  The  cries  gTCw 
maddening  as  Immenschikoff  and  Harlequin  now 
expended  their  utmost  strength  and  seemed  flying 
through  the  air.  But  Immenschikoff's  savage 
fury  and  long  limbs  soon  told.    In  vain  Bob  Bland 


IMMENSCHIKOFF.  161 

tried  to  creep  up,  to  make  his  challenge,  and  then 
try  a  Chifney  dash  at  the  winning  post.  Harle- 
quin was  six  lengths  at  least  behind.  Jimmy 
Jackson  was  working  forward  with  his  irresis- 
tible "  pull  and  hustle ;"  another  instant  his  whip 
hand  up  would  launch  the  winner  past  the  post, 
now  only  thirty  yards  off,  when  suddenly  Immen- 
schikoflf  stoj)ped  in  his  stride  as  if  a  Sneider 
bullet  had  gone  throug-h  his  brain,  crossed  his 
legs  staggeringly,  stumbled  four  or  five  yards, 
and  dropped — dead.  Jimmy  Jackson,  with  the 
quickness  of  lightning,  rolled  off,  nimble  as  an 
acrobat;  ran,  looked  at  its  eyes,  and  felt  its  heart; 
but  there  was  no  light,  no  pulsation. 

In  another  instant  Harlequin  flew  by  the  win- 
ning post,  up  went  the  number  4,  Mr.  Harker's 
Harlequin  (green  and  orange),  and  there  was  a 
roar  of  delio'ht  from  the  crowd  that  surs^ed  over 
the  course,  turning  the  green  black  by  the  irre- 
sistible inundation,  some  eager  to  discover  their 
debtors,  but  the  most  part  driven  by  irresistible 
curiosity  to  see  the  horse  that  had  died  so  sud- 
denly, and  in  such  an  extraordinary  manner. 
The  general  opinion  was  that  Immenschikoff  had 
ruptured  some  leading  blood-vessel  in  the  chest, 
but  already  a  report  had  got  about  and  it  was 
spreading  like  wild  fire,  that  there  had  been  foul 
play  somewhere.     Mr.  Harker  and  Bassevi,  how- 

VOL.    III.  M 


162  THE   VICAE's   COURTSHIP. 

ever,  did  not  agree  with  the  latter  opinion,  and 
two  coimtr}Tnen  in  the  crowd  said  they  had  had 
to  do  with  horses  all  their  lives,  and  had  often 
known  over-worked  horses  drop  suddenly  dead. 
Lord  Mazag;an  shook  his  head,  and  declared  that 
the  animal  should  be  examined  by  a  veterinary 
surgeon,  for  there  was  a  froth  about  the  lips 
which  seemed  to  him  suspicious. 

Cantelupe  and  Beauflower,  with  all  the  plun- 
ger's delighted  but  outwardly  S3rinpathetic  friends, 
were  still  standing  round  the  horse,  when  a  roar 
of  indignation  arose  near  the  winning  post,  where 
the  men  with  betting  books  had  assembled  to 
decide  their  profits  and  losses  ;  the  next  moment 
there  was  a  screaming  shout  of  "  a  welsher,  a 
welsher,''  and  there  came  flying  towards  them 
a  frightened  dishevelled  wretch,  bruised,  muddy, 
and  bleeding,  one  shoe  ofl",  his  hat  lost,  his  coat 
half  torn  away,  his  waistcoat  in  strips  flying 
behind  him.  It  was  poor  Paddy,  who,  in  the 
ardour  of  enthusiasm  and  the  confidence  of 
success,  had  adventured  on  bets  to  the  amount 
of  20?.  more  than  he  possessed  in  the  world. 
The  major,  half  resisting  the  onslaught,  half 
borne  away  by  it,  was  trying  hard  to  save  the 
unhappy  fellow,  who  Avas  delirious  with  afiiight 
at  his  own  danger,  and  with  horror  at  the  fate 
of  Immenschikoff',  from  immediate  \dolence,  and 


IMMEXSCHIKOFF.  163 

trying  to  collar  liim  and  hand  liim  over  to  more 
deliberate  justice.  By  a  tremendous  effort  the 
major  at  last  got  the  poor  frightened  wretch 
behind  him,  and  under  covert  of  the  group  of 
gentlemen,  and  then  swaying  a  huge  club  of  an 
oak  stick  he  swept  round  the  weapon  that  was 
as  terrible  as  the  sail  of  a  windmill. 

"  Back,"  he  cried,  to  a  frantic  groom  (one  of 
Harker's),  "  back,  you  howling  spalpeen,  or  111 
teach  you  how  to  pronounce  '  murder '  in  Irish. 
]VIr.  Beauflower,  help  me  to  keep  back  these 
barking  dogs.  Gentlemen,  the  man  may  be  a 
w^elsher,  but  you  won't  see  him  torn  to  pieces 
before  your  very  eyes,  will  you  ? " 

Beauflow^er  and  the  others  instantly,  with  the 
chivah'ous  instinct  of  true  gentlemen,  w^hether  in 
chain  mail  or  broad  cloth,  placed  the  man  in  a 
sort  of  hollow  square  and  fronted  their  adversaries, 
who  drew  slightly  l)ack,  but  kept  roaring  ''a 
welsher,''  "a  welsher,"'  "stone  him,"  "pump  liim," 
"  knock  his  head  off,"  "  kill  him." 

"What  is  all  this  about,  major  ?"  said  Cantelupe, 
whom  champagne  had  flushed  and  rendered  care- 
less as  to  his  losses. 

"  This  feUow,"  said  the  major,  "  has  been 
betting  ten  times  as  much  as  he's  got.  Come, 
Paddy,  hand  over  that  5/.,  and  I'll  make  it  go  as 
far  as  I  can  with  these  blackgyards.     But  that's 

M   2 


164  THE    vicar's   courtship. 

not  the  worst,  lie's  been  drugging  that  horse,  or 

letting  the  touts  do  it,  and  by if  it  was  my 

own  father,  I'd  pull  him  up.  We  all  think  it  was 
done  when  we  were  waiting  at  Warminster." 

'^  Where's  a  policeman "? "  said  Bassevi,  more 
indignant  than  anyone  else. 

"  That's  a  dangerous  fellow,"  said  Mr.  Harker, 
just  then  working  his  way  through  the  crowd, 
"  and  I  have  always  believed  that  he  had  some 
hand  in  the  murder  of  my  poor  keeper,  Travers." 

"  Now,  Pat,  you  come  along,"  said  P.  C.  Vincent, 
stony  as  ever,  "  nobody  shan't  touch  you  while 
I've  got  the  charge  of  you.  Hold  up,  man,  I'm 
not  going  to  carry  you." 

Poor  Paddy  ("dant  veniam  corvis,  vexant 
censura  the  gulls  ")  tried  in  vain  to  dash  himself 
at  the  feet  of  Cantelupe,  and  to  assert  his  fidelity 
and  his  innocence.  But  ofi"  the  stern  Ehadaman- 
thus  in  blue  and  pewter  buttons  dragged  him  to  the 
cart  that  was  to  whirl  him  into  Slobury  lock-up. 

Presently,  when  Beauflower  had  left  the  Cante- 
lupe party  round  the  dead  horse,  up  came  Mr. 
Pitts  with  another  tale  of  race-course  misery. 

"  You'll  be  sorry  to  hear,  sir,"  he  said,  "  that 
that  young  Brown  has  lost  a  quantity  of  money 
his  father  gave  him  to  buy  sheep  with  to-morrow 
at  Warminster.  He  got  playing  roulette  at  one 
of  the  booths,  they  stripped  him  of  every  farthing. 


IMMEXSCHIKOFF.  165 

and  now  he  lias  driven  off  quite  drunk  to 
Warminster  with  some  tipsy  fellows  in  a  cart. 
He  swears  he'll  enlist ;  old  Mr.  Brown's  nearly 
mad  about  it,  and  has  just  diiven  olF  after  him. 
Is  it  true,  sir,  that  young  Mr.  Cantelupe  has  lost 
27,000/.?" 

"  I  fear  he  has  lost  a  good  deal  by  this  unfor- 
tunate affair,  Mr.  Pitts,  but  I  hope  not  quite  so 
much.  Fm  very  sorry  to  hear  about  this  foolish 
young  fellow.  It  would,  perhaps,  be  better  if  he 
did  enlist.'' 

Mr.  Beauflower  had  just  seen  that  the  Harkers 
were  less  surrounded  by  carriages  than  they  had 
been,  and  was  making  his  way  up  as  near  them 
as  possible,  greeted  by  rays  of  welcome  from  the 
beacon  lights  of  Amy's  dear  eyes,  when  from  a 
booth  close  by  emerged  Cantelupe,  his  hat  bruised, 
his  eyes  staring,  his  face  heated  with  wine  and 
answer.  He  had  been  fioiiting;  with  a  man  who 
had  cheated  him  in  chanoing;  a  note,  there  was 
blood  upon  his  forehead,  and  his  scarf  was  torn 
loose.  Jack  Talbot  and  Lord  ]\Iazagan  were 
in  vain  trying  to  hold  him  back. 

He  came  up  shaking  his  fist  at  ]\Ir.  Harker, 
who  sat  lurid,  gloomy,  and  astonished. 

"  You,"  he  said,  "  you  have  had  a  hand  in  this. 
You're  trying  all  you  can  to  ruin  me.  You've  set 
some  rascal  to  poison  this  horse." 


166  THE    VICARS    COUETSHIP. 

''  You've  been  taking  too  mucli  cliampagne, 
Cantelupe,"  said  Harker,  coldly ;  "  go  and  sleep 
it  off.  I  must  remind  you  that  your  words  are 
actionable." 

Cantelupe  would  have  made  a  rush  to  scale  the 
barouche,  had  not  his  friends  surrounded,  and 
coaxed,  and  dragged  him  back.  There  was  then  a 
loud  conversation,  enforced  by  hands  on  his  shoul- 
ders, and  urgent  entreaties,  especially  from  Beau- 
flower,  who  tried  to  persuade  him  how  foolish  and 
dangerous  his  conduct  was,  and  how  groundless 
his  suspicions,  it  being  now  the  universally 
established  theory  on  the  course  that  Paddy,  to 
win  his  201.,  had  given  the  horse  some  slow 
poison  unknown  to  anyone  but  himself. 

Gradually  they  quieted  and  soothed  him,  and  he 
put  his  dress  to  rights,  smiled,  and  even  seemed, 
by  a  violent  mental  effort,  to  shake  off  his  intoxi- 
cation. He  shook  off  his  advisers,  however,  some- 
what angrily,  all  but  Beauflower,  who  took  his  arm, 
and  persuaded  him  to  offer  Harker  his  hand. 

Julia  and  Amy  were  delighted  at  this,  even 
Mrs.  and  Miss  Harker  smiled  approval. 

"  I  know  IVe  lost  everything,"  said  Cantelu]3e, 
with  rather  a  thick  voice,  "  but  still  I  won't  be 
treated  like  a  child  by  the  fellows  who've  flayed  me." 

"  Nonsense,  old  man,"  cried  Jack  Talbot,  "  been 
all  fair." 


IMMEXSCHIKOFF.  167 

Harker  leaned  over  the  side  of  the  barouche,  and 
in  a  Wand  and  conciliating  way  held  out  his  pale, 
pasty  hand,  but  there  was  an  ironical  smile  in  his 
eyes,  which  even  he  could  not  suppress,  and  Can- 
telupe  saw  and  felt  it. 

"  Xo,"  he  said,  flinging  down  the  proffered  hand 
he  had  just  coldly  touched,  "  no,  I  will  not  take 
it.  Let  him  do  his  worst.  I'd  rather  sell  every 
stick  at  Swallowcliff  than  cringe  to  a  low  cad  like 
that." 

''  Take  care,  young  man,"  said  Mr.  Harker,  the 
tiger  breaking  out  for  a  moment.  "  You'll  repent 
this.  I  never  forgive  when  I've  once  made  up  my 
mind." 

His  friends  forced  Cantelupe,  still  struggling, 
back  to  the  booth. 

'•  I  say,  Fitz,"  said  Talbot,  as  they  drove  home, 
to  Cantelupe,  now  more  sober,  "Filby  aud  the  rest 
have  settled  to  go  back  to  town  to-night.  You 
seem  rather  cut  up  ^4th  dropping  this  money. 
They  think  they're  in  the  way." 

"■  Then  Jack,  old  man,  we'll  have  a  long  night 
at  billiards." 

''  Yaas — but — but — I'm  going  too.  Filby  has 
asked  me  to  run  across  to  Baden  with  him  on 
Monday,  and  I'm  going." 


168  THE   vicar's    courtship. 


CHAPTEK  XL 

BREAKING    THE    ICE. 

Mr.  Pitts'  story  was  quite  true.  Not  only 
had  the  last  slice  gone  of  Cantelupe's  fortune 
(30,000/.),  it  was  now  rejDorted,  but  there  had 
been  also  humbler  sufferers  on  the  field  of  the 
cloth  of  green.  People  pity  the  general,  but  few 
care  for  the  poor  drummer  who  lies  in  the  ditch 
with  both  legs  broken.  Young  Brown  had,  in 
an  evil  moment,  spent  30/.  of  his  father's  hard- 
earned  money,  given  him  to  hand  over  to  a  man 
who  had  sold  Brown  some  ewes  and  wethers ; 
he  had  then  driven  to  Warminster  and  enlisted. 
Old  Brown,  half  distracted  at  the  conduct  of  his 
favourite  son,  had  found  him  very  tipsy  in  a 
public-house,  drinking  with  a  recruiting-sergeant, 
the  fatal  bunch  of  ribbons  already  dangling 
from  his  hat.  He  had  refused  to  be  bought  out, 
declaring  he  was  disgraced  for  ever,  that  he  was 
suspected  of  m_urder,  and  constantly  being  spied 
after  by  the  keepers,  and  that  he  never  wanted  to 


BREAKING   THE    ICE.  169 

see  Summerleas  again.  Eventually  liis  father 
returned,  almost  broken-hearted,  without  him. 

It  was  the  Wednesday  after  the  race  and  the 
Vicar  had  just  returned  from  trying  to  console 
the  poor  father  and  mother  and  the  poor  crippled 
brother,  who  seemed  to  pine  amid  the  general 
desolation  and  distress.  There  were  two  evi- 
dently dunning  letters  awaiting  Beauflower  on 
his  return  ;  but  it  being  Amy's  half-holiday,  it 
was  no  time  to  think  of  such  things,  so  he  thrust 
them  into  his  breast-pocket,  and  sallied  forth  to 
Fontford,  the  field  way,  as  light  hearted  as  if  there 
was  not  a  man  in  the  world  who  had  a  rig;ht  to 
rail  at  him  for  money.  Amy  was  to  be  at  home 
by  half-past  two,  and  he  was  to  meet  her  there, 
and  demand  her  hand  from  her  father  and  mother. 
Love  is  so  sanguine,  and  the  lover  had  no  doubt 
of  success.  He  felt  sure  (unless  the  old  people 
had  any  very  ambitious  views  for  Amy)  that  he 
could  remove  all  their  ol)jections.  The  pompous 
bell  at  the  Abbey  was  just  clanging  for  lunch 
when  the  Vicar  set  out. 

An  irrisistible  magnetism  led  him  as  he  passed 
to  turn  down  for  a  moment  to  the  old  ruin  where 
he  had  first  breathed  forth  the  love  that  was  now 
part  of  his  very  hfe's  blood.  As  he  turned  the 
corner  of  the  yew  bushes  towards  the  porch  a 
great  black  dog  came  up  to  him  with  laughing 


170  THE    vicar's    COUETSHIP. 

eyes,  mute  interrogations,  and  recognition.  It 
was  Leo.  Yes,  tliere  on  a  fallen  tree,  sat  Mr. 
Goodrick,  absorbed  in  meditation.  He  rose  as 
tlie  Vicar  advanced,  and  lield  out  liis  hand. 

"  You  young  men  look  forward,"  he  said  ;  "  we 
old  men  look  back.  The  best  part  of  our  life  is 
behind  us,  but  is  before  you  lucky  sons  of  the 
Immortal.  I  have  been  thinking  of  poor  Staunton 
here,  his  young  wife  and  his  dreams,  and  my  own, 
too  ;  for  you  know  I  also  lost  my  wife  not  long 
after  my  marriage,  and  the  world  has  been  ever 
since  only  a  sort  of  large  burial-place  in  my 
eyes." 

The  Vicar  related  the  object  of  his  walk. 

The  old  man  was  delighted.  "  Nothing,"  he 
said,  "  will  give  me  greater  pleasure  than  to 
hear  those  three  old  cracked  beUs  rivet  your 
golden  fetters,  you  luckiest  of  men.  I  love  that 
girl,  not  merely  for  her  tender,  loving,  gentle 
ways,  but  also  because  she  is  like  some  one  I  once 
loved.  May  Eros  and  Aphrodite  lend  honey  to 
your  words.  But  these  two  good  old  souls  will 
not  be  difficult  to  soften.  The  old  man  is  selfish, 
but  only  in  a  careless,  happy-go-lucky  way,  and 
the  wife  is  frugal  and  careful,  but  not  to  excess. 
They  can  t  believe  in  Cantelupe  now,  poor  lad  : 
his  losses  have  reduced  him  to  a  very  low  level, 
but  he  shan't  be  quite  ruined  even  now,  if  I  and 


BEEAKING   THE    ICE.  171 

Fairfield  can  help  it ;  for  he  is  one  of  the  three 
families  for  whom  Staunton  had  a  regard. 

The  Yicar  exj^ressed  his  fears  that  the  prospect 
of  an  alliance  with  Cantelupe  might  have  abeady 
led  them  to  some  rash  promise. 

"  Not  it — ugh !  If  Amy  doesn't  love  him, 
what  would  he  care  for  promises  ?  He's  too 
generous  and  high-spirited  for  that.  He  knows 
very  well  that  fathers  can't  give  away  a  daughter  s 
heart,  as  if  it  was  a  broccoli,  that  has  no  voice 
in  the  matter,  and  is  therefore  not  consulted  by 
the  gardener.  By  the  bye,  you  really  go  to 
London  on  Friday  ? " 

"Yes." 

"  Then  to-morrow  morning  I  or  Tony  will 
bring  over  the  two  jewel-cases.  They  are  too 
valuable  to  send  by  night,  especially  since  that 
undiscovered  murder." 

"  I  see  a  Spanish  sailor  tramp  has  been  taken 
up  at  Cardiff  on  suspicion." 

"  That  makes  about  the  seventh.  I  hear  the 
Warminster  magistrates  have  discharged  that 
poor  vagabond ;  Tony  tells  me  he  met  him  and 
that  he  seemed  almost  broken-hearted  at  being 
suspected  of  being  unfaithful  by  Cantelupe. 
He's  been  drinking  about  ever  since,  and  I'm 
afraid  is  what  Londoners  call  'going  to  the 
bad.' " 


172  THE   vicar's   courtship. 


"  Poor  fellow  !  "  said  the  Viear.  "  I  really 
believe  poor  Paddy  was  only  a  victim.  His 
wits  are  not  quite  full  measure.  He  has  always 
shown  such  an  extraordinary  fidelity  to  Cante- 
lupe,  who  befriended  him  so  when  he  was  taken 
up  for  poaching  on  the  Terraces  in  Travers's 
time.  You  heard  of  what  those  cruel  fellows  did 
to  my  little  kitten,  Zoe,  that  I  had  to  kill  ?  " 

"  Yes,  I  heard,"  said  Goodrick,  with  bitter  in- 
tensity. "  I  would  as  soon  have  a  murderer  for 
my  valet  as  employ  such  men  as  that.  But  those 
game-laws  harden  and  debase  all  who  have  to 
enforce  them.  Ugh  !  I  wish  I  had  the  place  ;  Pd 
clear  it  as  Kufus  cleared  the  New  Forest.  I  hate 
the  very  sight  of  a  jDheasant.  Good  -bye  ;  I  shall 
stop  here  and  muse  a  bit  longer,  and  then  I  shall 
go  and  fulfil  my  promise  (rather  against  the 
grain)  and  go  and  name  a  day  for  Harker  to 
come  and  see  my  Eembrandt  etchings.  Pve  got 
a  Hundred  Guilder  that  will  humble  the  fellow, 
who  thinks  that  Avith  his  money  he  can  buy  any- 
thing. It  is  the*  finest  existing.  I  have  him 
there.  Good-bye,  Eomeo  :  the  brightest  love- 
star  lead  thee  safe." 

"  Good-bye,"  said  the  Vicar,  and  swept  off  at  a 
smart  pace. 

Amy  had  not  yet  arrived  when  Beauflower 
reached  the  Lawsons',  and  he  was  afraid  to  start  in 


BREAKIXG   THE    ICE.  .  173 

search  of  her  for  fear  he  might  take  the  wrong  road, 
as  it  had  not  been  settled  whether  she  came  by  the 
Terraces  or  the  high  road.  Mr.  Eobinson  was  busy 
in  his  studio,  at  whose  door  the  nasturtiums  grew 
in  great  blooms  of  different  depths  of  pale  and 
dark  brown  orange,  and  in  their  odd-shaped  and 
leaky  cups  black  rufl&ans  of  humble  bees  were 
rummaging  with  all  the  quiet  courtesy  of  un- 
feed  custom-house  officers.  Below,  too,  S23read 
a  little  azm^e  growth  of  nemophyla,  and  some  un- 
obtrusive mignonette,  which  diffused  a  heavenly 
perfume  w^henever  the  breeze  passed  lingeringly 
over  it.  Mr.  Eobinson  sat  absorbed  before  a 
great  canvas,  on  wdiich  was  the  first  sketch  of  a 
Cupid  and  Psyche,  whom  three  Cupids  were  bind- 
ing together  with  strings  of  roses  and  myrtle  ;  the 
design  by  some  pupil  of  Titian.  It  was  a  pretty 
thino^,  and  full  of  delicious  colour.  Mr.  Kobin- 
son,  who  seemed  depressed,  grew  quite  eloquent 
about  it. 

"  Sir  Joshewa,''  he  said,  as  he  squeezed  some 
cobalt  lovingly  under  his  palette-knife,  "  always 
made  this  great  mistake  in  his  desire  for  rich 
impasto  and  solidity;  he  used  buttery  mediums 
to  paint  with,  and  covered  over  perishable  slow- 
drying  colours  with  thin  quick-drying  glazes. 
The  result  was  destruction/' 

Mrs.  Eobinson  sat  by  the  door  (not  that  lead- 


174  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

ing  into  the  inner  worksliop,  but  the  one  leading 
into  the  garden)  and  worked  at  some  old- 
fashioned  silk  netting  (really  a  present  for  her 
husband  on  his  forthcoming  birthday). 

"  Amy  will  never  forget  you,  Tm  sure/'  she 
said  to  the  Vicar,  who  was  amiably  standing  up, 
holding  a  skein  of  blue  silk  for  her  to  wind. 
"  Twice  you  have  saved  her  life  :  once  in  that 
terrible  brook,  and  now  from  those  dreadful 
wretches.  We  shall  soon  go  from  here,  but  we 
shall  always  remember  your  heroic  courage." 

"  My  dear  Mrs.  Kobinson,  what  I  did  every 
man  would  have  done.  You  have  overwhelmed 
me  with  thanks,  and  so  has  Amy.  Let  us  turn 
to  something  else.  Don  t  talk  nonsense  about 
going.      You  ain't   going — perhaps   you'll  never 

go." 

^^  You  have  not  heard  of  our  bad  news  (a  tear 
gathered  in  her  eye  as  she  spoke  and  glanced  at 
her  husband,  who  was  intent  on  a  scumble  over 
the  back  of  one  of  the  rosy  Cupids).  "  May  I 
tell  him,  John  ?  Yes,  I  see  I  may.  Oh,  Mr.  Beau- 
flower,  do,  do  pray  give  us  your  ad"\TLce,  for  indeed 
we  need  it." 

''  I  shall  be  only  too  happy,"  said  Beauflower ; 
"  come  now,  tell  me  all  your  troubles  ;  you  know 
by  profession  I  am  a  father  confessor." 

"  Yesterday  morning  we  had  a  letter  from  that 


BEEAKIXG   THE    ICE.  175 

cruel  Mr.  Bassevi,  telling  us  tliat  Mr.  Cantelupe  is 
entirely  ruined,  and  that  all  the  pictures  he 
ordered  must  be  instantly  stopped;  and  this 
morning,  that  young  coxcomb  of  a  servant  of  his, 
who  has  been  courting  om^  little  servant,  Susan, 
and  trying  to  persuade  her  that  she  ought  to  get 
a  better  place,  came  with  a  letter  stopping  all 
Mr.  Harker^s  pictures  too,  except  those  abeady 
begiin.^^ 

"It  is  very  hard,"  said  Mr.  Eobinson,  looking 
up  over  his  spectacles  ;  "just  as  I  thought  I  was 
achieving  some  remarkable  efifects  of  colom\ 
The  time  I  have  spent  here  has  been  the  happiest 
in  my  life.  I  have  felt  like  a  man  who  has  put 
into  harbour  after  a  storm — and  now  comes  this 
blow/^ 

"  I  should  insist  on  carrying  out  the  contract, 
Mr.  Eobinson,"  said  Beauflower.  "  I  think  I 
know  an  honest  lawyer  who  would  j)rotect  your 
interests  in  this  matter.  This  man  is  a  cheat. 
Has  he  paid  you  much  in  advance  ? " 

"  Well,"  said  Mr.  Eobinson,  transferring  his 
brushes  from  his  right  to  his  left  hand,  and  passing 
his  hand  through  his  thin  grey  hair  in  a  perturbed 
way;  "yes,  he  has  at  various  times  advanced 
certain  sums,  of  which,  trusting  to  his  honour,  I 
am  afraid  I  have  not  kept  a  very  exact  account. 
He  has  pressed  furniture,  and   wine,    and   other 


176  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

things  upon  me,  whicli  lie  now  pretends  leave  me 
considerably  in  liis  debt.  I  always  was  a  child  in 
money  matters,  and  I  fear  I  always  shall  be.  Oh 
dear,  dear,  I  only  wish  I  had  my  time  over  again.'' 

"  Then  the  tenants  the  major  got  us  so  kindly," 
said  Mrs.  Kobinson,  ^'talk  very  large  and  promise 
very  large,  but  they  have  only  paid  one  quarter's 
rent.  The  major  says  it's  all. right,  and  no  doubt 
it  is  ;  but  we  want  the  money,  especially  now." 

"  They  allow  him  the  agency  for  the  cham- 
pagne he  sells  for  them,"  said  Mr.  Eobinson,  "  and 
that  pays  his  lodgings  here,  and  his  whisky — 
a  considerable  item  (Mr.  Eobinson  said  this  with 
an  air  of  melancholy  experience) ;  but  then  he  is 
so  sanguine.  He  is  full  now  of  a  patent  he  is 
going  to  take  out  for  extracting  a  waterproof 
varnish  for  coats  from  horse-chestnut  buds.  The 
only  difficulty  remaining,  he  says,  is  obtaining  a 
sufficient  quantity,  so  he  is  getting  a  chemist  to 
analyse  the  substance,  to  make  it  artificially.  I 
don't  know  about  it,  but  he  is  very  sanguine." 

The  Vicar  laughed.  "  Mr.  Goodrick  laid  a  cruel 
trap  for  the  major  the  other  day,  Mrs.  Eobinson," 
he  said.  "  He  was  boasting,  in  his  amusing  way, 
of  havino;  seen  all  the  hig;hest  mountains  in  the 
world,  including  Chimborazo  and  the  Himalayas ; 
Goodrick  quietly  asked  him  if  he  had  ever  been 
up    Dorfel,    which    sounded    like   a   Norwegian 


BREAKIXG    THE    ICE.  177 

mountain.  '  Dorfel/  said  lie ;  '  bedad,  and  I 
have,  and  slept  on  the  top,  and  a  finer  view  than 
there  was  from  it  I  never  clapped  eyes  on/  But, 
unfortunately  for  the  major,  Dorfel  happens  to  be 
one  of  the  chief  mountains  in  the  moon,  and 
twenty-six  thousand  feet  high." 

Miserable  as  they  were,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Eobinson 
lauglied  heartily  at  this. 

"  Still  really  he  is  a  very  extraordinary  man," 
said  Mrs.  Eobinson,  "  and  he  has  gone  through 
extraordinary  adventures." 

"  I  would  not  for  the  world  underrate  him," 
said  the  Vicar,  "  but  I  must  say  his  imagination 
is  certainly  very  active." 

*'  All  these  misfortunes  coming  together,  my 
dear  sir,"  said  Eobinson,  "  you  see  make  us  both 
very  anxious  that  dear  Amy  should  keep  her 
situation,  and  bear  patiently  with  the  little  morti- 
fications and  indignities  that  those  proud  people 
put  upon  her,  and  which  she  sometimes  is  in- 
clined, I  much  fear  even  to  resent." 

"  Oh,  it's  shameful,  ^h\  Beauflower,"  said  Mrs. 
Eobinson.  "Lately  they  hardly  ever  have  her 
down  to  dinner  when  anyone  is  there.  They 
seem  frightened  to  death  that  people  should 
admire  her  more  than  that  stuck-up  disagreeable 
daughter  of  theirs." 

"  They  have  so  insulted  me  that  I  shall  never 

VOL.    III.  N 


178  THE   vicar's    COUETSHIP. 

cross  their  threshold  again/'  said  the  Vicar,  with 
warmth.  "  I  am  very  sorry  that  Amy — I  mean 
Miss  Eobinson^ — has  been  obliged  to  bear  these 
humiliations  so  lono\" 

o 

''  It  grieves  me  to  the  heart,"  said  Mrs.  Eobin- 
son,  "  to  think  that  we  shall  now  have  to  look  to 
our  dear  girl  for  aid.  But  stop — I  really  think 
I  hear  her  coming." 

There  was  the  click  of  a  latch,  and  a  light 
footfall  along  the  paved  passage  from  the  street. 
Then  the  prettiest  voice  in  the  world  was  heard 
carolling, 

"  The  mocking-bird  sits  singing  on  the  tree." 

Beauflower  stepped  behind  the  half-open  door  as 
Amy  stooped  to  kiss  her  mother  and  ran  in  to 
kiss  her  father.  Then  she  looked  round,  still  not 
seeing  the  Vicar,  and  said,  in  rather  a  disap- 
pointed way,  "  "Wliat,  isn't  he  come  ?  " 

"  Who,  Amy  ? "  said  her  father,  smiling. 

Just  at  that  moment  she  saw  Beauflower,  as  he 
stood  in  the  shadow,  and  by  an  uncontrollable 
emotion  of  love  and  delight,  flew  into  his  arms. 

''  Then  you  have  told  them  all,  dear  Ned  ? " 
she  said,  kissing  him. 

The  brush  droj)ped  from  Eobinson's  hand,  the 
netting  fell  on  Mrs.  Eobinson's  lap. 

"  Oh,  it's   come   to   that,  has   it  1 "    said   Mr. 


BREAKING   THE   ICE.  179 

Eobinson.  "  Mr.  Beauflower,  Mr.  Beaiiflower,  why, 
you  never  told  us  that  Amy  loved  you." 

"  Amy,"  said  Mrs.  Eobinson  ;  Amy  fell  at  her 
mother's  feet,  and  her  mother  pressed  her  to  her 
bosom  half  lovingly,  half  sorro^\^ully,  for  even 
maternal  love  is,  in  its  way,  selfish,  and  dreads  a 
rival. 

"  It  was  very  cowardly  of  me  delaying  to  ask 
your  consent,"  said  the  Vicar,  as  Amy  returned  to 
his  side,  and  nestled  there  in  all  the  innocent 
boldness  of  avowed  love. 

"It  is  useless,  I  see,  for  me  to  ask  Amy  if  she 
loves  you,"  said  Mr.  Eobinson.  "  WeU,  I  suppose 
it  must  be  so ;  but  you  must  wait,  my  dear  sir,  I 
fear,  for  brighter  days." 

"  Of  com^se  it  must  be,"  said  the  smiling  and 
delighted  mother,  "  and  Mr.  Beauflower  -will  stay 
and  have  tea  with  us,  out  here  ;  it  is  so  pleasant 
among  the  flowers,  and  there's  more  air ;  and  then 
he  can  take  Amy  back  to  the  Abbey." 

"  I  shall  not  walk  back  with  Mr.  Beauflower," 
said  Amy,  slijiping  her  arm  in  his  in  her  own 
pretty  fondling  way. 

"  Amy  !  "  said  the  surprised  lover. 

"  My  dear  ?  "  said  Mrs.  Eobinson. 

"  Holloh,  Amy ! ! !  "  said  Mr.  Eobinson,  letting 
a  collapsible  tube  of  flake  white  fall  with  a 
clatter  into  his  paint-box. 

N  2 


180  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

"  Ladies  and  gentlemen,"  said  Amy,  leading 
the  Vicar  forward,  like  a  manag;eress  addressing;  a 
House,  "  allow  me  to  inform  you,  and  all  whom  it 
may  concern,  that  Miss  Amy  Eobinson  does  not 
intend  returning  any  more  to  the  Abbey,  and 
moreover,  that  she  expects  her  boxes  by  the 
Slobury  carrier  this  very  night." 

"  Amy  !  "  broke  out  everyone  again. 

"  Merely  that — to  use  the  language  of  the 
servants,  with  whom  those  unjDleasant  j)eople 
seemed  determined  to  associate  me — I  have  given 
them  warning,  and  what  is  more,  taken  my  leave. 
But  shall  I  tell  the  story  while  we're  having  tea  ?  " 

*'  Yes,  yes,"  said  everj^one.     "  No,  no,  now." 

"  But  ah,  Amy  ! "  said  Mr.  Eobinson,  sighing 
as  he  selected  a  favourite  old  brush  vdth  only 
three  hairs  left  in  it  ;  "  you  have  been  very  rash 
and  hot-headed  ;  you  would  have  acted  differently 
if  you  had  known  all  the  trouble  that  has  come 
down  like  an  avalanche  on  your  mother  and 
myself  this  morning.  Amy,  we  have  little  to 
depend  upon  now  but  your  salary,  and  we  cannot 
allow  you  to  marry  and  then  have  to  come  like 
beggars  asking  for  alms  at  your  husband's  door." 

"  Amy,"  said  Mrs.  Eobinson,  bursting  into  tears 
by  a  sudden  re\Tilsion  of  feeling,  "that  ^\Tetch 
Bassevi  has  broken  all  his  promises,  and  stopped 
all  your  father's  engagements.     That  is  because 


BREAKING   THE   ICE.  181 

3'ou  refused  him,  and  the  major  can  get  no  rent 
for  us  from  those  people,  and  he  even  confessed  this 
morning  that  things  look  rather  suspicious,  and  that 
horrible  grocer  has  sent  his  bill  in  ao;ain  and  told 
the  boy  to  wait.  I  can't  bear  damping  your  joy 
with  all  this  bad  news,  and  it  pains  me  to  expose 
our  poverty  before  j\Ir.  Beauflower,  but  it  is  right 
I  should,  it  is  right  I  should." 

"  Never  mind,  my  darling,"  said  the  old  artist, 
laying  down  his  arrows  and  target,  his  palette 
and  brushes,  and  coming^  and  kissins:  his  wife's 
forehead;  "  we  too  were  young  once.  Amy  meant  it 
for  the  best,  she  did  not  know  all  that  happened." 

Then  Amy  arose,  like  a  J  oan  of  Arc  rising  from 
her  vow — the  tears  were  in  her  eyes — but  she 
shook  them  off  as  a  rose  shaken  by  the  morning 
wind  casts  off  its  jewellery  of  dew.-  She  drew  a 
letter  warm  from  her  bosom  that  now  beat  faster 
with  generous  dehght,  and  waved  it  in  the  air. 
She  had  come,  like  the  Duchess  of  Montford,  with 
countless  hopes,  like  mailed  knights  in  her  train, 
to  succour  the  beleaguered  city.  "  Troubles  or  no 
troubles,  dear  mother,"  she  said,  looking  radiant 
as  the  restored  Eurydice,  ''  troubles  or  no 
troubles,  this  is  why  I  left  the  Barkers.  Mrs. 
Harker  this  mornino;  was  more  cruel  to  me  than 
ever.  She  complained  of  my  wickedly  alienating 
Mr.  Cantelupe's  affections  from  her  daughter,  and 


182  THE   vicar's    COUETSHIP. 

of  meeting  Ned  secretly;  she  called  it  a  clan- 
destine intercourse  unknown  to  my  friends.  She 
heaped  on  me  every  sort  of  taunting  and  bitter 
reproach.  'She  even  dared  to  say  my  marriage 
ought  to  be  immediate.  People  talk  of  the  old 
Adam,  but  there  is  also  an  old  Eve — she  rose  in 
me  then,  I  told  her  I  would  bear  no  more,  I  would 
leave  that  moment ;  so  I  bowed  to  the  wicked 
and  cruel  woman,  kissed  dear  Ethel  a  dozen  times, 
gave  her  one  of  my  favourite  books,  wished  the 
housekeeper  and  one  or  two  of  the  female  servants 
who  had  been  kind  to  me  good  bye,  and  instantly 
left  the  house." 

"  It  was  nobly  done,  Amy,"  said  the  delighted 
lover. 

"  If  you  had  only  known  this  bad  news.  Amy," 
said  Mrs.  Kobinson,  "  God  would  have  given  you 
patience,  I  know  ;  yes,  even  under  that  sore  trial." 

"  God  is  good,"  said  Amy,  "  and  he  has  sent  this 
rainbow  after  the  storm."  She  waved  the  letter 
again.  "  This  came  last  night  directed  to  me.  It 
is  from  Mr.  Thorndyke,  that  kind  curiosity  dealer, 
who  used  to  send  you  pictures  to  restore,  and  who 
got  this  situation  for  me  at  the  Abbey.  Not 
knowing  your  address  he  desires  me  to  tell  you — 
what  do  you  think,  dear  papa  ? — now  guess, 
mamma." 

"  Oh,  don't  keep  us  in  suspense,  Amy  dear," 


BREAKING   THE    ICE.  183 

said  Mrs.  Eobinson,  who  was  lianging  upon  her 
words. 

"  Well,  I  will.  Why,  that  some  rich  patron  of 
his,  whose  name  he  does  not  mention,  has  directed 
him  to  offer  you,  dear  papa,  200?.  a  year  to  copy 
a  set  of  Yandycks,  which  Avill  be  sent  here,  for 
hmi.  The  series  will  take  many  years,  and  is 
not  to  preclude  other  work.  501.  is  to  be  sent 
in  advance.  Now  kiss  me,  kiss  me  directly, 
everybody,  while  I  dance  about." 

Old  Kobinson  fell  back  in  his  chair,  the  brush 
dropped  from  his  hand.  Then  he  looked  up 
and  said  in  a  low  deep  voice,  "  thank  God ! " 
He  rose  to  kiss  Amy,  but  she  was  already  on 
her  knees,  folded  in  her  mother's  arms.  When 
the  two  had  both  kissed  her,  she  flew  into  Ned's 
arms  and  nestled  there  en  permanence. 

"  I  never  felt  so  happy  in  my  life,"  said  Mr. 
Eobinson,  stepping  out  into  the  sunshine,  and 
picking  a  great  bunch  of  mignonette  for  Amy. 

"  And  now  we'll  have  a  good  cup  of  tea,"  said 
Mrs.  Kobinson,  "but,  oh  dear,  my  poor  old 
memory !  I  had  forgotten,  Amy,  there  is  a  parcel 
just  come  for  you  from  London." 

''  From  London  ? "  said  Amy,  her  eyebrows 
springing  into  an  arch  ;   "  what  can  it  be  ? " 

The  parcel  was  produced,  it  was  square  and 
compact.     Amy  tore  at  one  corner  of  the  brown 


184  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

paper,  and  picked  a  hole.  It  revealed  a  square 
Indian  box  inlaid  with  green  stained  ivory  and 
ebony ;  so  people  look  at  the  direction  of  a  letter, 
instead  of  at  once  opening  and  reading  it. 

]Mr.  Eobinson  took  a  knife  and  cut  the  string 
boldly.  There  appeared  a  costly  Indian  workbox, 
edged  and  cornered  with  bronze  and  silver.  There 
was  a  card  upon  it  in  Cantelupe's  writing,  inscribed : 

"For  the  Belle  of  Foxtford." 
"La  Belle  des  Belles." 

Amy  pushed  the  present  from  her  with  beau- 
tiful disdain. 

"  I  won't  have  it,"  she  said,  "  I  don't  want  his 
presents.     Let  him  send  them  to  Miss  Harker." 

"  I  didn't  think  Cantelupe  knew  so  much 
French,  j^oor  fellow,"  said  the  Vicar,  with  the 
generosity  of  a  victor.  "  I  never  could  get  any- 
thing into  his  head,  for  he  never  would  read  any- 
thing but  the  '  Kacing  Calendar'  and  '  Bell's  Life.' " 

The  tea  was  the  pleasantest  little  pic-nic  con- 
ceivable.     The   sunlio'ht  towards  sunset   fell  in 

o 

bars  and  trellises  across  the  one  side  of  the  room. 
The  flowers  wafted  in  their  tribute  of  scent. 
Everyone  laughed,  chatted,  and  was  happy,  and 
a  cup  of  tea  was  presented  by  unanimous  consent 
to  thirsty  and  receptive  Mr.  Lawson,  who  was 
planing  busily  in  the  next  room. 


BREAKING   TilE    ICE.  185 

All  at  once  tlicrc  was  a  du.sh  of  wliccls,  Iho 
flourLsh  of  a  liorri,  a  noisy  careless  impatient  krux-M 
at  the  street  door,  and  C;u]telupe  appeared,  liat 
in  hand,  at  th';  workshop  door,  dn'ssf-'l  in  IIjo 
culmination  of  tJie  latest  fasljjon,  and  holdiiig  a 
bouquet  of  the  raicst  flowers.  Just  as  he  entered, 
the  Vicar  was  holdin;^  up  Anjy's  little  v.jjite  Ijiujd, 
and  laughingly  exhibiting  the  l>etrotlj;il  ring 
which  she  wore.  Talleyrand  liimsf ,lf,  in  pooi- 
Cantelupe's  place,  might  have  been  [jurdoned 
some  confusion  at  such  an  unexpected  sight.  He 
turned  vcaj  led,  and  stammered — 

"Thousand  pardons— 'pon  my  word,  didn't 
know — Miss  Robinson,  I  beg " 

He  was,  in  fact,  after  leaving  the  bouquet 
with  some  indistinct  words,  backing  and  bowing 
himself  out,  when  ]>eauf1ower,  in  his  manly 
frank  sincere  way,  rose,  shook  his  liand,  and  forced 
the  discomfited  visitor  into  a  chair  next  ]\lrs. 
Robinson,  who,  with  great  jiromptitude,  instantly 
poured  him  out  a  cup  of  tea,  and  started  him 
with  a  fresh  muffin  that  smiling  Susan,  who,  with  a 
woman's  instinct,  had  n^ad  at  a  glance  what  had 
hajipened  and  what  was  happening,  just  tlien 
brought  in.  Cantelupe  being  a  man  of  the  world, 
in  a  short  time  enjoyed  himself  as  much  as  the  rest, 
and  told  the  whole  story  of  Immensehikoff  and  the 
germinating    sporules   of    Lycopodium    that 


186  THE   VICAE's    COUETSHIP. 

veterinary  siurgeon  of  Sliaftesbury  liad  just  found 
in  the  horse.  But  Amy  was  resolute  not  to  accept 
the  desk,  and  let  him  very  clearly  know  that  she 
was  engaged  to  Beauflower.  The  purest  love  is 
cruel  to  the  defeated.  It  is  not  in  women  to  waste 
much  thought  on  rejected  lovers.  Amy  was 
23olite,  and  no  more.  The  game  was  up,  as  Cante- 
lupe  expressed  it  to  himself,  and  Beauflower  had 
clearly  won  the  rubber. 

"  I  have  been  a  fool,"  he  said,  as  he  drove  Beau- 
flower home,  ''  an  immense  and  awful  fool,  and  I  ve 
]3aid  for  it.  Harker  has  foreclosed  his  mortgages, 
and  the  beggar  is  going  to  sell  me  up.  Tm  bank- 
rupt both  in  love  and  fortune.  I  might  have  been 
sure  Amy  would  never  have  me.  I  looked  the 
wrong  way,  there  was  some  one  I  might  have 
succeeded  better  with  and  been  happier  with,  but 
that  too  is  gone.  Tm  a  poor  penniless  fool,  driven 
about  anywhere  by  the  Jews.  There'll  be  a 
man  in  possession  to-morrow  at  the  old  crib.  It's 
hard  lines,  for  I  could  pull  through  now  if  they 
only  gave  me  time.  Fairfield  is  doing  his  best 
for  me.  Fox  and  Shekell  have  plundered  me  right 
and  left.  Of  course  you  heard  how  Jack  Talbot 
and  the  rest  of  the  hawks  took  flight  when  the 
pigeon  was  plucked.  By  Jove,  sir,  I  was  so  riled 
I  could  have  shot  one  or  two  of  them." 

"  May  ^I    ask   who  this  other   lady  to   whom 


BREAKING   THE   ICE.  187 

you     refer     is,     Cantelupe  ? "    said    BeaufloAver, 
thoughtfully. 

"  No,  I  will  never  mention  her  name  to  any- 
one. I  feel  I  am  an  idiot.  No  woman  will  ever 
love  me  as  you  are  loved.  I  am  too  wild  and 
thoughtless,  and  selfish.'' 

"  Then  become  different,  and  make  yourself 
worthy  of  some  good  girl's  love.  J\Iake  a  great 
effort,  man,  pay  off  these  miserable  debts,  and 
contract  no  more." 

"  Pay  off— I'll  sell  every  acre.  I'll  make  the 
w^hole  place  as  smooth  as  the  palm  of  my  hand. 
I  won  t  leave  a  bush,  but  it  is  too  late.  They 
advertise  the  property  next  week.  I  see  nowhere 
to  turn  for  the  money;  Oh,  I  could  shoot  myself." 

"  Break  out  of  the  broad  priim^ose  path  and 
strike  at  once  straight,  as  you  ride,  for  the  narrow 
way.  Don't  listen  to  nonsense  about  evil  stars, 
bad  luck  and  destiny,  get  under  a  new  star,  force 
your  luck  on  to  the  right  rails,  put  your  destiny 
again  on  the  forge.  But  wo !  I  must  get  down  here." 
"  I  feel  quite  a  new  man  when  I  hear  you  talk, 
old  feUow.  You  had  always  pluck  enough  for  a 
regiment.  I  only  wish  I  had  your  resolution. 
Well,  I  will  try  and  change  myself." 

"  One  more  question,"  said  Beauflower,  as  he 
descended  from  the  precipice  of  the  box  seat,  and 
stood  with  one  foot  on  the  roller  bolt.     "  One 


188  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

more  question,  and  now  you  must  answer  me, 
Fitz,  boldly,  yes  or  no.  "Was  it  not  you  who  sent 
that  80l.  anonymously  for  the  Chetwynd  Dilapi- 
dation Fund  1     Come,  yes  or  no  ? " 

The  colour  mounted  to  Cantelupe's  cheek.  He 
caught  up  his  whip  lash  and  looked  down  at  it 
like  a  scolded  schoolboy.  Then  after  a  pause  he 
said — 

"  Well,  yes  it  Avas  ;  and  as  luck  would  have  it, 
I  paid  it  in  too  before  this  awful  smash  came." 

"  You  must  not  give  it  all  now.'^ 

"  Bosh  !  you  don't  Avant  to  offend  me,  do  you  ? 
Are  you  down,  old  man  ?  Yaep  ! — my  beauties  ! 
— good-bye,  Beauflower,  my  respects  at  the  Vicar- 
age. See  you  again  soon.  Mind,  you  must  ask 
me  to  the  wedding,  unless  I'm  in  quod." 

Then  off  whirled  the  yellow  drag  round  the 
corner  by  the  Abbey. 

"  There's  good  in  him  stilV  said  Beauflower, 
as  he  beat  the  garden  wall  with  his  stick. 

He  told  the  good  news  at  home,  and  they  were 
delighted,  even  the  worthy  old  lady,  who  thought 
Amy  would  never  grow  old  enough  to  manage  a 
house. 

"  Poor  Mr.  Cantelupe,"  said  Julia,  who  was 
teaching  Wasp  to  beg.  "  I  suppose  that  nasty  Miss 
Harker  won't  have  the  poor  fellow  now  he  has  run 
through  all  his  money.     She  ought  to  be  ashamed 


BREAKIXG   THE    ICE.  189 

of  herself,  and  Miss  Chivers  says  so  too,  after  all 
she  and  her  mother  have  done  to  attract  him." 

"  Julia,"  said  Beauflower,  as  he  stooped  doTm 
and  earned  off  Wasp  from  his  slavery,  "  some  one 
somewhere  said,  *pity  is  akin  to  love,'  take  care!" 

Julia  made  no  reply,  but  sat  down  on  a  foot- 
stool at  her  brother's  feet,  and  pressed  his  hand 
under  her  chin. 

''My  dear  Edward,  do  come  and  look  here," 
said  the  worthy  and  unsuspecting  old  lady,  to 
whose  spectacled  eyes  the  little  Cupids  buzzing 
in  the  air  were  invisible  ;  "  only  just  look  what  a 
feverish  colour  JuHa  has  got.  I  told  her  she  was 
not  well,  besides  she's  been  crying." 

"  Yes,  it  is  so,"  thought  Beauflower,  as  he  left 
the  room  soon  afterwards.  "  Ju  loves  him,  and 
like  a  true  woman  loves  him  more  for  his  mis- 
fortunes. I  pray  to  God  that  he  may  see  his 
folly,  and  change  now  before  too  late.  He  has 
had  a  hard  lesson  enough,  poor  fellow." 

As  the  Vicar  changed  his  coat,  the  two  letters 
of  the  morning  dropped  out.  They  were  threat- 
ening letters ;  one  from  a  Mr.  Harpy,  of  Oxford, 
for  32l.  5s.;  the  other  from  a  Mr.  Clark,  a  fresh 
vulture,  inclosing  two  more  old  bills,  making  up 
together  77l.  145.  G^cL  Unless  these  accounts  were 
settled  by  the  12  th  of  August  (singularly  enough 
both  vultures  agreed  in  this  date ;  Beauflower  s 


190  THE   VICARS    COURTSHIP. 

marriage  liacl  been  fixed  for  tlie  20tli),  proceedings 
would  at  once  be  taken.  The  fresli  account  was 
really  owing;  for  the  other,  the  receipt  had  been 
destroyed.  Beauflower  answered  the  first  depre- 
catingly,  and  the  second  he  threw  into  the  waste 
paper  basket. 

There  was  but  one  remedy,  one  port  of  refuge 
now — Bassevi.  The  Vicar  sat  do^^al  and  wrote  to 
him,  saying  he  had  one  or  two  pictures  of  which 
he  wanted  to  dispose,  if  he  could  see  him  about 
three  o'clock  on  the  ensuing  Friday.  Anything  to 
stave  off  the  pressing  trouble.  He  would  also 
get  his  mother  to  try  and  persuade  the  insurance 
society  to  give  him  six  or  seven  hundred  pounds 
for  her  policy ;  anything  to  enable  him  to  pay 
that  galling  debt,  and  rescue  him  from  the  Fieuvre. 

There  were  tears  in  his  eyes  as  he  sat  poring 
over  his  accounts  and  trying  to  make  them 
balance  less  on  the  wrong  side,  when  the  door 
opened  and  Julia,  with  her  hair  down,  stole  in, 
and  silently  kissing  him,  looked  into  his  eyes 
sorrowfully ;  she,  the  proud,  gay  Beatrice,  who 
usually  seemed  never  to  have  known  a  care. 

"You  have  some  great  sorrow,  Ned?"  she  said, 
kneelinof  before  him  with  her  hands  in  his  :  "I 
have  long  seen  it.  You  have  now  always  those 
dreadful  accounts  before  you.  Are  you  in  debt, 
dear  ?  open  your  heart  to  me." 


BREAKING   THE   ICE.  191 

"  Yes,  I  am,  Ju,  and  overwlielmed.  There  is 
little  or  no  hope.  I  dare  not  tell  Amy,  nor  my 
mother ;  there  is  only  one  resource,  and  that  I 
must  try.  I  must  pay  a  few  of  the  pressing 
debts,  get  a  httle  money  for  the  weekly  demands 
of  the  chm'ch,  and  for  my  wedding  tour,  and  live 
frugally  till  the  next  tithes  come  in.'' 

Julia  consoled  him  by  all  sorts  of  hopeful 
schemes,  and  by  denunciations  of  money  in 
general. 

All  at  once  he  thrust  back  the  accounts  over 
which  they  were  poring,  and  held  her  face  be- 
tween his  hands  underneath  the  great  fall  of 
glossy  dark  hair  that  streamed  over  them ;  as  he 
looked  intently  into  her  eyes,  which  had  never 
before  Cjuailed  under  his  glance,  they  shrank  and 
closed  like  weather-telling  flowers  at  the  passing 
of  a  thunder-cloud. 

"Julia,  you  love  him?"  he  said,  that  was  all. 

Then  the  fountains  of  her  heart  burst  forth  into 
quick,  hot,  impetuous  tears,  she  hid  her  head  on 
his  shoulder,  and  murmured, 

"  Yes  ;  I  love  him.     I  love  him." 


192  THE   vicar's   courtship. 


CHAPTEK  XIL 

TESTING   THE    DIAMOND. 

On    the    Friday,  August    10,    George,   'more 
affected  on    parting    with   his   master    for  fou 
days  than  perhaps  strict  temperance  demanded, 
drove  him    with    the   Cuyps,    carefully  packed, 
to  the  10.15  a.m.  train  at  Slobury. 

The  Vicar  took  with  him  the  two  jewel-cases 
that  he  was  to  leave  for  Mr.  Goodrick  with  Mr. 
Hoffman,  at  Number  7,  Dorset  Chambers,  Austin 
Friars ;  he  placed  them  in  his  breast  pocket,  and 
took  care  not  to  go  to  sleep  during  the  journey 
for  fear  of  any  danger.  He  drove  on  arriving 
straight  to  the  New  Hummums,  and,  having 
dressed  and  dined,  went  and  called  on  his  cousin 
Fairfield,  at  5,  Fm^nival's  Inn. 

Fairfield  was  as  pleasant  and  as  preoccupied  as 
ever.  He  was  coming  Beauflower's  way  early  in 
September,  probably  the  3rd,  to  superintend  the 
sale  of  that  unfortunate  young  fellow's  property 
at  Swallowcliff,  and  to  try  and  make  some  salvage 


.TESTING   THE    DIAMOND.  193 

out  of  it,  but  lie  feared  the  sum  realised  would 
not  much  more  than  clear  off  the  mortgages. 

The  letter  Beauflower  had  received  from  Bas- 
sevi  the  day  before  he  left  Wiltshire  ran  thus, 

]22,  Charlotte  Street,  Fitzroy  Square, 

August  8,  1866. 

"  Dear  Sir, — I  well  remember  my  visit  to  your 
house.  I  am  very  busy  j ust  now  taking  stock,  as  my 
jDartner,  Mr.  Zollner,  is  talking  of  going  to  settle 
in  New  York,  but  I  will  make  a  point  of  being  at 
home  next  AYednesday  at  3  p.m.  if  you  will  do  me 
the  honour  of  callino^  at  Charlotte  Street.  I  shall 
be  happy  to  give  you  a  fair  price  for  the  two 
Cuyps,  the  little  carving  you  showed  me,  and  any 
other  valuables,  or  to  advance  money  upon  them, 
but  I  am  afraid  Ave  shall  differ  considerably  as  to 
their  trade  value.  Buying  and  selling  are  two 
different  things,  and  persons  unaccustomed  to  the 
fluctuations  of  business  are  often  inclined  to  ask 
preposterous  sums  for  very  doubtful  articles. 
"  I  am,  dear  Sir, 

"  Yours  faithfully, 

''  Isaac  Basse vi. 

"  Rev.  Edward  Beauflower. 

"  P.S.  Please  to  inquire  for  me  at  the  left  hand 
door,  the  picture-restorer's." 

Beauflower  had  confided  a  few  of  his  troubles 

VOL.    IIL  O 


194  THE   vicar's   COUETSHIP. 

to  Fairfield,  who  had  strongly  advised  him 
not  to  surrender  his  mother's  policy  for  less  than 
500?.  unless  very  hard  pressed ;  at  her  age  the 
loss  was  obvious,  moreover  the  surrender  would 
be  a  matter  of  some  little  time,  and  would  not 
meet  any  present  emergency.  It  would  be  better 
to  borrow  money  at  a  high  rate  of  interest  than 
do  that.  When  Beauflower  mentioned  his  in- 
tended marriage  to  Amy  Kobinson,  Fairfield  (im- 
perturbable as  he  usually  was)  unmistakeably 
started,  asked  if  Mr.  Goodrick  was  aware  of  his 
intention,  and  seemed  relieved  when  he  heard 
that  he  was.  As  for  the  threats  of  those  rascally 
Oxford  attorneys  the  Vicar  might  disregard  those, 
they  were  mere  attempts  at  extortion,  l3ut  he 
must  carefully  look  for  his  receipts. 

At  ten  o'clock  on  the  Tuesday  morning  Beau- 
flower  left  the  New  Hummums,  took  a  turn  in 
Covent  Garden  to  enjoy  the  scent  and  colour  of 
that  pleasant  central  avenue,  then  started  for 
Austin  Friars  to  deposit  his  treasures  in  the  hands 
of  Mr.  Hoffmann,  the  German  commissioner  for 
the  Berlin  Winter  Exhibition.  He  turned  into 
that  quiet  monastic  region  by  the  Dutch  church, 
and,  with  some  httle  difficulty,  found  No.  7, 
Dorset  Chambers.  Eeading  down  the  names  on 
the  door-post  he  discovered  on  the  second  floor 
Messrs.  Huth  and  Zimmermann,  the  German  wool- 


TESTING   THE    DIAMOND.  195 

merchants,  to  wliom  parcels  for  Mr.  Hoflfmann 
were  to  be  entrusted.  Beauflower  scaled  the  dark 
funereal  stairs  and  reached  the  second  landing, 
where  there  was  a  olass-door  with  the  names  of 
Huth  and  Zimmermann  painted  on  it  in  black 
letters.  Entering,  he  inquired  over  the  inky 
battlement  that  enclosed  the  clerks,  if  J\Ir.  Hoff- 
mann was  in. 

"  Your  name,  sir  ? "  said  a  sharp  clerk,  sliding 
from  his  stool  southward  towards  him. 

"  Mr.  Hoffmann  does  not  know  my  name,"  said 
Beauflower,  "  but  I  have  brought  a  small  parcel 
from  ]Mr.  Goodrick  of  Buckingham  Street  for  the 
Berlin  Exhibition." 

"  Very  sottj,  sir,  but  Mr.  Hoffmann  left  for 
Germany  yesterday,  and  we  were  told  to  teU  any 
one  who  called  that  it  was  too  late-  to  forward  any 
more  articles  to  Berlin." 

"  That  is  very  unfortunate.  I  was  to  have 
brought  them  up  last  Friday,  but  1  was  prevented." 

"  I  think  I  heard  the  name  of  Goodrick,"  said 
a  gentleman  with  one  pen  behind  his  ear,  and 
another  in  his  hand,  coming  from  an  inner  room ; 
"  I  believe,  sir,  you  have  brought  some  jewels 
that  Mr.  Hoffmann  was  expecting. 

Beauflower  explained  the  matter  and  regretted 
the  delay. 

"  Mr.  Hoffmann,"  said  the  gentleman  with  the 

0  2 


196  THE   vicar's    COUETSHIP. 

two  pens,  "was  much  disappointed  at  going  with- 
out them,  as  he  told  me  they  were  remarkably- 
fine  specimens  of  their  kind,  and  of  great  value. 
Might  I  be  allowed  to  see  them  ?  I  have  myself 
rather  a  taste  for  these  thino^s." 

Beauflower  assented  with  pleasure,  drew  out 
the  two  cases  and  opened  them.  The  merchant's 
eyes  glistened  as  he  laid  down  one  of  his  pens 
and  handled  the  blue  diamond  as  if  it  was  a 
preserved  fruit  he  was  going  to  swallow.  He  held 
it  in  every  light,  and  looked  into  it  as  a  watch- 
maker looks  into  a  watch.  The  opal,  too,  with 
its  milky  fire  charmed  him  much. 

''So!  a  very  beautiful  stone,  indeed,"  he  said, 
"  almost  equal  to  the  Hope  diamond;  and  as  good 
an  opal  too  as  I  ever  saw  out  of  Vienna.  These 
jewels  would  have  been  great  acquisitions  at 
Berlin."  Then  he  spoke  a  few  words  in  German  to 
one  of  the  clerks.  "Ah !  yes ;  my  clerk  tells  me  that 
Mr.  Hoffmann  does  not  wish  them  sent ;  he  would 
not  insure  such  valuables  arriving  safe.  Les 
escrocs  sont  si  adroits.  The  thieves  are  so  clever, 
they  get  inklings  of  these  things.  I  really 
wouldn't  trust  my  own  brother  with  such  stones ; 
we  commercial  men  get  so  suspicious,  you  see." 

The  Vicar  put  up  the  jewels  in  their  cases, 
thanked  Mr.  Huth  for  his  politeness,  and  returned 
to  the  Hummums.     He  then,  according  to  promise, 


TESTING    THE    DIAMOND.  197 

went  to  Mr.  Goodrick's  cliambers.  It  was  now 
nearly  twelve.  He  found  tlie  laundress,  as  usual, 
slightly  obscured,  and  too  redolent  of  the  fatal 
juniper  berry. 

She  had  been  werry  'ticklar  about  airing  the 
rooms.  Hoped  Master  was  quite  well  and  had  had 
no  return  of  those  faint  feelings.  The  gas  people 
had  been  about  their  money,  and  two  gentlemen 
had  called  one  morning  and  said  they  had  walked 
in  from  the  country  to  see  Mr.  Goodrick  and  would 
like  to  sit  down  a  bit,  but  this  request  she  refused ; 
and  since  then  the  police  had  been  round  and  told 
her  to  take  care  as  there  were  some  swell  mobsmen 
about  a-robbing  of  gentlemen's  chambers,  so  that 
was  a  merciful  visitation.  Mr.  Greenfell,  on  the 
third  floor,  had  been  taken  very  ill  on  the  stairs 
one  night  a  week  since ;  he  could  not  unlock  his 
door,  and  frightened  her  and  her  husband  very 
much,  but  it  had  been  since  found  ]\Ir.  G.  had 
been  out  to  the  Freemasons.  Would  Mr.  Beau- 
flower  mention  these  facts  to  Master,  and  would 
he  like  to  sit  down? 

The  Vicar  refused  to  sit  do^\^i  but  promised  to 
give  a  faithful  report  of  the  various  transactions 
enumerated. 

Then  he  went  out,  strolled  to  the  end  of  the 
street,  and  looked  through  the  spiked  grating  at 
the  old  sooty  water-gate  of  Zimri's  palace,  with  its 


198  THE    VICAE's    COUETSHIP. 

scollop  shells,  stone  globes,  and  the  almost  illegible 
motto  of  the  Villiers, — 

^^Fidei  coticula  crux." 

(The  Cross  is  the  whetstone  of  Faith),- — 
the  long  plain  letters  of  which  were  filled  up  with 
black  grime.  The  steps  were  all  awry,  np  which 
Waller  and  Charles  the  Second,  Killigrew  and 
Eochester,  may  have  stepped,  and  laughing  Nell 
Crwynne  tripped.  There  were  green  pads  of  moss 
now  between  the  joints  of  the  broken  steps,  and 
port- wine  coloured  mud,  cold  and  purply,  marked 
the  line  of  the  ebb  tide,  which  was  washing  up 
with  a  dull,  recurrent  flap  against  the  murky  side 
of  some  old  coal  barges  at  Hungerford  Stairs. 

Just  struck  one  ;  two  hours  longer.  The  Vicar 
strolled  into  the  National  Gallery,  looked  at  the 
grand  old  head  of  Gevartius,  and  the  Bardolphian 
face  of  Rembrandt,  and  thought  of  the  hours  old 
Eobinson — blessed  with  a  taste  of  art,  and  cursed 
with  a  mediocrity  of  talent — had  spent  there  sur- 
rounded by  all  the  efiete  crew  of  chattering 
copiers,  and  slavish  imitators  of  technicalities  and 
accident.  The  rooms  were  stivy,  the  ordinary 
visitors  vulgar,  stupid  and  tasteless.  He  was 
glad  to  get  out  again,  and  see  that  by  St.  Martin's 
clock  it  was  a  quarter  to  two.  Then,  passing  by 
the  pert  statue  of  Charles  the  First,  tossing  its 
empty  head  at  the  Banqueting  House   Avindow 


TESTING    THE    DIAMOND.  199 

to  the  west,  where  the  stubborn  and  faithless 
monarch  once  met  with  rather  a  disagreeable 
accident,  he  crossed  over  to  the  Horse-Guards, 
and,  thinking  of  poor  young  Brown  and  his 
follies,  looked  up  for  a  moment  at  those  handsome 
but  costly  chimney-piece  ornaments,  the  two  life 
guardsmen  in  the  niches  at  the  entrance,  and 
smiled  to  see  a  smart  maid-servant,  running 
across  the  road  with  a  foaming  pot  of  porter, 
awake  tender  recollections,  and  something  very 
like  a  wink  in  the  stern  eye  of  the  right  hand 
horseman,  who  previously  had  seemed  like  an 
enchanted  Barbarossa  Avaiting  for  the  Last 
Trumpet  to  summon  him  to  Armageddon.  Tivo, 
clashed  the  clocks,  with  an  irregular  file-firing  of 
clang  and  boom.  The  Vicar  passed  through  the 
dark  archway,  where  the  regiment  that  never 
fought  but  one  battle  strode,  or  lolled  on  benches 
outside  the  guard -room.  The  air  was  fresher  on 
the  Parade.  The  trees  on  the  Mall  side  were 
sickening  here  and  there  with  prematm^e  autumn. 
The  Vicar  ascended  the  steps  at  the  foot  of  the 
column  of  the  greatest  general  (as  to  disastrous 
failures)  of  modern  times,  and  eyed  him  with 
respect  where  he  stood  high  up  out  of  the  reach 
of  his  creditors  with  the  bill  file  of  a  liolitnino; 
conductor  protruding  from  his  stony  skull.  The 
street  of  Clubs;  Boodle  watching  at  his  eternal 


9M  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

window,  and  Noodle  glowering  at  another ;  he 
passed  up  steep  St.  James's  Street,  and  struck  east- 
ward for  Eegent  Street ;  he  admired  the  grand 
sweeping  curve  of  the  Quadrant,  and,  getting  into 
Oxford  Street,  all  a-buz  with  ladies  shopping  and 
passing  their  time  agreeably  in  ruining  their  hus- 
bands, he  eventually  reached  Tottenham  Court 
Eoad,  and  turned  round  by  Percy  Street  into  the 
Fitzroy  Square  district.  A  Bohemian,  dubious, 
night-haunted  part  of  the  district,  he  traversed, 
full  of  shy  shops,  suspicious  lodging-houses,  and 
doubtful  trades. 

It  was  not  difficult  to  find  No.  122.  There  it 
w^as,  half-way  down  on  the  left-hand  side,  two 
doors  from  a  French  washerwoman  and  clear 
starcher's.  It  was  a  large,  blank-looking  shoji, 
with  no  one  apparently  in  it,  and  next  it  a  showy 
pawnbroker's,  with  the  gilt  names  of  Bassevi  and 
ZoUner,  ominous  golden  balls  swinging  high  over 
the  door,  and  the  usual  convenient  side  alley  into 
which  the  well-worn  swing  doors  opened  to  let  in 
and  let  out — Poverty,  Theft,  Murder,  Drunkenness 
and  Shame.  The  windows  were  filled  breast-high 
with  dingy  trinkets,  gaudy  parasols,  opera  glasses, 
revolvers,  rings  and  miniatures.  The  window  of 
the  picture  restorer's  shop,  broad  and  dusty,  con- 
tained nothing  but  a  large  engraving  of  one  of 
Kaphael's    cartoons,    a    line    engraving   of    the 


TESTIXG    THE    DIAMOND.  201 

Princess  Charlotte,  an  objectionable  Jordaens,  and 
one  of  those  piebald  half-clealied  portraits,  "party 
per  pale  "  white  and  dark,  and  a  tattered  Land- 
scape by  Euysdal,  with  an  inscription  on  it 
avowing  Mr.  Bassevi's  intention  to  exhibit  the 
identical  picture  (a  good  deal  turned  upon  that), 
whole,  cleaned  and  in  its  right  mind,  that  very 
day  month.  The  Vicar  looked  at  his  watch ;  it 
was  just  five  minutes  past  three. 

He  crossed  the  street  to  the  door,  but  it  was 
locked.  He  knocked,  and  there  came  that  smart 
young  man,  the  beloved  of  Susan,  looking  as  pink 
and  ingenuous  as  a  pawnbroker's  apprentice  could 
well  be  expected  to  look. 

''  He  thought  Mr.  Bassevi  was  in  ;  but  he  was 
either  engaged  or  just  going  out.  He  had  an 
appointment  at  Christie  and  Manson's  at  four." 

The  Vicar  was  just  shaking  out  a  refractory  card 
when  J\Ir.  Bassevi  in  a  white  coat,  a  white  hat 
rather  on  one  side,  his  hands  in  his  pockets,  his 
mouth  full,  and  moving  in  an  atmosphere  redolent 
of  brown  sherry,  emerged  from  a  back  room, 
that  opened  by  a  glazed  glass-door  into  the  shop. 

"  I  was  just  going,"  he  said,  roughly,  like  a 
man  on  his  own  dunghill ;  "  thought  you  had  for- 
gotten your  appointment.  Very  busy  this  week 
cataloguing  Lord  Frogm ore's  pictures  in  Harley 
Street — can  give  you  five  minutes  "  (so  saying  he 


202  THE    VICAE's    COUETSHIP. 

pulled  out  a  monstrous  old  gold  repeater  that 
might  have  belonged  to  Sporus,  Bufo,  or  some 
other  of  Pope's  horrors).     "  This  Avay,  sir  !  " 

The  Vicar  apologised  for  being  a  few  minutes 
late,  and  followed  the  detestable  wretch  between 
stacks  of  ungilt  picture  frames,  and  dusty  can- 
vasses, that,  once  pictures,  seemed  now  to  have 
turned  into  mere  rubbish.  Bassevi  stopped  once 
at  a  coarse  Dutch  flower  picture. 

"That's  a  nice  little  bit  of  Vandervool,"  he 
said,  with  a  wave  of  his  pudgy  jewelled  hand, 
hideous  with  neglected  nails,  and  grimed  with 
London  dust. 

"  Very  curious  !  " 

Then  he  shut  the  door,  threw  himself  in  a  sort 
of  Wilberforce  attitude  in  a  dirty  dimity-covered 
easy  chair,  and  motioned  the  Vicar  to  a  seat  on 
a  frowzy,  greasy  sofa,  that  smelt  of  tobacco 
smoke. 

"  Now,  about  these  Cuyps — shall  we  say  fifteen 
each  ?     Where  are  they  ? " 

"  I  left  them  at  the  Hummums ;  but  you,  no 
doubt,  remember  them  sufliciently." 

"  That's  a  pity.  I  don't  like  advancing  money 
on  a  pig  in  a  poke.  One  was  pretty  well,  the 
other  so-so.  Well  then,  let's  say  30l.  each — that 
is  lOl.  too  much  for  the  one  and  5l.  too  much 
for  the  other.     AVant  to  part  with  the  carving  ? " 


TESTIXG   THE    DIAMOXD.  203 

"Those  pictures,"  said  Beauflower,  a  little 
angrily,  "cost  my  fatlier  a  large  sum  at  tlie 
Beckford  sale,  and  have  since  that  been  valued  at 
considerably  more  money/' 

"  If  they  were  not  worth  double,  do  you 
think,"  said  Bassevi,  mth  a  hideous  leer  of  cun- 
ning, "that  rd  lend  you  60^.  on  them?  That 
is  not  the  style  we  do  our  business.  Oh,  no,  sir  ! 
Well,  601.  for  the  Cuyps,  and  let's  say  lOl.  for  the 
carving.  I  would  not  give  more  than  15l.  for  it 
in  any  sale  room,  so  that's  doing  the  handsome 
thing  by  you,  mister.  I'm  always  losing  by 
these  specs.  There's  them  Vandykes  I  bought 
of  ]\Ir.  Cantelupe  (he  wouldn't  part  with  the 
best  because  they  were  the  nobs  of  the 
family),  and  they're  just  a  dead  lot  left  on  my 
hands." 

"  That  head  is  an  exquisite  piece  of  carving. 
Mr.  Pugin  once  offered  my  father  50l.  for  it.  I 
won't  let  it  go  for  that." 

"  As  you  like — as  you  like  !  You  won't  catch 
me  giving  501.  for  it.  Still,  I  don't  want  to 
haggle,  let's  say  15/.  for  it.  It's  a  mere  loan, 
you  know,  at  the  usual  interest  of  our  business. 
I  will  send  for  them  to-morrow,  and  the  cheque 
shaU  come  by  the  young  man  who  calls  for  them. 
He's  a  steady  lad,  you  may  depend  upon  his 
bringing  them  here  safely,  and  I'll  tell  him  to 


204.  THE  vicae's  courtship. 

take  a  cab.     If  you'll  allow  me,  111  go  and  make 
out  the  usual  form." 

The  glass-door  slammed,  and  the  Vicar  was 
left  alone.  Seventy-five  pounds  !  what  was  that  to 
throw  as  a  sop  to  the  Pieuvre  ?  There  were  the 
Oxford  tradesmen — there  was  the  insatiable  builder 
— there  was  the  Chetwynd  fund  to  restore — there 
was  the  marriage  tour  to  provide  for !  Where 
should  he  turn  ?  What  should  he  do  now  he 
had  begun  to  rake  together  money  ?  The  policy  ! 
No ;  it  was  cruel  to  touch  that  and  throw  away 
1500^.  for  500/.  or  at  most  700/. — no,  he  would 
not  touch  that  !  He  felt  Bassevi  had  cheated 
him ;  but  still  some  relief  was  obtained,  and  after 
all  it  was  only  a  loan.  As  he  searched  for  a 
certain  statement  of  accounts  that  he  had  drawn 
up  that  morning  at  breakfast,  and  j)ut  his  hand 
into  his  breast  pocket  it  came  upon  the  two  jewel 
cases.  That  instant  the  ever  ready  Fiend  hurled 
a  temptation  at  him  and  pierced  him  before  his 
conscience  could  throw  on  her  armour.  If  he  had 
once  grappled  with  the  demon  he  would  have 
thrown  it,  but  the  dart  struck  him  so  deep  and 
quick  that  he  had  no  power  to  resist.  It  was  the 
one  resource  left.  ' '  Dangerous  ! — Dishonourable ! " 
said  a  faint  voice  far  away;  "  Absurd  and  childish 
scruples,"  said  the  Tempter,  loud  and  boldly,  "to 
a  man    of  principle  there  is  no    danger  !     The 


TESTING   THE    DIAMOND.  205 

jewels  cannot  be  sent  to  Berlin.  A  slight  eva- 
sion will  conceal  from  tlieir  owner  that  tliey  have 
not  gone.  Before  he  can  hear  from  Berlin  yom' 
emergency  will  have  passed,  and  you  can  restore 
them  with  some  excuse ;  or  worst  come  to  the 
worst,  you  can  transfer  the  Policy  and  redeem 
them.  Miss  the  opportunity  and  you  will  be  a 
disOTaced  and  dishonoured  man — diso-raced  before 
your  fellow  clergy — before  the  builder — before 
your  parishioners — before  Amy !  Pledge  the  j  ewels, 
it  will  hurt  no  one,  and  it  will  save  you ! "  Then 
Beauflower  embraced  the  Fiend,  and  welcomed 
him  as  though  he  had  been  an  Angel  of  Light. 

Mr.  Bassevi  returned,  a  crafty  smile  on  his 
face,  and  handed  the  tickets  for  the  two  Cu}'^s 
and  the  carving. 

*'I  have  here,"  said  Beauflower,  rather  ner- 
vously, and  in  alow  voice,  ''two  jewels — a  dia- 
mond and  an  opal,  on  which  I  want  an  advance. 
They  are  very  fine,  and  of  great  value." 

A  lurid  ray  shot  from  Bassevi's  eyes,  which,  how- 
ever, instantly  resumed  their  usual  lowering  look  of 
unabashed  cunning.  His  cat-like  nature  was  on 
the  work,  eager  for  the  unexpected  prey.  He  tried 
to  appear  indifferent  but  he  could  not  succeed, 
although  Beauflower  was  too  anxious  to  observe 
him  closely,  and  indeed  by  nature  too  frank  and 
unsuspicious   to   regard   him    with   the   fear   he 


206  THE   VICAE's    COUETSHIP. 

merited.  The  man  opened  the  cases  and  looked 
contemptuously  to  the  blue  diamond  whose 
magic  lustre  lighted  the  dark  case. 

"Ah  !  these,"  he  said,  "  are  very  common  now. 
They're  only  Brazilian  stones,  and  the  colour  is 
against  them — badly  cut  too.  Blocky  —  very 
blocky,  and  too  thick  at  the  girdle.  If  the 
small  facets  were  sharper  it  would  have  had  twice 
the  lustre.  These  stones  go  entirely  by  weight — 
well  weigh  it."  Bassevi  opened  the  glass-door 
and  called  the  boy.  "  Tom,  run  to  Mr.  Zollner 
and  ask  him  for  his  scales  to  weigh  a  diamond. 
Quick,  my  boy." 

"  It  is  of  very  great  value,  I  have  been  told," 
said  Beauflower. 

"My  dear  sir,  if  you  only  knew  what  I  do 
about  diamonds,  you  would  be  astonished.  Ill 
just  tell  you  a  little  anecdote.  A  lady  of  rank 
who  was  in  distress  lately  sent  to  me  to  come  and 
value  her  jewels.  I  knew  very  well  that  that 
meant  an  advance  upon  them.  Her  husband  had 
been  a  collector  of  precious  stones,  and  had  also 
bought  a  great  many  for  his  wife.  Well,  I  went ; 
she  showed  me  her  diamonds — ^very  fine  they 
were.  Then  she  brought  from  a  cabinet  what  she 
called  a  very  large  rough  diamond  of  enormous 
value — priceless  value,  as  she  thought.  Now, 
we  have  every  week  colourless  topazes,  emeralds, 


TESTING   THE   DIAMOND.  207 

sapphires,  and  white  zircons,  brought  here  and 
oj0fered  us  for  diamonds.  I  doubted  my  friend. 
While  my  lady  turned  her  back  I  just  passed  a 
small  file  across  its  surface  sharply,  it  left  scratches. 
Bless  your  soul,  it  was  no  more  a  diamond  than 
Tm  a  diamond — it  was  a  merely  large  lump  of 
white  spinel.  Still  I  was  not  satisfied,  so  I  took 
it  home  and  tried  it  with  a  diamond.  Bless  you, 
in  half  an  hour  I  had  cut  a  long  grove  in  it.  I 
tried  it  with  a  prism  and  it  failed.  I  then  rubbed 
it  and  it  was  not  electric.  In  fact,  it  broke  down 
every  way,  and  I  refused  to  advance  a  pound 
u]Don  it,  to  the  lady's  great  mortification." 

Bassevi  then  breathed  on  the  blue  diamond,  and 
weighed  it ;  each  time  he  shook  his  head.  The  lad 
had  brought  the  scales  with  the  measm^es.  The 
scales  were  little  films  of  brass,  each  weio^hino;  a 
carat,  an  Indian  word  derived  from  the  name  of  a 
certain  seed  used  by  the  Hindoo  diamond  mer- 
chants in  weighing  their  gems.  One  by  one  the 
rogue  dropped  in  the  square  films  of  brass,  and 
expressed  some  surprise  as  the  stone  went  down 
at  eight  carats. 

"That  is  no  common  diamond,"  said  Beauflower ; 
"  it  has  been  compared  to  the  Hope  diamond." 

"Hope  diamond!"  sneered  Bassevi,  "why  it 
couldn't  hold  a  candle  to  it.  That  weighs  one 
hundred  and  seventy-seven  grains,  and  has  ten 


208  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

times  the  fire  in  it.  Pooli !  this  is  largish,  but  it's 
an  every-day  stone.  We  had  a  better  one  last 
week.  YoLi  know  what  the  trade  give  a  carat  for 
diamonds  ?  '^ 

''  I  don't,  indeed!"  said  Beauflower,  with  perfect 
openness.     "  I  must  trust  entirely  to  your  honour." 

''  Which  you  may  quite  rely  on.  Our  trade  goes 
entirely  by  this  little  green  book  here — '  Jeffries' 
Treatise  on  Diamonds  and  Pearls,  1751.'  There 
is  a  table  of  weights  and  prices.  Yes  ;  here  it 
is,  page  11."  Bassevi  ran  his  finger  down  the 
prices,  "6,  6^,  7,  7f .  Yes ;  here  it  is,  8  carats, 
512^.  Well,  if  this  diamond,  whatever  its  defects 
may  be  in  my  opinion,  answers  all  the  tests,  we 
can  afford  to  advance  22 OZ.  upon  it ;  and  on  this 
opal,  which  is  no  great  things,  say  another  40^. — 
260^.,  that's  about  our  figure,  sir." 

Beauflower  said  he  thought  the  offer  small  con- 
sidering the  undeniable  value  of  the  two  je,wels  ; 
but  as  it  was  to  meet  a  mere  temporary  necessity 
he  would  accept  the  offer  of  the  2Q0l.  Could  he 
have  it  at  once  ? 

"  No ;  not  till  certain  preliminary  forms  have 
been  gone  through,  and  above  all  not  till  the 
diamond  had  been  submitted  to  the  inspection  of 
a  Dutch  diamond  merchant,  a  friend  of  mine, 
in  (Simmaryaxe)  St.  Mary  Axe.  If  Mr.  Beau- 
flower will  call  about  eight  o'clock  the  following 


TESTING    THE    DIAMOND.  209 

evening,  I  will  conclude  the  matter  either  one  way 
or  the  other,  and  without  a  doubt,  I  should  say, 
will  hand  you  a  cheque  for  the  amount." 

Beauflower  almost  liked  the  rough,  off-hand 
way  of  the  man,  treating  things  in  such  a  broad 
general  manner,  and  careless  of  bargaining. 

"You  must  leave  the  jewels,"  Bassevi  said; 
"  that  of  com^se  you  have  no  objection  to  do.  I 
shall  give  you  a  formal  receipt  for  them.  Good- 
bye !  Tm  glad  you  came  here,  and  did  not  go  to 
that  Thorndyke,  whom  the  old  gentleman  down 
at  your  place  patronizes.  He'd  have  let  you  in. 
Oh,  he's  a  sharp  practiser,  he  is.  Well,  good-bye. 
Tom,  call  a  Hansom  for  me.  I  must  be  off  to  my 
appointment." 

As  Bassevi  leaped  into  the  cab  and  tucked  his 
^dllanous  white  hat  under  the  roof,  he  said  to 
himself, — 

"  By  the  Lord  Harr}^,  that's  the  smartest  thing  I 
ever  did.  Green  as  grass  as  I'm  a  Dutchman. 
Minories,  Cabby,  and  quick  as  you  like." 

Had  all  thought  of  Amy  vanished  from  her 
lover's  mind  in  that  whirlpool  of  excitement,  in 
those  long  and  "leaden  footed  hours"  that  he 
spent  waiting  for  the  evening  when  he  should 
again  meet  Bassevi  and  clutch  the  eagerly  wished- 
for  money  ?  No  !  her  image  had  receded  faint  and 
far,  it  had  dimmed  like  a  fading  photograph,  but 

VOL.   III.  P 


£10  THE    7ICAES    COURTSHIP. 

it  hovered  over  liim  still — slie  looked  forth  from 
that  great  white  cloud  that  huno;  over  the  Admi- 
ralty,  he  saw  her  in  the  sky  over  the  Abbey,  he 
fancied  she  was  sitting  beside  him  in  the  Park  as  on 
that  memorable  day  at  the  edge  of  Everley  wood. 
He  almost  started  at  faces  in  Piccadilly  that 
seemed  at  a  distance  to  be  so  like  her's,  yet  changed 
into  unlikeness  as  they  approached  nearer.  Her 
face  looked  upon  him  out  of  the  London  heaven 
mournfully,  like  those  reproachful  faces  that  come 
in  dreams  to  men  straying  from  the  right  path, 
yet  his  pride  refused  to  allow  the  justice  of  the 
reproach. 

How  long  the  day  seemed  in  the  strange  place, 
^mong  cold,  hard  faces,  among  the  pushing  selfish 
■€rowd  !  How  he  missed  his  own  quiet  home  and 
the  life  and  choristers  of  Nature!  Again  he  found 
himself  wandering  past  pictures  and  statues, 
at  which  the  same  vulgar  people  seemed  ever 
staring  and  gaping  ;  again  he  tramped  over  the 
pitiless  stones  of  London  streets,  and  found  him- 
self looking  at  the  same  useless  luxuries,  and  in  at 
the  same  windows,  so  that  he  hardly  knew  whe- 
ther yesterday  and  to-day  were  not  one  and  the 
same,  and  the  intervening  night  an  empty  dream. 
He  took  the  steam-boat  and  patrolled  the  river 
from  bridge  to  bridge,  still  the  heedless  sun  would 
not  hurry  its  setting. 


TESTING   THE   DLIMOXD.  211 

Again  he  found  liimself  at  tlie  statue  of  the 
unwise  king,  and  again  turned  his  steps  towards 
the  Horse-Guards.  The  same  immovable  men  on 
the  black  marble  horses,  their  steel  breast-plates 
oiitterino'  their  swords  shinino-  in  the  slant  sun- 
shine.  All  at  once  from  under  the  grim  peak 
of  a  helmet  the  eyes  of  one  of  the  soldiers  smiled 
a  melancholy  recognition.  Yes,  it  was,  it  was 
young  Brox\Ti,  pipe  clayed  and  rated  and  tamed 
by  stern  corporals  and  reviling  sergeants — subdued 
to  a  mere  machine,  and,  to  judge  by  his  contrite 
look,  sorely  repentant.  Beauflower  nodded,  and 
said, — 

"  All  Avell  at  home,''  as  he  passed  on. 

Slowly,  very  slowly,  the  sun  sank  down  over 
the  Kensington  roofs,  then,  snatching  a  hasty 
dinner  at  some  place  out  of  Kegent  Street,  Beau- 
flower  proceeded  towards  Charlotte  Street.  A 
strange  feehng  of  alarm  and  apprehension  filled 
his  mind  as  the  lamps  began  to  light  one  by  one, 
but  he  dismissed  it  as  a  foolish  symptom  of 
groundless  anxiety.  The  diamond  was  of  great 
value — the  advance  upon  it  of  the  sum  he  re- 
quired was  certain.  It  was  easy  for  him  to 
reclaim  it  ;  worst  come  to  the  worst,  if  he  had 
even  to  teU  his  weakness  to  Mr.  Goodrick,  it 
would  not  be  deemed  by  him,  under  the  circum- 
stances, any  very  unpardonable  oftence,  consider- 

p  2 


212  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

ing  the  jewel  case  had  arrived  too  late  for  the 
Prussian  commissioner. 

Bassevi's  shop  was  quite  dark  when  he  arrived 
at  the  door  and  rung  the  bell.  It  was  answered 
by  the  young  man,  who  looked  anxious  and  un- 
comfortable. Before  he  could  speak  to  him  Bas- 
sevi  himself  appeared.  He  had  his  hat  on,  and 
wore  a  short,  rough  pilot  coat.  He  was  blunter, 
rougher,  and  more  suspicious  in  manner  than 
he  had  been  the  day  before.  He  seemed  all 
business  now,  as  if  he  had  drawn  the  sword  of 
commerce  and  thrown  away  the  scabbard  of  mere 
formal  politeness.  He  showed  the  Vicar  into  the 
back  shop  that  was  lit  by  a  flickering  gaselier 
that  gave  but  a  low  wavering  light. 

Bassevi  was  dry  and  curt.  The  jewel  case  lay 
on  the  table  beside  a  pile  of  Sevres  china  plates, 
a  dish  of  Majolica,  and  some  old  ivory  triptychs. 

"  Well,  Mr.  Beauflower,''  Bassevi  said,  "  I  took 
this  diamond  last  night  to  my  adviser  on  these 
subjects,  Mr.  Da  Costa,  an  Amsterdam  merchant, 
luckily  now  in  town." 

''  Yes  \ " 

"  And  he  applied  the  usual  tests." 

'^Yesr' 

"  And  the  result  of  these  tests,  I  am  sorry  to 
say,  were  decidedly  unfavourable." 

"  The   man  seems  blunt   and  straightforward 


TESTING   THE    DL\MOXD.  213 

enough,"  thought  Beauflower,  "this  is  only  his 
coquetry/' 

'^  So  unfavourable,  indeed,  that  I  and  my 
partner,  Mr.  Zollner,  agreed  that  it  would  be  im- 
possible to  advance  any  money  at  all  upon  it." 

The  Vicar's  countenance  fell. 

"  Still  he  confessed  he  could  not  say  for  certain. 
But  he  advised  me  by  all  means  to  ask  you  to 
allow  it  to  be  submitted  to  our  one  final  and  in- 
fallible test." 

"  And  what  is  that  ? " 

"  You  can  read  about  it  yourself.  It  is  in  this 
book  I  have  here,  that  diamond  merchants  always 
keep  by  them.  *  Jean  Baptiste  Tavernier's  Voyages 
en  Turquie,  en  Perse,  et  aux  Indes,  1677-79.'" 
(Bassevi's  French  was  detestably  pronounced, 
wdth  a  gabbling  Jewish  accent,  but  he  understood 
the  language  well  enough  commercially). 

Beauflower  read  the  following  passage  (vol.  i. 
p.  326),  which  in  EngUsh  ran  thus: — "The 
diamond  merchants  who  bring  jewels  from  Gol- 
conda  to  Stamboul  to  sell  to  the  Grand  Seignior 
disclosed  to  me  as  a  great  and  precious  secret  their 
only  infallible  and  unerring  way  to  distinguish  a 
true  diamond,  the  counterfeits  of  which  are  so 
numerous  and  so  hard  to  detect.  If  the  diamond 
is  true  adamant,  it  can  be  placed  upon  an  anvil 
and  struck  with  the  full  force  of  a  hea^-}'  hammer, 


214  THE   vicar's   COUETSHIP. 

and  still  remain  unmarred  and  without  a  flaw,  so 
pure  and  dense  [is  the  substance  of  this  divine 
crystal  of  crystals." 

Beauflower  was  so  nervous  that  he  read  all  this 
over  once,  then  flew  at  it  again  and  read  it 
through  from  the  beginning. 

"  That  is  the  one  sole  infallible  test  of  the  trade, 
and  we  use  it j  daily ;  it  is  generally  kept  as  a 
secret  by  our  people,  but  I  am  blunt  and  frank, 
and  despise  all  that  d freemasonry  nonsense.'* 

Beauflower  opened]  the  case  and  drew  out  the 
diamond. 

"  It  looks  rather  darker,'^  he  said,  "  by  this 
light." 

"  Ah  !  that  merely  depends  on  the  way  it  is  lit. 
The  Hope  diamond,  you  know,  looks  like  an 
amethyst  by  candle-light.  Breathe  on  it  and  it 
will  look  lighter." 

The  Vicar  held  j  it  in  his  hand  and  thought 
for  a  moment.  His  brain  was  reeling  with 
excitement. 

**Yes,"  he  said,  ^'I  know  it  is  a  pure  stone 
and  of  great  value,  I  will  submit  it  to  any 
test." 

'^  It  is  done  in  a  moment,"  said  Basse vi,  with  a 
business-like  air ;  "  we  always  keep  the  simple 
apparatus  ready." 

As  he  said  this,  he  dived  into  a  dark  corner 


TESTING   THE   DIAMOND.  215 

on  on^  side  of  an  old  Bulil  bureau,  and  dragged 
out  an  anvil  some  three  feet  liigli,  with  the  usual 
horn  of  iron  at  one  end.  It  was  an  old  anvil,  and 
slightly  hollowed  in  the  centre  by  incessant  blows 
of  the  hammer. 

"  If  the  stone  is  a  pure  diamond  and  of  the 
first  water,  as  you  perhaps  very  justly  believe/' 
said  Bassevi,  di\awing  forth  a  heavy  hammer,  with- 
a  head  weighing  about  four  pounds,  "  this  hammer 
will  do  it  no  more  harm  than  a  drop  of  rain  doe& 
the  dome  of  Saint  Paul's. 

"  I  have  no  fear,"  said  Beauflower. 

Basse\d  took  the  jewel-case  from  the  Vicar's 
yielding  grasp,  breathed  on  the  jewel,  praised  its 
colour,  weighed  it  in  his  hand. 

*'  No  doubt  it  will  be  all  right,"  he  said,  as  he 
placed  it  in  the  ^cup  of  the  anvil,  -and  drew  back 
the  hammer  to  get  a  fair  blow. 

"  You  have  no  fears  as  to  the  experiment,  Mr. 
Beauflower  1  Now,  come,  do  you  mean  to  say 
your  pulse  beats  steady  and  as  usual  ? " 

"  I  don't  mean  to  deny  I  feel  some  smaU 
anxiety,"  said  Beauflower ;  "  but  it  is  merely  be- 
cause I  am  unaccustomed  to  the  testing  of  jewels.'* 

*'  May  I  strike  now  when  I  say  three  '? " 

''  Yes,  by  all  means." 

Bassevi  touched  the  diamond  as  it  shot  forth 
its  pale  blue  rays  to  get  it  perfectly  even.      Then 


216  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

he  motioned  Mr.  Beauflower  to  one  side,  sb  that 
the  gaslight  might  shine  full  upon  the  anvil.  He 
raised  the  heavy  hammer,  swung  it  twice  in  the 
air,  then  poised  it. 

"  You  give  the  signal,  Mr.  Beauflower — once, 
twice,  thrice,  and  at  the  third  time  I  will  strike. 
There  is  my  cheque-book  ready,  you  see,  on  the 
table.'-' 

Once — tivice — thrice. 

At  the  word  "thrice,"  the  hammer  rose  and 
fell.  There  was  a  jar  of  smitten  iron,  a  splinter- 
ing crash,  and  a  shower  of  fragments  of  the  sup- 
posed diamond  flew  right  and  left.  The  blue 
diamond  had  failed  under  the  severe  test,  and  had 
broken  into  a  thousand  pieces. 

Beauflower  s  brain  swam  ;  the  room  seemed  to 
go  round.  He  would  have  fallen  to  the  ground 
had  not  Basse vi  run  to  him  with  a  chair,  and 
then  brouoiit  him  a  o-lass  of  wine  from  a  half-full 
decanter  that  stood  on  the  table.  He  stood 
resting  the  hammer  on  the  table,  eyeing  the  pale 
and  distressed  face  of  the  young  Yicar. 

"You  see,"  he  said,  "this  wonderful  blue 
diamond  of  yours  was  merely  some  common 
crystal  tinged  by  nature  or  art.  A  pretty  thing 
if  I  had  advanced  two  or  three  hundred  pounds 
upon  it,  by  Jove  !  I  should  have  put  my  foot  in 
it  with  a  vengeance.     Now,  to  show  you  how  I 


TESTIXG    THE    DIAMOND.  217 

value  this  sham  diamond  dust,  you  shall  see 
what  I  do  with  it." 

Then  sweeping  up  a  dozen  of  the  chief  frag- 
ments into  a  shovel,  and  kicking  away  the  rest 
right  and  left  contemjDtuously,  he  threw  up 
the  window  and  tossed  them  into  a  back  alley, 
Avhere  a  party  of  street  children  could  be  heard 
playing. 

"  I  had  no  conception  it  could  be  a  counter- 
feit. You  will  take  my  word,  Fm  sure,  for 
that.  The  jewel  was  a  family  jewel,  and  must 
be  replaced." 

"  My  dear  sir,"  said  Bassevi,  taking  the  Vicar's 
moist  and  powerless  hand,  that  rested  languidly 
on  the  empty  jewel-case,  "  I  have  entire  reliance 
on  your  word.  We  are  all  deceived  sometimes. 
You  remember  my  story  of  the  lad}^  of  rank  and 
the  celebrated  rough  diamond.  Ha  !  ha  !  I  have 
been  taken  in  before  now.  Well,  now,  as  to  the 
opal.  That  also  is  of  less  value  than  you  think  ; 
still  it  is  a  good  one,  but  it  discolours  upon 
being  tested  by  electricity,  as  you  see,  and  it  will 
need  repolishing  to  restore  it.     Til  see  to  that." 

Bassevi  opened  the  case,  and  there  sure  enough 
was  the  opal  looking  yellow  and  dimmed,  its 
inner  fire  gone  out.  The  Vicar  had  no  heart  to 
bargain  now. 

"  I  will  say  30/.  for  that,  though  we  do  not 


218  THE   vicar's   COUETSHIP. 

mucli  want  it,  because  you  seem  rather  depressed 
at  the  diamond  proving  so  Avorthless. 

Beauflower  rose  to  his  feet  by  a  great  effort.  His 
eyes  seemed  suddenly  to  have  lost  their  lustre, 
like  the  opal. 

"Mr.  Bassevi/'  he  said,  " I  would  not  have  had 
this  happen  for  a  thousand  pounds.  It  must  be 
replaced  at  any  cost.  Can  a  stone  of  similar  size 
and  colour  be  produced  for  400?.  and  Avithin  two 
months  ? " 

Bassevi  sat  down  a  moment  with  one  foot  on  the 
anvil,  the  head  of  the  fatal  hammer  moving  over  the 
crystal  dust,  white  and  opaque,  that  still  lay  upon 
the  iron.  His  hand  moved  thoughtfully  about 
his  mouth,  and  his  greedy  eyes  remained  half 
closed. 

"  Yes,''  he  said,  "  I  think  I  could  promise  you 
one.  It  is  the  most  fortunate  thing  in  the  world 
for  you  that  my  friend  Da  Costa  is  still  in  town. 
He  will  find  you  one  either  at  Paris  or  Amster- 
dam. It  shall  weio^h  eight  carats,  and  be  a  blue 
diamond  of  the  same  size  and  character.  There 
are  pieces  here  large  enough  to  match  the  colour; 
but  I  shall  need  security,  you  know.  These  sort  of 
people  are  very  cautious,  and  it  is  a  large  sum  to 
pay  out  of  pocket.  You  must  give  me  an  I  0  U 
for  2501.  as  a  deposit." 

''  Give  me   pen  and  paper,"  said  Beauflower, 


TESTING   THE   DIAMOND.  219 

resolved  to  at  once  transfer  his  mother's  policy 
and  to  save  his  imperilled  honour.  "  I  can  depend 
on  you  and  on  your  secresy.  I  have  reasons  why 
this  must  be  kept  secret/' 

"Mum's  the  word,"  said  Bassevi,  putting  his 
dirty  hand  upon  his  coarse  mouth  ;  ''  our  profes- 
sion is  all  secrets.  You  may  depend  on  me.  I 
shall  get  you  a  diamond  that  could  not  be  known 
from  the  real  stone.  I  will  defy  the  keenest  con- 
noisseur to  detect  it.  Diamonds  with  bluish 
tinges  are  by  no  means  rare.  Give  me  time,  my 
dear  sir,  and  I  will  match  any  diamond  you  are 
pleased  to  bring  me  like  a  ribbon.  Let  us  say 
this  day  two  months ;  I  think  I  can  promise  it 
by  that  time.     I  have  your  address." 

Beauflower  thanked  him  warmly,  and  left  the 
shop,  bowed  out  by  the  now  more  courteous 
picture-restorer.  The  Jew  watched  him  down  the 
street,  and  when  he  was  fairly  round  the  corner 
he  slammed  the  door,  wxnt  into  his  inner  room, 
turned  up  the  gas,  threw  the  anvil  and  hammer 
into  their  dark  corner ;  then  casting  himself  into 
a  chair,  he  burst  into  a  hard,  vulgar,  braying, 
contemptuous  fit  of  laughter,  and  slapping  his 
right  thigh  with  his  hand,  shouted — 

"  Nicked,  by  the  Tabernacle  shtones  !  nicked, 
by  the  Holy  Prophet !  nicked !  0  Lord,  isn't  he 
green  !     Nicked,  by  all  the  devils,  nicked  !  " 


220  THE   vicar's   COUETSHIP. 

In  a  dark  corner  behind  the  glass-door,  whose 
glazing  was  scratched  off  here  and  there,  there 
was,  however,  a  frightened  listener  who  had  heard 
and  seen  everything. 


THE   MAN   IN   THE   PARABLE.  2^1 


CHAPTEE  XIII. 

THE    MAX    IX    THE    PARABLE. 

The  golden  day  had  come,  and  Summerleas 
was  buzzing  like  a  liive  in  April.  "  Kling,  klang, 
klong,"  went  the  three  bells,  making  the  most  of 
themselves,  and  chasing  each  other  up  and  down 
their  limited  gamut.  A  flag  waved  from  the 
nearly  completed  tower ;  it  looked  like  a  scarlet 
blossom  on  an  old  aloe,  that  flowers  only  once 
after  a  hundred  years'  parturition.  -  The  village 
having  put  ofi"  its  club-feast  several  w^eeks,  was 
going  to  celebrate  it  on  this  day,  the  twenty- 
fifth  of  August,  as  a  compliment  to  their  young 
Vicar. 

In  the  boundless  happiness  of  the  moment, 
Beauflower  forgot  even  the  Fieuvre  that  Im-ked  in 
a  distant  corner  of  his  mind,  waiting  to  rush 
again  upon  his  prey.  Fully  relying  on  Bassevi's 
promise  to  procure  an  exact  fac-simile  of  the  blue 
diamond,  that  bitter  trouble  he  had  also,  for  the 
time,  cast  behind  him.     The  sunshine  of  joy  had 


222  THE   VICAe's    courtship. 

dispelled  every  cloud,  and  the  glow  of  happiness 
was  warm  at  his  heart.  Amy's  tranquil  delight 
was  reflected  upon  him,  and  his  sanguine  and  im- 
petuous nature  had  devised  a  thousand  ways  of 
getting  rid  of  all  his  difficulties.  The  coronation 
day  of  his  life  had  come,  and  what  were  petty 
troubles  to  him  now?  mere  road-side  nettles  that 
he  trod  under  foot  as  he  passed  singing  on  his 
way  to  receive  Heaven's  choicest  blessing. 

The  Vicar,  disregarding  the  fashionable  etiquette 
in  such  matters,  and  determined  not  to  lead  the 
poor  old  discomfited  artist  into  any  expense,  had 
contrived  that  the  wedding  breakfast  should  be  at 
his  own  house ;  a  dreadful  time  of  it  old  Mrs. 
Beauflower's  servants  accordingly  had ;  but  Avhen 
a  marriage  is  in  the  case,  what  woman  cares 
for  trouble  ?  the  house  w^as,  therefore,  notwith- 
standing, as  merry  as  a  house  could  well  be,  and 
the  servants  sung  like  thrushes  as  they  toiled  at 
the  cakes  and  tartlets. 

The  club  had  begun  to  assemble  at  the  church- 
yard gate  about  ten  o'clock.  All  reaping  had 
been  suspended  for  the  day ;  as  the  weather  was 
steady,  it  did  not  much  matter,  and  Farmer  Brown 
willingly  submitted  to  that  small  inconvenience. 
The  bright  ploughshare  rested  half  way  in  the 
furrow ;  the  sickles  were  hanging  up  on  the  cottage 
wall  beside  the  rows  of  blue  plates.  Everybody  had 


THE    MAX    IX    THE    PAEABLE.  223 

a  holiday ;  all  the  school  children  were  draTNTi 
up,  with  flowers  ready  to  scatter  in  the  path  to  the 
church  door,  in  a  band,  with  the  whitest  of  pina- 
fores, and  the  rosiest  of  lauo'hingr  faces ;  the  school- 
mistress  herself  stood  at  the  head  of  the  cherub 
army,  as  happy  as  any  of  them,  and  ha^dng  a 
distinct  eye  to  matrimony  in  the  shape  of  a  hand- 
some young  exciseman  at  Birdbrook,  a  nephew  of 
worthy  old  Farmer  Brown.  The  children  had  all 
been  drilled  in  their  important  part  of  the  cere- 
monial, with  as  much  care  as  the  royal  champion 
is  in  riding  backwards  before  that  ceremony  which 
we  all  pray  to  God  we  may  never  live  to  see 
again.  They  were  as  dehghted  and  as  nervous  as 
a  stage  debutante  the  first  night  of  her  appearance. 
The  club  was  a  picture  worthy  of  Teniers.  It 
needed  all  his  dainty  touching,  as  !Mr.  Kobinson 
very  happily  said  ;  but  it  wanted  more  than  that, 
it  required  Stothard's  tenderness  and  goodness 
to  appreciate  those  shrewd  old  faces,  wrinkled 
and  reddened  by  the  wind  and  rain  of  many 
winters ;  bronzed  and  browned  by  the  scorch  of 
many  summers.  It  called  for  ^Yilkie's  humom-  to 
give  the  quiet  delight  of  the  old  faces,  the  gravity 
of  Mr.  Pitt  and  of  the  other  portly  churchwarden. 
It  demanded,  in  a  word,  Millais'  exc[uisite  finish, 
Marks's  quaint  fun,  Calderon's  ^picturesque  breadth, 
and  Frith's  piquancy,  to  reproduce   that  group 


224  THE    VICARS    COURTSHIP. 

Avith  the  blue  and  white  rosettes,  that  stood  gos- 
siping beside  the  big  drum,  and  waiting  for  the 
marriage  procession  that  in  a  few  minutes  was  to 
emerge  from  the  garden  gate  of  the  Vicarage  of 
Summer!  eas. 

On  the  skirt  of  the  crowd,  lingered  Paddy, 
tipsy,  as  he  always  was ;  now  pale,  wretched, 
hopeless,  a  very  skeleton  at  the  feast,  he  kept 
moaning  to  himself  that  he  had  never  drugged  the 
horse.  Not  far  from  him  was  a  gloomy-looking 
stranger,  Avhom  no  one  knew ;  and  who,  it  was 
supposed,  had  stopped  in  passing  by  merely  out 
of  curiosity.  "  He  looked,"  the  old  clerk  said, 
"  like  the  man  in  the  parable,  who  came  to  the 
feast,  but  had  not  on  the  marriage  garment." 

A  woman's  voice  may  be  soft  and  melodious 
as  an  angel's,  or  a  nightingale's;  but  it  is  never 
tuned  to  its  fullest  harmony  till  love  speaks  from 
her  lips ;  a  woman  may  be  as  beautiful  as  one 
of  those  daughters  of  Paradise  who  welcome  the 
Moslem  martyr  at  the  gates  of  Heaven;  but  you 
will  never  see  her  in  the  full  meridian  of  her 
beauty,  till  you  see  her  on  her  marriage  morning. 
But  why  talk  of  the  abstract  ?  It  is  of  Amy,  of 
Amy  that  we  speak.  Never  an  April  daybreak 
showed  more  of  sunshine  and  rosy  cloud  than 
her  eyes  showed  the  conflict  and  the  quick 
passing  of  emotions.     They  flitted  across  her  sen- 


THE   MAN   IN   THE    PARABLE.  225 

sitive  face  (and  of  all  beauty  an  intelligent  sensi- 
tiveness, such  as  that  with  which  the  Greeks 
invested  their  Clyte,  is  the  most  incomparable). 
To  look  at  her  was  to  love  her  ;  to  know  her, 
was,  as  Steele  beautifully  said  of  some  noble 
woman,  in  itself  a  liberal  education.  There  is  no 
word  to  express  how  she  looked  in  her  wedding- 
dress  of  white  silk,  but  the  inflated  French  adjec- 
tive ravissant.  How  charmingly  the  silk  fitted, 
clinging  tightly  round  her  Httle  waist,  and  follow- 
ing the  undulations  of  her  form;  how  like  a  Vesta 
she  looked  in  her  white  veil;  with  what  modest  and 
winning  grace  she  led  the  choir  of  pretty  brides- 
maids !  Poor  Ethel  was  at  that  moment  far  away, 
weeping  like  a  young  Niobe  under  a  golden  cascade 
of  her  own  beautiful  hair;  her  mother  having  re- 
fused to  allow  her  to  attend  the  wedding.  The 
three  Miss  Chetwynds,  poor  girls,  looked  very 
pretty  in  their  white  flowing  muslin,  and  orange 
flowers,  and  they  carried  bouquets  of  odorous 
orano^e-blossoms  in  their  hands.  The  two  daus^h- 
ters  of  the  rector  of  Bh^dbrook,  pretty  blooming 
girls  with  retrousse  noses,  and  wonderfully  alike, 
completed  this  delightful  division  of  the  procession. 
It  was,  perhaps,  unfortunate  that  Mr.  Eobinson, 
who  was  nervously  happy,  would  wear  a  tail-coat ; 
but  such  was  his  custom,  and  fashion  with  a  sigh 
yielded  to  his  changeless  habit. 

VOL.   III.  Q 


226  THE   VICAHS    COURTSHIP. 

The  bridegroom  was  not  lianclsome,  his  features 
were  not  perfect;  but  he  looked  the  very  perfection 
of  manliness  that  bridal  morning.  Not  yet  at  the 
meridian  of  life,  that  centre  of  the  arch,  "the 
"inezzo  cammin,"  that  Dante  fixed  at  thirty-five. 
Time,  the  thief  who  steals  our  youth  grain  by 
grain,  and  whose  only  gifts  are  like  "  the  gifts  of 
the  genii  which  are  curses,"  wrinkles  and  grey 
hairs,  tokens  of  his  power,  had  passed  him  by  as 
yet.  He  was  just  reaching  the  acme  of  his 
bodily  and  mental  vigour.  His  rich  brown  hair 
clustered  over  a  well  developed  and  characteristic 
forehead;  his  eyes  were  clear  and  brilliant  with 
love  and  with  intellio-ence,  his  form  was  elastic 
and  full  of  pliant  life.  There  was  nothing  about 
him  of  that  timid,  sapless,  and  puerile  mawkish- 
ness  that  too  often  distinguishes  the  young  clergy- 
man. There  was  little  of  the  milksop,  the  pedant, 
or  the  prig  about  Edward  Beauflower,  who  had 
pulled  a  good  oar  at  college,  put  on  the  gloves 
with  the  "  Norfolk  Bantam  "  himself,  and  held 
his  own  against  the  agile  "  Spider."  At  Oxford 
he  had  run,  leaped,  and  swam  with  the  best,  and 
had  been  once  stroke  in  the  University  boat. 
Many  a  look  of  love  and  admiration  greeted  him 
as  he  emerged  from  the  Vicarage  garden,  follo'N^Td 
by  the  major,  stupendous  in  a  bran  new  blue  frock 
coat  and  white  trousers   (he  had  not  advanced 


THE    MAX    IX    THE    PARABLE.  227 

mucli  since  the  fashion  of  twenty  years  ago,  when 
he  went  to  iDclia,  and  ascended  the  Mountains  of 
the  Moon),  and  a  white  rosette,  not  very  much 
smaller  than  a  sunflower.  The  flies  from  Fontford 
had  just  brought  Amy  and  the  bridesmaids,  and 
they  shone  like  a  snow  drift  as  they  passed  over 
the  gi-een  glebe  meadow.  Cantelupe  was  there  as 
happy  and  radiant  as  if  he  had  just  come  into  a 
fortune  instead  of  out  of  one,  and  ]\Ir.  Goodrich 
was  there  in  a  blue  frock  coat  and  white  waistcoat, 
and,  with  his  nankeen  face  slightly  ruddy  at  the 
cheek  bones,  he  looked  the  very  picture  of  an 
old  cultivated  English  gentleman.  Dr.  Briscoe 
was  happy,  stm^dy,  and  honest  as  usual. 

The  moment  the  first  glimpse  of  bridal  wdiite 
appeared,  the  major,  who  had  taken  a  most  vivid 
interest  in  the  matter,  gave  a  shout,  the  pre-ar- 
ranged signal  for  the  band,  which  instantly  burst 
forth  in  a  drumming,  reckless  manner,  wholly 
heedless  of  time.  (They  took  no  heed  of  time  but 
by  its  loss.)  The  tune  they  selected  was  "  Come 
haste  to  the  Wedding,"  which  was  quickly  followed 
by  "The  Eed,  White,  and  Blue."  It  was  well 
meant,  but  it  must  be  confessed  somewhat  old- 
fashioned.  Farmer  Brown,  Mr.  Pitts,  and  George, 
gaunt  in  Sunday  dress,  and  over  decorated  with 
white  rosettes,  took  ofi"  then-  hats  as  the  procession 
approached,  and  the  school  children  began  to  carol 

Q  2 


228  THE   vicar's    COUETSHIP. 

out  a  hymn  with  their  fresh  innocent  voices,  sweet 
as  a  chorus  of  spring  birds.  From  the  open  church 
door,  the  soft  sounds  of  the  harmonium  breathed 
forth,  like  the  music  from  a  distance  that  one 
hears  in  a  dream.  Abeady  the  shadow  of  the 
old  church  porch  had  fallen  on  Amy,  when  the 
murky  silent  man,  before  mentioned,  and  whom 
no  one  had  hitherto  regarded,  except  as  a  mere 
passer-by  attracted  by  curiosity,  stepped  forward 
with  a  stamped  paper  in  his  hand,  touched  the 
Vicar  on  the  shoulder,  and  said  in  a  low  voice, 
only  perceptible  to  the  bridal  party, 

"I  arrest  you,  Mr.  Beauflower,  at  the  suit  of 
John  Tucker  of  Oxford,  for  the  sum  of  35/.  16^." 

Beauflower  turned  very  pale,  and  was  silent. 
The  thunderbolt  had  at  last  fallen.  The  dreadful 
secret  was  blazoned  to  the  world.  He  stood  there 
branded  and  disgraced  before  his  dearest  friends. 
How  could  he  fall  lower  ?  Hurled,  too,  fr©m  the 
high  heaven  of  such  happiness.  That  one  moment 
he  remamed  alone  paralysed  l^y  the  misery  that 
had  struck  him  to  the  earth,  seemed  a  century.  The 
next  instant  Amy  was  by  his  side,  and  clasping 
his  hand,  anxious  and  tearful,  but  firm  to  face 
danger  or  sorrow,  however  crashing,  however 
insuperable  it  might  be. 

"  There  is  no  more  happiness  for  me  in  this 
world.  Amy,"  he  said  in  a  low  voice,  scarcely 


THE    MAX    IX    THE    PARABLE.  229 

dariiig  to  meet  her  eyes,  '4t  was  base  and  cowardly 
of  me  to  conceal  from  you  these  troubles.  You 
must  never  marry  a  disgraced  man.  Let  me  go 
to  the  prison  that  I  deserve,  and  remain  forgotten 
wdth  my  misery." 

"  AVliere  you  go  I  go,  Ned,"  said  Amy,  pressing 
his  hand.  "It  is  not  in  your  trouble  that  I  shall 
leave  you." 

Mr.  Goodrick  stepped  forward  and  took  a  hand 
of  each. 

"  There,"  he  said,  "  is  the  place  for  you," 
pointing  to  the  altar  where  the  rector  of  Birdbrook 
stood  in  his  sno^^y  surphce,  wondering  at  the 
strange  interruption,  of  the  cause  of  which  he  was 
entirely  ignorant.  "  I  will  satisfy  this  gentleman, 
but  he  must  wait  till  a  certain  church  service  has 
been  read,  and  a  certain  pleasant  breakfast 
eaten,  which  he  shall  share  in  his  own  depart- 
ment, and  if  it  be  necessary,  I  and  the  doctor  will 
go  with  Mr.  Beauflower  and  his  bride  as  far  as 
the  sheriff's  office  at  Salisbury,  w^here  this  trifling 
matter  can  be  finally  arranged  in  a  few  minutes, 
no  doubt  to  the  entire  satisfaction  of  all  parties." 

The  grim  man  who  had  not  on  the  marriage 
garment,  smiled,  bowed,  and  retired  to  his 
proper  distance.  What  could  Beauflower  say  as 
Perseus  smote  the  Pieuvre  this  stalwart  blow, 
and  freed  him  from  at  least  one  onslaught  of  the 


230  THE   VICAE's    COUETSHTP. 

monstrous  niglitmare  of  his  life.  His  heart 
brimmed  over,  the  joy  condensed  in  his  eyes 
into  two  large  tears  that  moistened  them,  yet  did 
not  fall.  He  grasped  his  old  friend's  hand  with 
a  fervour  that  was  more  eloquent  than  all  the 
speeches  in  the  world,  and  with  a  contempt  of 
etiquette,  perhaps  pardonable  under  the  cuxum- 
stances,  led  Amy  at  once  to  the  altar,  where  the 
holy  rites  soon  bound  them  together  by  the 
church's  golden  and  consecrated  chain. 

The  tearful  pleasure  of  the  wedding  breakfast, 
the  tremendous  speech  of  Major  Donovan,  gal- 
lant, Irish,  and  more  gallant  even  than  Irish  if 
that  were  possible.  Miss  Chivers'  quiet  delight  at 
the  whole  affair,  Mr.  Goodrich's  joy  at  Edward 
and  Amy's  happiness,  Mrs.  Beauflower  s  tranquil 
pleasure,  broken  in  upon  only  by  the  incessant 
miseries  of  servants'  neglects  and  mistakes,  and 
other  heinous  crimes ;  the  gross  and  open  flirta- 
tion of  Cantelupe  with  Miss  Julia  Beauflower, 
the  whole  mixed  with  the  constant  detonation  of 
champagne  corks,  (Mr.  Goodrick  had  insisted  on 
sending  dozens  of  silvered  bottles,  that  did  in- 
finite credit  to  the  Veuve  Cliquot) — it  is  not  for 
us  to  delay  our  story,  fast  hastening  to  its  close, 
by  describing  in  full  detail.  Suffice  it  to  say 
that  within  a  given  space  of  time  there  never  was 
much   more   commingled   laughing  and  crying ; 


THE    MAX    IX    THE    PARABLE.  231 

and  when  tlie  postillions,  blazoned  with  huge  white 
rosettes,  drove  off  the  four  greys — Mr.  Goodrick 
had  insisted  on  four  greys  at  his  own  expense — 
and  ^liss  Chivers  hit  the  off  wheel,  abeady  begin- 
ning to  revolve,  with  an  old  satin  slipper  of 
Julia's,  which  Cantelupe  afterwards  stole  and 
carried  off  openly  and  defiantly,  the  grim  bailiff, 
who  sat  stiff"  and  silent,  like  atra  cur  a  i^ost 
equitem,  was  the  only  unmoved  person. 

0  King  Cupid  !  0  Imperial  Cupid !  was  there 
ever  a  marriage  breakfast  at  which  some  fresh 
heart  did  not  become  a  pincushion  for  thy  rank- 
ling arrows  ?  It  was  in  an  interval  of  the  gaiety 
that  night,  in  fact  between  the  first  waltz  and  the 
second  quadrille,  that  Cantelupe,  as  happy  as  if 
there  was  no  man  in  possession  waiting  to  wel- 
come him  home,  said  to  Julia,  his  partner  for  the 
next  dance, 

"  How  miserably  lonely  a  marriage  makes  a 
fellow  !  I  miss  your  brother  a^^^uUy  ;  it  has  left 
quite  a — sort  of— blank." 

"  Especially  under  the  circumstances,"  said 
Julia,  looking  down  at  her  boucpiet  as  if  searching 
for  a  concealed  billet-doux  between  the  flowers. 

*' Now  that's  too  bad;  I  was  wrong  there.  Oh, 
that  was  a  mistake  of  mine ;  I  feel  now  that  I 
mistook  the  compass.  I  steered  north  when  I 
ought  to  have  steered  south.'' 


232  THE   VICAES    COURTSHIP. 

"  AVhat's  south?  wliich  is  south?  the  Abbey?" 
"'No"  said  Cantelupe,  in   a  very   low   voice, 
stooping  his  head  quite  unnecessarily,  and  fixing 
his  eyes  on  those  of  the  lady  he  addressed,  espe- 
cially when  they  wavered, — "  the  Vicarage." 

"  Are  you  good  people,"  called  out  Miss  Chivers 
mischievously  at  that  very  moment  from  the 
piano,  "going  to  stop  chattering  there  by  the 
window  all  night  ?  Julia,  who's  your  vis-ct-vis. 
Come,  it's  time  we  began  if  we're  ever  going  to 
have  this  quadrille.     Come,  chicks,  attend." 


THE  SALE  OF  THE  CANTELUPE  PROPERTY.      233 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

THE  SALE  OF  THE  CANTELUPE  PROPERTY. 

A  RUMOUR  had  somehow  got  about,  spread  first 
by  that  delightful  Avoman  Mrs.  Candour,  then  by 
her  sworn  friend,  the  equally  amiable  Mrs.  Grundy, 
that  there  was  something  underhand  going  on 
about  the  sale  of  the  Canteliipe  property.  It  was 
a  vague,  shapeless  rumour,  invisible  as  malaria, 
originated  by  no  one,  verified  by  no  one,  but  still 
it  blew  about  the  county  like  thistle-down,  and 
dropped  its  seed  here  and  there.  Mx.  Harker's 
name  was  not  in  any  way  mixed  up  with  it,  but 
there  was  a  suspicion  discussed  in  a  whisper  at 
farmers'  ordinaries,  from  gig  to  gig  at  chance 
meetings  at  cross-roads,  at  corn  markets,  at 
sheep  sales,  at  fairs  and  in  harvest  fields,  that 
Messrs.  Fox  and  Shekell,  those  very  sharp  soli- 
citors of  Bibury,  were  going  to  cheat  somebody 
or  some  one,  most  certainly  the  seller  and  most 
probably  the  purchaser.  There  had  been  from 
the  beginning  a  sort  of  mystery  and  silence  about 


234  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

tlie  sale,  wliicli  was  to  be  by  private  contract 
towards  tlie  end  of  August.  All  this  scandal,  in 
Mrs.  Candour  s  small  but  active  mind,  and  Mrs. 
Grundy's  receptive  and  credulous  ear,  bad  grown 
quick  as  mustard  and  cress  from  one  or  two  small 
but  quickly  germinating  seedlets.  There  was,  in 
fact,  something  suspicious  about  the  business 
from  the  very  commencement,  and  every  one  saw 
it  but  Cantelupe,  who  was  the  most  heedless  and 
unsuspicious  of  mortals,  and  was  then  much  more 
intent  on  a  rifle  competition  for  a  cup  Avhich  he 
had  given  his  regiment,  than  on  the  sale,  how- 
ever bitter  It  might  be  to  him  to  part  from  his 
Lares  and  Penates.  Some  said  this  was  all  to 
hide  his  real  vexation  and  regret,  but  if  it  was, 
all  that  can  be  said  is  that  the  acting  was  very 
good  for  a  beginner.  It  had  struck  every  one, 
in  the  first  place,  that  the  sale  had  been  very 
little  advertised,  even  in  the  county  papers ;  the 
Castle  and  grounds  had  not  been  thrown  open  to 
visitors ;  the  family  pictures  had  been  sold,  all  but 
a  few  of  the  best,  to  Mr.  Bassevi,  and  the  horses 
had  been  sent  up  to  London.  Above  all,  and 
this  was  thought  peculiarly  suspicious,  the  sale 
had  been  postponed  from  the  22nd  to  the  27th,  and 
people  began  to  report  that  now  it  would  not  be 
sold  at  all,  but  another  mortgage  effected.  Others 
said  that  this  was  only  to  throw  real  purchasers 


THE  SALE  OF  THE  CAN'TELUPE  PEOPERTY.       235 

off  the  scent,  in  order  that  just  at  the  kst 
moment  a  sale  might  be  smuggled  up  with  some 
favoured  purchaser,  vrlio  had,  perhaps,  thought 
a  few  hundreds  to  the  sharp  lawyers  no  bad 
way  of  obtaining  a  great  estate  (upon  which  the 
la^\yers  themselves  could  not  lay  their  knavish 
fingers)  many  thousand  pounds  cheaper  than  it 
ought  to  go  for.  But  the  public,  though  indig- 
nant at  injustice,  bears  other  people's  ^Tongs 
with  the  most  Christian  fortitude,  so  no  one  cared 
to  discover  the  real  truth  of  the  case,  and  the 
nefarious  bargain,  if  such  existed,  went  on  with 
every  prospect  of  a  completion  satisfactory  to  the 
rogues  concerned.  In  fact,  as  not  many  people 
have  a  hundred  thousand  pounds  lying  sun- 
ning at  their  banker's,  who  did  or  who  did  not 
buy  the  Cantelupe  property,  was  not  very  sorely 
taken  to  heart,  except  by  a  few  old  friends  of 
the  family,  who  saw  many  good  points  about  the 
young  spendthrift,  and  by  persons  like  worthy 
Farmer  Brown,  who  respected  the  old  family 
^v^.th.  almost  a  feudal  regard,  and  dreaded  the 
advent  of  ''new  money,"  with  all  its  uneasy 
pride  and  miserable  struggle  for  a  place  among 
the  chilly  county  famihes  who,  the  higher  their 
vintage  is,  are  only  the  more  certain  to  be  hien 
frappe.  There  were  squires  who  had  had  stubborn 
old  Saxon  c[uarrels  with  the  Cantelupes  about  some 


236  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

fence,  or  path,  or  watercourse,  forty  years  before, 

wlio  were  glad  that  the  d d  proud  set  had  gone 

by  the  board  at  last.  There  were  young  ladies, 
who  would  not  have  parted  with  their  false  hair 
to  save  all  the  oaks  at  Swallowcliff,  but  affected 
a  romantic  regret,  and  talked  of  Lady  Blanche 
Cantelupe,  who  held  out  the  castle  for  that  glorious 
King  Charles,  till  her  men  had  to  stew  their  boots 
and  cut  up  the  well  ropes  for  soup.  There  were 
stubborn  old  radical  tradesmen  at  Slobury  and 
Bibury,  another  class  who  were  glad  there  was 
"  another  of  the  nobs  gone,"  and  wished  it  was 
the  last  of  them ;  but  these  were  political  wild 
cats,  and  relics  of  an  almost  extinct  race. 

The  day  of  sale  arrived  at  last.  It  was  market 
day  at  Bibury,  and  Farmer  Brown  had  produced 
in  the  corn  market  a  sack  of  very  fine  new 
wheat,  which  had  been  tossed  up,  and  weighed, 
and  blown  by  dozens  of  ^olus-like  mouths  with 
smiling  approval.  The  whole  way  from  Sum- 
merleas.  Farmer  Brown  and  his  neighbour  Farmer 
Bletchingly,  had  discussed  the  prospects  of  the 
harvest.  Along  miles  of  sunny  down,  past 
long  patch-works  of  gold  and  green,  bristling 
stubble  and  dark  ploughland,  the  great  question 
had  been  fought  over,  and  now  the  same  question 
was  being  wrangled  about,  and  shouted  about  by 
a  hundred  or  so  howling  voices  in  the  arcades  of 


THE  SALE  OF  THE  CANTELUPE  PROPERTY.   237 

Bibuiy  corn  market.  The  cheap  Jacks  and  the 
showmen  were  noisy  and  busy  as  ever.  The  fat 
voluble  man  who  "  felt  it  always  a  peculiar  plea- 
sure to  sell  bootlaces  and  china  ornaments  in  the 
town  of  Bibury,''  was  selling  china  and  bootlaces 
to  his  own  puflfers  with  unequalled  rapidity. 

In  and  out  of  the  Cantelupe  Arms,  the  thirsty 
farmers,  and  here  and  there  a  country  gentle- 
man, moved  like  busy,  busy  bees  in  May  blossom 
time.  The  street,  usually  quiet  as  a  cemetery, 
was  full  of  ebbing  and  flowing  life.  The  great 
bow  window  of  the  hotel  faced  the  window  of 
Messrs.  Fox  and  Shekell,  where  behind  the  brown 
^\iTe  blinds  four  clerks  were  busy  at  abstracts 
of  the  Cantelupe  titles  and  specifications  of  the 
property.  It  was  about  four  o'clock  by  the  old 
town  church.  The  farmers  were  beofinnino-  to  tie 
up  their  sample  bags  and  corn  sacks,  and  preparing 
for  going  home.  The  ordinary  was  breaking  up, 
and  Polyphemic  men — broad-chested,  as  full  and 
red  as  peonies,  were  calling  to  the  ostlers  for 
horse,  gig,  chaise,  and  cart.  Young  swell  farmers, 
of  the  modern  school,  threatening  with  trim 
mustaches,  or  gay  with  exuberant  azure,  crimson, 
or  green  scarf  of  the  latest  fantasy,  were  arranging 
for  their  last  game  at  billiards  or  their  last  glass 

of   OTOO'. 

The  man  who  had  not  taken  too  much  was 


238  THE   VICAES    COUETSHIP. 

trying  to  make  up  for  lost  time,  and  tlie  man  who 
liad  taken  too  mucli  "  desliidly,"  was  trying  to 
medicine  himself  by  brandy  and  soda  back  into 
sobriety. 

Still,  whoever  came  or  went,  two  men  stood  at 
the  window  of  the  chief  hotel,  watching  the  oppo- 
site door,  and  all  who  entered.  But  not  to  be 
more  mysterious  than  necessary,  we  may  as  well 
at  once  declare  that  one  was  Mr.  Fairfield,  the 
young  solicitor  of  FurnivaFs  Inn,  and  the  other, 
old  Hill,  his  clerk.  They  had  had  a  quiet  dinner, 
and  a  modest  pint  of  sherry,  and  now,  fanatics  at 
business,  were  reading  through  broad  flapping 
sheets  of  particulars  of  the  "sale  of  a  very  valu- 
able freehold,  and  tithe  free  castellated  onansion 
'and  estate,  at  SwaUowclifl",  in  the  parish  of  Bird- 
brook,  in  the  county  of  Wiltshire,  consisting  of 
—  acres,  —  roods,  —  perches,  to  take  place  by 
private  contract,  on  Friday,  the  27th  of  August, 
1861. 

"Fox  &  Shekell,  Solicitors, 

"  BlBURY.'^ 

"  The  property,''  read  on  the  old  imperturbable 
clerk  to  his  master  (who  was  checking  it  by  a 
MS.  of  his  own),  "is  richly-wooded,  the  oaks  being 
of  a  great  age,  and  lies  altogether  within  a  ring 
fence,  with  the   exception  of  two   fields ;    it  is 


THE    SALE  OF  THE  CANTELUPE  PEOPERTY.       239 

situate  in  an  excellent  sporting  county,  abound- 
ing in  game,  and  adjoining  the  preserves  of  Lord 
Mazagan,  Jabez  Harker,  Esq.,  and  otlier  large 
landed  proprietors.  A  small  trout  stream  bounds 
tlie  estate,  and  tlie  river  Winder,  in  wbicli  tliere 
is  excellent  fishing,  is  only  half  a  mile  distant. 
SwallowcHff  Castle  is  contiguous  to  the  parish 
church  of  Birdbrook,  and  about  ten  miles  from 
the  town  of  Salisbury.  The  whole  of  the  estate 
is  freehold,  and  tithe  free,  a  modus  of  125.  being 
paid  on  tithes  :  a  yearly  sum  or  Lord's  rent  of 
125.  2cZ.  is  payable  for  the  Askerton  farm,  to  the 
Duke  of  Downshire,  as  lord  of  the  manor." 

When  the  lawyer  and  his  clerk  had  gone 
through  the  twenty  conditions  of  sale,  with  now 
and  then  a  shrug,  or  a  bitter  word  of  comment, 

"  By  the  vendor,  as  and  for  liquidated  da- 
mages," said  the  old  clerk  at  last,  and  having 
used  these  final  words  he  paused,  took  snuflf,  and 
turning  the  particulars  of  sale,  read  over  the  me- 
moranda of  the  agreement  to  be  signed  by  the 
purchaser,  with  much  unction,  chuckling  like  an 

old  raven  over  the  words  " ivas  the  highest 

hidder,  and  ivas  declared  the  purchaser,  subject 
to  the  above  conditions  of  the  property,  comprised 
in  the  ivithin  particulars,  at  the  price  of ." 

The  words  "the  highest  bidder,"  old  Hill  itahc- 
ised  in  his  pronunciation.     Then  he  got  up  to  un- 


240  THE   VICAES    COURTSHIP. 

cramp  himself,  put  his  pen  behind  his  ear,  adjusted 
his  large  and  broad  white  neckcloth,  and  flipped 
off  several  grains  of  snuff  that  had  fallen  on  the 
collar  of  his  black  waistcoat.  He  next  looked  up 
the  street  at  the  church  clock  and  compared  it 
with  his  own  watch. 

''Five  minutes  to  five,  sir,"  he  said  to  Mr. 
Fairfield,  who  was  writing  at  a  furious  rate, 
"  time." 

"  Take  another  glass  of  sherry,  Mr.  Hill ;  you 
need  not  collect  the  papers,  please,  we  shall  come 
back  here,  and  we  can  pay  the  bill  also  when  we 
return." 

"  No  more  sherry,  Mr.  Fairfield,  thank  you, 
sir.  I  never  exceed  three  glasses,  and  I  want  to 
thoroughly  enjoy  this  business." 

"  Is  Tony  ready  in  the  yard  ?  " 

"  Yes.  He  was  to  have  his  horse  ready  at  half- 
past  four,  sharp." 

"  Good  1  then  take  your  hat  and  come  across. 
We  shall  surprise  the  rascals.  Oh,  we  shall  fall 
like  a  bomb-shell  on  them.  They  don  t  know  the 
intentions  of  our  client,  I  feel  sure,  and  they  are, 
also,  I  am  certain,  ignorant  of  his  wealth.  Come 
along.  Hill." 

The  lawyer  and  his  clerk  took  their  hats,  and, 
with  a  word  to  the  waiter,  and  to  Tony,  who  was 
waiting  in  the  yard  on  horseback,  like  an  ebony 


THE  SALE  OF  THE  CANTELUPE  PROPERTY.       241 

statue,  stepped  across  to  Messrs.  Fox  and  Shekell's. 
The  two  lawyers  were  busy  in  their  inner  room  that 
looked  out  on  a  cheerful  prospect  of  a  very  crowded 
clmrchyard,  and  the  clerks  were  busy  and  rude. 
"  They  closed  in  an  hour,  and  ]\Iessrs.  Fox  and 
Shekell  could  not  be  disturbed ;  they  were  en- 
gaged on  most  important  business."  Mr.  Fairfield 
smiled  at  Mr.  Hill,  and  Mr.  Hill  smiled  at 
Fairfield. 

'•  I  suppose,  then,  we  can  t  see  the  gentlemen, 
Hill,  eh  ? "  said  Fairfield. 

"Oh  of  course  not,  sir!"  said  Hill,  with  great 
inward  enjoyment  of  the  joke. 

"  No,  sir,  not  to-day  ;  call  to-morrow  as  early 
as  you  like,"  said  the  head  clerk. 

''And  yet,"  said  Mr.  Fairfield,  "on  second 
consideration,  I  think  I  must  see  them  now  ;  eh, 
Hill  ?  " 

"Well,  I  really  think  it  would  be  better,  sir,  to 
see  'em  to-day,"  said  Hill,  whose  cough  had  come 
on  rather  severely,  and  coughing  was  his  mode  of 
respectfully  laughing. 

"  Take  in  my  card,"  said  Fairfield,  changing  his 
tone  suddenly  to  one  far  more  arbitrary  and  com- 
manding, "  I  am  a  London  solicitor,  come  to  ask 
some  questions  about  the  Cantelupe  property." 

"  Oh,  this  way,  sir ;  pray  walk  in ;  beg  your 
pardon,  sir ;  Mr.  Fox  will  see  you  in  one  moment, 


242  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

just  concluding  tlie  sale  of  a  large  property.  Will 
you  take  a  seat,  sir  ? '' 

"No,  I  must  see  Messrs.  Fox  and  Shekell 
directly"  said  Mr.  Fairfield, — ' '  tliis  moment. ' '  All 
the  clerks  looked  round  at  tkis,  for  the  new 
comer  spoke  loudly  and  sternly.  "  Tell  tliem  a 
gentleman  has  come  to  make  an  offer  for  the 
Cantelupe  property." 

The  clerk  looked  as  alarmed  as  if  a  volcano 
had  just  opened  at  the  front  window.  He  went 
into  the  inner  room,  there  was'  much  suppressed 
talking  behind  the  glass-door.  In  a  few  minutes 
the  clerk,  sniggering  and  reassured,  came  out  and 
begged  Mr.  Fairfield  to  walk  in. 

Mr.  Fairfield  and  his  old  clerk  walked  calmly  in. 

Mr.  Fox,  a  pale,  tall,  red-haired  man,  with  a 
cunning,  sour,  pointed  face  ;  and  Mr.  Shekell,  a 
short,  fat,  portly  man,  with  a  smiling  face,  and  a 
great  display  of  gold  chain,  sat  at  a  knee-desk, 
which  was  covered  with  title  deeds  and  specifi- 
cations of  property,  but  there  was  no  visible 
purchaser  at  all.  They  bowed  coldly  to  Mr. 
Fairfield,  but  did  not  rise. 

Fairfield  stated  in  a  quiet,  business-like  way, 
that  he  had  come  to  ofier  75,000Z.  for  the  Cante- 
lupe property. 

"  For  yourself  ? "  said  Mr.  Fox,  sharply,  and 
rather  sarcastically. 


THE  SALE  OF  THE  CANTELUPE  PEOPEETY.   243 

'•'  That  is  immaterial.  I  offer  the  money,  and 
have  the  deposit  ready." 

"We  have  akeady  been  offered  70,000Z.,  and 
we  have  directions,  if  outbid,  to  offer  80,000/." 

"This  is  a  singular  position  you  are  holding, 
gentlemen,"  said  Mr.  Fairfield,  "selling  the 
property,  and  yet  bidding  for  a  client  of  your 
own." 

"  It  may  be,  but  it  is  a  perfectly  legal  one.  The 
property  will  then  go  to  our  client  for  80,000?. 
We  close  at  six." 

"Mr.  Hill;"'  said  Fairfield,  "you  will  observe 
that  it  still  wants  a  C[uarter  to  six,  and  that  we 
offer  85,000/.  for  this  property.'' 

"  You  have  no  chance,  our  client  permits  us  to 
bid  as  high  as  90,000/." 

"I  bid  91,000/.,  and  will  go  higher.  You 
observe  the  conditions  of  sale,  '  the  highest  bidder 
shall  be  the  purchaser.'  " 

Messrs.  Fox  and  Shekell  consulted  for  some  time 
at  the  window.  "You  are  not,  perhaps,  aware," 
said  Mr.  Fox,  "  that  to  make  this  a  hond  Jicle 
purchase  you  must  leave  a  deposit  of  8000/.  If  you 
have  not  this  deposit  ready  we  shall  treat  this  pur- 
chase as  a  mere  fanfarronade,  and  at  once  knock 
it  down  to  our  client,  ]\Ir.  Harker,  of  Summerleas 
Abbey,  for  the  original  offer  of  70,000/." 

"  Rather  cheap  ? " 

p.  2 


244  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

"  Yes,  but  suppose  there  is  no  otlier  offer;  the 
sale  is  unconditional.  Mr.  Cantelupe  is  over  head 
and  ears  in  debt." 

"  I  have  a  cheque  ready,"  said  Mr.  Fairfield, 
"  for  7000^.,  that's  a  fair  deposit,  and  I  am  ready 
to  sign  the  memorandum.  You  have,  I  see,  the 
papers  all  ready  for  your  client,  but  they  are  not 
yet  signed,  which  is  fortunate,  as  the  sale  would 
have  been  'illegal.'  Mr.  Hill,  be  kind  enough  to 
tell  me  what  o'clock  it  is." 

Mr.  Hill  pulled  out  a  trusty  old  repeater,  and 
said  "  it  wants  twelve  minutes  to  six." 

"  If  the  purchase  money  is  not  paid,"  said  Mr. 
Shekell,  spluttering  with  spite,  "  by  the  time  the 
deeds  are  prepared  and  the  title  made  good,  you 
are  perhaps  aware  that  the  property  will  be  at 
once  re-sold,  but  our  client  will  not  advance  one 
pound  over  the  90,000Z." 

"  I  have  not  come  to  Slobury  to  learn  my  busi- 
ness, Mr.  Shekell,"  said  Fairfield,  with  the  dignity 
of  a  London  practitioner,  as  he  produced  the 
deposit  cheque.  "I  feel  sorry  to  have  dis- 
appointed your  client,  Mr.  Harker.  Mr.  Hill, 
read  through  the  memorandum  prepared  by  these 
gentlemen,  and  see  it  is  a  perfect  receipt.  Such 
strange  mistakes  do  take  place  with  country 
solicitors." 

Very    glumly    and    sourly   the     discomfited 


THE  SALE  OF  THE  CANTELUPE  PROPERTY.       245 

knaves  received  the  deposit,  and  handed  over  the 
memorandum  of  receipt  and  an  abstract  of  the 
property.  Then  Mr.  Fairfield  and  old  Hill,  who 
was  inwardly  delighted,  were  coldly  shown  out. 

Five  minutes  after  the  outer  door  slammed 
behind  them,  Tony  rode  out  of  the  town  to- 
wards Fontford,  at  a  good,  round  trot.  It  had 
been  Mr.  Goodrick's  wish  that  the  purchaser  of 
SwallowcHff  should  know  as  soon  as  possible  of 
his  success. 


246  THE   vicar's   courtship. 


CHAPTEE  XV. 

THE    keeper's    hut. 

It  was  a  bright  afternoon  in  the  third  week  of 
September.  The  happy  pair,  who  that  clay  week 
were  resting  in  the  shadows  of  Vallombrosa,  happy 
as  those  lovers  with  whom  Stothard  delighted  to 
people  his  Boccaccio  gardens,  had  returned  the 
night  before.  That  same  day  Mr.  Harker  set  out 
for  Fontford,  by  the  way  of  the  Terraces.  He 
wanted  Mr.  Eobinson  to  repair  a  picture  that  had 
been  scratched  by  some  servants  in  cleaning. 

The  harvest  had  been  early,  and  the  stubble 
fields  looked  bare  and  desolate  after  the  golden 
billows  which  had  inundated  the  country  all 
through  burning  August.  "  A\^iole  as  the  marble, 
founded  as  the  rock,"  Avas  that  bad  man,  as  he 
strode  along  the  Terrace,  over  the  mossy  grass, 
taking  defiantly  the  very  path  that  led  to  the 
keeper's  hut,  already  so  deeply  engraved  in  his 
memory.  He  took  a  sort  of  Satanic  pleasure  in 
thus  braving  his  conscience  and  defying  his  fear. 


THE    keeper's    hut.  247 

He  Lad,  indeed,  no  dread  of  tlie  spot,  now,  in  the 
broad  autumn  sunshine,  with  men  ploughing  only 
two  fields  off,  between  him  and  the  road  to  Font- 
ford,  and  a  squirrel  gambolling  in  a  larch-tree  over- 
head. The  leaves,  at  that  too  dreadful  time  fresh 
and  green,  were  now  yellowing  for  their  fall.  The 
grass,  reddened  that  June  night  with  human  blood, 
was  now  covered  with  fern  and  brambles. 

It  was  hardly  even  like  the  wild  place  in  the 
wood,  shrouded  with  perpetual  tmlight,  that  some- 
times rose  before  him  in  his  dreams.  Yet  there  was 
the  hut,  with  the  shadow  in  the  doorway,  just  as 
when  the  mmxlerer  stejoped  from  it,  and  fired  the 
cruel  shot.  There  it  stood  beside  the  broken  wall, 
and  near  the  pathway  from  Traverses  now  grown 
over  with  grass  and  seldom  trodden  by  the  keepers, 
who  shunned  the  place,  declaring  that  it  was^ 
haunted. 

To  himself,  Harker,  as  he  passed  the  place^ 
defended  the  murder.  "Murder,"  he  said,  ''was 
self-defence.  The  man  was  trying  to  kill  me  by 
bothering  me  with  threats,  and  by  contempt.  He 
would  have  preyed  on  me  till  one  of  us  died.  He 
would  have  disgraced  me  before  my  wife  and 
children,  proved  me  a  criminal,  and  sent  me  to 
die  in  the  prison-yard,  or  at  an  Austrahan  farm, 
if  I  had  ever  stood  at  bay  and  defied  him.  He 
had  got  secrets  about  old  Staunton's  will.     It  was  a 


248  THE   VICARS    COURTSHIP. 

case  almost  exactly  similar  to  that  of  poor  Pro- 
fessor Webster,  whom  he  had  always  pitied.  That 
wise  and  good  man,  driven  to  despair  by  the  per- 
secutions of  a  remorseless,  pitiless  debtor,  took 
the  opportunity  at  last  to  kill  him  in  secret.  No, 
he  (Harker)  did  not  repent,  and  were  another 
Travers  to  arise,  Avhich  was  of  course  impossible, 
he  would  again,  he  felt,  seek  some  subtle  and  in- 
fallibly safe  way  of  removing  the  wretch,  whose' 
death  alone  could  bring  him  peace." 

Heaven  had  not  condemned  the  act.  Earth 
had  kept  inviolably  secret  the  name  of  the  slayer 
of  Travers.  It  was  buried  in  the  fathomless 
darkness  for  ever.  The  only  man  who  ever  knew 
about  the  will  of  old  Mr.  Staunton  was  dead ;  the 
doctor  to  whom  he  had  confided  it  also  lay  dead 
far  away  in  some  unknown  corner  of  France.  The 
scoundrel  who  had  discovered  the  secret,  and 
traded  on  it,  had  been  removed  by  force,  and  lay 
silent  under  the  earth  of  Summerleas  church- 
yard. All  went  well,  and  he  to  whom  not  even 
a  blade  of  grass  on  the  Abbey  estate  belonged,  still 
held  in  his  inexorable  grasp  all  the  broad  acres 
and  the  great  wealth  that  really  belonged  to  some 
distant  descendant  of  Staunton,  however  remote 
he  might  be,  however  obscure. 

Harker's  iron  will  had  triumphed,  the  heart  of 
stone    rejoiced    in    the   power    that   the    promp- 


THE    keeper's    hut.  249 

titude  at  fraud,  and  tlie  daring  stroke  of  murder, 
had  given  him,  and  retained  in  his  hand.  He 
believed  in  no  Deity,  or  he  would  have  mocked  at 
his  inertness,  and  denied  his  power  over  man. 
Then  the  mm'derer's  dark,  tortuous  mind  travelled 
back  to  early  days,  and  the  first  seeds  he  had 
sown  of  future  plots,  seeds  which  had  gro^Ti  up 
with  such  rapidity,  and  borne  such  fruit. 

A  deep  groan  from  the  underwood  which  he  was 
skirting;  startled  him  from  these  reveries.  Without 
a  fear  he  eagerly  pushed  aside  the  bushes  to  see 
who  had  uttered  it,  and  for  a  moment  a  thought 
of  the  d}'ing  keeper  passed  through  his  scared 
mind.  Tliere,  in  a  small  cleared  space  amongst 
the  hazel  bushes,  at  the  foot  of  a  beech  tree,  the 
grass  round  him  blackened  by  fire,  lay,  on  his 
back,  a  sleeping  beggar,  in  a  muddy,  torn,  scarlet 
coat  and  a  bruised  black  velvet  hunting-cap. 
His  bare  feet  were  bleeding  where  they  had  been 
torn  by  the  brambles ;  a  broken,  dirty  pipe  lay 
by  one  of  his  relaxed  hands,  the  sparks  from  it 
had  burnt  the  grass  for  several  feet  round  the  tree, 
and  had  scorched  the  vagabond's  coat.  It  was 
poor  Paddy  Blake,  who  since  his  disgrace  had 
in  despair  sunk  into  utter  sottishness. 

Mr.  Harker  had  no  mercy  for  the  pitiable 
wretchedness  of  the  poor  Pariah.  He  thrust  the 
ferrule  of  his  hea\y  pointed  stick  into  the  man's 


250  THE   VICARS   COURTSHIP. 

chest  to  wake  him,  and  even  this  failing,  he  rolled 
him  roughly  with  his  foot. 

"  I  won't  have  you  about  my  place,"  he  said  ; 
"  so  pack  off.  I  Avant  no  lazy,  poaching,  suspi- 
cious fellows  about  my  estate.  Be  off,  or  m  set 
the  police  on  you." 

The  man  leaped  up,  still  half  asleep  ;  his  eyes 
were  wild  with  terror  and  incipient  delirium.  "  I 
know  you,"  he  said.  "  Yah  !  you're  the  son  of  old 
Staunton's  steward,  who  got  all  this  land  so 
luckily.  You  pity  no  one,  and  it  was  you  who 
set  my  master  upon  me  about  that  horse.  That 
drove  me  almost  mad.  I  have  been  nearly  mad 
ever  since,  for  he'd  been  kind  to  me,  and  I  was 
faithful  to  him.  It  was  you,  too,  set  going  that 
I  killed  the  keeper.  You  wicked  blackguard,  you 
trod  on  me  wantonly,  as  you  would  on  a  beetle, 
and  I  owe  you  for  it.  There  is  a  God  above  us 
still,  remember  that.  Some  day  it  may  be  your 
turn  to  be  driven  about  like  a  mad  dog,  and  then 
I'll  be  there  to  pelt  you.  You  beast,  I  should  like 
to  bite  your  windpipe  in  two.     /  licit e  you." 

As  Paddy  poured  out  these  half-insane  denun- 
ciations, and  even  laid  his  hand  on  Harker,  that 
gentleman  thrust  him  from  him,  and  hurled  the 
half-starved  delirious  wretch  staggering  into  the 
bushes,  then  shaking  his  heavy  pimento  stick,  he 
said,  savagely — 


THE   keeper's   hut.  251 

"  You  lay  your  loathsome  hand  on  me  again, 
you  lying  thief,  and  I  will  split  your  skull  with 
one  blow  of  this  stick.  The  police  will  be  after 
you,  my  man,  before  one  hour  is  over.  Eemember 
you Ve  threatened  my  life  ;  and  even  if  you  get 
away  this  time,  whenever  I  see  you  next.  111 
have  you  dragged  to  gaol,  or  beaten  by  my 
keepers.     You'll  defy  me,  will  you  V 

"  The  rascal  had  all  the  inclination  to  murder 
about  him ;  but  he  isn't  stronger  than  a  child," 
said  Harker  to  himself,  as  Paddy,  frightened,  but 
threatening,  skulked  limping  off  through  the 
bushes  like  a  wounded  weasel. 


252  THE   vicar's   COURTSHIP. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

THE    TWO    MINIATURES. 

The  week  after  the  return  of  the  "  happy  pair '' 
from  the  vineyards  and  olive  gardens  of  Italy  had 
been  expected  by  Mr.  Goodrich:,  who  did  not 
know  the  exact  day  that  Beaiiflower  would  come 
back,  the  virtuoso  sent  for  Mr.  Robinson  to  his 
new  house,  on  business. 

It  was  about  restoring  one  or  two  Dutch 
pictures,  that  had  been  injured  by  the  sun,  and 
more  especially  about  the  restoration  of  a  part  of 
the  background  of-  a  most  precious  miniature 
which  Mr.  Goodrich  valued  so  much  that  he 
would  not  allow  it  to  be  left  at  the  Lawsons',  or 
even  to  be  painted  on,  out  of  his  sight. 

Exactly  at  eleven,  or  a  few  minutes  after,  just  as 
Dr.  Briscoe  had  driven  up  to  "  Heart's  Delight,"  as 
the  eccentric  virtuoso  had  called  his  house,  for  a 
few  minutes'  chat,  old  Robinson  came  slowly  up 
the  lane  out  of  Fontford,  carrying  his  square  black 
tin    paint-box   in   one    hand,    and    his    brushes 


THE    TWO    MIXIATURES.  253 

wrapped  up  in  newspaper,  in  tlie  otlier ;  liis  face 
was  radiant  with  smiles,  and  he  walked  fast,  enjoy- 
ing all  he  heard  and  saw.  It  was  not  often  the 
worthy  old  technicalist  allowed  himself  a  morn- 
ing's holiday,  and  he  jDrofoundly  enjoyed  it.  But 
what  was  the  crowning  dehglit  of  the  day  was  that 
George  had  just  come  over  with  letters  from  the 
post,  and  brought  the  joyful  news  that  the  Vicar 
and  Amy  had  returned  late  the  night  before,  and 
would  be  with  him  at  a  little  before  one.  He 
therefore  intended  to  paint  steadily  for  two 
hours  on  the  miniature,  then  strike  work  and 
return  to  an  early  dinner  with  the  family,  who, 
he  had  left  word,  were  to  come  for  him  to 
"  Heart's  Delight." 

Goodrick's  house,  originally  a  dam23,  neglected, 
unused  place  (long  ago  occupied  by  Mr.  Harker's 
father,  when  he  was  a  humble  bailiff  to  the 
Stauntons),  had  now  grown  into  a  pretty  and 
tasteful  cottage,  with  a  laro-e  Tudor  window  on 
either  side  the  porch,  the  design  of  which  had 
been  cleverly  copied  from  the  old  Jacobite  ruin. 
The  old  overgrown  shrubs  cut  down  and  civi- 
lised by  the  gardener  s  stern  steel,  and  replanted 
in  proper  order  (especially  in  one  great  clump 
facing  the  porch),  were  grooving  luxuriantly,  and 
rows  of  larches,  skirting  the  road,  sheltered 
the  house  from  the  fields,  and  gave  it  a  cozy  old- 


254  THE   VICAES   COUETSHIP. 

established  look.  The  gravel  walks  were  neat, 
and  the  flower  borders  trim ;  some  rare  creepers 
with  blue  flowers,  like  outspread  butterflies, 
clustered  round  the  stone  mullions  of  one  win- 
dow, while  high  over  the  other,  and  all  round  the 
long  upper  bed-room  lattices,  a  Virginia  creeper 
spread  its  green  and  crimson  leaves  in  hectic 
beauty  that  seemed  to  defy  death.  The  gleam 
of  scarlet  against  the  grey  stone  wall  charmed 
the  artist,  who  instantly  began  to  think  whether 
the  impasto  to  represent  the  stone,  shouldn't  be 
scraped  with  a  knife,  and  then  glazed  with  some 
sunshine  colour,  in  slant  patches,  just  as  the  sun- 
shine rested  there  then. 

Leo,  majestically  arousing  like  the  friendly  lion 
in  an  allegory,  ushered  the  pilgrim  to  the  inter- 
preter's house,  where  through  the  open  lattice 
pleasant  voices  and  pleasant  faces  greeted  him. 
Tony  opened  the  door,  smiling. 

"Welcome,  Apelles  of  Fontford,"  said  Mr. 
Goodrich,  meeting  him  at  the  front  door,  and 
shaking  hands,  "come  and  argue  with  this 
heretic  in  here,  Avho  refuses  to  see  any  beauty  in 
Van  Huysum's  flowers."  He  threw  open  the  door 
of  a  room  deliciously  walled  with  books.  Dr. 
Briscoe  was  sitting  there  before  a  large  Dutch 
flower  picture,  of  which,  as  he  loudly  declared, 
he  could  make  nothing.     On  a  marble  plinth  the 


THE    TWO   MINIATURES.  255 

painter  had  rested  a  vase,  adorned  witli  a  bas-relief 
representing  the  childhood  of  Bacchus,  and  in  this 
vase  was  a  gorgeous  bouquet  of  yellow  roses,  hya- 
cinths, tulips,  auriculas,  primroses,  cro^Ti  imperials, 
and  poj)j)ies,  while  by  the  side  of  the  vase  lay  a 
bird's  nest  T\dth  eggs,  some  rose  buds,  and  a  trailing 
bunch  of  honeysuckle. 

The  artist  touched  the  canvas  with  a  wet  finger, 
and  got  his  eye  cj^uite  close  to  it. 

"Very  fine,"  he  said,  "very  solid.  Oil  of 
copaiba ;  first  painted  in  black,  and  ultramarine, 
and  white,  and  glazed  for  the  colom\  Van 
Huysum  has  been  using  Venice  turpentine  and 
wax  here.  Very  fine,  but  I  like  Euysch  and  Van 
Aalst  at  their  best  moments  quite  as  well.  That 
flower  to  the  left  is  slightly  faded." 

"  Exactly,  my  dear  sir,"  said  the  owner,  "  that's 
precisely  where  your  great  technical  knowledge 
will  come  in  usefully  to  fight  with  time." 

*'  Well,  you  may  say  what  you  Hke,  and  you 
may  talk  all  day,"  said  the  obstinate  doctor,  behind 
the  Torres  Vedras  lines  of  his  own  Saxon  doo-o-ed- 
ness,  "  but  I  say  a  man's  a  fool  to  try  to  paint 
flowers.  For  my  own  part  I'd  rather  have  a 
dandelion  with  the  sunshine  on  it,  or  a  bough  of 
dog-roses  with  the  June  dew  dripping  from  them, 
than  all  Van  Os  or  Van  anybody  else  ever  painted. 
The  transparency,  the  fragrance,  the  surrounding 


256  THE   VICARS    COURTSHIP. 

of  tlie  flowers  is  wanting  in  these  matter-of-fact 
pictures  ;  and  for  mere  ornament,  Td  a  thousand 
times  sooner  have  one  of  old  Hunt's  primroses  or 
boughs  of  pink  and  white  apple  blossoms.  There 
was  some  poetry  about  old  Hunt,  but  these  Dutch- 
men, pshaw  ! " 

"  That  comes  of  giving  two  thousand  francs  for 
this  Van  Huysum  at  the  Hague.  Ah!  there  is 
no  pleasing  you  amateurs.  Now  then,  Mr. 
Eobinson,  for  the  miniature." 

Mr.  Eobinson  had  already  taken  an  easel  from 
the  well-known  corner  of  the  library,  and  placed 
it  with  professional  alertness  in  a  good  light  near 
the  window.  Then  he  unlocked  his  square  black 
tin  box  with  a  little  key  that  hung  on  his  long 
old-fashioned  watch  chain,  lastly,  he  set  his  palette 
and  unrolled  his  brushes. 

"  I've  not  yet,  Mr.  Goodrick,"  he  said,  "  found 
out  that  kind  patron  of  mine,  and  Mr.  Thorndyke 
will  not  tell  me  his  name.  Oh,  what  a  head  I've 
got,  why  I've  actually  forgotten  to  tell  you  what 
I  came  so  full  of,  it's  that  Van  Huysum  put  it  out 
of  my  head !" 

Here  the  enthusiastic  old  child  squeezed  out  a 
little  coiling  worm  of  flake  white  between  the 
yellow  and  the  crimson,  and  stood  up  exulting. 

"  What  do  you  think  '? — I  know  you  will  be 
glad  to  hear  it.     Amy  and  her   husband    have 


THE    TWO    MINIATURES.  2o7 

returned,  and  are  coming  for  me  here,  in  order  to 
see  you,  at  one.  It  is  very  foolish  I  know,  but  I 
almost  feel  inclined  to  dance  and  sing." 

"  I  am  as  glad,"  said  Goodrick,  "  as  if  it  was 
my  own  daughter.  I  love  Amy ;  in  fact,  I  have 
done  so  almost  ever  since  I  first  saw  her,  yes  as  a 
daughter,  and  my  good  young  friend  Beauflower, 
— there's  a  heart  of  gold  for  you — is  as  clever  as 
he  is  good." 

"  That  he  is,"  said  the  doctor ;  "  and  as  for 
Amy,  there's  no  doubt  at  all  about  it  that  she's  a 
fairy  changeling,  but  then  we  all  like  the  change- 
ling in  fairy  stories." 

"You  cannot  praise  her  too  much,"  said  Mr. 
Robinson,  turning  up  his  cuffs  and  filling  the  little 
tin  panniers  on  his  palette  with  oil  and  turpen- 
tiue.  "  I  can  assure  you  two  gentlemen,  both  being 
fiiends  of  mine,  that  Amy  never  gave  me  or  her 
mother  a  moment's  trouble  in  her  life.  She  was 
always  a  sunshiny,  charming  temper,  that  had 
in  it  few  of  women's  usual  April  gusts." 

'*'  And  what  I  specially  admire  in  her,"  said 
Dr.  Briscoe,  "  is  that  she  is  so  unconscious  of  her 
perfection,  or  even  of  having  a  temj^er  so  sweet 
and  un variable. 

"  She  does  deserve  to  be  loved,"  said  Mr.  Good- 
rick, "and  I  never  see  her  but  I  think  of  my  young 
days,  when  I  had  dreams  of  winning  just  such  a 


258  THE   vicar's    courtship. 

little  paragon,  but  ah !  those  dreams,  doctor,  how 
soon  fresh  dreams  come  sprouting  from  their 
shoulders,  and  so  they  pass.'' 

"  Well,  they  do,"  said  the  doctor,  shaking  his 
old  grizzly  liead  at  the  Van  Huysom.  "  I  once 
thought  I  should  make  my  fortune  here,  and  a 
pretty  fortune  I've  found  it.  Swift  or  somebody, 
wasn't  it,  said  of  marriage,  '  that  we  w^ere  like  birds 
in  caches,  those  who  w^ere  out  wanted  to  2:et  in, 
and  those  who  were  in  wanted  to  get  out.'  I 
begin  to  think  I'd  better  have  tried  the  lottery 
for  a  wife  thirty  years  ago." 

"  Bag  of  eels  and  snakes  ;  but  of  course  you 
may  yet  pull  out  an  eel,"  said  Mr.  Goodrick,  re- 
lapsing into  bitterness.  *'  Nice  women  we  get 
for  waves  now,  female  doctors  and  female  electors, 
and  young  ladies  who,  instead  of  needing  helj), 
look  as  if  they  would  knock  you  down  if  you 
even  dared  to  offer  them  your  arm.  Ugh ! 
There  are  no  women  now,  only  female  men. 
Amy,  your  wife,  Kobinson,  Miss  Chivers,  and 
Mr.  Beauflower's  sister,  are  the  only  women  I 
know.  Are  you  all  ready,  Eobinson,  for  the 
miniature'?  Are  you  cpiite  comfortable  as  to  light 
and  so  on?  the  room  is  entirely  at  your  disposal." 

"  My  palette  is  set,  and  I  am  quite  ready  for 
work,"  said  Mr.  Eobinson. 

"  I  am  going,  for  I've  got  another  rase  of  fever 


THE   TWO   MINIATURES.  259 

at  Stoat's  Nest/'  said  Dr.  Briscoe,  ''  but  not  being 
without  curiosity,  I  shall  just  stay  and  see  this  in- 
comparable miniature  you  so  treasure." 

"You  will  then  see  the  portrait  of  one  very 
dear  to  me,  Briscoe," said  Mr.  Goodrich,  "it  is  the 
romance  of  my  life.  If  she  had  lived,  I  should 
not  have  been  the  poor,  lonely,  cynical  old  fellow 
you  now  have  before  you." 

As  he  said  this  he  rose,  went  to  a  large  ivory 
and  ebony  cabinet  that  stood  on  a  buhl  table  by 
the  window,  unlocked  it  with  a  silver  key  from 
his  pocket,  then  with  a  smaller  key  unlocked  a 
secret  drawer,  concealed  by  japanned  doors.  He 
drew  out  the  case,  opened  it  silently  with  reli- 
gious care,  and  kissed  it  three  times. 

"  I  dare  say  you  think  me  a  romantic  old  fool, 
doctor,"  he  said,  "  but  this  has  been  my  ideal, 
and  I  have  never  found  anything  to  replace  it." 

The  doctor  took  the  case  from  him,  while 
Robinson  wiped  his  palette  knife,  and  took  a  small 
mahlstick  that  screwed  together  in  three  joints, 
from  a  compartment  of  his  paint-box.  The  doctor 
held  the  golden-l:>ound  oval  miniature  to  several 
lights,  then  satisfying  himself  with  one  at  last, 
pondered  over  it  in  surprise  and  ecstasy. 

"  What,  do  you  mean  to  say,  Goodrich,"  he 
exclaimed,  as  he  looked  at  the  miniature  through 
a  tube  formed  by  his  left  hand,  '"'  do  you  mean  to 

s  2 


260  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

tell  me  you  don't  see  the  resemblance '?  what, 
don't  you  see  some  one  it  is  like  ?  only  the  hair 
is  fairer  here,  and  the  eyes  of  a  different  colour. 
Why,  it  is  surprising  !  " 

"  Of  course  I  do,"  said  Mr.  Goodrick,  who 
was  looking  for  something  in  a  portfolio  of  Dutch 
etchings,  "and  that's,  I  think,  why  I  love  the 
young  lady  you  mean  so  much." 

Then  he  came  up  and  looked  over  the  doctor's 
shoulder. 

"It  is  wonderfully  like.  I  thought  so  ever 
since  the  first  day  I  saw  Amy  doing  some- 
thing to  some  flowers  at  a  window  opposite  mine. 
It  is  not  the  features  merely  you  see  either,  for 
the  hair  and  the  eyes  differ.  I  don't  think  nature 
ever  quite  repeated  that  face,  but  kept  the  colour 
and  expression  for  the  angels  ;  but  there  is  the 
turn  of  her  neck,  and  the  smile  is  wonderfully 
like.  The  Dutchman  who  painted  that  in  Paris 
was  the  best  miniature  painter,  I  think,  who  ever 
lived.  For  myself,  I  far  preferred  him  to  either 
Hilliard,  Isaac,  or  Peter  Oliver,  for  exquisite 
finish  and  grace.  Poor  fellow,  he  died  of  drinking 
absinthe,  and  yet  I  respect  his  memory,  for  it  is 
to  him  I  owe  this  beautiful  shadow  of  her  who 
once  illumined  my  life." 

"  Dutchman  ? "  said  Mr.  Eobinson,  screwing  on 
the  third  joint  of  his  mahlstick.      "  Well  that's 


THE    TWO    MINIATURES.  261 


singular,  for  the  best  miniature  painter  I  ever 
knew  was  also  a  Dutchman — Van  Hoist.  I  have 
a  fine  bit  of  his  still  by  me." 

"  Van  Hoist !  ^Vell,  that  is  a  coincidence,  for 
that  was  the  very  name  of  the  man  who  painted 
my  miniature." 

"  It  was  ? "  said  Mr.  Robinson,  rising  from  his 
easel.  "  Well,  I  didn't  think  there  was  a  man  in 
England  had  any  of  Van  Hoist's  works  but 
myself;  let's  see  this  wonderful  miniature." 

Mr.  Robinson  sat  down  in  a  sc_[uare,  green, 
velvet-backed  Moliere  chair  by  the  window,  to 
assume  a  proper  critical  attitude,  and  then,  taking 
the  miniature  that  Mr.  Goodrick  handed  him,  put 
on  his  heavy  silver  spectacles  to  examine  it.  To 
the  surprise  of  the  two  friends,  w^ho  watched  him, 
his  countenance,  instead  of  expressing  delight  at 
the  technical  excellence  of  the  miniature,  was 
moved  by  a  surprise  that  was  so  sudden  and 
excessive  that  it  amounted  almost  to  terror.  He 
held  the  portrait  first  close  to  his  eyes,  then  at  a 
distance,  opened  and  shut  his  eyes,  and  stared 
round  the  room  as  if  to  assure  himself  that  he 
was  not  in  a  dream. 

"  Why,  what  is  the  matter  ? "  said  Mr.  Good- 
rick, whose  curiosity  was  roused  to  the  uttermost, 
"  you  seem  to  recognise  Van  Hoist's  work." 

"Recognise  it,"  said  Mr.  Robinson,  rushing  to 


26^  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

liis  paint-box,  and  unlocking  a  lower  tray  where 
lie  kept  one  or  two  unfinished  sketches,  and 
several  rarities,  including  a  Palladium  of  his,  a 
small  replica  of  the  Gevartiu's,  "  recognise  it !  I 
think  my  brain  is  going.  Eecognise  it,  Mr. 
Groodrick,  why  look  here  ! '' 

.  He  opened  a  square,  flat,  red  box,  wrapped  up 
in  soft  silver  paper,  and  drew  out  an  unfinished 
miniature  on  ivory.  It  was  a  facsimile  of  Mr. 
Goodrich's  miniature  —  hair,  eyes,  tiu^n  of  the 
head,  fashion  of  the  dress,  necklace,  everything,  ex- 
cept that  in  the  left  corner  of  the  background.  Van 
Hoist  had  signed  his  name,  with  the  date  1821. 
The  background  was  also  slightly  deeper  in  tone. 

Mr.  Goochick  now  in  his  turn  seemed  struck 
with  sudden  delirium.  He  seized  the  two  minia- 
tures, held  them  side  by  side,  and  conned  every 
touch  with  the  eager  curiosity  and  comparison  of 
an  expert. 

"  No,"  he  said,  "it  is  not  a  copy,  no  one  could 
have  a  copy,  it  has  never  been  from  under  my  lock 
and  key  for  forty  years.  There  are  no  miracles 
now.     How  was  this  '?     You  knew  Van  Hoist  ?  " 

"  I  knew  him  in  London,  in  the  year  I  married, 
1835.  I  showed  him  this  miniature,  and  he 
remembered  painting  it  in  Paris  in  1821." 

"In  1821.  Impossible  !  Did  he  mention — did 
he  mention  the  name  of  the  lady  he  painted  ? " 


THE    TWO    MINIATCKEjS.  1^63 

"  Yes  he  did,  but  I  knew  it  before," 

''You  knew  it.  Good  God!  how  could  you 
know  it  ? " 

"  She  was  my  wife's  half-sister." 

'•  Her  name  '(  " 

''  Lucy  Staunton." 

^Ir.  Goodrick  turned  pale,  as  if  his  heart  had 
for  a  moment  ceased  to  beat,  his  lips  turned  livid, 
and  he  sank  on  a  chair  beside  the  artist,  who  also 
appeared  strangely  perturbed,  and  kept  staring 
at  the  two  miniatures  as  if  his  own  picture  had 
become  miraculously  doubled.  Dr.  Briscoe  also 
appeared  strangely  roused  by  the  utterance  of 
this  old  name,  and  coming  to  Mr.  Goodrick,  asked 
if  he  should  ring  for  Tony  to  hving  a  glass  of 
wine  ;  for  he  was,  as  he  felt  by  his  pulse,  suffer- 
ing from  some  great  nervous  shock. 

But  Mr.  Goodrick  gave  the  doctor  no  answer, 
his  eyes  were  fixed  on  the  miniature,  and  the 
miniature  alone ;  everything  else,  earth,  sea,  or 
air,  seemed  to  him  now  indifferent. 

"  I  may  tell  you  now,"  he  said,  "  Mr.  Eobinson, 
as  a  friend  of  Mr.  Staunton,  the  husband  of  the 
lady  the  facsimile  of  whose  portrait  you  possess, 
that  when  I  returned  to  Eno^land  from  the  West 
Indies,  to  fulfil  some  last  wishes  of  my  poor  dead 
friend,  I  discovered,  through  the  medium  of  Mr. 
Fairfield,  my  solicitor,  and   Mr.   Thorndyke,   an 


26i  THE    VICAll's    COUKT«HIP. 

agent  of  mine,  in  the  purchase  of  jewels,  pictures, 
and  curiosities,  that  a  relative,  a  half-sister  of  my 
friend's  wife,  was  still  living,  and  having  married 
an  artist,  lived  in  Buckingham  Street,  Strand. 
Thorndyke  found  me  out  your  address,  and  I  took 
chambers  opposite  you,  in  the  autumn  of  the  last 
year.  At  the  window  of  those  chambers  I  first 
saw  Amy,  and  recognised  the  likeness  to  this 
miniature  left  me  by  Staunton  as  his  dearest 
idol." 

Dr.  Briscoe  listened  to  every  word  with  the 
deepest  attention,  and  his  character  of  secret- 
keeper  to  a  large  part  of  AYiltshire  showed  more 
and  more  in  his  brow  and  eyes. 

Mr.  Eobinson  had  listened  to  this  strange 
statement  with  his  head  resting  upon  his  hand, 
and  his  elbows  supported  on  the  table ;  he  did 
not  raise  his  head  when  Mr.  Goodrick  con- 
cluded. 

"  There  is  a  little  confession  I  have  to  make," 
said  the  old  artist,  with  a  tremulous  voice  ;  "  and 
yet  I  feel  I  must  make  it  to  so  old  a  friend  of  Mr. 
Staunton's ;  though  it  is  very  bitter  to  tell  one's  o^^ti 
shame,  and  expose  a  lie  of  twenty  years.  It  has 
long  lain  heavy  on  my  heart ;  I  had  resolved  to 
tell  Amy  the  day  of  her  marriage  ;  but  I  had  not 
courage  when  all  that  happened,  and  they  still 
loved  each  other.     It  was  so  hard  to  untwine  her 


THE    TWO    MINIATURES.  265 

arms  from  mv  neck,  and  tell  her  I  was  not  lier 
father." 

"'  You  not  her  father  !  Who  was  then  ?  "  said 
Mr.  Goodiick,  almost  fiercely,  as  he  started  up 
and  confronted  the  broken  man  who  made  the 
confession,  "  and  who  was  her  mother  ?  Tell  me, 
for  God's  sake,  tell  me  !  " 

"  Her  father  was  a  Captain  Laroche." 

"  And  her  mother  ?  " 

"  Her  mother  was  the  daughter  of  the  wife  of 
your  friend.'*' 

"  That  is  false,  man,  she  had  no  children/' 

"  Yes,  she  had  one  daug-hter,  in  oivino-  l^irth  to 
Avhom  she  died.     She " 

But  Mr.  Goodrick  had  fallen  Lack  in  his  chair 
and  fainted. 

Dr.  Briscoe  rano-  violently  for  water  and  for 
l:)randy. 

Slowly,  very  slowly,  the  old  man  recovered, 
and  a  faint  light  returned  into  his  eyes. 

"It  is  useless  for  me,"  he  said,  ''to  keep  on 
any  longer  the  iron  mask  I  have  worn  for  so  many 
years.  Do  you  wonder  why  the  disclosure  you 
have  made  rends  my  very  heart,  and  made  the 
l^lood  ebb  from  it  as  if  it  never  would  return  ?  I 
will  tell  you.  I  am  weary  of  my  disguise,  and 
God  in  heaven  be  thanked,  it  would  be  sinful  any 
longer  to  wear  it.     I,  too,  have  a  secret  to  tell 


''^Q^  THE    VICARS    COURTSHIP. 

that  will  astonish  l3oth  of  you,  my  friends.  1 
am  not  Goodrick — I  am  Herbert  Stamiton,  the 
drowned  man.  ]  am  the  son  cast  off  by  Herbert 
Staunton,  after  his  imprudent  marriage  with  Lucy 
Wilson,  the  daughter  of  a  poor  Devonshire  cler- 
gyman, who  came  to  stop  here  to  do  temporar}- 
duty  for  Beauflowers  father.  It  is  my  once 
friend,  that  accursed  villain,  that  cruel  treacherous 
Adllain,  Harker,  the  son  of  my  father's  steward, 
who  suppressed  my  letters  to  my  father,  and  his 
to  me,  till  we  became  for  ever  alienated.  He 
suppressed,  too — may  he  die  in  poverty  and 
despair  ! — he  must  have  suppressed  her  letters  to 
me,  and  mine  to  her.  She  died — she  for  whom  I 
would  have  sold  my  blood,  to  spare  one  pang — 
she  died  believing  that  I  had  deserted  her." 

The  old  man's  heart  overflowed  at  this  bitter 
thought,  and  he  burst  into  irresistible  and  pas- 
sionate tears. 

"  I  see  it  all,"  said  the  doctor,  as  he  sat  down 
and  buried  his  head  in  his  hands. 

"  Then  you  are  Amy's  grandfather  ? "  said 
Air.  Eobinson. 

"  I  am  her  grandfather.  Where  is  she,  that  I 
may  clasp  to  my  lieart  that  image  of  her  I  once 
loved?" 

"Harker  did  not  conceal  the  fact  of  Lucy's 
birth  from  you,"  said  Mr.  Eobinson.     ''  He  knew 


THE    TWO    MINIATURES.  ^07 

only  of  her  motlicr's  cleatli ;  the  ftict  of  the  birth 
of  a  child  was  concealed  from  him  Ijy  those  kind 
Devonshire  friends  who  tended  poor  Lncy  in  her 
last  illness.  They  were  indignant  at  your  sup- 
posed neglect,  for  Harker  stinted  her  even  of  the 
money  which  you,  no  doubt,  supplied."' 

"  Stinted  !     I  sent  money  many,  many  times." 

"  Indignant  witli  you,  they  resolved  to  adopt 
the  child,  and  not  to  disclose  to  you  her  birth  till 
she  was  grown  up,  or  till  you  showed  some  signs 
of  contrition  for  the  treatment  of  her  poor 
mother.'"' 

"  Gracious  God !  and  this  man  has  not  been 
struck  by  lightning  !  Oh  !  tliat  I  could  strip  this 
Tvo-etch,  leaf  by  leaf,  till  I  left  him  a  mere  log  of 
dead  wood  to  be  thrown  into  hell's  furnace.  My 
hate  is  so  great,  so  bitter,  so  malignant  that  I  could 
kill  him  now  bit  by  bit,  or  watch  him  broken  on  the 
wheel.  Oh  !  that  I  could  leave  Amy,  my  grand- 
daughter, these  broad  lands,  and  all  the  wealth 
this  fawning  wretch  won  hj  his  tricker}"  and  lies. 
T  would  not  kill  him,  God  and  man  have  for- 
bidden that ;  but  I  would  cast  him  out  to  disease 
and  to  beggary.  Yes,  both  he  and  his.  Oh !  that 
Heaven  w^ould  2:rant  me  some  reveno;e  to  offer 
on  that  dear  grave  !  Where  was  it  they  bmied 
her  ?     Oh  Lucy  !  " 

Mr.  Eobinson's  countenance  sunk,  as  he  slowly 


268  THE    VKJAe's    COUllTSHir. 

replied,  not  daring  even  to  meet  the  eye  of  his 
questioner.  "In  the  Fosse  Commune  of  Pere  la 
Chaise.  Lucy  died  suddenly  in  the  temporary 
absence  of  her  friends  at  Havre,  and  they  found 
her,  to  their  horror,  buried  when  they  returned. 
They  never  could  discover  her  grave." 

''  Buried  like  a  dog  !  She,  my  angel,  for  whom 
I  would  have  given  up  wealth,  ambition,  every- 
thino[.  Heaven  must  have  some  reveno-e  in  store 
for  these  crimes." 

"Yes,  and  it  sends  it  now,"  said  Dr.  Briscoe, 
drawing  a  packet  of  discoloured  letters  from  his 
breast  pocket.  "  There,"  said  he,  "  for  the  last 
tAvelve  years  I  have  carried  these  letters,  left  in 
my  charge  by  Dr.  Chevalier,  my  predecessor,  the 
doctor  who  attended  on  your  father." 

"  And  they  contain  ? " 

'•'  They  contain  a  proof  that  your  father's  will, 
leaving  everything  to  that  thief  Harker,  was  left 
unsigned,  and  that  the  signatures  attached  to  it 
were  forgeries." 

"  Forgeries  ?  Forgeries  ?  Then  my  father  did 
not  disinherit  me  ? " 

"  Compose  yourself  ;  sip  that  brandy.  I  insist 
on  it.     You  are  turning  pale  again." 

"No,  it  is  for  joy,  for  joy  this  time.  No,  I  shall 
not  faint  now.  Amy  is  my  iucy  restored  from  the 
grave.     This  happiness  even  death  cannot  deprive 


THE    TWO    MINIATURES.  ^09 

me  of.  I  defy  death  and  time.  Yes,  I  am  strong 
now — I  am  strong  now." 

''  Your  father  kept  his  will  unsigned,  hoping 
against  hope,  that  some  child  of  yours,  of  you, 
his  drowned  son,  might  appear,  and  to  him  or  his 
he  might  leave  the  property.  He  still  to  my  pre- 
decessor often  spoke  of  you  with  regret,  pardon, 
and.  tenderness." 

"  Bless  him  for  that." 

"  Latterly,  we  learn  from  Barker's  accomphce, 
the  father  of  Travers,  the  keeper  who  was  mur- 
dered, that  Harker  kept  the  old  man  in  a  con- 
stant stupor  with  laudanum,  lest  before  visitors 
he  might  suddenly  resolve  to  make  and  sign  a 
fresh  will." 

"  Villain !  Execrable  double-dyed  villain  !  Gra- 
cious Heaven  be  thanked  that  it  is  all  mine  for 
Amy.  I  should  die  happy  now,  if  I  died  at  the 
sight  of  her,  for  I  should  awake  at  Heaven's  gate 
beside  Lucy — Lucy  whom  I  love." 

These  passionate  words  were  hardly  uttered 
l)efore  the  library  door  was  thrown  wide  open, 
and  Tony  announced  with  a  practised  for- 
mality,— 

"Mr.  Jabez  Harker!" 

"  You  were  so  busy  talking,"  he  said,  "  you 
three  people,  as  I  passed  by  the  Avindow,  that  you 
actually  neither  saw  me  nor  heard  me.    You  were 


270  THE   vicar's    COUETSHIP. 

all  deaf  as  adders.  IVe  come,  Mr.  Goodrick,  to 
see  those  Twelve  Countesses  of  Peter  Lombart 
that  you  wanted  me  so  to  see,  and  compare  with 
my  Vandycks.  I  want  specially  to  see  the  '  Ann 
Carr/  Leslie  tells  me  it  is  very  fine.  Well,  you 
were  talking  away  not  to  hear  or  see  me.  Ha, 
ha  !  deaf  as  adders  ;  but,  Good  Gracious !  what's 
the  matter  with  you  all  ?  " 

"  Adders ! "  said  Mr.  Goodrick,  with  teeth 
scarcely  parted.  "  Adders  !  well  said  ;  and  the 
last  one  brimming  with  poison.'' 

"  Are  you  all  mad  1  AYhy  do  you  stare  at 
me  so  ^ 

"  I  will  tell  you  why  we  stare  at  you,"  said 
Dr.  Briscoe ;  "  we  stare  to  see  a  man  who  could 
betray  his  friend  and  deceive  his  benefactor ; 
who  could  let  a  son  die,  struck  down  by  his 
father's  anger,  and  a  father  die  ignorant  of  his 
son's  repentance  and  his  love.  We  stare  also 
to  see  the  rich  man  who,  in  another  minute,  will 
leave  this  room  branded  for  ever  as  a  forger,  and 
stripped,  beggared,  and  disgraced." 

"  Take  care  what  you  say,  doctor.  Oh,  you  are 
mad,  must  be  mad !  Who  is  to  do  all  this  ? 
Who  says  the  will  was  not  a  valid  one  ?  I 
shall  have  the  law  against  you,  Briscoe.  This  is 
a  conspiracy." 

"  This  confession  of  Joseph  Travers,  lately  de- 


THE   rSVO    MIXIATUPvES.  'ZU 

ceased,  butler  to  old  Mr.  Staunton.  He  gave 
with  his  own  hands  this  paper,  in  my  presence, 
to  Dr.  Chevalier." 

"  Pshaw !  a  lie  of  some  low  attorney's  con- 
triving ;  some  such  man  as  the  one  into  whose 
hands  the  CantelujDc  property  has  just  fallen. 
And  who  are  the  claimants  of  my  land  and  of 
the  Abbey,  pray.  Dr.  Briscoe  '?  Mr.  Eobinson, 
I  suppose,  or  your  worthy  self" 

Harker's  heart  had  for  the  moment  turned 
cold,  but  he  had,  by  a  strong  effort,  recovered  his 
com-age. 

"  You  want  to  see  him,  Mr.  Harker,"  said 
Goodrick;  "you  shall  be  gratified,  thou  incarna- 
tion of  all  evil.  Look  at  me.  Did  you  ever 
know  one  Herbert  Staunton  with  whom  you 
went  to  school  at  Marlborough,  and  who  was 
your  bosom  friend  and  ally,  till  he  ran  away 
from  here  with  Lucy  Wilson,  whose  child — " 

"  Child  ^ " 

"  Yes,  you  may  well  start ;  a  child  of  whom 
you  are  unacquainted — '' 

"  I  did  know  a  man  of  that  name,"  said 
Harker,  "  but  he  was  drowned  forty  years 
ago." 

"  I  AM  HE  ! " 

"  Oh,  of  course  you  are  ;  I  expected  that ;  ah  ! 
I  saw  that  was  coming.    So,  you  really  think,  you 


272  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

old  impostor,  that  Fm  actually  going  to  be  stripped 
by  such  a  bare-faced  led-up-to  trick  as  this. 
There  is  no  Herbert  Staunton,  and  no  daughter ; 
his  wife  died  without  children  six  months  after 
their  marriage.  The  will  is  beyond  suspicion. 
]\ly  lawyers  will  see  to  this ;  it  is  really  a  pity 
you  three  should  waste  your  money  in  this  foolish 
and  impudent  plot.  Gentlemen  conspirators,  I 
wish  you  respectfully  a  very  good  morning.'' 

("  They've  got  the  papers,  I  see,  d — ■  them," 
thought  Harker,  "  but  I  can  fight  them  ;  as  for 
this  claimant,  he's  a  cheat,  some  West  Indian 
who  knew  Staunton,  and  learned  from  him  cer- 
tain useful  facts,  which  he  now  wishes  to  turn 
into  cash.     Ha  !  they  don't  know  me.") 

"  Jabez  Harker,"  said  Goodrick,  with  the  voice 
of  a  judge  of  the  dead,  "  I  don't  want  to  repeat 
the  legal  proofs  of  my  own  existence ;  those  will 
come  out  soon  enough  for  you.  I  don't  want 
either  to  revile  you  for  the  Satanic  cruelty  of 
your  mode  of  severing  the  ties  that  held  Lucy  to 
me  and  me  to  my  father ;  that  you  will  answer 
here,  and  not  only  here  but  hereafter.  The 
recording  angel  has  a  long  memory  ;  but  I  want, 
instead  of  killing  you  at  my  feet,  which  I  might 
have  done  years  ago,  to  show  you  before  these 
two  friends  of  mine,  a  proof  which  will  send  the 
truthful  colour  to   even    your   brazen  forehead ; 


THE    TWO    MINIATURES.  273 

you  may  remember  now,  fifty-four  years  ago,  that 
one  holiday  at  Marlborough  in  the  cricket  field — • 
Observe  his  face,  gentlemen  ! " 

"Just  one  moment,  please,"  said  Dr.  Briscoe, 
with  his  back  to  the  door  at  which  Harker  darted. 

"One  day  in  the  cricket  field,  just  when  a  third 
game  was  over,  we  got  needles  and  gunpowder, 
and  imitating^  an  old  man  of  war's  man  whom  we 
had  seen  beo-aino;  the  day  before,  we  two,  as  sworn 
changeless  friends,  determined  to  prick  on  each 
of  om-  left  arms,  just  above  the  wrists,  a  true 
lovers  knot,  and  a  heart  Avith  cross  arrows  in 
it.  There  is  yours,"  —  in  an  instant,  Dr. 
Briscoe,  at  a  nod,  seized  Mr.  Harker's  hand,  and 
before  he  could  release  himself,  stripped  up  the 
shirt  cuff  and  showed  it, — "  and  here  is  mine." 

As  he  said  this,  Mr.  Goodrick '  bared  his  left 
wrist,  and  showed  a  little  above  it,  tattooed  in 
faint  blue  lines,  a  true  lovers'  knot  and  a 
heart  transfixed  with  arrows.  "You  see,"  he 
said,  "  the  man  cannot  speak.  I  came  down 
here,  Harker,  not  knowing  then  of  this  forgery, 
not  thinking  of  the  lost  estate,  but  only  to 
watch  the  unjust  steward,  and  see  whether  real 
happiness  had  come  with  such  base  earned 
wealth.  You  are  now,  perhaps,  convinced  that 
I  am  Herbert  Staunton,  and  that  the  report  that 
reached   my   father    and   you    of  my  death    by 


A'OL.  III. 


274  THE    VICARS    COURTSHIP. 

drowning  off  the  Pearl  Islands,  was  only  a  report 
invented  and  circulated  by  me  after  my  wife  liad 
died  and  my  father  had  thrown  me  off.  After 
that,  with  the  little  money  I  had  left,  I  went  and 
bought  a  sugar  plantation  in  Cuba ;  there,  as 
men  often  do  when  they  are  careless  of  life  or 
fortune,  I  sur^dved  many  stronger  men  and  grew 
rich.  You  are  no  longer  sceptical,  you  recog- 
nise in  me  now,  sir,  the  injured  man  who  was 
your  friend." 

"Eecognise  you  ?  "  said  Harker,  with  a  look  of 
the  most  devilish  hatred  and  contempt,  "  I  re- 
cognise you  only  as  a  fellow  who  has  caught  v 
some  small  points  of  identity,  which  any  cheat 
might  do.  ]\Iy  lawyers  will  soon  tell  you  how  far 
T  know  you."  Then  he  strode  out,  slamming  the 
door  behind  him  as  if  a  whirlwind  had  borne  him 
to  "his  own  place." 

"  So  we  exorcised  the  devil,"  said  Dr.  Briscoe, 
lauo^hinor,  as  the  hoofs  of  the  horse  which  Harker 
had  fastened  at  the  gate,  were  heard  echoing 
down  the  lane  towards  Fontford.  Some  c[uarter 
of  an  hour  afterwards,  as  the  three  men  were 
busily  reading  the  statement  of  the  old  butler, 
Travers's  father,  laughing  young  voices  were 
heard  outside  the  shrubbery,  and  the  next 
moment  Amy  and  the  Vicar  ran  to  the  window, 
and  looked  in,  bowing  and  smiling  welcomes.  Mrs. 


THE    TWO    MIXIATUFvES.  275 

Robinson  and  ]\Iiss  Chivers  followed  tlicm  close 
beliind.  Amy  had  never  looked  so  beautiful  and 
radiant.  She  seemed  to  move  encircled  by  a. 
saintly  aureole  of  pure  and  serene  happiness. 

But  no  one  greeted  Amy  or  the  Yicar  when 
they  entered,  beaming  with  love  and  happiness, 
and  rejoicing  at  the  sight  of  faces  so  dear  and  so 
friendly.  Old  Robinson  did  not  even  rise  from 
his  chair  when  Amy  flew  to  him  and  kissed  him, 
and  casting  herself  on  her  knees,  seized  his  thin, 
pallid  hands. 

''My  dear,"  he  said  to  his  wife,  ''I  have  told 
all.  Amy,  we  have  deceived  you  ever  since 
you  came  to  our  care  ;  Amy,  you  are  not  our 
chHd." 

"  You  are  not  my  father  !  Oh,  Edward,  what 
does  this  mean  1  what  can  it  mean  ?  " 

"  It  means.  Amy,"  said  Dr.  Briscoe,  advancing 
and  taking  Amy's  hand,  and  helping  her  to  rise, 
"  it  means  that  your  grandfather  Herbert  Staunton 
has  risen  from  the  dead,  that  he  and  ^Ir.  Goodrick 
are  one,  and  that  you  are  the  daughter  of  his 
child." 

"  My  child !"  sobbed  the  expectant  father,  and 
her  eyes  met  his,  which  shone  with  a  profound  joy 
and  peace. 

''  My  father!"  cried  Amy,  and  as  she  flew  into 
his  outstretched  arms,  tears  of  joy  burst  from  lier 


276  THE    VICARS    COURTSHIP. 

eyes.  "Not  my  father,"  she  said,  "but  my  clear 
grandfather."  Then  he  released  her  for  a 
moment,  and  she  ran  and  took  the  hands  of  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Eobmson,  "You  must  still  let  me, 
grandpapa,  love  those  who  have  loved  me  so 
dearly ;  and  Ned,  you  will  love  us  all,  won't 
you  ?  I  know  your  heart  is  large  enough  for  that, 
dearest." 


PADDY    BLAKE's    LAST    RIDE.  277 


CHAPTER  XVIL 

PADDY    blare's  LAST    RIDE. 

Poor  hounded  vagabond ;  known  to  be  a 
poacher;  suspected  of  drugging  Immenschikoflf ; 
by  many  regarded  as  having  had  some  knowledge 
at  least  of  the  keeper's  murder  ;  warned  off  here, 
"chivied"  there,  treated  coldly  even  by  his  old 
boon  companions  at  the  "Barker's  Arms,"  the 
"Peal  of  Bells,"  and  other  old  haunts  of  his; 
poor  Paddy  had  found  no  consolation  in  his 
troubles  but  sleep,  no  friend  but  his  old  trea- 
cherous enemy,  drink.  The  few  halfpence  he 
begged  or  borrowed  from  stray  grooms,  or  tipsy 
men  at  beer-shop  doors,  enabled  him  to  hurry 
himself  rather  faster  than  usual  to  the  long 
threatenino;  delirium  tremens.  Into  that  vortex  of 
suicidal  madness  Paddy  was  now  hurrying  blind- 
fold, and  with  incredible  speed.  It  needed  no 
intellectual  demon  from  the  region  of  flames  to 
allure  poor  Paddy  do^vn  the  primrose  path,  or  over 
the  rose-hidden  edge  of  Death's  black  precipices, 


278  THE   VICAK's    COUETSHIP- 

with  a  mind  naturally  weak,  unbalanced,  and 
without  the  power  of  resisting  impulses;  Avith  no 
safety-valve  of  prudence,  no  break  of  reflection ; 
his  brain,  moreover,  sodden  with  licjuid  madness, 
his  heart  half  broken  by  sorrow  at  being  thought 
unfaithful  to  his  benefactor,  Paddy  was  as  ready, 
at  the  word  of  the  foul  fiend  that  kept  steady  at 
his  crooked  elbow,  to  run  a  muck,  as  any  Malay 
madman,  fresh  from  a  three  days'  debauch  on 
Indian  hemp.  Despair,  indifference  for  life,  and  a 
wild  notion  of  dyiug  at  once  and  in  some  strange 
way  that  might  not  only  be  an  assertion  of  his 
innocence  about  the  horse,  but  a  vexation  to 
Squire  Harker,  was  seething  in  his  fevered  mind, 
as,  the  night  after  Harker  had  seen  him,  he  once 
again  ventured  into  the  Abbey  Woods,  and 
staggered  and  forced  a  way  through  the  thickest 
underwood,  in  a  part  least  frequented.  He  had 
eaten  nothing  now  for  two  days,  but  he  had 
spent  in  gin  and  beer  a  shilling  or  two  some 
grooms  at  Lord  Mazagan's  had  collected  for  him 
in  the  stable. 

The  poor  rogue's  mind  was  in  that  state  now  of 
chronic  excitement,  that  he  could  not  distinguish 
his  imaginations  from  realities ;  once,  when  a 
white  owl  screamed  close  to  the  hut  where 
Travers  was  murdered,  he  thought  he  saw  it  fly 
between  the  firs  with  its  wino\s  on  fire.      Then 


PADDY    blare's    LAST    EIDE.  279 

he  half  resolved  to  go  and  liaug  himself  on  a 
certain  horizontal  branch  of  an  elm,  that  he  re- 
membered thinking,  some  months  before,  was  a 
good  place  for  a  man  who  wanted  to  do  away 
with  himself.  Then  an  uncontrollable  fear  seized 
him,  and  he  ran  along;  the  terraces  with  the  frantic 
speed  of  a  madman,  fancying  at  every  surging 
•'sough"  of  the  wind  among  the  trees,  that  a 
pack  of  hell-hounds  had  been  set  on  him,  and 
would  tear  him  to  pieces  if  they  once  overtook 
him.  He  could  not  see  them,  but  he  saw,  as  he 
believed,  theii'  flaming  eyes  racing  past  among 
the  bushes,  and  once  he  threw  himself  into  a  weedy 
pond,  and  stood  breast  high  in  the  water,  pray- 
ing to  be  saved  from  their  fangs.  At  last, 
worn  out  with  fear,  frenzy,  and  fatigue,  he 
threw  himself  down  under  a  tall  juniper  bush, 
not  far  from  the  keeper  s  hut,  and  slept  for 
several  hours  in  its  ominous  shadow.  It  was 
scarcely  dark  when  he  went  to  sleep,  and  a  deep 
dull  red  light  was  in  the  west ;  when  he  awoke  it 
was  after  midnight,  and  the  full  moon  was  just 
rising  over  the  distant  woods  of  Swallowcliif. 
It  was  the  voices  of  some  passing  keepers  that 
had  aroused  him.  They  were  passing  close  to  the 
bush  where  he  lurked,  and  were  talking  of  some 
one  in  London  having  bouglit  all  the  Cantelupe 
estates. 


280  THE    VICARS    COUKTSHIP. 

"  Every  stick,"  said  one. 

''  It  was  that  last  siller  that  he  dropped  at 
the  races  that  knocked  him  over,"  said  the 
other. 

"  Yes  !  ah  !  that  blackguard  Paddy  doubled  on 
him.  Curse  him,  I  lost  two  pounds  over  that 
infernal  horse." 

Paddy  cowered  silently  till  they  had  gone  by 
on  their  rounds — the  Scotch  head-keeper  and  his 
man — then  he  slunk  out  into  the  moonlight,  that 
covered  the  terrace  with  cloth  of  fairy  silver  ; 
those  words  had  been  like  fire  coals  to  explode 
the  powder  mine  of  his  madness — he  who  would 
have  cut  off  his  arms  to  serve  Mr.  Cantelupe,  and 
his  legs  to  have  insured  victory  to  the  horse. 
He  was  stark  howling  mad  now,  and  his  thoughts 
were  resolutely  bent  on  instant  and  expiatory 
death. 

Bursting  through  the  bushes,  and  racing  with 
the  speed  of  light  down  the  great  slope  of  the 
Abbey  terraces,  falling  once  or  twice  over  bushes, 
and  lacerating  his  bare  feet  with  the  brambles, 
till  they  left  red  prints  on  the  grass  they  crushed, 
he  rushed  towards  Mr.  Harker's  outlying  stables, 
the  very  spot  where,  months  before,  he  had 
fought  the  Yorkshire  groom,  and  had,  unfortu- 
nately for  himself,  threatened  Travers.  It  was  a 
long  raw  looking  brick  building  two  stories  high, 


PADDY    BLAKE's    LAST    RIDE.  281 

and  the   shining  windows  were  staring  vacantly 
at  the  moon. 

The  grooms,  taking  advantage  of  Mr.  Daw- 
son's absence  in  London,  had  gone  out  contrary 
to  rules,  to  attend  a  club  feast  at  Slobury^  The 
helpers  and  boys — everyone — were  away,  and 
there  was  no  sound  inside  the  locked-up  doors, 
but  the  shivering  of  the  horses,  an  occasional 
neigh  or  whinny,  and  the  drag  of  the  weighted 
manger  chains. 

Paddy  thundered  at  the  door,  shouting  to  the 
ofrooms  bv  name  to  let  him  have  Immenschi- 
koff  out,  then  he  would  ride  and  win  on  him. 
Presently  he  dragged  and  wrenched  at  the  door 
handle,  and  then  tried  to  force  the  window.  Still 
no  reply,  but  the  uneasy  drag  of  the  chains  and 
the  sound  of  the  horses'  feet,  as  the  hunters  moved 
in  the  stalls. 

"Let  him  out,"  he  cried,  "or  I'll  burn  the 
place,"  and  he  rummaged  his  rags  to  try  and  find 
a  match,  and  thrust  it  under  the  door  into  the 
litter  of  loose  straw.  The  horses  iDCgan  to  kick 
and  neigh  as  he  broke  in  a  window  with  his 
fist,  and  tried  to  wrench  out  one  of  the  long 
narrow  iron  bars  that  guarded  it.  Foiled  in  both 
these  efforts,  and  hearing  the  hell-hounds  now, 
as  he  thought,  gathering  above  on  the  terrace  for 
a  rush  upon  him,  Paddy  climbed  the  wall  of  the 


282  THE    VIOAll'S    OOUKTSHir. 

paddock  on  one  side  of  tlie  stable,  and  there 
in  one  corner,  half  hidden  in  stra\Y,  found  the 
limb  of  an  elm,  that  had  been  used  to  j^rop  a  hay- 
stack which  had  leaned  on  one  side.  With  this, 
in  an  instant,  he  drove  in  a  small  double  door 
leading  into  the  stable,  and  used  for  the  removal 
of  litter  and  rubbish.  Once  in,  with  a  yell  of 
triumph,  and  dragging  in  the  bcittering-ram  with 
him,  he  soon  beat  down  the  wood  work  round 
the  back  of  the  stable  door ;  then  with  a  bill- 
hook he  found  in  the  harness-room,  where  it  had 
been  used  to  split  firewood,  clove  down  and  split 
the  rest,  and  wrenched  off  the  bolts  and  frame- 
work. The  restless  horses,  kicking  and  plunging, 
he  then  released  by  climbing  like  a  cat  round  the 
mangers  and  hay-racks ;  and  with  his  knife  cut- 
ting the  halters  turned  them  one  by  one  adrift, 
shouting  at  them  as  he  drove  them  madly  away, 
with  their  heads  turned  towards  Swallowcliff  and 
the  brook  where  Amy  so  nearly  perished.  As 
every  horse  passed  him  at  the  door,  Paddy 
slapped  him  on  the  flank,  and  gave  a  mad  frantic 
scream  of  delight. 

The  vicious  chestnut  mare.  Firefly,  was  the  only 
one  now  left,  and  her  halter  Paddy  had  not  cut 
effectually.  She  v/as  still  in  her  stall,  straining 
at  the  chain,  her  eyes  wild,  red  with  terror,  a 
dew  of  fear  clammy  upon  her  coat. 


PADDY    BLAKE  S    LAST    EIDE.  288 

Paddy,  wildly  clambering  about  the  manger, 
stopped  to  admire  the  beautiful  vixen.  At  that 
instant  the  madman's  eyes,  turning  to  the  door- 
way, saw  those  phosphorescent  glimmers  of  the 
retina  wdiich  to  the  crazed  creature  seemed  the 
eyes  of  hell-hounds  that  had  slunk  down  from 
the  wood,  and  were  now  waiting  in  ambush  for 
their  victim.  Not  a  moment  to  be  lost.  With 
a  yell  of  delight  he  threw  himself  on  the  mare's 
back,  cut  her  halter,  and  stooping  to  her  mane, 
which  he  clutched  with  the  grasp  of  madness, 
drove  her  through  the  doorway  to  follow  the 
A\TLld  hunt  already  storming  over  the  meadows 
below  the  Abbey  coverts. 

With  the  seat  of  a  Comanchee  Indian — knees 
like  vices,  feet  locked  under  the  mare's  belly, 
hands  entangled  in  the  black  niane — the  mad- 
man, like  the  ghost  of  a  dead  fox-hunter,  lu'ged 
the  mare  by  cries  and  howls  over  the  moonlit 
meadows,  across  which  in  the  distance  the  train 
of  flying  horses  could  be  seen  in  a  dark  wavering- 
line,  as  they  undulated  over  rails  and  hedges. 
Once  only,  as  the  mare  topped  a  double  rail. 
Paddy  let  go  his  hold  of  her  mane  with  one 
liand,  waved  his  battered  hunting-cap,  and  gave 
a  view  halloo.  Then  the  wild  hunt  swept  on. 
pursued  by  the  demon  dogs,  the  flame -breathing, 
maddenimr  tormentors  of  his  own   imagfination. 


284  THE    YICAPt's    COURTSHIP. 

Away  Firefly  and  her  rider  tore,  over  plough- 
land  and  fallow,  through  covert  and  copse,  over 
pasture,  park,  and  stubble.  The  mare,  too,  now 
seemed  to  have  also  gone  mad,  and  flew  through 
the  air  like  a  demon  horse,  white  foam  churning 
in  her  mouth,  hot  vapour  rising  from  her  blood- 
shot nostrils. 

The  string  of  half-tipsy  grooms,  laughing  and 
shouting  as  they  rambled  home  from  Slobmy, 
stopping  on  a  hill  to  light  their  pipes  and  empty 
a  soda-water  bottle  full  of  gin  they  had  brought 
with  them  for  fear  of  provisions  falling  short  by  the 
way,  and  looking  across  the  valley  towards  Swal- 
lowcliff,  saw,  to  their  horror  and  amazement,  a 
man  madly  riding  towards  the  dangerous  brook, 
chasing  before  him  six  or  seven  other  riderless 
horses.  All  l^ut  one  cleared  the  l.^rook,  and  that 
one  turned  and  dashed  across  the  country  towards 
Fontford.  The  rider  drove  his  horse  at  the  brook 
exactly  at  the  spot  where  an  oak  spread  its  boughs 
across.  They  saw  him  swept  from  the  horse's  back, 
and  disappear  in  the  water.  The  horse,  however, 
flew  on,  with  a  black  dog  or  a  fox,  they  could 
not  tell  which,  close  before  it. 

The  grooms,  half-sobered  by  this  strange  sight, 
hurried  down  together  fast  to  the  brook.  They 
could  see  nothing  but  a  dark  sop  in  a  shadoA\' 
under  the  tree.     The  most  sober  of  them,  at  once 


PADDY    blare's    LAST    lilDE.  285 

divino-  drew  to  the  surface  the  dead  Ijody  of 
Paddy  Blake.  The  blow  of  the  horizontal  oak 
bough  had  fractured  his  skull  in  th(^  most 
horrible  Avay,  and  he  must  have  fallen  stone  dead 
into  the  water. 


280  THE    VICARS    COURTSHIP 


CHAPTER  XVIIL 

THE    UNEXPECTED    VISITORS. 

Mr.  Goodrick's  tipsy  laundress,  and  her  no 
less  bibulous  husband,  were  having  a  final  glass 
at  the  "Apple  Tree,"  hob-nobbing  at  the  bar  with 
the  barmaid  and  potman,  who  had  strong  opinions 
as  to  the  desirability  of  the  proposed  embank- 
ment. 

"  A  little  bit  of  lemon,  miss,  just  for  flavour- 
ing," said  Mrs.  Harvey  to  the  barmaid,  who  was 
very  elegant  in  her  management  of  the  hot 
water,  and  in  peeling  lemons,  and  extracting 
queen  cakes  from  the  gold-fish  globes,  and  was 
supposed  to  be  not  unlikely  to  marry  the  gentle- 
man that  kept  the  fishmonger's  shop  at  the  top 
of  the  street,  "and  then  David  and  I  must  go 
and  lock  up ;  for  our  second  floor  is  back  yester- 
day from  the  country,  and  is  very  particular  all 
along  of  his  having  many  valuables ;  and  there's 
been  two  young  men  lately,  as  I  don't  half  like, 
calling  for  him   with  parcels.     And  there's  that 


THE    UXEXPECTED    VISITORS.  287 

little  silly  slut  of  a  girl-of-all-work  of  ours,  that 
one  you  know,  Miss  Baker,  as  fetches  the  beer — 
who's  a  born  fool,  as  I  say — lets  them  sit  down 
while  she  cleaned  up  the  grate,  and  they  asked  a 
good  many  questions  about  his  valuables,  jewels, 
and  what  not ;  and,  as  we  think,  played  some 
tricks  as  they  didn  t  ought  with  the  outer  lock." 

"  Ah,  it's  an  anxious  life  yours,  Mrs.  Harvey," 
said  the  sympathizing  barmaid. 

''  Ah,  indeed  it  is ;  what  with  mounting  two- 
and-seventy  steps  every  time  you  ansAvers  the 
attic,  and  he  most  unreasonable,  and  always  send- 
ing out  for  bloaters  and  penny  sporting  papers,  and 
screws  of  bird's  eye,  and  shirking  my  wages  if  he 
can,  not  as  my  gentleman  do  that  very  often,  as  / 
take  good  care.  Good  night  to  you.  Miss  Baker  ; 
o^ood  nio'ht,  Mr.  Joe  ;  good  nig^ht,  2fentlemen  all. 
No,  not  another  drop  to-night,  David,  you've  had 
quite  enough  ;  now  don't  bump  up  against  me 
like  that,  for  o-oodness'  sake." 

No.  30,  Buckingham  Street,  Avas  not  many 
doors  off,  out  in  the  wide  street  to  the  right,  and 
]\Ir.  and  Mrs.  Harvey,  having  with  stupid  gravity 
examined  the  key-hole  of  the  outer  door,  went  in 
and  slammed  the  door  safely  behind  them,  it  being 
then  exactly  twenty  minutes  to  twelve  o'clock. 

"More  shentlemanly  shentlemen,"  said  Mr. 
Harvey  to  his  amiable  but  rather  inebriated  wife. 


288  THE    YICAK's    COURTSHIP. 

''  than  these  two  swells  ash  treated  ush  to  oin  and 

o 

bitters,  and  talked  about  Mr.  Goodrick,  who  was 
a  friend,  says  they,  of  their  friend  ]\Ir.  Bassevi,  the 
picture-dealer,  I  never  clapped  my  two  eyes  upon.'' 

"  Particularly,  David,"  said  Mrs.  Harvey, 
resting  to  take  breath  on  the  second  landing  of 
the  kitchen  stairs,  "  the  tall  gentleman  Avith  the 
large  dark  whiskers,  and  which  he  was  a  noble- 
man s  valley-de-sham,  I'm  sure." 

"  Eubbage,  Liza,"  said  Mr.  Harvey,  "  he  was  a 
commercial  gent,  I  know,  by  the  way  he  talked 
nonsense  to  that  Miss  Baker.  I  call  him  very  full 
of  bounce,  I  do.  I  like  a  gentleman  as  is  a  gen- 
tleman, and  keeps  hisself  to  hisself,  not  one  as 
keeps  continally  talking  of  glasses  round." 

"  Stuff !  now  that's  like  your  low  talk,  David. 
Commercial  gent,  indeed!  he  was  no  such  thing  ; 
but  there,  you've  had  more  than  is  good  for 
you.     You  go  to  bed." 

It  was  fully  an  hour  later  than  this,  that  two 
men,  one  carrying  a  little  black  carpet-bag,  stood 
in  a  door- way  a  good  deal  lower  than  that  of  Mr. 
Goodrich's,  talking  in  an  undertone. 

"Shiv's  up  by  this  time,  Danvers,"  said  one, 
"  he  knows  all  the  moves  as  well  as  if  he'd  been 
a  screw  man''  (thief  who  uses  skeleton  keys)  "all 
his  life.  He's  been  there  before,  and  knows 
where  the  old  gent  puts  everything." 


THE    UNEXPECTED    VISITORS.  289 

"I  don't  half  trust  him,  Monty,"  said  the  other, 
the  bwering,  violent  ruffianly  fellow  who  planned 
the  plate  robbery  at  Mr.  Harker's,  "  ever  since 
that  partner  of  his  in  Charlotte  Street  bolted  to 
America,  and  half  burnt  the  house  down,  Sliiv's 
been  as  sharp  as  a  w^olf  for  money.  I  believe 
if  there's  sparklers  up  there  he'll  have  them  all, 
even  if  he  had  to  swallow  them." 

"You're  always  so  suspicious  of  Shiv,  Dan," 
said  Montague,  the  more  effeminate  and  pliant  of 
the  two  rascals,  "  why  bless  you,  he's  all  square. 
Didn't  he  put  us  on  to  that  mint  sauce  job  down 
Wiltshire ;  and  didn't  he  pay  us  well  for  the  horse 
trick?" 

"  Oh,  yes,  they  were  all  right,  he  daren't 
double  on  us  then,  but  why  should  he  want  to  go 
up  to  do  this  job  alone,  and  use  the  sleeping  stuff 
on  the  old  gent,  when  two  are  •  better  for  that 
than  one  ?     What  tools  did  he  take  up  ? " 

"  He's  got  the  keys  and  the  alderman ;  the 
common  councilman's  here  in  the  bag — the  three 
jointed  one." 

"You  say  he's  only  got  little  side  cribs  to  crack, 
and  when  the  old  gent  comes  in  he'll  hocus  him, 
and  get  that  wedge  of  notes  of  his  he  always 
carries  about  him." 

"You  trust  to  Shiv,  he's  a  clever  fellow." 

"  If  I  thought  he  was  not  going  to  divide  the 

VOL.  III.  t: 


290  THE   VICARS   COURTSHIP. 

swag  square,"  said  Danvers,  furious  at  the  very 

thought,  "  I'd  go  up  now,  by ,  yes,  I'd  go  up 

now  and  give  him  such  a  rap  with  a  Neddy  as  he 
woukln't  forget  in  a  hurry,  sweep  what  I  could  get, 
and  leave  him  there  to  rot.  No  one  shall  ever 
double  on  me  and  not  repent  it.  How  infernal 
cold  it  is  !  " 

"  Yes,  the  wind  comes  up  raw,  curse  it,  from  the 
river.  I  wish  we'd  some  brandy.  The  old  fellow 
generally  comes  back  from  the  club,  the  slavey  told 
me,  at  near  one.  He'll  be  here  soon.  Keep  up 
close  in  the  doorway.  Hullo,  here's  some  fellows 
drunk  as  Chloe.  I  think  they're  bound  to  that 
place  opposite,  where  we  saw  the  blokes  at  cards." 

"  There  were  four  men  walking  two  and  two, 
and  evidently  much  the  worse  for  wine.  They 
were  chattering  very  loud  and  all  together,  and 
staggering  to  and  fro.  Gathering  in  a  doorway 
nearly  oj)posite,  they  began  scratching  fusees, 
lighting  cigars,  and  singing  refrains  of  comic 
songs.  They  Avalked  down  to  the  railings  at  the 
bottom,  looked  out  on  the  river,  then  turned  and 
walked  up  to  the  Strand  end  of  the  street.  Every 
time  they  reached  a  certain  door  one  of  the  men 
who  had  been  "chaffing"  a  policeman  at  the 
end  of  the  street,  asked  the  rest  in,  and 
with  tipsy  jollity,  reddled  them  for  not  coming  in 
for  *' one  more  tum  "  (bier). 


THE   UNEXPECTED   VISITORS.  291 

It  was  about  twenty  minutes  to  one  that  an 
elderly  gentleman,  in  a  spencer,  came  slowly 
down  the  echoing  street  from  the  Strand.  The 
revellers  had  accepted  the  invitation,  and  gone 
in-doors  at  last,  and  could  now  be  seen  with  the 
blind  up,  filling  tumblers  and  dealing  cards,  one 
of  them  .standing  moodily  at  the  open  window  and 
looking  out  down  the  street.  The  old  gentleman 
gave  one  look  up  at  the  window,  shook  his 
head,  then  drawing  out  his  latch-key,  opened  the 
front  door  of  No.  30,  and  slammed  it  testily 
behind  liim. 

It  was  pitch  dark,  the  gas  light  usually  left 
Ijurning  for  him  on  the  first  landing  had  been  care- 
lessly turned  out.  The  only  sound  in  the  hall  was 
the  dull  tick,  tick,  of  the  kitchen  clock,  and  the 
shrill  monotonous  cry  of  the  crickets,  now  at  their 
midnight  Saturnalia.  The  staircase  was  a  panelled 
staircase,  and  the  stairs  creaked  ominously  as  Mr. 
Goodrick  ascended  them.  He  groped  at  a  side 
bracket  at  the  first  landing  for  his  candlestick 
and  the  matches,  but  they  Avere  neither  of  them 
there. 

"That  precious  couple  has  been  drinking 
again,"  he  said,  testily,  as  he  ascended  to  his  own 
fioor,  feeling  along  the  wall  and  the  banister  to 
find  where  the  stairs  widened. 

There  were  two  sets  of  chambers  on  the  second 

IT    2 


-y^  THE    VICAH'S    COURTSHIP. 

Hoor — those  on  the  left  belonged  to  a  navy  agent, 
who  was  only  there  from  10  till  4;  those  on  the 
right  were  Mr.  Goodrick's.  Neither  on  this  second 
bracket,  nor  on  the  mahogany  bench  outside,  where 
servants  waited  for  messages,  were  the  matches  to 
be  found.  He  stamped  with  vexation;  to  his 
surprise  a  faint  sound  seemed  to  reply  from  inside 
his  own  door.  He  stood  and  listened — there  was 
a  dead  silence.  Then  he  stooped  down  and 
listened  at  the  keyhole.  A  sudden  vague  sense 
of  fear  struck  cold  at  his  heart-.  It  seemed  to 
him  in  that  momentary  panic  that  some  one  was 
breathing  hot  and  thick,  and  in  a  repressed  way, 
on  the  other  side,  and  he  felt  half  inclined  to 
return  down-stairs  for  a  light.  He  stood  there 
listening,  and  half  irresolute,  for  several  minutes, 
then  ashamed  of  his  own  fears  at  such  a  constantly 
recurring  situation,  he  drew  out  his  keys,  felt  with 
his  hand  for  the  orifice,  and  inserting  the  key, 
threw  open  the  heavy  outer  door,  mechanically 
felt  in  the  letter-box  for  letters,  and  let  the  slide 
fall  with  a  jolt.  Then  he  slammed  the  outer  door 
behind  him,  and  the  jarring  thunder  seemed  to 
echo  through  the  whole  house  and  shake  it  from 
garret  to  basement. 

But  first  he  inserted  his  second  key,  and  opened 
the  inner  door ;  and  the  great  black  room  lay 
l)efore    him,    with    a    faint    gleam    from    some 


THE    UXEXPEOTED    VISTTOES.  293 

opposite  window  touching  here  and  there  the 
ceiling,  the  orb  of  the  mirror,  the  white  marble 
mantelpiece,  the  glass  of  the  chandelier,  and  the 
gilt  frames  of  one  or  two  of  the  pictures.  There 
was  the  table  with  the  little  cabinet  on  it,  there 
was  the  easy  chair  by  the  window,  just  as  he  had 
left  them  when  he  went  to  dine  at  the  club  at  six 
o'clock.  ]\lr.  Goodrick  stepped  to  the  mantelpiece 
for  the  matches  and  candle.  He  had  just  struck 
a  light,  when  a  dark  figure,  suddenly  disclosing 
itself,  leaped  from  the  shadow  of  the  large  Dutch 
escritoire  on  the  left  of  the  room,  blew  out  the 
candle,  and  ciragged  him  to  the  floor.  He  struggled 
up,  made  a  rush  at  the  bell-ropes  to  ring  for  assist- 
ance, but  they  had  been  cut  oft',  and  before  he  could 
dash  the  outer  door  open  and  shout  for  assistance, 
a  hand,  holding  a  handkerchief  dipped  in  chloro- 
form, closed  over  his  nose  and  mouth,  and  Good- 
rick fell  insensible  at  the  doorway. 

The  thief  then  struck  a  light,  Kt  two  candles, 
and  began  his  search.  He  had  just  swept  into  a 
large  carpet-bag  two  drawers  full  of  brilliants, 
sapphires,  and  other  jewels — he  had  wrenched 
open  an  escritoire  and  an  ebony  cabinet  full  of 
the  rarest  gold  coins — when  a  noise  in  the  street 
alarmed  him.  He  opened  the  window,  looked 
out,  and  listened,  but  it  was  only  a  drunken 
squabble  at  the  opposite   doorway,   and  he  shut 


•ZM  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

the  window  again,  and  standing  over  tlie  in- 
sensible man,  began  to  search  for  his  pocket- 
book.  He  drew  it  out,  and  after  it  two  small 
jewel-cases,  which  he  examined  with  the  keenest 
curiosity.  The  one  contained  a  large  blue  dia- 
mond, the  very  fac-simile  of  that  which  Beau- 
Hower  had  seen  destroyed  before  his  eyes ;  the 
other,  the  harlequin  opal  he  had  bargained  for  at 
the  same  time.  Bassevi  was  still  wondering  at 
these,  when  the  doors  were  thrown  sharply  open, 
and  three  men  rushed  in,  drove  him  to  the 
ground,  and  fell  on  him  in  a  heap,  as  he  fought 
and  struggled  to  get  a  life-j^reserver  from  hip- 
pocket.  It  was  all  in  vain,  the  jewel  case  flew^ 
from  his  hands,  and  an  instant  after  a  pair  of 
handcuffs  snapped  sharply  upon  his  wrists. 

"Bring  him  down,"  said  the  burliest  of  Bas- 
sevi's  captors,  a  superintendent  of  police,  "  and 
see  to  the  old  gent ;  he's  been  hocussed,  I  can 
smell  it.  Lucky  for  him  that  shop-boy  of  the 
Jew's  let  us  into  this  pretty  business." 

"Why,  this  is  lucky,"  said  the  great,  good-natured, 
red-faced  policeman,  who  had  to  lead  Bassevi  down 
to  the  cab  that  was  waiting  to  take  him  to  Bow 
Street,  "  this  ere  is  a  coinci'dence.  AVhy  we  want 
you  for  two  little  jobs,  a  bit  of  arson  in  Charlotte 
Street,  and  a  picture  robbery  at  Eome  ever  so 
many  years  ago.     Oh,  you  are  an  artful  customer, 


THE    UNEXPECTED    VISITORS.  295 

you  are,  and  I  suppose  your  name  isn't  Bassevi 
either.  You  wont  speak.  Very  well,  don't, 
and  if  you  do,  mind  this,  my  old  flick,  that  what- 
ever you  say  will  be  taken  down  against  you 
and  used  as  evidence  at  your  trial,  my  man." 

"And  here,  Blewitt,  or  one  of  you,"  said  the 
superintendent,  up-stairs,  "  lift  this  gentleman  on 
to  a  chair  near  the  window,  and  give  him  some 
water,  and  pick  up  all  those  sparklers  and  guineas 
that  are  about  the  floor.  He's  had  a  near  squeak  for 
it,  'pon  my  word,  a  very  near  squeak  ;  and  you, 
Tompson,  go  with  that  Jew  rascal,  and  we'll  take 
the  three  off"  together,  and  put  down  the  depo- 
sitions." 

Arousing  David  and  his  wife  to  send  for  a  doc- 
tor and  attend  to  their  still  half  insensible  lodo-er, 
the  superintendent  went  dowm.-stairs,  one  con- 
stable remaining  with  Mr.  Goodrick,  and  the 
other  dragging  Basse^d,  not  over  gently,  by  the 
collar. 

In  the  hall  were  Danvers  and  Montague,  each 
handcufted,  and  in  the  clutch  of  a  stalwart 
helmeted  man. 

"  The  galf 's  blo^\m,  Shiv,"  said  Montague,  when 
he  saw  Bassevi  coming  towards  them. 

"  It's  over  the  herring-pond  this  time,"  said 
Danvers,  who  was  bleeding  at  the  mouth,  "  but 
mind  this,  I'll  settle  the  hash  of  the  first  warder 


296  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

that  puts  me  down  for  short  grub.  They're 
always  dowu  on  me  at  Portland,  because  I'm  not 
a  sneak  like  you,  Monty,  or  Shiv." 

The  superintendent,  as  he  arranged  the  order 
of  march,  for  it  was  too  late  for  a  cab,  walked  up 
and  down,  eyeing  his  captives  with  ironical  ap- 
proval. 

"  And  may  I  ask  you  three  gentlemen,"  he  said, 
"  now  that  everything's  comfortable,  and  we're 
ready  to  start,  if  any  of  you  ever  heard  of  some 
plate  that  was  stolen,  some  months  back,  at  a 
little  place  called  Summerleas  in  Wiltshire  \  It 
needn't  matter  to  you  now  you're  in  for  seven 
years,  and  it  would  oblige  us  gents  in  the  police." 

"  Don't  know  where  he  means,"  said  Montague, 
''  do  you,  Dan  \  " 

"  Can't  imagine ;  you  Bobbies  are  always  so 
deuced  full  of  chaff,  and  if  we  did  know,  what 

should  we  get  for  telling,  eh  %    You  d Bobby, 

I  only  wish  I  could  have  got  my  kennedy  ready  a 
moment  sooner." 

"  And  so  you  really  thought  we  were  gents  as 
'ad  got  tight  \  Well,  we  did  keep  it  up  pretty 
tidy,"  said  the  good-natured  burly  police  constable 
to  his  young  charges.  "  I'm  blessed  if  I  ever  see 
a  set  of  old  cracksmen  taken  in  so  neatly  in  my 
life,  and  we  were  down  on  you,  too,  before  you 
could  get   your   knuckle-dusters   handy.      We'd 


THE    UNEXPECTED    VISITORS.  297 

planned  all  that.  Wc  knew  your  time  from 
Bassevi's  shop  lad,  and  we'd  caught  your  pal  with 
the  light  cart  neatly,  just  as  he  turned  out  of  Bed- 
ford Street.'' 

"  It  was  worth  the  trial,"  said  Montague. 

"  Shut  up,  don't  talk.  They're  only  leading 
you  on,  you  fool,"  growled  Danvers. 

"  Yes,  shut  up,"  said  Bassevi,  "  it'll  be  all  in 
evidence.  Let  them  find  out  what  they  can. 
We've  lost  the  game,  that's  evident." 

"  Well,  I  should  rather  say  you  had,  my  noble 
swells,"  said  the  burly  policeman;  "but  there, 
better  luck  next  time.  Youi*  profession  is  like  the 
Stock  Exchange  ;  it's  a  short  cut  to  a  fortune, 
but  the  worst  of  it  is,  that  you  sometimes  break 
your  neck  in  getting  round  the  shy  places. 

Basse^d  had  only  one  secret  regret,  and  that 
was  that  when  the  police  broke  in  on  him,  he  had 
not  used  his  Spanish  spring  knife ;  but  he  deceived 
himself,  he  had  not  the  courage  to  have  done  it, 
even  if  he  had  thought  of  it. 


2 98  THE    vicar's    courtship. 


CHAPTER  XIX. 


FARMER   brown's    LEASE. 


It  was  a  few  days  after  Mr.  Gooclrick's  depar- 
ture for  London,  whitlier  lie  went  to  see  about  tlie 
immediate  prosecution  of  liis  claims,  that  Beau- 
flower  received  a  letter  from  him.  Tlie  Pieuvrc 
had  been  scared  away  at  last  for  ever,  for  Mr.  Good- 
rick  had  settled  upon  the  Vicar  and  Amy  600/. 
a-year,  with  400/.  down  to  make  up  the  round 
thousand.  He  did  not  wish,  he  said,  to  give  so 
careless  a  fellow  too  much  at  once.  But  there 
was  one  trouble,  one  phantom  of  past  folly  still 
Q-nawino;  at  Beauflower's  heart,  still  castins;  a 
cofiin-black  shadow  across  the  path  of  his  sun- 
shine. The  blue  diamond  and  opal  had  still  to 
be  restored,  and  the  substitute  stone  Bassevi  had 
not  yet  sent.  He  had  twice  written,  however,  to 
promise  it,  and  to  apologise  for  the  delay.  It 
was  to  be  done  on  the  4th  of  October,  and  then 
he  would  require  the  money.  It  seemed  to  the 
sanguine  and  trustful  man  a  fair  and  honourable 


FAEMER   brown's    LEASE.  290 

promise,  likt4y  to  be  fulfilled  in  a  fair  and 
honourable  manner.  It  would  be  still  possible 
23erhaps  to  conceal  the  unhappy  breach  of  confi- 
dence from  his  father-in-law's  ears.  Judge,  there- 
fore, Beaufiower's  mortification  Avhen  he  read  the 
followino'  letter. 

"  Odohci'  2nd,  18G1. 

''  My  dear  Beauflower, 

"  You  will  be  surprised  to  hear  that  I 
have  been  in  great  danger  from  burglars.  On 
Tuesday  night  I  came  home  late  from  the  club, 
opened  the  front  door  of  No.  30,  as  usual,  and 
went  up-stairs.  The  gas  had  been  turned  out, 
and  I  felt  a  strange  sort  of  creeping  presentiment 
that  there  was  something  wrong,  yet  I  saw 
nothing,  and  heard  nothing  to  justify  alarm. 
Half  ashamed  of  myself  for  these  absurd  fears,  I 
strode  up  and  unlocked  my  two  doors.  While  I 
stood  for  a  moment  before  opening  the  first,  I 
fancied  I  heard  some  one  breathing  hard  inside. 
I  stooped  and  listened,  but  then  it  stopped. 
'Pshaw,  Herbert  Staunton,'  said  I  aloud,  in  my 
testy  absolute  way  ;  and  I  unlocked  the  doors  and 
went  in.  I  struck  a  light  at  the  mantelpiece  and 
saw  by  the  first  flame  a  man  stooping  down  over 
a  broken  cabinet  of  coin.  I  shouted  and  tried  to 
pull  the  bell  and  give  the  alarm,  but  the  rascal 


300  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

had  cut  the  bell-ropes,  and  before  I  could  shout 
a  second  time  loud  enouo;h  to  be  heard  m  the 
basement,  the  thief  had  closed  with  me.  and 
forced  a  large  sponge,  full  of  chloroform,  over  my 
nose  and  mouth.  Then  I  swooned — it  was  lucky 
I  ever  recovered,  for  he  had  given  me  an  un- 
merciful dose.  Break  this  quietly  to  dear  Amy.  I 
indeed  thank  God,  who  has  so  often  preserved  me, 
for  this  escape.  And  who  do  you  think  the  man 
proved  to  be  ?  Why,  a  friend  of  yours — Bassevi 
— that  blood-sucker  from  whom  I  have  now  set 
free  four  or  five  poor  groaning  galley  slaves  of 
artists,  his  victims.  It  appears  that  he  had  a 
hand  in  stealing  that  plate — you  remember  the 
ludicrous  scene  of  horror — at  Harker's.  He  had 
once  called  on  me  here,  with  a  messag;e  from  that 
worthy  fellow  Thorndyke,  and  had  then,  we  sup- 
pose, "spotted,"  as  the  police  inspector  calls  it, 
my  special  valuables.  The  two  men  with  him 
were  those  smart-dressed  ba2:smen  fellows  who 
astonished  the  Slobury  world,  and  eventually 
made  so  triumphant  an  exit.  They  had  been 
engaged  with  him,  years  ago,  in  a  ver}-  impudent 
picture  robbery  at  Kome,  so  I  suppose  they  had  a 
hold  over  him  directly  he  began  to  go  down-hill, 
as  he  has  been  doing  lately.  Diamond  cut  diamond, 
I  suppose ;  his  partner  Zollner,  alias  Zimmermann, 
a  monstrous  rascal,  has  bolted  to  America,  first 


FARMER    brown's    LEASE.  301 

trying  to  burn  the  house  do^^^i  in  order  to  con- 
ceal his  frauds.  I  have  great  hopes  ^ve  shall 
transport  Bassevi  and  his  two  companions.  But 
now  I  must  relate  the  oddest  adventure  that  has 
happened  to  me  in  London,  not  even  omitting 
the  over-chloroformino\  The  dav  after  I  G;ot  to 
town,  Thorndyke  sent  a  ]\Ir.  Joseph  Lyons,  a 
Portuguese  Jew,  to  me  with  two  jewels,  which  he 
thought  I  should  like.  They  had  been  offered 
him  in  rather  a  mysterious  way,  and  if  I  would 
not  take  them  at  once,  he  was  going  to  start  for 
Lisbon  with  them  by  the  first  P.  k  0.  He 
owned,  after  some  pressure,  that  he  was  a  friend 
of  Bassevi's.  He  wanted  large  prices.  To  my 
utter  astonishment,  when  I  opened  the  cases,  I 
found  that  the  one  was  my  blue  diamond,  and 
the  other  my  favourite  opal.  No-  one  can  deceive 
me  in  jewels.  I  knew  them  at  once.  I  knew 
their  exact  weight,  lustre,  tinge,  and  mode  of 
cutting.  They  are  both,  moreover,  most  unusual 
stones.  Now,  my  dear  boy,  I  know  something  of 
that  strano-e  countrv,  the  human  heart,  and  feel 
sure  I  see  almost  exactly  wliat  has  happened. 
You  are  stainless  as  gold,  you  are  incapable  of 
even  a  suppression  of  truth,  except  under  the  most 
cruel  and  imperative  temptation  and  calamity. 
Now  I  have  since  heard  that  ^h\  Hoffmann,  the 
Prussian  agent,  had  left  before  you  got  to  London, 


30a  THE    VICARS    COURTSHIP. 

I  remembered,  too,  at  tliat  time,  that  you  \Yere 
very  preoccupied  and  anxious.  Two  and  two 
together  make  four.  I  conclude  that  under  some 
terrible  pressure,  for  which  your  tender  and  pure 
conscience  has  since  suffered  agonies  of  remorse, 
you  went  and  pawned  these  jewels  to  some  one, 
very  likely  Bassevi,  who  deceived  you  by  his 
tricks  to  believe  they  were  worthless,  or,  perhaps, 
they  still  remain  with  him,  and  he  prepared 
duplicates  to  deceive  you,  while  he  disposes 
of  the  originals.  I  have,  therefore,  retained  pos- 
session of  the  jewels  till  I  can  hear  from  you.  I 
know  you  will  tell  all,  and  from  what  you  inform 
me  I  can  soon  discover  to  what  tricks  the  villains 
had  resort.  I  know  all  their  finesses.  My  dear 
boy,  I  forgive  you  a  thousand  times  over.  I  know 
the  misery  of  debt,  and  I  am  confident  of  your 
flawless  honour.  Those  very  jewels  Bassevi  found 
on  me  while  I  lay  insensible ;  it  must  have 
puzzled  him  to  think  how  I  possibly  could  have 
come  by  them.  They  were  dropped  in  the 
struggle,  and  found  by  my  laundress's  husband 
a  few^  hours  afterwards ;  the  fine  blue  diamond 
behind  a  bureau,  and  that  glorious  opal  under  the 
fender,  of  all  places  in  the  world.  Later,  Bassevi, 
feeling  himself  sure  of  transportation,  on  my  visit- 
ing him  at  Pentonville  and  promising  to  do  him  one 
or  two  small  services,  made  a  clean  breast  of  it,  and 


FAEMER   brown's    LEASE.  303 

confessed  the  whole  affair — how  he  got  a  blue- 
tinged  cr}^stal  cut  the  weight  and  shape  of  my 
diamond,  for  which  he  substituted  it  during  the 
four-and'twenty  hours  he  had  it  for  that  purpose. 
It  was  that  sham  crystal,  worth  no  more  than 
three  pounds,  that  he  smashed  in  the  sham  test, 
which,  by  the  bye,  has  been  exploded  these  hun- 
dred and  fifty  years.  In  the  stone  he  was  buying  for 
you  he  would  have  again,  no  doubt,  clieated  you, 
but  that  you  escaped.  The  opal  he  dipped  in 
soap- water  and  ammonia,  which,  as  every  lapi- 
dary and  connoisseur  knows,  deprives  it  of  all  fire 
and  lustre  for  a  time,  but  for  a  time  only.  I 
recovered  both  my  darhngs  Avithout  injury,  there- 
fore you  have  really  been  the  greatest  sufferer;  for 
that  you  have  suffered  bitterly  in  mind  for  the 
momentary  breach  of  faith,  I  feel  -sure.  Well,  all 
that,  my  dear  boy,  is  now  forgotten  and  forgiven, 
and  we  will  never  mention  it  again. 

"  I  need  scarcely,  now  that  you  are  the  hus- 
band of  my  child,  the  joy  of  my  heart,  conceal 
from  you  anything.  It  was  I  who  bought  the 
Cantelupe  estates.  I  made  an  enormous  fortune 
in  Cuba,  where  my  partner  died  of  yellow  fever, 
and  left  me  all  his  share  of  the  plantations.  I 
have  consulted  that  excellent  fellow,  Fairfield, 
about  it,  and  he  agrees  with  me  that  I  must  nurse 
the  property,  till  I  have  reimbursed  myself  the 


304  THE    VICAE's    COUPcTSHIP. 

195,000/.,  or  nearly  ;  fori  won't  be  too  sharp  with 
the  son  of  my  dear  father's  old  friend ;  and,  in  the 
meantime,  I  shall  allow  ]iim  1000/.  a  vear  out  of 
it  to  live  on.  This  will  make  the  young  scatter- 
brain  learn  the  value  of  money,  and  on  this  sum 
he  can,  if  he  likes  to,  marry  when  he  grows  steady. 
I  think  I  can  guess,  as  perhaps  you  can,  to  what 
point  of  the  compass  he  will  turn  for  a  wife.  Of 
my  father's  three  staunch  friends  I  have  thus,  you 
see,  had  the  pleasure  of  serving  two  ;  and  now, 
worthy  old  Farmer  Brown  must,  in  some  way  or 
other,  have  his  slice  of  the  cake. 

''  I  have  spun  a  long  yarn,  and  must  be  off  to 
the  club,  where  I  have  an  appointment  with 
Thorndyke.  I  shall  l^e  down,  God  willing,  on 
Thursday  next  with  you  and  Amy.  When  walk- 
ing or  driving  in  my  direction,  call  at  Heart's 
Content,  and  tell  Tony,  my  servant,  (and  master, 
I  am  afraid),  and  old  Betty,  to  see  that  everything 
is  nice  and  straight. 

"  I  remain,  my  dear  Ned, 

"  Your  loving  father-in-law, 

"  Herbert  Staunton. 

"  Rev.  E.  Beauflowepw. 

"P.S. — A  dozen  kisses  to  Amy,  for  whom  I 
have  just  bought  something  wonderful  in  Indian 
shawls.     You  wiU  be  glad  to  hear  Fairfield  thinks 


FARMER    brown's    LEASE.  305 

that  I  shall  have  very  small  trouble  in  proving 
the  forger}'  of  the  signatures  to  my  father's  will, 
and  not  much  more  in  proving  my  own  identity. 
Two  sur\ivors  of  the  wreck  oft'  the  Pearl  Islands 
are  now  old  men  li^dno-  at  Jamaica,  and  I  can 
easily  obtain  their  aftidavits.  I  have,  also,  all  my 
father's  and  wife's  letters,  and  several  family 
papers  and  registers.  That  wretch  had  better 
pack  up  at  once.     He'll  die  a  beggar  even  now. 

"  I  am  very  sorry  for  poor  little  Ethel.  For 
that  bitter,  proud,  pushing,  managing  woman,  and 
that  sour,  unreal,  spiteful  old  maid,  I  feel  no  pity. 
Good-bye,  I  must  now  really  conclude,  for  I've 
o^ot  to  drive  to  the  club,  and  then  to  attend  the 
examination  of  Basse vi  and  his  two  companions 
at  Bow  Street.  I  long  to  see  Amy  and  my  dear 
Heart's  Content  again." 

The  Vicar  had  just  finished  this  letter  when  the 
study  door  opened,  and  old  Mrs.  Beauflower  ap- 
peared, perturbed  on  domestic  subjects  as  usual. 

"My  dear  Ned,"  she  said,  "I'm  afraid  that 
Georsre  has  been  drinkino-  ao-ain  ;  the  servants 
have  been  calling  everywhere  for  him.  They 
want  some  wood,  but  he  is  nowhere  to  be  found." 

"It's  too  bad,"  said  the  Vicar.  "I'll  go  after 
him." 

"  There's  another  more  important  thing  I  have 

VOL.  III.  X 


306  THE   vicar's    COUETSHIP. 

to  say/'  said  Mrs.  Beauflower,  "  and  I  don't  know 
what  to  do.  Mr.  Cantelupe  is  down-stairs  in  the 
drawdng-room.  I  was  called  out  to  see  the  butcher, 
and  I  had  to  send  Julia  in  to  him,  and  now  Mary's 
just  been  to  tell  me  that  she  heard  Miss  Julia 
crying.  What  can  it  mean  1  Julia  crying,  of  all 
people  in  the  world.  If  he  was  angry,  I  should, 
of  course,  Ned,  think  she'd  been  saying  one  of 

her  sharp  cruel  things,  but  she Ned,  why  do 

you  laugh  ?    I  call  it  very  serious." 

"  My  dear  old  self-tormentor,"  said  the  Yicar, 
buttoning  his  coat  across  his  chest,  "  you  need  not 
be  the  least  alarmed,  I  think  I  know  pretty  well 
what  the  young  scapegrace  has  been  saying,  and 
the  answer  he  has  got.  He'll  not  forget  it,  mark 
me." 

"  Do  go  down." 

"  I  will,  directly." 

"  And  don't  treat  everything  so  lightly." 

"  Yes,  I  must — lio-ht  thino-s." 

When  the  Vicar  opened  the  drawing-room  door, 
if  the  truth  must  be  told,  Cantelupe's  arm  was 
e^ddently  round  Julia's  waist,  and  his  cheek  was 
touching  hers ;  but  the  moment  the  Yicar 
appeared,  he  turned  abruptly  to  a  photograph 
album,  and  Julia  bent  very  low  over  some  flowers. 

"  How  de  do,  Beauflower  1  riding  over,  just 
dropped  in." 


FARMER   brown's    LEASE.  307 

"  Just  SO/''  said  the  Vicar,  with  an  arch  know- 
ino'ness,  that  refused  altoQ-ether  to  be  hoodwinked, 
'' poiJped  in,  in  fact.'' 

"  What  do  you  mean,  old  fellow  ?  "  said  Cante- 
lupe,  the  tell-tale  colour  spreading  like  a  prairie 
fire,  with  most  subtle  contagion,  from  his  cheek  to 
hers.  "You  seem  very  chaffy  this  morning,  isn't 
he  Ju — Miss  Beauflower — " 

The  lover's  confusion  at  this  slip  was  too 
obvious.  As  the  French  say,  "  il  frappait  aux 
yeux," 

"  My  dear  fellow,  we  are  old  friends,"  said  the 
Vicar,  seizing  his  hands,  "Julia  and  you  must 
therefore  forgive  my  disdaining  all  evasions  of 
ridiculous  eticpiette.    You  have  been  proposing  to 

Jidia,  and  I  am  very  glad  of  it (then  he  gave 

Julia  a  searching  look) ;  "  she,  like  a  wise  girl, 
has  accepted  you,  and  like  a  foolish  girl  is  cry- 
ing from  sheer  joy.  Come,  say  it  is  so,  and 
join  hands. 

"  There  is  no  mistake  about  it,  old  fellow,  you've 
hit  it,"  said  Cantelupe,  '*  and  I  am  ready  to  leap 
out  of  my  shoes  for  joy." 

Julia  made  no  reply,  but  ran  to  her  brother, 
pressed  her  arms  round  him,  laid  her  head  on  his 
shoulder,  and  looked  up  shyly  in  his  eyes. 

"  He's  such  a  great  careless  fellow,"  she  said, 
with  still  a  sparkle  of  the  old  Beatrice  vein  ;  "  and 

X  2 


308  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

he  wanted  some  one  to  look  after  him and  to 

love  him  so." 

^  ^  ^  ■?? 

The  Yicar  had  left  the  lovers  at  the  gates  of 
their  Paradise,  and  had  strolled  out  to  call  at 
Farmer  Brown's  before  he  returned  to  luncheon, 
as  he  had  heard  that  tlie  invalid  son  had  not  been 
so  Avell  for  some  days. 

To  his  surprise,  a  large  empty  waggon  stood  at 
the  door,  with  two  chests  of  drawers  lying  in  it 
upon  some  loose  straw,  and  two  of  the  farming 
men  were  brinoino-  out  an  old  oak  wardrobe, 
watched  by  old  Mrs.  Brown ;  who,  to  judge  by 
the  aj^ron  held  up  to  her  eyes,  had  been,  or  indeed 
was  at  that  very  moment,  crying.  She  shook  Mr. 
Beauflower  by  the  hands,  and  ushered  him  in 
silently.  The  invalid  son  sat  by  the  side  of  the 
fire  on  the  hearth,  which  had  gone  out,  and  was 
crying  bitterly. 

"  Why,  my  good  people,  what  is  the  matter  ? " 
said  the  Yicar,  sitting  down  by  the  side  of  the 
invalid ;  "  one  would  really  think  you  were 
moving  house." 

"  So  we  be,  and  that's  the  killcrow,"  said  old 
Mrs.  Brown,  apologising  episodically,  with  her  true 
matronly  instinct,  for  her  dirty  "yepparn  "  (apron). 
"  It  was  this  very  morning,  as  ever  was,  that  I 
was  up-stairs  about  nine  o'clock,  sorting  out  some 


FARMER    BROWNS    LEASE.  309 

pasmets  (parsnips)  in  tlie  spare  room,  wlien  I 
lieard  John  come  slowly  up-stairs,  slower  than  he 
most  in  deal  does,  and  clashing  down  a  tool  basket 
on  our  bed-room  floor.  I  called  out,  '  What  be'st 
about  1'  for  I  heard  him  unscrewing  the  bed,  and  he 
answered  something  I  could  not  catch,  for  him  rather 
hash.  Now,  thirty-four  year  I  bide  here,  and  never 
knew  him  come  in  from  the  fields  and  the  men  at 
that  hom%  so  I  looked  out  the  pasmets  and  some 
apples  as  was  spotting,  and  went  in.  "Well,  it  did 
give  me  a  turn,  as  you  may  believe,  for  there  was 
John  kneeling  down  taking  our  bed  to  pieces,  and 
I  saw  a  hot  tear,  as  big  as  a  wafer,  fall  on  the 
boards  close  by  where  his  head  was  turned  side- 
ways to  me,  like.  '  Why,  what  ever  ails  you,  with 
our  bed,  John  ? '  says  I,  '  it  doesn  t  want  no  taking 
to  pieces.  What  be'st  doing,  man  ? '  He  never 
looked  up,  John  didn't,  but  going  on  with  his 
work,  he  says,  '  Jenny,  I'm  taking  down  the  bed, 
we  leave  here  to-day.'  '  Leave  here  to-day  ?  ' 
says  I,  and  nearly  fainted.  'John,  you've  had  a  sun- 
stroke ^  '  '  No,'  says  he,  in  a  low  voice  that  went  to 
my  heart.  '  Mr.  Harker  has  refused  to  renew  my 
lease,  we  who  have  been  here  three  generations. 
Came  here,'  says  he,  '  from  Wimborne  in  Dorset- 
shire, in  1730,  and  all  out  of  spite  about  our  poor 
son  Bob  and  the  keepers ;  so,'  says  John,  '  I  won't 
stop  the  last  quarter,  but  mean  to  go  at  once.' " 


310  THE   vicar's    COUHTSHIP. 

Then  tlie  Yicar  told  the  whole  story  of  My. 
Staunton's  re-appearance,  and  his  likelihood  of 
soon  proving  his  father's  will  a  forgery,  and  obtain- 
ing possession  of  the  Abbey  estate.  In  a  word,  on 
the  good  old  farmer  descending  the  stairs  with  a 
chair  under  each  arm,  Beauflower  so  reasoned  with 
him,  and  encouraged  him,  as  to  persuade  him  to 
stay  the  quarter,  and  wait  for  the  lease  which 
would  be  readily  granted  by  the  new  heir. 

At  the  turn  of  the  road  to  the  great  lodge  gate- 
way, who  should  come  tramping  along,  with  a 
carpet  bag  slung  by  a  strap  over  his  left  shoulder, 
but  Major  Donovan  himself  ?  He  was  not  in  very 
good  spirits,  and  looked  rather  vexed. 

"  Going  up  to  town,"  he  said,  ''  about  this 
patent  for  extracting  waterproof  varnish  from 
horse-chestnut  buds  ?  Certain  fortune,  my  boy,  if 
we  can  only  get  a  good  analysis,  and  chemically 
imitate  it.  It's  just  the  turn  of  a  halfpenny, 
bedad,  between  me  and  millions  ;  and  I'm  also 
going  up  about  the  old  boy's  visit.  Can't  get  a 
copper  now  from  those  chaps,  and  they've  reduced 
my  agency  two-thirds.  Fair's  fair.  So  I'm  just 
going  to  look  them  up ;  and  between  you  and  me 
and  the  gate-post,  squeeze  it  out  of  some  of  them, 
somehow,  as  sure  as  my  name's  Donovan.  God 
bless  you." 

"  If  they  don't  pay,  I  don't  envy  the  life  the 


FARMER   BROWN'^   LEASE.  311 

Charlemagne  Champagne  Company  will  lead," 
thought  the  Vicar,  as  he  entered  the  vicarage 
garden  by  the  glebe  field,  in  search  of  George. 
The  workmen  had  just  got  the  gilt  ^Yeathercock 
upon  the  roof  of  the  old  tower,  and  were  cheering 
as  the  plumber  fixed  it. 

The  Vicar  found  George  sitting  on  the  kail  bed, 
a  Wiltshire  Marius  moralisino;  amid  the  ruins  of 
Carthage.  He  had  quafted  far  too  much  of  "  Ze 
vin  tristej'  and  seemed  absorbed  in  "  alchiholly 
and  musing." 

''Always  shaid  we  should  slice  the  weather- 
cocksh  up  in  our  time,"  he  said,  eyeing  the  church 
tower  lachrjTuosely,  "and  now  itsh  all  rait,  and 
three  sheers  for  the  Queen  and  the  people ! — 
three  sheers  for  red,  white,  and  blue  !" 

The  Vicar  instantly  discharged  the  reprobate 
for  the  three-and-fortieth  time. 


31^  THE    vicar's    courtship. 


CHAPTER  XX. 

THE    FACE    AT    THE    WINDOW. 

Three  days  after  Mr.  Goodrick  returned  to 
Heart's  Content,  Mr.  Harker  received  a  letter 
from  his  solicitors,  Fox  and  Shekell,  saying 
that  they  were  willing  to  fight  the  matter  with 
him  to  the  last  gasp,  but  they  had  very  little  hope 
in  the  face  of  the  evidence  which  Mr.  Fairfield 
had  kindly  allowed  Mr.  Fox,  in  their  presence,  to 
read  and  examine.  It  was  clear  that  the  will  of 
the  late  Mr.  Staunton  had  been  tampered  with, 
and  the  paper  given  to  Dr.  Clievalier,  sworn  to  by 
him,  and  handed  by  him  to  Dr.  Briscoe,  was  most 
difficult  to  get  over.  It  was,  they  feared,  a 
desperate  case.  They  were  quite  sure  that  he 
(their  client)  was  innocent  of  all  fraud,  but  fraud 
there  had  been  somewhere,  and  there  was  not  the 
shadow  of  a  doubt  that  the  will  was  invalid,  and 
that  the  signature  of  Mr.  Staunton  was  a  forgery. 
Nor  was  it  possible  either  to  resist  the  overwhelm- 
ing weight  of  evidence  that  pointed  to  the  fact 


THE  FACE  AT  THE  WIXDOW.       313 

that  the  quondam  ]Mr.  CTOodiick,  of  Buckingham 
Street,  was  the  sole  surviving  son  of  ]\Ir.  Staunton, 
of  Summerleas  Abbey,  and  the  heir  to  all  the 
property;  but  tliey  were  inclined  to  think,  taking 
into  consideration  the  death  of  so  many  of  the 
parties  concerned,  and  the  very  long  time  he 
(Mr.  Harker)  had  been  in  possession,  that  it  would 
be  possible,  by  means  of  immediate  compromise, 
before  matters  grew  embittered,  to  obtain  for 
him  (Mr.  Harker)  a  certain  large  annuity  for  at 
once  surrendering  possession. 

"  Fools  and  cheats,"  said  Harker,  grinding  the 
letter  between  the  bars  of  his  study  fire  with  a 
red-hot  poker.  ''  They  evidently  haven't  a  hope, 
and  they're  afraid  of  the  whole  thing,  and  want 
to  drop  it.  That  letter  just  means  this,  'we 
throw  up  the  game ; '  a  week  or  two  more,  and 
I  shall  leave  this  place  a  beggar,  despised  and 
disgraced." 

If  it  had  been  those  old  days  when  men  made 
compacts  with  fiends  who  appeared  at  their  wish, 
springing  from  the  floor  or  the  solid  earth,  step- 
ping from  the  tree  or  wall,  at  the  silent  incanta- 
tion, Harker  would  have  whispered  into  the  fire 
there  before  him,  or  into  the  darkness  outside 
the  glass-doors,  and  at  once  to  the  black  shadow 
that  came  lengthening  out  from  the  flame  or  the 
blackness,  have  sold  his  hopes  of  eternal  salva- 


314  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

tion,  and  his  place  in  the  book  of  life,  for  a  triumph 
over  his  inexorable  enemy,  who  had  at  length, 
after  a  lono;  ambuscade,  hunted  him  down  and 
stripped  him  of  wealth,  -power,  and  fair  fame. 
Dark  thoughts,  risen  from  hell,  swept  fast  through 
his  heated  brain.  Dark  promptings  of  evil  came  to 
him  from  the  dancing;  flame-lig;ht,  as  he  sat  in 
the  dim  room,  without  lamp  or  candle.  Dark 
whispers  came  from  his  own  shadow,  black, 
shapeless,  grotesque,  resting  half  on  the  floor  and 
half  on  the  wall.  Dark  breathings  of  evil  came 
from  the  nio-ht  wind,  shrewish  and  mournful  in 
the  keyhole,  or  rumbling  moodily  high  up  in  the 
chimney,  that  seemed  vibrating  in  the  rising  storm. 
They  seemed  like  passing  figures  that  darkened  at 
intervals  the  bright  glimmer  that  danced  on  the 
ceilino-  or  the  oiow  and  the  mottled  colour  of  the 
backs  of  the  books  that  lined  the  walls ;  and  on 
the  tank,  that  like  a  black  sarcophagus  still  stood 
there,  under  the  window  by  the  turning-lathe. 
Uroino's  to  evil  were  descendino'  on  him  and 
pressing  round  him  on  every  side.  Hell  had 
arisen  and  gathered  at  his  summons  her  dark, 
never-sleeping,  ever- watchful  bands.  The  good 
ano'els  had  left  him,  and  watched  him  now  mourn- 
fully  and  with  lingering  regret  from  the  nearest 
star,  invisible  as  it  was.  He  thought  and  thought, 
struggling   for   foothold    and    handhold    among 


THE    FACE    AT    THE    WINDOW.  315 

those  doubts  and  fears  that  now  relentlessly 
beset  him,  but  nowhere  was  there  hope.  His 
mind,  usually  so  quick  and  elastic,  refused  to 
move  from  the  one  thouoiit  of  Traverses  murder, 
and  those  two  fatal  words  that  memory  again  set 
tolling  ceaselessly  within  his  brain. 

"  On  sufferance.     On  sufferance." 

Then  at  that  bitter  thought  he  rose  from  where 
he  had  sat  in  front  of  the  fire,  brooding  in  its 
warmtli,  and  with  the  red  glow  crimsoning  those 
hands  crime  had  once  ensanguined,  he  gTound  his 
teeth  savagely  as  he  struck  the  coals  heavily  with  a 
bruising  blow  of  the  poker,  then  snapping  a  match 
angrily,  lit  his  lamp.  He  looked  as  resolute  and 
iron-framed  as  a  man  of  forty,  as  he  stood  there, 
with  a  dangerous  lurid  light  in  his  eyes,  staring- 
round  the  room,  and  more  especially  on  a  litter 
of  sticks  in  one  corner,  on  the  tank,  and  then 
out  at  the  windows  into  the  seething  darkness. 

There  lay  turned  down  on  the  table  (left  by 
Ethel,  who  had  been  reading  there  just  before 
dinner,)  a  thick  octavo  volume  bound  in  scarlet 
cloth.  As  he  paced  restlessly  to  and  fro  like  a 
newly-caught  tiger  in  a  cage,  Harker,  from  mere 
curiosity,  took  up  the  book,  and  drawing  his  easy 
chair  to  the  table,  read  the  page  at  which  it  had 
been  left  open.  It  was  the  Annual  Register  for 
1849,  and  the  leaf  folded  down  by  Ethel  was  i\ 


'316  THE    VICAE's    courtship. 

page  of  the  trial  of  that  savage  and  determined 
man,  James  Bloomfield  Eush,  for  shooting  Mr. 
Jenny  and  his  son,  at  Stanfield  Hall,  near  Nor- 
wich, on  November  26,  1848.  Mr.  Harker 
devoured  the  whole  of  the  two  pages  where  the 
book  was  turned  down,  and  especially  this  part, 
which  he  read  over  and  over,  till  it  seemed  printed 
on  his  brain  in  letters  of  fire : — 

"About  half-past  eight  Mr.  Jenny  was  sitting 
alone  in  his  dining-room.  His  son  and  daughter- 
in-law'ivere  in  the  drawing-room,  j^vejxtring  for  a 
game  ofpicquet.  Mr.  Jermij  left  the  dining-room 
and  jyroceeded  to  the  hall  door.  The  moment  he 
opened  it,  and  eame  into  the  ■porch,  some  person 
discharged  a  gun  at  him,  hloiving  his  heart 
nearly  to  p)ieces,  and  hreahing  tliree  of  his  ribs. 
He  fell,  and  instantly  expired.  Immediately 
after  this  a  figure  entered  by  a  door  on  the  same 
side  of  the  house,  but  lower  down  than  the  hall 
door,  and  proceeded  along  the  iKissage,  in  luhich 
it  dropped  ttvo  papers.  In  his  uxty  the  murderer 
encountered  the  butler,  ivhom  he  p>ushed  bach  into 
the  p)antry.  Mr.  Jermy,  junior,  came  out  of  the 
draiving-room  to  learn  the  cause  of  the  report. 
The  man  again  fired,  and  Mr.  Jermy  fell  doivn 
dead  in  the  hall." 

Barker's  brain  was  on  fire — he  could  read  no 
more.   Satan  had  sent  the  thought  to  the  heart  pre- 


THE    FACE    AT    THE    WINDOW.  317 

pared  to  receive  it.  He  dashed  down  the  book, 
turned,  stared  for  a  moment  into  the  very  centre 
of  the  red-liot  coals,  and  clenched  his  rioht  hand, 
as  if  it  held  a  weapon  in  it  to  crush  at  one  blow 
all  his  enemies. 

The  plan  was  desperate,  yet  it  was  safe.  It  was 
the  nioiit  and  the  hour  to  do  it.  All  thoug;ht  of 
danger  or  detection  he  cast  from  him,  look- 
ing only  on  the  one  certainty  of  triumph  and 
revenge.  It  must  succeed,  detection  was  impos- 
sible. It  was  supernaturaUy  wicked  and  subtle  ; 
there  would  be  no  sound,  no  sight,  no  track  of 
the  man  who  smote.  "  ACurder,  it  is  no  murder," 
whispered  the  old  voice  from  his  shadow,  "it  is 
only  retaliation  !  He  wants  to  strip  and  disgrace 
you  of  your  liard  earned  power  and  wealth  ; 
you  stop  him  l)y  shortening  his  life  a  few  years, 
and  securing  yourself,  by  one  act  of  daring,  peace 
and  rest  and  wealth  for  ever.  You  will  call  it 
robbery,  and  instantly  arrest  two  of  the  worst 
poachers  in  the  place  on  suspicion." 

Instantly  Harker  set  to  work  to  reaUse  his  dark 
thougjht.  While  he  was  stiU  readino;  that  Eush 
trial,  his  eye  had  fallen  on  a  black  japanned  tin 
case  that  stood  amono;  the  sticks  and  rods  in 
the  corner  of  the  room,  behind  the  lathe.  It 
contained  that  very  air-gun  of  his  dead  boy's 
which   he   had   lent    to    Lord    Mazaoan   for  his 


318  THE    VICAES    COURTSHIP. 

nepliew  from  Eton.  It  was  that  weapon  wliicli 
at  that  moment  sug^orested  to  liim  the  crime  that 
would  save  him  from  misery  and  ruin.  Very 
carefully  he  closed  the  shutters,  listened  first 
for  a  moment  with  one  of  the  glass-doors  open, 
to  the  rising  wind  driving  flocks  of  frightened 
leaves  over  the  laAvn  and  surging  in  the  terrace 
fir-trees.  Then  he  drew  the  short  gun  out  of  its 
case,  and  selected  half  a  dozen  of  the  small  bullets 
from  a  bag-full,  which  Lord  Mazagan  had  also 
returned,  and  which  he  had  put  away  in  the 
right-hand  top  drawer  of  the  lathe.  It  was 
a  breech-loading  air  gun,  and  could  contain  air 
enough  at  one  pumping  to  discharge  six  bullets. 
Harker  took  the  gun  to  the  lamp,  and  examined 
the  weapon  with  an  eager  care.  He  pumped  it 
full  once,  and  pulled  the  trigger  six  times,  to 
observe  how  almost  noiselessly  it  discharged. 
The  six  slight  pops,  not  louder  than  cracks  of 
a  child's  whip,  that  it  did  make,  he  drowned  by 
firing  the  gun  quickly  up  the  chimney  with  his  left 
hand,  and  at  the  same  time  jolting  the  fire  irons 
too;ether  with  his  ri2;ht.  But  the  wind  was  too 
boisterous  for  so  slight  a  sound  to  be  heard  far. 
He  levelled  it,  tried  the  piece,  and  observed 
where  the  notch  of  the  back  sio-ht  came  ag^ainst 
the  edge  of  the  fore  sight.  He  passed  his  hand 
approvingly  over  the  serrated  surface  of  the  butt. 


THE  FACE  AT  THE  WINDOW.        319 

Then  lie  took  out  of  a  cupboard  an  old  dark 
Inverness  cape,  and  an  okl  slouched  black  wide- 
awake, and  placed  them  on  a  chair  in  a  dark 
corner  of  the  room.  He  next  took  out  the  key 
of  the  room  door,  and  going  out  locked  it  on 
the  outside,  and  went  into  the  drawing-room. 
It  was  exactly  twenty  minutes  past  eight  by 
the  clock  in  the  hall  as  he  opened  the  drawing- 
room  door. 

Miss  Harker  was  seated  gTimly  at  the  piano, 
toiling  at  some  showy  false  bit  of  execution. 
Mrs.  Harker  was  writing  letters  at  her  Davenport, 
and  Ethel,  absorbed  in  a  fairy  story,  laughed  out 
a  oTeetino;  to  her  father  from  under  a  cascade  of 
golden  hair. 

"Oh,  papa,"  she  said,  "  may  I  come  into  the 
study  for  my  book  I  left  there  1  I'm  reading  such  a 
horrid  murder.    May  I  come  and  sit  with  you  '? " 

"  No,  Ethel  darhng,  not  to-night.  I'm  very  busy, 
I  want  no  one  to  come  near  me — no  one,  for  two 
hours.  Mamma,  will  you  teU  the  servants  no 
one  is  to  disturb  me  ''i  I've  g-ot  some  most  difficult 
accounts  to  audit." 

Mrs.  Harker  promised  to  attend  to  her  hus- 
liand's  wish,  and,  returning  to  his  study,  he 
again  locked  the  door.  The  moment  he  had  done 
so  he  threw  on  the  Inverness  cape  and  the  wide- 
awake, and  tied  a  dark  blue  shawl  handkerchief 


320  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

SO  high  over  his  mouth  as  only  to  leave  his  nose 
visible  between  the  comforter  and  the  shadow- 
cast  by  the  broad-l)rimmed  hat.  Quickly  he 
pumped  the  gun  full,  loaded  it,  and  placed  five 
spare  bullets  in  his  waistcoat  pocket.  Then  first 
lowering  the  lamp,  the  better  to  see  in  the  outer 
darkness,  and  reconnoitring  from  the  half  opened 
glass-door,  he  tucked  the  short  gun  imder  his 
coat,  and  stealthily  stepped  forth.  He  remembered 
that  Mr.  Goodrich  always  sat  in  his  study  till 
ten  o'clock  Avithout  closing  the  shutter.  He — the 
assassin — watching  him  safely  from  the  darkness, 
could  therefore  shoot  him  dead  in  his  chair,  and 
escape  without  lea^dng  any  more  track  than  the 
bullet  leaves  in  the  air.  It  was  Saturday  night, 
when  the  keepers  usually  relaxed  the  vigilance  of 
their  rounds,  and  Harker  selected  a  path  where  no 
one  was  likely  to  meet  him.  If  they  did  cross  him 
in  the  darkness  he  could  easily  grunt  out  a  ''  good 
night,"  in  a  feigned  voice,  and  there  was  no 
light  to  show  his  face. 

It  was  a  stormy  night  at  the  very  end  of 
October,  and  the  moon  would  not  rise  till  nearly 
midnight.  Just  half  an  hour's  walk  to  Heart's 
Content,  where  the  murderer  had  to  seek  his 
unconscious  victim.  The  dead  leaves  were  driv- 
ing in  the  wind.  The  storm  suro^ed  throusfh 
the   fir-woods   on   the  Terrace  in  paroxysms  of 


THE    FACE    AT    THE    WINDOW.  -SrU 

rage,  that  lulled  only  to  burst  forth  again.  The 
muffled  man,  heedless  of  the  rain  that  beat  fret- 
fully in  his  eyes,  and  on  the  uncovered  portion 
of  his  face,  strode  on  along;  a  lane  that  ran  at  the 
bottom  of  the  Terraces,  to  the  left  of  the  hut 
where  Travers  was  found  dead,  and  under  a 
viaduct  that  continued  the  terrace  overhead.  One 
thought  of  the  keeper  passed  his  mind  at  this  spot, 
but  the  rag-e  of  that  one  thoug^ht  drove  him  for- 
Avard,  and  he  passed  on  without  even  a  pang  of 
remorse.  Two  pools  of  fire  his  eyes  appeared  to 
himself,  and  he  could  hardly  help  thinking  that 
the  glare  would  betray  him  to  anyone  he  met. 
But  still  he  had  no  fear  and  never  wavered. 

He  now  got  out  of  the  deep  lane,  and  cutting 
across  into  the  Fontford  road,  by  Miss  Chivers's 
garden  wall,  crossed  the  highway,  and  struck 
up  the  retired  lane  that  led  to  Heart's  Content. 
It  was  a  straggling  upland  path,  leading  towards 
Warminster,  and  between  high,  lonely  fields,  that 
had  not  been  more  than  ten  years  or  so  reclaimed 
from  the  down-land  they  bordered.  Far  to  the 
left  ran  the  road  to  Bibur}',  to  the  right  those 
slopes  of  fields  that  rose  above  Summerleas. 

There  was  not  even  a  labourer's  house  on 
either  side  of  the  hilly  lane,  only,  about  half  way. 
a  pond,  and  some  disused  cattle  sheds,  and,  a 
little  farther  on,  a  spreading  belt  of  young  firs. 

VOL.  III.  Y 


322  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

that  faced  the  shrubberies  of  Heart's  Content. 
In  the  intervals  of  the  wind,  that  broke  in  waves 
against  the  trees,  a  person  with  keen  ears  lis- 
tening very  attentively,  could  hear  from  outside 
the  gate  of  Heart's  Content,  the  passing  carts 
on  the  Fontford  road.  Then  after  those  lulls, 
the  wind  would  seem  to  go  suddenly  frenzied, 
and  to  burst  in  a  storm  of  leaves  which  it 
had  gathered  from  the  ditches  and  the  furrows, 
to  scatter  down  the  lane. 

It  was  a  lonely  residence  in  that  by-road  end- 
ing in  the  Downs.  Any  two  well  armed  desperate 
men,  falling  at  midnight  on  that  house,  could 
have  forced  the  door,  cut  every  throat,  and  got 
out  again  on  the  wild  bare  Down  with  all  the 
treasure,  leaving  no  more  clue  than  a  trout  leaves 
in  the  brook  down  which  it  flashes. 

The  man  stood  listening,  with  his  hand  on  the 
latch  of  the  gate,  pressing  it  open  with  a  hard, 
slow,  even  pressure,  so  that  it  should  make  no 
sound.  Then  a  thought  seized  him,  for  he  let 
go  the  latch  with  extreme  care,  and  stole  back 
into  the  farther  darkness,  beyond  the  firs.  There 
quick,  and  with  the  iron  resolution  and  cruel 
promptitude  of  his  nature,  he  sat  down  under  a 
hedge,  23ulled  of^iis  spring  boots,  took  off  his  loose 
woollen  stockings,  and  putting  his  boots  swiftly  on 
his  naked  feet,  drew  on  the  stockings  over  the 


THE    FACE    AT    THE    WINDOW.  823 

boots,  SO  as  to  deaden  all  sound  tliey  could  make 
on  the  gritty  gravel,  tlie  dry  brittle  wood  of 
the  plantation,  or  among  the  dead  crackling  leaves 
inside  the  shrubber}\  This  done,  he  grasped  his 
gun  ready  for  action.  There  were  five  more  lives 
in  those  bullets  he  carried,  and  for  a  moment  he 
debated  within  himself  whether  it  would  not  be 
better  to  kill  the  whole  household  and  carry  off 
some  valuables,  so  as  to  remove  all  possible  sus- 
picion of  anyone  but  thieves.  If  he  could  only 
get  those  confessions,  or  the  affidavits,  that  Fox 
&  Shekell  had  told  him,  Mr.  Goodrick — bah ! 
Staunton,  for  it  must  be  him — always  carried 
about  him.  Driven  on  by  the  demon  of  murder, 
liis  judgment  l^linded,  all  his  senses  full  of  the 
one  absorbing  thought,  the  man  forgot  that  Amy 
would  still  be  the  heir,  that  the  claims  would 
still  be  pressed  and  other  proofs  obtained.  He 
felt  only  the  thii'st  for  revenge,  the  insatiable 
thirst,  the  demoniacal  resolution  to  destroy  this 
enemy  as  he  had  destroyed  the  last. 

He  stood  there,  a  mere  inner  core  of  blackness 
in  the  darkness  of  that  October  night,  exulting  in 
the  omnipotence  of  evil,  defying  the  hidden 
lightnings  of  heaven,  glorying  in  the  conscious- 
ness that  he  held  his  enemy's  life  in  his  hands. 
He  paused,  as  an  epicure  does  before  tasting 
some  costly  fruit,   enjopng  by  anticipation  and 

Y   2 


82^  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

mentally  the  coming  delight.  The  revenge  in  his 
hand  was  so  sure,  so  baffling  to  any  pursuer 
there  might  be.  The  rain  Avould  destroy  all  foot- 
prints, and  keep  policemen,  keepers,  and  chance 
pedestrians  in  the  publichouses,  huts,  or  other 
places  of  shelter.  With  rifle  or  revolver  the 
murderer  would  have  felt  uneasy  about  his  caps 
or  powder  getting  damp  and  failing  at  the  deadly 
moment,  but  the  silent  and  terrible  air-gun  re- 
quired no  care ;  nothing  could  mar  it,  or  check 
its  ^performance  of  the  crime. 

The  murderer  had  again  his  hand  firmly  on  the 
latch  of  the  gate  to  the  drive,  he  pressed  it 
noiselessly  open,  but  this  time  wedged  it  back 
and  tied  it  with  some  string  he  had  in  his  pocket, 
so  that  it  should  not  baulk  or  hinder  his  quick 
silent  flight  homewards.  Just  at  that  moment 
the  bells  of  Fontford  began  to  chime,  slowly  and 
reluctantly  at  first,  then  gradually  blending  into  a 
full  peal.  Na  !  ne  !  ni !  no  !  nu  I  the  gravely 
joyful  sounds  came  by  him  on  the  fitful  weaves  of 
wind,  breaking  upon  the  ear  only  for  this  instant, 
to  be  lost  in  the  next. 

And  now  softly,  softly,  with  the  velvet  feet  of 
a  tiger  stealing  on  his  prey,  the  murderer  crept 
betAveen  the  laurels,  his  cape  thrown  back  over 
his  shoulders,  his  gun  clutched  ready  in  his  hand. 
Another  moment  and  it  would  vomit  death  on  his 


THE    FACE    AT    THE    WINDOW.  '3.-i5 

bitter  enemy  in  that  house.  Brushing  so  swiftly 
past  a  large  arbutus  that  the  swish  back  of  the 
outside  branches  made  him  start  and  pause  and 
fancy  he  heard  footsteps  up  the  lane,  and  hear 
his  own  heart  beat  loud  as  a  force-pump,  and  the 
blood  buzz  and  sing  in  his  ears,  the  man  stole 
quickly  round  the  laurels  of  the  drive  where  it 
circled  towards  the  house.  Once  round  there  he 
would  see  the  window  where  the  man  he  sought 
would  be. 

Yes,  there  was  the  window  with  the  central 
blind  of  the  bay  down  and  luminous  with  the  inner 
light.  Now  off  the  turf  of  the  borders,  silently 
his  muffled  feet  moved  cautiously  over  the  noise- 
less gravel,  on  to  the  border  under  the  window. 
The  dead  leaves  gathered  there  rustled  a  little, 
but  the  great  ominous  roar  of  wind  that  just  then 
blew  fiercely  past  from  south  to  north  effaced  all 
lesser  sounds.  Then,  with  his  gun  cocked,  and  a 
second  bullet  ready  in  his  mouth,  first  feeling  all 
the  apertures  of  the  gun,  the  murderer  stole  to 
the  window  and  glanced  through  the  opening 
left  by  the  edge  of  the  l)lind.  There  he  was  ;  yes, 
there  was  the  old  man  he  hated  ;  he  remembered 
his  fiice  now.  It  locis  Staunton,  standing  up  by 
a  paraffin  lamp  with  a  glass  stem,  examining  the 
signature  in  an  old  engraving.  Leo  was  lying  at 
his  feet.     The  murderer  noted  pitilessly  the  grey 


o:l(J  THE    VICARS    COURTSHIP. 

liair,  the  eyes  that  had  so  often  gazed  iu  his  with 
affection,  the  hand  that  had  grasped  his  so  often 
years  ago.     The  thirst  for  blood  rose,  flooding  his 
heart.     He  raised  the  gun,  he  levelled  it  with  the 
subtlest  aim  for  the  bullet  to  pierce  the  man  s 
brain,  then  paused  a  moment,  and  passing  round 
to  the   side   window,  where   the  l^lind  was  not 
down,  took  aim   again.     Just   at   that   moment 
]\Ir.  Goodrick  turned  and  saw  the  dark  figure  at 
the  window.     The  start  back,  involuntary  as  it 
was,  slio'htlv  diverted  the  murderer's  aim.     The 
bullet  split  the  window  and  sti'uck  the  upper  part 
of  the  lamp,  just  where  the  glass  stem  joined  the 
upper  reservoir  ;    it  fell  Avith  a  crash  from  the 
table  on   to  the   floor ;    in    an   instant   the   fire 
ran    alono;   the   floor   to   the   window,    where  it 
blazed    up    with    a   tremendous    explosion,   like 
the  burst  of  fii^e    from  a  crater,  reddening  the 
savage  face  outside ;  furious  almost  to  madness, 
Leo,    through  the  broken  window  and  through 
the  fire  and  smoke,  leaped  open-mouthed  at  the 
assassin.     But   abeady   the   man    had   reloaded, 
and  shot  the  dog  dead  as  he  leaped  full  at  him 
and   Ijore  him    backwards.      Then    Harker   rose 
quietly,  and  as    Mr.   Goodrick   stood  pulling  at 
the  bell-rope  to  summon  assistance,  he  stood  at 
the  window  and  aimed  steadily,  and  with  malig- 
nant care,  straight  at  his  heart.     That  moment's 


THE    FACE    AT    THE    WINDOW.  3:^7 

gloating  delay  lost  hiin  tlie  game.  God's  hand 
moves  quicker  than  the  Devil's.  As  Harker  raised 
the  gun  a  second  time  behind  the  blind  which 
was  on  fire,  and  l^ehind  which  he  had  retreated, 
a  strong  hand  flashed  a  lantern  in  his  eyes,  beat 
the  gun  from  his  hand,  struck  him  to  the  ground, 
and  grappled  with  him. 

It  was  Beauflower ;  invited  luckily  that  night 
at  nine,  with  Dr.  Briscoe,  to  a  game  at  billiards, 
he  had  seen  the  explosion,  and  stolen  on  the  man 
whom,  from  the  gate,  he  had  seen  fire  the  first  time 
through  the  window. 

''Quick,"  he  cried,  "doctor!  I've  caught  the 
man  ;  it's  Harker,  it  is,  by  heaven  !  " 

But  striking  his  captor  a  tremendous  blow 
in  the  face  with  the  lantern  wrested  from  him, 
Harker,  by  a  great  efibrt,  slipped  from  the  Vicar's 
grasp. 

"  Strike  him  down,"  shouted  Beauflower  to  the 
doctor,  who  was  clubbing  his  stick  at  the  gate, 
"  he's  close  to  you  now  !     Stop  him  !  " 

The  next  minute  the  doctor's  blow  fell  savagely 
on  the  murderer,  who,  however,  driving  him  back 
by  a  rush  that  sent  him  to  the  ground,  flew  into 
the  darkness  away  across  the  Downs. 


328  THE    YICAR  S    COURTSHIP. 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

THE    major's    house-warming. 

It  was  a  windy,  wet  night,  that  the  major  and 
a  burly  and  not  very  prepossessing,  friend,  knocked 
and  rang  at  the  door  of  the  Anglo-Champagne 
Company.  The  two  men,  rather  grimly  silent, 
watched  for  some  minutes,  looking  up  at  the 
windows ;  but  there  was  no  light,  and  no  sound. 
On  a  thii'd  time  pounding  at  the  door  with  the 
knocker,  a  candle  appeared  at  the  first  floor, 
and  an  old  bleary  woman  threw  up  a  windoAv, 
looked  out,  and  said  in  a  querulous,  frightened 
voice — 

"  Who  are  you  ?  we're  all  a-bed.  ^Yhiit  is  it  ? 
— what  do  you  want?  All  the  gentlemen  are 
gone,  and  the  oflice  shut  up  these  four  hours.  If 
you  don't  go  away,  I'll  call  the  police." 

The  major's  companion  growled  like  a  bulldog, 
but  only  whispered.  The  major  was  bland  and 
frank. 

"  Get   out   of  that,  old  mother  Harrison,"  he 


THE    major's    house-warming.  329 

cried  ;  "  why,  its  only  me,  Major  Donovan,  who 
brought  you  that  snuff  the  other  day.  I  know 
all  the  little  game.  I  want  to  come  in  and  shake 
my  elbow  a  bit." 

"  That's  quite  another  thing.  Oh,  it's  you,  Major 
Donovan ! "  chuckled  the  old  hag,  disappearing 
with  the  candle. 

"We're  on  'em,  major,"  said  Donovan's  friend; 
"keep  quiet,  and  we'll  have  'em  snug  as  nine- 
pence.  You  be  rather  sprung,  and  mind,  I'm  the 
rich  former  from  Essex ;  you've  brought  me 
to  see  life.  Perhaps  they'll  let  me  win  a  few 
shiners,  and  that  won't  hurt  anyone,  you  know." 

"  Eight  you  are,  Jim,"  said  the  major,  tucking 
his  big  blackthorn  under  his  arm,  as  the  old 
woman,  shuffling  at  chains,  and  reasoning  with 
rusty  bolts,  eventually  opened  the  door,  and  with 
her  lean,  wizen  hand,  shading  the  candle  from 
the  gusty  October  wind,  let  them  in,  and  instantly 
closed  the  door  behind  them.  There  were  still  two 
green  swing  doors,  studded  like  jovial  coffin  lids 
with  rows  of  brass-headed  nails,  between  the 
front  door  and  the  outer  hall. 

''  Why,  mother,  they  have  been  a-doing  the 
place  up  nice,"  said  the  major  ;  "  bedad,  it  bangs 
Banagher  now  ;  is  your  old  man  below  ?  he  knows 
what  I  want ;  tell  him  to  be  ready  in  a  quarter  of 
an  hour  at  the  front  door,  and  he'll  find  his  friend 


3o0  THE    VIOxVllS    COURTSHir. 

where    I    told     him  ;    you   mind   what    I    «ay 


now/^ 


"There  they  are  a-going  of  it,  Hke  good  nns, 
as  I  thought/'  said  the  major,  as  he  pressed 
throuo'h  the  two  o-reen  valves  into  the  more 
central  part  of  the  house.  They  certainly  were 
"  going  of  it." 

"It  is  very  lively  to-night ;  there  are  strangers 
in  the  club — very  rich  gentlemen,  I  think.  I 
heard  one  was  a  marquis.'' 

It  was  lively.  There  came  from  open  doors 
up-stairs  the  sound  of  half -tipsy  voices,  the  rattle 
of  dice,  and  the  fitful  whir-r-r  of  the  roulette 
wheel,  while  a  sonorous  foreign  voice  was 
shouting — 

"  Make  your  game,  shentlemens,  w^hile  the  ball 
is  rolling— faites  le  jeu,  messieurs  et  mesdames, 
faites  le  jeu.  (Whir-r-r),  le  jeu  est  fciit :  rouge 
paie  et  la  couleur  gagne." 

Then  there  was  a  shout  of  applause  and  execra- 
tions, a  chink  of  money  and  of  glasses,  a  great 
explosion  of  champagne  corks,  and  finally  a  roai- 
of  tipsy  laughter,  as  some  one  fell  off  his  chair, 
and  some  one  else  flung  a  pack  of  cards,  swishing 
in  a  red,  white,  and  black  shower  down  the 
staircase. 

"  Come  along  Jim,"  said  the  major,  and  in 
their  wet,  dripping  long  coats,  he  and  his  friend 


THE    MAJORS    HOUSE-WARMING.  3ol 

asceuded  the  stairs.  Tliev  were  received  with  a 
shout  of  surprise  and  applause  by  the  directors  of 
the  Anglo-Champagne  Wine  Comj^an}'.  It  was 
quite  an  ovation.  ]Mr.  Greenway  called  to  a  page 
boy,  who  was  waiting  to  bring  two  devilled  brandy- 
smashes  for  the  two  gents  who  had  honoured 
them.  Darkaschunder,  in  a  scarlet  fez  cap,  paused 
in  his  task  as  croupier,  and  held  up  a  full 
champagne  glass  to  them.  The  German  gentle- 
man, who  was  busy  staking  money  fast  on  the 
red,  which  had  come  up  four  times  running,  roared 
(^ut  a  scrap  of  a  German  diinking-song  about— 

"  Xinet}^  times,  ninety  times,  ninety -nine, 
And  ninety  times  nine  brave  tailors." 

'•  Gentleman  from  Essex  ;  great  grazing  farm  ; 
AN'ants  to  see  life,  and  try  his  luck,''  said  the 
major,  pointing  out  his  fiiend,  as  they  stripped  off 
their  coats,  and  placed  them  with  their  ser- 
\dceable  sticks  in  a  corner  by  the  window. 
The  major  was  noisy  and  excited ;  he  sang  a 
good  deal,  as  he  sat  down  in  the  close,  glaringly 
lit  room  beside  the  fat  German  croupier,  and 
whispered,  looking  towards  his  friend,  who  was 
already  busily  at  work  at  a  small  side  loo  table 
^^dth  a  party  instantly  organised. 

"Book  full  of  notes:  rich  as  Croesus — jolly 
oreen." 


')o2  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

The  baron  winked  at  Mr.  Greenway  and  Mr. 
Darkaschunder,  and  then  they  all  winked  ap- 
proval, but  almost  imperceptibly  to  the  major. 

"  Pray,  what's  your  favourite  tipple,  sir  ? "  said 
Mr.  Grreenw^ay  ;  "  I  think  you'll  find  this  Curacoa 
Punch  licks  creation,  and  would  give  it  odds ;  or 
will  you  have  Cham  ? " 

"  It  is  very  j^rime,"  said  the  Essex  farmer,  a 
man  with  small  li23s,  flattish  nose,  and  rather  a 
coarse  bumpy  forehead.  "  That'll  do  for  me — 
come,  play  away  gents ;  it's  all  luck.  That 
makes  5/.  to  me,  but  it's  cursed  slow.  Suppose 
we  go  for  lOl.  this  time  ? " 

''  Agreed,  agreed  !  you're  a  man  of  shpirit.  I 
like  to  see  men  of  shpirit,"'  said  the  baron, 
laughing,  till  his  piggish  eyes  were  half  buried  in 
the  red  fat  of  his  cheeks ;  "  but  mind,  my  lieber 
gentlemans,  I  don't  go  higher  than  10/.  Mein 
Gott !  what  luck  has  this  Herr  from  Essex  ?  He 
knows  a  trick  or  two  ;  he  can  makes  the  cards 
do  what  he  likes." 

"  I'll  bet  20/.  I  win  this  round,"  said  the  Essex 
man,  elated  by  the  praise. 

"  I'll  take  ye,"  said  Mr.  Darkaschunder,  wetting 
his  thumb  to  deal. 

In  the  meantime,  while  the  major  was  only 
staking  a  pound  or  two  on  the  red  or  black 
accordingly  as  the    colours    seemed    to    promise 


THE  majok's  house-warming.  333 

sequences,  the  strangers  present  were  busy,  espe- 
cially the  gallant  marquis,  akeady  half  drunk,  and 
talking  to  every  one,  heedless  of  the  game  in  which 
he  was  being  fast  stripped,  and  drinking  champagne 
in  tumblersful,  seemed,  singularly  enough,  to  be 
generally  losing. 

"  Lend  me  two  fivers,  marquis ;  by  thunders, 
the  red  has  been  up  six  times,  and  I'll  lay  a 
hundred  now,  right  away,  on  the  black,''  said 
Mr.  Greenway.  Boy,  bring  some  fizz  here,  the 
marquis  hasn't  got  a  drop  in  his  glass." 

"  Lend,    be    d ,"    said  the  marquis,   ''  you 

Yankee  beggar  ;  I'll  put  all  I've  got  on  the  black 
myself.  What  good  are  you  ?  you're  no  good. 
Baron,  lend  me  one  or  two  tenners,  man,  I've  got 
a  doosed  good  chance  here.  Haven't  had  such  a 
chance  since  I  cleared  out  Cantelupe  once  at 
Doncaster  ;  pot  of  money,  by  Jove  ;  bet  him  four 
thousand  the  colour  stopped.  There's  nothing 
like  plunging,  my  boys. 


'  Up  to  anj-thing-  you  like,  my  boys, 
Up  to  any  hour  you  like,  my  boys, 
For  Ch.ampagTie  Charley  is  my  name,  my  boys ." 


Whir-r  ! 

''  Lost,  by  the  Lord  Harry  !     Come,  you  chapsi? 
we'd  better  e^et  out  of  this  hole.     The  ball  does 


3.3 1  THE    vicar's    COUETSHIP. 

not  I'uu  fair.  I  swear  I  saw  liim  do  something 
imderneatli.     I  mean  that  blacko;uard  nio;g;er/' 

In  an  instant  there  was  an  uproar,  and  the 
gang  began  to  form  phalanx,  and  clutch  at  the 
stakes. 

"  Come ;  no  cursed  nonsense,  gentlemen,"'  said 
the  Lablache  sort  of  baron,  advancing  with  cards 
in  his  hand ;  "  we're  all  enjoying  ourselves,  you 
know.  This  friend  of  the  major's  from  Essex  is 
clearing  us  all  out ;  everything  here,  I  shvear,  is 
fair  and  honest — don't  make  a  row,  and  spoil  it 
all.  If  the  marquis  wants  his  last  money  back. 
Darkaschunder  will  ofive  it  him." 

o 

"  No,  no,"  said  the  black  baboon  savage  at  the 
discovery ;  "  he  lost,  he  pay ;  gentleman  lose, 
gentleman  pay.  I  lost  just  now.  I  didn't  com- 
plain of  the  table,  I  paid.  Mashalla  !  He  shan't 
have  his  money." 

'*'  Won't  I,  by  Jove,  you  thieving  scoundrel  ? " 
said  the  marquis,  clenching  his  fist.  "  You 
chaps,  let's  go  in  and  punch  these  blackguards' 
heads.  DiUon,  you're  ready,  I  can  see.  Come 
along,  Probyn,  we'U  go  in  at  'em ;  we're  not  going 
to  be  robbed  like  this." 

''  Up  wid  ye  now,  Jim  !  "  said  the  major,  making 
for  his  stick,  and  whizzing  it  round  his  head  as 
Jim,  with  the  unmistakeable  quietude  of  the  pro- 
fessional athlete  (for  Jim  was  not  unknown  in  the 


THE    MAJORS    HOUSE-WARMING.  835 

Essex  marslies),  threw  off  Lis  coat,  and  squared 
his  enormous  arms. 

"  Marquis,  I'm  on  your  side,  bedad !  we'll 
polish  off  the  whole  lot — the  dirty  blackguards  !  " 
shouted  the  major,  kicking  over  the  loo  table,  and 
smashing  tlie  roulette  wheel,  to  prevent  its 
removal. 


"  We'll  pay  the  reckoning  on  the  nail 
.Vnd  divil  a  man  but  goes  to  jail, 
From  Garryowen,  my  glory." 


The  retreat  from  Corunna,  the  retreat  from 
^loscow,  was  nothing  to  the  dismay  and  con- 
fusion as  some  of  the  strangers  present,  suddenly 
awake  to  a  sense  of  danger,  either  joined  the 
marquis  and  the  major  or  skulked  away  down- 
stairs with  or  without  hats,  coats,  and  sticks,  as  the 
case  might  be. 

^Ir.  Green  way's  eyes  flashed  fire,  as  trying  to 
cram  a  dozen  or  two  sovereigns,  half  of  which  fell 
on  the  floor,  into  his  pocket,  he  drew  out  from 
his  waistcoat  one  of  those  small  deadly  double- 
barrelled  Derrenger  pistols  that  New  York 
swindlers  often  carry,  and  slowly  cocking  it, 
advanced  on  the  marquis. 

"'  If  you  folks  don't  get  out  of  this  quickly,"  he 
said,  ''rU  make  the  tallest  dead  body  of  one  of  you 
right  aAvay.     I  don't  care  which  it  is,  but  I  just 


336  THE  vicar's  courtship. 

let  you  know  that  tlierell  he  a  coffin  wanted  to- 
night, and  it  won't  be  for  me.'*' 

"  Don't  you  make  too  sure  of  that/'  said  the 
redoubtal)le  major,  as  enraged  at  this  he  leaped 
forward  like  a  tiger-elephant,  and  struck  a  tre- 
mendous blow  upwards  at  the  hand  that  held  the 
Aveapon.  It  knocked  it  into  paralysis.  The 
pistol  flew  to  the  ceiling  from  the  crushed  and 
mashed  fingers  of  the  swindler  and  exploded 
twice.  Maddened  at  this,  the  rogues  made  their 
rush,  seizing  anything,  chairs,  chimney  ornaments, 
sticks,  decanters,  tumblers,  champagne  bottles, 
fighting  their  way  to  the  door,  which  Avas  now 
blocked  by  the  marquis's  party.  Discord  at  that 
sight  gave  a  thieves'  whistle  for  help  from  below. 
Cunning  tried  to  turn  ofi"  the  gas,  and  Terror 
cowered  under  the  table. 

Oh,  for  the  pen  of  Homer,  or  of  the  great 
poet  of  the  Niebelungenlied,  to  describe  the 
prowess  of  the  major  and  his  hired  champion, 
who  proved  a  glutton  at  his  work  !  On  the  burly 
baron's  bullet  skull  first  fell  the  major's  potent 
stafi".  The  baron's  champagne  bottle,  fiung  too 
hastily,  beat  out  the  back  window,  but  not  the 
major's  useful  brains.  Then  the  major  flew  at  the 
American,  who,  with  his  left  hand,  had  drawn  a 
spring  knife,  and  Avas  running  at  the  marquis  ; 
with  deadly  truth  on  the  tendinous  part  of  the  left 


THE   major's   house-warming.  337 

wrist,  just  where  the  uhia  and  radius  join  to 
receive  the  plaited  bones  of  that  great  piece  of 
mechanism  the  hand,  the  weapon  smote,  and  the 
howling  rascal  fell  under  Jim's  feet,  who  kicking 
him  away  into  a  corner  made  straight  at  the 
Hindoo,  who  wa^dng  two  decanters,  was  calHng  to 
the  boy  to  throw  soda-water  bottles  as  fast  as  he 
could.  With  the  fct  decanter  the  Hindoo  pro- 
strated Jim,  but  before  he  could  discharge  the 
second,  the  major  catching  him  between  the  eyes, 
drove  him  half  way  downstairs,  with  the  shock 
of  a  catapult.  The  marquis,  down  for  a  moment 
from  a  blow  with  a  tumbler,  instantly  rallied  in 
the  pluckiest  way,  and  struck  another  of  the 
gang  a  teeth  splintering  smasher  with  the  leg 
twisted  off  a  chair.  Then  there  was  a  rush  over 
the  fallen,  and  the  swindlers  were  driven  back- 
wards do\\Tistairs  and  through  the  passage  (suf- 
fering rather  at  the  green  doors),  into  the  street. 

But  even  there  the  gods  were  pitiless  on  the 
fallen;  at  the  door  old  Mrs.  Brown's  husband  and 
four  stern  men  in  blue,  pewter  as  to  the  buttons, 
armed  as  to  the  hands,  rushed  at  thcii*  collars. 

''  And  every  one  of  *em  goes  to  jail, 
From  Garryowen,  my  glory." 

''  I  give  all  these  in  charge.  Sergeant  Davis," 
said  the  major.     '^  They're  all  swindlers.     They've 


338  THE    vicar's    (JOUPvTSHIP. 

swindled  my  friend  Eobinson  out  of  three  quarters' 
rent,  then  they  started  a  gokl  hell,  you  11  find  the 
pieces  upstairs  ;  what's  more,  they  owe  me  for 
a  half-year's  agency  for  their  swindling  com- 
pany ;  and  what's  more  still,  they  tried  to  murder 
me  and  these  noble  swells  liere,  and  Arould  have 
done  it  hut  for  me  and  eJim  Owen,  who,  if  I  may 
he  allowed  to  publicly  thank  him,  I  must  say, 
handled  his  mauleys  superb,  and  I  propose  my  noble 
sportsmen  to  send  the  hat  round  for  a  few  guineas, 
for  if  it  hadn't  been  for  me  and  Jim,  you'd  have 
been  nowhere,  with  all  your  pluck,  and  I  beg  to 
say  that  though  sovs.  is  the  rule  of  the  evening, 
fivers  will  not  be  turned  away  at  the  doors.  Jim 
got  it  very  heavy  once,  but  he  finished  his  man 
at  last.  You'll  find  him  under  the  table  now, 
I'll  swear.  My  boys,  I  propose  a  little  stout  and 
bitter  at  the  '  Apple  Tree,'  to  all  noble  sportsmen 
requiring  refreshment." 


THE  SHOP  IN  THE  EDGEWARE  ROAD.    339 


CHAPTER  XXIL 

THE    chemist's    SHOP   IX   THE   EDGEWARE   ROAD. 

That  A\Tetciied  man — his  left  arm  broken  by 
the  blow  from  Dr.  Briscoe's  stick — fled  without 
hat  or  cloak,  for  he  dropped  the  latter  for  speed, 
and  the  first  had  fallen  in  the  grapple  with  the 
Vicar.  He  ran  as  far  as  he  could,  falling  now  and 
then  over  furze-bushes  or  ant-hills,  but  keeping, 
as  well  as  he  could,  the  direction  of  Wiley, 
where  he  knew  an  express  train  to  London  passed 
at  about  a  quarter  to  twelve.  Breaking  into  the 
high-road  from  a  fir  plantation,  at  about  three 
miles  from  Fontford,  from  whence  no  sound  of 
wheels,  hoofs,  or  any  other  form  of  pursuit  reached 
the  faint  and  wounded  creature,  he  rested.  The 
moon  just  then  shone  out  fair,  pure  and  bright, 
and  showed  all  the  grey  roofs  of  Fontford,  and 
the  little  needle  of  a  spire,  small  in  the  distance. 

Three  miles  farther  on,  near  eleven,  the  trap  of 
a  great  red-faced  hearty  commercial  traveller  over- 
took him.     Harker  asked  him  for  a  lift ;  he  had 

z  2 


.•i40  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

lost  his  hat,  he  said,  in  the  dark,  having  mistaken 
his  way,  fallen  down  a  ridge,  and  hurt  his  arm. 
The  driver  gave  him  a  lift  with  pleasure,  having 
no  fear  of  a  scared,  helpless-looking  man  who 
seemed  much  hurt.  They  stopped  at  an  inn  in 
Wiley,  and  Harker  refusing  to  get  out,  the  man 
kindly  brought  him  out  a  hot  tumbler  of  brandy- 
and-water.  The  traveller  also,  at  Harker's  request, 
went  into  the  first  village  shop,  and  while  Harker 
held  the  reins,  brought  him  a  common  felt  wide 
awake.  He  was  going  on  to  Amesbury  that  night, 
so  at  the  turning  to  Wiley,  the  traveller  jovially 
wished  Harker  good  night,  and  drove  on. 

At  half-past  eleven  Harker  ventured  into  the 
station,  and  slouching  his  hat  and  drawing  up 
his  comforter,  asked  for  a  second-class  ticket  to 
London.  That  left  him  only  four  shillings. 
Presently  the  fiery  eyes  rushed  into  the  station, 
with  a  pant  and  hiss  and  l)ellow ;  the  murderer 
crept  into  a  corner  of  an  unoccupied  second-class 
carriao'e,  and  the  train  bore  him  awav — whither? — 


*^G^? 


'^y- 


hope,  happiness,  virtue  gone.  The  good  angels 
had  left  him  for  ever.  Fiery  evil  faces  were  dis- 
torted with  hideous  lauoiiter  as  the  train  flew  oft' 

o 

roaring  with  the  murderer  to  the  great  receptacle 
of  crime  and  honour,  of  joy  and  misery,  of  Dives 
and  of  Lazarus.  Most  miserable  of  sinners,  he 
had  given  his  soul  away,  and  the  payment  had 


THE  SHOP  IN  THE  EDGEWARE  EOAD.    341 

turned  to  dust  in  his  hand.  It  seemed  as  if  some 
demon  monster  had  come  for  him  now  and  borne 
him  off  to  EbHs. 

Oh,  the  tortm-ino;  hours  that  he  dozed  or 
woke  to  think  of  the  past,  and  tremble  for  the 
future,  and  to  groan  in  agony  of  hopeless  remorse 
at  the  earthly  and  the  heavenly  happiness  he  had 
suriTndered  for  a  dream.  Aorain  he  recalled  the 
warm,  luxurious  room  he  had  left  locked  already, 
no  doubt,  broken  into  by  rough  eager  cruel  men. 
again  he  retraced  cYery  step  through  the  wood  to 
the  gate,  and  to  the  window  of  '"  Heart's  Content.'" 
He  saw  again  the  grey-haired  man  at  the  lamp, 
heard  the  gun's  faint  report,  heard  the  lamp  crash  : 
saw  the  flame  burst  forth  as  fi'om  a  door  suddenly 
opening  in  hell ;  saw  the  dog  leap  and  fall.  Then 
came  the  grapple  with  the  man  who  seized  him 
and  who  saw  his  face,  the  flight,  the  maiming  blow. 
the  anguish  of  the  walk,  the  risk  of  the  station, 
and  now,  was  it  only  an  e^^il  dream  ?  Then  he 
fell  asleep,  dead  asleep. 

A  sharp  cry  of  ''  tickets,  tickets,"  awoke  him. 

"  Where's  this,  guard  ?  what  place  is  this  1 " 

'•'  Your  ticket,  man,  you're  half  asleep.  Can't 
stop  here  all  night.     ^\Tiy,  Waterloo  of  course." 

London. — Four  o'clock  in  the  morning.  Had 
the  telegraph  anticipated  his  flight  with  its  magic 
vnve  \     No,   there   was   no  policeman,  only  one 


342  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

or  two  sleepy  porters  who  let  him  freely  pass  into 
the  street.  Fierce  animal  hunger  was  on  him,  as 
he  walked  far  into  the  Borough  away  from  every- 
thing, and  at  the  corner  of  Baalzephon  Lane  went 
into  a  squalid  coffee-house,  a  nook  that  only  the 
workmen  of  a  neighbouring  fellmonger's  fre- 
quented. He  ate  and  drank  largely,  and  that 
left  him  only  two  and  ninepence.  Presently  one 
of  the  men  began  reading  in  a  country  paper  a 
paragraph  about  the  death  of  a  beggar,  a  "  tout '' 
and  race  card  seller  in  Wiltshire  ;  a  man  named 
Blake,  who,  mad  with  drink,  had  broken  open  a 
Mr.  Harker's  stables,  stolen  a  horse,  and  ridden 
tiU  he  fell  dead. 

''  I've  heard  that  name  Harkcr,"  said  another 
of  the  men;  "he's  the  richest  bloke  in  the 
county,  except  the  Marquis  of  Westminster,  ^Adio 
has  they  say  1000/.  a  day." 

Instantly  paying  what  he  had  to  pay,  the 
murderer,  with  one  frightened  glance  at  the 
speakers,  slunk  off  towards  the  New  Cut,  where 
he  might  l^ury  himself  among  sordid  people,  who 
would  not  know  him  nor  wonder  at  any  form  of 
misery. 

Towards  night,  after  more  food,  which  left  him 
only  a  shilling  and  some  pence — for  he  had  left  his 
watch  and  chain  at  home  and  had  nothing  but  his 
clothes  that  he  could  pawn,  and  they  were  wet 


'IHK  SHOP  IN  THK  EDGEWARE  ROAD.    34 o 

througii  by  a  sudden  shower — tlic  murderer  found 
himself  m  the  Kegent's  Park,  so  fatigued  that  he 
eould  scarcely  walk,  and  caring  only  for  death. 
There,  under  one  of  the  loneliest  trees,  dreading 
every  policeman  he  saw  in  the  distance,  the  wretch 
fell  asleep.  It  had  rained  again  and  it  had  also 
grown  quite  dark  while  he  was  asleep,  and  he  arose 
chilled  and  aching.  He  must  die  now ;  he  would 
not  live  to  endure  that  searching  misery,  or  the 
degradation  of  a  gaol  and  felons'  company.  With 
an  outburst  of  his  old  savage  resolution,  he  drew 
his  hat  over  his  lace,  and  leaving  the  park, 
Avallvcd,  fast  as  his  tired  limbs  would  carry  him, 
to  the  Edgeware  Road.  The  lamps  were  lit,  and 
their  light  was  golden  on  the  wet  pavement  and 
in  the  puddles. 

Suddenly  the  stones  turned  as  crimson  at 
Ids  feet  as  if  he  had  entered  a  slauohter-house. 
He  shuddered  :  a  palsy  of  fear  seized  him.  He 
looked  up :  it  was  a  chemist's.  He  paused  a 
moment  under  the  red  lamp  :  then  staggered  to 
the  door  and  asked  for  a  shillino;'s  worth  of 
morphia.  The  man,  busy  at  the  moment,  paid 
liim  no  attention.  Then  he  looked  insolently 
and  contemptuously  up  from  liis  pill  machine 
and  said, — 

''  I  say,  my  man,  don't  you  put  your  wxt  arms 
on   my   counter.      There's  the  morphia  for  you. 


344  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

Mind,  it's  poison  in  over-dose — for  tootli-aclie,  I 
suppose  ? " 

''  Yes  ;  there's  the  shilling.  Good  night." 
Harker  clutched  the  two-ounce  bottle,  and 
went  out.  Death — the  power  of  death— was 
once  more  in  his  hand  :  but  this  time  for  himself 
— for  himself!  Another  hour,  Avhere  should  he 
be  ?  At  rest  for  ever,  or  in  eternal  torture  ? 
in  changeless  sleep  or  before  the  veiled  judge 
and  the  accusing  dead  ?  No,  that  way  lay  mad- 
ness. He  spent  his  last  pence  on  gin — tossed  off 
the  fiery  vitriol,  and  felt  his  brain  burn  with  it  as 
he  wished,  for  with  the  fire  came  some  rest.  As 
he  hurried  on  through  the  selfish  jostling  crowd 
a  ragged  man  stopped  him,  mistaking  him  for  an 
old  friend.  Harker  shuddered,  though  so  near  the 
edge  of  the  grave,  for  he  thought  the  man  had 
recognised  him  and  was  going  to  arrest  him  ;  but 
the  man  passed  on  laughing,  and  with  a  burly 
oath  turned  into  the  nearest  public-house  to 
laugh  over  his  mistake  with  his  friend  the  land- 
lord, who  poisoned  men  in  a  respectable  legal  soit 
of  way. 

At  the  corner  of  a  turning  southward  of 
Praed  Street,  a  crowd  stopped  him.  They  were 
gathered  round  a  hoarding,  reading  some- 
thing. Harker  pushed  through  them  and  came 
to  a  placard : 


THE    SHOP    IN    THE    EDGEWARE    EOAD.         345 
MURDER ! 

£100  reward!! 
It  was  a  reward  offered  for  the  discovery  of  tlie 
murderer  of  John  Travers,  gamekeeper  to  Jabez 
Harker,  Esq.,  of  Summerleas  Abbey,  WiltsHre. 

Harker  pushed  on,  paler  than  before,  hardly 
daring  to  turn  round  lest  he  should  see  the 
murdered  man  himself  following  him  ;  and  every 
face  in  the  crowd,  suddenly  reddened  with  ac- 
cusing blood,  seemed  to  turn  and  stare  at  him  as 
he  fled.  At  the  corner  of  Praed  Street  at  last, 
he  turned  down  a  mews,  sat  down  on  a  dunghill, 
and  tossed  ofif  the  poison  at  a  gulp.  He  was 
mad — almost  mad  Avitli  despair.  No  thought  of 
wife  or  children — no  thought  of  anything  but 
escape  from  the  agony  of  despair  and  the  shame 
of  exposure.  No ;  lie  would  not  die  there  ;  he 
would  go  back  to  the  park,  and  expire  in  peace 
under  a  tree,  where  no  one  would  find  him  till  he 
was  stark  dead  and  beyond  the  reach  of  justice  or 
of  enemies.     So  he  rose  and  went. 

But  the  deadly  venom  was  too  swift.  Half 
benumbed  with  the  fatal  lethargy,  he  was  just 
staggering  across  the  street,  turning  eastward, 
when,  in  the  scudding  rain,  a  half-blinded  and 
rather  drunken  cabman,  diiving  a  flashing  hansom 
at  frantic  speed,  struck  him  down,  crashed  over 
him,  and  passed  on. 


•540  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

Ill  an  instant  a  crowd,  with  a  policeman  in  it, 
seemed  to  rise  out  of  the  very  earth,  and  closed 
round  the  miserable  oToanino-  mass  of  blood  and 
mire  that  a  moment  before  Avas  a  vig^orous, 
healthy  man. 

'•'  Take  him  to  an  hospital,"  said  one  energetic 
person. 

"  Call  a  cab,'^  said  another. 

"You  look  here,  you  fellows,"  said  a  well- 
dressed  thin  young  medical  student,  pushing 
through  the  crowd,  an  eye-glass  in  his  eye,  and 
looking  at  the  body;  '•' my  name's  Dobbie.  Take 
him  to  St.  Mary's.  It  seems  a  regular  smash  up. 
but  it'U  be  a  very  interesting  case,  no  doubt, 
ril  be  with  you  in  a  crack.     I'm  a  dresser  there." 

'•'Take  him  to  St.  George's,  Bobby,"  cried  u 
brewer's  man. 

"  St.  George's  \  swell  humbug,"  said  the  stu- 
dent. "  St.  Mary's,  cabby — ijust  handy — right 
you  are,  drive  on." 


THE    FORSTER    WARD.  347 


CHAPTER   XXIII. 

THE   FORSTER   WARD. 

It  was  three  days  after  tliis  that  j\Ir.  Staunton — 
who  had  come  up  to  town  by  desire  of  the  police 
to  assist  them  in  searching  for  the  would-be 
assassin — ascending  the  steps  of  his  club,  nodded 
to  the  porter,  who  had  already  read  of  his  extra- 
ordinary escape.  It  was  about  five  o'clock,  and 
the  rooms  were  full  of  the  usual  quid-nuncs,  busy 
at  the  newspaper  stands  and  at  the  files.  In  his 
favourite  corner  he  found  his  old  crony,  Har- 
grave,  rather  shattered  by  a  recent  illness,  but 
still  chatty,  cheerful,  and  sociable.  Mr.  Good- 
rick  instantly  sat  down  by  his  side,  took  his 
hand,  dipped  at  his  snuif-box,  and  engaged  with. 
him  yard-arm  to  yard-arm.  He  was  glad  to  find 
his  old  friend  looking  so  much  better — yes,  so 
much  better  than  he  had  been  led  to  expect ;  and 
there  these  two  old  club  associates  sat,  like  two 
school-boy  friends,  for  a  moment  silent,  then 
lapsing  into  quiet  conversatioi). 


348  THE    VICAKS    COURTSHIP. 

As  Mr.  Staunton  was  going  upstairs  to  tlie 
library,  that  dreadful  bore,  Huskyson,  button- 
holed him  with  some  secret  back-stair  and  most 
important  intelligence  just  arrived  from  Berlin. 
Would  he  believe  it,  the  Duke  of  Oberkopf- 
undohrindet  has  suspended  diplomatic  relation- 
ships with  the  Duke  of  Ledernekopf,  the  result 
would  probably  be  a  European  war  and  a  junc- 
tion of  all  the  small  duchies  against  Prussia. 
"  There's  such  a  storm  brewing,  my  dear  sir " 

''As  never  was  seen,  I  suppose,  in  any  slop- 
basin " 

At  that  moment  one  of  the  club  pages  brought 
Mr.  Staunton  two  letters.  One  was  from  Amy — 
dear  Amy.  Edward  had  started  for  London, 
with  Dr.  Briscoe  and  Vincent  the  police-con- 
stable. They  had  got  some  clue  to  Harker,  and 
had  instantly  started  for  town. 

Amy's  letter,  gentle  and  affectionate  of  course, 
was  full  of  thanks  to  God  for  her  grandfather's 
escape.  "  Ned  tells  me,"  she  said  in  one  part,  "  that 
when  he  looked  towards  the  house  and  saw  that 
wicked  man  standing  dark  against  the  gush  of 
flame,  he  really  thought  for  the  moment  that 
Hell  had  shot  forth  some  monster,  but  in  an 
instant — brave  fellow  ! — he  saw  the  real  danger 
and  dashed  forward." 

Just  as  Staunton  was  pacing  the  hall  of  the 


THE    FORSTER   WARD.  349 

club,  waiting  for  a  friend,  one  of  the  servants  ran 
up  and  said  there  were  three  gentlemen  waiting  for 
him  in  the  strangers'  room.     He  went  and  found 
Beaufiower,    Dr.     Briscoe,    and    P.-C.    Vincent. 
They   had   received   intelligence   from    Scotland 
Yard   that   Harker    had    been    tracked    to   the 
Waterloo  station,  and  from  there  to  a  coftee-shop 
in  the  Borough.     Inquiries  had  been  made  at  the 
Docks,  at  the  steam-boat  wharfs,  and  at  all  the 
railway  stations,  and  nothing  being  traceable  any- 
where, it  was  thought  he  must  be  looked  for  in 
some  of  the  parish  dead-houses,  or  that  he  would 
be  found  somewhere  in  the  river.     Vincent  was 
that  night  to  go  round  to  the  hospitals  and  see  if  he 
could  discover  hun  in  any  of  the  wards,  and  the  next 
night  a  detective  was  to  take  him  round  to  some 
thieves'  lodoino'-houses,  where  the  wretch  midit 
perhaps  be  lurking.     Beaufiower  and  the  Doctor 
were  to  sleep  at  the  Tavistock,  and  to  be  called 
the  moment  any  information  could  be  obtained. 

About  eight  o'clock  the  next  morning,  P.-C. 
Vincent  and  a  London  detective  tapped  at  Beau- 
iiower's  door. 

"  We  think  we've  heard  on  him,  sir,"'  said 
Vincent,  "  at  St.  Mary's  Hospital.  It's  a  man  as 
was  run  over  last  Sunday  night,  about  nine 
o'clock,  in  the  Edgeware  Road,  and  was  taken  to 
the   Paddington  Hospital.     The   hair    and   eyes 


350  THE    VIC  All's   COURTSHIP. 

answer,  and  the  dress,  and  his  linen  is  marked 
J.  H.  ;  it's  lie,  sir,  sure  as  you're  alive.  I've 
got  a  hansom  at  the  door,  and  have  sent  a  close 
cab  for  Mr.  Staunton,  who'll  come  on  here  w^hile 
you're  taking  a  snack  as  Dr.  Briscoe  has  alread}' 
ordered.  Don't  hurry,  sir ;  hut  the  quicker  you 
arc  the  sooner  we  shall  know  if  we've  got  our 
man." 

"  All  right — down  in  a  minute,  Vincent,"  cried 
Beauflower. 

The  party  was  collected  and  ready  m  al)out 
three-quarters  of  an  hour,  and  the  two  cabs  drove 
together  swiftly  to  the  Paddington  Hospital.  A 
vague  horror  Avas  filling  Beauflower's  mind.  His 
father-in-law  and  Dr.  Briscoe  were  silent  and 
anxious.  The  policemen  coldly  discussed  the 
points  of  evidence  in  an  under-breath.  Presently 
the  cab  swe^^t  round  to  the  hospital  j)ortico.  A 
large,  ugly,  square,  many- windowed  building,  with 
St.  Maey's  Hospital  inscribed  in  large  letters 
on  the  front,  stood  before  them,  as  the  drivers 
got  down  and  threw  open  the  doors. 

It  was  just  nine,  and  one  or  two  poor  sickly 
and  bandaged  persons  were  hanging  about  the 
steps,  waiting  for  9.30,  the  hour  when  the  house- 
surgeons  see  the  minor  surgical  cases,  and  out- 
patients can  come  without  either  letter  or  order. 
The   pallid    creatures  at  Death's    door   gathered 


THE    FORSTER   WARD.  351 

closer,  Ml  of  curiosity  to  sec  a  new  patient,  but, 
to  their  infinite  disgust,  five  healthy  men  stepped 
out  and  went  up  the  steps. 

The  detective  ran  up  first,  and  spoke  to  the 
porter,  who  emerged  from  his  little  side  room, 
and  looked  at  a  scries  of  handles  and  speaking 
pipes  labelled  with  the  names  of  the  diflferent 
wards.  The  man,  who  had  been  expecting 
them,  led  them  without  a  word  to  a  door  out  of 
the  hall  to  the  right,  above  which  were  written 
the  words  "Secretary's  Office/'  A  tall,  thin, 
grave  man  in  black  bowed  as  they  entered,  and 
offered  them  seats. 

"You've  come,  gentlemen,"  he  said,  ''as  the 
officer  informed  me  late  last  night,  about  a  man 
who  was  brought  here  on  Sunday,  run  over  in  the 
Edgeware  Eoad.     Here  is  our  entry. 

"  •'  9.30  p.m.,  Sunday,  October  30,  1 861.— Man 
brought  in  suffering  from  the  effects  of  morphia. 
He  had  taken  so  large  a  dose  that  he  had  been 
unable  to  retain  it,  and  the  usual  antidotes  proved 
efficacious.  While  drowsy  with  the  poison  a  cal) 
had  run  over  him,  and  crushed  both  his  legs  just 
above  the  knee.' 

"  That  is  our  note,  gentlemen.  The  man's  legs 
had  to  be  instantly  removed  by  Mr.  Spencer 
Smith.  You  can,  if  you  like,  see  the  man.  He 
still  lingers,  but  there  is  small  hope  of  his  reco- 


352  THE   vicar's   courtship. 

very.  He  refuses  to  give  liis  name,  Ijiit  liis  linen 
is  marked  'J.  H.'  Mr.  Lane  told  me  lie  could 
not  last  very  long,  but  the  nurse  sent  down  word 
this  morning  that  he  looks  better  and  had  taken  a 
little  nourishment,  but  his  mind  still  wanders." 

''  We  will  go  up,  if  you  will  allow  us,"  said 
Dr.  Briscoe,  quite  at  home  in  an  hospital.  "  We 
only  want  to  identify  the  man ;  it  is  a  person 
who's  been  trying  to  commit  murder." 

"  Good  gracious ! "  said  the  calm  registrar, 
turning  over  his  ledger  to  begin  a  pleasant,  new, 
clean  leaf.  "  You  don't  say  so.  Well,  Til  send 
one  of  the  messengers  with  you,  and  the  nurse 
can  take  you  round." 

The  secretary  rang  a  bell  for  a  man.  When  he 
came  he  said,  "  Davis,  take  these  gentlemen  up 
to  the  Forster  Ward,  and  tell  Mrs.  Bellamy  to 
show  them  the  patient  they  wish  to  see." 

The  man  bowed,  and  led  them  stolidly  up  the 
great  blank  stone  staii-s  past  two  great  doors,  one 
inscribed  " The  Thistlethwaite,"  the  other  "The 
Grafton  Ward."  The  Forster  Ward  was  on  the 
second  floor.  They  went  higher.  The  man  opened 
a  door  quietly.  There  was  a  long  corridor  with 
a  clean  planking  and  a  double  row  of  beds.  Mrs. 
Bellamy  emerged  from  the  little  room,  that  had 
a  window  commanding  a  view  of  the  whole  per- 
spective. 


THE    FORSTER  WARD.  353 

''  Man  run  over  last  Sunday  ?  "  she  said,  look- 
ing rather  sternly  at  the  visitors.  "  Oh,  you  mean 
No.  44."  Here  her  face  softened,  and  her  eyes 
glanced  doTs^n  the  ward.  "Friends  of  No.  44  ?  " 
she  said. 

*'  No ;  come  to  identify  him  for  attempt  at 
murder  down  in  the  country." 

"  Oh,  then,  I  will  show  you  him." 

They  passed  between  rows  of  pale  sleeping 
faces.  One  or  two  of  the  patients  sat  up  in  bed 
and  stared  at  them  with  hollow  or  with  fevered 
eyes ;  two  or  three  groaning  wretches  turned  un- 
easily and  muttered  as  they  passed.  The  nurse 
paused  just  beyond  the  second  fireplace  in  the 
extreme  left-hand  corner  of  the  ward  at  a  bed, 
round  which  the  coarse  blue  check  curtains  were 
closely  dra^ATi. 

]\Ir.  Staunton  made  a  motion  not  to  disturb  the 
poor  wretch.  He  was  perhaps  asleep,  the  unhappy 
man,  with  both  legs  lately  amputated.  The 
others  spoke  to  him  in  a  whisper,  and  said  to  the 
nurse  they  would  retm^n  when  the  man  awoke  and 
had  had  his  breakfast.  The  nurse  gave  the  police- 
man a  hard  look  of  intelligence.  It  was  only  busi- 
ness to  her,  all  this — mere  routine  ;  she  had  lived 
side  by  side  with  death,  and  did  not  fear  its 
approach ;  the  detective  caught  the  meaning  of 
her  look,   said  nothing,  but  strode  forward,  his 

VOL,   III.  A  A 


354  THE    ^'ICAE's    COUETSHIP. 

great  boots  clumping  ruthlessly  on  tlie  uncarpeteci 
planks.  With  a  rough  hand  he  dragged  back  the 
curtains,  rasping  the  rings  along  the  brass  rod  on 
which  they  were  strung. 

Yes  ;  there  lay  the  murderer.  It  was  he.  They 
knew  his  brow,  his  hair,  his  features,  hut  he  was 
dead ;  his  wretched  face,  hideously  distorted  with 
the  pangs  of  death  and  of  remorse,  lay  there,  a 
wax  mask  with  the  glassy  eyes  fixed.  The  hand 
Avith  the  tattooed  wrist,  had  clutched  the  bed- 
clothes, and  still  held  them. 

"  He's  hooked  it,''  said  the  London  policeman. 
"  Lucky  for  him." 

"  He  is  gone,"  said  the  Vicar,  closing  the  cur- 
tains, and  turning  solemnly  to  his  friends,  "  gone 
beyond  our  reach,  and  to  a  more  awful  Judge. 
'  I  have  seen  the  Avicked  in  great  power,  and 
spreading  himself  like  a  green  bay  tree.  Yet 
he  passed  away,  and  lo  1  he  was  not ;  I  sought 
him  but  he  could  not  be  found.' " 


THE    GOOD-BYE.  355 


CHAPTEE  XXIV. 

THE    GOOD-BYE. 

What  have  we  more  to  tell  ?  In  less  than  a 
year  Mr.  Fairfield  wrung  from  Fox  and  Shekell 
the  last  acre  of  the  Staunton  property,  and  rein- 
stated the  rio;htful  heir,  who  celebrated  his 
enthronement  by  a  grand  banquet  to  half  the 
county,  by  an  ox  roasted  whole,  and  also  by 
several  roasted  tar-barrels,  which,  though  less 
nutritious,  lasted  longer  than  even  the  ox. 

Cantelupe,  having  sown  his  wild  oats  pretty 
lavishly,  pulled  up  and  tried  a  more  profitable 
crop.  He  married  Julia  Beauflower  in  about 
three  months  after  Harker's  miserable  death,  and 
soon  discovered  who  it  was  who  had  so  gene- 
rously saved  his  estates  for  him.  Lord  Mazagan, 
who  had  not  put  out  a  finger  to  help  his  unfortu- 
nate nephew,  expressed  to  the  Duke  the  other 
day  at  the  club  his  opinion  that  "  Fitz  had  pulled 
through  very  weU — very  weU,  indeed."    In  a  year 


856  THE   VICAE's   courtship. 

or  two,  both  at  the  Castle  and  the  Vicarage,  little 
voices  began  to  be  heard,  and  little  feet  began  to 
paddle  about  the  corridors.  Two  happier  couples 
w^ere  not  easily  to  be  discovered ;  and  as  for 
Edward  and  Amy,  the  Dunmow  Flitch  Avould 
have  been  but  a  small  reward  for  their  undeviat- 
ing  harmony. 

Mrs.  Harker  and  her  daughters  with  some 
money  they  had  secured,  went  to  live  at  Boulogne, 
while  a  rich  uncle,  a  lawyer  at  Exeter,  took  care 
of  Ethel.  Mrs.  Harker,  worn  out  by  grief  and 
mortification,  had  a  paralytic  stroke  two  years 
after  her  husband's  death,  and  Miss  Harker  mar- 
ried a  French  count  of  supposed  enormous  wealth, 
who,  however,  proved  a  billiard  sharper,  and  beat 
her  terribly. 

And  now  for  our  minor  characters.  Mr.  Pitts 
became  bankrupt  two  years  after  our  story  ends, 
chiefly  owing  to  his  having  been  fined  for  send- 
ing mangy  meat  to  the  London  market.  That 
good  old  soul,  Farmer  Brown,  had  his  lease 
renewed,  and  prospered.  The  wild  son,  by  dint 
of  incessant  pipe-clay,  rose  at  last  to  be  sergeant 
of  the  Life  Guards,  which  honourable  situation 
he  still  holds  with  honour  to  himself  and  credit 
to  his  Queen  and  country.  The  younger  Miss 
Chivers  is  dead,  but  the  elder  Miss  Chivers  is 


THE    GOOD-BYE.  357 

still  a  special  favourite  at  the  Vicarage,  and  the 
sworn  adviser  of  Amy.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Robin- 
son hve  at  "  Heart's  Content,"  handsomely  pen- 
sioned by  Mr.  Staunton,  and  as  happy  and  cozy 
as  two  old  love  birds.  George  has  married,  and 
has  just  taken  the  pledge  for  the  fourteenth  time. 
Mr.  Bassevi  is  at  present  in  one  of  our  remote 
colonies,  stud}T.ng  the  geolog}^  of  the  district  of 
which  he  is  the  ornament,  and  devoting  himself 
to  lapidary  pursuits  on  one  of  the  Government 
high  roads,  which  he  has  tended  greatly  to  im- 
prove. The  rough  energy  of  Mr.  Dan  vers  and 
the  polite  urbanity  of  ]\Ir.  Montague  are  also 
helping  to  enlarge  the  civilisation  of  the  same 
noble  region  of  the  world. 

The  major  is  at  present  consul  at  Clarence 
Island,  Tierra  del  Fuego.  The  following  extract 
from  his  last  letter  will  show  exactly  what  he  is 
doing,  and  his  present  proud  position  : — 

"  I  have  plenty  of  time  to  myself,"  he  writes, 
"  and  I  think  the  place  in  time  will  be  a  first-rate 
station.  Our  volcanoes  are  yery  active,  our  birch 
timber  is  plentiful,  our  slate  and  hornblend  are 
magnificent,  our  foxes'  skins  a  valuable  article  of 
commerce.  A  Patagonian  fisherman  (seven  feet 
two)  has  just  brought  me  the  gratifymg  news  of 
the  discovery  of  gold  in  one  of  the  mountain 


358  THE    vicar's    courtship. 

streams.  This  must  be  looked  into.  My  popu- 
lation is  chiefly  black  and  whitey-brown,  fond  of 
whiskey,  and  not  industrious,  but  the  schoolmaster 
is  abroad  and  two  recent  wrecks  have  enriched 
our  glorious,  glorious  island  with  no  less  than 
fourteen  Lascars,  six  negroes,  and  four  Chinamen. 
If  you  could  hear  of  a  tidewaiter  s  place  that 
would  suit  me,  and  that  was  a  little  nearer 
London,  I  should  like  it ;  but  there  is  great  scope 
here  for  the  philanthropist,  and  my  big  stick 
smooths  the  way  for  the  future  missionary. 
Hurrah  !  Just  got  news  of  a  big  Yankee  schooner 
on  shore.  I  must  be  off"  to  protect  the  property. 
What  are  you  grinning  at,  you  blackgyard  ?  Be 
asy  there.  I  mean  protect ;  but  not  for  nothing, 
you  spalpane,  of  course.  Natures  natur,  so  one 
drop  of  the  cratur,  and  then  away  to  the  rescue. 
Get  out  of  that  with  your  winking." 

Two  small  characters  of  our  dramatis  personcB 
we  had  almost  forgotten.  We  mean  pretty  little 
Susan,  the  housemaid  of  the  EoHnsons,  and  her 
lover,  the  smart  young  man  at  Mr.  Bassevi's,  who 
refused  to  share  in  the  lying  frauds  of  his  rascally 
employer,  and  who,  by  his  secret  instructions  to 
the  police,  saved  the  life  of  Mr.  Staunton.  Well, 
a  happy  end  befell  them,  and  one  not  uncommon 
to  lovers — they  married.     He  prospered  as  the 


THE    GOOD-BYE.  359 

confidential  man  at  a  great  print-shop  in  Pall 
Mall,  and  about  four  years  ago  started  on  his  own 
account  in  a  little  shop  in  Bedford  Street,  Covent 
Garden,  that  seems  likely  to  flourish. 


THE    END. 

