STRAWBERRY HILL; 



AN 



HISTORICAL XOYEL. 



BY THE AUTHOR OF 

SHAKSPEARE AND HIS FRIENDS," "MAIDS OF HONOUR, 
" SIR ROGER DE COVERLET," &c. 



" Here are no assassins, no poisoners, no Neros, 
Borgias, Catilines, Richards of York ! Here are 
the foibles of an age — no very bad one." 

Horace Walfole. 



IN THREE VOLUMES. 
VOL I. 



LONDON : 
HENRY COLBURN, PUBLISHER, 

GREAT MARLBOROUGH STREET. 
1847. 



HATTOK & CO., PRINTERS, KING STREET, COVENT GAROKN^. 



'y-» 



V') 



IXTRODUCTIOX 






^ *' Going I Going! Gentlemen and Ladies, 

7 for tlie last time of offering this lot. For 

^ the last time. Xo advance upon this bid- 

{■- ding? Going — going — gone!" 
^>; Such was the speech which greeted tlie 

^ ears of the Author, from a clear sonorous 

^ voice, as, early in the month of May 1842, 

4 he entered one of the chambers of the 

J most celeljrated, if not the most admired of 

^ modern structures. He was enjoying a 

A 2 



IV INTRODUCTION. 

distinction which would have been denied a 
stranger half a century before. Xor did he 
value it less, because it was shared by a 
multitude. He was a visitor at Strawberry 
Hill. He made one of an eager, curious 
crowd, whose onlv letter of introduction 
appeared in the shape of an auctioneer's 
catalogue. 

Even when passing through the monastic 
entrance into the hall, he could hardly be- 
lieve, much less reconcile himself to the 
astounding fact, that he was there — not to 
look and marvel, but to bid and buy. All 
the treasures of Strawberry Hill, literary, 
antiquarian, and artistical, were for sale to 
the highest bidder. That quaint edifice, on 
which the author of "The Castle of Otranto" 
had .lavished the resources of his gothic 
imagination, was to be stripped to the bare 
walls: those matchless decorations, which 
at so vast an amount of labour and expense 
were sought for and collected from every 
available quarter in Europe, were to be dis- 



INTRODUCTION. V 

tributed amongst a thousand owners, at the 
best price that, could be got for them. 

It was impossible for any historical student 
to have entered the place, without recalling 
to mind some of the numerous associations 
that marked it as the head quarters of wit 
and fashion in the last century : but as well 
as having been the rendezvous of the beau- 
ties, the wits, and the gossips of the age, it 
had been made equally famous as a sort of 
nursery of Letters, where certain of its most 
delicate plants had for a considerable period 
been carefully reared and successfully planted 
out. The Strawberry Hill personages, in 
their claims to celebrity, found rivals only 
in the Strawberry Hill press. 

Could a change more violent be conceived 
than that which had fallen upon it, in the 
course of the half century that had elapsed 
since the death of its architect and founder ? 
The visitor, instead of having to pay his 
compliments to the greatest of fashionable 
authors, found himself the object of curious 



VI IXTKODUCTION. 



scrutiny from the greatest of fashionable 
auctioneers. The historical pictures, the 
rare objects of vertu^ the choice furniture, 
the admirable librar}^, were about to melt 
away before the wand of that potent magician, 
whose *' Going, going, gone," is a form of con- 
juration more certain in its effects than lips 
of maoi or ma^ister ever uttered. The fair 
AValdegraves, the sparkling Selwyns, the 
loquacious Suffolks, had given place to a 
mob of picture-dealers, booksellers, and 
curiosity hunters; and piquant scandal, 
brilliant repartee, and agreeable anecdote, 
had had to make room for vulgar jokes, 
common-place puns,andflippant pleasantries. 
It was a change indeed ! 

Full of those extremely philosophical 
reflections that would naturally suggest 
themselves under such circumstances, the 
Author was examining a group of miniatures 
that had been tastefully arranged in the 
Long Gallery, when he was struck by one 
that seemed to demand attention, by an 



INTRODUCTION. VU 

expression of features that would have ren- 
dered it prominent among a thousand. It 
was the face of a young and peculiarly 
handsome female, in which there was imme- 
diately recognizable that rare combination 
of commanding intellect, with the most femi- 
nine softness and grace. Such a face could 
never have been passed ^vithout remark: 
but, mdependently of the general expression, 
there was something in the look of those 
most intellectual eyes so full of melancholy 
tenderness, that it was impossible to meet it 
once without soon desirino; to see it ao^ain 
and again. 

The face was one that, more perfectly than 
any other, realized the bright creations of 
Shakspeare; it would have become the im- 
passioned Juliet, or the tender Desdemona, 
or the graceful Imogen, or the exquisite 
^liranda, equally well, because there was 
palpably so much of sentiment, and romance, 
and sympathy, in its general expression, as 
can only be said to exist in their most perfect 



viii INTRODUCTION. 

proportions, in these examples of tlie portrait 
gallery of our great photographist. 

It was a long time before he proceeded on 
the usual tour of inspection. He lingered 
very much beyond the period allowed at 
auctions to anticipated purchasers. Never- 
theless, he found himself inattentive to the 
claims of the thousand desirable objects 
which surrounded him wherever he moved. 
Art and Vertu^ Antiquity and Learning, put 
forth their attractions in vain. He was 
insensible to the merits of Sir Joshua and 
HoDfarth — the charms of the immortal ena- 
mels he passed, unregardful of the fame of 
Petitot and Boit — he was blind to the value 
of the Faenza ware of Robbia and Bernard 
Galizzi — the rare workmanship of Cellini 
and Jean de Bologna were to him no more 
than the chasings of ordinary workers in 
metal — the precious manufactures of 
Limoges, of Sevres, and Dresden — the 
inimitable missals enriched by Julio Clovio, 
and RafFaelle — the matchless glass, glowing 



INTRODUCTION. IX 

with the never-fading colours of Jean 
Cousin — the wonderful bronzes, the admir- 
able marbles, the magnificent armour, and 
the costly decorations of various descriptions 
that filled every chamber — were of no 
more interest to him than the heaped up 
lumber of a AYardour- Street curiosit}^ 
shop. 

The house seemed to afford every phase 
of female loveliness. The Beauties of the 
Courts of England, France and Italy, for 
nearly three centuries, had smiled in their 
most becoming dresses — but a company that 
boasted of having found lovers in Kings, 
Princes, and Grand Dukes, could not divert the 
attention of a humble scholar : those graces 
which had been immortalized by Holbein and 
Janet, Yasari and Vandyke, Mignard, Lely, 
Kneller, Jar\4s, Eckhardt, Richardson, Rey- 
nolds, and a score more of less fashionable 
limners, were, in his estimation, of no ac- 
count, in comparison with a mere drawing 
by some artist whose name apparently had 



X INTRODUCTION. 

been too obscure to demand tlie slightest 
attempt at preservation. 

Wonderful, it may be thought, must have 
been the attractions that left the spectator 
indifferent among Ninon de TEnclos, Bianca 
Capella, the innumerable Yenuses of Louis 
le Grand and Charles the Second, and the 
Gunnings, the Waldegraves, and the Berry s 
— the more respectable beauties of a more 
respectable age: wonderful indeed they 
were. At the earliest opportunity he re- 
turned to the portrait. Admiration was 
now mingled with curiosity. It was strange 
that where every face possessed a name, and 
some a biography, the most charming of 
them all should have found no other record 
than the equally brief and unsatisfatory 
''Portrait of a Lady" — that legend sacred 
to Royal- Academy inanities, in Court dresses 
and opera mantles, and British- Artist vul- 
garities in satin and point lace. 

He was ultimately so fortunate as to en- 
list the services of an elderly person, whom 



INTRODUCTION. XI 

he believed to be one of the auctioneer's 
employes. AVhether he was broker, an- 
tiquary, picture dealer, or bookseller, the 
author could not satisfy himself; for, with 
the jargon of all these trades, his conversa- 
tion gave evidence of as intimate an ac- 
quaintance with pursuits that had not the 
least connection with either of them. He 
wore a loose over- coat, of a fashion nearly 
half a century the antecedent of Paletots 
and Taglionis, over an equally loose and 
rusty suit of black, that seemed to possess 
an extraordinary number of pockets, into 
the depths of which the wearer's hand 
frequently dived during his discourse, for 
what seemed a most singular form of il- 
lustration. 

He talked of auctions, and he made a 
plunge into one side of his great coat, and 
brought forth a bundle of cuttings from 
newspapers of various dates, of accounts of 
all the celebrated sales that had taken place 
during the last century. From auctions he 



Xll INTRODUCTION. 

insensibly glided to exhibitions, and lo! 
from another depth came an equally for- 
midable heap, respecting all the public 
entertainments of London, for a similar 
period. Shakspeare of course was started ; 
and the lucubrations of the editors of a 
dozen papers, in the shape of a third bundle, 
saw the light. Shakspeare led to Garrick — 
Garrick to Junius — Junius to Wilkes, and 
Wilkes to Walpole; and at every change 
came forth its appropriate heap of printed 
slips, from side pocket, back, breast, and 
half a dozen other places, the exact position 
of which it is not so easy to indicate; and 
they came forth as naturally as though 
forming a necessary part of the discourse. 

Had the subject been the voyage of 
Jonah, or the Siege of Troy, the building of 
Solomon's Temple, or the apotheosis of the 
Man in the Moon, doubtless a supply of the 
same familiar excerptce would have been as 
readily produced. 

Not without hope that his companion 



INTRODUCTION. xlii 

might have led his industrious scissors in 
the direction of anonymous portraits, the 
author directed his attention to the fair un- 
known that had so deeply interested him ; 
but for once his capacious pockets remained 
undisturbed, and as though wanting the 
material which supported his conversation, 
he became singularly uncommunicative. He, 
however, unceremoniously made use of a 
privilege, the which, as he was allowed to 
exercise it unchallenged, proved his influence 
or confidential position. Pie took down the 
picture for a nearer examination. There 
was nothing on its surface, and on a cursory 
examination there appeared as little on the 
back, likely to enlighten either of them ; but 
on a more rigid scrutiny, and after care- 
fully -sviping away the dust, some characters 
became legible, which at last the author 
made out to consist of the followino^ words, 
written in a small Itahan hand : — 



XIV INTKODUCTION. 

The discoverer turned to inform liis com- 
panion of his good fortune ; but he had dis- 
appeared. He looked round and beheld him 
at a distance, engaged in what appeared a 
most confidential discourse with a ^Minister 
of State, well known for his taste in art and 
literature. It was evident by the bundle 
he was in the act of producing from one of 
his multitudinous pockets, that he was too 
satisfactorily occupied to care to be dis- 
turbed. 

The portrait was replaced, after it had 
afforded the most convincing evidence that 
it contained no other record of the beautiful 
original or of her history. Another ear- 
nest survey of those bright features sub- 
jected the author, more than ever, to the 
influence of that tender eloquence which 
flashed so irresistibly from beneath her 
silken lashes. 

There was something in that brief in- 
scription which seemed to confirm what the 
touching expression of the face suggested. 



IXTRODUCTION. XV 

The more he regarded this interesting por- 
trait, the more the imagination employed 
itself in speculations concerning the fair 
creature it represented. He could not but 
fancy that he had arrived at what might 
be styled " a great fact" in his personal his- 
tor}', ^Yhich had escaped the vigilance of 
even the ablest of the Walpole commenta- 
tors; and that he had obtained an insiirht 
into the character of the retired states- 
man, which ought to invest the walls of 
" Strawberry Hill" with more romance than 
ever existed within those of the Castle of 
Otranto. 

These speculations have shaped them- 
selves into a continuous narrative, in which 
the best read scholar vn]l find some thin'^s 
stated of which he can have no previous 
knowledge. The author is not without a 
hope that this prospect of novelty will be 
deemed a recommendation; but he is well 
aware, that the story contains too many 
appeals to the reader's patience, to render 



XVI INTRODUCTION. 

liim over-sanguine as to the result of an 
advantage so equivocal. Merely begging it 
to be understood that, notwithstanding its 
title, his work is to be regarded rather as 
an illustration of the founder of the struc- 
ture so designated, than of the place which 
must always be classed among the most 
popular of his works, he leaves " Straw- 
berry Hill" to the indulgence of those who 
may be induced to read its pages. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 



CHAPTER 1. 

A CONTESTED ELECTION. 

" Hurrah for Walpole I" 
" Walpole and the Constitution !" 
'' Xo Walpole !" " No Placeman !" '' No 
Hanover Fiats !" 
" Brio^frs for ever !" 

Such were the most prominent, among an 
infinite number of very opposite exclama- 
tions, that burst from the Avell practised 

VOL. I. B 



2 STRAWBERRY UILL. 

throats of a very noisy portion of that mul- 
titudinous firm, Messrs. Tag, Rag, and Bob- 
tail, whilst, as usual, they were playing the 
double part of actors and spectators in a 
contested election. For it so happens that 
the free people of England are in the habit 
of making extremely free when about exercis- 
ing that invaluable feature in their freedom, 
the privilege of electing a fit and proper person 
to be their representative in the Imperial 
Parliament; and at the period to which we 
are referring — about the middle of the last 
century — this privilege, judging from the 
use made of it, was being exercised to its 
fullest extent, and with the most intense ap- 
preciation of its advantages. 

A certain obscure little market town in 
Cornwall was then in the full enjoyment of 
the Saturnalia with which its population 
celebrated the occasion of contributing their 
quota to the legislative wisdom of the coun- 
try ; and by a very singular coincidence it so 
happened, that this preparation for making 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 3 

the laws was always considered the best pos- 
sible opportunity for breaking them. At 
such a time a great deal was sure to be 
heard respecting free and enlightened Eng- 
lishmen, liberty and patriotism, which, as 
soon became manifest, was capable of but 
one interpretation, and this formed the dis- 
creditable triad — drunkenness, bribery, and 
bloodshed. 

The town shewed signs of activity similar 
to those exhibited bv a hive of bees, thrown 
into extraordinary commotion by being sud- 
denly upset. Flags of all hues and sizes, 
joined with a liberal supply of laurel-leaves, 
flowers, and ribbons, waved from everv win- 
dow, giving the whole street an extremely 
parti-coloured aspect — as though the good 
people thought they required a suit of mot- 
ley to express how completely they were 
playing the fool. 

There were not wanting a sufficient num- 
ber of fiofures to o^ive life to the architecture 
of the place ; for every window was crowded 

B 2 



4 STRAWBERKY HILL. 

Avitli parties drinking, smoking, singing, and 
shouting — sometimes, it seemed, for their own 
satisfaction only — sometimes, when the case- 
ment was closer to the ground, to the satis- 
faction of the equally restless, equally noisy, 
and much more mischievous crowd below. 

Now and then there would be a rush to 
the windows, to behold a passing procession, 
lieaded by a blustering drum and a couple 
of squeaking fifes — the military band in at- 
tendance upon a regiment of truculent look- 
ing heroes, in very dirty coats, and still 
dirtier linen, sporting with the same easy 
dignity their cudgels and their colours, and 
giving the most unequivocal demonstrations 
that they were as full of patriotism as of 
beer. Over their heads waved a prodigious 
banner, displaying the colours of one of the 
candidates, with a motto equally character- 
istic; and every now and then this was 
waved in a manner that very much excited 
the raptures of that heroic assembly, and 
also very much threatened the eyes of those 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 5 

who chanced to be within reach of its un- 
steady supporters. 

Many an encouraging sound came from 
the groups at one or the other of the capa- 
cious bow- windows, whence mugs of beer 
would occasionally be thrust forth to refresh 
the energies of some popular leader. It 
would so occur, however, that at otlKT 
houses, where a different coloured ribbon 
happened to be sported, the only recognition 
the noisy vagabonds received came from 
some reckless opponent, in the shape of a 
cutting jibe, or a contemptuous exclamation. 
Lucky was the wight if he escaped with a 
handful of mud in his face ; but usually such 
an interruption was the signal for the com- 
mencement of hostilities ; the house w^as at- 
tacked, and in as little time as is taken to 
describe it, every pane of^ glass smashed to 
atoms. The row brought down the forces 
of the opposite party, cudgels began to play, 
heads to break, " Walpole for ever!" was 
shouted as fiercely as some hundred throats. 



b STRAWBERRY HILL. 

hoarse with bawling and drunk with beer, 
could shout, and was answered as fiercely 
by shrieks of " Briggs for ever ! " in quite 
as drunken and as discordant a chorus. 

One of the contending forces would, after 
a while, give way, closely followed by their 
victorious opponents, leaving over the well- 
contested field a score or two of disabled 
followers, who lost little time in endeavour- 
ing to get their broken heads tinkered at the 
nearest surgeon's. The place left vacant 
would then be filled by a couple of stento- 
rian ballad-sino^ers, chauntin*]^ some election 
squib bitterly commenting upon one of the 
candidates. Another crowd would soon col- 
lect, the jest would be received with vocifer- 
ous applause by one party, and with ill-con- 
cealed hostility by the other. Something 
was sure to be said by the Blues, to which 
the Yellows were not inclined to submit — the 
ballad singers were shoved into the gutter — 
the cudgels were again in play — more heads 
were broken, more plasters were applied for. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 7 

and, in due time, once more the street was 
allowed an interval of quiet. 

Such was the state of Callington in the 
year of our Lord 1741; and having given 
some description of tlie sort of constituency 
that were exercising their franchise, it is 
necessary we should be equally faithful in 
our delineation of the candidates who sever- 
ally desired to be their representative. 
These consisted of two — and persons more 
diametrically opposed to each other, there 
was scarcely a possibility of finding through- 
out the three kingdoms. 

The popular candidate was a ^Ir. Jonathan 
Briggs, by his familiars commonly called 
*' Jolly Jonathan ;" a heavy, clumsy, broad- 
faced and large-limbed owner, or rather 
part-owner, of a productive copper mine that 
was worked in the neighbourhood — affording 
employment to a vast number of the very 
hard-working, big- fisted, coarse -featured, 
clumsy-limbed, inhabitants of the district. 
His ample shoulders were encased in a coat 



8 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

of coarse broad-cloth, that appeared to have 
been made in those days of remote history 
in which we are assured there were giants; 
and the buttons, that might upon an emer- 
gency have done duty as saucepan lids, cor- 
responded with the dimensions of the cuffs, 
the skirts, and the other portions of this 
voluminous piece of drapery. 

The waistcoat, of crimson cloth, embroi- 
dered at the edges, was only slightly less 
liberal in its dimensions than the coat — 
for it reached very nearly to the knees of 
his serviceable buck- skin breeches, within 
an inch or so of the yellow worsted hose, 
that seemed to keep the wearer's fleshy legs 
in a state of the most covetable comfort. A 
full wig, a clumsy three-cornered hat, and a 
pair of heavy broad-toed shoes, fastened witli 
large silver buckles, completed his costume. 

Such was the outward man of ''Jolly 
Jonathan." Imagine such a man, totally 
devoid of that part of education then 
kno\vn by the name of " breeding," — that is 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 9 

to say, as rough, unpolished, and rude, as a 
Cornish mine-o^vner, of some fifty years of 
age, could be in the middle of the eighteentii 
century — downright, independent, preju- 
diced, and fearless, and with no pretensions to 
any talent, beyond that persevering industry 
which had raised him from an humble origin 
to opulence. A man who united in himself 
every possible description of opposite cha- 
racteristics — a hearty lover of freedom, yet 
a tyrant in the exercise of his wealth — a 
sound Protestant, yet a secret well-msher to 
the Catholic Prince of the Stuart family theu 
in exile, — and a bitter enemy to the whole 
tribe of creatures in power, yet quite willing 
to join in ousting them from their places to 
make way for men whose government was 
likely to be a great deal more difficult to 
bear. 

^\Tien we say that Jonathan Briggs was 
bigoted, obstinate, prejudiced, and ex- 
tremely ignorant, we shall have little more 
to add to make the portrait complete ; but 



B 3 



10 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

we must not foroet to <nye him credit for 
perfect honesty of purpose. ]\[an or boy, 
Jolly Jonathan would have scorned sailing 
under false colours — he never concealed his 
detestation of the Whigs — nay, he had re- 
solved to contest the election of his native 
town with the son of the all-powerful minis- 
ter, Sir Robert Walpole, to afford himself 
an opportunity for declaring, more fully than 
he had ever been able to do at the Aveekly 
meetings of the highly respectable Club at 
the Red Lion, of which he had been chair- 
man for the last twenty years, that intense 
detestation he had always felt for their prin- 
ciples — after the entrance of the third bowl 
of punch. 

His opponent was a young man of slight 
figure and pale complexion, dressed very 
elegantly in a claret-coloured coat, embroi- 
dered to the bottom and at the cuffs; a 
rich satin vest elaborately flowered; velvet 
breeches and fine cotton stockings, with 
shoes covering the instep, where each was 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 11 

fastened with a silver buckle ; delicate ruffles 
at liis wrists, a light sword at his side, and his 
hair powdered, tied behind, and surmount- 
ed by a richly-triinnied hat of the last fash- 
ion, proclaimed him a beau of the jfdv 
1741. 

There were many other points of dissimi- 
litude between them, besides dress. The 
younger candidate had received the beneht 
of a classical education; had enjoyed his 
Yirgil and his cricket-match at Eton; had 
had the advanta^'es of EucHd and cock-fifrht- 
ing at Cambridge; since when, he had still 
further enriched his mind by foreign travel, 
ha\dng journeyed from Paris to Rome -^dth 
a very different result from what was expe- 
rienced by the less fortunate tourist wh(j 
travelled from Dan to Beersheba — for he had 
gathered as he went a tolerable collection of 
coins and scandal, medals and bon mots^ 
old pictures, new opera tunes, and the best 
authenticated modem antiques; with jests, 
anecdotes, satires and lampoons in great va- 



12 STRAWBEKRY HILL. 

riety, and every thing necessary to set up a 
man of fashion as a virtuoso and a wit. There 
was a mehmcholy expression in those pale 
and thoughtful features, that gave the im- 
pression of one rushing upon a desperate en- 
terprise to escape from the pressure of feel- 
ings too painful to be t(jlerated, — as though 
the young adventurer sought in the tumult 
of politics, oblivion of some misfortune that 
had overtaken him elsewhere. Nevertheless 
there was a smile upon his lip. A world 
of cutting ridicule and biting sarcasm lurked 
in that smile. It was evident that he strove 
to conceal the bitterness of his feelings under 
cover of a jest. 

Such was Horace Walpole, the third son 
of Sir Robert Walpole, at the opening of 
our story, in the zenith of his fame as a 
powerful minister and an able statesman — 
in the zenith too of his unpopularity, as the 
inventor of innumerable imposts, and a fa- 
vourer of monopohes, standing armies, des- 
potic laws, and Hanoverian interests. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. lo 

As we have said, of the two, the fonner was 
tlie popular candidate ; but then his opponent 
had many powerful recommendations — he 
had all the government interest — he was 
supported by the noblemen and gentlemen 
of the neiorhbourhood who held the s^reatest 
influence, and was possessed of many quali- 
fications for the office he sought, to which 
the uneducated mine-owner could have my 
pretensions. 

We must now venture to carry the reader 
with us to the hustings, in the presence of 
a boisterous mob of Cornish miners, agri- 
cultural labourers, and a vast mass of the 
humbler classes of the population of the 
town and neighbourhood, Avith a banner or 
other spnbol of party here and there rising 
above their closely-packed heads, which was 
not unfrequently of such an insulting na- 
ture, as to excite commotions that placed 
both the symbol and its bearer in very con- 
siderable jeopardy. 

The hustings was a platform raised in 



14 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

the most open part of the town, at a suffi- 
cient elevation to allow those who were 
desirous of addressing " the free and en- 
lightened electors," to be seen at any rea- 
sonable distance. At the present moment 
it seemed as crowded as though the town 
intended to supply the whole complement 
of members required for the business of le- 
gislation, instead of limiting its quota to 
one. 

A considerable degree of speechifying had 
been going on, of that peculiar kind in de- 
mand on such occasions. 

Mr. Jonathan Briggs was proposed and 
seconded by his staunch friends Captain 
Pincher and Orlando Budge, Esq. — the 
one a snappish sea captain, whose wooden 
leg secured him almost as much respect 
in his native town as his moderate pension ; 
the other a retired draper, who, having 
inherited a considerable fortune from a dis- 
tant relation, availed himself of every op- 
portunity of pushing himself forward, un- 



STRAAVBERRY HILL. 15 

der the impression that his property gave 
him the right to consider himself — which he 
was extremely ambitious of being thought — 
'' a public character." 

The proposer and seconder of the son of 
the Prime Minister were, as mioht be ex- 
pected, very different personages — the first 
being the Right Hon. Lord Tremayne, of 
Tremayne Castle, a very great nobleman in 
Cornwall, a man even of some consequence 
in London, but of very limited capacity any 
where; and Sir Harry Pendives, Baronet, 
of Pendives Court, possessed of twenty thou- 
sand a year, a pack of fox-hounds, and a 
capacity which, where the bottle was con- 
cerned, Avould put to confusion the best 
head that ever sat upon a wise man's shoul- 
ders. 

Their orations had been spoken to an ad 
libitum accompaniment of interruptions of 
eveiy description, from the ludicrous excla- 
mation intended to raise a horse-lauo-h, to 
the less agreeable missile that midit close 



16 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

an eye or level a row of teeth, according as 
to whether the taste of the operator lay in 
the direction of damaged eyes or fractured 
masticators. These, however, were experi- 
mental demonstrations. The estimable con- 
stituents of Callington were too well aware 
of their duty to their country, to be prodi- 
gal of their cabbage-stumps to personages 
of such secondary interest. 

A shout that must have " rent the skies," 
if they had not that day been made of par- 
ticularly stout materials, arose in the air, 
as the well-known figure of Jolly Jona- 
than advanced to the front of the hus- 
tings, bearing in one of his prodigious hands 
the long clay pipe with which he had been 
regaling himself while waiting his turn to 
speak. It was evident Jonathan did not 
want friends — and very vociferous friends 
they were — but then it may as well be 
known that their *' most sweet voices'' were 
justly his due, inasmuch as he had paid the 
very handsome sum of two shillings a-head. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 17 

and beer a discretion^ for the very respect- 
able row in his favour they were then creat- 
ing. 

Mr. Briggs began his oration with that 
free-and-easy assurance that might have 
been expected from so practised an orator 
at the Red Lion. He commenced by ex- 
plaining his desire to become the Represen- 
tative of his native to^vn, and his qualifica- 
tions for such an office. His lanoruao^e was 
particularly homely, Avith which it must be 
acknowledged his manners completely cor- 
responded. For him Lord Chesterfield had 
lived in vain; and though justice compels 
us to say that this could not be said of 
Lindley Murray, it was simply because, as 
yet, Lindley Murray had not lived at all. 

It was a practice in the feudal times for 
the warder of a castle, before he entered 
into a parley with any one approaching the 
gates, to "blow his horn." To this chival- 
rous fashion the stalwart mine-owner had 
recourse, in a manner as singular as it was 



18 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

picturesque, as soon as he began to find that 
his communications with the many headed 
mass before him were not so rapid as he 
desired. A speckled blue cotton handker- 
chief was hawled from the depths of his 
capacious pocket, directly he felt himself at 
a loss for an idea, into the folds of Avhich 
his nose sunk like a best bower anchor into 
a mud bank ; and having perpetrated a flou- 
rish that must have been heard by the most 
distant of his audience, he took up the thread 
of his discourse as if it had got disentangled 
by the extraordinary exertions he had made 
to clear his head. 

Though some specimen of his rhetorical 
powers may be expected from us, we are 
afraid we are not capable of doing them jus- 
tice, for most assuredly his was a species of 
oratory of which we have no examples, either 
amongst the philippics of Demosthenes or the 
orations of Cicero. 

"Friends and countrymen," continued the 
candidate, his face like a peony under a 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 19 

broilinof sun, "brave and enliohtened En^- 
lishmen — men worthy of the glorious name 
of free-born Britons, — victory is certain if 
you shews yourselves worthy of it. Let 
every one what has a vote lose no time in 
registering it in my favour. Remember my 
principles ! Remember the ground I stands 
upon!" 

Here a stentorian voice, in a scarcely 
intelligible Cornish dialect, acquainted the 
orator that there was no fear of that being 
forgotten, as long as the plank on which his 
honour's feet rested remained visible. 

"Remember," continued the speaker, after 
the laugh had subsided, " we are not slaves, 
but Britons." The distinction was not ex- 
plained. " Remember our rights, our liber- 
ties, our" — Here the orator dived into the 
recesses of his blue pennant, with an effect 
that prodigiously startled an old dame in an 
opposite balcony, who looked as if apprehen- 
sive of an earthquake. 

" Xever forget who are the enemies of the 



20 STRA^VBERRY HILL. 

people," he recommenced, with additional 
energy, " never forget who are your friends. 
Eest assured that if I am to be your mem- 
ber, I am determined to do everything for 
every body." 

At this extremely liberal announcement, 
the cheering appeared unanimous ; but it 
was turned to as unanimous a laugh, when 
a ragged fellow on a neighbouring sign-post 
asked the candidate to lend him five shillings ; 
adding, he wouldn't say a word about the 
rest of the guinea^ till his honour was in 
Parliament. 

^' One more word, and I have done," con- 
tinued the orator ; " I cannot entertain a 
moment's doubt as to the result of this con- 
test. Slavery and chains are not to the 
taste of the free and enlightened voters of 
this borough." 

The free and enlightened voters expresssed 
their concurrence in this opinion, in a man- 
ner that at least proved the soundness of 
their lungs. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 21 

'* Hasten to the poll !" cried the candidate. 
'' 1 looks for every man's vote, what has the 
feelings of a patriot, and knows how to act 
like one. The eyes of the whole country 
are upon you — fail not to shew that you are 
worthy of the high opinion the world has of 
your public spirit, and ever bear in mind the 
o^lorious cause for which we are struofo^lins: — 
the cause for which Russell died on the field, 
and Hampden perished on the scaiFold." 

Here the reader must be informed that 
Jolly Jonathan, like many other provincial 
(jrators, had a few pet phrases, of which he 
generally availed himself when desirous of 
producing a great effect. With regard to 
the blundering reference to the two patriots 
just mentioned, though often set right, he 
had uttered the same w^ords a thousand 
times, and could not be persuaded he was in 
error. 

The speaker having as he fancied said 
enough for himself, now proceeded to attack 
his adversary. Hitherto, although it could 



22 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

not be said that he had had it all his own 
way, the interruptions from the mob had been 
anything but hostile ; but directly he ven- 
tured to mention his rival disparagingly, 
the strength of the Walpole party made 
itself manifest in a manner neither agree- 
able, nor altogether unattended with danger. 
Groans, hisses, and shouts of derision, accom- 
panied him in every paragraph. The voci- 
ferous cheering however of his own partizans 
encouraged him to proceed. 

It soon appeared as though a particular 
portion of the mob were bent upon apply- 
ing their own punctuation to their towns- 
man's eloquence. A comma would come in 
the sliape of a cabbage-stump — a rotten 
apple did the duty of a semicolon — a colon 
found an excellent equivalent in a couple of 
addled eggs — and ultimately a dead cat ful- 
filled the service of a full stop, by knocking 
the orator off his legs, and tumbling him 
into the arms of his staunch friends, Captain 
Pincher and Orlando Budge, Esq. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 23 

The other candidate now presented him- 
self — attended by his noble proposer and 
wealthy fox-hunting friend — with apparently, 
in the background, a guard of honour 
composed of his principal supporters. 

His appearance would have been the 
prelude to a general row, on the part of the 
infuriated partizans of Briggs, had not 
the air of fashion with which he proffered 
liis bow, as he advanced in front of the 
hustings, and the very gentlemanlike cut 
and quality of his gamients, made a power- 
ful impression in his favour. The sturdy 
Cornishmen were well aware that he was 
a son of the unpopular minister, and that 
his political principles were diametrically 
opposed to whatever they considered lilx^ral ; 
but the most ignorant were as well aware 
he had just returned from '' foreign parts," 
and they chose to employ some few minutes 
of personal observation, before they would 
venture upon an expression of their senti- 
ments respecting hun. 



'2i STRAWBERRY HILL. 

While the universal curiosity was being 
gratified, the object of it, with ready tact, 
took advantaore of the silence to fjain a 
hearing. Instead of indulging in the cus- 
tomary common -places of election speeches, 
the candidate thought proper, and had taken 
wonderful pains in the matter, to prepare 
an oration of so extremely classic a charac- 
ter, as to do credit to his Etonian studies 
and Cambridge reflections. It was in the 
hio^hest deo^ree amusino^ to notice the effect 
produced on his uneducated Cornish audience, 
by the marvellous display of scholarship) 
that was presented to them. It cannot be 
said, that those who had '' come to scoff re- 
mained to pray," but assuredly it appeared 
ns if those who had come to pelt, remained 
to listen. In exchange for the cut-and-dried 
phrases, ^yiih. which, time out of mind, their 
^'otes had been cajoled, their ears were 
regaled with sentences worthy of the groves 
of Academe, teeming with careful scholar- 
ship, and overflowing with classical allusion. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 25 

The stalwart miner, instead of dispos- 
ing of his ready missile, stood with open 
mouth and wondering eyes, while the fluent 
speaker was rhapsodizing on Spartan liber- 
ty. Scraps of melhfluous Greek found their 
way to the untutored ear of the boor, who 
dropped his turnip and scratched his head 
in the intensity of his mystification. The 
ragged mechanics tried to look as little puz- 
zled as possible at every reference to the 
Areiopagites, to ostracism, and to other mar- 
vellous features in Athenian politics, which 
the young candidate had chosen to mention 
so famiharly; and the honest tradesman, 
^^'ho knew about as much of Greek history 
as of the ^lan-in-the-Moon, listened to the 
anecdote of Harmodius and Aristogiton, A\dth 
an impression on his mind that he had never 
been so astonished in his life. 

But having secured their attention, the 
sagacious orator launched out into a wider 
field — a field that seemed to embrace every 
thing, from the Trojan war to the conquest 

VOL. 1. c 



26 STRA^^VEERRY HILL. 

of Jerusalem — a heterogeneous medley of 
straujxe names and stramrer ideas, that made 
the wisest of his hearers as much at fault 
as though he had just dropped into a new 
planet. Even his opponent, who was just 
recoverinf]: from the rou^i^h salute that had 
so summarily disposed of his eloquence, and 
who thought so highly of liis own wisdom, 
found himself 'completely bothered by the 
hard names that kept rushing from the 
mouth of the speaker, like a swarm of ants 
from their violated nest. 

Captain Pincher, who, when anything 
was uttered before him that was beyond his 
comprehension, was always disposed to re- 
sent it as a reflection upon his understand- 
ing, now found so much to quarrel with, 
that it became an absolute impossibility to 
know where to begin. His coadjutor looked 
equally indignant. He felt himself in a fog, 
and with the prophetic instinct of persons 
of his class, entertained a misgiving that 
the speaker was making a fool of him. 



STRATVBERRY HILL. 27 

Lord Tremavne smiled — a never-failiDfr 
resource when his Lordship felt himself at 
a loss. He wanted to shew that the ver}^ 
classical oration of the Prime Minister's 
son was thoroughly appreciated. Sir Harry 
Pendives frowned; he had waited to hear 
his young friend explain his views in favour 
of the country gentlemen, with especial re- 
ference to brinD:inD^ before Parliament some 
new law for the preservation of foxes ; but 
in his ideas the orator had evidently lost 
the scent, and seemed to be sapng what 
was as much to the purpose as an anniver- 
sary sermon at a hunting carouse. 

The novelty of the thing had done won- 
ders. The mob had been taken by surprise, 
and, satisfied that there must be something 
more than ordinary in so very puzzling a 
discourse, ventured to applaud whenever 
the speaker paused for breath. This encou- 
raged others to follow their example, till the 
more extravagant he became, the more vo- 
ciferous grew the cheers of his audience ; and 

c 2 



28 STEA^VBERRY HILL. 

when he concluded with a peroration made 
up of such an extraordinary confusion of 
ideas, as to render the rest of the strange 
address intelligible in comparison, the plau- 
dits became so long and so loud, that in the 
memory of the oldest polling- clerk there 
had never been heard a speech which had 
been half so well received. 

The reader, therefore, \^dll not be very 
greatly surprised to learn, that when the 
Sheriff called for a show of hands, the sup- 
porters of the younger candidate outnum- 
))ered the other party ten to one ; and when 
a poll was demanded by the disconcerted 
Briggs, the shouts of " Walpole for ever!" 
so aijffravated his diminished followers, that 
they commenced an attack upon their oppo- 
nents with all their forces. A fierce con- 
test was the result. Banners waved and 
cudgels played — the party shouts presently 
became the war cries of two desperate armies 
— the mass of Cornish heads that filled the 
space before the hustings, exhibited as much 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 29 

commotion as the sea on their o^vn rou2rh 
coast, in the ^vildest storm that ever visited 
the Land's End; and screams, groans, and 
hisses arose from all directions simulta- 
neously with a shower which apparently 
had never been equalled in the singularit}' 
of its elements, save on the occasion of that 
oft quoted phenomenon, when it rained 
''cats, dogs, and pitch-forks." 

But it was the last belligerent effort of 
the unfortunate "Blues;" their hopes were 
destroyed and their heads broken. If they 
were not thrashed to their heart's content, 
by the triumphant " Yellows," marvellous 
indeed must have been the extent of castiga- 
tion that would have satisfied them. 



30 STRA^\rBERRY HILL. 



CHAPTER II. 

CHAIRING THE JVIE^IBER. 

There was a very duU meeting in the 
club-room at the Red Lion. That capacious 
chamber which had so long beheld the as- 
semblies of " The Free and United True 
Blues of the Borough of CaUington," and 
had resounded with the eloquence of its per- 
petual president, the melody of its honorary 
secretary, and the mirth of its venerated 
treasurer, was now turned into a committee- 
room. Its ranges of windows left with 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 31 

scarcely a whole pane — its extensive floor 
littered with broken glass, brickbats, cab- 
bage-stumps, and dead cats — a heap of tat- 
tered banners lying in one corner — frag- 
ments of placarded boards heaped in an- 
other — whilst one portion of the room, near 
the door, was crowded with a very vaga- 
bond-looking lot of fellows, with tattered 
garments bespattered with mud, and heads 
tied up with blood-stained cloths, or covered 
with plasters, which told quite as plainly as 
their dismal visages, that the election was 
far from going on as favourably as their 
candidate could have desired. 

There was a long table in the centre of 
the room, bearmg, besides a punch-bowl 
and glasses, tobacco and pipes, an assort- 
ment of business-like looking books, writing 
materials, and a mass of printed papers, in 
which the words, " Vote for Briggs," might 
be read at a considerable distance. At 
one end of the table, in his chair of office, 
sat the clumsy figure of Jolly Jonathan. 



32 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

But who could have recognized hhn with 
that chap-fallen countenance! Where was 
the ever-smiling benignity of the perpetual 
president? Where the ready cut-and-dried 
eloquence of the practised chairman ? What 
could have transformed his peony counte- 
nance into that unwholesome mass of blue 
and yellow, that, unwashed, unshaven, with 
disarranged neckcloth and dusty coat, seemed 
to sit so uncomfortably under his disordered 
wig? 

His feelings were evidently too intense 
for language — indeed he made it apparent 
that they were too intense for any thing but 
the contents of the punch-bowl before him, 
which, through the agency of a silver ladle 
and a capacious glass, disappeared down his 
throat with as much method as though the 
arrangement was produced by machinery. 

At the other end of the table sat Captain 
Pincher, shemng his teeth like an angry 
bull-dog, and talking as pugnaciously as 
though he intended to fight the whole to^vn 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 33 

by sections, and cared very little if he began 
with his very particular friends around him. 

Orlando Budge, Esq., looked as much 
sympathy as he could contrive to throw 
into his batter-pudding physiognomy. He 
was well aware that one public character 
ought to feel for another ; and, not knowing 
how soon it might be his own turn to endure 
a similar disappointment, he exhibited the 
intensity of his sympathy, by applying, as 
diligently as his friend, to the source of con- 
solation he had selected. 

They had been drinking many hours. 
Mr. Budge felt, that if he sympathised in 
this way much longer, he should be in a 
condition to require sympathy for himself. 
He perceived the four comers of the room 
running a race, with a speed that was to 
him dreadfully alarming ; and once or twice 
he was under the necessity of rubbing his 
eyes, to ascertain, as clearly as possible, 
whether there were not two candidates in 
the room instead of one. 

c3 



34 STRAWBERRY IHLL. 

Around the table reclined, in various re- 
flective attitudes, the members of the com- 
mittee; some leaning forward, with both 
elbows on the table — some leaning back, 
with their heads resting on their hands — a 
few meditating mth crossed arms and bent 
brows, and others absorbed, as it were, in 
a philosophical study of their finger-nails. 
They were chiefly tradesmen of the town, 
sufficiently well to do to be able to walk 
into the Red Lion and call for their glass, 
and pay, when demanded, their subscrip- 
tion, as members of " The Free and 
United True Blues of the Borough of Cal- 
lington." 

There were the sturdy Hodge Mealman, 
the miller, and the flashy Dick Sweetwort, 
the brewer ; there were Old Bricks, the buil- 
der, and Young Bricks, the tanner; there 
were Dips, the chandler. Chips, the carpen- 
ter, and Wollopall, the schoolmaster of the 
Grammar-school. These were people as well 
known as the sign over the door of the old- 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 35 

fashioned inn where they were in the habit 
of passing their evenings. 

We have now only to bring under review 
one more personage. A short ill-made little 
fellow, in an old wig a mile too big for him, 
sitting on a chair with his legs crossed un- 
der the seat, diligently casting up long 
columns of figures, in what appeared to be 
the polling-books that had been used by 
Briggs's committee. He was seen with pen 
in one hand, and a large glass of hot gin- 
and-water in the other, mounting up each 
monstrous column; the point of the pen 
resting on the figures in succession, as 
though they formed a numerical ladder, till 
he had achieved the top, when calhng out 
the result, as the sum should be placed at 
the bottom of the page, he took a copious 
draught of the steaming Geneva, and began 
to add up the next colmnn. 

Whether it was that the number of figures 
was too much for his calculating powers, or 
his vision had become affected by the quan- 



36 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

tity of spirit Avith which he had thought 
proper to refresh himself during his labours, 
it is certain that his result of the state of the 
poll, according to his calculation, as much 
surprised the committee as himself. But 
the assistance of the schoolmaster having 
been called, the large majority of the 
drunken poll-clerk was speedily changed to 
a most humiliating minority. 

Captain Pincher denounced the clerk in 
very savage terms, and seemed inclined to 
disallow the correctness of his arithmetic, 
when a tremendous uproar in the street 
drew off the attention of the committee, and 
in an instant every one rushed to the broken 
windows to behold what was going on. 
Martial music filled the air, accompanied 
by shouts so loud as to bring the convic- 
tion that the whole population assisted in 
producing them. Nearer approached the 
tumult— flags and banners waved proudly 
over the heads of what seemed an incalcu- 
lable multitude. What it meant, not one of 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 37 

the Free and United True Blues appeared 
to be aware. 

The procession came near enough to en- 
able the puzzled committee men to ascer- 
tain its nature and its object. The inscrip- 
tions on the flags, and the continuous 
shouts, prepared them for the overpowering 
truth. The next object that met theu* gaze 
was the last drop to the brimming cup of 
vexation the ambitious Briofofs had been 
made to imbibe — They were chairing the 
successful candidate. Horace AValpole was 
Member for the Borouo^h of Calhno^ton. It 
was all over with the True Blues. The 
hated Yellows had gained the victory. 

The procession stopped under the win- 
dows of the Red Lion — we should have said 
the frames: " Walpole for ever!" cried a 
smart young fellow in the Walpole livery, 
in a state of frantic excitement, waving his 
cocked hat over his head. Three loud cheers 
proclaimed the triumph of the Walpohtes 
over their opponents. 



38 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

This was too much for poor Briggs, and 
equally too much for his friends. The per- 
petual president sank back in the arms of 
the faithful treasurer, who was equally 
overpowered either by his functions or his 
feelings; and it was not till the next sun 
shone, and their heads began to recover 
from the extent of their potations, that they 
found themselves sufficiently masters of their 
own actions to believe they should ever be 
able to hold up their heads again in their 
native town. 

We will not attempt to describe the 
extravagant rejoicings with which the 
frantic Walpolites celebrated their vic- 
tory. The worthy electors of Callington 
appeared as irrational as free and enlight- 
ened electors ought to be who had been 
made so very drunk, and had been bribed 
so very handsomely. At the period we are 
seeking to illustrate, the value of votes was 
much better understood than it appears to 
be at present, and the appreciation of 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 39 

voters, both by themselves and their candi- 
dates, was consequently at an amazmg quo- 
tation. 

It was a subject of much rejoicing in tliis 
Cornish constituency, that their candidate 
had the advantage of Government influence 
and Treasury resources. It was obvious 
that the son of such a minister as Sir Eobert 
Walpole, ought to be returned by them. 
His committee did not fall short of their ex- 
pectations: and the final state of the poll 
proved how well they had done the business 
of the state, in securing the return of a sup- 
porter of the Government, and how readily 
the electors had responded to the unanswer- 
able appeal that had been made to them, 
by electing him as their representative. 

But it may be asked, how did their mem- 
ber receive honours so new to him? When 
enjoying the noisy hospitality of the mag- 
nates of the borough — when once more 
lauded to the skies by the somewhat over- 
zealous but not too sensible Lord Tremayne, 



40 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

of Tremayne Castle, and " tallyho'd ! " by 
the blunt and boisterous Sir Harry Pen- 
dives, of Pendives Court — did not his pale 
cheek j^low with animation, and his heart 
throb with pleasure? 

A tinore of colour had driven warmth to 
his pallid complexion — the pulses of his 
heart were unusually disturbed; but the 
cause of neither of these effects existed in 
his satisfaction at his present position. 

He felt himself to be the sport of two op- 
posing influences. To allow the exercise 
of one, was to menace the existence of the 
other. His new honours might elevate him 
in the opinion of one whose regard, though 
he had found it so difficult to attain, he 
coveted above all human gifts; he knew 
they would be regarded as badges of dis- 
grace by another, whose esteem had once 
been — apparently still was — the most prized 
of earthly distinctions. His heart beat tu- 
multuously as he thought of the career now 
opening to his ambition ; but he blushed as 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 41 

the humiliating suggestion was presented to 
his mind, whether it might not be said, in 
a different quarter, that he had made him- 
self a tool to be put to any discreditable use 
that might be found for it. 



42 STRAWBERRY HILL. 



CHAPTER III. 

THE WALPOLE FAJ^IILY. 

Horace Walpole was a Member of Par- 
liament. How ardently lie had longed for 
this distinction, it is in vain to attempt to 
describe. His position was far from being 
a covetable one, though it was one, the dis- 
advantages of which others experienced as 
well as himself. He was a younger son, 
and had to endure an unusual amount of a 
younger son's humiliations. 

At an early age he had been made to feel 



STRA^YBERRY HILL. 43 

his want of consequence at the domestic 
hearth. His father, absorbed in the war 
of politics, had little time to devote to cul- 
tivating the affections of his children. He 
was a statesman — he forgot he was also a 
parent. Sir Robert Walpole knew that his 
place was at the head of the councils of his 
sovereign, and that he had enough to do to 
maintain it. He could not afford a thou^jht 
for home. He was immersed in the busi- 
ness of the country. Besides the rivalry of 
foreign states, which was always sufficiently 
mienacing, he had to guard against foes 
more dangerous, that he knew but too well 
existed in his own land. 

The second sovereign of the House of 
Hanover sat upon the British throne. The 
nation, to be sure, were in a better humour 
mth liis rule than they had been with that 
of his father. George the Second had shewn 
some sympathy with England, though much 
more Hanoverian in his feehngs than was 
agreeable to the mass of his British sub- 



44 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

jects; but they were well aware that the 
expatriated Stuarts were still in existence, 
and there was a sufficient number of them 
dissatisfied with the present state of things, 
or prejudiced in favour of the royal exiles, 
to irive a minister considerable uneasiness, 
should any event occur to put it in the 
power of either of such claimants to con- 
test their forfeited throne with its present 
possessor. 

Sir Robert knew very well that the most 
active intrigues were in force, in more than 
one of the Continental courts, to plunge 
the British islands into a rebellion ; and was 
quite as well aware that the ruse of de- 
nouncing the son of James II. as "a Pre- 
tender," did very little service to the Hano- 
verian cause. His measures were of a much 
more active nature. He was indefatigable 
in counteracting the influence of the Ja- 
cobites in foreign courts, and in prevent- 
ino^ their becominor formidable to him in 
England. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 45 

But this was far from being all his task- 
work. He found that a powerful party ex- 
isted in what he might consider his own 
camp, the object of which was to deprive 
him of his covetable position, as the respon- 
sible ruler of the country. Party feuds 
ran high in both houses of Parliament, and 
the able statesman was hated and feared by 
envious friends as much as by the most 
hostile of his poHtical enemies. To guard 
himself against the machinations of both 
open and concealed foes, was another great 
item in his multitudinous labours. 

With so much upon his hands, notwith- 
standing the absolute claims of flesh and 
blood, it cannot be considered extraordi- 
]iary, that the harassed minister should 
appear a careless husband and a neglectful 
father ; yet it could not be said that he was 
either unkind or unfeelino:. 

We inchne to the opinion that a minister 
should have no affections — that sentiment 
cannot assimilate with diplomacy — that do- 



46 STRAWBERRY HELL. 

mestic happiness is incompatible with states- 
manship. Indeed we think that a youth 
vowed to the State should be like one in 
Catholic countries vowed to the Church — 
he should be devoted to a life of celibacy. 
If it come to pass that a situation should be 
advertised as vacant for the First Lord of 
the Treasury, it should invariably be stated, 
as it often is in much humbler vocations, 
that the candidate should be " without en- 
cumbrances." 

How is it possible for one who hath the 
destinies of a nation in his hands, to give 
his attention to the bringing up of little 
boys and girls? How can he turn from 
the concoction of a royal speech to the 
consideration of a schoolboy's wants and 
wishes — leave a declaration of war, to no- 
tice a young lady's improvement in fancy 
work ; or take off his attention from grant- 
ing subsidies to foreign states, to pay the 
demands of lesson-^ivinor fashionable musi- 
cians and dancing-masters? 



STRA^nBERRY UILL. 47 

But though Horace Walpole had seen 
little of his father, he had heard a great 
deal of him; and the reports that reached 
hira of his greatness produced early in his 
mind a powerful impression, which, com- 
bined with the very unusual enjoyment of 
being in his presence, excited a wonderful 
deofree of reverence and devotion. 

Possibly maternal aiFection might have 
modified his peculiar idiosyncracy ; but he 
had lost his mother some years since, and 
shortly afterwards gained another by his 
father's second marriage with a lady who 
had previously been his mistress. This new 
connection, as might be supposed, did not 
better his condition. 

Thus, as it were on the threshold of 
manhood, our hero was forced to concentrate 
his attention on his remaining parent; and 
it was singular to observe the impressions 
that had been produced in his boyhood, in- 
fluencing his mind ^vith such intensity as 
completely to direct his career. 



48 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

He became more sensible of the ambitious 
position of his father as the confidential ad- 
viser of his Sovereign, the chief director of 
the Government, as well as the dispenser of 
a vast share of its patronage ; and a peculiar 
feeling of devotion to him took possession 
of his nature, which not all the slights he 
was made to feel — as much through his 
comparative unimportant position in the 
family as a younger son, as from the do- 
mestic deficiencies of the engrossed minister 
— could diminish in the slightest degree: 

Sir Robert Walpole now led a bachelor 
lift* — he was growing old, but he appeared 
determined to enjoy to the utmost what was 
left of his existence, and the minister's ex- 
treme conviviality astonished both friends 
and enemies. His son Horace continually 
heard the most extraordinary accounts of 
his parent's endearing manners and jovial 
disposition ; and it seemed hard to him that 
he, his child, should have no share in a heart 
that appeared to be thrown open to all the 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 49 

world. The same post that brought him in- 
telligence of the boundless hospitality of his 
paternal home, brought him a formal inti- 
mation that he was to prepare for finishing 
his education with the Grand Tour. 

As he paced his quiet chambers at Cam- 
bridire, where this resolution — written in 
the frigid style of a communication from a 
superior to a humble subordinate — had found 
him, young AValpole entered into one of 
those romantic determinations which not 
unfrequently seize upon the minds of very 
young men, possessed of more than ordi- 
nary sensibility. With his heart yearning 
towards his illustrious parent, he instantly 
took measures to transport himself out of 
the country whose destinies at that moment 
seemed so completely in that parent's hands ; 
and at once gave up every hope of seeing for 
an indefinite time, the approving smile that 
appeared to him to be the most covetable of 
human enjoyments. 

It is not our purpose to follow the young 

VOL. L D 



50 STRAWBEERY HILL. 

traveller along the route that had previously 
been chalked out for him, though a tour 
through France and Italy a hundred years 
ago was not quite the common-place journey 
it has now become. Suffice it to say, that 
he never for a moment forgot the feelings 
that bound him to his country and to his 
liome — that his father's honour and great- 
ness were ever the first objects of his 
thoughts ; and that he continually sought to 
obtain information that might be of service 
to him, which he contrived to forward to 
England, Avithout affording the Minister any 
clue to the source whence it came. 

All this time he affected a wonderful cheer- 
fulness — wrote numberless letters abounding 
with pleasantry, and apparently had no 
thought in the world but to amuse himself 
and to improve his taste. He cultivated 
the friendship of two or three of his school- 
fellows with such assiduity, as ought to have 
satisfied any one that they afforded all the 
social pleasure his heart required. 



STRATVTBERRY HILL. 51 

In due time Horace Walpole returned to 
England. He could not avoid anticipating, 
during the last month of his travels, the 
gratification he should experience when per- 
mitted to enjoy his father's society. Though 
absent from England, he had, through his 
correspondence, obtained tolerably correct 
information of the state of parties at home ; 
besides which, his own observations of many 
thino:s that came "svithin his coornizance re- 
lating to the prospects of the Pretender, 
whose family were residents in Italy, made 
him aware, to a considerable extent, of what 
was plotting by parties abroad. This know- 
ledge gave him a more lively interest in Sir 
Robert Walpole and his proceedings. He 
seemed to share in his responsibilities, and 
feel his troubles. He experienced all the 
enthusiasm of a thorough partizan, joined to 
the devotion of the most affectionate of 
sons. 

He had scarcely found himself domiciled 
in the tOA\Ti mansion of the Minister, who 

D 2 



U. OF ILL Lib. 



52 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

was then keeping open house with his usual 
prodigality at his magnificent country man- 
sion, Houghton, in Suffolk, when he had 
the mortification of receiving from his father 
a formal command to start for Cornwall im- 
mediately, as preparations were making to 
ensure him a seat in Parliament for the 
borough of Callington. 

At first this was bitter enough ; but after 
some time passed in allowing the current of 
excited sensibility to flow on unchecked, the 
cold tenor of the message was forgotten in 
the brilliant opening it gave for realizing 
those dreams of poHtical ambition he had 
been so fond of encouraging under the soft 
skies of Italy ; but not till after a dream a 
thousand times more seductive, to the glow- 
ing illusions of which he had abandoned 
every sense, had been most rudely disturbed. 
The result of the journey we have already 
related. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 53 



CHAPTER IV. 
A YOUNGER SON. 

• " ^YELL, it was a prodigious good joke, I 
must allow/' said a rakish looking young 
gentleman, addressing a circle of men about 
his own age, evidently in a state of the 
highest good humour, who appeared to be 
taking their breakfast in a large room on the 
ground floor of Sir Robert Walpole's oflicial 
residence in Downing Street. 

They were friends of Horace AValpole ; 
nearly all could claim the reputation of 
" Wits," and they had met to congratulate 



54 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

him on his success : the wonderful classical 
oration that had produced such surprising 
effects in his favour had just been the cause 
of a vast expenditure of very hearty mirth. 

The room in which they were sitting was 
one of considerable size, well furnished with 
bulky chairs boasting morocco seats; a 
dining-table of the largest dimensions; a 
massive side-board ; and a series of fine full- 
length portraits of the Walpole family. The 
table and side -board were spread with eat- 
ables of different kinds, from substantial 
joints of cold meat that appeared sufficient 
to satisfy the appetites of a regiment, to cer- 
tain little delicacies fresh from the hand of 
the cook, that could have been intended only 
for those whose eating was on a much more 
limited scale. Amongst these good things, 
was a liberal display of coffee, chocolate, and 
tea, in handsome silver vessels, with a pro- 
portionate array of the usual furniture of the 
breakfast table. 

They seemed a very happy party : much 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 55 

happier than such antagonistic characters 
as "Wits" are reputed to be. They ate 
heartily, drank heartily, and laughed heartily ; 
indulging in the last proceeding quite as 
much as in either of the other two. It 
was evident that they were under no re- 
straint ; for although an old servant in the 
Walpole livery waited upon them, the rosy 
gills, well-dressed wig, and ample corpora- 
tion of Sir Robertas town butler were too 
familiar to them all to allow their pos- 
sessor to act as a check upon their vivacity. 
Indeed, Oswald was one of those privileged 
domestics who, from long service, or respect 
for their qualities, have been regarded as 
part of the family ^Yith whom they are 
found ; and the butler of the Prime Minister 
was, in fact, a person of no small conse- 
quence in that house. He had saved suf- 
ficient money — for accumulating which, by 
the way, he had possessed singular advan- 
tao^es — to make his remaininof in service a 
matter of perfect indifference to him ; yet he 



56 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

would as soon have thought of investing his 
savings, bribes, and the other " perquisites " 
of his place, in South Sea Stock, as of quit- 
ting the family. 

In his eyes, Sir Robert Walpole Avas a 
greater man than King or Keyser — and, ac- 
cording to his ideas, his master's prodigious 
greatness reflected no slight portion of con- 
sequence upon himself. An ever-present 
feeling of this betrayed him into the exhi- 
bition of numberless singularities, that caused 
a good deal of amusement, without, however, 
diminishing the regard in which he was so 
generally held. 

Oswald felt an unbounded reverence for 
his master, and he experienced an attachment 
of a warmer character to his younger son. 
Pie had noticed the neglect from which 
the boy had suifered in early life : noticing 
also his superior intelligence and many en- 
dearing qualities, he had been in the habit 
of sheA\dng him all the good offices in his 
power ; and his feehngs in his favour had be- 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 57 

come so powerful, now the neglected boy had 
become a man, that there was nothing prac- 
ticable which the old man would not willingly 
have done to please him. 

Probably, of all that merry breakfast party, 
Oswald was the merriest: vet he was the 
most attentive of attendants, recommending 
every delicacy on the well-covered table with 
an eloquence of the most persuasive kind; 
but the familiarity was so respectful, it could 
not have alarmed the prejudices of the most 
rigid respecter of the claims of birth. 

There was one person in the room who 
was conspicuous, from the singular contrast 
presented to the laughing faces around, in a 
physiognomy that looked as if the possessor 
were either too sleepy to be conscious of what 
was then going forward, or too simple to 
appreciate the jests of his companions. In- 
deed, there was a demureness in his coun- 
tenance that might readily have created the 
impression that he was out of place among 
his vivacious associates ; whilst, on the con- 

D 3 



58 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

trary, his listless and drowsy manner gave 
him the appearance of having prolonged the 
overnight's gaieties till he had deprived him- 
self of his natural rest. 

The neatness of his dress, however, was at 
variance Avith the latter supposition. His 
complexion was colourless ; but the smooth 
cheek and well- mown chin had evidently but 
recently received the advantage of a careful 
toilet. Xot a curl in his wig was out of 
order ; his lace cravat and ruffles were fresh 
from the laundress ; there was not a stain upon 
the broad gold lace that faced his waistcoat 
which was buttoned up to the throat ; his 
single-breasted Quaker-like coat was "wdthout 
a rumple, and his velvet breeches without a 
crease. In short, in his person he was far 
from betraying any of the ordinary signs of 
a young rake after a sleepless debauch. 

It seemed, then, that he must be set down 
as one of those hio:h-bred orentlemen — half 
simpleton, half saint — who are occasionally 
to be met with in gay circles, playing the 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 59 

necessary part of hutt to their ill-cliosen 
associates. And this inference was much 
strengthened by a peculiar turning up of the 
whites of his eyes whenever he was roused 
out of his torpor to make a reply to a perti- 
nacious questioner. 

Yet it very soon became clear that if he 
was not a drowsy profligate, he most assur- 
edly was not an unconscious hutt : for those 
lips never opened except to utter some quaint 
remark, or relate some piquant anecdote, 
to the wit of which the listless manner and 
demure aspect of the speaker apparently 
gave irresistible poignancy ; for the voice was 
rarely heard without eliciting a general laugh 
— a laugh, however, that never aiFected Mm 
— his torpor was immovable^ his demure- 
ness stereotyped : as the report followed the 
flash of his wit, he turned up his eyes, and 
looked as unconscious of the jest, as though 
his features were as hard as those of '' his 
irrandsire cut in alabaster." 

This " sleeping partner," as he might 



GO STRAWBERRY HILL. 

have been called, of the firm of Wits col- 
lected in that apartment, was no other than 
George Sehvyn, whose eccentricities of man- 
ner and quaintness of phrase were, even in 
these early days of his fame, making him one 
of the most fashionable men of his day. 

" Yes, it was a jest that reflects as much 
credit upon those who used it as upon those 
who received it," continued the speaker; " It 
argues a very enlightened constituency to 
appreciate so thoroughly so superior a piece 
of scholarship from a candidate for their 
suffrages." 

'' Hanbury Williams, that is a monstrous 
loo^ical conclusion " observed another of the 
party. He was a youth of delicate com- 
plexion, and highly intellectual physiognomy; 
and had addressed a gentleman somewhat 
his senior in years, at the further end of the 
table, who chanced to be demolishing a 
pigeon pie, and smothering a laugh at the 
same time. 

'' For the address to the amazingly en- 



STKAWBERRY HILL. Gl 

lightened electors of the borough of Calling- 
ton, it does not become me to say more of 
its supereminent merit than I possibly can 
help, seeing that I assisted in its composi- 
tion," answered Sir Charles. 

" Yes ; Williams and Gray helped me with 
the poetical touches," said Horace Walpole, 
in the same humour, as he kept devouring 
a devilled chicken, -w^th a relish that o:reatlv 
delighted the attentive butler. " The fact 
is, my genius is a bird of such very noble 
feather, it will soar only in the highest 
regions of the sublime." 

'' Oh dear!" exclaimed George Selwyn, 
in his customary drowsy manner, " our 
friend's genius, I fear, is like a boy's kite — 
the more elevated it is, the less you see of 
it." 

^' It was all monstrous sublime and poeti- 
cal too, I haven't a doubt," resumed another 
of the young men, after the laugh that fol- 
lowed the utterance of Selwyn's jest had 
subsided; "but always excepting the taste 



62 SXrvAWBERRY HILL. 

of those Boeotian Callingtonians in classical 
eloquence, which, I must say, surprised me 
extremely." 

'' That admission ought to be prodi- 
giously in their favour, '^ observed Sir 
Charles, " for Montagu is a very astonish- 
ing fellow in his way, and therefore ought to 
be the less sensible of what is extraordinary 
in others. I remember I surprised him once 
— but then, as I have reason to believe, it 
was very late after dinner, when our eyes 
are not so easily open to starts and convul- 
sions, as at a more sober hour of the day. 
The fact is, I had been drinking freely, at 
some fellow's of our acquaintance, and was 
quitting to return to my o\vn domicile ; my 
foot slipped on the stairs, and I tumbled 
from top to bottom. When I picked myself 
up, Montagu kindly expressed his surprise 
I had not broken my neck." 

" Excepting their classical taste, let me 
say again," said Montagu, availing himself 
of a break in the storm of mirth that had 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 63 

just passed over, "I think a mob of more 
illiterate, stupid, ignorant animals than 
your Cornwall constituents, I never saw in 
the whole course of my existence/' 

" By Jove, Horace, I wouldn't stand 
that!" exclaimed a young and very hand- 
some military officer, sending his cup to be 
replenished; "remember, any reflection on 
the enlio'htened electors of Callinoton must 
be personal to their very enlightened repre- 
sentative." 

" 1 should be the horriblest ungrateful 
wretch alive, Conway," replied Horace, in 
the same humour, " could I sit still and 
hear anything to the prejudice of a body of 
men who have honoured me with their con- 
fidence, and whom in return I cannot help 
regarding as possessing a degree of judg- 
ment and sagacity very much in advance 
of their cotemporaries." 

The exclamations, the affected coughing, 
and the mockin;]^ lauii'h that followed the 
last speech, prevented the breakfast pro- 



64 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

ceeding for some minutes; but the friends 
were much too inclined to enjoy themselves 
to remit their exertions — either masticatory, 
bibulous, or jocose — for any other than 
the shortest possible period ; and in a few 
seconds a running fire of jests again was 
heard, accompanying the rattle of knives 
and forks and the clatter of tea-cups — almost 
as musical a noise as a modern piano forte 
concerto — and so it continued till that luxu- 
rious meal was terminated. 

" Oswald, my good fellow," said Horace 
Walpole, addressing his father's confidential 
servant as he was passing him, "have any 
letters arrived from Norfolk, or has any 
one called since I have been in town?" 

" Your letters are in the Library, Mr. 
Horace," replied Oswald, looking with an 
air which he had learned to put on, from 
having passed so much of his life in the 
service of so eminent a diplomatist as Sir 
Robert Walpole. 

The young Member was too familiar with 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 65 

Ills old friend, to allow such a look to escape 
him. He saw there was something in re- 
serve of more than ordinary importance; 
and availing himself of the first opportunity 
of lea\dng his friends, he was soon in that 
well-kno^^i chamber, so redolent of the 
odours of calf-skin and morocco. There was 
a fine collection of books ranged on their 
shelves with a mihtary regularity — the tall 
folios and bulky quartos appearing like a 
squadron of hea^y cavalry — the large paper 
octavos standm<r Hke a column of grpena- 
diers — and the duodecimos and other little 
books, which appeared from the gaps on 
the shelves to have been in most frequent 
requisition, were evidently doing duty as 
light infantry in skirmishing order. 

On the top of the book-cases, at reg-ular 
distances, were busts of eminent scholars; 
and a fine portrait of George II. in his 
robes, by KneUer, was placed over the old- 
fashioned mantel-piece. A large library- 
table stood in the centre of the room, fur- 



66 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

nislied with movable desks all round and 
drawers beneath, and bearing a massive 
silver ink-stand, a liberal supply of writing 
materials, a despatch-box, a few recently 
published books and pamphlets — presenta- 
tion copies from subservient authors and 
politicians of his o^vn party — reviews, ma- 
gazines, newspapers, and piles of documents 
of every possible form, size, and description, 
from a lady's billet to a county petition. 

Horace drew one of the heavy chairs to 
the place where he noticed several letters; 
and immediately selecting one bearing the 
well-known handwriting of his father, "svith 
a throbbing; heart he threw himself into 
the seat, and impatiently tore the large 
armorial seal with which it had been se- 
cured. 

If he expected it was to contain the 
summons to Houghton, for which he had 
so ardently longed, his surprise must only 
have been exceeded by his disappointment 
when he read the folio wino; lines : — 



STKAWBERRY HILL. 67 

" Houghton Hall. 

" Dear Horace — You will find that an 
income sufficient for your wants has been 
secured to you, as you mil henceforth receive 
£2000 per annum from the Exchequer, wdth 
£1000 as Comptroller of the Pipe; and as I 
think it is quite time you should have a house 
to yourself, I have directed my agent to en- 
gage a very suitable one which was in the 
market. As all arrangements have been 
completed, I recommend you to lose no 
time in taking possession of your new home, 
and remain, 

" Your aiFectionate Father, 

" Egbert Walpole." 

"To Horace Waipole, Esq., M.P." 

The perusal of this curt specimen of fa- 
therly affection was a severe shock to the 
sensitive feelings of the younger son. If he 
had been a natural child, and was to be got 
rid of in some respectable way, that should 
prevent the necessity of any farther refe- 
rence to a parent who was ashamed of him, 



68 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

this sort of dealing was just what might 
be expected from a person in Sir Piobert 
Walpole's position; but to the son who 
had legitimate claims upon his love, whose 
heart was overfloT\'ing ^nth filial affec- 
tion, the present proceeding was very hu- 
miliating. 

The young ]\Iember flung himself back 
in his chair in an agony of shame and sor- 
row. Surely, he thought, the heart of the 
great Statesman must have parted with all 
proper feelings for his kind, if he can dispose 
of his offspring in this unceremonious man- 
ner ; not a syllable of approval, or even of 
notice, of the obedience and the tact he had 
shewn in obtaining the Cornish borough ! 
not a word of affectionate inquiry, though 
they had not met for so long a time ; not a 
sentence of parental advice, though he was 
to take upon himself so many new resj^onsi- 
bihties ! He was turned out of the house, 
that was clear. He was sent about his busi- 
ness. He was provided for and got rid of. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 69 

It was plain he was looked upon as a mere 
machine, that was to be put in its place and 
made to act, and required no further care. 

He began to foncy he was thought to be 
in the way of his elder brothers while he 
remained under the paternal roof, and felt 
a pang of jealousy as he reflected on the ad- 
vantages they had been allowed in the con- 
stant communication they had enjoyed with. 
one or other of their parents, whilst he had 
been banished as one unworthy of such asso- 
ciation. He was well aware that in capacity 
he was far superior to either, and this made 
him feel more acutely the ill-judged par- 
tiality with which they had been treated. 

"Why, Horace, my boy," exclaimed the 
friendly voice of his cousin Conway, slapping 
him familiarly on the shoulder, " What can 
have given you such a deuced fit of the 
blues ? I'll be hanged if your phiz isn't 
quite cerulean." 

" Read fhat^ Harry," said the other, thrust- 
ing the letter into his hand. The young 



70 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

officer very methodically opened and read 
the epistle. " Allow me to congratulate 
you," he replied, as his eye ran do"\vn the 
contents; ''three thousand a-year, and a 
house of your own. What a lucky dog you 
are! If such a windfall had happened to 
Harry Conway, now, instead of to Horace 
AValpole — ' odds counterscarps and demi- 
bastions ! ' as a fellow says in our regi- 
ment." 

" Oh, Harry, it has made me quite mise- 
rable." 

" What, your father's generosity ! Upon 
my soul, you puzzle me. But if three thou- 
sand a year makes you miserable, what 
would six have done? Come, cheer up, and 
thank your stars it's no worse. To be sure, 
the old gentleman has taken a deal of trouble 
to show the flinty heart so freely attributed 
to fathers. His want of regard for you is 
quite shocking to contemplate." 

'' You make a jest of it ! You don't — 
3'ou can't understand my feelings.'* 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 71 

" Of course not. How can you expect a 
poor captain of foot, with more gold on his 
shoulders than in his pocket, to understand 
the feehngs of a gentleman who is desperately 
wretched because a kind father has made 
him comfortable for life?" 

" Kind^ Harry ! Kind father ! I don't 
think Sir Robert has the most remote con- 
ception of what kindness towards a son 
means." 

"Why, how you talk! Of course it 
means the gift of two or three pretty sine- 
cures — such as constitute your three thou- 
sand a-year. I would the Fates had provided 
me with so aiFectionate a parent. I would 
take his kindness in a very different mood 
from that in which it is but too clear you 
now receive it." 

" But, Harry, was there ever so unfeeling 
a letter written?" 

" Unfeeling ! A letter that provides you 
with a handsome establishment and a mon- 
strous pretty fortune, unfeeling! Come, 



72 STHA\AT^ERRY HILL. 

Horace, my boy, your success iii Cornwall 
has turned your head. You don't see things 
now as you ought to do; there's not a 
younger brother of a noble family in England, 
who wouldn't be ready to jump out of his 
honourable sldn at the fair prospect now 
opening before you !" 

" Younger brother /" exclaimed Horace 
Walpole, bitterly, "that is the curse ^^dth 
which I am sent adrift. It seems, like the 
mark of Cain, to brand me with an e\dlname 
wherever I go." 

" Then don't go," said his friend, who 
knew that a jest would have more effect 
upon his melancholy cousin than any argu- 
ments. '' Stay in your new house — spend 
your three thousand a-year like a gentleman 
— seek to make a name in the conflict of 
parties — observe well what is going on 
around you — await your opportunity — and 
then, younger son or no younger son, if you 
don't get a tolerable good place in the ladder 
of life, I shall be prodigiously mistaken." 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 73 

" Look at those fellows we have left in 
the other room. There is West, for instance. 
He is an only son — the only son, too, of a 
Lord Chancellor. Yet he has not half the 
chance you have of getting on in the world. 
Kext, there is Gray, who bids fair to be a 
niighty pretty poet; but rhymes are mon- 
strous insecure stepping-stones up the accli- 
vities of ambition. Then we come to 
Asheton, ]\Iontagu, and Hanbury Williams — 
choice spirits, out of doubt. They were not 
bom to hide their light under a bushel — 
but, my dear coz, whatever merit they pos- 
sess, your superlative one of having a First 
Lord of the Treasury for your progenitor, 
is certainly not amongst them. 

" Lastly, there is George Sehv}m — a 
drowsy phoenix, slumbering on the ashes of 
his own jokes; an incomparable fellow for 
smart sayings. He knows how to put in a 
jest as a skilful bowler puts in a cricket ball. 
In short, he is a great talker. But then, you 
know the proverb so often quoted by us in 

VOL. I. E 



74 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

old times, in reference to the doings of such 
great personages. You have no fear of being 
bowled out by him. 

" The long and the short of it is, Horace, 
that you are too proud or too lazy to work, 
and yet ashamed to beg ; you, I doubt not, 
would prefer lying under the tree, waiting 
for the fruit to drop into your mouth, to 
receiving any portion from the hands of 
another, or taking the trouble to chmb, and 
gather the fruit for yourself." 

''You are ^Tong, Harry, be assured!" 
repHed his kinsman seriously. " I am as 
far from being indolent as from wanting 
ambition. Indeed, I will confess to you that 
more than one of those deep influences 
which impel adventurous spirits on the road 
to "greatness, ur2:es me in the strono^est man- 
ner to endeavour to achieve distinction. It 
is no common career that would satisfy me. 
I set my heart on the possession of rank, 
wealth, great poUtical influence, high literary 
fame, and the most brilliant reputation in 
society." 



STKAWBERRY HILL. 75 

Captain Conway perpetrated a prolonged 
whistle on the his^hest note in the whistlinir 
gamut. 

" Modest ideas in a younger son, cer- 
tainly!" he observed, laughingly; " by Jove, 
though," he added in a more serious manner, 
" with so capital a father as yours, such 
things are not impossible. I wish I had 
your chance of promotion ; I promise you I 
should not be quarrelling as you now are 
with the first instalment of Dame Fortune's 
favours. Younger son, indeed! So well 
do I think of your prospects, I wouldn't 
mind standing in your shoes. I don't think 
I should make a bad Secretary of State. 
In your place I couldn't be satisfied ^yiih. a 
less important ofiice." 

Captain Conway was a young man who 
possessed in an eminent degree the pecu- 
liarity of always looking on the bright side 
of things. Let the worst case be presented 
to him in its worst light, and he never failed 
to discover something in it vastly consola- 

E 2 



76 STRAT\T3ERRY HILL. 

tory. In his eyes, the greatest misfortunes 
were sure to bring some benefit with them. 
The most intolerable disappointment would 
not come unattended ^nth some striking 
advantage. 

Some " friend of humanity" once pointed 
out the deplorable condition of juvenile 
chimney-sweeps; he replied cheerfully, "Ah! 
I)Ul then only think what a capital denti- 
frice they have always ready for their use, 
and no expense to them!" 

On another occasion, a very melancholy 
case of distress was represented to him of a 
poor woman Avho had lost her husband and 
three children in one week, by t}'phus fe- 
ver. There surely could be nothing conso- 
latory in so sad an affliction, his friends 
thought : but Captain Conway at once saw 
the case had a bright side. He encourag- 
ingly remarked, that, under the circum- 
stances, one suit of mourning would be suf- 
ficient to shew the grief of the poor woman 
for all the family ; but had they died at in- 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 77 

tervals widely apart, she would have been 
obliged to put on fresh mourning for each, 
which must have been dreadfully inconve- 
nient to a woman of her limited means. 

Horace Walpole listened to his gay cou- 
sin's representation of the bright side of his 
affairs, till his o^vn gloomy ^iew of them 
cleared up considerably. He could not, 
however, avoid feehng most acutely the 
want of sympathy for him that there seemed 
to exist in liis father's heart. 

^Tiilst smarting under the miiuence of 
disappointment, his mind kept recurring 
to a passage in his past life, that appeared 
to be most vividly remembered, because he 
had come to the resolution of bur}dng every 
transaction connected mth it in oblivion. 
His heart beat more rapidly — there was a 
glow on his cheek and a fire in his eye to 
which both had long been a stranger. But 
it was a momentary flashing forth of a spi- 
rit that he considered ought to be dead and 
buried, or at least ought to assume a dif- 



78 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

ferent shape, and exhibit opposite tenden- 
cies. 

A little self-examination would have 
shewn him the inconsistency of his feehngs. 
He had vowed himself a neophyte in the 
service of diplomacy — he had sworn to wor- 
ship only at the altar of politics. But his 
was indisputably a hard lot. What service 
had he previously foresworn ? — At what 
altar had he so long been used to worship? 
Filial love was with him a deep and holy 
influence, that had become, as it were, his 
very life — but he could have confessed 
that the heart is capable of as holy an in- 
fluence that in its object was dearer than 
life itself. 

These influences had been in opposition 
to each other: it was only by the entire 
sacrifice of his happiness that he had al- 
lowed the former to triumph. The disap- 
pointment he experienced in the cold for- 
mahty of his father's conduct, seemed to 
shew how vainly he had made that sacrifice, 



STRAWBERRY HELL. 79 

whilst forcing on him the conviction that 
now he had lost all and could gain no- 
thing. 

But with the young, despondency makes 
but a brief sojourn: Horace Walpole had 
become possessed of new duties and respon- 
sibilities sufficient to keep his mind too 
actively employed to indulge, to any inju- 
rious extent, in unprofitable repinings. He 
had chosen his vocation. To him, thou^^h 
the Past offered no solace, the Future had 
at least ambition. 

" Come back to the breakfast room," cried 
Ills cousin laugliingiy, dragging him towards 
the door; " Hanbury Williams has ^vritten a 
new song, which has made all our sides 
ache, and caused Sehvyn to be ^^ide awake 
for five minutes ; you must come and hear 
it." 

Unresistingly Horace allowed himself to 
be led in the required direction. 



80 STRAWBERRY HILL. 



CHAPTER V. 

PRI^'CE FREDERICK AND COMPANY. 

Why it was, or liow it was, has ever been 
a mystery, and a mystery it is believed 
must ever remain ; but so it was : the Royal 
Family of England, for the first two or three 
generations of the Hanoverian d}Tiasty, were 
remarkable for their disHke of each other 
in the direct line. George L hated his heir, 
and his heir returned the compliment with 
interest. George II. did ditto to his father, 
in his domestic account "with his Prince of 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 81 

Wales; and the prince followed the prece- 
dent that had been set hun by his progeni- 
tor, with a cordiality that must have satis- 
fied the most sceptical that he came of the 
true stock. 

There must have been some pecuHarit}' 
in the blood of the Brunswick Luneburg 
race, to have created this curious charac- 
teristic. We know that fathers may have 
flinty hearts, and that sons do occasionall}' 
shew any tiling but a proper degree of affec- 
tion for their "governors;" but such are 
ordinary fathers and sons. The divinity 
that is said to hedge a king, ought, we hum- 
bly conceive, to have fenced in the Majes- 
ties of George the First and Second from 
such vulgar squabbles as disturb the peace 
of \Tilgar families. But it appeared very 
much as though these Hanoverian heirs- 
were a species of royal cuckoo, that each in 
his turn, as soon as he was well fledged, 
and arrived at his full strength, sought to 
tumble the old birds out of their nest, and 

e3 



82 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

take the whole accommodation of it to him- 
self. 

We don't pretend to say that there are 
no cases on record in which princes have 
shewn themselves unpatient of their fathers' 
rule. We have in our memory as fine a 
collection of family jars as ever were fabri- 
cated out of royal clay; but then such 
things were always managed in a princely 
fashion. If an eldest son had a domestic 
grievance to complain of, he rallied his 
friends around him, proclaimed his quarrel 
to the world at the head of an army, marched 
against the parental banner, and it has 
more than once happened, given liis impe- 
rial father a sound drubbing preliminary to 
turning him out of his throne. Now this 
was not exactly filial — we question if it w^as 
quite respectful — but then there is some- 
thing characteristic in it — it is a princely 
way of doing such things. 

In another case, an old gentleman, in the 
full enjoyment of his dignities, suddenly 



STRAAVBEREY HILL. 83 

receives intelligence of the revolt of a dis- 
tant part of his dominions, with the object 
of obtaining the throne for his heir. Does 
he weep ''tears such as royal fathers shed,"' 
and denounce his son's ingratitude and his 
subjects' rebeUion! Not a bit of it. He 
calls for his armour and collects his forces ; 
at the head of his invincible squadrons 
charges the rebels; disperses them to the 
four winds ; takes his son prisoner ; and — 
chops his head off. This is not, in every 
respect, so parental, perhaps, as might be 
desired. Such conduct could not be quite 
natural in ordinary fathers of families ; but 
then, could anything be more truly royal ? 

But the members of the ancient house of 
Guelph chose to quarrel A\ith each other — 
certainly in a much safer, • assuredly in a 
less creditable fashion. The king and the 
heir-apparent squabbled like two ancient 
fish-women for a customer ; they carried on 
their rivalry at a safe distance, but near 
enough to allow of their vituperative elo- 



84 STRAWBERRY HELL. 

quence having such a range as would con- 
vey it with full force against its object — 
they warred not with weapons but with 
words. They would not shock the civilised 
world by descending to fight hke gentle- 
men; they only abused each other like 
pickpockets. 

George I. denounced his son as a scoun- 
drel. George II. did the same. George 
Prince of Wales regarded his parent mtli 
abhorrence — Frederick Prince of Wales 
entertained exactly similar feelings. This 
hereditary hatred acted like the system of 
fagging at our great schools — the successor, 
notwithstanding the terrible extent to which 
he must have suffered in his subordinate 
state, cultivating the same tyranny over 
his subordinate with all his power and ma- 
lice. 

The reason of their being such exact 
counterparts of each other can be logically 
explained : — 

1. We have many reasons for suspecting 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 85 

the first of our Hanoverian sovereigns to 
have been thoroughly heartless. 

2. We have looked in vain at his actions 
for any evidence of mind. 

3. Without heart and head, such a king 
must have been little better than an old 
block. 

We must not be surprised, then, to find 
his son and grandson such perfect " chips 
of the old block." 

Prince Frederick is the only member of 
this royal family with whom our story has 
anything to do at present ; and as he hap- 
pens to be one our readers are likely to 
have heard comparatively little about, we 
shall proceed to introduce his Royal High- 
ness, as much at full length as possible. 

Frederick, Prince of Wales, was contem- 
porary as well as namesake of that illus- 
trious royal commander who had succeeded 
to the throne of Prussia — we verily believe, 
only to shew that there could be a Frede- 
rick the Little as well as a Frederick the 



86 STR.VWBERRY 11U.L. 

Great. He had arrived at man's estate, 
with as little sense of manhood about 
him as of any other sense of which it was 
likely he could make a creditable use. He 
had been educated in Hanover — of course 
in the same school in which his father and 
grandfather had picked up their education. 
It must have been a curious system of scho- 
lastic study of which they had the advan- 
tage. "WTiether it boasted of a royal road 
to mathematics, as well as to other branches 
of learning, has not been made known to 
us; but, as far as can be judged of it, it 
combined the elements of folly with the 
higher blanches of licentiousness. 

\Yhere there was vice at the foundation, 
it is unreasonable to expect much virtue in 
the superstructure. Indeed, that did not 
seem to enter into the design — for where 
mistresses were employed as the Caryatida? 
of the edifice, it was clear enough the main 
features of the elevation were profligacy and 
wickedness. 



STILVWBERRY HILL. 87 

At the period of our story, Prince Frede- 
rick was a husband and a father. If we 
could employ the term husband-german, 
and father-german, in the same sense as 
cousin -german, we should convey a very 
correct idea, in more senses than one, of the 
sort of distant relationship he bore to his 
wife and family. But the Princes of the 
House of Hanover had been brought up in a 
peculiar independence of family ties, and 
with a disposition equally peculiar for ties 
of a more familiar and less sacred character. 
Their tastes were very homely, yet were 
quite at variance with whatever belonged to 
home ; as ^dtness in the instance of Georo^e I. 
those female oo^res, the Schulenburor and the 
Kielmansegge — in that of George II. the 
unfascinating Wallmoden — in that of Prince 
Frederick, half a dozen " Cynthias of the 
minute," equally notorious for the humility 
of their attractions, and the imposing way in 
which they were employed. 

Yet his Poyal Highness had one attach- 



88 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

ment that, at least, with those easily pleased, 
might have been considered rational. As 
among the blind the one-eyed is a king, 
among the plain faces of the Prince of 
Wales's favourites, the moderately good- 
looking features of Lady Archibald Hamil- 
ton allowed her the claims of a beauty. The 
Prince shared the rather frequent foible of 
such exalted personages, of preferring other 
men's wives to their own — a compliment to 
the superior taste of the husband, which it 
is to be hoped the gentleman sufficiently 
appreciated. Lady Hamilton was a wife 
and a mother. It was no doubt a great 
honour for the seventh son of a Duke to pos- 
sess a wife who pleased the Heir- Apparent ; 
and possibly their son. Sir William Hamilton, 
subsequently so well known for his lady's 
intimacy with Xelson, and other acquaint- 
ances of the like kind — as the play-bills have 
it, " too numerous to mention"— found con- 
solation m the remembrance, that whatever 
his wife was, his mother had been. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 89 

But Lady Archibald, though a Venus 
more in inclination than in appearance, 
could render herself not only agreeable but 
fascinating. There are some women, of but 
second-rate attractions, who possess a manner 
that renders them a vast deal more alluring 
than their more beautiful contemporaries. 
Her Ladyship possessed tliis manner in a very 
eminent degree ; and having acquired from 
nature a disposition for gallantry, she seemed 
to have no intention of letting it lay fallow. 

The Prince of Wales was her acknow- 
ledged lover, and Lord Hamilton her ac- 
knowledged husband. But her capacious 
heart yearned to disperse its sensibilities 
over a more extensive field. She longed for 
more lovers and more husbands. She there- 
fore sought conquests in various directions, 
unkno^vn, of course, to her royal gallant, 
and, it is to be hoped, quite as much so to 
her noble partner. 

There was another feature in Lady Archi- 
bald's character. The Prince, under the 



90 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

influence of her fascinations, chose to make 
her Ladyship the depositary of all his poli- 
tical secrets, which the sagacious lady always 
contrived to dispose of in another quarter 
for the best terms she could command. She 
did not profess to have any politics. Indeed, 
although she had never heard the line, she 
would not have been disposed 

" To party to give what was meant for mankind." 

The reader must therefore be prepared to 
find the Heir-Apparent's favourite mistress 
occasionally falling into very strange com- 
pany, and occasionally engaged in very 
strange scenes. 

Prince Frederick had quarrelled with his 
royal father so often, that use had made 
quarrelling mth him a second nature. His 
head had got filled — and it wanted filling 
terribly — with vague notions of the dignity 
and consequence of his position as Heir- 
Apparent. His father, he began to imagine, 
kept him upon an inadequate allowance. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 91 

He was very mucli in debt, as Heirs -Apparent 
so rapidly contrive to be ; and took especial 
care every one should know that this was 
through his parent's parsimony. 

As he took no pains to conceal how much 
he was opposed to the King, the political 
party who were in opposition to the govern- 
ment paid great court to him. It is singular 
how invariably Oppositions patronize the 
son of the Sovereign in preference to the 
Sovereign himself; and the more disobedient 
and contumelious he becomes, the more 
devotedly they commend themselves to his 
service. 

The Prince of Wales was well aware of 
the power of the Tory party to render him 
formidable. Like persons of limited capacity 
generally, he had a quick eye to his o^vn 
interests, and this sharpness of vision he 
often betrayed in a manner infinitely less 
respectable than banding with the opponents 
of his father's government. The leaders of 
the Opposition had also their selfish objects 



92 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

in view. They regarded him as the best 
court card in their hands, and had hopes of 
playing him successfully against the King. 
These leaders comprised, in the House of 
Commons, Sir William Wyndham, a powerful 
debater, and one of the ablest Tories of the 
day, and Mr. Pulteney, a patriotic orator of 
vast experience and little virtue, impelled 
on his course by the most bitter hostility to 
his great rival. Sir Robert AYalpole. 

There were many other able men of the 
same party ; but Pulteney and Wyndham are 
the most important, and shall have due 
respect at our hands. They were admitted 
into the Prince's counsels: but the chief ad- 
viser of his Royal Highness, and who was 
on the most familiar footing with him, was 
another Tory Member, possessed of two 
boroughs and very elastic principles. 

With Bubb Doddington, the Prince was in 
the habit of being extremely confidential and 
familiar — as often condescending to make a 
butt as a dupe of him. For him, too, he 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 93 

would prove the intensity of his friendship 
by borroTsing considerable sums ; but as the 
Prince did so without the most remote in- 
tention of repaying the money, it ought to 
be resrarded as a much more strikin^r act of 
condescension; for accepting a gift is, one 
would think, infinitely more gracious than 
accepting a loan. 

Bubb Doddington possessed a great deal 
more ambition than sagacity — he worshipped 
the rising sun, and allowed his thousands to 
disappear from his pockets in a manner that, 
whilst it shewed wonderful ingenuity in the 
extractor, betrayed much too secure a con- 
\'iction in the extracted that tliej were a 
golden seed, which, in due time, should 
\ield a most abundant harvest. 

But though Bubb Doddington was the 
most intimate of the Prince's counsellors, 
his Royal Highness had the good fortune to 
possess another who had obtained a much 
greater degree of influence over him. With 
this person his consultations were rigidly 



94 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

secret. Few were aware how often the 
Prince rode in a certain direction ; a much 
more hmited number were cognizant of 
these rides terminating at the villa of one of 
the ablest spirits of his time. 

Henry St. John Viscount Bolingbroke 
took a vast deal of pains to convince his 
contemporaries that he was a philosopher ; 
his labours were not less great to satisfy 
them that he was a statesman. He had 
heard that extremes meet, and possibly he 
entertained the idea of dovetailing them in 
the combination he put forth to the world in 
his own proper person. We believe he did 
this with such marked success, that posterity 
have come to the conclusion that his philo- 
sophy and statesmanship ended exactly 
where they began. 

St. John w^as now the gravest of philo- 
sophers — in the tmnkling of an eye the 
gayest of men of pleasure ; you scarcely had 
time to admire the excess of his enjoyment, 
when he suddenly changed to the most ab- 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 95 

sorbed of politicians : and whilst you were 
lost in wonder at his complete abandonment 
to the war of parties, lo ! and behold ! he was 
all for contemplation, primitive manners, 
and a hermitage. 

We first find him exerting himself to be- 
come a public character towards the close 
of the reign of Queen Anne. His busy 
brain was ever intriguing; but, in conse- 
quence of some unhappy obliquity of intelli- 
gence, he usually managed to attach himself 
to the unsuccessful party. When the Queen 
was dying, he intrigued to bring in a suc- 
cessor ; but somehow, in spite of all he could 
do or say, the Elector of Hanover came in, 
and the Chevalier St. George was kept out. 

Although St. John might have accommo- 
dated himself to this disappointment had he 
been allowed, it so happened he was not; 
and finding that King George would not 
employ him, he went over to the Chevaher, 
who would. But the service of a Pretender, 
he soon found, required more philosophy and 



96 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

more statesmanship than even he had at his 
command ; and in fit of distaste for public 
life Xo. 1, he retired into privacy, and pro- 
fessed himself charmed ^\ith the delights of 
solitude and a French cottage. 

Exquisite as was this quiet way of life to 
the philosophic statesman, he felt " there 
was something more exquisite still " in the 
employment of his great talents in the great 
field for which he knew them to be so well 
adapted. He diso-wned his Jacobitism — he 
professed himself a steady supporter of the 
Hanoverian succession — he wished to have 
nothing more to do with politics — and he 
declared himself only a harmless ^philosopher, 
Avho desired to be allowed to end his days 
in the study of virtue, in some tranquil 
corner of his native land. 

He intrigued quietly, but very actively, for 
the favour he sought. The banished man 
oAvned his error, and promised an amended 
life. It so happened that amongst the King's 
ministers was one who knew him thorouo'hly. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 97 

Sir Kobert Walpole and St. John had been 
schoolfellows. Walpole was too well ac- 
quainted witli his old friend's meddling 
spirit, to place much confidence in his pre- 
sent professions. He opposed his recall ; but 
a bribe of eleven thousand pounds to the 
King's ugly favourite overpowered his influ- 
ence at the Council, and the philosopher 
was permitted to breathe his native air. 

At first he did nothing but speak in 
apothegms, and shew his intense enjoyment 
of the society of a few chosen friends, his 
inestimable books, and the simple pleasures of 
a country life. In a short time the superi- 
ority of his schoolfellow, whom he was pleased 
to think so greatly inferior to him in all the 
higher qualifications of a minister — whom 
he considered to be no philosopher, and very 
little of a statesman, — rose up before him — 
disturbing his studies, marring his felicity, 
and destroying his peace of mind. Whether 
he affected to be Cincinnatus in the fields, 
or Pliny in the garden, — assumed the bear- 

VOL. I. F 



98 STRA^VBERRY HILL. 

iiig of a Mecasnas among men of letters, or a 
Lorenzo de Medicis in patronizing art — the 
figure of Sir Robert Walpole cast an envious 
shadow over his contentment, and his phi- 
losophy at once became prodigiously at 
fault. 

Gradually he increased the circle of his 
friends till they comprised the leading Tories, 
and several of the most eminent public men 
of the day. He entertained at his table the 
most powerful writers ; he became a liberal 
patron to whoever had talent of any available 
sort — pamphleteers, poets, satirists, painters, 
and orators, found him a cordial friend, and 
an admirable adviser. He set on foot a 
periodical called " The Craftsman," in which 
he endeavoured to make his countrjTuen fa- 
miliar with the various qualities of his great 
mind, and did not forget to shew them the 
remarkable deficiency in all such qualities 
in the mind of his rival. 

It is on record that St. John, about this 
time, assumed to be on friendly terms with 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 99 

Walpole, who permitted his being introduced 
to the King, and, in the same kindly spirit, 
invited him to be his guest at his quiet sub- 
urban villa at Chelsea. The sight of the 
comfort, the equanimity, the prosperous 
greatness of his hated rival, was too much for 
the disappointed politician; envy got the 
better of his philosophy, and so affected his 
stomach, that the first mouthful he took of 
the handsome banquet set before him, stuck 
in his throat ; and the only way to conceal 
his overpowering feelings he could adopt, 
was a hasty withdrawal from the Minister's 
hospitable board, on the plea of sudden in- 
disposition. 

After this he exerted himself more strenu- 
ously than ever against his old schoolfellow; 
and managed to acquire in an indirect way so 
much influence with the King, as ultimately 
to create a prejudice in the Royal mind, 
that threatened the immediate dismissal of 
his Majesty's tried servant. It was confi- 
dently asserted, in what were considered the 

F 2 



100 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

best-informed circles, that Walpole was 
about to be dismissed, and that St. John 
was to obtain his place. One unlooked-for 
event disposed of the whole intrigue. The 
King died ; his successor would have nothing 
to do with the busy plotter ; and, in fit of dis- 
taste for public life No. 2, St. John retired 
to his quiet hermitage, and again shut 
himself from the world, and again vowed to 
devote himself to philosophy and solitude. 

This fit had lasted its proper interval. 
Sir Robert Walpole was in possession of 
greater power than ever; and now his bril- 
liant, specious, hollow, envious rival, was 
enoraofed in another intri2:ue for his over- 
throw, — devoting himself to it mth an in- 
tensity of purpose, that appeared likely to 
be satisfied with nothing short of his de- 
struction. He had not got hold of a king 
this time to work upon — he had a much 
more pliable material. He had contrived to 
impress upon the thoughtless, selfish, reck- 
less Prince Frederick, that he was the only 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 101 

man in England whose counsel could be of 
advantasfe to him. There was a certain 
garden-house erected at the extremity of the 
flower-o^arden attached to Lord Bolinirbroke's 
villa at Dawley, that was fitted up with won- 
derful taste — Arcadian scenes worthy of the 
pencil of Watteau or Lancret, were painted 
in flowery compartments in the panelling 
— a small book-case of choice volumes 
attracted the reflective to study — luxurious 
couches and easy chairs tempted the indolent 
to repose — a marble table presented the 
finest fruits and flowers — and in a gay 
marqueterie commode were usually some 
extremely rare wines, with " all appliances 
and means to boot " for an exquisite repast. 
This formed the usual cell of the philoso- 
phical Statesman. Here, in his fits of soli- 
tude, he shut himself from the world, and 
here he dreamt of impossible virtue on a 
down cushion; and, whilst filhng himself 
with claret and ratefies, fancied he was an 
anchorite, disgusted with the vanities of the 



102 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

world. The garden-house was certainly a very 
pretty retirement. It could boast of other 
advantages. AVhen the fit of philosophy was 
subsidinir, and the arts of the statesman were 
again coming into play, its possessing a door 
leading into an unfrequented green lane, 
made it a most desirable place for a secret 
meetinof: and here had often come more 
than one of the leading Tory Members, to 
arrange wdth the clever, briUiant, slippery 
politician, the plan of a campaign against 
the existing Government. 

At the period to which we are now refer- 
ing, the room contained two individuals. 
One, a man of insignificant stature and mean 
appearance, was seated at his ease in a luxu- 
rious fauteuil, with a handsome three-cor- 
nered hat on his head, and a golden tooth- 
pick in his hand. His riding coat thro^vn 
open, displayed a star on the breast of his 
inner coat. The fine materials of his dress, 
and the handsome manner in which they 
were put together, proclaimed the wearer to 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 10 



Q 



be a person of distinction. He might still 
be considered young, and was not ill-looking ; 
his complexion being fair, and each feature 
well-developed. The general expression was 
that of self-satisfaction and complacency. 
He had evidently been enjoying himself, — 
which mio'ht account for the stratified air 
which then illumined liis somewhat too unin- 
tellectual countenance. 

The other inmate of the garden-house was 
to all appearance a well-dressed and well-bred 
man of fashion — of tall — of even command- 
ing figure, with a fine intelligent look, 
gaining its animation from a pair of eyes 
remarkable for their subtle expression. The 
countenance was now brimming over, as it 
were, w^th courtesy and respect, as, standing 
upright, and leaning on the back of the 
chair on Avhich his companion was seated, 
he continued to address him. 

These two individuals were Frederick 
Prince of Wales, and St. John A^iscount 
Bolingbroke. 



104 STRAAVBERRY HILL. 

Bolingbroke was unrivalled as a conver- 
sationalist ; possessing an extraordinary fas- 
cination of manner, with a remarkable bril- 
liancy of discourse, that won towards him 
many persons who would otherwise have 
kept aloof from his intrigues. His attain- 
ments, too, were of a high order. If he was 
not entitled to the distinction of being very 
philosophical, it must be allowed that he 
wrote and spoke in a manner that would 
have conferred credit on more than one phi- 
losopher whose greatness has never been 
challenged. It was a thousand pities that a 
man with so great a mind should sometunes 
have she^vn so little a soul. 

By the way, it is a somewhat singular coin- 
cidence, that the present and two preceding 
centuries should have had its " busy B," each 
as greatly to be admired as little to be 
trusted. The seventeenth century produced 
Bacon — the eighteenth, Bohngbroke — and 
the nineteenth, one too notorious to require 
naming — a triumvirate of eccentric genius 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 105 

no Other country could have brought 
forth. 

The interview had already lasted some 
time ; but whether his Royal Highness was 
fascinated with the excellent wine of his 
entertainer, or with his equally inspiriting 
discourse, he shewed no symptoms of taking 
his departure, but kept sippmg from his oft- 
replenished glass, and listening to his ever- 
attentive host, as though both claims on his 
attention should have his best consideration. 

The discourse must have had in it some- 
thing unusually persuasive : its sonorous 
apothegms — its eloquent declamation — its 
transcendent philosophy — must have made 
an unusual impression on the Heir Apparent. 
Xor must we forget the consummate skill 
with which it was adapted to the limited 
intelligence that it was expected was to 
profit by it. 

The Prince listened, pretending that he 
understood every word spoken by the bril- 
liant plotter. The well-directed appeals to 



F 3 



106 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

his vanity effected more than would have 
done the most urgent appeals to his under- 
standing. Perhaps it never struck the clever 
statesman, how extremely inconsistent was 
the part he was playing. He quite forgot 
how eagerly he had once plotted to shut 
out from all prospect of the throne the 
Prince he was now counselling to take a 
bold step in opposition to his father's Go- 
vernment. But he had now no thought of 
the Pretender — it is very likely he cared 
quite as little for every member of the Han- 
overian dynasty — he cared but for one ob- 
ject, he entertained but one idea — to make 
use of the Prince of Wales as an agent 
likely to ensure the success of his grand 
scheme — to work the overthrow of his hated 
rival. 

" The times never were so ripe for a 
change as at present, your Royal High- 
ness," he observed, by way of conclusion ; 
" Walpole totters in his giddy elevation like 
an architrave too heavy for the slender 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 107 

pillar on which it has been mounted. He is 
threatened both from within and ANithout — 
from his own coadjutors quite as much as 
from the most determined of his opponents. 
Newcastle hates him — Townshend has taken 
offence at some imao^ined slio-ht: few of 
them can brook his airs of superiority and 
assumed omnipotence with his Sovereign. 

'^ The Tories, as a party, are daily at- 
tacking him with greater boldness. There 
is a powerfiil body of members of the 
House of Commons, amongst whom AV;^Tid- 
ham, Pulteney, and Marchmont are antago- 
nists at whose powerful voices he has long 
learned to tremble. There are men of great 
parts and influence in the House of Peers, 
who hold the name of the Minister in equal 
detestation. 

" A combined attack is about being made 
upon him — certainly the most formidable 
he has ever had to defend himself against : 
let this be followed up by the proposed 
movement on the part of your Royal High- 



108 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

ness — and I, who only desire to be consi- 
dered the most humble of your Royal High- 
ness's well-wishers, will venture to state that 
the result will be the disgrace of an incom- 
petent Minister, and the elevation to his 
proper position in the eyes of the EngHsh 
people, of a Prince who has given so many 
assurances that he is born to secure their 
prosperity." 

" That is just my way of thinking," re- 
plied the young man with admirable non- 
chalance, as he rose from his seat and began 
to adjust his riding-coat. " My father is not, 
ill my opinion, likely to live much longer. 
I should like prodigiously to know how 
much longer it is possible for him to live." 

" That is not, I am afraid, a question ca- 
pable of a ready solution," observed his phi- 
losophic counsellor. '' Life is uncertain to 
us all ; but with the aged, dissolution must 
be a matter of daily expectation." 

" He breaks fast," pithily observed his 
hopeful son. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 109 

" The signs of decay in his Majesty's 
frame, it must be allowed, are becoming 
more and more conspicuous," said his equally 
hopeful counsellor. " Death, moreover, is 
our common obliiration to Xature ; and if the 
account has been long standing, we are the 
less likely to be allowed to defer the pay- 
ment." 

" TMien I succeed to the throne," added 
the eager Heir Apparent, as he drew on his 
gloves, " I shall bear in mind the exertions 
of my friends in my behalf." 

" Such ideas are worthy of your Royal 
Highness's generosity of mind. But," said 
his Lordship, with a marked air of self- 
denial, '' if I may be allowed to speak of so 
humble an individual as myself, I must beg 
to assure your Royal Highness that office 
has no charms for me. I have foresworn 
ambition, to study virtue — I renounce poli- 
tics in favour of philosophy." 

AMiether the amiable Telemachus put any 
faith in the professions of liis skilful Mentor 



110 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

does not appear. He almost immediately 
took his leave, and mounting his horse, 
which was in waiting close at hand, he rode 
towards town with the full intention of 
losing no time in taking the bold step 
which had been represented as so certain of 
advantage to him. 

" Now I have him!" exclaimed the stu- 
dent of \'irtue, with much bitterness of em- 
phasis, as, left alone in his luxurious retire- 
ment, he paced its confined limits with 
uneasy strides. " Walpole ! the star which 
has been kept so long out of its sphere, now 
rapidly approaches to hurl you from yours ! 
Though more than once balked of my re- 
venge, I feel agreeably assured it is now 
within my grasp." 

Had the great Minister's younger son, 
who, notwithstanding he felt himself dis- 
carded from his father's house and heart, 
was thoroughly devoted to his father's 
interests, been aware of tliis secret and well- 
devised plot to ruin liim, it would have 



STRAWBERRY HILL. Ill 

offered the occasion he so much desired, 
to prove the depth of that attachment to 
his person that prompted all his thoughts 
and actions. But Horace was lamenting 
the forced estrangement he had no power 
to prevent, — except when his rebeUious 
thoucrhts ventured into a direction even less 
likely to afford his troubled mind the con- 
solation which he required. But had he 
entertained a surmise of his father's danger, 
not a moment Avould he have suffered to 
elapse before he had substituted action for 
reflection. 



112 STRAWBERRY HILL. 



CHAPTER VI. 



THE SUPPER-CLL^ AT "tHE ADMIRAL \T:RN0N.' 



There was a vast display of bustling pre- 
paration amongst the individuals composing 
tlie establishment of " The Admiral Vernon," 
a small pubHc-house situated in one of the 
bye-streets of Soho. It was club night; and 
the bustling little publican and his bustling 
little wife, assisted by a still more active 
waiter and maid-of-all-work, were employ- 
ing their best exertions in seeing that the 
long table in the supper-room was properly 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 113 

laid — the uncushioned oak chairs set in 
their proper places — the floor properly 
sanded — the supper in a proper state of 
forwardness — the candles lit — the kettle 
boiling — the pipes laid out — the spoons 
counted — and the plates hot : in short, that 
every thing was exactly where it should be, 
so that no fault could be found by any of 
the extremely difficult-to-be-pleased persons 
whom, it was evident, the anxious landlord 
momentarily exi:)ected. 

Xo doubt, " The Admiral Vemon" was 
to be honoured that night by a party of 
yery fastidious convives^ who could enjoy 
" the feast of reason and the flow of soul," 
only when the said feast was '' done to a 
turn," and the said flow was exactlv of the 
right temperature, strength, and sweetness. 
^lost probably they were a select circle of 
Epicureans, who met together to enjoy, in 
the unceremonious freedom allowed at a 
tavern, a sociality too refined and parti- 
cular to be permitted in their own homes. 



114 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

Perhaps some such highly respectable as- 
semblage as have found immortality in the 
pleasant pages of the Spectator, in which 
persons of birth and fashion mingled, and 
found enjoyments which they prized quite 
as highly as their more luxurious successors 
prize the attractions of the Eeform or the 
Conservative Club. 

The landlord was in his best blue coat and 
^vig — the landlady in her best chintz gown 
and apron — the waiter and maid-of-all-work 
were sporting their cleanest face and hands, 
— ^in short the inmates of " The Admiral Ver- 
non" were quite ready to receive their very 
particular company; and as the hands of 
the great clock in the room indicated an 
immediate approach to the hour of eight, 
they were all well aware their very parti- 
cular company might be looked for every 
minute. 

" I think there 's nothing to find fault 
about," said the landlord, in a somewhat 
tremulous tone, to his wife, as he took a 



STEAWBERRY HILL. 115 

last careful scrutiny of the preparations of 
the supper-table — clearly impressed with 
the notion, that if there should be anything 
amiss, it was likely to go hard with him. 

The wife also gave her scrutiny. The 
result was perfectly satisfactory. The waiter 
and maid-of-all-work, with the same nervous 
apprehension, gave theirs ; and a very heavy' 
load seemed taken off their several minds 
when they had ascertained beyond a doubt 
all was exactly as it ought to be. 

"Jane," added the landlord, "go to the 
bar, to be in readiness to receive them. 
Jem," he called to the waiter, " run to the 
front door, and see if any on 'em are coming. 
And Sally," he added, "you take care 
every thing 's dished as though you was 
doing it for a wager, so as they don't blow 
me up for being kept waiting." 

Each of the trio obeyed with alacrity the 
directions he or she had received, and the 
master of the house busied himself a few 
moments in placing the chairs at what he 



IIG STRAWBERRY HELL. 

thought the most correct distance from the 
table. The attention he paid to such 
minutia}, shewed either how extremely care- 
ful he was to leave no room for dissatisfac- 
tion, or the strong impression there was on 
his mind of the difficulty there existed of 
pleasing the parties whose comfort he had 
been so anxiously endeavouring to secure. 
In the midst of his employment at the 
further end of the room, he thought he 
heard a noise. He felt assured some mem- 
bers of the Club had arrived. 

There was a little rustling in the passage, 
and he heard his wife's voice crying "Oh fie 
now!" He couldn't mistake the sound that 
followed. But the man was something of a 
philosopher ; he felt satisfied it was far better 
of two evils to choose the least ; he was well 
aware his customers could not be breaking 
his head while they were kissing his -vvife. 
He listened, and heard a familiar voice that 
made him shake in his shoes. 

" Adorable creature ! I am infinitely de- 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 117 

lighted to find you alone. Allow me to say 
you are looking a million times more charm- 
ing than ever. Positively, my dear, such 
prodigious perfections are quite thrown 
away upon that everlasting rascal. He is a 
low feUow, unworthy to touch your seraphic 
shoe-tie. Cursed low fellow, poz." 

*'Pray, let me go. Goodness gracious!" 
" Indeed, my dear, you are buried, lost, 
cast away, in such a vulgar place as this. 
Those matchless beauties were born to 
grace a higher spear. Don't you think so, 
Duke?" 

"Of coorth, I do, Marquith!" was the 
lisping reply in another voice. 

"Incomparable charmer!" resumed the 
first voice, in impassioned tones, "exquisite 
epitome of your sex's perfections ! AVhy will 
you tolerate that everlasting rascal? He is 
too low a feUow for the society of so di\ine 
a creature. Isn't he, Duke?" 

" Dethidedly, Marquith," was the ready 
response. 



118 STRAAVBERRY HILL. 

If the trembling little publican was in the 
habit of looking at the bright side of things, 
like the gay-hearted Captain Conway, he 
ought to have derived very great consolation 
from the knowledge, that if his wife had ad- 
mirers, they were worth boasting of. A 
]\Iarquis and a Duke were surely high enough 
to satisfy the ambition of any husband. 
His company might well be fastidious, if 
these were to be regarded as a sample of 
them. But he did not seem very much 
puffed up with this gratifying reflection. 
He was intently listening, vdth a face in 
which fear was struggling with curiosity. 
No doubt he stood very much in awe of his 
noble customers. 

But whatever were his reflections, they 
were brought to a sudden conclusion, by the 
waiter entering the room as hurriedly as if 
he had been shot out of a cannon. He had 
been hurled forward at the imminent risk of 
dislocating his neck, and saved his own bones 
by nearly breaking those of his master, with 



STRAA^TBERRY HILL. 119 

whom he came in contact as the latter was 
approachmg the door. 

" So you were listening, were you, you 
everlasting rascal!" exclaimed the voice of 
the person styled ^larquis, rapidly follomng 
the waiter, accompanied by his ducal com- 
panion. 

Could it be possible? Yes, it was pos- 
sible. The noble gallant, who had so stig- 
matized the 2^001* publican as a " low-born 
fellow," was in a suit of sky blue livery, 
turned up with crimson; his companion, 
whom he had addressed as "Duke," wore 
another, still more showy, of scarlet and gold. 

Xeither the landlord nor his waiter seemed 
in the least deo^ree astonished at beholdinir 
such apparently distinguished personages 
come swaggering towards them, making the 
most of their five-feet-eleven, vdth footmen's 
laced hats upon their heads, and wearing a 
costume so derogatory. The reason for 
which soon appeared in the influx into the 
room of several men similarly clad. 



120 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

This diversion appeared to be the salvation 
of the poor waiter. He managed to slip 
out of the room while the new comers were 
paying their compliments to those who had 
preceded them. 

" Marquis, your most obedient ! Duke, I 
kiss your hand." 

" Ah, Sir William ! Ah, General ! I protest 
I 'm monstrous glad to see you looking so 
weU." 

« 

*' Positively we haven't met for an age : 
but then you know I 've been at Scarborough 
such a prodigious time." 

'' And an immensity of good it 's done 
you. I vow to gad I should hardly have 
kno^Mi you. The General 's quite another 
man, isn't he, Duke." 

" Yeth — quite another man, ]\Iarquith." 

" I protest now you flatter me, ]\Iarquis — 
you do indeed, Duke. Demme ! " 

Such were the congratulations and re- 
cognitions that passed between these per- 
sonasres: and there was such an air of 



STRAWBERRY HELL. 121 

fashionable aiFectation in their greetings, 
that a stranger might have looked on in 
doubt whether they held the exalted place 
in society they assumed, or were only, as 
was really the case, so many impudent 
lacqueys aping the manners and assuming 
the names of their masters. 

More of the same fraternity arrived, who 
went through much the same style of 
greeting. Not the least amusing part of 
the scene was the curious wav in whicli 
titles were appropriated. It was ludicrous 
enough to see a Duke in such parti-coloured 
vestments; but when another flaunting 
knight of the shoulder-knot was addressed 
by the reverend appellation of Bishop, the 
ridiculousness of the thing became still 
more apparent. 

During the last two or three minutes the 
trembling little landlord had retained a 
respectful position near the principal group 
in the room, as though wishing to gain the 
eye of the tall consequential personage 
VOL. T. r. 



122 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

yclept ^Marquis: but that great man was 
evidently not disposed to see his host, and 
more than once plainly turned his back 
upon him. Still the poor publican per- 
severed, and Avitli a trembling anxiety in his 
nervous fidgetty manner, that shewed he felt 
it to be a part of his duty. His pertinacity 
had the desired effect. 

" Well, fellow, what are you doing here? " 
inquired the great man, knitting his brows 
very angrily, and putting his thumbs with 
a consequential swagger into the arm-holes 
of his flowery vest. 

" If you please, a — a,"' stuttered the little 
man, in a great fright — " I merely wished 
to know, a — a — whether your worship 
would Avish to have supper served directly." 
" You did, did you, you everlasting ras- 
cal?" fiercely demanded the other. "Damn 
your impudence ; You 're a low fellow. Sir — 
cursed low fellow. Isn't he, Duke?" 

" Exthremely low fellow indeed, Mar- 
quith," was that worthy's response. Other 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 123 

expressions equally uncomplimentary came 
pouring upon his devoted head, till the poor 
man began to fear that he was likely to be 
thrust out of his room much in the same expe- 
ditious style his subordinate had so lately been 
sent into it. The entrance of two more visi- 
tors appeared to call off attention from him. 
They were Oswald, who was hailed by every 
one present as " Sir Robert," and a younger 
companion who wore the same livery. 

" Gentlemen," he said, advancing into the 
room, " allow me to introduce a new mem- 
ber to the Club. This is my excellent young 
friend Mr. Fibbs, just returned from foreign 
parts, where he has had the honour of filhng 
the post of Gentleman's Gentleman to our 
young master Horace Walpole, Esq. M.P., 
Avith whom he still remains." 

" I feel very proud of being made knoA\Ti 
to so many distinguished persons," said a 
young man of a smart figure and good- 
looking features, that evidently did not lack 
assurance, as he bowed very low to the com- 

G 2 



124 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

pany — " Comment vous portez vous? as we 
say in France." 

]\Iost of Mr. Fibbs's new associates lost 
no time in paying their compliments and 
offering their felicitations, as if quite happy 
at making the acquaintance of so accom- 
plished a traveller. 

'' I vow to gad I am prodigious glad we 
possess amongst us a gentleman of your 
undoubted breeding," observed the sky-blue- 
and-crimson Marquis. "It is not always 
that new members come before us enjoying 
your extensive accomplishments. I was in 
France once myself — went there on a tower : 
prodigious nice place, isn't it, Duke ?" 

" Monthrouth nithe plathe, Marquith," 
was the ready reply. 

" Gentlemen, you do me honour," answered 
the travelled valet : " I hope to be allowed 
the satisfaction of paying my footing by a 
bowl of punch ; and beg to assure you that 
the proposal is quite co?i amore^ as we say in 
Italv." 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 125 

This generous resolution at once made 
Mr. Fibbs extremely popular ^vith the mem- 
bers of the Club. 

\\Tiilst they are putting their cocked hats 
on the row of pegs along the wall, and taking 
their places at the table, agreeably to the 
intimation that was given them that supper 
was being served, we ^vill just beg permis- 
sion to state, as the reader now, however, 
may surmise, that the grand company whom 
the trembling little landlord had anticipated 
with so much anxiety, as though they were 
the most fastidious aristocrats under the 
sun, consisted of an association of upper 
footmen, butlers, and valets, who were in the 
habit of meetino^ to^-ether once a month, at 
an obscure public house (kept by a man suffi- 
ciently humble in spirit to endure their in- 
solence), to wash down a hearty meal off 
their favourite joint, with copious draughts 
of their several favourite potations. 

This favourite joint was invariably '' a leg 
of mutton and trimmings ;" indeed, so popu- 



126 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

lar was it with them, that when, in conse- 
quence of a considerable increase in the 
members, something more was required to 
satisfy all their appetites, it was put to the 
vote whether another joint should be added, 
and it was finally resolved unanimously, 
" that they would have two legs of mutton 
and two trimmings." 

The supper table, surrounded as it was 
by so many showy liveries, presented a sin- 
gular if not an agreeable effect to the eye. 
There were other features in it that seemed 
to demand observation. At the head of the 
long table sat Oswald; and in justice to him 
it must be allowed that his bearing was that 
of a chairman, quite aware of his own con- 
sequence, and quite determined to maintain 
it. He was a man advancing into years; 
but his florid complexion, and clear, shrewd 
grey eye, gave a freshness to his features, 
that made many a good judge of age rank 
him twenty years younger than he was; 
then his plump face, surmounted by a capa- 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 127 

cious wig, gave an air of tranquil dignity to 
his appearance that well became his seat of 
office. 

The Chairman had near liim the well-fed 
and consequential ser^dtors of the Duke 
of Xewcastle, Lord ToA\Tishend, General 
Churchill, the Marquis of Rockingham, the 
Bishop of London, and several other sup- 
porters of Government, including the tra- 
velled valet of Horace AValpole, who, though 
a new member, had, thanks to his own im- 
pudence, become as much at home amongst 
them as the Chairman himself. 

At the other end of the table sat a tall, 
formal, half- sly, half- sarcastic-looking Scotch- 
man, known as Sandie M'Foxie, the confi- 
dential servant of Mr. Pulteney, between 
whom and Oswald there was always a good 
deal of skirmishing going on, proceeding, of 
course, from the very opposite politics they 
advocated, as representatives of their re- 
spective masters, the two great political 
chiefs of the AMiigs and the Tories. He was 



128 STKAWBERRY HILL. 

supported on one side by the French valet 
of Lord Bolingbroke, and on the other by the 
English footman of Sir AVilliam Wyndham. 
Next to the latter was a little sleek smirking 
fellow, who acted as major-domo to Lady 
Archibald Hamilton. The liveries of other 
leaders of the Tories might have been seen 
at this end of the table. In short, it was 
very clear that there were two parties in* 
'' The Upper Servants' Supper Club,^' and 
that they ranged themselves under their 
respective leaders — the Walpole party being 
at top, the Pulteney party remaining at the 
bottom of the table. 

The meal commenced with great spirit, 
by a simultaneous attack on the two steam- 
ing joints ; the little landlord waiting obse- 
quiously at the side of the Chairman, but 
with a nervous alacrity offering his services 
wherever they were required ; and the rest of 
his establishment, excepting his pretty little 
wife, who remained in the bar to serve out 
the liquors, were actively employed in satis- 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 129 

fying the multitudinous demands that were 
made upon them. Amid the clatter of the 
horn-handled knives and forks, and the rat- 
tling of the white plates, a medley of voices 
came from all parts of the table, making as 
rude a chorus as can well be conceived. 

" Kow, you everlasting rascal, am I to be 
kept waiting all night? I vow to gad I 
never saw so slow an animal in all my born 
days. Did you, Duke?" 

" He 'th very thlow, thertainly, Marquith." 

" Hark ye, fellow," continued the lisper in 
a higher key, " be thure you bring me the 
Pope'th eye and lotth of caper thauth. I'm 
very fond of the Pope'th eye ^yiih lotth of 
caper thauth," added he in a confidential 
tone to his next neighbour. 

*' I don't object to caper sauce, 'cause I 
never heard nothino^ ao^ainst its beino^ ortho- 
dox," exclaimed the representative of the 
Bishop of London — a tallow-faced cockney, 
in a very stiff neck- cloth. '' But no Pope's 
eye for me : I hates everything Papistical." 

g3 



130 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

'' A little more o' them mashed turnips, 
Marquis, and a carrot or two; I don't care 
about 'taters, they 're so devilish low." 

" That Sir William 's the greediest hog I 
ever came near," remarked the Marquis in 
an under tone, as he was serving the vege- 
tables, *' he wants to have all the turnips to 
himself. Monstrous vulgar, isn't it, Duke?" 

" I 'm dithguthted, Marquith ! " replied his 
friend, too intent on paying his devotions to 
his favourite tit-bit, that had been just 
placed before him, to be more communi- 
cative. 

" Excellent bit of mutton, this," remarked 
the Chainnan, actively cutting away, his 
face moist with the steam and his own 
exertions, " let me recommend you a slice." 

" Thank you, I will take a little of the 
gigot^ as we say in France," replied his young 
acquaintance. 

" I 'm just thinking this is as bonny a 
joint as a hungr}^ man need partake of," 
said the representative of the great Tory 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 131 

party ; and he added, Avith a sly glance at 
some of his friends, " the mutton 's a wee 
bit too well flavoured to have been fattened 
on a Whig pasture." 

At this jest the servants of Lord BoHng- 
broke and Lady Hamilton exchanged signi- 
ficant glances; whilst Sir Wilham Wynd- 
ham's footman burst into a horse-laugh. 

^luch in this way the meal proceeded to 
its conclusion ; the master and his attendants 
having anything but a sinecure in supplying 
the wants and mshes of their insolent cus- 
tomers. They darted backwards and for- 
wards with inconceivable aoilitv, as each 
sharp summons reached their ears : now for 
more meat — more beer — more vegetables, 
more bread — till, to their evident reUef, 
there was no more of either to be had. 

Oswald, who always had his eyes and ears 
open, whilst describing to the travelled valet 
of his master's son the characters of the dif- 
ferent persons at the table with him, noticed 
how frequently the leading members of the 



132 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

opposite party laid their powdered heads to- 
gether over their plates, and seemed ab- 
sorbed in communications of the deepest 
interest. 

" I suspect there 's something in the wind," 
he observed to his fellow- servant, as the 
cloth was being cleared, ''there 's a deal 
more than ordinary in the cunning look of 
that cursed Scotchman. That Frenchman, 
too, 's a deep fellow, and looks uncommon 
like a Jesuit ; and then there 's that smirking 
thief of my Lady Archibald, and Wyndham's 
vulgar scoundrel. I know by their grimaces 
they are engaged in a plot against us. 
Now, Fibbs, mind what I say. You presently 
go and seat yourself at t'other end of the 
table, as though you wanted to talk with old 
Kickshaw respecting your visit to France. 
Say all you can against us. Do you take? 
— and if you can pick up anything, let me 
know." 

" I understand perfectly. Au r^evoir, as 
we say in France," replied his companion; 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 13 



o 



and the next nninute he was seated by the 
side of the Frenchman, who, having been 
cordially hailed in his own tongue, made 
way for him with pleased alacrity. Nor was 
Mr. Fibbs ill-received by the party he now 
joined ; this perhaps he owed partly to his 
being a new comer, partly to the handsome 
manner in which he had offered to pay his 
footing. 

The legs of mutton and trimmings having 
been disposed of, preparations were now 
made for the after-meal enjoyments, which 
consisted of drinking and smoking. Every 
member was provided with a pipe and a 
sufficiency of tobacco, and he proceeded to 
call for whatever liquor he preferred, or 
could afford to pay for. 

The landlord and his assistants were again 
obliged to exhibit an unnatural degree of 
vigilance in endeavouring to attend to every 
body at once. The variety of the different 
orders they received, was much more amus- 
ing than the sharp and imperative tones in 



134 STRAAVBERRY HILL. 

which they were given. After the new Mem- 
ber's bowl of punch had disappeared, the 
more aristocratic portion of the Club called 
for wine — many demanded gin-and-water — 
others called for usquebaugh; and the rest 
patronized such indescribable mixtures as 
flip, dog's-nose, lamb's- wool, huff- cap, three- 
threads, and purl. 

" Xow, you everlasting rascal, attend to 
me," cried his wife's admirer to the trembling 
little publican — " a bottle of Madeira. Duke, 
will you join ? " 

" Of coorth, Marquith." 

" Then be sure it is the best in your 
cellar. We don't mind the expense — Do we, 
Duke?" 

" D the expenth, Marquith." 

" Coijjo de Bacco ! as we say in Italy," 
cried the new Member, " My friend Monsieur 
Quelquechose and myself will drink to each 
other's better acquaintance in a bottle of 
claret." 

" Oui^ man ami, I shall be mosh glad." 



STRAWBERRY HUX. 135 

" TVTiat 'bacco was that you were speaking 
of ? " inquired the untravelled representative 
of Sir William Wyndham. 

" Hignorant liass !" exclaimed the Bishop 
of London in an under tone, expressive of 
immense contempt. 

"" Now, gentlemen! " cried the Chairman, 
when he had ascertained that all the mem- 
bers had been provided with what they re- 
quired, " seeing as how your pipes are 
lighted and your glasses filled, I must beg 
to propose our usual toast — High wages and 
easy places ! " 

This toast was drunk with the most lively 
demonstrations of applause. It was easy to 
see that every one approved of it. 

" And now, gentlemen," added the Vice 
from the other end of the table, " the toast 
ye have just drunk is verra proper and ne- 
cessary for us all to uphold. I '11 no say a 
word against it. But I 've got a bit of a 
sentiment whilk I 'm certain sure ye '11 think 
quite as gude. I '11 e'en declare it at once. 



136 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

^ May gude masters, who look after notliing, 
find gude servants, willing to put their 
hands to anything.' " 

The sentiment, with its occult meaning, 
it is scarcely necessary to say, was quite as 
well received as the toast. 

A few more toasts and sentiments of a 
similar description followed, and then, as 
was usual, the conversation began gradually 
to assume a political character. The shrewd 
old servitor of Sir Robert Walpole iname- 
diately took a leading part in it, and was of 
course opposed by the crafty-looking attend- 
ant on Mr. Pulteney. The chief supporters 
of each occasionally took a share in the argu- 
ment ; but, with the exception of a few inter- 
ruptions, it appeared to be a trial of strength 
between the two rivals at the supper table. 

In the course of the argument, the Wal- 
pole party were rather roughly handled by 
the liveried orator of the Pulteneys ; and in 
return the Pulteney party got quite as 
sharply dealt with by the liveried orator of 



STliAWBEKRY HILL. 137 

the Minister. The Scotchman was most 
severe on the foreign policy of Ministers, 
abused their proceedings respecting Poland, 
denounced their policy in Italy, and was 
particularly indignant on the subject of the 
Pragmatic Sanction. 

The worthy Oswald was not abashed by 
so many powerful exceptions, and defended 
the Government measures with prodigious 
spirit — identifying himself with the great 
Minister in the most amusing manner, by 
always using the pronoun ive in allusion to 
the acts of the Government — which by the 
way was also the practice of his opponent, 
when mentioning the acts of the Opposition. 

" In short," said the representative of the 
Tory leader, after a long and severe philippic, 
'•'' it 's as plain as the nose on your face, that 
your folly and misgovernment are sending 
the country to the devil." 

" That 's the fact," added his neighbour, 
the liveried Sir William Wyndham. " The 
Whigs have done nothing but mischief 



138 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

We are the only people capable of setting 
thinfi^s to rio^hts." 

" I have my doubts on that head," replied 
the Chairman, "' however, I 'm for Pro- 
testant ascendancy and the union of Church 
and State." 

" We must be sure to support the 
Church," cried, with a hearty execration, 
the stiff-necked Bishop of London. " I 
halways stands by my own border." 

" A prodigious good resolution," observed 
the Marquis. " We, as belongs to the State, 
ought to support the State : what do you say, 
Duke?" 

"Dethidedly, Marquith," replied his friend, 
momentarily taking his pipe from liis mouth. 

" I don't despair," rejoined Mr. Pulteney's 
servant. "If I 'm not verra much mis- 
taken, there '11 be a wonderful change in 
things long before certain persons are pre- 
pared for it. If these worthless AYhigs 
don't get out of our way, we shall be under 
the necessity of kicking them out." 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 139 

The dependents of Lord Bolingbroke and 
Lady Archibald Hamilton again exchanged 
very significant glances. 

" We are not at all afraid of that," re- 
plied Mr. OsTvald, vrith a vast expression of 
cool contempt; ''we despise the wretched 
tools of a paltiy faction too much to fear 
them." 

"Ye 're too gude, by half," angrily re- 
torted Mr. MToxiej "but I 'm thinking its 
just better to be tools than rogues." 

"Rogues!" shouted the Chairman an- 
grily, rising from his seat, "is that in- 
tended for this end of the table?" 

" Rogues!" echoed the Marquis's state 
footman with becoming' diofnity, " I vow 
to gad we '11 not stand that; will we, 
Duke?" 

" Thertainly not, Marquith!" replied his 
friend, with the same feeling of virtuous in- 
dignation very strongly impressed in his 
countenance, " it 'th motht inthulting. He 
ought to be made to know, perthonth of 



140 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

dithtincthon mutht not be inthulted with 
impunity." 

''Rogues!" repeated Oswald, his broad 
face in a blaze of anger, " I 'd have you to 
know who you 're a-speaking to." 

" He 's a haggrawating hinfidel, not worth 
our notice," observed the prelate in livery, 
lookinor in the direction of the offender as 
if he had just swallowed something ex- 
tremely disagreeable. 

The Chairman was not in a humour to 
put up with such an affront. His good- 
natured physiognomy was turned to fiery 
indignation at hearing a phrase, which, 
though addressed to him, he knew to be 
applied to his master; and he retorted in 
language equally offensive. His rival re- 
plied in words still more objectionable, and 
the whole room then began to resound with 
the war of words. The Tories abused the 
Whigs like pickpockets, and the Whigs 
retorted on the Tories with a Billingsgate 
equally comprehensive. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 141 

The political partizans seemed every mo- 
ment getting more and more excited — exe- 
crations and threats were exchanged, like 
long shots in a fight at sea. Every man 
at last jumped to his feet — a pitched battle 
seemed inevitable, when suddenly the waiter 
rushed into the room, bawling with the 
full force of his lungs, and a prodigious as- 
pirate on the second and last word, that " the 
Opera was over." 

In an instant all tried to seize their hats 
and hasten to the carria^fes waitinc^ in the 
Haymarket, or to the homes of their mas- 
ters — in whichever quarter their services 
Avere likely to be required — with a degree 
of anxiety that made them quite oblivious 
of their recent dispute. 



142 STRAWBERRY HILL. 



CHAPTER VII. 

HORACE WALPOLE AND HIS VALET. 

The valet of a gentleman of fortune, a 
hundred years ago, was in many respects a 
different kind of animal to the fashionable 
valet of the present day. He was a most 
useful personage — he could do every thing — 
and, what was of equal importance, he could 
say every thing, required of him. He was 
possessed of an inexhaustible fund of good 
humour — an unfailing impudence — a hajipy 
invention : was not less full of vanity than 



STRAWBERKY HILL. 143 

of mendacity — was devoted to his master — 
was employed as the ambassador in his 
amours — the counsel in his difficulties — and 
the prime minister in all his little matters 
of finance. He was also the most amusing 
of gossips; for it appeared to be a part of 
his duties to get acquainted ^ith every 
thing and every body, for the express pur- 
pose, as it seemed, of entertaining his em- 
ployer whilst engaged in the tedious ar- 
rangements of the toilet. 

The stage has pretty frequently mtro- 
duced us to indi\'iduals of this genus do- 
mestic ; but we are more famihar ^dth 
foreign than with native specimens. Never- 
theless, the English valet, as he flourished 
about the middle of the last century, was 
a character worthy the acquamtance of the 
readers of the present; therefore, we shall 
make no apolog}^ for preserving a full- 
length of him in these pages in the person 
of ^Ir. Fibbs, the confidential and favourite 
attendant on our hero. 



144 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

Fibbs and his master, though both in their 
youth, might call themselves old acquaint- 
ances ; they had first become known to each 
otlier at Eton. The former was the grandson 
of the dame in whose house young Walpole 
lived ; and his good looks, general clever- 
ness, and cheerful disposition made him a 
favourite with many of the elder youths, 
who often employed him in confidential 
embassies, which the boys of the school 
could not undertake. 

Walpole tried his fidelity more than once, 
and the result was so satisfactory to each 
that it created a mutual regard. AATien the 
^linister's son went to Cambridge, he con- 
trived to get his humble acquaintance em- 
ployment at his College, where his educa- 
tion proceeded rapidly ; and when he went 
abroad, he took Fibbs with him as his per- 
sonal servant. During his travels, the lat- 
ter contrived to finish his education as a 
valet quite as successfully as his master 
completed that of a gentleman. 



STRAAYBERRY HILL. 145 

It must be allowed that the young man 
followed the usual practice of favourite ser- 
vants, by taking a few liberties with his 
master; but then he never failed to treat 
hmi with the utmost respect before a third 
party. Xo indulgence ever induced the 
grandson of Dame Fibbs to behave to his 
master with an undue degree of familiarity. 
And there was another curious feature in 
the odd amalgamation of virtues and vices 
that made up his character. If it appeared 
necessary, he would beg for him, fight for 
him, lie for him, or steal for him, to any 
extent ; but to his master he had no decep- 
tion, and was a miracle of servile honesty. 

Fibbs had not the objections his mas- 
ter entertained to seeking new quarters. 
He might have felt some little regret at 
leaving the Minister's splendid edifice in 
Downing Street ; but when he found the 
new house so spacious — observed it to be 
so handsomely furnished — and learned that 
it was to be his young master's residence, 

VOL. I. H 



14G STEAWBERRY HILL. 

he was perfectly reconciled to the change. 
The honours of his master he regarded 
as in some part his own; and he rose 
in his own estimation to a marvellous 
height, when he reflected that he held the 
honourable and responsible office of valet 
to a Member of Parliament, having a fine 
house in Arlinsfton Street, and who was, 
moreover, the son of the Prime Minister. 

He drew a remarkably logical deduction 
— possibly the result of his Cambridge 
education — that, supposing Sir Robert Wal- 
pole to be the greatest great man in England, 
it followed that, in the eye of the world, 
his master was the greatest great man's son 
in England ; ergo^ it could not be othermse 
than that an individual so confidentially 
employed by the latter as himself, should be 
entitled to the distinction of being the 
greatest valet of the greatest great man's 
son in the same great empire. 

It is impossible to imagine a young man 
in his position better satisfied with it than 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 147 

was the Eton Dame's grandson ; and when 
he entered the dressing room of his master, 
the mornino; after his introduction to " The 
Upper Servants' Supper Club," (as faithfully 
related in our last chapter), in a light sleeved 
vest, bearing on his arm his master's coat 
carefuUy brushed and folded, a silver mug 
of hot water in his hand, a lather box, case 
of razors, strop, and clean napkin, his lively 
countenance expressed as much secret satis- 
faction as it was possible to have concen- 
trated in so moderate a compass. 

In this respect he was a striking contrast 
to his master, who, as he sat in his dressing 
gown, evidently waiting his servant's ap- 
proach, looked as discontented and uncom- 
fortable as a young gentleman of more than 
ordinary sensibility could be, who wanted 
sympathy in the one object on which he had 
placed all his affection, and — a matter equally 
important in his personal appearance — 
wanted shaving. 

Yery few valets, now-a-days, condescend 

h2 



148 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

to exercise the accomplishments of a barber ; 
perhaps that is the reason why they have 
so completely lost their identity with the 
Leporellos, Figaros, and other popular re- 
presentatives of their peculiar class. In 
these enlightened days gentlemen keep to 
themselves the enjoyment of the razor. 

It may be said that they have not much 
to do ; for what with the encroachments of 
whiskers, beard, mustachios, and imperial, 
the lathering and scraping have been re- 
duced to a very moderate limit. But in 
the barefaced days of George II. the natural 
domain of shaving spread over the entire 
facial surface, wherever a bristle could be 
cultivated; and not unfrequently included 
the whole of the head. Xow the same crop 
is carefuUy planted out, after continued top- 
dressings of those powerful guanos. Macassar 
Oil and Bear's Grease : — then, the whole was 
kept in stubble. 

Shaving, therefore, was an operation de- 
manding no slight degree of manual dex- 



STRAWBERRY HILL. , 149 

terity, and took up a great deal of time. 
This period, which would othermse have 
been insufferably tedious, the operator con- 
trived should pass by as pleasantly as pos- 
sible, by calling in aid the resources of 
gossip, scandal, and entertaining anecdotes, 
which were as much at the valet's disposal 
as his soap-suds. 

" A fine morning this, your Honour," ex- 
claimed Fibbs, as he proceeded to place a nap- 
kin round his master's throat, "prodigious 
fine morning. Ahnost as fine as we had at 
Rome. hella Italia ! as we say in Italy. 
That is the country for fine weather. For 
my part, I cannot imagine why everybody 
does not desire to live there. ^Nevertheless, 
I am well aware that there are prejudices. 
The Laplander prefers his cheerless snows 
to the sunniest chmes. De gustibus non est 
disputandujUj as we said at Eton. 

" I must acknowledge I'm all for sun- 
shine," he continued, as he briskly manu- 
factured the lather, " it puts a man in good 



150 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

spirits, your Honour. I don't think there 
would be any suicides, if the sun could be 
made to shine all the year round. And 
there would be a great deal more happiness 
in the world, depend on 't. The men would 
be too comfortable to think of quarrelling 
with each other. I say nothing of the wo- 
men, for your Honour knows — ' the greater 
includes the less,* as we said at Cambridge. 
"" It 's a thousand pities, every country 
hasn't a sun of its own," he added, as he 
half smothered his young master's nose, 
mouth, and ears under an accumulation of 
soap-suds, briskly distributing it equally over 
the face with the brush, with the nonchalance 
of an artist laying his colours on the canvass ; 
'* it would be an arran element, a o^reat deal 
more satisfactory, your Honour, depend on 't, 
and make vast changes over the whole civi- 
lized orlobe. The foo^o-iest Hollander would 
become as sprightly as a Gascon, and the 
miserablest native of Greenland would out- 
laugh the merriest Savoyard that ever danced 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 151 

to a cracked flageolet. Fiat lux, as we said 
at Eton, and then nobody need have the 
vapours. We should see the world in its 
brightest aspect; and its unproved appear- 
ance would vastly improve our spirits." 

Possibly his young master might have 
made some observations on this original 
conception of his servant for making all 
mankind happy, but he knew his mouth to 
be too well fortified with a breast- work of 
lather, to risk opening his lips. And now 
the bright razor flashed before his eyes, Avith 
a preliminary strop on the operator's pahn; 
and he was one of those mse men who would 
refrain from entering into an argument vnih 
an opponent flourishing a deadly weapon 
within an inch of his throat. 

" I 'm sorry to see your Honour so dull," 
continued his volatile attendant, as he pro- 
ceeded to remove the lather he had just 
laid on so artistically; "I remember when 
we were at Rome, you were regarded as the 
most cheerful Enf]:lishman in the dominions 



152 STRAWBEERY HILL. 

of his Holiness. But then there was a lady 
in the case, and Amor vincit omnia, as we 
said at Eton. She was very beautiful, and 
very — 

" By your leave, I must have your Ho- 
nour's nose a little higher," suddenly ob- 
served the operator, as he elevated that 
useful member with his finger and thmnb, so 
as to aUow the upper lip the full benefit of the 
sharp blade passing so dexterously over it. 
" Yes, I must acknowledge she was what I 
call a great beauty, your Honour. La belle 
des belles, as we say in France. But I never 
could make out exactly, your Honour, what 
parted you. I remember weU enough her say- 
ing to me once, when I took a billet from you 
to the Palazza What-d'ye-caU'em, in which 
she lived, ' Signor Fibbs,' says she, ' I have a 
great regard for your ]\Iaster.' ' He 's dying 
for you, my Lady,' says I, quite plump ; for 
I invariably look on such small acknowledg- 
ments on the part of her sex as a petitio prin- 
cipii, as we said at Cambridge, and allow the 



STEAWBERRY HILL. 153 

poor creature the full benefit of it. t Signor 
Fibbs/ says she — 

'' Your Honour's chin a little lower — that 's 
it,'' said the gossip, interrupting his reminis- 
cences for the purpose of securing a proper 
completion of his task. " ' Signor Fibbs,' says 
she, ' tell your master, from me, that I am 
perfectly sensible of his delicacy' — those 
were the very words, your Honour — ' per- 
fectly sensible of his delicacy, but that an 
impassable gulf yawns between us, and 
therefore it is impossible that we can be 
anything to each other.' 

" I was a little transmogrified at this, your 
Honour, you may be sure, knowing every 
thing respecting you both so well as I did ; 
but then I was quite as well aware that woman 
is an animal sui generis^ as we said at Cam- 
bridge, and therefore pretended to take what 
I had heard as a matter of course. I won't 
say I didn't call to mind at the time a certain 
rosy-cheeked little girl at Frogmore, who 
cried her apron -syringing wet when your Ho- 

H 3 



154 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

nour left Eton ; and yet, confound the jade, 
a month afterwards married the miller's club- 
footed son at Datchet. Homme propose et 
Dieu dispose, as we say in France : but 
when the man doii't propose, 'tis the girl 
disposes of herself; and, as if she fancied 
that the devil took the hindmost of her sex 
in the race for matrimony, it is generally 
in the most hasty and reckless manner 
possible." 

" I think, Mr. Fibbs, you are giving that 
restless tongue of yours a great deal too 
much license," observed his master, as soon 
as he found he might venture to remon- 
strate — which opportunity he had been 
rather impatiently waiting for for some 
minutes — " how often am I to tell you 
never to allude to what transpired at 
Rome! . ." Here the young Member gave 
a profound sigh. 

" No offence, your Honour," replied his at- 
tendant, deprecatingly — who was perfectly 
aware there was a mystery in this attachment 



STRAA^^ERRY HILL. 155 

of his young master, and would have given 
half his wages to find it out; "sorry I 
alluded to the subject, your Honour; but 
cannot help being concerned that the affair 
should have ended so unsatisfactorily. But, 
Che sara sara^ as we said in Italy. 

"What would you please to wear?" he 
added, having completed his operations on 
his young master's head and face. " Which 
suit would your Honour like to appear in 
to-day?" 

The necessary directions were given, and 
the process of dressing began. Like most 
young men of family of his day, Horace 
Walpole paid particular attention to his 
person, and his apparel was always of 
the most fashionable make. His valet se- 
conded his wishes with great attention 
and assiduity, but it seemed a natural ai'- 
rangement of the machine, for the tongue 
to keep pace mth the movement of the 
hands. He perceived his young master to 
be in rather low spirits, and sought to 



156 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

amuse him by a relation of all he had seen 
and heard the previous night. The ridicu- 
lous features of the " The Upper Servants' 
Supper Club" lost nothing in such hands; 
and the listener's thoughtful rather than 
sorrowful countenance brightened more than 
once, as he felt the humour of the scene. 
His smile, however, presently changed to 
an expression of the most intense interest, 
as the narrator began to unfold the suspi- 
cions that had been entertained by the 
sagacious chairman, of there being some 
plot hatching amongst the Pulteney party. 

" According to orders," continued the 
communicative valet, '^ I seated myself be- 
tween a couple of as sly foxes as ever 
robbed henroost — arcades ambo, as we said 
at Eton. I put forth all my powers of pleas- 
ing, together with certain accomplishments 
less worthy of credit, which though have 
often done good service. I considered, that 
to argue from false premises to just conclu- 
sions, and to employ the suppressio veri^ as 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 157 

we said at Cambridge, was excusable with 
such opponents." 

" Did you hear anything to satisfy you 
that my father had aught to fear from the 
intrigues of his enemies?" inquired the 
Minister's son, with considerable earnest- 
ness. 

" I heard nothing but hints," replied his 
attendant; ''but they were pregnant with 
meaning: and I could see from the good 
understanding that existed between the 
Scotchman and his French friend, and the 
servants of Sir William Wyndham and Lady 
Archibald Hamilton, that they were aware 
of something that was vastly agreeable to 
themselves and their employers, and must 
be equally to the prejudice of Sir Robert 
and his friends." 

" I doubt it was worth troubling your- 
self about," said his young master, as if 
disappointed at learning so little. "It is 
probable enough such persons would pre- 
tend to know what it was impossible 



158 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

would come under their observation. If 
Lady Archibald did enter into a plot "with 
my Lord Bolingbroke and the Pulteney 
party, it is monstrous absurd to imagine 
they would let their servants into their 
confidence, when secrecy was of the first 
importance to them." 

^' That is all very true, your Honour," ob- 
served the other. " But be assured, that as 
long as servants have ears, and doors have 
key-holes, a secret kno^wn to the master of 
the house is sure very soon to travel to his 
domestics. Experientia docet, as we said 
at Eton." 

" Surely you don't mean to say you have 
listened at key-holes!" exclaimed his young 
master. 

" Not to learn your Honour's secrets, 
certainly," replied his companion; "but to 
learn those of others in which you were 
interested. Every animal has some pecu- 
liar faculty on which it relies on an emer- 
gency. The feeble hare finds safety in her 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 159 

smftness of foot — the courageous cock de- 
fends himself mth his spurs — the gentle 
partridge, when put in peril by the sports- 
man, trusts to her speed of wing — and the 
harmless duck avoids her foes by her skill 
in diving : the domestic servant, in his 
emergency, trusts to his ears; and when- 
ever there is a tolerable conductor of sound, 
either in the way of thin partitions, opened 
windows, or key -holed doors, your Honour 
may be sure he will quickly find the use of it. 

'' I don't mean altogether to defend the 
practice, your Honour," he continued, "but it 
is natural we should desire to live and learn, 
and we must learn according to the means 
for acquiring information at our disposal. 
A key-hole is an indirect channel of commu- 
nication, certainly, your Honour, and per- 
haps should be regarded as an unlawful one : 
but Necessitas non habet leges^ as we said at 
Cambridge." 

" You have learnt no little sophistry 
amongst the knowledge you acquired at 



160 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

Cambridge," observed Horace Walpole, in 
some degree amused at his companion's jus- 
tification of an unwarrantable habit. The 
smile, however, was but transient : the re- 
ference that had so recently been made in 
his presence to an attachment he had en- 
tered into nearly twelve months before, 
had excited many asociations of more than 
ordinary interest. He sighed again — a 
pretty sure sign that his feelings had been 
touched. 

" Make your mind easy, your Honour, 
as regards this apparent plot amongst your 
respected father's enemies," observed his 
valet, believing his young master's solicitude 
had been excited in that direction. " I 
verily believe I should have got to the bot- 
tom of it last night, if it had not been for 
the skirmish that so suddenly sprang up 
at the table. But if there 's a secret, de- 
pend on it I '11 know the rights of it before 
twenty-four hours are over my head; and 
as I accepted the cordial invitations to visit 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 161 

them, given by my liveried friends, at Mr. 
Pulteney's — Sir William Wyndham's — my 
Lady Archibald Hamilton's — and my Lord 
Bolingbroke's, depend on it, your Honour, 
if there is anything to be discovered, I am 
in the ris-ht road to find it out. Restez tran- 
quille, as we say in France." 

By this time the young Member for Cal- 
lington had completed his toilet. His ap- 
pearance showed at a glance the attention 
that had been bestowed upon it ; and when 
he took his last scrutiny in the glass, he felt 
perfectly satisfied that everything, from the 
set of his wig to the fold of his shoe-tie, was 
perfectly unexceptionable. He gave some 
order to his attendant of an unimportant 
character, and some directions respecting 
\isitors. But he spoke listlessly, as if his 
attention was in another direction. At last, 
as he was about to leave the room, he sud- 
denly turned to his companion, and said, 
"By the bye, Fibbs, should you by any 
chance hear, in the course of your peregri- 



162 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

nations, any news of importance, menacing 
Sir Robert — anything, I mean, that can be 
relied on — I trust you will lose no time in 
communicating with me. No matter where 
1 am, or how I am engaged, I shall expect 
you to find your way to me, and without 
allowing any unnecessary time to elapse, to 
put me in possession of whatever you may 
have ascertained." 

" And now," said the Minister's younger 
son to himself, after he had heard out his 
servant's assurances of doing whatever he 
desired, and was making his way to enter the 
chair that was waiting for him in the hall, 
" now for Lady Archibald. If she is the wo- 
man I have every reason to believe her to be, 
I do not despair of being able to make her 
useful. Should there be aught to fear in these 
rumours of coalition against Sir Robert, I most 
earnestly hope I may be enabled to see the 
danger. I hope still more earnestly I 
may have the good fortune to guard him 
from it. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 163 

" Ah, x\.rabella ! " he exclaimed witli more 
fervour, '^ deeply as my spirit has been 
moved by thy exquisite beauty, I feel I 
could renounce thee, and all thy admirable 
gifts, to gain the proud distinction of being 
of service to so noble a parent." 



164 STRAWBERRY HILL. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

ARABELLA FALKLAND. 

We think it now high time to introduce 
one of the dramatis jpersonce of this story, of 
whose existence, although we may have 
given some slight indications, we have said 
much too little to satisfy even the most gentle 
of readers. A tale without a heroine stands 
much in the same position as a conserva- 
tory without a flower; and although these 
volumes assume a more historical character 
than can be said to belong to the mere novel, 



STRAWBERRY UILL. 165 

we are conscious that we shall be quite as 
much expected to fulfil the demands of fic- 
tion, as if we had as little to do T\ith truth 
as that stupendous romancer M. Thiers. 

There could only be one reason for our 
deferring so long the introduction of the 
young lady who is to play the important role 
in this drama of the last century — and this 
reason is, the want of any necessity for her 
appearance. Solomon said that there was a 
time for everything — and we are perfectly 
convinced he was riirht. There is a time 
for prize oxen and a time for white-bait — a 
time for the Horticultural Gardens, and a 
time for the ballet at the Opera House — a 
time for putrid bones, and a time for Perigord 
pies — a time for Archaeological gossip, and a 
time for Tractarian foolery — a time for Stars 
and Garters, and a time for stripes and rags 
— in short, a time for God, and a time for 
the de^il. — There must be, of course, a time 
for our heroine. 

We have not delayed her entrance upon 



166 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

the scene from a misgiving of her being able 
to play her part with effect. We beg to 
state that there is no room for doubt in such 
a case. The one pure and perfect chrysolite 
mentioned by the poet was not more admir- 
able than was the nature of Arabella 
Falkland. To a tall commanding figure — a 
figure combining the majesty of a Juno with 
the spiritual grace of the more youthful 
Psyche — there were added features impressed 
vrith. a spirit of such exquisite loveliness, 
that it seemed to the love- sick youth who 
ventured within the influence of her attrac- 
tions, an impossibility to gaze into those soft, 
subduing eyes, mthout his whole being be- 
comimx thrilled with a new sense — a sense 
of the beautiful, so ecstatic, so profound, 
that it became from that time forth an epoch 
in his existence — a sort of new style in his 
calendar, by which he might date his 
sensations. 

But these charms were physical only ; for 
thoufj-h her fine intellisrence made itself visible 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 167 

in her beauty as in a miiTor, the graces of 
her person were but the natural dower 
granted to the daughters of Eve in fee simple 
to the end of time, for their maintenance, 
security and honour. Her mind was a Pan- 
dora's box, full, not of evil gifts, but of good, 
with nobleness at the top, and wisdom at the 
bottom, modesty in a quiet comer, and 
virtue everywhere. 

At the period when she first made the 
acquaintance of Horace Walpole, she was 
living in Kome, with her father, A'^iscount 
Falkland, a nobleman of ancient family and 
of the Catholic faith, and an expatriated 
Jacobite, kno^\Ti to be in the service of the 
Pretender. She was young — just entering 
upon the quick sensibilities and proud 
resolves of womanhood — yet bearing upon 
her unsullied heart all those pure and holy 
feelings which, from childhood to adolescence, 
had grown and flourished around her gene- 
rous nature, like the rich wild flowers of 
some ever-sunny clime upon a virgin soil. 



168 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

Lord Falkland was in heart and soul a 
patrician — a man of somewhat haughty 
spirit — infinitely proud of his unsullied 
blood, yet equally proud of his incomparable 
daughter. His change of fortune, conse- 
quent upon his adherence to the Stuarts in 
their misfortunes, had only made him more 
proud, more gloomy, more an ascetic, than 
he had been when possessed of the extensive 
revenues of Falkland Court. There were 
tAVO or three powerful impulses at work in 
that busy brain, which swayed and directed 
all its energies. First came his love for his 
daughter — the last of an illustrious line, who 
seemed to inherit, mth all the beauty for 
Avhich so many of her female ancestors had 
been famous — as witness the immortal labours 
of Holbein, Vandyke, Lely, and Kneller — all 
the worth and talent which had distinguished 
the most famous of those churchmen, gene- 
rals, and statesmen, whose effigies, from the 
same eminent hands, also assisted in adorn- 
ing the great picture-gallery in their aban- 
doned home. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 1G9 

Next to his passionate love for the only 
being beside himself who bore his name, was 
his affection for his sovereign. Loyalty had 
been a characteristic of his house for many 
generations. It had dyed many a well con- 
tested field with crimson in the troublous 
times of the First Charles — it was as ready 
to yield the same evidence of its sincerity in 
the equally hapless time of his unfortunate 
descendants. The son of James II. knew 
his value, regarded him with equal admira- 
tion and esteem, and gave him a post in his 
little court, which, though barren of pecuni- 
ary advantage, the loyal exile would not 
have exchanged for the greatest distinction 
in the most gorgeous court in Christendom. 

The third and last of these powerful in- 
fluences was his reverence for his religion. 
The Catholic Church had fallen somewhat 
from its greatness, but in his eyes it was the 
greatest as well as the holiest of holy insti- 
tutions : many had abandoned its faith whom 
it had protected, honored, and enriched, but 

VOL. I. I 



170 STKAWBERRY HILL. 

the Falklands were not of the number ; and 
the last male of that steadfast race paid such 
homage to its spirit, as though he sought to 
make amends, by the ardour of his con- 
sistency, for the apostacy of those who had 
resigned its blessings. 

He had married late in life, a few years 
subsequently to his expatriation from his 
father-land, a daughter of a poor but exalted 
Roman family. This connection with a 
princely house might have added to his dig- 
nity, but it was very far from increasing his 
resources. However, it so happened that 
the Princess unfortunately did not long 
draw upon them — she died in giving birth 
to a dau;i:hter ; and for a long: time her hus- 
band appeared to have withdrawn himself 
from the world, to the sole enjoyment of the 
society of his Confessor, the Padre Michaeli, 
and his religious meditations. 

The infant Arabella, christened after Lord 
Falkland's adored mother, was placed under 
the care of a kinswoman, the Lady Abbess 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 171 

of a celebrated religious house in the neiirh- 
bourhood of Rome ; and the Signora Falkland 
happening to be a most intellectual as well as 
a truly noble Englishwoman, the child re- 
ceived so admirable an education, and her 
finely gifted mind was so skilfully directed 
to whatever could most elevate and ennoble 
it, that when the father received back his 
daughter, it appeared to his confnsed senses 
as though he had been in a heav}^ dream, 
from which he was awakened by a holy 
messenger, come to guide him to a world 
of glorious action and wondrous intelligence. 
Arabella Falkland, thouGfh Italian born, 
was Enghsh bred : her sympathies were 
with her father's, rather than with her mo- 
ther's home : her thoughts were more with 
Falkland Court than with the YiUaCastrucci. 
Yet, grafted on English purity, Italian en- 
thusiasm gave her a romantic temperament 
that existed only for what was most beautiful 
in nature, and most admirable in art. The 

study of the master-pieces of Italian poetry — 

I 2 



172 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

the lofty mysteries of Dante, the stirring 
thoughts of Tasso, and the eloquent feelings 
of Petrarch, had been joined with as intimate 
a knowledge of the loftiest examples of 
English genius in the passionate ecstacies of 
Shakspeare, and the holy aspirations of 
.Milton. She was a being that seemed 
created to excite a deathless passion — till the 
beauty of her form and features was observed 
in the same ineffable brightness to clothe 
her thoughts ; and then it was seen that she 
was as much the minister of Love as its idol 
— as completely the poet of Beauty as its 
object. 

It was at this interesting period she first 
accidentally encountered, whilst exploring 
one of the classic ruins of her native city, a 
young Englishman, who came recommended 
to her favourable consideration by an act of 
gallantry, which at some risk to his life pre- 
served her own. To her an Englishman 
was always an object of interest; but when 
on a second interview she discovered that 



STEAWBERRY HILL. 173 

her new acquaintance possessed the most 
refined taste, an accomj)lished mind, and the 
most ready appreciation of all those gifts and 
qualities for which she felt such passionate 
admiration, an invisible link of communica- 
tion arose between them, that every day's 
additional knowledge of each other's worth 
lengthened, "s\idened, and strengthened, till 
it became a bridge strong enough to bear the 
rapidly increasing traffic of two youthful 
hearts, overflowing with love for each other. 
The young Englishman, as soon as he as- 
certained who the Italian beauty was who had 
so ra\'ished his senses, thought it wisest to 
conceal his family name ; apprehensive that 
any information on this point would at once 
and for ever put an end to the exquisite 
happiness he was then enjoying. But Ara- 
bella Falkland having learned from him his 
Cliristian name, required no further know- 
ledge. Her father was absent from Eome 
on a pohtical mission, during the first fort- 
night of this acquaintance, and by the time 



174 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

he returned, the feehngs of the lovers were 
too much committed to be easily disen- 
tan!2:led. 

Lord Falkland, as has been said, was a 
proud man, and had the proudest views for 
his dauo'hter — he was also a man of irresis- 
tible prejudices ; and when he discovered that 
the son of a man he held in such absolute 
abhorrence as Sir Robert Walpole — the most 
dreaded enemy of the Jacobites — the most 
able supporter of the Hanoverian usurper — 
had dared to form an attachment with the 
daughter of a Falkland, it was impossible to 
imao^ine the extent of his indio:nation. 

Arabella had been taught to hate the 
name of Walpole, as she had been taught to 
worship the cause which that name had so 
often tumbled to the dust; and mth her 
natural enthusiasm she had learned to regard 
it with very considerable abhorrence. Yet, 
as soon as she ascertained that her lover was a 
Walpole, the name unaccountably lost a good 
deal of its detestable qualities. Nevertheless 



STKAWBERRY HILL. 175 

she immediately became weU aware that 
there was an impassable gulf between them. 
It was impossible for one brought up as she 
had been, to abandon the principles which 
had made the Falklands exiles in a forei^rn 
land. Attachment to the fallen house of 
Stuart formed the first article in her 
creed. 

The enthusiastic do not readily give up 
hope; and notwithstanding the uncompro- 
mising hostility of her parent, she fancied 
that there was a prospect, though a very 
remote one, of her attachment gaining his 
approval. She created in that ideal picture 
gallery — her youthful mind — a vision that 
answered to her sanguine wishes. She 
could imagine a Prince of the exiled family, 
winning the throne of his ancestors with the 
energy of a hero ; and the powerful Minister 
of the usurper, by a timely concession, 
making his peace with his legitimate Sove- 
reign. What she saw beyond this, was a 
vista of brightness and beauty, that left 



176 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

nothing for doubt, and as little for appre- 
hension. 

The last meeting of the young lovers gave 
to an hour more intensity of feeling than 
could have been distributed over an age. 
They knew that they must part. They 
were equally weU aware that the obstacles 
that stood in the way of their happiness, 
were such as to render the rupture of their 
attachment inevitable. Arabella Falkland 
ventured to disclose to her disconsolate lover 
the faint star that twinkled in her future — 
but like herself, Horace Walpole was devoted 
to his parent. He would not hear of a pos- 
sibility, that in his eyes was a degradation to 
his father ; and being better informed of the 
state and feeling of his country, considered 
the prospects of the Pretender to be quite 
desperate. 

They parted. Our hero kept liis attach- 
ment a profound secret even from his nearest 
friends, and strove to consider it only as a 
brilhant dream, which had vanished without 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 177 

leaving the slightest tangible ipvoof of its 
visitation. Arabella Falkland also regarded 
it as a dream — but it was a dream from 
which she had been disturbed without having 
been thoroughly awakened. Her romantic 
disposition — her poetical imagination, united 
mth a peculiarly sensitive organization, 
rendered the impressions which had been 
made dming that agreeable intunacy too 
durable to be as readily erased as Lord Falk- 
land desired. 

There was evidently a struggle going on 
— generally the most intense of all moral 
struoffrles — the strufr^^le of inclination with 

CO CO 

duty; and although there were no other 
indications of it than were to be found in a 
fading complexion, an absent manner, and 
a spiritless gaze, it was as severe as if its 
sioms had been a thousand times more de- 

o 

monstrative. The only thing that sup- 
ported her in this conflict was her pride. 
She felt that she possessed too high a 
position to allow herself to be humiliated by 



I 3 



178 STRAWBERKY HILL. 

a subserviency to her inclinations. It was 
not for a daughter of her illustrious house, 
to pine, because a stern necessity had made 
it a duty to stifle her emotions. Never- 
theless — so omnipotent is affection, despite 
of all influences — she did suffer herself to 
be humiliated in the sense she had implied ; 
she did pine, even whilst striving most ear- 
nestly to emancipate herself from the sub- 
jection she could not remove. 

It is impossible to say how many moon- 
lio^ht nio^hts she had sat at the same bal- 
cony, with the same lute in her lap, and 
the same soft music passing from its strings, 
as she murmured the melodious words of 
the Italian poet of whom her absent lover 
had been so ardent an admirer. Equally 
vain is it to enumerate the saunterings 
throuo^h favourite walks — the loiterin^rs 
at particular spots — and the lingering be- 
side certain trees and fountains, which 
marked her solitary rambles, Had any one 
told her she sought such places that she 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 179 

might recall those associations connected 
with them, which enabled her to renew the 
gratification she had then and there expe- 
perienced, for the first time, in the society 
of one she was bound to forget, her pride 
would have been up in arms in an instant, 
and she would have indignantly repudiated 
such a suggestion. Xevertheles^, it was 
strictly true. 

Arabella Falkland had acquiesced in her 
father's wishes. Apparently, she had be- 
come convinced that she ought to have no 
feeling in common with a Walpole. She 
had expressed to the young gentleman her 
determination to break off the affectionate 
intercourse that she unwittingly had allowed 
to exist : aU the pride of her princely race 
revolted aofainst the idea of a dausfhter of 
that ancient house entertaining a passion 
for a son of the worst enemy of her 
father and her sovereign. She had parted 
from her lover — she had burst asunder 
the bonds that had united them; yet he 



180 STRAWBERIIY HILL. 

had scarcely crossed the channel, when she 
felt the conviction creeping upon her mind, 
that she had been the suicide of her own 
happiness. 

Lord Falkland was not an unobservant 
spectator of his child's state of mind; but 
he was too Avise a man to attempt to com- 
l)at it. He found that there were other 
uses for diplomacy besides attempts to de- 
lude courts and cabinets. He saw that a 
new pursuit was necessary to divert his 
daughter's attention, and exerted himself 
to interest her as much as possible for the 
unfortunate family to whom he had proved 
himself so devotedly attached. He assimied 
to take her into his confidence, and reveal 
to her the prospects of the exiles consequent 
upon his negociations in their behalf with 
foreign powers. 

She entered into this confidence with 
wonderful readiness. Her sympathy was 
most strongly awakened for the family of 
her sovereign; and as his Lordship dilated 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 181 

on the very sanguine hopes he appeared to 
entertain of the youthful Prince, to whom 
all loyal Jacobites gave the title of Prince 
of Wales, the subject, in her eyes, acquired 
additional interest. It was impossible, she 
thought, to imagine a cause so worthy of 
the advocacy of the loyal heart, as that of 
the Stuarts. She made earnest inquiries 
respecting the young Prince, and received, 
with singular pleasure, her father's intima- 
tion of the probability there existed of his 
Royal Highness soon becoming a frequent 
visitor at their villa. 

Her romantic imagination was in rap- 
tures, at the idea of rendering herself use- 
ful towards advancing the fortunes of this 
hopeful branch of the Stuart race; and to 
some mysterious intimations, which his 
Lordship had thought proper to drop occa- 
sionally, of the great services she might 
perfonn, did certain anticipated contingen- 
cies occur, she listened with breathless in- 
terest. 



182 STRAWBErtRY HILL. 

It was during one of these half-myste- 
rious, half-confidential communications, that 
Lord Falkland and his daughter sat toge- 
ther, in the twilight of a summer evening, 
near the open window looking out upon the 
noble terrace that was so great an orna- 
ment to their villa. They sat together 
alone, and so had sat for more than an hour : 
the commandins: fisrure of the sa^^^acious 
statesman, -with his proud and intellectual 
countenance, harmonizing well with the fine 
form and lofty beauty of his daughter, 
whose flashing eyes appeared to resume 
their wonted brilliancy, as she sat listening 
to his stirring representations of the favour- 
able intentions of the Court of France to- 
wards his royal master. But the time had 
passed without her perceiving it — so ab- 
sorbed was she with the eloquent discourse 
to which she had been listening. 

" But it is not to foreign intervention 
solely," he observed with emphasis, "that 
his Majesty looks forward to that restoration 



STRA\YBERRY HILL. 183 

for which all his faithful servants so ear- 
nestly pray. It would be quite at variance 
with his gracious disposition to be obliged to 
conquer his kingdom. The triumj)h would 
be valueless in his eyes, that could be pur- 
chased only at the expense of the blood of 
his subjects." 

The young enthusiast paused, as usual, 
when she anticipated some important revela- 
tion — which, from these fine flourishes, she 
certainly did anticipate. 

" In England," he continued, sinking his 
voice to a more confidential tone, " there is 
an incalculable number of the King's friends. 
We know from the very best authority, that, 
from the highest peer in the realm to the 
humblest peasant, the cause of the Stuarts 
has most devoted partizans, and that nothing 
more is necessary than the landing in the 
kingdom of a sufiicient armed force to oppose 
that of the usurper, for these to flock to his 
Majesty's banner in thousands and tens of 
thousands." 



184 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

" AYliat a Morious moment will that be ! " 
exclaimed ^liss Falkland, warmly : '' There 
is nothing I so ardently desire to behold, as 
such a spirit-stirring spectacle as a brave 
nation, like our dear countrymen, rising in 
arms to support the cause of their legitimate 
sovereign." 

" I think it not at all improbable that such 
a spectacle you may have an opportunity of 
beholding," observed her father. 

" Indeed ! " cried the young lady, evidently 
as much surprised as delighted. 

" Yes, my child," he replied, '' the time, 
possibly, is not far off, when we may both 
be treading our native soil — ay, both be 
enjo\'ing, to our hearts' content, the inap- 
preciable comforts of our long lost Falkland 
Court." 

" My dear father, what blessings have you 
in store for your daughter ! Dear England 
has appeared to me a kind of Paradise, to 
enter which I might long and long in vain. 
But Falkland Court — how have I treasured 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 185 

in my mind every feature of that hallowed 
spot which I could prevail on you to make 
known to me ! If ever human feeling felt 
the influence of a home-sickness, I have lan- 
guished to behold the residence of my 
ancestors. Dear Falkland Court, what 
would I irive to be within so blessed a 
sanctuary ! " 

" Do you think you could venture to run 
some risk to advance the interests of your 
sovereign?" inquired his Lordship. 

"Am I a Falkland?" she replied, — and her 
fine features were as expressive of dignity as 
of loveliness. " Rest assured, my dear 
father, there is no danger I am afraid to 
meet in a good cause ; rest assured, too, that 
there is notliing I should so much desire to 
do, as to serve, under any circumstances of 
peril or difficulty, the cause of our beloved 
monarch." 

" My child," exclaimed the father, with 
emotion, " I cannot entertain the slightest 
doubt of your courage or of your ability; 



186 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

and it is very possible in due course of time 
I may make trial of both. I have lately 
sometimes thought that your presence in 
England, where you are not at all known, 
might be extremely to his Majesty's service, 
as a medium of communication with the 
leading noblemen and gentlemen who may 
be considered the Kinc^'s friends. 

" But," he added, in a more serious 
tone and manner, " before I can suffer you 
to embark in so responsible a business, I 
must be assured of your entire devotion to 
the cause. Do not misunderstand me. You 
are young, and have already shewn yourself 
much too easily led by hastily formed impres- 
sions. It would not do, where the lives and 
fortunes of many gallant noblemen are com- 
promised, to send amongst them one whose 
heart was with their enemy. The inspired text 
says, ' Xo man can serve two masters ; ' nor 
can such double service be allowed to a woman. 
If your feelings and sentiments are given to 
any one known to be in bitter opposition to 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 187 

US, your support can be dispensed ^dth ; but 
if, on the contrary, you determine to abandon 
all thought and sympathy, save for your legi- 
timate sovereign and his faithful partizans, 
there cannot be a question that you may 
make yourself instrumental to the happy 
restoration all his Majesty's loyal subjects 
have so much at heart." 

Miss Falkland had cast down her eyes 
during the delivery of the last sentences, and 
by her swellmg bosom it was easy to per- 
ceive that she was under the influence of 
considerable emotion. As her father con- 
cluded, she raised her eyes, T\dth a glance 
full of determination, to his own, and placed 
her hand in his. It trembled slightly, but 
the sagacious statesman did not choose to 
notice this feminine weakness. He pressed 
it tenderly, and then, drawing her- towards 
him, imprinted an affectionate caress upon 
her forehead. They understood each other. 

" I have been led into these remarks, my 
love," he resumed, puUing a letter out of his 



188 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

coat-pocket, " chiefly in consequence of a 
communication I have received from your 
aunt." 

"From Aunt Furbelowe?" inquired the 
young lady, with sudden animation. 

" From the Dowager Lady Furbelowe," 
he replied. " My sister appears as irrational 
and inconsistent as ever. Fashion and 
politics, literature and conspiracies, by turns 
have full possession of that most unsteady 
vane, her ladyship's mind. Did I not know 
that her principles were as stable as her 
caprices were evanescent, I should be more 
careless respecting her correspondence than 
might be quite proper in so near a relation." 

" Oh, Papa, you must not be so severe. 
Aunt Furbelowe is a monstrous favourite of 
mine. I have never seen her, it is true, yet 
her oddities have made her as familiar to me 
as though I had been in constant intimacy 
with her all my life. But pray indulge me 
with a perusal of her Ladyship's letter." 

The indulgence requested was immediately 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 189 

allowed, and Miss Falkland was soon engaged 
upon the following curious epistle : — 

" The Dowager Lady Furbelow e^ at Scar- 
borough^ to Viscount Falkland, at Borne, 

*' My Dear Brother, — The Doctors have 
ordered me to Scarborough to drink the 
waters ; and though I hugely suspect them 
to be a set of ignorant quacks, who know- 
no more of my constitution than they do of 
the Pyramids, I have posted through I know 
not how many miles of atrocious road, been 
twice stopped by highwa^-men, once be- 
nighted, and thrice upset, and managed to 
get to the wells mth whole bones, though 
deucedly hipped, as you may suppose. 

" I have no doubt that the to^\m are vastly 
sorry I have left them, even for a season ; I 
was so much in the habit of affording them 
subjects for conversation. I do not suppose 
that any woman of my age ever gave her 
friends such constant cause for marvelling, 
back-biting, and scandal. Many an honest 



190 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

dolt has found, in the retaihng of my most 
intolerable sayings and doings, such a relief 
from the vapours as the faculty could never 
have given him, had he feed them even in 
strict accordance with their own appreciation 
of themselves. Now, alas ! they have no 
better resource than my Lady Caroline 
Fitzroy, and her little freedoms — or my 
Lady Wortley Montagu, and her great ones. 
" Unfortunately, the vagaries of the Elec- 
tor of Planover with the self-denying Wall- 
moden, and those of his son vnth the no 
less amiable vestal Lady Archibald Hamilton, 
are as familiar as the tricks of Powell's 
puppets, without being half so diverting. 
Vice and folly in high places come as natu- 
rally as two chairmen to a sedan; and so 
common are they, that to get distinguished 
by the town, an old fool like myself must 
needs do somethinc^ vicious and foolish to a 
degree. My favourite vice at present would 
be slander — a vice sacred to old women of 
both sexes — but unfortunately for its due 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 191 

exhibition, I can say nothing of the com- 
pany I am forced to keep, that can count to 
their discredit or damage their reputations 
— credit and reputation being alike out of the 
question ; and when I play the fool, instead 
of having an audience in my friends, I find 
them all rivalling me in the same performance. 
" This, to me, has all the monotony of Mrs. 
Salmon's Avax-work — and so I have thought 
proper to change it for a little treason. My 
Lady Townshend and I have laid our heads 
together, after consulting with other Jacobites, 
who are permitted the singular indulgence 
of carrying their heads upon their shoulders ; 
and we have come to the conclusion, that 
they were never so rife for a movement in 
favour of the Chevalier as they are now. 
The Whigs are disunited — the Tories dis- 
contented — the courtiers would be glad of 
a change where there is less necessity for 
studying German — and even the Elector and 
his son would no doubt be monstrous grati- 
fied at the prospect of having some one to 



192 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

quarrel with, to vary a little their eternal 
squabbles with each other. 

" Walpole is the only one of the ministers 
who seems perfectly content ^vith the pre- 
sent state of things ; but if a man who has 
it all his own way is not satisfied, he must 
be the most unconscionable dog under the 
sun. He looks as jovial as a farmer after 
having secured an ample harvest : but the 
greater jollity, you may be sure, the more 
unsatisfactory would be the prospects of 
Jacobitism. Your old acquaintance St. 
John is in the field ; but he is the fox who, 
having lost his tail in a trap, is persuading 
his friends to dispense -with the same appen- 
dage. He is now in monstrous favour with 
Pulteney, W}mdham, and the rest of the 
patriots, who, if such members are not 
more useful to them than their heads, 
might, one would think, very easily be 
convinced of the possibility of doing with- 
out them. 

" By the way, Walpole has a son just 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 193 

entered Parliament — A young fellow, they 
say, of some parts — who, if not a wit him- 
self, tries to be mistaken for one, by passing 
in a crowd of such — as a bad shilling passes 
in a handful of sterHns; coin. If Charles 
Townshend, and George Selwyn, Sir Charles 
Hanbury Williams, and Henry Conway, 
and other privileged jesters, happen to be 
following their customary occupation of 
being more merry than wise, you may be 
sure Horace Walpole has got amongst them, 
and, like a fly on a carriage-wheel, is 
mightily astonished at the dust he is kick- 
ing up around him. But this young fellow, 
it seems, must needs be a man of gallantry 
as well as a wit ; and devotes himself to cer- 
tain ladies, who are well known for the 
favour they bestow on all young gentlemen 
of his merit and enterprise. 

" I have almost forgotten to tell you what 
bargains I have secured at the China bazaar 
— amongst others, a pair of the greatest 
treasures of monstrous griffins ever seen in 

VOL. I. K 



194 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

London, which I carried off in spite of the 
opposition of two Duchesses, a Countess, and 
an Admiral's A\ddow. Since when I have 
had the misfortune to break one, and I shall 
be inconsolable till I match it. If there 
should be any good old china procurable 
at Rome, pray try what you can do for 
me. I give you full directions to buy up 
all the griffins in the place, rather than 
lose a chance of matching my matchless 
monstrosity. 

" I leave till the last the most important 
part of my communication. All persons 
known to profess feelings in favour of the 
Chevalier are so strictly watched by the 
emissaries of the Government, that it is 
almost impossible for one to perform any 
particular service without its immediately 
becoming known. It struck me, that we 
must have the aid of some one totally un- 
knoAvn to the usurper's innumerable spies; 
and a happy thought brought me the image 
of my niece Arabella, of whose talents and 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 195 

acquirements I have heard such favour- 
able notices. If you can send her to Eno-- 
land, rely on it she will find a home under 
my roof, and I will take especial care of 
her welfare and yours. Think of this ; — A 
residence in London may be of vast advan- 
tage to the child's prospects. But if you 
send her, be sure you don't forget the 
griffin. Remember; I must have a griffin 
at any price. 

" From your loving Sister, 
" Dorothy Furbelowe." 

"P.S. Dear Brother. — I can't pro- 
cure any good snuff. I prefer right Spanish 
when I can get it; but I suppose you have 
plenty at Rome of the best sort. Popes and 
Cardinals are not likely to tickle their holy 
noses with rubbish. Get me a pound or 
two, with a good stock of pulvillio and 
citron-water. I have got the most ador- 
able little pug you ever saw; but my mon- 
key is a sad mischievous rogue — he is so 

k2 



196 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

bent on pulling oiF people's periwigs, that 
I shall be obliged to keep him out of the 
way of my visitors. I trust the King is 
well, and likewise the Holy Father — these 
names my Protestant friends associate mth 
another personage, mth whom they may 
probably some day be on more intimate 
terms. Do not fail to name my ideas to 
his Majesty respecting the necessity of strik- 
ing a great blow : but of all things pray 
don't forget the griffin. — D. F." 

The perusal of this strange document ex- 
cited various feelings in the breast of Ara- 
bella Falkland ; but the passage relating to 
Horace Walpole made a deep and lasting 
impression. She now shewed a remarkable 
eagerness to fulfil her father's mshes in 
every respect. It was impossible to have 
met vdth a more devoted Jacobite, or a 
more loyal adherent to the phantom of Bri- 
tish Sovereignty, then -with so much diffi- 
culty kept up at Rome. Politics appeared 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 197 

completely to have dethroned Love in her 
affections. Her pride had been wounded by 
the assumed levity of her lover, who, al- 
though he had, at her own request, parted 
from her absolutely and for ever, she fan- 
cied committed an unpardonable offence, in 
so readily availing hunself of his freedom 
to shew how completely he had thrown off* 
her influence. 

Arabella Falkland from that day became 
an enthusiastic adherent of the Stuarts. 
She haughtily determined to forget the un- 
worthy son of the detested minister. In a 
future page we shall see how this detenni- 
nation was fulfilled. 



198 STRAWBERRY HILL. 



CHAPTER IX. 

THE PORTENTOUS QUARREL. 

We all know the oft-quoted passage, from 
the source of nine-tenths of our most fami- 
liar quotations, illustrative of the peculiar 
ways in which greatness is acquired. Whe- 
ther Sir Robert Walpole achieved his, or had 
it thrust upon him, we cannot now stop to 
inquire : but certain it is, he might, at the 
period we are illustrating, have been pro- 
nounced the greatest man in England. 

Judging from appearances, greatness now- 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 199 

a-days is made up of very curious elements. 
One achieves it by doing little things on a 
great scale, and another by doing great 
things in some new, marvellous, little way. 
Greatness in parliament looks rather to ma- 
jorities than to eloquence, and has its foun- 
dation on a happy facility in shifting its prin- 
ciples ; so that it has no fixed position, but 
stands on the pivot of expediency, which 
turns round as by the operation of some 
shifting magnet, concealed from the public 
eye. 

Greatness in the legal profession embodies 
quahties which, in any other, could not fail 
of beino^ reo:arded as infamous. The man 
who, for a great hire, defends, by his oratory 
and knowledge of the law, murderers and 
wretches of the most depraved character, 
and dies after having realised a fortune and 
secured a peerage, is pronounced a great 
lawyer. 

In the profession of a physician, greatness 
seems to reside in a certain aptitude for 



200 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

assuming the most marvellous properties in 
the simplest agents. One ventures to appear 
as a ministering angel with a medicine chest 
of the most approved poisons ; whilst another 
finds his whole pharmacopa3ia in a glass of 
cold water. 

In literature we have greatness under 
various aspects — sometimes springing up in 
a night, like Jonah's gourd — sometimes rot- 
ting in a day, like a diseased potato. One 
instance has recently been very prominently 
brought before us, in a certain foreign writer 
pretending to the rank of an historian, and 
putting forth his claims to greatness in the 
able manner in which he seeks to '^ feed fat 
the ancient grudge" of his countrymen 
aofainst Eno^land. If ]\I. Thiers can be 
allowed the style and title of " Great," he 
must share it with his iUustrious predeces- 
sors in the same style of composition — Fer- 
dinand Mendez Pinto, and Baron Mun- 
chausen. 

In science, we are permitted to gather our 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 201 

ideas of greatness from the exaggerated 
notions of modern scientific philosophy. 
Every man seems to be looking at everything 
through Lord Rosse's monster telescope. 
They turn it in the direction of the past, and 
they see nothing but stupendous Megathe- 
riums, and immeasurable Saurians. They 
shew the fossil tail of an extinct monstrosity, 
possessing more joints than the caudal extre- 
mity of a certain Irish member, which is long 
enough to astonish even Lord Monboddo. If 
these prodigious discoveries constitute a just 
and proper claim to greatness, then these phi- 
losophers must be content to share it with the 
first discoverer of the American sea-serpent. 
In art, greatness also has been looked upon 
as an affair of size rather than skill. The 
man who painted pictures of so Brobdignagian 
a character, as each to require nearly an acre 
of wall to itself, was, of course, a much 
greater painter than he whose feeble talents 
found ample space in a three-quarter or a 
kit-cat. The vastness of his genius will 

K 3 



202 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

not allow him, like such humble scrubs as 
Titian and Vandyke, to delineate single ob- 
jects ; he paints whole Houses of Commons on 
one canvass — nay, his passion for the mul- 
titudinous has led him to embark in such 
many-headed monsters as City festivals and 
Royal Christenings. 

AVe have even heard that this taste has 
proceeded to such an extent, that a pictorial 
Knight of great celebrity has taken for a 
subject a review of the Household troops in 
Hyde Park, in which every figure is to be a 
portrait, and all warranted likenesses, from 
the humblest drummer-boy up to the Com- 
mander-in-Chief. To make the picture a 
greater bargain, the average number of 
spectators will be ''thrown in;" as a few 
thousand persons, more or less, cannot be of 
the slightest importance, the artist having 
as great a facility in manufacturing figures, 
as Babbage's calculating machine. 

The greatness of a minister, however, is a 
very different matter to the greatness of all 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 20 O 

Other great men. In our enlightened era, 
we might suppose it to consist of a daily 
roasting in the newspapers — a weekly squib- 
bing from Punch — an incessant bombard- 
ment from those heavy batteries, the Quar- 
terly Eeviews — and an ever- varying, never- 
failing cut Sit your physiognomy from the 
dexterous weapon of H. B. In this free 
country, a minister is everybody's game; 
and therefore it is that everybody lets fly at 
him. Let him do what he will, or go where 
he will, he must reconcile himself to facing a 
general discharge from arms of every calibre, 
from that monster ordnance, the Times, to 
the pop-gun of a fashionable novelist. 

In the days of Sir Robert Walpole, mat- 
ters, perhaps, were not quite so bad for the 
poor man. The English people had not 
arrived at a full knowledge of the extraor- 
dinary extent of abuse it was proper to give 
to the leader of the Government. They 
had not learned that a First Lord of the 
Treasury, like a sucking-pig, requires 2on- 



20-4 STRAWBERRY HELL. 

stant basting. Nevertheless, if Sir Robert 
had not as careful a roasting, he found many 
assistants ia tlie political cuisine^ who pro- 
vided for him as though he was a lobster, 
instead of a minister, by endeavouring to 
keep him in constant hot water. If there 
was not sufficient of this sort of thing to be 
had at the hands of his opponents, he was 
sure to find more than enough from one or 
other of his coadjutors. 

The materials that form a Government, 
like those that make a salad, require judicious 
handling to render the mixture sufficiently 
homogeneous. Put in the oil of suavity as 
liberally as possible, you will not always 
prevent the vinegar of envy and jealousy 
from becoming predominant; and flavour 
your dish with all the Attic salt in the world, 
you cannot in every instance avoid the 
insipidity of mediocrity from spoiling its 
rehsh. 

So it was with the Ministry of George II. 
Sir Robert Walpole gave strength, solidity. 



STRAWBERRY HELL. 205 

and respectability to it. His genius inspired 
it with the vigorous vitality that had made 
itself manifest in all its actions. In a period 
of extraordinary peril, his spirit had been 
developed in every measure, and his skill 
had conducted it towards every trimnph. 
In the sense Louis XIY. had arrogantly de- 
clared that he was the State, Sir Kobert 
Walpole might have boasted that he was the 
Government. 

The King was well aware of his quahfica- 
tions. The able and amiable Queen Caroline 
on her death-bed had recommended — not the 
servant to the master, but the master to the 
servant; and, singularly enough, his Majesty 
regarded the recommendation as more bind- 
ing than any promise that might then have 
been exacted from him. He subsequently 
placed himself in the hands of AValpole, -with 
as much confidence in his talents as respect 
for his worth ; and aU the insinuations, and 
all the fierce attacks of his active enemies, 
could not in the slightest degree affect the 



206 STRAA\T3ERRY HILL. 

liigli opinion liis royal master entertained of 
him. 

This regard was exhibited too openly to 
be agreeable even to some of his coadjutors. 
In particidar, one weak and pompous man, 
the Duke of Xewcastle, saw in it a slight to 
his superior rank, and a neglect of his — what 
we may be allowed to style, singular know- 
ledge in the science of government, that gave 
him vast offence. His Grace was not with- 
out a certain degree of power — and he had a 
brother, Henry Pelham, who also put forth 
no inconsiderable claims to statesmanship. 
He had also borough influence to a very 
large extent, and consequently a formidable 
band of political retainers. 

With the Duke of Newcastle, the machi- 
nations of the subtle Bolingbroke had already 
commenced, and in an indirect manner he 
had so worked upon the pride and vanity of 
his Grace, that the Pelham blood was in a 
state of fermentation, and in both himself 
and his brother only waited the proper 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 207 

moment for displaying itself to effect the 
overthrow of their political chief. Boling- 
broke, in the course of his philosophical 
studies, had learned the value of the adage, 
Divide et impera^ and was bent on working 
the destruction of the man he hated, by 
detaching from his party so important a 
section of it as these shallow Pelhams. 

Sir Robert had a more attached associate, 
and a much nearer connection, in his coad- 
jutor and brother-in-law, Lord Townshend ; 
a nobleman who had passed the best part of 
his life in the service of the State, had en- 
joyed much of the confidence of the late 
King, and, for a Minister, might be said to 
have possessed more than the average degree 
of honesty. He had early embraced the 
cause of the Hanoverian succession, and in 
troublous times had supported it with much 
energy and a respectable degree of talent. 

The failinGf of Lord ToTVTishend was 
warmth of temper. He was a man of at- 
tainments very superior to those of the 



182 STKAWBERRY HILL. 

feeble Duke of Newcastle ; and Lord Boling- 
broke knew that the arts that would succeed 
with his Grace, would be quite thro^vn away 
upon his Lordship. His only hope of 
detaching him from his brother-in-law, 
existed in the chance of the Prime Minister 
doing or saying something that should 
irritate the irritable Secretary of State, so 
as to cause a permanent breach between 
them. 

They were in the habit of meeting almost 
daily at the house of a mutual friend in 
Cleveland Row, near St. James's Palace. Of 
this Lord Bolingbroke had notice, through 
one of his numerous confederates. He also 
learned the extremely friendly — nay, even 
affectionate terms in which the brothers-in- 
law continued to live mth each other. The 
philosopher was in despair ; for although 
the Secretary of State was extremely irri- 
table, it so happened that the Prime Minis- 
ter was a man of boundless good humour. 
However ready the other might be to take 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 209 

offence, he appeared the last man in the 
world capable of giving it. 

It chanced that they had agreed to meet, 
as usual, to consider together some impor- 
tant measure that was about to be submit- 
ted to the King in Council. Sir Robert had 
been detained by the King considerably 
beyond his time. Now, if there was one 
thing likely to put Lord Townshend out of 
temper, it was bemg kept w^aiting. He 
was a man who knew the value of time, 
and could not endure to see it squan- 
dered. 

The suite of drawing-rooms in Cleveland 
Row were as prettily furnished, according to 
the prevailing taste, as could have been ex- 
pected in the residence of a man of fashion. 
There were ugly pictures on the walls, and 
ugly china ornaments on the chimney- 
pieces, ugly mirrors, and an ugly carpet, 
mth the usual allowance of ugly chairs, 
tables, and comer cupboards. 

An elderly man of gentlemanly appear- 



210 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

ance, with features marked by a very evi- 
dent im23atience, was seated on a chair near 
one of the windows, apparently listening 
to some observations from a round smooth- 
faced personage, whose features were elo- 
quent of shallo-wness and self-conceit, while 
his manners were meant to be the perfec- 
tion of courtly bearing, mingled with a vast 
affectation of confidence and personal re- 
gard. The elder of the two appeared to be 
listening : but in fact he gave scarcely any 
attention to his companion; his thoughts 
were bearing, with a very unpleasant inten- 
sity, on the unpleasant fact, that he had 
been kept waiting half an hour. 

These two individuals were Lord Towns- 
hend, the Secretary of State, and Bubb 
Doddington, Esq. — a person, as we have 
already stated, believed to be the chief 
confidant and adviser of the Prince of 
Wales: but although Mr. Doddington had 
no objection whatever to be in the con- 
fidence of the Heir Apparent, he chose 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 211 

to entertain a sort of sneaking kindness 
for the principal ministers of the King. 
In short, he was one of those far-seeing 
men who prepare themselves for all emer- 
gencies. He sought to provide for every 
possible contingency with so much care, 
that even if the whole world should be turned 
topsy turvy, Bubb Doddington would fall 
upon his legs. 

It was curious to denote the o^atherino^ 
impatience spreading like a cloud over the 
fine features of Lord Townshend, and ob- 
serve, at the same time, the suavity and 
devotion that made the inexpressive fea- 
tures of his companion so very expressive. 
Mr. Bubb Doddington had a great regard 
for my Lord Townshend; indeed, he took 
the trouble of asserting, that his attachment 
to his Majesty was unabated, not^vithstand- 
ing he had been driven into the arms of 
the Opposition by a refusal of his claims 
to a peerage, to satisfy which in the son 
of an apothecary, as he was said to be. 



212 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

seemed, according to the jocose expression 
of George Sehvyn, " a physic-al impossi- 
bility." 

" Well, you see my Lord," said Mr. Dod- 
dington, with great self-complacency, '^ it is 
not because I have the honour of being very 
much in the confidence of his Royal High- 
ness — indeed, between ourselves, I doubt 
this confidential feeling on his part could be 
exceeded — for, no later than last night, his 
Royal Highness condescended to mn tAvo 
hundred pounds from me, at a very inte- 
testing game at cards he was so very good 
as to show me how to play. But it is not, 
as I was going to say, because I am so much 
in the confidence of the Prince, that I 
should be on ill terms with the Ministers 
of the CroAvn. Indeed I never felt more 
disposed than at present to cultivate a 
good understanding mth his Majesty's 
advisers — particularly with one so well 
esteemed of the King as my Lord Towns- 
hend." 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 213 

Mv Lord Townshencl took no notice of 
the compliment. 

" I should have felt great pleasure," con- 
tinued the disappointed aspirant for a peer- 
age, "in meeeting so powerfal a friend of 
his Majesty as Sir Robert Walpole; but 
then, I am well aware his time is so conti- 
nually taken up, by the calls made upon it 
by his Majesty, that he is scarcely ever out 
of the royal closet." 

"How do you know that?" sharply de- 
manded his companion. 

" Oh, I 've reason to believe it 's quite no- 
torious." 

"Have you?" gruffly remarked the Se- 
cretary of State. 

"Oh yes indeed!" exclaimed the other, 
" Sir Robert, I have heard, is far from de- 
sirous of ha\ing it a secret. To be sure, it 
is expecting too much to think he would 
conceal what would prove to the world how 
much more the King tliinks of him than of 
his colleagues." 



214 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

" You think so, do you ? " demanded Lord 
Townshend, only kept from picking a quarrel 
i^dth his companion, by recalling to his mind 
the gentleman's insignificance. 

'' I am not singular in my opinion, my 
Lord ; that you may depend," continued 
Bubb Doddington. "It is a matter that 
excites a monstrous deal of observation. 
People marvel so experienced a statesman as 
my Lord Townshend should, aj^parently, be 
so little in his sovereign's estimation, as this 
monopoly of the royal attention by Sir 
Eol3ert Walpole seems to warrant." 

'' They do, eh ! " cried the Secretary of 
State, eyeing the figure of the Prince's 
counsellor from head to foot with cer- 
tainly anything but a friendly scrutiny; 
and adding, -with rather a heightened 
complexion, " Let me tell you, Mr. Bubb 
Doddington, I think all such people a 
pack of fools, and that it would be a mon- 
strous deal better for them to mind their 
OAvn business. Sir Robert Walpole's favour 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 215 

with the King is well known, and creates no 
uneasiness among his friends, though I am 
well aware that it does amongst his enemies. 
What my colleagues may think of such pre- 
ference, I cannot pretend to say ; but at least 
/have no cause to be dissatisfied with it. 
His Majesty has given me no reason to ima- 
gine that my services have been overlooked ; 
and as for Sir Robert, I feel satisfied he is 
not more with the King than is required by 
his high position in his Majesty's councils. 
However, perhaps it would be as well were 
you to bring this subject before his attention 
yourself; and as I expect him to enter the 
room every moment, you cannot have a 
better opportunity for satisfpng your 
curiosity." 

The apothecary's son vehemently dis- 
claimed any curiosity; and as soon as he 
heard the Prime Minister's expected entrance 
into the house, it acted upon him as a spur 
to his own inclinations. He rose to depart, 
uttering a thousand professions of regard. 



216 STRAWBEERY HILL. 

To these his companion paid very little atten- 
tion. His spirits were a little ruffled. At 
any other thne he would have immediately 
detected the ruse that was being played upon 
him, and laughed it to scorn. But notwith- 
standing he had met it with so much spirit, 
the insinuation sank deep into his heart; 
and the irritation he had been made to expe- 
rience through the want of punctuality of 
his colleague, had increased tenfold, after he 
had heard his friend Doddington's allusions. 

Scarcely had that gentleman taken his 
departure, when the voice of Sir Eobert 
Walpole on the stairs announced his arrival ; 
and the next moment he entered with a 
forced smile, and an abortive attempt at a 
little pleasantry. 

There was a marked contrast in the ap- 
pearance of the two ministers. Both were 
dressed in the Court suit of the time — the 
full ruffle — the well-arranged wig — the taper 
sword, and the budded shoes, were ahke in 
each. Their countenances, however, differed. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 217 

if their costume did not. The face of the 
First Lord of the Treasury beamed like a 
harvest-moon. No physiognomist would 
have suspected such pleasant features being 
the index of a mind made up of the most 
intricate machinery. The calmest lake in 
a valley, warmed by a glorying sun, never 
looked more bright and tranquil. 

There was, however, a flush spreading 
over its broad disk, while entering the room 
with his cocked-hat under his arm, as his 
eye met the cold, and somewhat severe look 
of the irritated Secretary of State. His sus- 
picions were excited. He had noticed Bubb 
Doddington, whom he not only knew to be 
an adviser of the Prince of Wales, but a 
connection of Bolingbroke's, stealthily leav- 
ing the house, apparently wishing to escape 
his recognition. The altered aspect of his 
brother-in-law assured him his wily enemy 
had been at work. At the same time Lord 
Townshend felt satisfied, from the confusion 
in his relative's countenance, that there 

VOL. I. L 



218 STRA^VBERRY UILL. 

inust be some sinister object in his long con- 
ference with the King; and every moment 
felt more disposed to demand why he, an 
old servant of the CroAvn, was treated with 
so little confidence. 

This was exactly the state of things that 
the crafty Bolingbroke had laboured so cun- 
ningly to produce. He would have rubbed 
his hands in an ecstacy of secret congratu- 
lation, could he have perceived the complete 
success of his artifices. 

" Townshend! " exclaimed the Prime 
Minister abruptly, ''what was that fellow 
doing here ? " 

Now it so happened, that this was a style 
in which Lord Townshend had hitherto never 
been addressed by his brother-in-law, and he 
could attribute its unceremonious tone only 
to his being desirous of shewing the impor- 
tance Avith which the King's unbounded con- 
fidence invested him. The voice of authority 
grated harshly on the irritated nerves of the 
angry Secretary of State. He was not in a 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 219 

humour to be dealt mtli in so offensive a 
manner. He fired up instantly when he 
fancied an affront was intended him — strode 
towards his brother-in-law, crossed his arms, 
looked him haughtily in the face, and replied, 
"^Tiat 's that to you?" 

" Oh, that 's the state of the case, is it, 
my Lord?" said the other, coldly, ''you 
must have carried on your secret negocia- 
tions some time, to enable you to throw off 
the mask so completely. Allow me to con- 
gratulate your Lordship on your improved 
prospects." 

" Zounds! Sir, what d'ye mean? " shouted 
the angry nobleman, in a voice of thunder. 

" Oh, you are ashamed to acknowledge it," 
exclaimed the Prime Minister. " Then I 
suppose I must inform you, that I am aware 
of your intrigue, cleverly as it has been car- 
ried on. But let me tell your Lordship, as 
the song says, 

' It 's as well to be off with the old love, 
Before you are on with the new.' " 

l2 



220 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

''I. care nothing for your old song — I know 
nothing of your intrigue," answered the 
Secretary of State, sharply. 

" My Lord," observed the other, with a 
contemptuous expression too evident to be 
mistaken, " for once, there is no man's sin- 
cerity whom I so much doubt as your 
Lordship's." 

This Avas adding fuel to the fire. To Lord 
Townshend, the conscious superiority, as 
shewn in the cold, quiet tone of his brother- 
in-law, was bad enough; but the severe 
reflection on his veracity which was expressed 
in his words, was intolerable. A man of less 
command over his temper would have been 
excused a little intemperance upon such pro- 
vocation, therefore an explosion from so 
irritable a person might have been anti- 
cipated. 

" Zounds ! you old rascal ! " cried his 
Lordship, passionately, " what do you mean 
by that?" 

" Do I live to be called rascal by such 



STRAWBERIIY HELL. 221 

a superannuated scoundrel as you?" was 
the equally passionate reply. 

The angry old men, excited beyond the 
]x)unds of reason, simultaneously seized each 
other with both hands violently by the 
collar; and, as completely forgetting their 
exalted position as their near relationship, 
shook away with aU their force. 

They appeared more like two fierce bull- 
dogs, intent on worr^dng each other to death, 
than the well-bred gentlemen they had 
seemed a minute since — every moment, by 
some coarse appellation or insulting remark, 
adding fresh energy to their fierce passions ; 
till, recollecting they were able to settle their 
quarrel in a more becoming manner, they let 
go their holds of their coat-collars, to seize 
the handles of their swords. 

" Come on, villain ! " shouted the Secre- 
tary of State, drawing his sword T\ith a look 
that threatened instant extermination. 

" Defend yourself, h}'pocrite ! " cried the 
Prime Minister, panting ^vith furious excite- 
ment. 



222 STEAA\T3EPvRY HILL. 

In an instant their blades crossed, and 
in another the blood of one or both of them 
might have been dyeing the carpet, had not 
the door been hastily pushed open, and 
several persons in the house, alarmed by the 
noise, rushed in and separated them. 

The sight of the intruders seemed to 
waken the combatants to some sense of the 
impropriety, if not to the folly of their con- 
duct, in squabbling and fighting in another 
person's house ; and they were so far pacified 
as to discontinue the contest, though their 
mutual animosity was far from being allayed. 

" Another time, fellow, and another 
place ! " cried Lord ToAvnshend, as some 
friends were hurrying him out of the room. 
Sir Robert Walpole was not permitted to 
take any notice of the menace. He was in 
the arms of his younger son, who was 
manifesting the most lively anxiety in his 
behalf. 

It so happened that he had not long 
entered the house with his friend George 



STI^\.WBERRY HILL. 223 

Sehvyn, whose family were its inmates, when 
his attention was attracted by the loud 
sounds of angry altercation so near him. He 
recognized his father's voice with a strange 
tumult of excited feelings ; but it was only 
when he became aware that the quarrel was 
proceeding to acts of personal violence, that 
he felt he dared risk an intrusion. He 
rushed with his companions into the scene of 
the conflict just in time to prevent mischief. 

The greatest shock to his feelings, how- 
ever, he soon found in what he considered 
the coldness of his father. Sir Robert was 
not quite well pleased at being found by his 
son under circumstances so little creditable 
to his understanding. He felt he had been 
acting very like a fool, and something like a 
madman ; and, in return for his son's solici- 
tude, he could not avoid testifying a good 
deal of dissatisfaction with himself, which the 
sensitive young man, when he quitted him, 
felt assured had been intended for him. 

The quarrel between the first Lord of the 



224 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

Treasury and the Secretary of State, was 
attended mth the result most agreeable to 
that political engineer who was so busy 
undermining the power of Sir Robert Wal- 
pole. Lord Townshend sent in his resigna- 
tion the same day ; and though in his calmer 
moments he could not bring himself to enter 
into a deadly conflict with so near a relative, 
his angry spirit was not to be reconciled 
into acting under his directing influence : he 
retired altogether from public life. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 225 



CHAPTER X. 

THE HEIR A^T) MAls^ FRIENDS. 

Lady Archibald HA:yiiLTON was one of 
those remarkably clever women, who fancy 
themselves possessed of a patent whicli 
raises them above public opinion. She 
dressed a-la-mode — she gave parties — she 
visited — she went to every kind of pubhc 
entertainment; and when she had tired of 
shewing herself to the town, went through 
the same series of follies and gaieties at Bath, 
Scarborough, and Tunbridge Wells; delud- 

L 3 



226 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

in;? herself with the belief that she had 
passed everywhere for a respectable cha- 
racter. 

But leaving out of the question her Lady- 
ship's more than equivocal position with the 
Prince of Wales, there Avere certain ru- 
mours afloat in connection with her name, 
that often gave it, in the eyes of the mo- 
rahst, an extremely ugly complexion. Her 
house was a very gay house — but there was 
not much in that : the houses of other ladies 
of fashion might just as well be called gay. 
Then there was a good deal of what the 
fashionable world called gallantry, believed 
to be carried on there : this too might be 
said of the houses of many other ladies of 
quality. Added to which, it was reported 
that play was permitted in her apartment, 
Avhich, though it bore the name of high, 
in a more moral sense deserved to be con- 
sidered as low as roguery could sink it. 

There is a natural buoyancy in some peo- 
ple, that prevents them sinking where others 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 227 

could not avoid instant destruction. A 
man will jump oif a bridge ^ith heavy 
stones in his pocket, and presently rise to 
the surface vdih all the buoyancy of a cork — 
no doubt to hear the satisfactory proverl) 
which ensures security from drowning to 
those who are born to a more ignomious 
end. 

So was it ^vith Lady Hamilton. Her 
offences were heavy enough to have pre- 
vented Lady Archibald ever getting her 
head above water in the world, after her 
plunge into its unfathomable vortex; but 
in her Ladyship's " lightness" existed her 
safety. She floated on bravely upon the 
roughest waves. Hesivy as she had made 
herself, she could not drown. She was 
received almost everywhere — her rooms 
were crowded mth company, and she had 
always around her more admirers than she 
knew how to dispose of — notwithstanding 
that there was unquestionably a deal of 
philanthropy in her disposition. 



228 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

Lady Arcliibald was peculiarly partial to 
the society of young men of fortune; and 
if they were also young men of wit and 
spirit, her partiality became more demon- 
strative. It might be thought that these 
partialities would have been offensive to 
her princely lover ; but he also had a pecu- 
liar partiality for the young fellows about 
town who had plenty of money, and could 
render themselves pleasant company, and 
he encouraged rather than disapproved of 
her taste in that direction. How much her 
card-tables were affected by this predilec- 
tion, it is impossible to say — though it is 
well known to us, that at Lady Hamilton's 
the Prince was a pretty constant card- 
player — and, singular to relate, always a 
fortunate one. 

Possibly, however, the possession of 
wealth was only insisted on to make cer- 
tain of the respectability of her guests — for 
in those days riches, if not accompanied by 
rank, were held by persons in such a posi- 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 229 

tion in society, that their respectability was 
recognized as a matter of course. It was 
not then the custom for persons in trade to 
assume the rank of gentlemen : for such to 
take upon themselves the title of Esquire — 
so conunon an assumption in the present 
day — would have been regarded as an enor- 
mity equal to that of exercising the privi- 
lege of franking a letter without enjoying 
the necessary qualification. 

Perhaps, then, with Lady Hamilton and 
her royal lover, to be well off, was but 
another form of the phrase to be well 
bom; and the condition of being witty 
was doubtless merely put forth to secure 
them entertaining companions. Her La- 
dyship deligTited to have round her the 
sons of the most determined opponents of 
the Prince of Wales. Such visits were 
usually clandestine; nevertheless she en- 
couraged them. She believed the power of 
her attractions was shewn by their riskino- 
these stolen visits. But it was rather the 



230 STRiiWBEERY HILL. 

fashion to visit the Prince of AVales's mis- 
tress ; and more than one father winked at 
his son going there, from a prudent desire 
to obtain, whilst they retained the favour 
of tlie Ivinir, a channel of communication 
to that of the Heir Apparent. 

It was evening. The handsome suite of 
apartments was thronged with what, by 
courtesy, was styled the best company. 
The rooms were as well lighted as a liberal 
supply of wax-lights could effect that object, 
and seemed furnished in what was then con- 
sidered " the first style" — a style, however, 
which a banker's Avife of the present day 
would turn up her extremely genteel nose 
at, for the very little evidence of taste it 
afforded. Even the projecting Cupids that 
supported the branches held before the mir- 
rors, were ugly, awkward, and excessively 
vulgar — they better fulfilled the idea of 
sucking pugilists, than of the immortal child 
whose beauty, grace, and refinement have 
been represented so often by the most gifted 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 231 

painters, sculptors, and poets, that have 
ever existed. 

The paintings on the walls were not in 
much better taste. There was a legendary 
picture of St. George, either by Paul Vero- 
nese or Tintoretto, in which it was difficult 
to say which had the most dragonish coun- 
tenance — the creature that had been slain by 
the Saint, or the Princess he had dehvered 
from it. Venetian painters had evidently 
as singular notions respecting the female 
form and countenance, as the carvers of 
looking-glass frames had of those of the God 
of Love. It was no unusual thins: in their 
representations, to see a Venus with a club 
foot, or a Madonna that might readily 
be mistaken for a Medusa. Such monstro- 
sities were to be found in many a nobleman's 
mansion in England. Indeed, just at that 
period there was a general desire exhibited 
amongst the higher classes to collect objects 
of vertu^ as they were called. 

But these were not the only libels on 



232 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

creation. Lady Hamilton was wise in her 
veneration. She was not a woman of sur- 
passing loveliness, but she sagaciously chose 
to be fascinating by comparison, and there- 
fore her China shepherdesses, quite as much 
as her pictorial deities, appeared to be as 
ugly as art could make them. Thus sur- 
rounded, it may readily be conceived that her 
ladyship appeared to very great advantage. 

Near the door of the principal drawing- 
room, a group of young men stood, very 
busily employed in the operation of quizzing 
the company. Now quizzing is a very 
scientific process, and requires no slight 
talent to proceed with it in the proper for- 
mula. We see no tiling extraordinary in the 
great popularity it has always enjoyed. It 
must be popular, because it is cheap — the 
amusement it aflPords us being always at the 
expense of other people. 

" I say, Charley," said the handsome 
Captain Conway to one of his companions, 
a dashing young fellow of his own age, who 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 233 

shortly afterwards, as the well-known Charles 
Townshend, made a name in society which 
threatened to eclipse the reputation of even 
his most brilliant contemporaries, " what is 
Bubb Doddington doing up in that comer 
mth the Prince? He seems mighty confi- 
dential." 

*' Oh !" said the youthful wit, very readily, 
" Bubby, you must know, has made up his 
mind to be a peer of the realm. He has no 
chance with the King, so he has fastened him- 
self on the Heir Apparent ; and his dreams 
by night, and his thoughts by day, are 
devoted to the consideration of the title that 
is most desirable he should adopt, for he 
has already got the Prince's promise to en- 
noble him." 

*' That 's easier said than done," remarked 
Sir Charles Hanbury Williams ; "till figs 
are found on thorns, and grapes on thistles, 
it is a little too much to expect that any one 
can perform such an hnpossibility as to en- 
noble Bubby." 



234 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

'' It 's well kno^vii Bubl^y's father was an 
apothecary," continued Charles Townshend, 
" so I think we had better suggest to him 
the title of Baron Gallipot." 

"Let him have a double title to correspond 
with his double face," said Selwyn, turning 
up the whites of his drowsy eyes, " he might 
then bear the appropriate name of Viscount 
Pestle and Mortar." 

" But then he '11 want a coat of arms," ob- 
served Horace Walpole, who formed one of 
the group. 

'' Oh, that 's easily found," replied Charles 
Townshend, "three draughts sable, on a field 
vert, quarterly." 

" Very green, indeed," exclaimed Henry 
Conway. 

" The three draughts ought to be daily, 
instead of quarterly," said Selwyn, "I 'm sure 
no doctor would let me off for less." 

" Three draughts sable, on a field vert, in 
the first and third quarters," repeated the 
other, " with two leeches proper, in a bordure 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 235 

for tlie others. In an escutcheon of pretence, 
ia squirt rampant." 

" But then he must have supporters," ob- 
served the Captain. 

" Oh, for supporters, we '11 give him an 
old woman regardant, armed with a rushlight 
in her dexter hand, on the sinister side; 
and on the dexter, an undertaker couchant, 
bearing a coffin of his own colours." 

" And for the crest?" inquired Horace, 
laughing as much as the rest. 

"A death's head and cross bones, of 
course." 

" Now you 've forgot the motto." 

" Oh, that suggests itself. It should be 
in a label — not attached to the draught ; that 
would be more medicinal than heraldic — but 
in a scroll under the armorial bearings, 
and should be in Old English characters — 
^®Kficn taHm to ht intll isfxaitm/" 

It was well that Bubb Doddington was 
too intently occupied in detailing to Prince 
Frederick the result of his interview with 



236 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

Lord Townshend, to notice this mischievous 
group, or he might have suspected himself 
to be the subject of their conversation, from 
the expressive looks they were directing to- 
wards him. Had he been near enough to 
hear the liberty they were taking with his 
foible, the embryo nobleman would have felt 
overwhehned with mortification. 

" Lady Archie is looking very earnestly 
towards you, Horace," exclaimed Sir Charles; 
" if you have a mind to enter the lists with 
a Prince of the Blood, I think there 's an 
opening for you." 

" r faith you may say that very safely," 
said Charles Townshend, " but the opening 
is by no means so exclusive as you would 
infer. It 's a kind of breach practicable for 
either horse or foot." 

" I am in doubt whether I shall take 
advantage of it," replied Horace Walpole, 
" even should it be as inviting as you de- 
scribe. I am not sure I have sufficient cou- 
rage to volunteer on so dangerous a service." 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 237 

" ^lio is that tall anatomy of a man witli 
whom she is now engaged in conversation?" 
inquired Captain Conway. 

" Oh, that 's General Pipeclay ; a highly 
meritorious officer, who, as you may judge 
from his height, has been long in the service," 
replied George Selw}'n, in his drowsiest 
manner. " I don't think it possible, however 
much he may be in battle henceforth, that 
he should ever receive so much as a flesh 
wound, — as it is obvious enough he has no 
flesh to receive it in. He is a hero, not in 
miniature, but in skeleton. I never look at 
the General, when I find him in such close 
confabulation with our hostess, without 
fancying I am gazing upon a couple of un- 
couth figures that have walked out of some 
old Dutch print of ' Death and the Lady.'" 
This was an amazing eflbrt for Sel^'}Ti, and 
he again sank into his customary torpor. 

" By Jove, there is Lady Caroline Peter- 
sham! " cried Sir Charles, directing the 
attention of the rest to a ver}^ pi'etty, and 



238 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

evidently very fashionaLle woman, who had 
just then entered the dra^ving room; " Our 
friend Lady Archie has not, I fancy, shewn 
her usual prudence in inviting so attractive 
a rival." 

'' Well, if she has shewn her usual im- 
prudence, there can be no doubt she has 
shewn quite enough," drawled George 
Selwyn. 

" What next, I wonder ! " cried young 
Townshend, as he caught sight of the well- 
known figure of Lord Bolingbroke making 
his way through the well-dressed crowd, with 
a most liberal display of courteous recogni- 
tions to all around, apparently to join the 
group about the Prince. 

"AATiat next? " echoed Hanbury Williams. 
" What could you expect after such a Dr. 
Faustus, but his instructor? " 

'^ Qh, as to that, I have very great doubts," 
ol^served Captain Conway, " I have a might}* 
shrewd suspicion he 's not the Doctor, be- 
cause — " 



STRAAYBERKY HILL. 239 

*' You never took him to be such a con- 
juror," said Charles Townshend, hastily. 

" Not exactly," replied the young Captain, 
" But I think he 's so de\dlish deep, he must 
be — you understand — the other personage." 

'' Tlie Devil he is ! " exclaimed George 
Selwyn, ^vith a ludicrous emphasis that 
created a general laugh, as he appeared to 
rouse himself out of a dream. 

Horace Walpole gazed vdi\\ a gi^eat deal 
of interest upon that clever intriguer, whom, 
from certain information that had lately 
reached him, he had learned to reo^ard as 
his father's bitterest enemy ; and as he looked 
upon him, a sense of dislike amounting to 
hostility took possession of his whole nature. 
It seemed to have become a part of his reli- 
gion, that his father's enemy should be his 
own ; and that the first article of his faith 
was, To like those who liked him, and hate 
those who hated him. 

" Come, Horace, what makes you stare 
so at BoUngbroke?" said Captain Conway, 



240 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

drawing his friend a little way from the 
group, " You 've not paid so much atten- 
tion to mv nonsense, as to marvel what the 
old gentleman has done with a certain 
appendage with which it is believed he inva- 
riably goes into company? Come, that 's 
Pulteney he 's talking to — you '11 attract 
attention if you stare at him so rudely." 

Pulteney ! — another of those whom he had 
so lately learned to hold in the most absolute 
detestation. Another enemy of Sir Robert 
Walpole, and one almost as formidable as 
Lord Bolingbroke. He wished to linger and 
observe them both, that he might have every 
feature so thoroughly impressed upon his 
memory, he could recal the image whenever 
he desired to gratify his hatred at its expense. 
But his kinsman hurried him away, and took 
oiF his attention by talking of himself and 
his OAvn prospects. He had been promised 
promotion, was appointed aide-de-camp to 
the Duke of Cumberland, and expected to be 
summoned to join his regiment to embark 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 241 

for the seat of war. Some hard fi^^htinsr, he 
said, might be expected, from the temper and 
preparations of the hostile armies, and, as 
he meant to distinguish himself, it would 
not be at all improbable that he should get 
knocked on the head, or at least lose a limb. 
'' But then you know, Horace, my boy," 
exclaimed the young soldier, in his most 
consolatory tone, "if the worst comes to 
the worst, there 's satisfaction in knowing 
there 's no worst to endure after it : and I 
shall die in the bed of Honour — which is, of 
course, the most desirable death a soldier 
could meet with. A^Tiat the deuce else I 
could ^^'ish for, I don't know! And then 
you know, supposing I get oiF with only 
the loss of a limb — which will be a sin- 
ocular instance of f^rood fortune — there can't 
be a doubt that a wooden leg costs a deal 
less money to provide for than a natural 
one : should my loss be an arm — if I can do 
nothing else with my empty sleeve, I can 
laugh in it. You see, as I am constantly 

VOL. I. M 



242 STRA^VBERRY BUX, 

telling }'oii, I always look at the bright side 
of things." 

Here the curious argument was inter- 
rupted by a female voice, from a lady who 
had approached them unobserved. 

'' I have been waiting a monstrous time, 
Captain Conway, for you to introduce your 
friend." 

'' Oh, a thousand pardons, Lady Archi- 
bald," cried the gallant Captain, eagerly; 
'"'' By Jove, we were just talking of you. 
T.ady Archibald — my friend Horace Wal- 
pole; Horace — Lady Archibald Hamilton." 

The lady went through the ceremony 
in her most fascinating manner, — and, to 
do her justice, she could appear a very 
charming woman. The gentleman sought 
to prepossess the lady in his favour ; and his 
appearance was so very much in his favour, 
that, with such a connoisseur of what was 
orentleman-like as he had before him, he was 
sure of making more than ordinary impres- 
sion. Thev regarded each other with much 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 243 

more attention than strangers usually dis- 
play on meeting for the first time ; but then 
Horace Walpole knew that he stood before 
one of the most powerful agents of the 
strong party then in violent opposition to 
liis father. She was on the list of those 
he felt especially called upon to hate. 

Lady Archibald knew that she was in 
the presence of a son of the man whose 
influence, her friends averred, was most 
prejudicial to her interests as a politician: 
thereibre, she must look upon him as no 
common personage. Lady Archibald also 
saw that the young stranger had a pleasing 
manner, and possessed a pair of eyes that 
seemed to promise a devout worshipper. 
As a woman of gallantry, she could not 
avoid refrardino; him with more than usual 
attention. 

" I haven't a doubt you '11 like each other 
desperately on better acquaintance," conti- 
nued the young officer, as the parties he 
had made known to each other were ex- 

M 2 



244 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

pressing tlie customary civilities, *' it 's 
against orders from Head Quarters, per- 
liaps, to make you acquainted; but then 
I don't suppose Horace will join your Lady- 
ship's forces: and, monstrous agreeable as 
I have always found your Ladyship, I have 
my doubts you could fascinate him so com- 
pletely, as to make him forget his allegiance 
to his o^vn banner." 

A good deal of amusing badinage fol- 
lowed on this subject, in which Lady Ha- 
milton contrived to express many things 
that ought to have been gratifying to any 
young gentleman ^\ith a disposition for gal- 
lantry, and in which Horace Walpole did not 
foro-et to commend himself, bv the utterance 
of such agreeable sentiments as are the cus- 
tomar}^ coin of conversation during an early 
acquaintance between well-bred individuals 
of the two sexes. 

It was extremely singular that these two 
persons, who, from their peculiar positions, 
ought to have been irreconcileable foes, im- 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 245 

pressed on each other sentiments, which, if 
they might not be styled favourable, were 
of such a nature as to render it as great 
an injustice to call it unfavourable. 

The son of the Prime Minister thought 
he had never before seen eyes so truly elo- 
quent — they seemed gifted mth the faculty, 
as fine 'svriters call it, " of peering into the 
soul : " and he observed with the same plea- 
sure, a peculiar modulation of the voice that 
appeared to be as full of meaning as of music. 
The mistress of the Heir Apparent acknow- 
ledged that she had never come in contact 
with a mind apparently so fresh, so full of 
resources, and so refined. She pretended to 
cultivate a taste for the elegant and classical 
— a taste, however, which she found very 
few opportunities for encouraging in the 
inelegant and unclassical society it had been 
her misfortune that her lot should be cast. 

The friends of Horace Walpole mars^elled 
immensely when they beheld Lady Archi- 
bald Hamilton, after they had interchanged 



24:Q STllAWBERRY HILL. 

compliments, take the young Members arm: 
and, as the company made Avay on all sides, 
with every symptom of outward respect, 
lie was seen, with all the appearance of the 
most devoted cavalier, proceeding with her 
to the further end of the room. 

" Lady Hamilton must surely be a very 
estimable person," observed her cavalier, 
with the most gallant air he could as- 
sume. 

" You think so from seeing so many people 
here," replied the lady laughingly ; ''but de- 
pend on 't, it 's only a new version of the 
old fable of the Hare and many Friends." 

" Why, I have been led to suppose that 
the Ilei?' has something to do with it," re- 
marked her companion, hazarding an allu- 
sion to her ladyship's connection "vvith the 
Prince of Wales. The lady laughed una- 
bashed, and as if she was extremely amused 
with the idea. 

" Mighty good. Sir, mighty good ! " she 
exclaimed, " and vou are not far wroni]f. I 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 247 

believe I am in a great measure indebted 
to his Royal Highness for the popularity I 
enjoy; " and then she added in a more con- 
fidential tone, '' An obligation, by the way, 
which I have incurred solely from the agree- 
able prospect it holds out to me of being 
able to serve the deserving. I believe I 
have a great deal of influence in that quarter ; 
but I must confess it 's monstrous dull work 
endeavouring]: to make such an uninteresting; 
mortal take the interest he ought, in what 
should most command it." 

Here the lady sighed, as if she felt her 
position to be anything but satisfactory, or 
else as if to intimate that she had feelings 
that were not to be controlled by her ambi- 
tion. 

'* Assuredly you may lay claim to the 
happiness of boasting amongst your admirers 
the many distinguished men I observe around 
you," said Horace Walpole. 

"" I make no claim to happiness, and I 
never boast," replied Lady Hamilton, in a 



248 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

tone of voice that might be called pathetic ; 
"and as for my numerous admirers, as you 
are pleased to call them, they are summer 
flies swarming to the honey-pot. They know 
well enough that I am not the honey, but 
the worthless vessel that contains it. I care 
not for such admirers, you may depend. 
One honest heart is worth whole hecatombs 
of such time-servers." 

The lady again sighed. Her young cava- 
lier ou^rht to have been satisfied that his fair 
companion was an object that commanded 
his best sympatliies. He certainly was very 
voung, and rather inexperienced in the 
world ; but he felt he had too much at stake 
to allow a diversion of his feelings from 
what he considered was their legitimate ob- 
ject. If Lady Archibald Hamilton was an 
enemy of his father's, it was obvious she 
must be an enemy of his. At any rate, he 
should ever regard her with hostility. 

These reflections were interrupted by their 
reaching the group about the Prince of 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 249 

AVales, that immediately made way, as the 
favourite and her companion approached. 
She whispered that she was about to intro- 
duce him, and that he was to be sure and 
exercise his own sagacity in observing whe- 
ther such an individual, exalted though he 
might be, could satisfy the heart of a woman 
possessed of any sensibility. 

Horace Walpole was at first a little sur- 
prised at the cordiality of his reception. If 
he had been the most influential of his sup- 
porters, instead of the son of liis most pow- 
erful opponent, the Prince could not have 
exhibited greater kindness of manner towards 
him. An mdifferent observer, seeing the 
affectionate interest he displayed so win- 
ningly to the young Member, might have 
been induced to set him do^vn as one of the 
most amiable of men. But such amiability, 
unfortunately, too often forms the bulk of 
the stock in trade of the hidi and mi^rhtv. 
Ci^dlity is a cheap virtue, which, if it 
becomes a pedlar, must still more become a 

m3 



250 STRAWBERKY HILL. 

prince. To smile, and make complimentary 
speeches to their inferiors, form by far the 
greater part of " The Whole Duty," not of 
man, but of the great man. Pity it is that 
appearances are so deceitful, — that, like the 
soap-bubble, it has such a very charming 
eifect, but — there is nothing in it. A great 
man condescends to make himself as agree- 
able as possible to a little one, as mecha- 
nically as he washes his face to become as 
agreeable as possil)le to himself. The little 
man departs, and vnih him vanishes all in- 
terest in his concerns, as completely as if he 
had never existed. 

Prince Frederick questioned our hero con- 
cerning his travels, and what he had observed, 
and appeared to be extremely delighted with 
the accounts he elicited respecting the great 
cities of Italy, and their works of art. 
Young Walpole was something of an enthu- 
siast in art, and could not avoid, whilst upon 
tlie subject, displaying, not only what he 
knew, but what he felt. The speaker shortly 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 251 

found himself the centre of an admiring 
group of listeners, prominent amongst whom 
were Pulteney, Marchmont, Bubb Dodding- 
ton, Lord Bolingbroke, Shippen, Lord Car- 
taret, and Sandys. 

Presently the conversation became general ; 
and if a moment since he felt any surprise 
at being an object of attention to a circle 
composed of his father's bitterest enemies, 
his astonishment was most profound when 
he remarked that they all treated him with as 
much appearance of personal esteem as if he 
were an attached friend of some twenty years' 
standing. 

The Minister's son had an abundant field 
on which to employ his powers of observa- 
tion, but of course the chief object in it was 
the Heir Apparent, and towards him he di- 
rected the principal share of his attention. 
The manners of his Eoyal Highness were 
certainly extremely conciliatory, but this did 
not prevent the observ^er from discovering 
that his mind was very shallow, and as little 



252 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

benefited by education as any intellect in his 
father's dominions. 

The Prince shortly afterwards proceeded 
to play at loliisk^ having Lady Archibald for 
a partner, against Bubb Doddington and 
Lord Bolingbroke ; and as, in the excitement 
of play, he became less on his guard, the 
same shrewd observer could not fail of de- 
tecting a certain looseness of principle, and 
an apparent absence of all high or honour- 
able sentiment, that as ill became his rank, 
as his cordiality became it well. 

The conduct of the philosopher of Dawley 
towards the son of his hated rival, formed a 
fine study for the student of human nature. 
The Prince chose to retain his new acquaint- 
ance near him ; a position by no means dis- 
agreeable to that young gentleman, as it 
enabled him to receive all the little conde- 
scensions of his Royal Highness, as well as 
all the greatly expressive glances of his Royal 
Highness's mistress. 

Bolingbroke took advantage of every op- 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 253 

portunity of ingratiating himself with young 
Walpole. In the pauses of the game, when 
the deal was going on, he was almost sure 
to address him, or express some observation 
which could only be intended for his ear. 
And what he said seemed so very much to 
the purpose, so profound or so brilHant, so 
philanthropic or so just, that it could not 
fail of its due effect on a well educated mind. 
A stranger, with his intelligence untouched 
by any opposing influences, must have felt 
singularly prejudiced in favour of so admir- 
able a converser ; but Horace Walpole never 
lost sight of the conviction that he was in 
the presence of his father's bitterest enemies, 
and consequently all their fascinations were 
unavaiHng. 

Bubb Doddington, too, was equally intent 
on making himself agreeable; but unfortu- 
nately for him, in the society of such a spirit 
as that of Bolingbroke, his qualities, what- 
ever they were, could not come forth so 
prominently as he wished. With all the 



254 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

desire in the world to take a leading part, 
he not only found himself obliged to play 
second fiddle, but forced to play in so very 
subdued and modest a manner, that his per- 
formance, he had reason to fear, would go 
for little or nothing — much too just an ap- 
preciation to be satisfactory. 

Whether it was in consequence of the 
Prince mnning the odd trick — an extra- 
ordinary triumph, considering he had such 
an experienced trickster as Bolingbroke for 
an opponent — or from his Eoyal Highness 
not having expended his stock of civility, 
certain it is, at the conclusion of the game, 
the Minister's younger son was again an ob- 
ject of friendly attention to the Heir Apparent. 
He rose from the card-table, and putting his 
arm familiarly within that of his young 
acquaintance, led him a little apart from the 
group. 

Possibly the reader supposes Prince Fre- 
derick took that opportunity for confiden- 
tially hinting to the member for Callington 



STRAAVBEKPtY HILL. 255 

his Royal Highness's wishes respecting his 
political conduct, and held out some im- 
portant inducement to lead him into con- 
necting himself with the Prince's party. 
It is possible that Horace Walpole anticipated 
this. If he did so, never was man more 
completely disappointed. His Royal High- 
ness led him out of earshot of his friends, 
and then with an air of profound confidence, 
and in a subdued whisper expressive of the 
intense interest he felt in the subject, he 
said, " Between you and I, Mr. Walpole, my 
Lord Bolin^broke did wrono^, in that last 
trick but one, in playing the knave." 

^' I quite agree with your Royal High- 
ness," replied the Minister's son, in the same 
earnest tone and manner, "my Lord Boling- 
broke should never have played the knave.''' 



256 STRAWBEREY HILL. 



CHAPTER XL 
BUBB DODDINGTON. 

The political horizon gave evidence of a 
storm brewing, that threatened to burst 
over the head of Sir Robert Walpole; and 
the quick-sighted affection of his younger 
son had already acquired sufficient know- 
ledge of the atmosphere around him, to be 
aware of the tendency of the gathering 
clouds. But though his own observations 
assured him that miscliief was impending, 
and the same conviction followed from the 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 257 

investigations of his shrewd and useful de- 
pendent in a less direct channel, the saga, 
city of both was at fault when they sought 
to discover the exact shape in which this 
mischief was to disclose itself. 

Horace Walpole expended much anxious 
thou^rht in endeavouring^ to arrive at the 
secret the hostile party preserved so tena- 
ciously. There could be no doubt that the 
clever and crafty Bolingbroke was the main- 
spring of this mysterious movement. It 
suited well his political engineering — this 
working in the dark. It was e^ddent he 
was digging a mine, the object of which 
was to overthrow the administration of his 
rival by a sudden and overwhelmmg explo- 
sion. To keep Sir Robert in ignorance of 
its existence, was of the first importance 
to its success — hence the care with which 
the operations were masked from his obser- 
vation. 

The son of the Minister thought of ap- 
plvin^^r to Ladv Archibald Hamilton for the 



258 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

information he sought ; but a moment's 
reflection satisfied him that their acquaint- 
ance was much too recent to allow of his 
hazarding a confession of his decided par- 
tiality for his father, to so zealous a Tory 
partizan as Prince Frederick's mistress. 
For notwithstanding the hints she had 
dropped of her position being irksome to 
her feelings, his were too strongly preju- 
diced against her as one of his father's 
enemies, to allow them to influence him; 
though he was fully sensible of the advan- 
tage he might gain by keeping on a good 
understanding with her. 

The active and agreeable Fibbs had con- 
trived to make the acquaintance of more 
than one of those extensive depositaries of 
family secrets — housekeepers and ladies' 
maids — to whom his vivacity, good looks, 
foreign phrases, and travelled manners, were 
overpowering recommendations ; but the 
information he had elicited was so vague 
and uncertain, that nothing could be made 
of it. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 259 

He had given them to understand, in 
confidence, how monstrous tired he was of 
the Walpoles — how completely his opinions 
were at variance with the fusty notions of 
the present Government — and had even led 
them to believe that his young master was 
as tired of them as himself; but though he 
found no difficulty in making himself agree- 
able, he could not obtain the information 
of which he was in quest : in his search for 
the secret, there was an impediment in his 
way, upon which, with all his shrewdness, 
he had not calculated — it so happened, 
his fair companions did not know it them- 
selves. 

Horace Walpole was engaged in a par- 
ticularly brown study, seated in a capacious 
arm-chair, in the well-supplied library in 
Arlington-street, when he was surprised by 
the servant suddenly announcing Mr. Bubb 
Doddington. In a moment afterwards Mr. 
Bubb Doddino-ton, overflowinf>: as it were 
with mingled suavity and importance, en- 



260 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

tered the apiirtinent. The Minister's son was 
at a loss for the motive of such a visit, as, 
though he recollected that the sleek, placid, 
self-conceited countenance, now advancing 
so cordially towards him, had come under 
his observation at the Prince's card-table, he 
recollected, also, that so little communica- 
tion had passed between himself and that 
fjentleman, that a visit from him the next 
morning was the last tiling he should have 
anticipated. 

At that moment, however, a reminiscence 
of the ridiculous coat of arms which the 
most brilliant of the To^vnshends had found 
for this nobleman expectant, caused such a 
smile to light up the young Member's fea- 
tures, that Mr. Doddington felt he had no 
reason to complain of his reception. 

Notwithstanding, however, the happy self- 
satisfied look of his visitor, there was a cer- 
tain uneasy expression about his sleepy eyes 
which would have convinced a Lavater that 
the particular friend of the Heir Apparent, 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 261 

and the peer of the reahii that was to be, 
was not quite contented with his present 
circumstances. 

Whilst this ambitious courtier was paying 
his compliments, and expressing a host of 
apologies for his intrusion, his companion 
was speculating on the object of his visit; 
and he soon determined in his mind that the 
gentleman had come as an ambassador from 
the Prince, to propose some friendly arrange- 
ment arising out of the decided impression 
he had produced on his Royal Highness the 
previous evening. 

It is almost needless to say, the speculator 
was very much in the wrong. The impres- 
sion he flattered himself he had produced 
was too transient to afford the Prince a 
single after-thought upon the subject. Mr. 
Bubb Doddington was his ovm ambassador. 
To be sure, he was the confidential friend of 
the Heir Apparent, to whom he had the 
honour of lending his money and losing his 
money according as the whim of his Royal 



262 STKAWBEKKr HILL. 

Highness lay in the way of borrowing or of 
winning. But great as were these honours, 
they did not quite satisfy the ambition of the 
apothecary's son. He knew the Prince of 
Wales could promise — but he Avas quite as 
Avell aware the King could perform; and 
his gratification in being the companion of a 
Prince, and his desire to stand well with the 
Sovereign, often kept him oscillating like a 
pendulum, in the direction in which he 
fancied his interests predominated. 

On the previous evening, after Prince 
Frederick had got rid of all his company, he 
entered into a long explanation of his in- 
tentions to his good-natured friend whose 
])urse had been so convenient to him, in 
which he alarmed that oscillatory courtier 
prodigiously. It was evident to him that 
the Opposition were pushing the Prince for- 
ward to take up a position against his father, 
which could not but greatly embarrass those 
of his friends who sought to keep up a good 
understanding with the existing Ministry. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 2G3 

Boliiigbroke had infused into the shallow 
mind of the Heir Apparent so iierce an 
hostility to his father's ablest ]ylinister, that 
lie was determined to do every thing in his 
power to drive him from the Government; 
and with this object in view, his Royal High- 
ness was about to make a political demon- 
stration supported by the whole power of 
the Tory party, strengthened by recruits 
from amongst the Minister's almost in- 
numerable enemies. The timid time-server 
became alarmed. To take the part in this 
rash movement the Prince required him to 
do, appeared so full of peril to his own in- 
terests, that after a faint remonstrance, he 
thought it most advisable to provide for his 
own safety by opening communications with 
the Prime Minister, in which he purposed 
making favourable terms for himself by be- 
traying the intentions of his master. 

Horace Walpole listened with the most 
intense interest to the details of the grand 
plot his extremely friendly acquaintance of 



264 STRAWBERKY HILL. 

the previous evening unfolded to him. The 
secret that had baffled him was at once in 
liis power. The storm that was brewing 
over the head of Sir Robert Walpole betrayed 
the pkice where it was to break out. The 
Minister's son was careful not to lose an 
atom of this valuable information. *' Fore- 
warned is fore-armed." He knew the value 
of the proverb, and was fidly resolved to 
prove its truth with as much dispatch as 
was practicable. 

But the great attention he gave to the 
particulars that were being narrated to him 
by no means blinded him to the peculiarities 
and deficiencies of the narrator. The extreme 
candour, the excessive disinterestedness, the 
wonderful self-denial, of the Prince's very 
particular friend, in this timely communica- 
tion to the son of the Minister, vv'ere not lost 
upon him. 

'' Then, if I understand you right," said 
Horace Walpole, particularly anxious that 
nothing should be misunderstood, " it is the 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 265 

intention of the Prince of Wales to make a 
demand in Parliament for a jointure for the 
Princess, and £100,000 per annum for him- 
self." 

^' Just so, my dear Sir, just so." 
" And this, not only without the sanction 
of the father of his Royal Highness, but in 
as unquestionable a shape as possible, putting 
himself forward in opposition to his wishes, 
and in defiance of his authority ? " 
" That is the exact state of the case." 
" And in this independent, or it might 
be called hostile movement, I am to under- 
stand that his Royal Highness counts on 
the support, not only of the Opposition party, 
but of several distinguished AMiigs." 

" Just what I said. Moreover, his Royal 
Highness, on my representing the risk he 
was running, and the very remote chance he 
had of success, stated his mind was made 
up, and that he counted on the assistance 
of the Dukes of Argyle and Dorset, and 
Lord Wilmington; and that Mr.. Pulteney, 

VOL. I. N 



\ 



266 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

Lord Carteret, Lord Chesterfield, and Sir 
AVilliam Wyndham, were monstrous eager 
in the affair. His Royal Highness further 
stated that Lord Winchelsea had gone down 
to Petworth to bring the old Duke of 
Somerset to move the measure in the House 
of Lords, and that Mr. Sandys, Mr. Gibbon, 
or Sir John Barnard the financier, were 
likely to move the measure in the House of 
Commons." 

This seemed a formidable enough confede- 
racy ; and the son of the man against whom 
it was directed, may be excused feeling more 
than a common interest in listening to the 
particulars. 

'' Surely," he said, " His Royal Highness 
must feel this daring hostility to his father 
to be exceedingly improper?" 

" My dear Sir," replied the courtier with 
more than a courtier's suavity, " I represented 
to His Royal Highness — in fact I felt bound 
to do so, in consequence of the vast respect 
I have always entertained for his Majesty — 



STRA^^^ERRY HILL. 2G7 

the false position in which he was placing 
himself by this public exhibition of uniilial 
feeling — and reminded him of the delicate 
state of his father's health." 

'' AVhich had its due weight with him, of 
course?" 

" His Royal Highness was so good as to 
say," added the courtier, "that the King 
could not live many years, but might linger 
thus a good wliile ; and he could not stay 
that while." 

Horace Walpole did not make any remark 
at this startling exposition of royal affection, 
but it produced a strong impression on his 
mind. He presently made inquiries as to 
the feelings entertained towards this bold 
measure by the Prince's friends ; and he suc- 
ceeded in ascertaining that the desire of his 
Royal Highness to proceed to extremities 
mth the King, even though a civil war were 
the consequence, had alarmed many quite 
as much as it had frio^htened Mr. Doddinorton 
— several drew back, not a few stood aloof, 

N 2 



268 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

and some of the wiser heads had ventured 
upon a remonstrance. 

The worthy aspirant for a peerage said a 
great deal more respecting his own honour 
and conscience, and ended his confidential 
communication with a well-expressed hint, 
that it was in the power of his estimable 
friend, Sir Robert Walpole, always to com- 
mand his best services in any affair that did 
not affect his principles. He then took his 
leave with an abundance of pretty compli- 
ments and encouraging prophecies to the very 
promising son of his estimable friend, who 
felt happier by a great deal than he had 
been for years, when he saw his visitor fairly 
out of the house. 

"Quick, Fibbs, quick! 'A chair to the 
Treasury," he exclaimed, hurriedly, as his 
valet answered his startling summons at the 
bell, " I have not a moment to lose : tell the 
fellows to carry me along as rapidly as 
they can put their feet to the ground." 

A very short time — though to his impa- 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 269 

tient spirit it seemed an hour — sufficed 
to see him l^orne in a sedan, by a couple of 
stalwart Irishmen, in the direction of his 
father's official residence. The bearers had 
been well talked to by the valet, and well 
feed by the master, therefore it is but reason- 
able to imagine they did not allow the grass 
to grow under their feet — if any they found 
there — as they jogged along with their bur- 
then. He passed the interval in recalling 
the particulars of the important statement 
he had just heard; and when he felt satisfied 
he had not forofotten the least item in the ac- 
count, a glow of intense satisfaction suffused 
his whole system, as he reflected on the vast 
service he was about to do to his father. 

That father, whose character he so revered 
— whose talents he looked upon with such 
enthusiastic admiration — whose position as 
the first Englishman of his age, seemed, to 
his excited fancy, higher than that of either 
King or Keyser — that father, he was about 
to save from the most imminent danger with 



270 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

which his power had ever been threatened ; 
for he knew the energy of that great 
mind, and the extent of its resources, too 
well, to doubt that, with so timely a know- 
ledge of the conspiracy that the wily Boling- 
broke had so skilfully formed, he would find 
any difficulty in defeating it. 

Arrived at Whitehall, our hero learned 
with dismay that Sir Eobert was engaged 
giving an audience to the French Ambas- 
sador, and could not be disturbed on any 
account. His son knew full well that every 
minute lost was an advantage to the enemy. 
His impatience, his excitement, his anxiety, 
became extreme, as he heard the quarters 
strike one after another by the time-piece in 
the waiting-room. He made several ineffec- 
tual efforts to induce one of the messengers 
to disturb his father, but they shook their 
heads with a look of alarm, as if the invita- 
tion was suggestive of nothing less than a 
prosecution for High Treason. 

Horace execrated the iron rules of official 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 271 

etiquette most heartily, as he paced the 
empty room with impatient strides and a 
beatino: heart ; and then he cursed the Am- 
bassador, for taking up his father's time at 
so critical a period of his fortunes. But his 
intemperance was of no more good in expe- 
diting the departure of the one, than had 
been his anxiety for the other's welfare. 

Time still continued to pass on, and the 
cursed Ambassador stiU continued to linger. 
In a fit of desperation, Horace was just 
about to burst upon the diplomatists, when 
he heard a little bell ring, which his quick 
ear recognised as the usual announcement 
of the Minister when dismissing a visitor; 
and he flung himself into a chair, waiting 
his own summons, and striving at the same 
time to still the eager throbbing of his 
heart. 

He waited several minutes, but no sum- 
mons came. The Ambassador was gone, he 
was certain — his father must be alone — he 
must see him. He dashed at once into the 



272 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

adjoining room, and once more demanded 
of the plodding secretaries why Sir Robert 
had not been made aware that he had been 
waiting an hour to see him on most impor- 
tant business. He was quietly told that 
the Minister had had immediate notice of 
his son's visit, on the departure of the Am- 
bassador, and had replied that he could not 
be disturbed, as he had a despatch to write 
of the utmost importance. 

Horace was in an agony. All the bodily 
sufFerino: he had endured throughout the 
course of his life, could not have amounted 
to the intense distress he felt on hearing 
this conamunication. 

" I must implore you to go again to him," 
said he at last, " it is a matter of the great- 
est urgency. Tell him the business I have 
come upon is of vital importance. Not a 
minute ought to be lost in making him 
acquainted with it." 

At first the gentlemen severally shook 
their heads, in their customary official way, 



STRAWBEHRY HILL. 273 

and continued their writing; but one — an 
elderly man — who had long enjoyed the 
Minister's confidence, imaginmg there was 
somethino: in the tone and manner of the 
young gentleman that spoke an unusual 
errand, expressed his wilHngness to go and 
speak again to Sir Robert. 

In a few minutes Horace was summoned 
to the presence of his father. When the 
door opened for him he could hardly enter 
the room, his feelings so overpowered him. 
He saw his father sitting quietly at a table 
covered with papers, evidently so immersed 
in his occupation as not to have noticed his 
entrance. Even in the intensity of his ex- 
citement, the young Member could not avoid 
a feeling of surprise at observing how calm, 
how cheerful, was the Minister's counte- 
nance. It was not the face he had seen 
disfigured by anger, when he had so timely 
interposed to prevent the two angry states- 
men imbruing their hands in each other's 
blood. It was a countenance full of sun- 

n3 



274 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

shine — so full, indeed, that even the thought- 
ful attention he was giving to his employ- 
ment modified but a little the jocund ex- 
pression that played around the mouth, 
and lighted up the whole physiognomy. 

But Horace felt, as soon as he had 
sufficiently recovered from his agitation, 
that the time was too precious to be em- 
ployed even in regarding features so be- 
loved; and he cleared his throat to begin 
the important communication of which he 
was the bearer. 

" Sit down, Horace, and tell me what 
you 've got to say," said the Minister, 
without raising his eyes from the paper 
before him. His son felt that a form of 
address so cold, to one who had hastened, 
with the wann impulse of filial afi*ection, 
to rescue him from a snare in which he was 
about to be encompassed, was anything but 
what he had anticipated; but he gulped 
down his feelings as hastily as he could, 
and at once proceeded to narrate the whole 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 275 

of what Mr. Bubb Doddington's fears for 
his own interests had led him to di\nilo-e. 

At first the young ]\[ember was a little 
too excited to express himself as perspicu- 
ously as he desired ; but as he proceeded, he 
gained confidence and coolness. He fully 
expected that the news of such a coalition, 
brought together to agitate so bold an at- 
tack, through the royal prerogative, on the 
King's favourite ^Minister, would come upon 
him like a bomb-shell. His astonishment 
was extreme at perceiving that his father 
never once lifted his pen from the paper, ex- 
cept to dip it in his massive silver inkstand. 
Mingled with his astonishment was no slight 
degree of mortification. But he began at 
last to think that the Minister was so ab- 
sorbed in writing the important despatch, 
that he could give no attention to his son's 
at least equally important communication. 
When nearly at the end of his narrative, he 
left off speaking. 

"Is that all, Horace?" immediately in- 



276 STRAWBErxRY HILL. 

quired his father — at least proving that he 
was not so inattentive as he had appeared. 

" I am afraid, Sir, you have not been able 
to attend to what I have been stating," 
replied his son, somewhat dejectedly. 

'' I have heard every word, Horace,'^ said 
the Minister, looking up from his writing 
for the first time, " but it so happens it is 
so much attention thrown away, as I was 
previously acquainted with every circum- 
stance you have been so good as to com- 
municate." 

The young Member stared aghast. His 
anxiety — his alarm — his earnest affection — 
his heartfelt devotion, had been as fruitless 
as they were superfluous. He felt almost 
ashamed that he had so unnecessarily be- 
trayed the deep interest in his father with 
which his heart was full to overflowing. 

" Your new friend, Mr. Bubb Dodding- 
ton, is rather late in making his revelations," 
continued the Minister, with a good-hu- 
moured smile. " Eager as he has been to 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 277 

betray his princely patron, in the hope of its 
turning to his advantage, another has been 
more eager still. I know every thing, and 
am prepared for every thing. Nay, I am 
in a condition to inform you, not only that 
the proud old Duke of Somerset mil see 
liis Eoyal Highness and his friends hanged 
before he would stir a step in his favour; 
but that the seeds of disunion have already 
been sown among the Prince's most zealous 
supporters. 

" The fools imagine," continued the 
Minister, "that because I have appeared 
ignorant of their plot, their precious secrets 
are safe. They will find out their mistake 
when this grand motion of theirs comes 
before Parliament. I rather suspect my 
Lord Bolingbroke mil then require all his 
boasted philosophy to enable him to endure 
his disappointment, and that Prince Frede- 
rick will discover — what I am afraid some 
ill-natured observers have discovered already 
— ^that he has been made a fool of." 



278 STRAWT3ERRY HILL. 

Our hero appeared lost in wonder at 
liis father's apparent sense of security, 
and the quiet contempt he appeared to 
entertain for his numerous and powerful 
enemies. But in all this there was visible 
only the Minister secure in his own pride 
of power — of the father, there was not the 
slightest trace. Had he been an utter 
stranger to the family of Walpole, Sir Robert 
could not have exhibited more indifference 
to his son's presence, and less thankfulness 
for his errand, than he had done. 

Horace would have given worlds, had he 
had them at his disposal, could he have heard 
a few kind words in recognition of the instance 
he had given of the strength of his filial 
affection, or a few earnest commendations 
of his political zeal. But in this eventful 
moment he seemed fated to feel more acutely 
than ever the insignificance of his position 
as a younger son. 

He rose to take leave. " Yes," said the 
Minister, quietly resuming his occupation. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 279 

'' I am too busy to afford you any further 
attention. This despatch must be sent off 
immediately." 

As he hurried out of the apartment, our 
hero asked himself, " Is there no way of 
thawing the ice of this man's nature ? Will 
no act of devotion in his son awaken him to 
the consciousness of being a parent, and 
impel him to shew a proper sympathy for 
his offspring?" 

One proof of the intensity of his interest 
in his father's welfare he had just given — 
this the urgency of the case had made him 
bring under the Minister's observation : an- 
other proof had been given ; but this — and he 
congratulated himself on the tenacity with 
which he had held the secret — he had hitherto 
concealed from his father's knowledge. 

He had sacrificed the most absorbing pas- 
sion that ever thrilled the heart of man, 
on the altar of filial affection. He had 
offered up one of the loveliest, the worthiest, 
and most accomplished of her sex, as a peace- 



280 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

offering to his father's love. Plad he allowed 
what he had done in this memorable matter 
to transpire, he could not avoid coming to 
the ungratifying conclusion, that his reward 
would have been about the same as that he 
had reaped by his timely warning to save 
Sir Robert from the machinations that had 
so cunningly been contrived for his de- 
struction. 



STRA^\T3ERRY HILL. 281 



CHAPTER XII. 
A DREAM DISTURBED. 

Sir Robert Walpole proved a true pro- 
phet. The grand movement, in defiance of 
royal authority, which covertly aimed at the 
overthrow of the Minister, was brought for- 
ward, with a wonderful deal of parade, by 
the eloquent and disinterested Pulteney, in 
the House of Commons, in the form of an 
address to the King, to settle on his Heir 
£100,000 a year, with as liberal a jointure 
to the Princess. A similar motion was 



282 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

brought before the notice of the House of 
Lords, by the amiable Lord Cartaret. In 
the former it was defeated in a division, the 
votes for the Minister being 234, for the 
Prince 204; in the latter the result was 
much less flattering, the motion having been 
negatived by a majority of 103 to 40. 

The philosophic Bolingbroke was so moved 
by the ill success of his machinations, that, 
in fit of distaste for public life No. 3, he 
abruptly left England, vowing he would 
never return to it again; and buried himself 
in the deepest seclusion attainable in a 
pretty cottage in the neighbourhood of Fon- 
tainebleau. 

His illustrious friend took his defeat in 
still greater dudgeon. He abused his royal 
father more bitterly than ever, and of course 
did not spare the obnoxious Prime Minister 
— now hated a thousand times more fiercely 
than before. In that dogged sullenness 
which appeared hereditary in his family, he 
chose to put a great affront upon the King, 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 283 

by hastily removing his consort from Hamp- 
ton Court to St. James's, when about to give 
birth to a child ; preventing the performance 
of those ceremonies which were necessary to 
authenticate the birth of a royal oiFspring, 
and endangering the lives of both mother 
and child. This contumelious act greatly 
irritated the King ; and although the Prince 
ventured to make many excuses, and ap- 
peared as humble as he had before been con- 
tumacious, his royal father was too deeply 
offended to be easily appeased, and at last, 
in an angry message, commanded him to 
quit St. James's palace. 

It is a curious coincidence, that Georofe I. 
had a quarrel with his Heir respecting a 
grandchild, and just as summarily turned 
the Prince out of doors, as it might be called, 
as George II. did Prince Frederick. The 
latter found a domicile in Norfolk House, 
St. James's Square, where he kept up the 
indecorous squabble with his parent with a 
degree of rancour and vulgarity that greatly 



28-i STRAWBERRY HILL. 

scandalized the right-thinking portion of 
the community. But the Opposition enjoyed 
it wonderfully; and the disinterested Pul- 
teney and the uncompromising Marchmont, 
the amiable Carteret and the other leaders 
of the Tories, took care to give his Royal 
Highness the advantage of their countenance 
and advice. 

We must not forget to state, that the re- 
sult of this division in both Houses of Par- 
liament gave quite as much satisfaction to 
some little folks, as it had created in some 
great ones. The next meeting of '' The 
Upper Servants' Supper Club" possessed 
certain remarkable features. The President 
maintained his presidential dignity undis- 
turbed, to the breaking up of the party ; the 
Vice having lost a great deal of that offensive 
assurance which had, on the last meeting of 
the Club, so very nearly brought them all to 
loggerheads. Indeed, the Pulteney end of 
the table looked what, in the graphic lan- 
guage of one of the Walpolites, was termed 



STRAAVBERRY HILL. 285 

" dumb-founclered." Xo one, hoAvever, shone 
so conspicuously that evening as their tra- 
velled fellow-member. Indeed, he made so 
imposing a display of what had been said 
at Eton and Cambridge, and what con- 
tinued to be said in France and Italy, that 
those well -coupled hounds in livery, who 
addressed each other by the highest titles of 
the peerage, appeared as if they could not 
sufficiently express their admiration. 

^' I think I should like to take a tower ^^^ 
observed the sky-blue-and-crimson gentleman 
to the other, "It 's monstrous genteel to 
talk about Paris and Rome, and all them 
fine outlandish places, and goes a prodigious 
way with the women in the housekeeper's 
room. What do you think, Duke?" 

" I think tho too, Marquith," replied his 
scarlet-and-gold companion. 

" I suspect Mrs. Jenny is ver}^ much taken 
with that sort of thing? " 

" Monthtrouthly taken with it, Marquith.' 

"And Mrs. Susan will listen to nothino- 
else?" 



286 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

" Slic'th grown quite inthenthible to my 
meritth, I 'm tliorry to tliay." 

The Duke sighed, and then the Marquis 
sighed. There was evidently a great deal 
in the back-ground respecting the Mrs. Jenny 
and the Mrs. Susan mentioned by these wor- 
thies ; but as, at this moment, the brilliant 
valet of Mr. Walpole commenced a remi- 
niscence of a certain extraordinary adven- 
ture of his in the Abruzzi, with a female 
bandit, they ceased their conversation to 
listen to the wonderful narrative, and no 
further insiu^ht could be obtained into the 
cause of their intense sensibility. But we 
must direct our attention to higher game. 

Singular to relate, Horace Walpole was 
but little elevated by his father's triumph ; 
he had received such a fall in the unexpected 
reception of his warning, that nothing now 
seemed to have power to raise him. Possibly 
the foreknowledge of this result might have 
helped in causing this comparative indiffer- 
ence; and when his friends warmly congra- 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 287 

tulated him on the good fortune of the 
Minister, he received this evidence of their 
o^oodwill as if he had nothino^ to do with it. 
He felt like a servant listening to the praises of 
a master who had dismissed him his service. 
For some time he appeared to have taken 
a distaste for public business — as though he 
had no interest in the conflict of AMiigs and 
Tories, and cared only for the reputation of 
a man of fashion. He attended all the gay 
parties, partook of all the amusements, and 
shared in all the frivolous pursuits of what 
then constituted the heau monde. He became 
known to everybody, and every one became 
known to him. Amongst his acquaintances 
he did not forget to cultivate a D:ood under- 
standing with the female leaders of ton — 
indeed he might have considered himself on 
a very good footing with more than one of 
those fair philanthropists, whose lives shew a 
perfect illustration of the command so very 
difficult to follow — " Love your neighbour 
as yourself." 



288 STRA^VBERKY HILL. 

Amongst these, he thought it advisable 
to pay every possible attention to Lady 
Archibald Hamilton ; and her ladyship took 
care to make known to him that she was 
not indifferent to his merit. Their commu- 
nications, however, had as yet been extremely 
limited — they amounted to nothing beyond 
compliments and flirtations, speaking smiles 
and telegraphic glances ; but this is the kind 
of fuel with which Master Cupid dresses our 
human stoves, ready for the flame which is 
so soon to fill every little pipe in our bodies 
with its pleasant but dangerous heat. 

Our hero did not think it advisable to 
make his visits at Xorfolk House too con- 
spicuous ; nor was he satisfied that his Royal 
Hio"hness could so far foro-et his hatred of 
the father, as to be particularly friendly to 
the son — unless some object was to be gained 
by it. He once had the honour of taking a 
hand at whisk .at the royal table; but, by 
some extraordinary accident, the Prince lost 
the odd trick to him ; and this circumstance 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 289 

was always remembered to his disadvantage. 
Bubb Doddington never could have done 
such a thing. Had he so committed himself, 
he knew full well his promised peerage would 
not have been worth a pinch of snuff. 

But in this unprofitable kind of life 
Horace Walpole found little gratification. 
The \dvacity of his friends entertained him ; 
the inexhaustible spirits of such companions 
as Hanbury AVilliams and Charles To'svns- 
hend, and the ludicrous eccentricities of the 
torpid wit George Selw}Ti, acted as a per- 
petual fountain of champagne, in which he 
might refresh and invigorate his nature, 
whea weary of the influence of his own 
thouo;hts and feelinofs. But was he alwavs 
weary of them? Xo. They might take 
one direction in which they were like eagles 
floating in an exalted atmosphere : that they 
were sure to have entirely to themselves. 

Often, when returning in the early morn- 
ing from a crowded rout or noisy ridotto, 
has the weary pleasure- seeker thro^vn hini- 

VOL. I. 



290 STEA^\T3ErtRY HILL. 

self on an easy couch or chair, and forgotten 
all the frivolous world in which he had so 
lately been moving ; and with the pencil of 
memory dipped in the bright colours of the 
imagination, brought upon the disc of the 
mind those scenes of the past over which 
happiness breathed its exquisite sunshine — 
breathed, alas! but to show how vapoury, 
how transient, how delusive, were such 
phantasmagoria. But to the dreamer it 
faded not. It was all aerial — a fata morgana 
of the heart, as illusory as it was brilliant. 
But he who throws himself back on the past, 
looks solely for its beauty ; and in the past 
only Horace knew he could look for beauty 
— at least, that loveliness that contents the 
sold — that light that throws no shadows. 

What mattered it to him that these in- 
dulgences formed that forbidden fruit of his 
tree of knowledge? He gathered and ate, 
and ate and gathered, as though he were 
still in his Paradise, and had no command- 
ment to infrin<]^e. He beheld those wondrous 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 291 

eyes, he heard those eloquent sounds — round 
him there floated a magic atmosphere of love 
and music — passionate hopes sparkled like 
stars in that exquisite firmament — his pulses 
bounded with a delirious ecstasy — his whole 
frame thrilled -with an incommunicable bliss 
— he felt transported into that region of never 
ending sunshine, the Elysium of classic song, 
where the Loves and the Graces are the 
attendants on human perfectibility, bearing 
golden beakers of ambrosia and nectar, impos- 
sible to resist — he fancied he clasped in his 
rapturous arms a form, whose divine propor- 
tions put to shame the charms of all the fair 
deities of Olympus — when his ecstasies were 
very suddenly and very rudely put to flight 
by a voice that he soon became conscious 
was much too earthly for so exalted a locality 
as the Elysian Fields. 

"Now, if your Honour pleases," exclaimed 
the very sleepy Fibbs, with a bedchamber can- 
dlestick in his hand, trying to rouse his young 
master, while he vainly attempted to stifle a 

2 



292 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

ya^vn, " it 's very late, Sir ; allez couchei\ as 
we say iii France. You 'd better go to bed, 
Sir ; it 's rather early hours for a siesta^ as we 
say in Italy. I 've been waiting your return, 
reading ' Tom Jones,' till I fell asleep over a 
love-scene with his sweetheart, Sir." This 
was accompanied by an opening of his mouth, 
of such prodigious extension, that checking 
it was evidently out of the question. 

His master stared at him unconsciously 
for a few seconds, then rose from his recum- 
bent posture, and — oh horror to the romance 
which had so lately transported him amongst 
the Loves and Graces! — stretched out his 
arms and followed the sleepy demonstration 
of his attendant, in a manner that threatened 
immediate dislocation of his jaws. 



STKA^YBERRY HILL. 293 



CHAPTER XIIT. 



A woman's heart. 



There is no subject more Trritten about, 
and, as usual, less known, than a woman's 
heart. T\"e have our moral anatomists who 
profess to shew the whole arcana of its 
curious secrets, and dissect with equal assi- 
duity and care its finest fibre, that they may 
make the world thoroughly acquainted ^-ith 
it; and then they boast of their familiarity 
with its structure and economy. But when 
we hear of such claimants of this rare know- 



294 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

ledge, we are strongly tempted to exclaim — 
after the fashion of a second-rate painter of 
the last generation, when informed that a 
royal personage had declared that he was 
well acquainted mth him — ''Pooh ! it 's only 
his brag." 

These subtle inquirers and deep observers 
mil, nearly always, be found lamentably 
ignorant. A woman's heart is one of the 
lost books of Euclid : — not one unattainable 
problem, but a whole volume of them. Our 
progress in such mathematics enables us to 
see only a short distance into the difficulty. 
We are cognizant of its inconsistencies and 
contradictions, but we neither pretend to 
analyze nor to explain them. 

In the instance of our heroine, we are per- 
fectly aware of the combination of incoherent 
qualities that may be said to form her cha- 
racter. But in our eyes, woman is the 
SPHYNX, typified by the inexplicable monu- 
ment of the Egyptians — an unexplainable 
conundrum — an Ornitliorhynctus jjaradoxus^ 



STEAWBERRY HILL. 295 

more marvellous than the naturalists of 
Australia have made knoAvn to us. We are 
not professed reasoners on such riddles ; and 
if Arabella Falkland seems to act at variance 
"vvitli what some writers term her idiosyn- 
cracy, we must not be expected to expound 
a phenomenon so very common with her 
dear sex. 

Consistency, now-a-days, among the lords 
of the creation, is a virtue as completely 
forgotten as the composition of the Greek 
fire ; or, if ever to be seen, it is in those who 
are consistent only in being inconsistent. 
What the philosopher Square designated 
" the eternal fitness of things," has long be- 
come the exact reverse. Nothing is appro- 
priate but what is most opposite. Im- 
possibilities are matters of course, and 
contradictions the best possible logic. 

Our holy men rival each other in exhi- 
biting every vice that can most degrade 
humanity. If they are not wolves to their 
flocks, it is because they take care to prove 



296 STEAWBERRY HILL. 

themselves more monstrous beasts.* Our 
learned men stultify themselves by follies of 
which a child would be ashamed. One sees 
incredible marvels by looking through his 
legs; another discovers impossible comets 
when most probably his legs refused to sup- 
port him; and a whole tribe of them are at 
feud with each other as to the best means 
of preserving for the present the rubbish 
of the past. Our wealthy men emulate 

* Perhaps it may be thought hard, an entire profession 
should be stigmatised for the unworthiness of a few of its 
members ; but when at least a dozen cases of clerical delin- 
quency have lately occurred, embracing the most atrocious 
crimes in the calendar of wickedness, including: incest, adul- 
tery, fornication, forger^-, drunkenness, and simonj-, and the 
criminals are still suffered to retain their sacred employ- 
ments, we, in common with all the right-thinking part of the 
laity, cannot help considering the profession to be lament- 
ably disgraced. The Quakers, when one of their body mis- 
behaves himself, dismiss him from their community — an 
officer, acting in a manner unbecoming an officer, is ca- 
shiered — and even a common soldier, when found to be an 
incorrigible vagabond, is drummed out of his regiment. A 
Minister of the Gospel alone has the privilege of exhibiting 
the most revolting depravity, without the fear of expulsion 
from his order. 



STEAWBEKRY HILL. 297 

each other in extravagant donations towards 
a memorial to some man whose riches al- 
most exceed calculation; whibt the newly- 
born of their fellow-creatures, from being 
denied covering when quitting the chainty 
that allowed them birth, y the freez- 

ing blast; and the helpless aged, 

turned out of the hu* ^ . i : had always 
been to them a shelt^ ;wever httle it 
may have realized our i.e. - of a home, are 
left to die in the first ditch to Tvliioh thev 
can crawl. Undoubtedly we :: ' come to 
the eternal z^/i -fitness of things. 

It is not the mesm-ii-; :,.' . : - 
with the backs of their 1 ; - : all society 
have got the same extraordinary gift of 
beholding objects out of their sphere of 
vision ; — nay, so strange is this quahry, that 
the human mole, who never observed an 
inch bevond his nose in a natural wav. can 
readily chscover the most minute trifle when 
he can regard it in some inapproachable 
position. It is such as these who overlook 

o3 



298 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

the crime that taints the air they breathe, 
while subscribing their thousands to convert 
the heathen in the Antipodes. 

It used to be accounted a singularity in 
the waterman that he should look one way 
and row another ; but now the whole family 
of mankind follow the same fashion: they 
are content to go backward, and see only 
what they have passed. We should not 
have, unless this were the case, the constant 
references to Hansard in one place — the 
voluntary return to a long abandoned faith 
in another — the eager adaptation of art 
in its most uncouth barbarism — and the 
frantic enthusiasm for literature in its swad- 
dling-clothes. In short, we are all looking 
one way and rowing another. 

If such irregularities are common in 
one sex, there surely can be little occasion 
for apology for whatever there is of a like 
nature in the other. Heroines may be 
regarded as the comets — if not of the Coper- 
nican, of the Colburnian system; they be- 



STRAWBERIIY HILL. 299 

long to that class of the heavenly bodies 
that invariably pursue an eccentric course. 
Our heroine mil be found peculiarly to 
deserve this similitude. She was passion- 
ately in love with Horace Walpole, and she 
had long professed to consider him unwor- 
thy of a thought ; and she was exclusively 
devoted to the unfortunate exile her father 
had served with such rare fidelity ; yet cared 
more to hear how her discarded lover was 
distinguishing himself, than the probabili- 
ties there existed of her Sovereign's trium- 
phant return to his dominions. 

Several months had passed since the ab- 
rupt termination to the sweetest enjoyment 
Arabella had ever known, when she was 
sittincc mth her father in one of the eleo^ant 
apartments of their villa, looking out into 
the open country, with a volume of Petrarch 
in her hand. The book, attractive as it 
was, had engaged but little of her thoughts. 
The poetry of the Italian lover seemed tame 
compared to that which had been breathed 



300 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

SO glowingly into licr o^^^l soul. The hand 
that clasped the open volume was in her 
lap; and her eloquent eyes, softened and 
subdued by some tender recollection, rested 
themselves on vacancy — a tear Avas trem- 
bling on her long silken lashes — and the 
light of the soul within seemed to flash 
upon it, making it a diamond more radiant 
than the most experienced lapidary had 
ever seen. 

Arabella Falkland had so completely 
given herself up to her oaati reflections, that 
she did not notice she had for some time 
been the object of her father's anxious and 
tender scrutiny. His proud and gloomy 
features gave evidence of deep emotion, as 
he shook his head distrustfully, and ceased 
to take any interest in the pious work from 
which he had so recently derived such deep 
gratification. He sighed heavily. Just then 
there was a struggle going on in his breast, 
that imported much to his fair companion. 
He had lately been entertaining certain 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 301 

ambitious speculations which sought the 
advancement of his idolized daughter, by 
an exaltation that very few fathers of his 
rank would have contemplated even in their 
dreams. 

Lord Falkland valued his daughter's 
worth as equal to grace any destiny. But 
with this great ambition was great love. 
At the idea of her having to endure suffer- 
ing, by the current of her affections being 
rudely diverted from the channel they had 
made for themselves, he caught himself 
wishing that Horace Walpole had not been 
the son of a man who had rendered him- 
self so obnoxious to the Jacobites as the 
Usurper's able Minister ; or that some pros- 
pect would offer for directing her warm 
young heart towards a more desirable ob- 
ject. This last idea reminded him of a 
circumstance that appeared to have escaped 
his recollection. 

^' Arabella, my love! " he exclaimed. 

A smile broke over the saddened features 



302 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

of the youtliful beauty, directly she heard 
herself addressed by her parent ; and all trace 
of that pensive tenderness which had so 
touched his nature, vanished like a vapour 
before the sun. 

" What think you of his Eoyal Highness ? " 
he added. 

Now there was a good deal in this ques- 
tion that requires explanation. The confi- 
dence reposed in his counsellor by the Che- 
valier St. George, as the son of James II. 
was usually styled, afforded Lord Falkland 
opportunities of being on terms of affec- 
tionate intimacy with the royal children. 
The eldest had been a frequent visitor at th^ 
villa, and these visits had greatly increased 
since it had boasted so rare an attraction as 
the lovely daughter of its possessor. 

The Prince of Wales — as he was consi- 
dered by his father's miniature Court — had 
arrived at an age when the influence of femi- 
nine beauty makes its way most directly to 
the imagination ; and, attended as was this 



STRAAVBERIIY HILL. SOP) 

winning charm in the person of Arabella 
Falkland Avith an intelligence that was even 
more attractive, it must not be thought very 
surprising that the young Prince shewed a 
marked preference for her society. 

This preference was the key-stone in the 
ambitious structure on which the proud and 
fond father thought of rearing his daughter's 
happiness — his pride and his partiality lead- 
ing him very readily to imagine, that if not 
for her own inestimable worth, and her 
descent from one of the most ancient fami- 
lies in England, as a member of the princely 
house into which he had married, he might 
reasonably aspire to such an alliance. 

His daughter certainly took a decided 
interest in the youthful Prince: she was 
steadfast in her devotion to his family; and 
possibly her kindly manner towards him, and 
the pleasure his presence seemed to afford 
her, caused both her father and his Royal 
Hio-hness to believe that she regarded him 
with affection. 



304 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

" I think Prince Charles possessed of many 
good qualities," replied the young lady to 
her father's question — " He is ardent, ro- 
mantic, and sanguine — very good materials 
to work upon for noble results, if the dispo- 
sition of his Royal Highness be sufficiently 
plastic to allow of such work." 

" You ou<2:ht to know somethino^ of his 
disposition, my child, for you have had no 
lack of opportunity for studying it." 

" True, Papa. I have lately seen a good 
deal of Prince Charles, but not sufficient to 
satisfy me that his disposition is ever}^thing 
his best friends could wish." 

" You astonish me. Every one in Rome 
speaks in the highest terms of his Royal 
Highness' s amiability." 

" I do not doubt that the Prince is very 
amiable." 

" What would you have in a Prince? " 

" I would have energy — decision of cha- 
racter — high intellect — generous sympathies 
— and exalted courage." 



STRA^\TBERRY HILL. 305 

Lord Falkland paused. Was it to admire 
the lofty expression of that exquisite coun- 
tenance, or to reflect on what he had heard ? 
In a moment he spoke again. 

*' You think the Prince deficient in these 
qualities? " 

"I have not seen any evidence of their 
existence," she quietly replied. 

" But you must remember, my child, that 
his Royal Highness is peculiarly situated. 
Ke is placed in such circumstances as render 
it impossible for him to find occasion for the 
development of such qualities. He may 
possess them — indeed it is a moral certainty 
that a Stuart must possess them — they lie 
ready for use, when the time arrives which 
should call them into action. We are not 
the masters of our o^vn destinies. The best 
— the greatest — the msest — are but puppets 
in the hand of the Great Disposer of events. 
The misfortunes of his family have placed 
his Royal Highness in a position that throws 
almost insurmountable obstacles in the way 



306 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

of his finding for himself such a career as 
you and all his warmest friends desire for 
him. But our negociations with the court 
of France will, I have every reason to believe, 
in a very short time, open for the Prince the 
path of honour and greatness, under auspices 
as brilliant as shall accord with the grandeur 
of his birth.'' 

" No one would or could rejoice at this 
more than myself — but " — 

" His Royal Highness the Prince of 
Wales ! " shouted their confidential English 
servant, throwing the door as wide open as 
possible, to admit a young man of fair and 
rather delicate aspect, slight figure, and 
graceful bearing, wearing his o^vn light hair 
rather long, and dressed in a suit of purple 
velvet without ornament except the star at 
his breast. 

Lord Falkland and his daufrhter rose as 
the Prince entered; and, assuredly, his Royal 
Highness had no reason to complain, either 
of want of respect or of cordiality in his 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 307 

reception. The Prince began detailing, mtli 
great affability, and with much apparent 
light-heartedness, the gossip of Rome. Lord 
Falkland made respectful inquiries after the 
health of his father, and Arabella made 
similar allusions to his brother; but the 
Prince at that moment had but little to say 
respecting his family, and a vast deal about 
strangers, of whom the Falklands cared to 
know nothing. 

Presently his Lordship was summoned 
away, and the two young people w^ere left 
alone. The Prince immediately drew his 
chair close to his fair companion, and, look- 
ing into her brilliant eyes with no slight 
degree of admiration, began a conversation 
of a very different kind and tendency. 

" What makes you so thoughtful to-day? " 
he inquired earnestly; " I do not think so 
divine a face ought ever to look serious." 

" I have reason to be thoughtful, your 
Royal Highness." 

" Oh, pray get rid of your reason, and 



308 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

your tliouglitfulness ^vill of course go in its 
train. But what has happened? I trust 
nothing can have occurred likely to chase 
away from that angelic mouth, the smiles 
that clothe it with such ravishing beauty?'' 

" Indeed, every day I have cause to make 
me smile less and less — to make me think 
more and more." 

" For Heaven's sake tell me what is the 
cause, that threatens to that charming face 
so much mischief." 

" Yourself, Prince." 

" Do you indeed tell me that / am the 
cause?" exclaimed his lioyal Highness, 
taking her hand with a tender glance ; "In 
the name of all that 's deplorable, what have 
I done?" 

'' It is not what your Royal Highness has 
done that causes so much thought," said his 
fair companion, suiFering him to retain her 
hand, " it is what your Royal Highness has 
not done." 

"I am fairly puzzled," he cried ; " perhaps 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 903 

you are only amusing yourself; but yet you 
do not look as if you were jesting." 

"It is far too serious a matter ; but I will 
in few words explain what causes me so 
much reflection — indeed, I may add, without 
aiFectation, so much concern." 

The Prince looked as grateful as he 
thought he ought to look, at being told by 
so beautiful a woman that he was an object 
of interest. 

" The unworthy position of Your Royal 
Highness's family has long engrossed my 
best sympathies. I could not behold, ^vitli- 
out the awakening of all my sensibilities, 
the rightful Sovereign of my country reduced, 
by misfortunes which he had not incurred, 
to his present humble fortunes." 

" Yes, divine Arabella, I am well aware 
of the goodness of your heart. Your kind 
feelings towards us do you honour, and be 
assured that I am truly and deeply grateful 
for them. But my father's dependence on 
other governments prevents any thing being 



310 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

attempted to alter the state to which we 
have unhappily been reduced." 

" Pardon me, if I say I do not see that. 
The King unfortunately may be dependent 
— but that dependence need not shackle the 
Prince of Wales." 

" I A^^sh I could see a way of doing any- 
thing : I should not be long in following it, 
wherever it led." 

" With such feelings, half the difficulties 
of your Royal Highness's position may be 
readily got rid of." 

" How ?" cried the Prince, with lively 
emotion, as he continued to watch the ex- 
pressive countenance of his beautiful coun- 
sellor. 

'^ Heroic minds make their own opportu- 
nities," she calmly replied; " Alexander the 
Great was not much older than your Royal 
Hiofhness when he set out on his career of 
conquest ; and, though I am well aware he 
was very much better furnished for such a 
career, there is no doubt you have advan- 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 311 

tages he did not possess, with all his re- 
sources." 

" Pray tell me what they are, for I assure 
you I am quite ignorant of them." 

'' In the kingdoms he went to conquer, all 
were enemies ; in those which ought to be 
your conquest, your Eoyal Highness has 
numerous friends." 

"Granted; but numerous as they are, I 
am more than doubtful they would suffice 
without very considerable assistance. I am 
as eager as ever was Alexander to attempt 
such an enterprise ; but this for one man to 
undertake, in my judgment, savours more of 
madness than heroism." 

" Doubtless your Royal Highness has 
read the legends of our Holy Church — and 
must remember how the Primitive Fathers, 
Apostles, and Holy Saints of our sacred 
faith, established our blessed rehgion among 
heathen nations. They did not go with an 
army of ecclesiastics to take possession of 
the heathen soil, and by force convert the 



312 STRA^YBEERY HILL. 

natives to Christianity. The Apostle ven- 
tured unattended into the midst of fierce 
hordes, of which every individual would 
have made a merit of putting him to death. 
He preached God's Holy "Word — his elo- 
quence was his only weapon, his faith his 
only defence. He went alone, where every 
man was his enemy — he went, and conquered. 
The same exalted impulse that created a 
saint, under other circumstances would form 
a hero." 

The Prince gazed upon the noble expres- 
sion in the countenance of his companion 
for some few seconds, with admiration that 
appeared too eloquent for language. 

" Has it never occurred to your Koyal 
Highness," she continued with increasing 
animation, " that the greatest risk might be 
attended with the greatest results? — that 
more miofht be done under circumstances 
apparently hopeless, than where they were the 
most auspicious? The best provided expe- 
ditions have often proved the most signal 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 813 

failures. AVliat wanted the Spanish Armada 
to insure the object for which its vast means 
were collected? Its end was most disas- 
trous. What sort of resources had Columbus 
for his great expedition ? How limited 
were the means with which Fernando Cortez 
added the empires of South America to 
European rule! 

" I am ever haunted by an heroic dream, 
in which an illustrious individual, in whom 
I cannot but feel the deepest interest, figures 
as a worthy rival to these great men. I 
fancy a legitimate Prince, long exiled from 
his countr}", suddenly making his appearance 
amongst his loving subjects — whose devotion 
is excited to the highest exaltation of which 
mere human feeling is capable, by his ap- 
parent helplessness — added to the confidence 
in their honour he expresses, by venturing 
in the midst of them, with little but his own 
sword and his good cause to back him in his 
glorious enterprise. 

" I imag^ine a flame of the most ardent 

VOL. I. P 



314 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

loyalty kindled in the breasts of a few gene- 
rous men by this stirring spectacle — I see 
their noble examples followed by hundreds 
— those hundreds rapidly swelling to thou- 
sands — of daring and active partizans. I 
behold the irresistible shock of these brave 
spirits overthromng the armed bands sent 
to oppose them, and then multiplpng their 
force a thousand-fold with wondrous rapidity. 

" 1 \iew the young hero at the head of a 
well-appointed army, proceeding on his vic- 
torious way, driving before him the hired 
bands of the Usurper of his royal dignity ; 
and, lastly. Fancy brings forward the con- 
cluding scene of these inspiring pictures, in 
the shape of the triumphant entrance of this 
heroic Prince into the capital of his here- 
ditary dominions, amid the hearty acclama- 
tions and grateful welcomes of his happy 
people." 

" You are right," observed his Eoyal 
Highness, warmly pressing her hand in his 
OTVTi, as, with much emotion, he rose from 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 315 

his seat, " You have pointed out to me, 
di\ine Arabella, what I ought to do. As 
Heaven is my witness, I am impatient to 
begin the adventure. Perhaps you do not 
know that negociations are proceeding mth 
the Court of France, that hold out such a 
prospect to me as I should have most coveted, 
had not your thrilling words just convinced 
me that another was open, infinitely more 
glorious. 

" I am about proceeding to that Court 
by its invitation. I dare not refuse its assist- 
ance, if offered under circumstances that 
render its acceptance advantageous to my 
father's interests ; but should that assistance 
not be forthcoming, be assured, my lovely 
counsellor, the next intelligence of my move- 
ments that reaches your ear, shall afford you 
the conviction, that neither your exquisite 
beauty, nor your spirit-stirring eloquence, 
has been without a^^propriate results." 

The Prince gallantly raised her hand to 
his lips, and the next moment Arabella Falk- 

p 2 



316 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

land was alone. — Not quite alone, for she 
had the company of her o^\^l bright thoughts, 
which assured her that the far distant 
star that had glimmered in her gloomy 
future, had received a vast increase of size 
and radiance — that her attachment to the 
son of the hated Walpole had lost that utter 
hopelessness in which she had for so many 
melancholy months tried to regard it. 



END OF VOL. I. 

STRAWBERRY HILL, 



VOL. II. 



STRAWBERRY HILL 



AN 



HISTORICAL XOVEL, 



ET THE AUTHOR OF 

'SHAKSPEARE AND HIS FRIENDS," "MAIDS OF HONOUR, 
" SIR ROGER DE COVERLET," &c. 



" Here are no assassins, no poisoners, no Neros, 
Borgias, Catilines, Richards of York ! Here are 
the foibles of an age — no very bad one." 

Horace Walpole. 



IN THREE VOLOIES. 
VOL. II. 



LONDON : 
HENRY COLBURN, PUBLISHER, 

GREAT MARLBOROUGH STREET. 
1847. 



?X3 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 



CHAPTER I. 



THE DUKE OF NEWCASTLE'S LEVEE. 



Lord Boles'gbroivE liad been induced to 
leave his hermitage at Fontainebleau. It 
had become necessary for liim to return to 
England, ostensibly to take possession of 
some property that had been bequeathed to 
him, but in reality because his devotion to 
philosophy in France was getting irksome, 
and his desire to meddle in State affairs in 

VOL. II. B 



2 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

England had become too strong any longer 
to be kept under control. 

The philosopher took possession of his 
patrimony — a snug edifice in the classic 
reirionof Battersea — that Arcadia of cabbao:e- 
growers — that Paradise of market gardeners 
— that Tempe of the lovers of asparagus, 
rhubarb, and cos lettuces : and his last fit of 
distaste for public life not having quite ex- 
hausted itself, he again affected to live 
retired, and to exclude himself from the busy 
world. 

Here he studied Machiavelli, Rochefau- 
cault, Guicciardini, and Montesquieu — here 
he sought to lead his intellect into the pro- 
found, the abstruse, the mysterious, and the 
obscure — till the delicate state of his mind 
had been sufficiently re-invigorated by so 
capital a course of intellectual asses' milk, to 
be able once more to enter upon a struggle 
with his more fortunate rival. Then the 
hermit of Battersea began, like an old spider 
awakening from the torpidity in which he 
had lived the winter, to re-construct his 



STRAAVBERRY HILL. 3 

scattered webs, and lie in wait for the prey 
that his instinct told liim would soon be in 
his clutches. 

Everything fell out just as this clever 
diplomatist desired. The grand lever in his 
political mechanics — the Prince of "Wales — 
was soon as often in the neighbourhood of 
Battersea, as he had pre^'iously been in that 
of Dawley : the Tories were only too glad 
to avail themselves of the services of so able 
an engineer, not to hasten to secure them 
directlv thev were aorain in the market : — 
and many of the WTiigs, who were most 
jealous of the superior talent of Sir JRobert 
Walpole, were quite as anxious to secure 
Lord Boling-broke's assistance in ofettincf the 



great Minister out of the w 



c 



ay- 



Among the latter, the most influential 
were the Minister's own coadjutors, the Pel- 
hams. The Duke of Xewcastle. that beau 
ideal of empty pride and shallow pomp, 
could not avoid feeling a sort of degradation 
when his political chief came " between the 
wind and his nobility." His Grace fancied 

B 2 



4 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

it would be a vast deal better, and assuredly 
in every way more appropriate, for a Duke 
of Xewcastle to be at the head of the Govern- 
ment, than a Sir Eobert Walpole. 

His brother, Mr. Pelham, a much abler 
man, shared his sentiments. These senti- 
ments it was the object of the philosopher of 
Battersea to strengthen and encourage ; and 
to do this he did not want either incHnation 
or skill. In short all those ao^encies were tell- 
ing so strongly against the Walpole interest, 
that the Pulteney section of " The Upper 
Servants' Supper Club" once more became 
vastly aggravating; to the increasing dis- 
pleasure of the worthy butler of the First 
Lord of the Treasury, and the extreme in- 
dignation of the travelled valet of his son. 

But perhaps we should give the reader a 
clearer insight into the state of things at this 
particular period of our story, were we to 
describe to him the routine of a Ministerial 
levee, the Minister being no other than the 
extremely pompous and extremely shallow 
Duke of Newcastle, to whom we have just 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 5 

alluded. In his mansion, everything was 
conducted in the most stately manner. An 
army of footmen, among whom was our 
lisping acquaintance of the " Admiral Ver- 
non," were to be met with, clad in their 
state liveries, placed at various mtervals be- 
tween the hall- door and the ofrand suite of 
apartments in which the company were 
allowed to assemble, all evidently in the 
finest possible state of servile indolence. 
Ushers, pages, a major-domo, and a cham 
berlain, were employed to attend upon visi- 
tors, from the reception rooms to the chamber 
of audience. 

EveryAvhere the eye fell upon indications 
of the importance, the wealth, and the power 
of the Pelhams. If the visitor was not 
assured from what he beheld that they were 
a favoured race — the tribe of Levi, set apart 
for the highest political offices in the Chris- 
tian community — it was no fault of the 
existing possessor of the Dukedom. As far 
as full-length portraits could go — as far as 
batons of command, badges of office, orders 



6 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

of dignity, vestments of State, could repre- 
sent greatness in a family, nothing had been 
left undone. 

Then there were other evidences of the 
Pelhams being a favoured family — there 
were magnificent pictures on the walls, 
costliest services of plate on the side-boards, 
displays of Dresden china of almost incal- 
culable value in cabinets, stupendous mirrors, 
of which the enormous frames were miracles 
of carving and gilding, over the mantel- 
pieces, and signs of excessive wealth every- 
where. There was not a chair in either 
room that did not express, as clearly as the 
costliest upholsterers could convey a mean- 
ing, that in that mansion lodged a remarkable 
example of the great ones of the earth ; 
there was not a table, there w^as not even a 
stool, which did not declare in equally un- 
mistakeable hieroglyphics, that if a truly 
great man ever existed on the face of the 
globe, that great man was Thomas Pelham, 
Duke of Newcastle. 

About noon, one warm summer's day, in 



STRAWBERRY HELL. 7 

the year 1743, a considerable throng had 
collected in his Grace's reception-rooms. 
It was composed of the usual hangers-on 
of the family — a vast assemblage of needy 
expectants, who were in the habit of pre- 
senting themselves before the great man on 
all such occasions, to remind him, in that 
respectful way, of the good things he had 
so long led them to expect at his hands — 
then came the holders of his Grace's nu- 
merous boroughs, to shew that they were 
sufficiently grateful for his patronage — and 
then came as numerous a body, extremely 
anxious to step into their shoes m the said 
boroughs, as soon as the said shoes should 
become vacant — there were also sundiy 
poor relations, come to feed their own pride 
on the prodigal display made of his, by the 
head of the family — and sundry rich rela- 
tions, to fancy they were possessed of so 
much additional wealth in the magnificence, 
placed so ostentatiously before them, of their 
illustrious kinsman. 

In addition might be seen a hungry crowd 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 



of time-serving politicians, who hurried to 
the Minister's levee under the impression 
that there was a change about to take place 
in the Government which would be vastly 
to his advantage, and, were they in time, 
miirht be almost as much to theirs. Witli 
these, ahnost lost in the crowd, were seve- 
ral meritorious persons in search of the 
great man's patronage : — rising divines anx- 
ious for a benefice — learned scholars, seek- 
ing subsistence — clever artists, languishing 
for employment — poets, orators, pamphle- 
teers, and critics, elbowing each other for 
a moderate slice of the great man's counte- 
nance and purse. 

Of these, many amused themselves by 
wonderinfj at the inmunerable indications 
presented to them of their patron's power 
and affluence — and on most occasions this 
was fated to be all their enjoyment; for, 
after cooling their weary heels and feeding 
their wondering eyes for two or three hours, 
it was often intimated to them that his 
Grace would see no more company that 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 9 

day, as he had an appointment with his 
Majesty, or was summoned to a Cabinet 
Council, or had gone to the House of Lords, 
or by making some one or other of a choice 
of half a hundred other excuses, equally im- 
posing and equally false. 

And then the tired apphcant — the humble 
scholar — the active pohtician — the unem- 
ployed artist — the poor divine — and the rest 
of the curious menagerie that made up the 
Newcastle ark of clean and unclean beasts, 
made the best of their way out of the street- 
door, confidently expecting better fortune 
to attend them on their next visit — and, on 
the next levee, going through exactly the 
same profitless ceremonies. 

Very little talking was allowed. In fact, 
scarcely any one — if he did venture to 
speak in so grand a domicile — dared to 
utter a word above his breath. The spirit of 
the place was a vast deal too sacred for the 
expression of idle gossip ; and that inmiensely 
consequential person the Duke's chamber- 
lain, in his velvet suit and sword, who was 

b3 



10 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

almost as great a man as his master, would 
look reprovingly should any rash stranger 
break the stately silence so natural to such 
stately apartments; but should he be still 
so oblivious of where he was and of what 
he was doing, as to laugh, the chamber- 
lain's frown would become so portentous, 
and the horror-struck look of the well-bro- 
ken-in crowd so expressive, that the sacri- 
legious mirth was sure to be marvellously 
soon put a stop to. 

A few privileged persons did indulge in 
an occasional observation; and it was evi- 
dent the laws did not forbid such exclama- 
tions as "Beautiful ! " — "Extremely fine ! " — 
" The Duke has prodigious taste ! " — " The 
Pelhams are a vastly illustrious family ! " — 
Such the ushers and pages looked upon as 
natural as an occasional blow of the nose, 
an unpremeditated cough, and a sponta- 
neous sneeze. 

If any superior person chanced to be 
amongst the company, his superiority was 
obvious to the rest by the greater duration 



STRAWT3ERRY HILL. 11 

and loudness of his observations. If he 
spoke in an audible whisper, he might 
safely be set down as an independent Mem- 
ber of Parliament, and most probably a 
Baronet; if he talked in his natural tone, 
he could be nothing less than a Baron — 
perhaps a Viscount ; if he seemed very much 
at his ease and spoke very confidently, 
there could be no question of his being a 
Marquis or an Earl — for no one of less dig- 
nity, it was very well known, would venture 
to assume such a privilege. 

Woe be to the luckless wight of ignoble 
lineage, who miprudently chose to follow the 
example these grandees had set him : if he 
whispered, he was stared out of countenance ; 
if he spoke aloud, he was snubbed; and if 
he presumed to be at his ease, an intunation 
was quickly conveyed to him, that his Grace 
was so much engaged, it was quite unpossibh* 
he could be seen. It mattered not that he 
was an estimable character — a man of talent, 
scholarship, and probity — a pious divine, or 
a matchless artist ; if he infrmged one of the 



12 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

unalterable laws of the Newcastle etiquette, 
his star had waned before the gaze of the 
Minister — he had sunk himself irretrievably 
in the estimation of the glorious race of 
Pelham. 

But we have not yet introduced to the 
reader this inestimable example of a states- 
man, who believed himself, as is said of 
poets in the well-known Latin adage, to be 
born, not made. This Porphyrogenitas of 
English politics was a man who, even in his 
height, shewed his ruling passion to make 
the most of himself; his red-heeled shoes 
elevating him, as much as was safe to the 
wearer, above the standard of men of his 
growth. 

His wig was of rather modest dimensions, 
as though to intimate the little capacity it 
covered ; and the satin bag behind seemed as 
perfect a type of the emptiness that went 
before it. We must say as little as possible 
of the coat, which was of the best material, 
deUcately faced with gold, and ruffled with 
the finest lace — and of the light figured 



STRAWBERRY HILL. . 13 

satin vest, reaching to the hips, and orna- 
mented with similar embroidery; neither 
must we be delayed by the glossy black satin 
small clothes'i with the fine hose drawn over 
the knees, and the aforesaid red-heeled shoes 
with gold buckles. 

We must call due attention to the gold 
hilt of the sword peeping from his Grace's 
skirts, and the broad ribbon of honour that 
crossed his chest : but our first object is the 
countenance, that, like a roc's egg^ was 
evidently intended to be the last and great- 
est ornament Nature had allowed, when 
furnishing so many perfections to so great 
a man. 

Now there happen to be physiognomies 
that are expressive of too much, and some 
that are expressive of too little. No Lavater 
could deny a marked individuality to the 
sheep, the goose and the owl; and in the 
human family there are occasionally met 
A^dth sets of features so sheepish, goose-like, 
and owlish, that they might induce a specu- 
lative physiologist to suspect — in accordance 



14 STRAWBEREY HILL. 

with Lord Monboddo's theory, that men 
were descended from monkeys, — some might 
quite as rationally look for their ancestors 
anion g: a flock of antediluvian wethers, or 
pre- Adamite geese, or still more antiquarian 
owls, who had the honour of hooting at such 
prodigious fine fellows as the Megatherium 
and the Ichthyosaurus, as heartily as some 
of their descendants do at as great monsters 
of our o^vn age. 

The countenance of his Grace of New- 
castle was not one of these remarkable speci- 
mens of individuality — simply because it was 
a happy mixture of them all. The bird of 
Minerva never appeared more owlish — no 
sheep's head on a block ever presented itself 
so apropos de mouton ; and had he lived in 
the days of Macbeth, there is no question 
that his hail by that illustrious personage 
would always have been, " Where gottest 
thou that goose look? " 

It was during one of his levees, when the 
reception rooms were most crowded, that the 
Duke was sitting in a crimson velvet chair of 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 15 

state, in a small apartment richly decorated. 
On these occasions he chose to be seated, as a 
position affording a greater display of dignity 
than was possible of attainment by a man of 
his awkward, scrambling, shuffling gait, when 
on liis Ws. There was a fine full-Jenorth 
portrait of the King on one side of the room, 
and an equally fine full-length of the Duke 
on the opposite side ; the walls were so near 
— the state robes of each so similar — and they 
looked so affectionately at each other, that 
they might easily have been mistaken for the 
immortal kings of Brentford, smelling at one 
rose. 

Letters bearing the royal seal, almost as 
large as a moderate-sized warming-pan, lay 
on the table, with various bundles of official- 
looking papers, addressed in a Brobdignagian 
character, to his Grace the Duke of New- 
castle, &c. &c., with all his titles at full 
length ; and there were writing implements 
of a very costly kind, having the armorial 
bearings of the Pelhams fully displayed. 

On this point we may as well add here, 



16 STRAAYBEIIRY HILL. 

that for fear any visitor should enter the 
house in ignorance of the quality of the 
owner, the ducal coronet stared him in the 
face from every object that attracted his 
attention; it flashed upon him from the 
saucepan-lid-like silver buttons of the 
lacqueys — it blazed from the gilt tops of the 
mirrors — it even spread its glory in the 
embroidery on the foot-stools. It was quite 
impossible any one could for an instant doubt 
where he was, when so much care was taken 
to shew him that he had entered the temple 
of the Grand Llama of English politics. 

The great man was seated very much at 
his ease — as so very great a man should be 
— hstening with an air intended to be a well- 
balanced union of stateliness with condescen- 
sion, to a man who, it was evident, had been 
making a stiniggie to put on the outward 
characteristics of a gentleman; but it was 
clear, even to the full-blown porter who gave 
hun entrance to the mansion, on receiving 
his last crown piece, that his coat had been 
brushed too much by a great deal, and that 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 17 

the smoothness of the plain three-cornered 
cocked-hat he held under his arm, as he stood 
bowing to the Minister, was equally inde- 
pendent of nap. 

Yet there was a fire in his sunken eye, 
and an expression on his faded cheek, that 
spoke of something within, in a much more 
respectable state of preservation than his 
clean, yet threadbare suit. There was a 
storehouse of fine thoughts, that only wanted 
the hand of patronage to be thro^vn open to 
the enjopnent of the whole world ; there 
was a vast reservoir of sweet feeling, that 
merely waited for the same judicious assist- 
ance, to place its refreshing waters at the 
disposal of every human heart. 

" I have ventured to apply to your Grace 
once more," commenced the great poet — for 
such he was — in a falterins; voice to the 
great man, " on the subject of that appoint- 
ment your Grace did me the honour to say 
I should receive, as soon as the proper 
arrangements could be made." 

*'Yes — Mister— Mister?" (His Grace 



18 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

invariably forgot the name of every unti- 
tled person who came before him.) '' Mr. 

. Bless me, I forget; but I see so 

many persons, that really — their names — " 

" Bayes, my Lord Duke." 

" Oh yes ; I remember perfectly," said 
his Grace, with a gentle wave of his jewel- 
led hand, and an equally gentle smile, 
"your name 's Blaze; you wrote a fine 
poem — marvellous fine poem — in a patriotic 
spirit — prodigious patriotic speech." 

This commendation from so illustrious a 
source might have been extremely agree- 
able to the neglected genius, had he not, in 
each of the dozen audiences to which he 
had been admitted by his anticipated pa- 
tron, heard it repeated in exactly the same 
words, even to the mistake of his name. 

" You are still engaged on your great 
work, I suppose; eh, Mr. Blaze?" inquired 
the Duke; and then looking with a degree 
of sapience that would have put the bird 
of ^linerva out of countenance, he added, 
"Dehghtfid employment, that of writing 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 19 

poetry — prodigious delightful ! — employing 
the human intellect in a fine field of specu- 
lation — marvellous fine field." 

The poet ought to have been pleased to 
hear this appreciation of his studies; but 
unfortunately the sentences were as fami- 
liar to him as those which had preceded 
them. 

" The poem has been completed some 
time," quietly replied Mr. Bayes — a piece 
of information he had been in the habit of 
repeating on every visit during the last six 
months. 

"I am glad to hear it — prodigious glad 
to hear it!" said his Grace, with a bland 
smile, *' I have no doubt in the world 'tis a 
fine work — marvellous fine work." 

So decided an opinion from so exalted 
a patron, ought to have been encouraging 
to any man of genius ; but the luckless poet 
had heard it too often not to be perfectly 
aware of its very little value. The Duke 
had evidently a stereotyped set of phrases 
for all applicants, to whom he brought them 



20 STKAWBERRY HILL. 

out in regular succession as tliey were 
wanted. But Mr. Bayes required some- 
thing more substantial than words. He had 
been made to live upon hope for a long 
time, but such Poor-Law-Union diet was be- 
ginning to tell fearfully upon his attenuated 
frame. 

He had been led on to expect the great 
man would do somethinor for him, that 
should for ever place him above the reach 
of want, till he had parted with his last 
coin ; and now the desperateness of his case 
urged him to appeal more strongly than 
he had hitherto dared to do, to the great 
man who had assumed to be his patron. 

" I must venture to remind your Grace," 
recommenced the poor poet more firmly, 
'* of the promise you were so kind as to 
make me, when I first had the honour of 
presenting myself in this room. At various 
times since then, your Grace has led me to 
believe that a comfortable post was in your 
gift. My circumstances are such as to ren- 
der such generosity on the part of your 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 21 

Grace, to a friendless man of letters, as 
seasonable as the prospect of it is agreeable. 
It has become vitally necessary that I 
should urge your Grace to the immediate 
fulfihnent of your kind wishes in my be- 
half; and your Grace may rest assured I 
shall not be deficient in sfratitude." 

During this speech it was curious to 
mark the physiognomical changes the Duke 
chose to exhibit. On being reminded of 
his promise, the sapient look gave way to a 
particularly sheepish one; and when he 
learned that the fulfilment of it was re- 
garded as a matter that could not be de- 
layed, the visage changed to something very 
goose-like indeed. 

"Oh! ah! yes, Mister Blaze," said the 
Duke, in a hesitatino^ voice, 'Hhere mio-ht 
have been something said of my doing some- 
thing for you when an opportunity presented 
itself. I shall be very happy to serve a per- 
son of your worth — prodigious happy — but 
you see I have a great number of applica- 
tions of the same sort — marvellous number. 



22 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

It 's quite impossible I can find places for 
everybody: but on the very first vacancy, 
rely on my good offices. I am always glad 
to be of service to a man of genius like your- 
self—prodigious glad. Don't forget to pre- 
sent yourself at my next levee : but just now 
you must excuse me — the Cabinet meet to- 
day — important affairs of State — marvellous 
important — good morning, Mr. Blaze!" 

" Pumps," exclaimed his Grace, as that 
monstrous important personage, his Grace's 
chamberlain, entered the room, after the 
dismissal of the hapless poet. 

" I wait your Grace's orders," replied that 
functionary, in an extremely deferential 
manner. 

" Tell the groom of the chambers to de- 
sire one of the pages to command the head 
footman to tell the porter not to let that 
fellow in again who has just left me," said 
the head of the house of Pelham, in a tone 
and with a manner, to the pompousness of 
which it is impossible to do justice. 

" Your Grace's commands shall be attended 



STRAWBERRY PULL. 23 

to immediately," answered the Chamberlain, 
with a bow that might have passed for the 
genuflexion of an Eastern Yizier before the 
Commander of the Faithful. 

"Paltry scribbler!" muttered the great 
man, as he crossed one knee over the other, 
with the look of a goose certainly, but of 
one whose feathers had been ruffled by a 
rude attempt to pluck a cjuill at his expense. 
To be reminded of a promise, the Minister 
looked upon as a piece of impertinence that 
could not be too severely punished. 
" Pumps," cried his Grace again. 
" I wait your Grace's orders," replied the 
well-drilled Chamberlain. 
" ^Tiose turn comes next?'' 
" Young 'Mr. Lackwit and old Mr. Lack- 
wit, please your Grace," answered the obse- 
quious Pumps, "with a letter of introduction 
for the former from the Earl of Spoonbill." 
"Let them enter." 

In a few minutes there entered the cham- 
.ber a respectable-looking elderly man, ac- 
companied by his son, a tall gawky youth, 




24 STRAAA^BERRY HILL. 

who looked half pleased and half frightened 
as he approached the great man. 

*' I have the honour of bearing a letter 
from the Eight Honourable the Earl of 
Spoonbill to his Grace the Duke of Xew- 
castle," commenced the elder gentleman: 
"it is respecting my son. This is my son, 
please your Grace." His Grace looked in 
the desired direction, and made the very 
slightest inclination of the head. 

" The noble Earl has taken the greatest 
interest in my son, and in fact, I may say, 
in the whole family, who I trust are sufii- 
ciently proud and grateful for his condescen- 
sion. His Lordship is desirous that my son 
should be personally kno^vn to your Grace, 
hoping that it may be in your Grace's power 
to obtain liim some little sinecure, or post of 
sufficient income. My son is twenty-one, 
please your Grace, and I will venture to say 
will never discredit your Grace's patron- 



age." 



The Duke quietly took the letter, and 
quietly opened it, while the foregoing speech 



STKAWBERRY HILL. 25 

was being perpetrated. He appeared to 
cast his eye over its contents, but he never 
troubled himself to read a line of it. 

" My friend the Earl of Spoonbill has 
placed me under a great obligation," began 
the Duke, with quite an owlish gravity, " in 
recommending to my notice persons of your 
worth. I am glad to have it in my power 
to be of service to a family of such respect- 
ability as the" — 

" Lackwits, please your Grace," said the 
elder applicant quickly. " L — a — c — k — 
w — i — t — s," he added, slowly repeating 
every letter. 

"I am glad to have it in my power to be of 
service to a family of such respectability as the 
Lackiits — prodigious glad," repeated he, in 
the manner of a school-boy going over his les- 
son when corrected. " I shall bear vour claims 
in mind whenever an opportunity presents it- 
self; but you must be aware that, holding the 
high position I do in his Majesty's councils, I 
have a vast number of applicants for my 
favour — a marvellous number. Depend on 

VOL. II. c 



26 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

it I vnR not lose sight of a person recom- 
mended to me by a nobleman so high in 
my esteem as my Lord Spoonbill. I should 
consider it the greatest happiness of my life 
to oblige his Lordship. I am delighted at 
having the opportunity of shewing the re- 
gard I have for him — prodigious delighted. 
Pray don't forget to present yourselves at 
my levees — but at present I know you mil 
excuse me, when I assure you affairs of 
State, of importance — marvellous importance 
— demand my attention." 

The Lackwits were dismissed, and they 
were succeeded by several visitors of a 
similar description, who came either -with 
the hope of getting something, or to remind 
their illustrious patron of something having 
been promised them. It was singular to 
notice the unvarying regularity of the great 
man's proceedings in all these cases; how 
systematically all his cut-and-dried phrases, 
and his well-preserved looks, came out at the 
proper moment. The same sentences dove- 
tailed so nicely into every case, that nothing 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 27 

could appear more spontaneous and appro- 
priate ; and the same manner was accorded 
with so nice a sense of justice towards all, 
that no one could boast of preference or 
complain of prejudice. 

After the Minister had disposed of these, 
the chamberlain announced Sir Greo:ory 
Bumptious. Xow, Sir Gregory Bumptious 
was an independent Member of Parliament, 
with a loud voice and a high spirit, of com- 
manding figure, and having a way with him 
which gave every one reason to believe, that 
if he wished to offend the gentleman, the 
gentleman would meet him half way and 
thrash him the rest. 

" Your Servant, my Lord Duke." 
" Pumps, set a chair. Glad to see you, 
Sir Gregory — prodigious glad. I hope 
Lady Bumptious enjoys her usual good 
health? I saw her at Court t'other dav, 
looking quite blooming — marvellous bloom- 
ing. The King very seldom notices ladies 
— prodigious seldom ; — but his Majesty 
seemed quite taken with the very lady-hke 

c 2 



28 STRAWBERRY HELL. 

manners of Lady Bumptious — marvellous 
lady-like." 

Sir Gregory Bumptious had entered the 
great man's cabinet in rather an angry 
mood, at some neglect that had been shewn 
a recommendation of his ; but so flattering 
a notice of his wife — who happened to be 
a remarkably fussy, ill-featured woman — 
mollified him considerably. This effect, 
however, would not have been produced, 
had Sir Gregory been aware that the speech 
he had just heard was one the great man 
addressed invariably to all his married visi- 
tors of a certain grade. 

" The King 's mighty good to have such 
an opinion of my wife," said the softened 
high-spirited county Member. 

'' I protest his Majesty has a high opi- 
nion of you. Sir Gregory — prodigious high 
opinion," resumed the Duke, following up 
his advantage, *' It was only t'other day 
he was saying to me, ' Sir Gregory Bump- 
tious speaks well in the House — marvellous 
well.' " 



STRA"\\T5ErvRY HILL. 29 

If there was anything that Sir Gregory 
Bumptious prided himself upon, it was his 
oratory — most probably because he was a 
very bad speaker; and this allusion — from 
such exalted authority, too — to his speech- 
making, so smoothed his temper, that all 
feeling of dissatisfaction evaporated, and he 
was never in a more agreeable humour in 
his life. The case would have been altered 
considerably, had the irate Baronet been 
aware, that when called upon by a Member 
of the Lower House, the Duke of Newcas- 
tle invariably hazarded the same harmless 
fib respecting the royal appreciation of his 
eloquence. 

" I must say, his Majesty is extremely 
condescendin":," exclaimed the gratified Sir 
Gregory, evidently in a humour, like Bot- 
tom the Weaver, to " roar as gently as a 
sucking dove." 

" Oh, not at all; the King has a great 
regard for you — prodigious regard," quickly 
put in the great man ; and then as if anx- 
ious to make the most of his advantage, he 



30 STRAWBERRY HU.L. 

added, ** By the way, that reminds me, I 
have an appointment with his Majesty — 
must be in the palace in twenty minutes. 
Hope you '11 excuse me ; good morning, 
Sir Gregory." 

After this departure there were announced 
Ensign and Lady Squash. The latter, a 
languishing fine lady of fashion, in the ex- 
treme of the mode^ and a well-defined hoop, 
overflowing with perfumery and affecta- 
tions ; and the other a sickly-looking youth, 
her son, dressed in regimentals, and ap- 
pearing anything but a hero. 

If, as a great man has stated, gratitude 
is " a lively sense of favours to come," my 
Lady Squash was exceedingly grateful to her 
powerful friend. Throughout her simpering 
it was very apparent, that her Ladyship ex- 
pected, through the Duke's influence, that her 
lout of a boy should become a general ; and 
a very beautiful specimen of the adaptitude 
of means to an end, might again have been 
observed in the application of the Minister's 
stock of phrases. He went through the 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 31 

regular routine, and in due time Ensign 
and Lady Squash were got rid of. 

They were succeeded by a motley group 
of all kinds and complexions. A plethoric 
Dean, sighing for a Bishoprick — a spend- 
thrift Peer, begging for a pension — an un- 
employed General, seeking for a regiment — 
a needy Courtier, anxious for a post — weal- 
thy Country Gentlemen, in search of baro- 
netcies — and still more wealthy City Mer- 
chants, in quest of the honours of knight- 
hood. To all the Minister meted out his 
patronage, as though he had apportioned 
each his share to a grain. 

The next announcement, there could be 
little doubt, was one of no ordinary nature, 
from the astonishment caused by the men- 
tion of the name. The groom of the cham- 
bers certainly said " Viscount Bolingbroke ;" 
and sure enough, in a very few seconds, 
the philosopher of Battersea entered the 
apartment. 

The Duke of Newcastle had distributed 
his courtesies in a fine graduated scale, that 



32 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

shewed the gradations of his estimation 
very distinctly. This, however, was his 
practice when gi\"ing separate audiences ; 
but when entering his levee-room, he af- 
fected the popular to such an extent, that 
he went shuffling and scrambling on like a 
polar bear amongst a kennel of hounds, 
giving every one a hug that came in his 
way. 

When receiving persons in his cabinet, 
nobodies were forced to stand during their 
audience — people of some note were allowed 
to seat themselves — persons of quahty had 
the honour of shaking hands with the Mi- 
nister : but an unusual distinction was con- 
ferred by him upon the philosophical states- 
man, fresh from his hermitage. On him he 
conferred the extraordinary honour of ris- 
ing from his seat as his visitor advanced 
towards him. In short, Lord Bolin2:broke 
obtained a very cordial reception. It was 
clear, two such very warm friends had 
rarely met ; and yet most true it is, not- 
withstanding their extremely friendly ex- 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 33 

pressions, in their secret tliouglits one 
thought the other a most desperate ass, 
and the ass thought his dear friend a mon- 
strous sly fox. 

There was a curious and very marked 
contrast distinguishable in the appearance of 
these worthies of the last century. The fine 
person, the noble countenance, the polished 
urbanity of Bolingbroke, were seen to vast 
advantage beside the vulgar figure, the pom- 
pous courtesy, and shuffling, scrambling gait 
of his Grace of Newcastle. The former was 
a man marked out by nature as a leader and 
counsellor, that would unquestionably have 
taken a distinguished position in his peculiar 
sphere, whether that had placed him amongst 
the unlettered savages of the new world, or 
the wisest and ablest statesmen of the old. 
But it was quite as evident that the other, 
whether his fortunes had been cast amongst 
savage or civilized, could never have been 
anything more than could have been achieved 
for him by the recommendation of tattooing 
or tailoring. 

c 3 



34 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

The result of this interview we are not at 
liberty to coniinunicate. Suffice it to say, 
that an entente cordiale was soon established 
between these two great men, and this was 
based on their cordial hatred of Sir Robert 
Walpole. 

In the hands of so able an intriguer as 
Bolingbroke, the Duke was a mere puppet. 
It was in vain he strove to look as Avise as 
the bird of wisdom ; he could not help occa- 
sionally looking as foolish as the bird of foUy, 
when he was made to feel the supremacy of 
the spirit of his companion. His cut-and- 
dried phrases were, as usual, brought out in 
their proper order ; but on such a mind as 
Bolingbroke's they dropped like flakes of 
snow upon a mountain stream — they fell 
without leaving the slightest vestige of their 
existence. 

The clever plotter divested the head of 
the house of Pelham of all the defences his 
stately ceremonies had cast around him, and 
brought him helplessly into a net, which he 
cast over his head with the dexterity of an 



STEAWBERRY HILL. 35 

ancient gladiator. The end of the confer- 
ence was, that the Pelhams were engaged, 
heart and soul, with the philosopher of Bat- 
tersea, for the overthrow of the obnoxious 
First Lord of the Treasury. 



36 STRAWBERRJ- HILL. 



CHAPTER II. 

WALPOLE CORRESPONDENCE. 

The Honourable Major Conway to Horatio 
Walpole^ Esq., M.P. 

"Dear Horace, — The art of war here is 
going on as spiritedly as a duck-hunt — heroes 
are as common as tenpenny nails on a car- 
penter's bench, and seem quite as ready to 
be knocked on the head. I know not exactly 
who was the first soldier — that is to say, 
who invented war — but whoever he was, he 
must have been a rare fellow in his way ; he 
must have been one of those great men before 



STRA^^^3ERPtY HILL. 37 

Agamemnon, according to the old classic 
phrase, who, having been driven desperate 
by ill-treatment, assembled his rank and file 
by beat of drum, and with flags flying and 
fifes playing, began a campaign by driving 
in the advanced posts of the enemy, and 
forcmg his positions. 

" This may be very true, you will say, 
but not peculiarly interesting. You would 
doubtless prefer to learn what is going on 
amongst our Allies abroad at this present 
writing. The state of warfare in the infancy 
of the world will be a very good subject of 
study when it is in its dotage. But never 
mind, as the poet truly says, and as I as 
truly repeat : 

" Tlaere are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio, 
Than are dreamt of in thy philosophy." 

And thy philosophy, I believe, is pretty com^- 
prehensive — embracing ever}i;hing, from the 
vast girdle of the earth, to the little one of 
some C}Tithia of the minute, who has attrac- 
tions enough to please your somewhat fasti- 
dious taste. 



38 STRA^VBERRY HILL. 

" But, apropos of love-making — I should 
monstrously like to know how you are getting 
on with Lady Archibald. The thing is not 
exactly proper, I admit, but then you are not 
so great a reprobate as our friend Charley, 
who, on having been found entertaining him- 
self with a certain pretty married woman 
attached to the To^vnshend establishment, 
when reminded of the wrong he was doing, 
stoutly averred that he had not 'coveted' 
according to the Decalogue ; the individual 
being his own man^s wife^ instead of another 
man's. 

" I doubt my Lady Archie is satisfied 
with her armorial bearings, though she is 
entitled to use those of her husband's ducal 
house — for there is reason to believe that 
she has long been in the habit of quartering 
the royal arms with her own : whether she 
is anxious for an addition from the Walpole 
heraldry — rampant, couchant, or regardant, 
must be better known to yourself than to 
me. 

" When was George Selwyn last awake? — 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 39 

I suspect he is setting up for a wit, and 
desires to be a sleeping partner in some joking 
firm. 

"But what has become of Gray? He 
seems to have got away from all his old 
friends. 

"Is Hanbury "Williams writing ballads, 
or negociating treaties ? 

" You must be sure and let me know how 
you are going on with your inestimable pro- 
genitor. I have a vast opinion of him. 
There must be something very great in a 
man, to be so greatly abused as Sir Robert 
has been. Like the flying fish, he appears 
to have as many enemies above as below 
him. But if I am not hugely mistaken, he 
will shew them abundance of sport before he 
becomes the prey of either. 

" There is a little fish I have read of, who, 
when in danger, discolours the water around 
him, and leaves his enemy to flounder in a 
mess in which he cannot see an inch beyond 
his nose. I think our w^orthy friend has 
recourse to such tactics occasionally, and 



40 STRAWBEIIKY HILL. 

that his skill in evading the approaches of 
his numerous foes, by disturbing the current 
along which they are floating so confidently, 
till they find it impossible to get at him, 
will always keep him out of any immediate 
danger. 

" For your sake I ^dsh him a good quit- 
tance of all such troublesome customers. 
But I wonder you don't do something to let 
him know the sort of stufi* you are made of. 
What have you been about all this time? 
I think the good burgesses of that Cornish 
borough of yours, where I had so much 
amusement, have some reason to complain. 
I should hardly think that you had fulfilled 
their expectations. Nay, I don't know but 
what that fellow Briggs would have made 
a more useful Member. 

" I have thus far written for my own amuse- 
ment, but now I must add something for 
yours; and acquaint you with the state of 
things in this part of the world. Know, 
then, that we have had a good deal of march- 
ing and some fighting — enough, assuredly. 



STIiiVWBERRY HILL. 41 

to save his Britannic Majesty the reproach 
attached to that heroic monarch, who, 
according to the Chronicles, ' marched up 
the hill, and then marched do^Ti a^rain.' 

*' As I am an aide-de-camp of our young 
Duke of Cumberland, who, I am bound to 
say, seems quite as much a soldier as his 
royal father, I have seen a ^rood deal of what 
has been going on, and more than once have 
shewn the enemy that your friend Harry 
Conway has no objection to a little comfort- 
able fighting. Always on horseback, bear- 
ing orders from my General, and frequently 
when different reo^iments are eno^ao^ed, and 
the bullets are flying about like a storm of 
hail, and the whole field is swallowed up in 
a monstrous cloud, choked with gun-powder, 
deafened mth artillery, blinded with smoke, 
I rush on to the officer with whom I have 
to communicate, to the music of groans, 
trumpets, drums, and thunder, wherever he 
may be. 

'* It matters not that he is engaged with the 
enemy: where he goes, I must follow. I 



42 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

find him in the midst of his men, cutting his 
way to fame, but I must interrupt his carving, 
well as he may be doing it, to make him 
listen to me. The next moment I am either 
directing my way to some other position, in 
the same picturesque break-neck style, or 
dashing back the way I came, bearing the 
report of the officer with whom I have 
communicated. 

" If my horse and I return with a whole 
skin each, we, or rather I do for my four- 
footed friend, thank Providence and the 
French marksmen: but this is such good 
fortune as we cannot always expect. If we 
bear with us a bullet or two, the best thing 
we can do is to find a surgeon ; and if our 
case is not very bad, we may expect to have 
to repeat the same kind of amusement as 
soon as agreeable to the enemy. 

" But now it is high time to tell you what 
we have been doing. Our forces, consisting 
of English, Hanoverians, Hessians, and some 
Austrian regiments, having Lord Stair as 
Commander-in-Chief, were on the north bank 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 43 

of the Maine, when the Duke de Noailles, 
with a powerful French army, approached 
on the southern bank. This was rather a 
dehcate position for the forces of France and 
England to be in, considering that war had 
not yet been declared between the two coun- 
tries — nevertheless, it was evident the several 
commanders only waited a proper moment 
to commence hostilities. 

" The General of the Allies, finding himself 
not strong enough to cope with the French, 
chose to fall back, with the view of obtain- 
ing reinforcements from Hanover; but the 
French were so quickly on his heels, and the 
dispositions of their General were so excel- 
lent, that he cut us off from our magazine 
at Hanau, where was our bread and forage 
— intercepted our communications with 
Franconia, whence we might have derived 
our supplies — and cooped us up in a narrow 
vaUey that runs along the river Maine, from 
the town of Aschaffenburg to the large 
villao^e of Dettinf]^en. 

" In this desperate state of affairs I arrived 



44 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

at the scene of war with the King, the Duke 
of Cumberland, and Lord Carteret, from 
Hanover. Our forces were reduced to 3 7,000 
men — very nearly half-starved — the men 
nearly without food, and the horses almost 
mthout forage. The Hessians and Hano- 
verians, from whom we had been cut off, 
were not in much better plight, and were 
marching upon Hanau. 

" The King, after several councils of war, 
finding his army threatened in flank and 
rear, batteries rising on the river, and star- 
vation threatening everywhere, resolved to 
break out of the trap in which he had been 
enclosed, and forming the army into two 
columns he set them in motion in the direc- 
tion of the defile of Dettingen, where, un- 
known to him, the Duke de Grammont 
awaited his advance with 23,000 men. His 
Majesty conmianded in the rear, which he 
believed to be the post of danger, till he be- 
held the sudden halt of his columns; his 
advanced posts rapidly falling back upon 
the main army, and the French apparently 



STRAWBEERY HILL. 45 

in great force in tlie Dettingen pass. The 
King rapidly rode to the front, arranged his 
men in order of battle, infantry supported 
by cavalry, and prepared to force his way. 

"It was hisfh time he did so : for a division 
of the enemy, 12,000 strong, was close upon 
his rear; their commander was bringing up 
other formidable bodies of men, and his 
fiank was being played upon by the batteries 
on the banks of the Maine. Young De 
Grammont did not wait for his uncle, the 
Duke de Xoailles, but with a terrible uproar 
advanced with all his force to attack the 
Allies. The noise frio^htened the Kino^'s horse, 
who ran away with his rider, and in all pro- 
bability would have carried him into the 
French lines, when, luckily for his Majesty 
and for all of us, he was stopped, and the 
King, dismounting, placed himself at the 
head of his British and Hanoverian infantry, 
flourished his sword, and made a speech, 
which, as I happened to be on his left, 
where the Duke of Cumberland had placed 
himself, I heard very distinctly. 



46 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

" ' Now, my boys/ said he, ' now for the 
honour of En^T^land. Fire, and behave bravely, 
and the French will soon run/ 

" This oration may not be quite so classical 
as those Ca3sar or Hannibal addressed to 
their troops previously to a battle, but it 
was quite as much to the purpose. 

" On came Grammont and his cavalry, 
making a brilliant charge, creating at first 
some little confusion; but as the batteries 
had ceased firing, from not being able to 
distinguish friends from foes, the King 
formed his infantry into one dense column, 
and placing himself at their head, with his 
son beside him, made one overwhelming 
charge upon \\iQ enemy. Horse and foot 
gave way before it — a panic seized the 
French — the English rushed mth sword 
and bayonet upon their foes, as they 
crowded in disorder towards the bridges, 
where multitudes were killed or drowned in 
the river; and a vast number, finding no 
hope of escape, surrendered without striking 
a blow. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 47 

" Thus ended the Battle of Dettingen, 
with a loss to the French of 6000 men, to 
the Allies of 2000. The King and the Duke 
were in the thick of the fight, and bore 
themselves bravely — the latter refusing to 
leave the field, though wounded in the 
leg. Though we fought upon empty sto- 
machs, we shewed ourselves monstrous 
stout-hearted. The victory was not a very 
profitable one ; yet its results were emi- 
nently satisfactory to all, as soon as we 
became aware, that although the French 
had managed to deprive us of our bread, 
we had contrived to ' save our bacon.' 

" We subsequently marched upon Hanau, 
where we found plenty of every thing but 
the enemy, and the expected reinforce- 
ments from Hanover. We are now strong 
enough to turn upon Xoailles; but as yet 
nothing has been decided on, except that it 
is necessary for Lord Stair to fall out with 
every body, because his advice is not fol- 
lowed to bring things to such a pretty pass 
as that we managed to fight our way out of. 



48 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

" I have now only to add, that I hacked 
away at the ]\lonsieurs ^vith such industry, that 
I have been thought worthy of promotion, 
and may consider myself to hold a respect- 
able place in the favour of his Majesty and 
the Duke, who have expressed themselves 
very warmly in my behalf. I have no 
doubt I shall do very well, if the subjects 
of the King of France throw none of their 
warlike impediments in my career. But 
1 'U not think of anything so disastrous, my 
custom being very different. No one knows 
better than yourself how much I am in the 
habit of looking at the bright side of 
things. 

" Believe me ever, your faithful Friend, 
" And affectionate Kinsman, 

"Harry Conway." 



Horatio Walpole, Esq.^ M,P., to the Honour- 
able Colonel Conway, 
" Dear Harry, — We are all here in ec- 
stasies about Dettingen. Every body talks 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 49 

about it. Ever}" one boasts of it. Like 
the air we breathe, it seems impossible to 
open one's mouth without its being full of 
it. And then all the to^^Tl are outstrivino: 
each other, endeavouring to possess the most 
memorials of so agreeable an occurrence. 
We have Dettingen muffs, and Dettingen 
cuffs ; Dettmgen wigs, and Dettingen jigs ; 
Dettingen jugs, and Dettingen rugs; Det- 
tingen fans, and Dettingen pans. ]S ight-caps, 
buckles, gloves, boots, ruffles, and three- 
legged stools, all bear the same inspiriting 
name — nay more, the old pie-man, who fre- 
quents the Strand, has been bit by the same 
folly, and invites his patriotic customers to 
purchase his Dettingen mutton pies, and 
Dettingen kidney puddings. 

"And so 'Great Georo^e our Kinof' is a 
hero ! The age of miracles has come back 
to us. How true is that fine text, for those 
who are not possessed of a sanguine tempe- 
rament — ' Blessed are they who expect no 
thing.' I am sure my anticipations were 
like those of Lady Betty Fitzfumblc before 

VOL II. D 



50 STRAWBEKRY HILL. 

she was made bone of old Fitz's very osteo- 
logical proportions — of the most moderate 
description. But, of course, I gulp my 
astonishment, and shout my admiration as 
loudly as the best of 'em. I am ready 
to swear that General George Guelph is a 
second Caesar. Indeed, had he lived in 
more classical times, instead of merely beat- 
ing the French, I am ready to aver — deny 
it who dare — he would have been pursuing 
so comprehensive a career of conquest, that, 
like Alexander the Great, he would at last 
have been obliged to sigh for more worlds 
to conquer. Hurrah for King George ! 

" The most pleasant part of this agree- 
able news to me is the intelligence of your 
safety. I have no objection to a victory, 
or any other English luxury. I like thrash- 
ing the subjects of the King of France, 
quite as much as a loyal subject of the 
King of England is bound to do; but 
the victory would be regarded by me as a 
monstrous dear purchase, if it could only 
be had at the cost of Harry Conway. I will 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 51 

not conceal from you that there are some 
amongst you whom I could spare mth infi- 
nitely less regret. My Lord Stair, now, if 
he had joined the shades of the heroes, I 
should have felt a sort of satisfaction at his 
having made so soldier-like an end: but I 
suppose the aforesaid shades do not fancy 
Scotchmen, or approve of such bungling 
heroes. I trust, however, before he can 
lead our armies into such another trap, they 
may be brought to look more kindly on his 
merits — whatever they are. 

" You have asked me so many questions, 
and given me so many themes, that my 
reply ought to be a volume instead of a 
letter; but let us beofin at the beodnnino: 
— as a great authority has recommended, — 
and I have no doubt I shall be helped along 
wonderfully by the conviction I entertain, 
^\'ith many other equally sensible people, 
that there must be an end to all things. 

*' As to my Lady Archibald, she is mighty 
civil. I might be disposed to appreciate 
her attentions, were I not so well satisfied 

D 2 

y. Of iu- ua 



52 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

that she employs her civility, just as any 
other trader would do, to increase her cus- 
tom. Her serving the royal family may be 
a recommendation to her goods; but it so 
happens, I am rather difficult to please ; and 
I would prefer in some things being my 
o^vn caterer, to following in the footsteps of 
any prince in Christendom. 

" I scribble occasionally, as you know. 
You remember the fair Venus we met at 
Lady Caroline Fitzroy's, of whom George 
Selwyn said that the swain who desired to 
find favour in her eyes must be that inve- 
terate gambler ' who sets his soul upon a 
cast.^ We are on mighty good terms; — 
so I made her the subject of the follomng 
verses. 



LINES ADDRESSED TO A YOUNG LADY WITH 
A CERTAIN PECULIARITY OF VISION. 

" Lady, when gazing on your face, 
I scarce can my emotion smother. 
To mark that unaccustomed grace, 
That looks one way and sees another. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 53 



" Even as I gaze, their cmious freaks 
Your flashing orbs are now revealing ; 
For while on me one sunbeam breaks, 
The other frolics o'er the ceiling ! 

" Unnatural gifts few men can brook, 

And yours the hardiest have afii'ighted ; 
For those who always two ways look, 
May boast of being second-sighted I 

" But if my merits you prefer, 

Stem should I be as Aristarchus, 
Did I not full content aver, 

Looked you as many ways as Argus."' 

" Our fellows are variously occupied. 
Gray has just published a volume of poems 
which has had immense success, and Geor2*e 
Selwyn, in his waking moments, has per- 
petrated a series of jests, the result of which 
has been equally satisfactory. The rest are 
to be met with here and there and eveiy- 
where, buzzing about like flies in search of 
sweets, and dropping into every place where 
they are least expected. Charley Towns- 
hend has been setting Rainham into convul- 
sions, by some jest of his which was of that 
risible quahty, it was almost enough to have 
tickled the family vault. 



54 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

" There is a vast deal of pleasantry in 
these ToT\Tishends. His Lady mother rivals 
Charley in the quaintness of her sayings and 
doings. Like a Sheffield twenty-bladed 
knife, she is all points. I don't know how 
she can sheathe herself when she goes into 
the society of her fine lady associates, so as 
to prevent hurting those who meddle with 
her. She must be amongst them like a 
porcupine in the midst of a pack of silky 
spaniels ; and make her dearest female friends, 
after a prolonged association, suffer from an 
attack of that malady which is usually ex- 
plained in the description — feeling all over 
like needles and pins. 

* ' Do you know, Harry, I have been trying 
to lose my o^vn identity — no great loss per- 
haps, after all; for it is likely enough any 
one who found what I strove to part with, 
would think it hardly worth appropriating; 
but the fact is, I have been leading the life 
of a man of fashion, till I began to fear I 
liad degenerated into a forked radish in a 
well-cut coat and inexpressibles. I found 



STEAWBERRY HILL. 55 

myself one day, after undergoing a surfeit of 
fooleries, in a fit of disgust, mentally asking 
myself what my father must think of my 
extraordinary, or rather ordinary conduct. 

" While he was battling mth difficulties of 
every description — displaying the highest 
intellectual energy — providing for every 
contingency that might affect the prosperity 
of a nation, — I was sauntering at auctions — 
lingering at masquerades — ya^Tiing at 
operas — gossipping at ridottos — and playing 
the fool every where. I thought, ' Why 
should I be at the beck and call of Lady 
this, and Miss t'other? — talking nonsense to 
every pretty face, as if I had become a priest 
in the temple of Beauty, and was employed 
in offering every idol the necessary incense ; 
— Why should Horace Walpole, of his own 
free will, remain a galley-slave at the oar of 
Folly ; and help, with all his strength, to row 
the gaudy vessel doAvn the stream of Time ?' 

" And again the thought returned to me, 
that I was doing this, with so noble an 
example before me of what might be done — 



56 STEAWBEKRY HILL. 

of what might be attained by talent rightly 
directed — which example I had been in the 
habit, from my earliest youth, of holding 
before my admiring gaze, with a resolution, 
strong as death, to follow in the same foot- 
steps — to rival in the same merit. And 
this resolution I had allowed to lay dormant 
till the energies that might have advanced 
me far in my course, were nearly dead for 
want of use. 

'' It was true my pride had been humbled, 
and my vanity hurt, by the discovery of the 
very trifling estimation in w^hich I was held, 
by one whose approval I so highly appre- 
ciated : but I now, for the first time, awoke 
to a consciousness that this approval could 
only be the further off, by my removing 
myself from that sphere of usefulness and 
honour in which I so earnestly desired to 
move. If he thought little of me when 
a young man, aspiring for honourable 
employment, he would think much less 
when I had become a mere maccaroni — a 
shallow pretender to fashion — an empty cox- 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 57 

comb, who had nothing to boast of but his 
wearing apparel. 

" I felt like Sampson bound by green 
withes. I snapped my fashionable bonds as 
though they were so many threads ; — balls, 
operas, routs, masquerades, auctions, and 
plays, should now be of as little importance 
to me as the innumerable fair dames vrLth 
whom I had been in the habit of associatino-. 
I would not abandon the pleasures of the 
world, and live the life of a hennit ; simply 
because a diet of herbs, and water from the 
spring, with the uninterrupted enjoyment oi 
my own thoughts, do not form a bill of fare 
exactly to my taste ; but I would partake 
moderately of every enjo}TQent in which a 
gentleman is expected to indulge, and shew 
the world in which I mingled that I would 
do it no discredit, and it should do me no 
injury. 

" Any distinction in the State, I felt, must 
come through the hands of him who had it 
so completely at his disposal. I could not 
urge my claims to hmi — I was anxious he 

D 3 



58 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

should find them out. There was another 
path open to me, in which I should not re- 
quire his assistance — where success could 
not fail of attracting his attention; and, 
were that once gained, I doubted not 
everything else I desired was easy of attain- 
ment. My determination was made. 

" Harry, I have made up my mind to 
become a man of letters. And, as the most 
necessary step in this direction, I have begun 
to Avrite a book. Yes, I sit down every 
day, pen in hand, to put my ideas upon 
paper, full of the resolution of attaining 
some respectable, if not lofty position up 
the hill of Fame. It would astonish you 
mightily to see what I am about — to observe 
the peculiar structure which, with the help 
of a printing press, 1 intend to set up before 
the public gaze, to convince them of what 
vast things I am capable of. 

" Perhaps you mil laugh at the idea of 
my writing a romance, as a recommendation 
to one of the most unromantic men in Eng- 
land; but I hold in due respect the praise 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 59 

of small beginnings towards great undertak- 
ings. The book is for the multitude, who 
scramble for novelties of this kind as greedily 
as pigs for acorns ; and I shall take care to 
make it wonderful enough to astonish the 
most indifferent of my readers. 

'' I will confess to you, I am visited by a 
perspective, when reflecting on the results of 
its publication, almost as brilliant as that of 
the hopeful Alnaschar over his basket of 
brittle ware ; and the vision is so engrossing, 
that, were it possible, my kicking down the 
materials of my future greatness would fol- 
low as a matter of course. I "will also admit 
that the princess of the Arabian tale has 
her representative in my glowing vision; 
but instead of spuming her, I should be 
much more likely to make the sort of mis- 
chievous stumble that brings about the 
catastrophe, when rushing to clasp her to 
my arms. 

" You know nothing of the heroine of this 
exquisite dream. She is a memorial of the 
Past I have never dared to mention, even to 



60 STRAWBEKRY HILL. 

SO dear a friend as yourself. Till lately, I 
have as little ventured to remind myself of 
her existence. Yet, the little I can remem- 
ber of genuine happiness is so indissolubly 
connected with her name, that all my man- 
hood seems one dreary blank, deprived of it. 
And my strange destiny insists upon this 
deprivation — ay, insists, that the light which 
illumed the fairest hours of my existence 
should be put out, and leave my retrospec- 
tion in utter darkness. 

^' To tell you how much I have been led 
on, in the composition of this romance, by a 
desire to write a work which should be ad- 
mired by her whose praise seemed to me the 
sweetest fame poet ever won, is no easy task. 
It is curious enou<2:h that I have lon^: been 
teaching myself to forget her; and yet, at 
every admirable passage that flows from 
my pen, I keep anticipating her admiration 
^^'ith an intensity of gratification, that proves 
how wonderfully I appreciate it. 

"But it is but a melancholy interest I 
enjoy in the cultivation of these fancies : I 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 61 

am only too well aware that my name or 
fame can be to her nothing more than an 
echo of a pleasant sound. When I first 
gave myself up to the bewildering delirium 
of loving a creature so infinitely raised above 
her species, I was well aware that, sooner or 
later, the dark shadow of worldly prejudices 
would come between us, and separate us for 
ever. But it was with my story as with 
one of those beautiful fables found in the 
fairy legends of diiFerent countries, where 
mortal man cultivates a passion for spiritual 
maiden, with the full knowledge of an insur- 
mountable barrier to its consummation. I 
could not liberate mvself from the fascina- 
tions that held me to this superior being, till 
its existence was acknowledged by herself. 

" Many months have passed over since we 
parted — in the mutual conviction, that for 
us the Future had no promise — the Present 
no pleasure — the Past no profit. Since then 
I have endeavoured to harden my heart in 
that petrifying well, the world; but I have 
not been so successful as most people who 



62 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

have tried the same process. Possibly their 
hearts were previously so worldly as to re- 
quire very little hardening to turn them 
into stone. 

" It appeared as though the intellectual 
labour in which I am eno^aored had asrain 
brought my nature in communion mth her ; 
and my heart, instead of becoming a petri- 
faction, had thrown off the thin crust which 
had there been deposited by that vast well 
of Knaresborough, within the influence of 
which I have been living; and that every 
day I was reversing the process, and every 
day becoming more sensible of the exquisite 
vitality of my former state. 

" You will not wonder, then, with what 
abundant ecstasy I give wings to my imagi- 
nation, and take my flight through the 
regions of romance, buoyant with the belief 
that I am approaching her. It may be all . 
a delusion and a mockery, as sober moments 
always represent; but it affords me a 
stimulus, without which I should be little 
better than a clod : and, if it be a cheat, it is 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 63 

one a thousand times more pleasing than 
ordinaiy realities. 

" Should I never enjoy again the sunshine 
of her presence, which unromantic matter of 
fact never ceases to proclaim to me, there 
mil be no slight gratification in the know- 
ledge that she will find a companion in my 
work — through which she will become 
acquainted with my thoughts — that cannot 
conceal from her that her worth is impressed, 
however faintly, in everything admirable of 
which those thoughts afibrd any trace. 
" Ever your afiectionate Cousin, 

" Horatio Walpole." 



64 STRAWBERRY HILL. 



CHAPTER III. 



THE RIDOTTO IN THE HOUSEIvEEPER'S ROOM. 



'' La ! Mrs. Jenny, how can you say so ! 
I declare to you I was in another place at 
the pacific time you mentioned." 

This little speech was uttered by a portly, 
well-fed, middle-aged woman, dressed extra- 
vagantly a-la-mode, possessed of black lan- 
guishing eyes, a pair of cheeks extremely 
well rouged, and bearing at least three dif- 
ferent patches; a large and ruddy mouth, 
and a nose that was evidently a cross be- 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 65 

tween a pointer and a pug. Her head was 
lavishly adorned mth ribbons, and she 
wore a large necklace of tawdry beads upon 
a neck, the ample proportions of which 
would have been much better protected by 
a kerchief. 

But the neck of Mrs. Susan was not, like 
that of the swan or the giraffe, out of pro- 
portion with the body to which it belonged. 
Mrs. Susan was a sort of Jano below stairs, 
and, in her swelling shape, displayed the 
full-blown dignity of a Housekeeper gran- 
diflora — as the classical gardeners of the pre- 
sent day would not fail of specifying such 
a magnificent plant as the very unportant 
housekeeper of the very important Duke of 
Newcastle. 

The good woman was not so young as 
she had been ; but it was quite clear she 
had no intention, however past her youth, 
of allowing her fascinations to be kept in the 
background; for she might still boast of 
good looks, and, among the flowers of the 
kitchen garden, had an attractive, sun- 



66 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

flower sort of bloom, that rarely failed of 
excitinfij observation. 

But then her manners did her, as she 
fancied, no slight service. She was won- 
derfully genteel in her notions — even for a 
middle-aged housekeeper. This she evinced 
in nothing more clearly than in her choice 
of language, which, though the terms were 
often very curiously placed, would have 
done no discredit to her ducal master in his 
most stately mood. 

" As I live, Mrs. Jenny, you are pro- 
digious scandalous. Indeed, you appear 
sometimes to have so little regard for truth, 
that, did I not know you better, my dear, 
I should be vastly inclined to accuse you of 
mendicity." 

'^ Well to be sure, Mrs. Susan ! I must 
say, my dear, you are monstrous perlite." 

This was said in a lively manner by an- 
other female, at least ten years the junior 
of her companion, with equally languishing 
blue eyes, equally rouged cheeks, a more 
delicate mouth and nose, and altogether a 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 67 

more delicate person. Her dress was consi- 
derably more coquettish, while quite as 
smart as that of her senior. In fact, if 
Mrs. Susan was to be classed as House- 
keeper grandijiora^ ]\Irs. Jenny deserved the 
title oi Lady's-maid splendens, 

" Mr. Fibbs can believe it or not, just as 
he likes; it 's quite hoptional," she added, 
looking at the travelled valet with a glance 
intended to carry conviction with it. 

" Now, ladies," exclaimed that very 
agreeable personage, as he sat between 
them, stirring his tea-cup, and looking quite 
as much at home as though every tiling in 
that very comfortable housekeeper's room 
was liis exclusive property, " mia hella sig- 
nora^ mia carissima signorina^ as we said in 
Italy, — I hope, I trust, you will moderate 
that vivacity that renders you both so inex- 
pressibly agreeable." 

Mrs. Susan bridled a little. Something 
had been said by the incautious Mrs. Jenny 
that offended her ; but the compliment of the 
accomplished valet fell like oil upon the 



68 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

rasrino: waves. As she drank her tea, how- 
ever, she should have liked the compliment 
better had it not included her bosom friend ; 
and she entered into a resolution not to 
invite her to her evening assemblies, if she 
did not behave herself better; for she was 
beginning to think, that "the young wo- 
man must be taught to keep her distance." 
No lady's maid, according to her mode of 
etiquette, ought to be suffered to take Hber- 
ties with a housekeeper; but this Mrs. 
Jenny had not only done : she had committed 
a more unpardonable act in making too 
free with the housekeeper's most particular 
friend. 

If Mrs. Susan began to consider Mrs. 
Jenny " a forward minx," the latter re- 
turned the compHment by setting the house- 
keeper do^vn, in her mind, as "a good-for- 
nothing old hussy. At her time of life 
to be ogling the men in the ridiculous way 
she did ! She never in her born days had 
seen anything so howdacious ! " 

That was the Lady's maid's secret opinion 



STIiAi;\T3ERRY HILL. 69 

of her superior. The fact is, Mrs. Susan 
gave treats, or ridottos, as she styled them; 
and Mrs. Susan was supposed to have a 
good deal more at her disposal, even, than 
the abundance of good things that the Duke 
of Xewcastle might innocently have sup- 
posed were his o^^Tl; and this occasioned 
many individuals of the other sex, the 
coquettish Lady's-maid desired to be her 
most particular friends, to appear at the 
said treats in that position to her senior. 

" By the way, that just reminds me of an 
adventure I met with, of a very singular 
character, when at Florence," observ^ed the 
travelled valet, as the still-room maid, who 
was waiting-maid in the housekeeper's room, 
handed him some cake with his tea. 

" An adventure ! " exclaimed the Lady's 
maid, in her most effective manner. " AVell, 
I do doat upon adventures, to be sure ; I shall 
listen to it with perdigious pleasure." 

" Pr{?digious, my dear," observed the 
housekeeper to her bosom friend, with an 
intense satisfaction at being able to shew 



70 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

Mr. Fibbs liow deplorably ignorant her bosom 
friend was; "I am monstrous afraid, child, 
you are not so familiar with your entomology 
as you ought to be. But that 's of course 
no reflection on you, my dear ; none in the 
least. It 's the bounden duty of parents and 
guardians — if one has parents and guardians, 
and isn't an unnatural child, which I thanks 
my stars / never was — to take care that one 
expresses oneself properly when one goes 
into company, and pronounces words as they 
is written, and never utters any improper 
aspirations." 

" Exactly so, my dear Mrs. Susan," re- 
plied the Lady's maid, a little nettled at 
this powerful attack upon her, and unhand- 
some allusion to her private history, before 
a person she was so extremely desirous to 
captivate ; " there is nothing that betrays so 
much hignorance ; except when persons, my 
dearest Mrs. Susan, makes use of a lot of 
fine words, Mrs. Susan, which they knows 
no more the meaning of than the babe un- 
born : and makes themselves monstrous ridi- 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 71 

culous into the bargain. Hignorance is one 
thing, my dearest ]\Irs. Susan, but in my 
mind haffectation 's a great deal worser." 

" The Marchesa Bumblebeedizzi was the 
beauty of all Florence," commenced Mr. 
Fibbs, anxious to prevent the storm he saw 
brewing in the rather murky horizon of the 
housekeeper's countenance. His object was 
gained: both his companions appeared de- 
sirous to forget their feud, in the curiosity 
they felt to hear what was forthcoming 
about the exalted lady their most particular 
friend had just mentioned. 

" Every one was in raptures with the 
Marchesa," continued the narrator; "the 
ladies envied her her superior charms — the 
gentlemen were dying to throw themselves 
at her feet, and avow themselves the slaves 
of her beaux yeux^ as we say in France. I 
arrived in Florence on the very day three 
duels were fought by different noblemen, 
who were rivals for her affections. The 
whole city was in confusion — the Prince 
Beccafigo was despaired of — Count Ortolan 



72 STEAWBERRY HILL. 

was a corpse — and the Grand Duke Eustifusti 
had irot a bad thrust in his left arm." 

" My goodness I" exclaimed Mrs. Susan, 
looking extremely concerned, " those nasty 
swords ! I wish gentlemen never wore 'em. 
If they fall out, nothing satisfies them but 
becoming suicides of their fellow-creatures." 

"Well, for my part, I think a sword 
mighty becoming," observed the Lady's 
maid, determined to show her independence. 
Mrs. Susan said nothing — she looked at her 
bosom friend, not swords, but daggers. 

" I retired to my chamber the evening of 
my arrival, rather tired after my long 
journey," resumed the valet. '' Amor vincit 
omnia ! as we said at Eton, was my excla- 
mation, when I perceived on my dressing- 
table a little scented billet addressed in a 
delicate running hand ' a VEccelenzo Sig- 
nor FibhsJ As there could be no doubt 
the letter was intended for me, I made no 
scruple of breaking the seal, which I ob- 
served was a couple of doves billing and 
cooing within a wreath of roses." 



STRAWBERRY IIILL. 73 

" How per — how jjrodigious sentimen- 
tal!" cried the lady's maid, correcting her 
mispronunciation very emphatically. 

" My astonishment may be imagined 
when I read the following sentences," con- 
tinued the favourite of the housekeeper's 
room, T^ith an air as if the extraordinary 
adventure he was relating, he could regard 
only as one of very ordinary occurrence. 

" ' I have seen thee : henceforth thou art 
my fate. I love thee ; but how I love thee, 
vam is language to express. I sigh for 
thee — let me not die for thee. If thou hast 
a heart susceptible to vroman's tenderest 
influence, come to the Palazzo Bumblebee- 
dizzi, at the hour of twelve, on the terrace 
steps nearest the orange-grove. Remember, 
and be secret. 

' Until death, thine adoring 

' Marchesa.' " 

" AYell to be sure!" cried the house- 
keeper, in undisguised indignation, " I pro- 
test I never heard talk of anything so igno- 

VOL. II. E 



74 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

ininious; IMarkesa tliough she was called, 
I 'd lay any wager she was no better than 
she should be — in short, a regular Jezebel." 

" Now, my dear Mrs. Susan, you must 
remember foreign customs are not our cus- 
toms," remarked the gentleman, gravely. 

*' Thanks to goodness — and I hopes the 
people as looks after our customs, if they 
catches any body bringing over any you 've 
been speaking of, will treat them as coun- 
try band as possible." 

" No doubt they will," replied he, and 
then quietly resumed his story. " When I 
had read this epistle, I recalled to mind what 
I had heard respecting the desperate state of 
Prince Beccafigo, the unhappy end of Count 
Ortolan, and the severe wound of the Grand 
Duke Kustifusti, and prudence bade me 
stay : but Audi alteram partem^ as we said 
at Cambridge. On the other hand, then, I 
recollected the moving descriptions I had 
read of this ravishing beauty — this pride of 
Florence — this w^onder of Italy : and all the 
gallantry within me was up in arms to fulfil 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 75 

the too flattering wishes of the divine, the 
incomparable Marchesa." 

" I had a better opinion of you, Mr. 
Fibbs," said the Housekeeper, with some 
dignity, and a blush which seemed to be 
scorching the patches on her rouged cheeks. 
It was now the Lady's-maid's turn to be 
shocked. She, however, satisfied her con- 
science by looking intensely modest at the 
bowl of her spoon. 

"I arrived," continued the travelled valet, 
as though quite indifferent to the unfavour- 
able impression he was creating, " at the 
hour of twelve, at the Palazzo Bunible- 
beedizzi; and on the stairs of the terrace, 
near the orange-grove, I had the felicity of 
beholding the di\dne Marchesa. Veni^ vidi, 
vici, as we said at Eton." 

Mrs. Susan held up her head very high, 
clasped her hands before her ample breast, 
and cast her eyes sternly in the direction of 
the ceiling. Mrs. Jenny stared into her tea- 
cup, and apparently found there some un- 
usual attraction. 

E 2 



7(3 STRAWTBERRY HILL. 

" We rushed into eacli other's anus." 

At this announcement ]\Irs. Susan drew 
her chair back several inches, and Mrs. 
Jenny thought she ought to faint. 

" We were locked in an embrace so rap- 
turous as could be enjoyed only a discretion^ 
as we said in France, by happy lovers meet- 
ing clandestinely at midnight, under an Ita- 
lian sky, upon an Italian terrace." 

The discreet housekeeper drew her chair 
sharply several inches further back, and 
gave a glance at the oifender, which par- 
took much more of the quality of her 
pickling than of her preserving stores. 
The lady's-maid, who would not for the 
world have seemed less virtuous than her 
superior, placed her cup and saucer down, 
and scientifically arranged herself for 
a little hysterics. In the next moment 
their curiosity got the better of their in- 
dignation ; and they listened, though with 
a decided impression that their most parti- 
cular friend ought to have been more par- 
ticular by a great deal. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 77 

*' We were enjoying an Elysium — our 
souls too full for utterance — our hearts 
throbbing together in mutual ecstasy, when 
I heard a noise to my right. I quickly 
turned round, and beheld a man of lofty 
stature and the most gloomy visage I ever 
beheld, wrapped in a large cloak, advancing 
towards me with rapid strides, with a naked 
poignard uplifted in his hand. ' Traitor ! ' 
he shrieked, in accents of mingled rage and 
jealousy, ' thine hour is come — receive thy 
doom!' At the sound of his voice, the 
beautiful Marchesa, in an agony of terror 
exclaimed — ' ]\Iy husband ! ' — and rushed 
like hghtning up the stairs of the terrace." 

" Then the good-for-nothing Avretch was a 
married woman!" cried the horror-struck 
Mrs. Susan, lifting up her hands and eyes 
in pious amazement. Mrs. Jenny deter- 
mined not to faint ; but she in a very proper 
manner turned her back on the speaker. 

" Yes ; the gentleman was no other than 
the Marquis Bumblebeedizzi," answered 
their companion : " hearing that his wife had 



78 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

made an assignation, he lay in ambush to 
make a victim of her lover. Exempli gratia^ 
as we said at Cambridge. Fortunately, at 
the very moment of his approach, my atten- 
tion was directed by a noise to my left. I 
beheld another man approaching with a 
dra^vn sword. He, according to report, was 
one of the favoured lovers of the divine 
^larchesa, and had left his bed at that un- 
timely hour to gain one more smile from his 
adored mistress. I drew back instanta- 
neously, as I beheld myself menaced with 
immediate death from a desperate enemy on 
each side of me. 

*' You will be shocked to hear the catas- 
trophe," added the gentleman, very much 
at his ease, finishing the contents of his tea- 
cup. " Indeed, I think it is too terrible to 
listen to : too frightful to repeat." 

In a moment the two females were as 
close to him as they could conveniently get, 
pressing to hear the conclusion of the ad- 
venture; for, now there could be nothing 
wrong in the story, they were very weU 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 79 

satisfied there could be nothing wrong in 
their listening to it. 

"Judge, ladies, of my horror," resumed 
the narrator, after withstanding their united 
entreaties for several minutes, "at behold- 
ing, the moment I fell back from my ad- 
vancing enemies, the Marquis Bumblebee- 
dizzi weltering in the blood of the poor 
Grand Duke Rustifusti, and the Grand Duke 
Rustifusti weltering in the blood of the poor 
Marquis Bumblebeedizzi ! One had been 
run through the body, the other stabbed to 
the heart. tempora^ mores! as we 
said at Eton." 

While this confidential conversation had 
been going on at the tea-table, the other 
guests of Mrs. Susan were amusing them- 
selves according to their several inclinations. 
A party, consisting of the Chamberlain, the 
Butler, the Steward, and the Groom of the 
Chambers, were assembled round a card 
table, playing at ombre, and seemed very 
happy in their amusement. In contrast to 
them appeared two other guests of Mrs. 



so STRAWBERRY HILL. 

Susan, who sat in a corner by themselves, 
to all appearance out of conceit of every 
thing in the world, except a plate of buttered 
muffins, which was constantly handed to 
them, and its contents eagerly devoured. 

" Curse me if I can stand this sort of 
thing any longer ! " exclaimed one in a de- 
termined tone. *' I 'm sure he 's a low fellow, 
or he wouldn't behave so shabbily. Don't 
you think so, Duke?"' 

" Of coorth I do, Marquith! " replied the 
other of the reader's two old acquaintances 
in livery, as he expeditiously disposed of a 
very buttery mouthful. 

"I don't know Avhat 's come of Mrs. 
Jenny," resumed the other, in the same dis- 
satisfied tone, " I used to consider her a girl 
possessed of a mighty pretty taste and judg- 
ment. Then I was everything to her. 
Even our butler remarked how monstrous 
civil to me she was. But now, may I 
perish, if she takes any more notice of my 
presence, while this fellow is in her com- 
pany, than if I were a beggarly shoe-black. 



STRAA\T3ERRY HILL. 81 

I would call her to an account for this, was 
I not certain sure the change in her was 
all OAving to this inveigling, circumventing, 
palavering, foreigneering coxcomb, whom I 
have a prodigious inclination to affront be- 
fore her face. A capital idea, eh, Duke?" 

" Ekthellent idea, Marquith," replied the 
other. '^ By the bye, I think itth monthtrouth 
dithgratheful of Mithtreth Thuthan behaving 
to hun ath the doth. Monthtrouth dith- 
gratheful, Marquith." 

" WeU, I 'U tell you what I wHl do, Duke." 

" Yeth, Marquith." 

"• I won't stand it, that's flat." 

" And / won't thtand it, Marquith, and 
tho ith that^SLt?' 

" I'm deucedly inclined to pick a quarrel 
with that everlasting rascal. I would fight 
the fellow for half-a-farthing. Shall I go 
up and pull his nose, or throw him out of 
the window ? Eh, Duke ?" 

" Don't be rath, Marquith. Remember 
the ladith. Pray don't alarm Mithtreth 
Thuthan." 

E 3 



82 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

" D — ^Irs. Susan. It 's that aggravating 
little gypsey, Mrs. Jenny, I'm thinking of. 
I thought she had more sense than to waste 
her time upon the valet of a Baronet's 
younger son, when she can have a Marquis's 
own State Footman. It 's a degradation, 
Duke, which no State Footman of spirit 
ought to put up with." 

'' Of coorth it ith, Marquith." 
" It 's decidedly an insult, Duke." 
" Dethidedly an inthult, Marquith." 
" We must show him that we are not to 
be trifled with, Duke." 

" Motht thertainly we mutht, Marquith." 
" Wait till we 've finished the muffins, 
Duke, and then we '11 soon let the fellow 
know who 's who, here." 

The greasy edibles now rapidly disap- 
peared do^vn the throats of the agitated 
friends, as they occasionally sent scowling 
glances in the direction of the trio at the 
tea-table, who were evidently extremely 
sociable — at least, the two ladies had quite 
forgotten their most particular friend's 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 8 



Q 



little peccadillo with the great Italian 
lady. 

By them the threatening looks of the 
Damon and Pythias in livery did not pass 
vm observed. Perhaps, of the three, the 
travelled valet enjoyed them the most. He 
entertained a very small opinion of his once 
especial friends, Messieurs. Duke and Mar- 
quis, and continued to practice on the cre- 
dulity, and feed the vanity of their mistresses, 
quite as much to annoy them as to amuse 
himself. How completely he succeeded will 
presently be shewn. 

Mrs. Susan might have entertained some 
misgi^-ings that she was acting wisely, in 
neo:lectino: her old flame in her endeavour 
to secure a new one — but Mrs. Jenny was 
younger, and more careless of her conquests ; 
the idea that she was making one of her 
swains intolerably jealous, she regarded only 
as a gratifying tribute to her charms. 

There was another circumstance that con- 
tributed as much as anything to the dis- 
agreeable feelinofs her tall friends in the 



84 STRAWBERIIY HILL. 

corner were forced to endure. The Lady's 
^laid was " not a o^oinof to see that hodious 
old woman" succeed in her designs upon so 
agreeable a young man as Mr. Fibbs ; and 
the Housekeeper was quite as determined 
" that impudent little minx" shouldn't have 
him, if she tried ever so. 

The tea-things had been removed — the 
little still-room maid had gone to join the 
cook's evening assembly in the kitchen — the 
card players were so taken up by their o^vn 
loud jokes, and louder mirth, as to be com- 
pletely unmindful of what was going on 
around them. Mrs. Susan, with a plate of 
cake, and Mrs. Jenny, with another of 
oranges cut in quarters, were rivalling each 
other in their entreaties to the lady-killing 
Mr. Fibbs, who, with a glass of wine to his 
lips, and a most winning smile on his good- 
looking countenance, was addressing some 
very gallant speech to his fair companions, 
when the two jealous personages, to whose 
wounded self-love this scene had been gun- 
powder and aqua-fortis, started up from 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 85 

their seats, and with flushed faces and deter- 
mined strides stalked towards the happy 
trio. 

Mr. Fibbs saw them advance; but the 
movement — the object of which he antici- 
pated — only caused him to increase his ap- 
jDarent ardour in addressing his attentive 
associates. 

" Positively, my dears, you are molto 
raviso, as we said in Italy," exclaimed the 
travelled valet. " I cannot tell vou how 
much you remind me, my adored Mrs. Susan, 
of my exquisite friend Madame la Comtesse 
Pomme de Terre, with whom I passed so 
many agreeable days at the delightful Cha- 
teau Pomme de Terre, in France; while 
you, my dear Mrs. Jenny, alFord me similar 
pleasing recollections of the ravishing Baro- 
ness Maccaroni, whose splendid mansion, 
the Villa Maccaroni, at Xaples, is so well 
kno^vn to all English travellers, who, like 
me, have enjoyed the advantages of le grand 
tour^ as we say in France." 

The compliment was well taken in both 



8G STRAWBERRY HILL. 

directions. The virtuous Housekeeper was 
half afraid at first that the Countess was no 
better than the ]\Iarchesa; but it was clear 
at least that her most particular friend had 
very high acquaintances, and she took it as 
mighty civil of him to compare her with so 
great a lady as she felt satisfied was the 
mistress of the Chateau Pomme de Terre. 
The Lady's-maid seemed even more sensible 
of so agreeable a comparison, and smiled her 
sweetest smile in return. 

" Do take a bit of cake, Mr. Fibbs, ^^ith 
your glass of Bucephalus. I assure you the 
Duke told me he had never tasted so agree- 
able a combustible." 

It is probable his Grace said comestible^ 
and the wine was Bucellas. 

" Now I 'm sure a horange will do you a 
vast deal of good, Mr. Fibbs," exclaimed the 
other, wdth a manner equally -winning. 

" You seem quite at home, here, Mr. 
Thingamy ! " suddenly cried the Marquis's 
o^\Ti state footman, very rudely, as he planted 
himself, with a monstrous fierce air, right in 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 87 

front of the gallant gay Lothario of the 
Housekeeper's room. 

" Yeth, you theme quite at home, here, 
thir," echoed his friend at his elbow. The 
travelled valet unconcernedly looked the first 
of the two full in the face, and then allowed 
his eyes to fall gradually down the row of 
buttons on his waistcoat — then descended 
his plush breeches with the same quiet 
scrutiny — and slowly fell down his stockings 
to his shoe-buckles. He then, as leisurely, 
gave an ascending scrutiny to his companion ; 
and, when he had reached his face, turned 
to address the half-alarmed Mrs. Susan, 
without taking any further notice of her tall 
Damon, or of his equally tall Pythias. 

" I assure you, my charming friend,'' he 
observed, " that you are the very image of 
the most agreeable Frenchwoman I ever 
met with — the reflection of her very person ; 
veluti in speculum^ as we said at Eton." 

This sort of treatment did not seem to 
agree with the dignity of a ^larquis's own 
State Footman. 



88 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

" People must be cursed fools to believe 
such stuff — eh, Duke?" cried he, as offen- 
sively as possible. 

"Ofcoorththeymutht, Marquith," readily 
said the other. 

" And as for you, my dear," continued the 
travelled valet, turning affectionately to 
Mrs. Jenny, after taking a glance at his 
"s\dne, as he held it a moment steadily between 
his eyes and the light, ''there cannot be 
anything more clearly established, than your 
close resemblance to that extremely fascinat- 
ing Neapolitan. Mirahile dictu, as we said 
at Cambridge." 

This familiarity with his mistress was the 
last drop of gall that overflowed his pre- 
viously brimming cup, and the Marquis's 
OAvn State Footman at once lost all command 
over his temper. 

" You 're a low fellow ! " exclaimed he, 
lookins: blue, under the combined influence 
of rage an d j ealousy . The words had scarcely 
escaped his lips, when he fell back two or 
three paces — the natural result of having 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 89 

unexpectedly received the contents of the 
wine-2flass in his face, that the insulted valet 
had hurled at him with all his force. 

In a moment the whole room was a scene 
of confusion. The card-players hastily left 
their chairs with consternation and alarm 
"svritten most legibly in their w^ell-fed faces. 
They w^ere just in time to prevent further 
violence — they were just in time to allay the 
fright of Mrs. Susan; but they were too late 
to prevent one catastrophe — Mrs. Jenny 
would not have lost such an opportunity for 
one of her mistress's best dresses — she was 
in a ht. 



90 STRAWBERRY HILL. 



CHAPTER IV. 

BEAU NASH, AND THE POIP-ROOM AT BATH. 

The pump-room at Bath was, a hundred 
years ago, the head-quarters of fashionable 
frivolity. The waters of this gay city of 
King Bladud were then in the height of their 
celebrity. Invalids of all descriptions flocked 
to try their eflicacy — much in the way flocks 
of geese hurry to the fens, to flounder in the 
waters, gabble, and be plucked. But Bath 
was a place of fashionable resort; and a 
considerable portion of its very numerous 



STRAWBERIIY HILL. 91 

visitors made the waters the ostensible object 
of their residence mthin its walls. 

Persons of all ages and all sexes, or as Lady 
Wortley Montagu described them — men, 
women, and Herveys — elbowed each other 
in the pump-room. The tired-out statesman 
came for a little relaxation ; the comfortable 
tradesman for a little pleasure ; needy bache- 
lors sought wealthy brides, and buxom 
mdows agreeable partners. From morning 
till night there was a constant round of 
water-drinking, dancing, masquerades, card- 
playmg, gossip, poUtics, and methodism; — 
for let it be borne in mmd, that it was a 
place for saints as well as for sinners ; and, 
whilst the gayer portion of the community 
ran after assemblies and all such carnal 
amusements, the more serious moiety hurried 
as eagerly to hear the energetic expoundings 
of the favourite thump-cushion of the season. 

The pump-room was the general ren- 
dezvous and promenade of every body who 
desired to be thought somebody. Here a 
crowd of ladies, prominent in their swelling 



92 STKAWBERRY HILL. 

apparel and powdered head-dresses, minced 
along on their high-heeled shoes, escorted by 
a crowd of cavaliers in their full-skirted 
coats of various colours, with the ordi- 
nary accompaniments of sword, ruffles, mg, 
cocked-hat, capacious vest, well-setting small- 
clothes, long hose, and buckled shoes. 

These two great divisions in the human 
family seemed subdivided into infinite va- 
rieties. In the first, there was the leader of 
the beau monde^ who talked loud, appeared 
to hold every one at her disposal, and cared 
for nothing but the topic of the hour. Then 
came the reigning toast — generally a much 
younger, as well as a much prettier woman 
— with her circle of admirers, putting forth 
her most charming affectations, and having 
quite as high an appreciation of herself as 
the most devoted of her adorers. Next came 
the great heiress — plain in person, gorgeous 
in dress; by far the most arrogant of the 
three, and imagining all the men who ap- 
proached her designed to appropriate her 
snub nose and a hundred thousand pounds. 



STRAT\'BERRY HILL. 93 

After these came the old dowager, sworn 
servant to cards and scandal — followed by 
the gossip, the matchmaker, and the adven- 
turess, strmng hard to make the best of so 
good a market. Fat parsons' wives, and 
sporting daughters of fox-hunting squires ; 
aldermen's wealthy widows, ambitious of 
good society; and antiquated virgins, who 
would not despair : — they formed a few only 
of those who made up the female company 
at the pump-room : but each was the tjrpe 
of a pretty considerable class, who claimed 
no unimportant position in the world around 
them. 

The male portion of the promenaders were 
at least equally numerous. The old noble, a 
mart}T to gout — the young one, to sharpers ; 
dishonest tradespeople, and roguish servants; 
the buck — a well-dressed young fellow, with 
a vast deal of spirit, and a standing army of 
duns ; the military fortune-hunter, whose 
sole resources for his campaign were six feet 
of impudence, a brazen physiognomy, and a 
good suit of clothes ; the plethoric divine 



94 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

and the consumptive man of genius; the 
fashionable physician, and the equally fa- 
shionable pickpocket; purblind admirals, 
and generals who had not a leg to stand 
upon; staunch old Jacobites, who could 
scarcely conceal their contempt for the 
Hanover succession — and zealous old AVhigs, 
who could hardly be restrained from some 
practical exhibition of their horror of the 
Pope, the Devil, and the Pretender. 

With such strange elements, it might be 
thought difficult to maintain harmony ; but 
this was left to one man, whose business it 
was to keep the heterogeneous mixture so 
nicely amalgamated, that no disturbance 
could ensue. There were some high spirits 
among the gentlemen, and some intractable 
ones among the ladies, but it became neces- 
sary to preserve such spirits within due 
bounds : the impudent would become offens- 
ive, and the reckless dangerous, had there 
not been a controlling power to keep both in 
check. 

It is wonderful what very humble instru- 



STRAWBEREY HILL. 95 

ments may sometimes be made to answer in 
great emergencies. The Janizaries used to 
display their camp-kettle as an unfailing 
signal for revolt — and the heroes of the 
French revolution were equally stirred at 
the sight of a dirty red night-cap. The 
company at Bath did not set up for their 
veneration either of these respectable em- 
blems, — though they made choice of one 
equally empty, in that bo^ving, scraping, 
palavering example of the genus Fiddle- 
faddle — a master of the ceremonies. 

But the person who held this office at 
Bath about a hundred years ago, was im- 
mensely superior to the degenerate animal 
of the same species now to be found at our 
fashionable watering places. All the impu- 
dence of all the masters of the ceremonies 
who have flourished from his time to the 
present, would not amount to what Beau 
Nash, as he was styled, possessed of that 
useful quality. He was the arbiter eleganti- 
arum of the pump-room — the autocrat of 
the ball-room — the Minos of every dispute 



96 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

— the juclp;e Avithout appeal, in all the most 
difficult points of precedency, dress, gen- 
tility, and fashion : in short, he was absolute 
sovereign of Bath. 

Yet thouirh Beau Xash was enthroned to 
give the law to rank and fashion, and laid 
down the unalterable dogmas of birth and 
breeding, it was very difficult to account for 
such an elevation in his case, unless it could 
be referred to some rule of contraries, that 
would qualify him to understand the claims 
of blood from having no such claims him- 
self. The qualification lay, perhaps, in its 
being entirely of the same material as the 
famous prophetic head, invented by Friar 
Bacon. 

He was little better than a shallow fop; 
but by the mere force of his own inex- 
haustible impudence, he produced such an 
impression on the visitors of Bath, that he 
was enabled to stare down the most confident, 
and humble the most presuming amongst 
what was called the very best company. 
Such was Beau Nash: but whether Bath 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 97 

called Beau Nash into existence, or Bean 
Nash made Bath wliat it was — and both 
positions have had their advocates — we 
cannot now stop to inquire. 

It was the usual hour for the company to 
assemble in the pump-room ; and as it was 
the height of the season, that large apart- 
ment was filling fast with its usual motley 
collection. Here and there were several 
groups, apparently engaged in earnest con- 
versation : they were the different varieties of 
the class Gossip — the political, the fashion- 
able, and the scandalous gossip — the charac- 
teristics of which were so strongly marked, 
there was no mistaking one group for 
another. 

A party of fashionable loungers, male and 
female, had planted themselves near the 
door, as though for the purpose of seeing 
who went in and out ; and it was evident, 
from their loud laughter, that they were 
amusing themselves with a little ridicule — 
an amusement still common amongst persons 
of more wit than manners. 

VOL. II. F 



98 STEAWBEHRY HILL. 

At a little distance from them was ano- 
ther party, apparently composed of country 
gentlemen, with one or two persons of dis- 
tinction who had so long refrained from 
going to court, they could scarcely be dis- 
tinguished from their rustic neighbours. 
They were engaged in discussing the news 
which had lately arrived from the Frencli 
coast, and it was e\ddently of more than 
ordinary interest. 

On a bench situated close to the wall, 
midway between the two groups, there sat a 
female, so closely muffled up as almost to 
defy scrutiny; and by her side was a sin- 
gular-looking old gentleman, who might 
have passed for her father or guardian. 

They seemed very quiet people, unknown 
to any one, and in all probability had taken 
the retired place in which they sat, merely to 
rest themselves after their promenade. They, 
apparently, found sufficient employment in 
their own observ^ations, for they had remained 
for some time without addressing each other. 

" If I 'm not mightily mistaken," observed 



STRA^VBERRY RILL. 99 

an old-fashioned elderly gentleman in a 
Eamilies ^\ng, belonging to the political 
group, " the game will soon be played ; and 
then^ my friends, we shall see who has got 
the best hand." 

" Yes, my lord," said another of the same 
party, " and we shall also see who plays his 
hand the best ; for in a game of this nature, 
skill will sometimes do more than cards." 

"Ay, ay. Sir Harry !" cried a third ; " but 
nobody knows what may come of the game 
till it 's played out. By all account," he 
added, sinking his voice, "the Prince is in 
earnest, and if the French court are as much 
in earnest as he, I don't think the issue ver}' 
doubtful." 

" Who has he got with him at Paris, I 
wonder?" inquired another. 

" Oh ! he has several good names," replied 
the old-fashioned nobleman, " chiefly Irish 
and Scotch ; one, however, is certainh' 
English — my Lord Falkland ; and you may 
be sure, if my Lord Falkland is ^^'ith him, 
something is going to be done." 

f2 



100 STEATVBEREY HILL. 

" 'Tis high thne," said Sir Harry, em- 
phatically. 

" Have you seen AValpole?" asked one. 

" Yes ; he arrived here two days since," 
was the reply ; " he pretends to laugh at the 
doings at Paris, but I don't doubt at all his 
taking it mighty serious before long." 

'' There 's a son of his here too, I am told," 
said his lordship. '' Is he likely to turn out 
anything? Is he worth looking after, think 
you?" 

" Not at all," answered Sir Harry, ''he 
is said to be more fond of amusing himself 
with that Jezebel, Lady Archibald Hamilton." 

The lady on the bench here made a move- 
ment, which caused the speaker hastily to 
turn round ; but seeing only the very quiet 
pair who occupied the seat, he immediately 
resumed the conversation. 

'' I have heard he is mighty fond of 
affecting the virtuoso," continued he ; "there 
was a report, too, of his having become a 
bookworm, and was going to enter into a 
rivalry with the scribblers of Grub Street." 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 101 

" Did you know that the Crown Prince of 
Hanover is here?" inquired one, in an under 
tone. 

" I saw him yesterday," replied the noble- 
man in the Ramilies wig, " and think he 
would be a monstrous deal better employed 
in preparing his family for his approaching 
change of lodging to his beloved Hanover, 
when the Prince of Wales sets foot in 
England, than in flaunting about with that 
painted hussy. Lady Archibald, or with that 
empty booby, Bubb Doddington." 

At this moment the knot of Jacobites were 
disturbed by the approach of a military 
looking man, in the service of King George, 
who eyed them in a manner that shewed he 
entertained no unfounded suspicion they 
were employed in talking treason. 

The attention of the company was directed 
to the entrance of Prince Frederick with a 
numerous retinue, to whom a large propor- 
tion of the company seemed desirous of 
shewing all proper respect — the gentlemen 
bowing, the ladies curtseying, as his Royal 



102 STRAT\T3EE,IIY HILL. 

Highness passed througli their ranks, gra- 
ciously recognising their civilities — for he 
assumed the merit of being a gracious prince. 
The little knot of Jacobites, however, did 
not join in these demonstrations. They 
quietly walked away as he approached — not 
choosing to pay any court to an individual 
they could recognise only as the Crown 
Prince of Hanover. 

IMany persons of distinction were near 
his Royal Highness; particularly one well- 
dressed, well-powdered gentleman, whose 
manner and bearing would have pointed 
him out as at least an ambassador from 
some powerful state, or a potentate of some 
minor principality, had not his appearance 
been unmistakeably Enghsh. One who was 
so familiar with the Heir- Apparent, could 
not be otherwise than a nobleman of the 
highest rank; but whatever his dignity, it 
was clear enough he was well-knoAvn, for he 
almost every moment interrupted his dis- 
course with the Prince, with all sorts of free- 
and-easy addresses to the most distinguished 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 103 

persons in the throng through which he was 
passing. 

It was either " Duchess, I kiss your liand 
— My Lord, your most obedient — Captain, 
your servant — I hope I see your Ladyship 
well — My Lord Bishop, I trust your gout is 
not so troublesome — Child, you are looking 
charmingly to day — Sir Peter, I am glad to 
see you — Alderman, how 's your digestion? 
— Madam, I hope you did not catch cold at 
the Assembly t'other night — My Lord Duke, 
this is a pleasure I did not count upon" — 
and so on, till he had gone through, to all 
appearance, every title to be found in the 
pump-room. 

It was strange, but not less true, that 
these recognitions were received by the in- 
dividuals to whom they were addressed 
v.ith such satisfaction, as proved that they 
were quite as well pleased to be so addressed 
by that great man, whoever he was, as to 
receive a bow from the Prince beside him, 
whom he contrived to throw so completely 
into the shade. 



104 STRAWBERRY UILL. 

This marvellous great personage, who 
could attract towards himself a greater de- 
gree of notice than the son of his sovereign, 
was no other than the illustrious Beau Nash. 
He made himself appear the Cardinal Wol- 
sey of the pump-room ; and the Ego ei rex 
meus^ so characteristic of the lofty church- 
man, would have been quite as natural in 
him — for he certainly made his Prince, in 
that vast assembly at least, secondary to 
himself. 

" Holy Moses ! look at Nash ! " exclaimed a 
lady, with a good deal of vivacity, from 
amongst the group of fashionable gossips. 
'' I vow and protest, a peacock spreading his 
tail before the sun, and secretly congratu- 
lating himself on being in such marvellous 
fine feather, is a world less glorious than 
our Master of the Ceremonies." 

'' What would Lady Townshend have the 
poor man be at?" inquired Sir Charles 
Hanbury Williams ; ''he is doing the honours 
of the place to his Royal Highness, mth 
whom any kind of honour is a rarity." 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 105 

" Mother, you are only en\dous you can't 
cut such a figure yourself," observed Charles 
Townshend. 

" Nay, Charles, I 'U be hanged if I haven't 
cut many a better out of pasteboard," the 
lady replied ; " but here 's a bird of another 
breed — surely 'tis the goose that laid the 
golden egg ! " 

The individual thus alluded to by Lady 
Townshend, was no other than the pompous 
Duke of Xewcastle, who came awkwardly 
shuffling into the room, fully impressed with 
the belief that he was the greatest statesman 
in the world, and the first man of quality in 
the kingdom. 

" Does any one know what has become of 
Horace Walpole?" asked George Sel^vyn, as 
if he had just roused himself from a six- 
weeks' nap. ''I asked Lady Archibald what 
she had done with him, but she gave me to 
believe that she hadn^t done with him." 

" I'm thinking there she let you know the 
truth, for once," observed Lady To^vnshend, 
archly ; " to be sure, she is not much addicted 

F 3 



lOG STRAWBERRY HILL. 

to honesty; but even the greatest rogues 
have their moments of conscientiousness. 
Faith, now, it 's mighty strange that the 
young Walpole should be so good an imi- 
tator of the old one : one does everything 
he can for the King — the other seems intent 
on being no less useful to the Prince." 

The young female on the bench appeared 
to be getting restless. Possibly she did not 
relish this fashionable gossip, and the scandal 
she was obliged to hear unpleasantly inter- 
rupted her thoughts. It was in her power 
to put an end to the annoyance — but still 
she lingered. Her equally silent companion 
seemed to be directing his attention to the 
conversation of the other group, and did not 
notice the lady's impatience, or hear what 
had fallen from the people whose vicinity 
had proved so disagreeable to her. 

" Well, all I know is, she 's sure to take 
care of him," added Seh\yn, in his usual 
torpid manner. " Egad, it looks as though 
Horace's good fortune was a Lady Bountiful, 
who made her drifts a deuced deal more useful 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 107 

than palatable ; her mne is always antimo- 
iiial, and her cakes cathartic : she very sensibly 
endeavours to touch the heart by moving 
the bowels. Lady Archie's love for a young- 
fellow, if it isn't physic to him, strike me 
dumb if I know what it is." 

" He 's certainly monstrous lucky, if that 's 
the case," said young Townshend, joining 
in the general laugh ; " and as for the lady, 
all I can say of her is, she isn't likely to 
throw her physic to the dogs." 

" Ah, Charley, how can you say that, 
when you know it 's all given to the puppies 
of her acquaintance !" replied Lady Towns- 
hend, in the same humour. 

The youno^ ladv on the bench rose as if to 
move away ; but whether it was from inde- 
cision, or the influx of fresh company into 
the room, she almost immediately sat down 
again. 

Sir Eobert AYalpole now entered, witli 
two or three staunch political friends. He 
was evidently in high spirits — his jovial face 
beaminsT with health and irood nature, and 



108 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

his lau<2:h rinofino: with cheerfulness. And 
yet he was on the brink of a precipice — he 
had a thousand causes of care and apprehen- 
sion : the country was threatened with an 
invasion — the people were on the eve of 
rebellion — his enemies were increasing in 
audacity as well as in number — and his 
friends becoming treacherous. 

Bubb Doddington followed at a little dis- 
tance. It might easily be seen, from this 
political weathercock, in which quarter the 
wind was blowing. He seemed to have his 
promised peerage always in his thoughts — 
indeed, he carried this self-conceit as palpably 
in his face as if it supported a coronet. He 
saw the Minister close to him ; but, instead 
of advancing to pay his respects with the 
eagerness he would gladly have shewn a year 
or two back, he crossed the pump-room to 
where he beheld a genius of his own stamp, 
in the awkward, shuffling, pompous Duke of 
Newcastle. 

Presently Horace Walpole, and his cousin 
Colonel Conway, entered. The former was 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 109 

looking pale and anxious : close study and 
long vigils were doing their work upon a 
constitution previously inclined to be delicate. 
The young soldier looked handsomer than 
ever; his campaign had done him no more 
harm than his promotion. Something said 
by one to the other set them both laugh- 
ing as they were approaching their friends. 

It was observed that the lady on the 
bench started when her gaze fell upon the 
younger AValpole, and a slight trembling 
seized her as she heard his name uttered bv 
some of the group who had just before 
coupled it with so much scandal. The two 
young men were hailed by them so cordially, 
that the attention of her companion was 
directed towards them. 

"Zounds, Horace!" exclaimed Seh\^'n, 
turning up his sleepy eyes, "you look as 
lively as an undertaker during an epidemic." 

"Yes, that is it exactly," added Lady 
Townshend, laughingly, " our friend's gaiety 
is rather solemn, I must say; it is for all 
the world Uke that of a man who has just 



110 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

buried a monstrous troublesome wife; only 
restrained by a sense of decorum from jump- 
ing out of liis skin." 

" Shouldn't wonder if that 's his case," 
remarked Selwyn, suppressing a yawn ; and 
then added, as though making an effort to 
keep awake, '' I say, Horace, have you lost 
your o^vn ^vife, or somebody's else's?'^ 

" As our friend is not a Benedict," said 
Colonel Conway, laughingly, " if he has lost 
a wife, it can be no concern of his; he 
cannot much lament her, knowing how often 
she must have gone astray previously." 

" That 's customary," said his cousin, 
joining in the joke, '' but at least I have the 
consolation of knowing, that my loss is ano- 
ther man's profit." 

" Well, I 'm sorry for Lord Archie," ob- 
served Charles Townshend, with well-affected 
condolence, " but if his Lordship has become 
a widower, the stroke of death must have 
been felt in many quarters besides the do- 
mestic hearth." 

" If you allude to Lady Archibald Ha- 



STRA^^^?ERRY HILL. Ill 

I 

milt on," observed Horace Walpole, *' I am 
happy to inform you that I parted with her 
last night at her own Assembly, in the best 
liealth and spirits ; and had the pleasure of 
escortino: her this mornin^^ to a China 
auction, where she is now giving the auc- 
tioneer the best evidence of her being in the 
land of the living." 

" Come, Father ! we will leave this place," 
said the lady on the bench, rising, evidently ^ 
in a state of considerable agitation, to depart. 

" I think it would be better," replied her 
companion, gravely; and presently they both 
quitted the pump-room. 

Little did the Minister's younger son 
know the mischief he had done by the 
thoughtless admission he had just made. 
Little did he guess that the heart he cared 
for more than he could have done for a thou- 
sand Lady Archibalds, had been throb - 
ing within a few feet of liis own. Most 
impatiently the proud spirit of Lord Falk- 
land's daujT^hter liad heard the scandalous 
imputations on her lover : but when his own 



112 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

lips confirmed them, as far as an acknow- 
ledgment of intimacy with a woman of bad 
character could do, she felt the damning evi- 
dence too strong for her to attempt to combat, 
and left him, almost with as much contempt 
as pity. 

Horace Walpole could know nothing — 
could guess nothing, of what had occurred ; 
being ignorant even that the young lady 
was in England. He only knew that, hope- 
less as his passion seemed, he loved Arabella 
Falkland with a power that would have 
wrestled with death for the mastery. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 113 



CHAPTER V. 

THE CRISIS. 

" Every body 's in Bath, your Honour," ob- 
served the travelled valet to his master, as he 
was superintending his breakfast. The young 
gentleman sighed: there was a person, he 
felt convinced, did not make one of the com- 
pany ; and he would gladly have dispensed 
with the best half of it, to have secured her 
society with the remainder. At that very 
moment she was in the next street. 

" Every body 's in Bath, your Honour," re- 



114 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

peated Mr. Fibbs; "never knew the place so 
full; one can hardly get along for the chairs 
that throng the streets. Per fas et nefas^ 
as we said at Eton." 

" Did Colonel Conway get my note, 
Fibbs?" inquired the Ministers son, list- 
lessly. 

'' Yes, your Honour," he answered, " the 
Colonel said he should not fail to be with 
you at the time you appointed. lie was 
so good as to enter into conversation with 
me, respecting old times and scenes at Eton 
and Cambridge ; and he had many a hearty 
laugh at our boyish adventures and escapes. 
Boat races on the Thames — cricket matches 
in the playing-fields— pretty girls at the 
miller's, and tucks-out at ' The Christo- 
pher:' all were recollected by the Colonel, 
your Honour; I never knew a pleasanter 
gentleman — especially when he presented me 
with a crown ; and when I replied,yi;22s coronat 
opus^ as we said at Cambridge, he laughed 
at my Latin, and flung me a guinea." 

His master smiled; but as he did not 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 115 

receive any encouragement to proceed, Mr. 
Fibbs thought proper to cease his commu- 
nications. The truth is, our hero was in no 
humour for them. Ever alive to the inte- 
rests of liis father, the rmnours that he had 
lately heard respecting the formidable coa- 
lition that the restless spirit of Bolingbroke 
had once more succeeded in oro^anizins^ for 
the overthrow of his schoolfellow, filled liim 
with uneasiness. 

At present there was no more commu- 
nion of sentiment between the Minister and 
his son, than there was when the latter had 
returned from his travels. This, with his 
peculiar sensitiveness, the latter attributed 
to his being so insignificant a member of the 
family as a younger son; and the impres- 
sion threatened to embitter his whole exis- 
tence. It rendered him moody and dissa- 
tisfied; he fancied that the mark of Cain 
was on his brow — that he was a Pariah in 
the division of castes — that tlie bend sinis- 
ter was indelibly fixed in liis heraldry — in 
short, that his liaving elder brothers put 



116 STRA^^ERRY HILL. 

him out of the pale of his father's affec- 
tions. 

But these fancies attended him only in 
his despairing moods : occasionally he had 
others of a totally different aspect. We 
have already said that he was engaged in 
literary composition. He was bringing his 
work to a close; and neither painter nor 
sculj^tor, rapt in admiration of some master- 
piece of art of his own creation, could have 
looked upon a production of his genius with 
a satisfaction more intense, than this perform- 
ance was regarded by its author — not from 
confidence in its merit, but from the pleasur- 
able visions it never failed to place before 
his mind. 

The publication of his work was a me- 
dium through which he beheld all sorts of 
pleasing objects; but the two prominent 
ones were, his becoming an object of pride 
and pleasure to his distinguished parent, 
and his exciting sensations of a similarly 
agreeable and ennobling character in a 
quarter which, though to him as remote as 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 117 

if it were another sphere, brought images 
of beauty and affection as freshly on his 
mind, as though they were reflections of 
things existing before his eyes. 

It appeared as if these impressions were 
to set in motion the most powerful energies 
he possessed; that his soul — as in the 
fabulous account of Mahomet's coffin, ever 
hanofins" between heaven and earth — was 
to be suspended by some such agency be- 
tween physical and fihal love. It was pos- 
sible that these enerofies mio^ht become an- 
tagonistic — then the struggle of the spirit 
would be great indeed. This struggle was 
nearer than he anticipated : it was coming 
upon him — it menaced him from a distance, 
like the cloud "no bigger than a man's 
hand," that is the harbinger of whirlwinds, 
tempests, and toniadoes. 

The cousins were sitttin^^ toorether over a 
manuscript — one was reading and the other 
listening, apparently with equal pleasure — 
when Fibbs entered with a billet, which he 
gave his master with a peculiarly significant 
smile. 



118 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

'* A billet doux^ Sir, as we say in France," 
whispered he, ^' brought by Mistress Jenny, 
my Lady Hamilton's own maid." 

Colonel Conway left his seat and strode 
to the window, where he was soon very 
busily engaged in making his observations 
on the passers by. His kinsman took that 
opportunity of looking oA^r his note. It 
was from Lady Archil3ald, in the usual lan- 
oruao-e of ladies of crallantrv, makinof an 
assisTnation at her own house, which was 
in one of the most fashionable streets in 
the gay city of Bath. 

Horace Walpole's first impulse was to 
crush it in his hand; but he remembered 
what had been told him respecting the se- 
cret intri<rues ao:ainst his father, which were 

CO ' 

carried on under her roof; and the idea that 
had already been more than once presented 
to him, of making the Lady subservient to 
his OAvn political views, again suggested 
itself. He resolved to go. Fibbs was soon 
in possession of the necessary reply, whicli, 
there is no doubt, a gentleman of his tra- 



STRAWEEEKY HILL. 119 

veiled experience delivered to the fair mes- 
senger ^^dth all the ceremonies sanctioned 
by the gallantry of the Servants' Hall. 

" Horace, my boy," cried the Colonel for 
the third or fourth time, " there 's the liand- 
somest face and the finest figure, gone bv 
just now, I have seen in the whole course of 
my existence. I called to you several times, 
but I might as Avell have called to a post. 
By Jove, you have lost a most ra\dshing 
sisrht! I wonder whether that old fellow 
"sv-ith her is her father, her uncle, or 
her guardian. Strange looking hunks! 
Shouldn't have taken him to be any rela- 
tion. Xo more like her, than a Dutch 
cheese is like a mermaid. Hope she 's going 
to stay some time in Bath. I 'm hugely im- 
patient to see her again." 

" Why, how you rave, Harry I " exclaimed 
his kinsman, joining him at the window. 
*' I had no notion a pretty face could touch 
you so nearly." 

" Touch me, Horace!" replied he, "I tell 
you what, my fine fellow, if you had seen 



120 STKAWBEERY HILL. 

her, maugre your passion for your Roman 
inamorata you are so deuced close about, 
you would have been all over Bath after 
her by this time, and boring me to death 
about her perfections." 

Horace Walpole laughed. He knew 
himself better. He, however, could not 
have entertained the most remote idea of 
who the wonderful beauty was. He felt 
convinced there was but one woman in the 
world who could have justified his cousin's 
observ^ation, and he would as soon have 
expected to meet the Pretender at Bath, as 
Arabella Falkland. Yet Arabella Falkland 
was in Bath, as we have said, and she it 
was who had just passed the mndow. 

" As respects this father of yours," ob- 
served Colonel Conway, as they both re- 
turned to their seats, " I don't think the 
case is so bad as you put it. You ought to 
know pretty well, by this time, that I have 
a way with me of always looking at the 
bright side of things ; and dark as you have 
made out your picture, my dear Horace, you 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 121 

may depend on 't, it may be made to look a 
wonderful deal brighter, when placed in a 
proper light." 

^ " What proper light can there be, Harry?" 
said the other, gloomily. " I am an alien 
from my father's heart and hearth — I am 
considered worthy of no more notice than 
that decent degree of respect that ought to 
be afforded to a distant connection of the 
family — in short, I am a younger son." 

" As the man said of his bhnd horse, that 
is more your misfortune than your fault, 
Horace. You are a younger son, it is true ; 
but for your consolation, and to shew you 
the bright side I Hke to look upon, I assure 
you that is an evil which is always lessening. 
You are now a younger son, but you know, 
my dear Horace, every year you are getting 
an older son." 

" You are as bad as Charley To-^mshend 
or George Selw}'n, Harry. Some people, 
when asked for bread, give a stone : you are 
quite as tantalizing, for when I ask for con- 
solation you offer a jest." 

VOL. II. G 



122 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

" Nothing can be more proper, be assured. 
Laugh at your troubles, my dear fellow. 
They are a kind of duns, that have never 
confidence to look you in the face, if you 
treat them in the spirit they deserve. But, 
joking apart, I think this Castle of Otranto 
of yours is more substantial than the cha- 
teaux en Espagne you are so fond of raising." 

" You think my father will be pleased 
with it?" 

" I don't know that. Sir Robert Walpole, 
I fancy, is not particularly partial to the 
Belles Lettres. There is, however, a vast 
deal of difference between a book produced 
by a stranger, who may take himself to the 
devil whenever he likes, for all we care — and 
one that proceeds either from oneself, one's 
nearest relation, or dearest friend. I doubt if 
Sir Robert could be brought to trouble him- 
self about the Castle of Otranto, or any other 
Castle, the owner of which did not possess 
influence in one House of Parliament, or 
^'otes in the other : but flesh and blood are 
all-powerful. When the Castle of Otranto 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 123 

is in everybody's hands, and its praise on 
everybody's lips — as I hope it will be — and 
he learns that his own son — a part of him- 
self, as it were — can lay claim to the notice 
and popularity it enjoys — I verily believe 
all the father will be so strongly stirred 
within him, that you will then scarcely 
escape the fate of that favourite child, who 
was huo^D^ed to death in the arms of its 
affectionate parent." 

" There 's no getting you to be serious 
for five minutes at a time, Harry. But 
pray tell me what you think of my father's 
position." 

" To tell you the truth, Horace, I think 
he never was so hard pressed. He has 
powerful enemies; and they hang on his 
flank and rear, and threaten both his wings, 
so that he must find no slisrht difficultv in 
getting along. The Prince, Bolingbroke, 
Wyndham, and Pulteney, menace him in 
different directions; for, however well some 
of them conceal their movements, it is clear 
enough to any shrewd observer, they only 

G 2 



124 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

wait an opportunity for a combined 
attack." 

" Do you think the result doubtful?" 
" I have too much confidence in your 
father's talents and resources to doubt the 
issue of a contest. But, my dear Horace, in 
the best arranged order of battle — in the 
finest series of manoeuvres, accidents will 
occur, which may mar everything. The 
probabihties are, that Sir Kobert will triumph 
as he has triumphed before; but when I 
refer to the state of things on the continent, 
and the strong Jacobite feeling which is gain- 
ing ground in this country, and w^ears a most 
menacing aspect in the northern parts of the 
kingdom, I will not conceal from you, my dear 
Horace, that there is reason for apprehension." 
" What have we most to fear, Harry? " 
" It is not easy to point out what is most 
to be feared. But the threatened invasion 
from France, or a rebellious rising in Eng- 
land, may throw so many difiiculties in the 
^linister's already Avell-beset path, that a 
spirited attack from his enemies might over- 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 125 

throw him, horse and foot. There is, how- 
ever, one vast advantage of which they can- 
not deprive him; this may enable hun to 
hold his fjround a lono; time." 

*' The King's favour, you mean, Harry?" 
"Exactly. The King, I know, is very 
much attached to him. I know, also, that 
he cultivates feelings of a very opposite ten- 
dency for the Prince, AY}mdham, Boling- 
broke, and Pulteney. The first he hates — 
the second he despises — the third he fears — 
and the fourth he doubts. Neither is Hkely 
to do the Minister much harm vrith the 
Kin^. The chief dano^er is in another direc- 
tion. The arts of his enemies have had a 
vast influence over public opinion : and unless 
his friends rally round him, and he displays 
consummate judgment, public opinion will, 
in the end, be too strong for both King and 
Minister." 

" I have had that impression some time, 
Harry. I feel that something must be done 
to stop the growing mischief. We must 
write pamphlets — we must publish essays — 



126 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

we must circulate political squibs. I will 
throAv myself into the thickest of the fight ; 
and if we do not conquer these fellows, 
Harry — if we are forced to retire, it shall 
not be my fault if my father cannot say, like 
Henry IV. after the battle of Pa via — ' All is 
lost, except our honour.' " 

The conversation between the cousins con- 
tinued a short time longer ; but all Colonel 
Conway's eiForts to find a bright side for liis 
afikirs, failed to have any satisfactory efi'ect 
upon our hero. Apparently the young sol- 
dier was one of the innumerable ephemeridas 
who live in the sunshine of the gay world. 
He laughed, he jested, he idled, he trifled 
his time away, as zealously as the emptiest 
of his contemporaries. But he was a good 
deal better than he seemed. 

Notwithstanding Henry Conway belonged 
to the constellation in which George Selw}m 
and Charley Townshend took their eccentric 
course, scattering their brilliant scintillations 
wherever they moved, he had qualities of a 
much more useful kind. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 127 

" I tell you Tvhat it is, my boy ! " he at 
last exclaimed, as he laughingly took up 
his cocked-hat to depart. " Your respected 
father has destmed you to be a statesman ; 
and, like a good boy, a statesman you intend 
to be : and, by Jove, I think it 's such a 
deuced good thing, I shouldn't wonder at all 
if, some of these odd days, I exchanged into 
the same regiment. It strikes me I have a 
prodigious talent in that way, though nobody 
ever perceived it ; but that of course arises 
from sheer blindness. You had better, then, 
make good use of your time, or I shall be a 
Minister before you." 

Both laughed heartily at the idea ; and 
as they parted, our hero, in the same mood, 
earnestly begged he might hope for his 
patronage. 



128 STRAWBERRY HILL. 



CHAPTER VI. 

A REBELLION UNMASKED. 

Horace Walpole, at the appointed hour, 
proceeded to the place of assignation. He 
was dissatisfied with the step he was taking. 
The purity and intensity of his attachment 
to Arabella Falkland, were evinced in his 
disinclination to commit himself in the 
manner he was doing with Lady Archibald 
Hamilton. Her Ladyship had latterly she"wn 
him many marks of her favour, and he could 
scarcely refrain from exhibiting towards her 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 129 

the customary gallantries: but, notwith- 
standing the Lady's preference was far 
from problematical, he had certainly carried 
on the intimacy with much less ardour than 
a man of gallantry was expected to evince 
in similar circumstances. 

At the court of George 11. morality could 
not be expected to be held in much estima- 
tion. His Majesty, with that hereditary 
folly so remarkable in his race, had, in his 
old age, taken to himself a German mistress 
— one of a like brood with those wretched 
harpies who made the reign of his father so 
contemptible. Her name was AYallmoden, 
but she had been ennobled with the title of 
Countess of Yarmouth. The example of 
his father was followed by his son — mth this 
difference, that the Prince's taste was rather 
English than Hanoverian. 

As it was well known that both the 
King and the Heir- Apparent kept mistresses, 
such high examples were not without due 
influence on the Court. Every great man 
found it necessary to have such an individual 

g3 



130 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

on his establishment. In wealthy noble- 
men's books of accounts, her salary found 
its place with that of the chaplain and apo- 
thecary, and other ordinary expenses. But 
the evil did not rest here. The general 
disrespect of the marriage vow caused a 
general laxity of morals — there was as little 
sense of propriety amongst ladies of quality, 
as principle amongst men of fashion. In- 
trigue appeared to form a part of the regular 
daily routine of both sexes, to such an ex- 
tent, that noblemen mixing in the gay 
world, much beyond the age that should 
have exempted them from such follies, 
thought it not beneath them to be reputed 
as hcentious as their sons and grandsons. 

This was the penalty we paid for accept- 
ing a foreign Prince for our ruler, who was 
tainted with the worst vices of the continent ; 
and it was not till this royal exotic had been 
thoroughly naturalized, after displaying its 
vices through three generations, that the 
nation could boast of an example of respect- 
ability filling the highest place in the State, 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 131 

in the person of its pure-minded and honest - 
hearted Sovereign, George III. 

The fulfihnent of the assignation which 
Horace Walpole had suiFered himself to 
enter into mth the mistress of the Prince of 
Wales, would have been thought in those 
vicious days quite a venial error: yet he 
could only reconcile himself to it by a good 
deal of sophistical justification, in which liis 
devotion to his father was more apparent 
than his sense of right. One thing at least 
was clear — if Lady Archibald fancied she 
had a lover in the son of the Minister, she 
was mistaken : he did not care a straw for 
her. 

A hundred years ago the streets of Bath 
were very ill lighted, and far from being 
very well paved. At night, here and there, 
at the houses of people of fashion, an oil 
lamp shed its feeble rays through the thick 
darkness. AYhen the o^vners sought their 
homes, it was usually in a sedan, attended 
by torch-bearers, who, on lighting the gentle- 
man to his door, extinguished their links in 



132 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

a sort of inverted iron funnel, to be found 
still retaining its time-honoured place on 
each side the doorway of houses of the last 
century. 

Of course there was no seeing the number 
of the door, or otherwise making out the 
proper house after dark, without the assist- 
ance of the link-boy. This useful personage 
made a moderate income by attending gentle- 
folks who remained at places of entertain- 
ment late at night, and had to return any 
distance to their own homes. Nor was it 
quite safe to venture through the gloomy 
streets without such attendants, as foot-pads 
often concealed themselves at comers, or 
under doorways, to rush upon the unwary 
passenger, 

Horace AValpole, however, required se- 
crecy, and dispensed mth a Hnk. He had 
visited the house often before, therefore had 
the less necessity for a guide; and as for 
danger, he had taken care to come provided 
to meet any one or more of such gentry as 
were likely to molest him. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 133 

It happened to be not only a very dark, 
but a very disagreeable night, and the tho- 
roughfare seemed almost entirely deserted. 
Nevertheless he reached the street in which 
the lady lived, without meeting with the 
slio:htest adventure. The house was souo^ht 
and gained with the same ease. As he came 
up to the door, he leaned against it, waiting 
for the signal which he was to answer before 
he was admitted. To his surprise he found 
it move on its hino^es. Imaoininof that some- 
thino: had caused a chano-e in the ladv's 
plans, he without hesitation quietly pushed 
open the door, closed it in the way he found 
it, and then, though the passage was quite 
dark, he resolved to find his way to Lady 
Archibald's boudoir^ with the position of 
which he was well acquainted. 

He gained the stair-case — he passed the 
first flio:ht — he entered the drawing-room — 
there were wax lights burning on a table ; 
but without paying any particular attention 
to the objects around him, he proceeded 
hastily in the direction of the ante-room. He 



134 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

was stopped by coming against a recess 
masked by curtains. This surprised him : 
but he was infinitely more surprised on 
making the discovery, which he immediately 
did, that he was not in Lady Hamilton's 
drawing-room. This he at once ascertained 
by the diiFerent manner in which the apart- 
ment he was in was furnished — and also by 
the diiFerent form of the rooms. 

For a gentleman to find himself towards 
midnight an intruder in a strange house, was 
not very agreeable; and to be discovered 
lurkino^ in one of its chambers at that un- 
timely hour, was something so derogatory 
that it was to be avoided at any risk. He 
would have retraced his steps with very little 
loss of time, but he heard footsteps ascending 
the stairs he had mounted, accompanied by 
the voices of one or more persons speaking 
in subdued tones. Involuntarily he glided 
behind the curtains, ^Yith the fervent hope 
that these most unwelcome people would 
merely pass through the room, and leave the 
coast clear for his escape. 



STRA^TBERRY HILL. 135 

He heard several persons enter, and his 
mortification may be imagined when he heard 
them all seat themselves. He felt his posi- 
tion getting worse and worse — indeed it was 
far from enviable. He was likely to be pre- 
vented from fulfilling his engagement, which 
in all probability would incense Lady Archi- 
bald. Every moment he ran the risk of being 
detected in his hiding-place. He could not 
at all reconcile himself to the idea of the son 
of Sir Robert Walpole being caught like a 
burglar, hid in a recess of a house into whicli 
he had never previously ventured ; then he 
cursed his folly for having by a mistake 
led him into so critical a position. But he 
saw his execrations were of no use. All 
that his error now allowed him to do, was to 
retrieve it. His only hope of escape lay in 
keeping himself quiet, and taking advantage 
of the first opportunity that should present 
itself of getting out of the room unobserved. 

He listened attentively, and could so dis- 
tinctly hear the voices of different persons 
who shortly commenced a conversation, that 



136 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

not a word escaped him. His astonishment 
may be imagined when he heard sentiments 
of the most treasonable character exjDressed, 
and designs in favour of the Pretender dis- 
cussed, which convinced him that he had 
undesignedly become an auditor of the pro- 
ceedings of a secret conclave of furious 
Jacobites. 

This made his case a thousand times 
worse than it was before. Were his hidins:- 
place discovered, his fate, he knew, would 
soon be decided. Xo man was more hated 
by the adherents of the exiled family than 
Sir Robert Walpole; and if they caught a son 
of so formidable an enemy playing the part 
of a spy, he could not expect any mercy at 
their hands. He might certainly have at- 
tempted to give an alarm ; but at that late 
hour, unaware of how many might be con- 
cealed in the house, he w^as perfectly cer- 
tain that the slightest attempt of the kind 
would insure his destruction. 

There was another most important con- 
sideration : as certain plains were being 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 137 

detailed, it became more and more evident to 
him that it was of the utmost consequence 
to his father he should be made acquainted 
mtli the whole, with the least possible loss of 
time. He felt the conviction, that whether 
he liked it or not, a spy he was forced to be ; 
and he hardly dared draw his breath, so 
painfully conscious was he of the very critical 
position in which he had placed himself. 

There were several persons ; and as more 
than one was addressed by some title of dis- 
tinction, he had no doubt some of the most 
distinguished of the Jacobites had assembled 
at Bath for the purpose of discussing the state 
of affairs, and takino^ such measures as miofht 
be most advisable in the present juncture. 
He heard one person addressed by a form em- 
ployed only towards Roman- Catholic priests ; 
and he felt assured from what transpired, 
that the holy father was an agent of the 
Pretender, sent to communicate his intentions 
to his adherents in Great Britain. 

The nature of the anticipated assistance 
from France was duly entered upon, and the 



138 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

involuntary spy was made acquainted with 
the vast promises of assistance to the Young 
Pretender which the Minister of King Louis 
had thought proper to make. Then came 
the names of noblemen and gentlemen in 
England, Wales and Scotland, who were to 
be relied upon, and the extent of the as- 
sistance each was expected to afford. The 
Minister's son was thunderstruck on hearing 
persons mentioned as most active in the 
cause of the Stuarts, whose zeal for the 
family of Brunsmck hitherto no one had 
been so hardy as to doubt; others were 
named, whose fidelity was thought to have 
been secured by the clemency shewn towards 
them for their participation in the rebellion 
of 1715. 

Our hero's excitement was becoming every 
minute more intense, when he heard a voice 
the tones of which thrilled through every 
nerve. At first he fancied it must be a de- 
lusion. It was a thing utterly incredible — 
improbable — impossible. Still he heard those 
melodious accents — he had never heard any- 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 139 

thing to resemble them before — it was a 
voice that he ought to be familiar ^vith. 

His feelings were getting too powerful to 
be controlled. In an agony of fear, doubt, 
and wonder, he gently drew back sufficient 
of the curtain to allow hun a glance at what 
was going forward. 

His worst apprehensions were realised. 
Round a table he saw seated, with various 
papers before them, a number of noblemen 
and gentlemen, some of whom he recognised. 
At one end of the table sat, in a clerical garb, 
the priest he had heard so often addressed 
by his associates ; at the other end, pale, and 
with a singularly painful expression in her 
fine features, sat Arabella Falkland. 

Horace Walpole, as he remarked the world- 
ly intriguing faces of such of the conspirators 
as were advanced in life, and compared them 
"vvith the clear, fair, youthful countenance of 
his idolized mistresss — the latter seemed to 
him like an angel of light among spirits of 
darkness. AATiat a contrast was there in 
that bright lofty brow, and some of the 



140 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

(lark care-worn, hard-featured physiognomies 
around her ! He could not however account 
for the peculiarly painful expression of her 
features : lighted as they were by enthusiasm, 
there was still a feeling as of pride struggling 
Avith despair, apparent in her countenance, 
that gave it an expression altogether foreign 
to its ordinary one. 

Was it that she believed herself embarked 
in a cause that could not succeed? or that 
she dreaded the bloodshed and misery the 
struggle must occasion, and, with true wo- 
manly sympathy, felt reluctant to have any- 
thino; to do with so hazardous a business? 
It never for a moment entered his mind that 
he could be the cause of her evident suffering; 
that she was engaged in a desperate conflict 
to conquer her feelings in his favour, since 
she had ascertained, as she believed, how un- 
worthy he was of her attachment. 

He could scarcely avoid testifying his ad- 
miration, on hearing the lucid and eloquent 
statements of the Pretender's affairs, she 
laid before the assembled Jacobites. She 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 141 

detailed the negociations of the French court 
with King James ( the Old Pretender) at Rome, 
explained the designs of Cardinal Fleury 
to replace the Stuart dynasty on the British 
throne, in conjunction with the Scottish 
Jacobites who had entered into an association 
to assist the exiles in the approaching strug- 
gle. The journey to Paris by Prince Charles 
was then described, and his exertions in 
France to advance his royal father's interest. 
And lastly she entered into the detail of 
the military and naval assistance Louis XY. 
proposed to afford his unfortunate kinsman, 
of which a military force, ten thousand strong, 
under the direction of that eminent com- 
mander Marshal Saxe, were to land in En- 
gland, simultaneously with the debarkation 
of another French force in Scotland. 

" Gentlemen ! " added the fair conspirator 
to her attentive auditors, " this is an affair 
of the most vital importance. There never 
was a cause which appealed more strongly 
to those sentiments of justice which pervade 
every honourable mind. It is the cause of 



142 STIIAWBERRY HILL. 

an amiable prince, who, without having com- 
mitted any fault, is de^^rived of his birthright ; 
and, in his proper position, beholds a foreigner 
who seems placed there only to disgrace it." 

'' I 've seen two of these Hanoverian cattle, 
and I trust I may never live to see a third," 
cried a stern old Jacobite, 

" These princes of Brunswick may be 
good enough in their o^vn country, though I 
am told they are scarcely sufficiently credit- 
able, even for Germany," continued Arabella 
Falkland; '^ but the people of England ought 
not to be satisfied with the indifferent ruler 
of a foreign state, when the legitimate de- 
scendants of their o^\^i distinguished race of 
princes are in existence. We have been too 
patient under the insult. We have sub- 
mitted much too quietly to our degradation. 
The Stuarts, for whom we shed so much 
invaluable blood in the time of the great 
struofo-le, we have allowed to be driven out 
of the country, and then surrendered our- 
selves tamely to the rule of an alien and an 
usurper. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 143 

" But the time has come when longer sub- 
mission to this degradation is impossible," 
she added : " as I have already explained to 
you, the powerful King of France has inte- 
rested himself greatly in behalf of our young 
Prince; and, with his Majesty's assistance, 
he will shortly be at the head of such a force 
as must render the recovery of his kingdom 
not only possible, but certain. But it is ab- 
solutely necessary that all who are true to 
the family, from whom many of you have 
derived your honours, and in a great mea- 
sure your wealth, should be ready to join 
with heart and hand in the plan for a simul- 
taneous rising." 

The conspirators listened with a good deal 
of attention to the fair orator. To such at- 
tention they knew her to be well entitled, as 
the daughter of the Pretender's trusty coun- 
sellor. Lord Falkland; but whether it was 
because they feared the existing Govern- 
ment, or experienced a lively remembrance 
of the ill result of the rebellion in 1715, they 
did not enter into the arrangements for tak- 



144 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

ing up a hostile attitude ; they were evidently 
in no hurry for committing themselves irre- 
trievably. 

" You see, the devil of it is, my dear 
Miss Falkland," said one, " that confounded 
fellow, Walpole, is so sharp-witted, he is 
sure to find us out directly we begin to 
move." 

" Ah ! he 's a shrewd fellow," observed 
another, " and I am told his son Horace is 
like to prove as deep as his father." 

" Tush, my Lords ! " exclaimed Arabella 
Falkland, impatiently, " What have we to 
fear from these Walpoles? The father is a 
time-server, who I think might easily be 
bought off, if we thought him worth the 
buying; and as for his son" — here her 
voice expressed a degree of bitterness it is 
impossible to describe — "no matter," she 
added, hurriedly — "he is not worthy our 
notice." 

These bitter words Horace Walpole heard 
in as much amazement as indignation. It 
seemed incredible that she should speak of 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 145 

him so disparagingly — she, who had once 
regarded hmi with sentiments of the warmest, 
of the deepest attachment — who had more 
than once expressed her conviction of his 
honour, and her admiration of his worth. 

What a change, he felt, must have taken 
place in the few short months since they 
had met ! How completely must her poli- 
tical predilections have perverted those feel- 
ings in his favour, to which he had so often 
looked back with the same freshness of en- 
j opnent they had originally created ! 

The painful sensations which this speech 
created, did not prevent his observing the 
extreme danger of her position. He felt 
she must be saved at any hazard. He per- 
ceived that the only way of insuring her 
safety was to disconnect her from the band 
of reckless Jacobites with whom, so unac- 
countably, she had got entangled. 

But how was this to be done? he asked 
himself. At present he was a prisoner. 
In a short time it was not improbable liis 
father, from some of his numerous sources 

VOL. II. B 



146 STEA^TBEERY HILL. 

of information, would learn the fact of this 
treasonable meeting, and the dangerous part 
which the daughter of Lord Falkland had 
thought proper to play in it. It could not 
be long after the receipt of this information, 
before she would find herself experiencing 
the discomforts of a narrow lodging in the 
Tower. 

Considerable time had now elapsed, and 
one or two of the least active spirits amongst 
the conspirators, overcome either with their 
late vigils, or with the wearying recital of 
the different plans and statements that had 
been laid before them, had, without any 
ceremony, folded their arms upon the table, 
laid their heads thereon, and resigned them- 
selves without any further struggle to the 
somnolency that had overpowered them. 

The thought entered the mind of our 
hero, to endeavour to make his escape from 
the room unobserved. He noticed that the 
faces of the sleepers would be towards him ; 
and that their less fatigued companions 
appeared so absorbed in their treasonable 



STRAAVBERRY HILL. 147 

debates, that it was not difficult to glide, 
from the recess in which he was, to the 
door, without attracting their observation. 

Still it was a movement attended with im- 
minent hazard. The shghtest noise on his 
part, or change of position on theirs, would 
betray him to their observation ; and then 
he was well aware his fate was sealed. 
Nevertheless, in the hope of being able to 
rescue the woman he had so devotedly loved, 
he determined to run the risk. 

The candles burnt dimly — the sleepers 
were in a heav}^ slumber — and those who 
were most awake riveted their attention on 
the fair being whose eloquence had already 
so greatly stirred their hearts. Horace 
Walpole glided noiselessly from his conceal- 
ment. He felt his heart beat with, unusual 
violence, but beyond that, he was sensible of 
no excitement. He had resolved to dare 
everything, and was in the mood to abide 
the issue. 

Arabella Falkland had been contrasting 
the princes of the House of Stuart with 

n L> 



148 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

those of the House of Hanover — she had 
deeply excited the sympathies of her hearers, 
by relating the sufferings, the indignities, 
and the humiliations of the royal exiles; 
and then created in their hearts quite as 
powerful an indignation, by reminding them 
of the unamiable traits and disagreeable 
cliaracteristics of their more fortunate rivals. 
She had worked herself into a state of un- 
usual excitement, and her words were be- 
coming every moment more dangerous. 

She next urged them to strike a blow for 
their true prince, which shoiild be as much 
to their honour as to his advantage : telling 
them they had nothing to fear from any of 
the agents of the usurper — least of all from 
their vindictive enemies the Walpoles, whom 
they would find no difficulty in crushing 
whenever either of them fell into their power. 

At that moment, whilst speaking under 
the influence of outraged feelings, she raised 
her head, and her gaze suddenly encountered 
that of the individual she was so bitterly 
stioTnatizinof. 



STRAWBERRY HELL. 149 

There are occasions when the feelinofs of 
a lonof life are concentrated in a sino-le 
moment, and Nature speaks out in spite of 
all petty obstructions. Although Arabella 
Falkland had that instant been speaking so 
contemptuously of her lover, her first im- 
pression was the danger of his position — her 
first wish, to insure his safety. 

She thought not, conspirator though she 
was, of the cause she had been so ably ad- 
vocating — of the lives and fortunes of her 
associates, put in peril by the intelligence 
of their plans he was carrying away. She 
thought only that the shghtest hesitation or 
faltering in her speech might excite attention 
towards him; and with a heart almost sufiPo- 
cated by the overwhelming pressure of its 
womanly emotions, by making a supernatural 
efibrt she proceeded with her discourse, 
apparently without a thought beyond it. 

At every word she uttered, her ear was 
following him — in an agony of apprehension 
— step by step : her sense of hearing at once 
became wonderfully acute — she knew he was 



150 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

Opening the door, though not the slightest 
sound was audible — she traced him down 
stairs with the same marvellous inspiration. 
But nature had been taxed too much — she 
faltered in her speech, her cheek became 
deadly pale, and as her lover quitted the 
house, she fell to the floor in a swoon. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 151 



CHAPTER VII. 

KILLING NO MLTIDER. 

In what a state was Horace Walpole when 
he reached his own lodgings ! Poor Fibbs 
stared at him in utter amazement. He had 
never before beheld him under such extra - 
ordinar}^ excitement. Sleepy as the tired 
valet was, his master's paUid countenance, his 
flashing eyes, his broken exclamations, his 
restless uneasy movements, not only made 
him thoroughly awake, but made him feel an 
anxiety for his health which no previous 
occasion had called forth. 



152 STKAWBERRY HILL. 

Fibbs was possessed of a good deal of 
natural shrewdness. He saw at a glance 
that something had occurred of an unusual 
nature. He was perfectly well aware of the 
assignation with Lady Archibald Hamilton, 
through the medium of his coquettish ac^ 
quaintance, her Ladyship's woman: and 
there could be no doubt in his OAvn mind, of 
his young master having been in some very 
unpleasant manner disturbed while engaged 
with the lady. 

From such premises he drew his own 
conclusions, with the kind of logic of which 
he had contrived to pick up a smattering at 
Cambridge, combined mth that he had 
learned in the more practical school, the 
Servants' Hall. It was evident there had 
been a duel ; and, as it was quite clear his 
master had not been killed, it was equally 
evident his antagonist had. 

But then came the question. Who was the 
antagonist ? It might have been the lady's 
husband. The travelled valet, however, 
was perfectly certain, that kilhng a lady's 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 153 

husband was such an every-day occurrence 
in gallantry, that it was not of sufficient 
importance to account for the extremely 
excited state in which he found his master. 
He had done something of a vast deal more 
consequence, there could not be a doubt. 
No young man of family and fortune would 
come home mth such a blanched cheek, and 
in such an unaccountable humour, after 
committino: such a mere bao^atelle. 

There was but one cause that could pro- 
duce such effects. Of course a valet of Mr. 
Fibbs's sagacity was well acquainted with the 
position in which Lady Archibald stood with 
the Prince of Wales. He was as satisfied as 
he was of his own existence, that it was the 
Prince who had disturbed their tete-a-tete — 
and ergo^ he added, it was quite plain his 
master had killed his Royal Highness. 

Having come to that conclusion, every- 
thing appeared rational and proper. To run 
an Heir Apparent through the body, Mr. Fibbs 
acknowledged to himself, was rather a serious 
business, and he wondered no longer at the 

h3 



154 STRAAVBERRY HILL. 

verv serious manner in which a son of the 
King's Minister regarded it. He, however, 
took very little time to consider what he 
should do. He resolved to stand by his 
master, though he had killed fifty princes ; 
and serious business though it were, he could 
not help regarding it as considerably increas- 
ing his consequence. He argued very logi- 
cally, that it was not every valet who had a 
master who would venture to kill a King's 
son. 

Nothing was further from the troubled 
thoughts of the Minister's son at that mo- 
ment, than either Lady Archibald or Prince 
Frederick — indeed he had quite as completely 
forgotten them, as if they had never existed. 
His mind was a perfect chaos. All was 
confusion, dismay, and bewilderment. He 
thought over the adventure in which he had 
been engaged; and the more he thought of 
it, the more troubled became his ideas. 

Then came the most marvellous part ol" 
this strange business. If her heart had been 
so completely hostile as was apparent from 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 155 

her discourse, when she recognised him in 
the room standing ^\ithin a few yards of her 
— as he was confident she did recognise him 
— why was it that she assisted so materially 
in his escape? A word — a look — a start 
from her, and in a few seconds he would 
have been a corpse at her feet. 

He paced his chamber ^ith uneasy strides. 
He was restless, feverish, and wretched, to a 
degree he had never before experienced. 
The separation from her had been a dreadful 
necessity, but that did not lower him m her 
estimation. To hear her speak of him vnih 
contempt, he had not been prepared ; and he 
could not satisfy himself there was either 
necessity or justice in it. 

Throuofhout all this feelino' for himself, 
his troubled mind was haunted by an im- 
pression of her danger, and the necessity 
there was for his taking prompt measures 
for putting her on her guard, or detacliing 
her from her reckless associates; but he 
asked himself the question — ^M^iat could he 
do ? At that hour all interference was out of 



156 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

the question — and at a time more seasonable 
the difficulty still presented itself, of not 
knowing whether she would submit to such 
interference — with that of not being able to 
do anything against her companions, without 
running the risk of compromising her. In 
every way the affair was extremely per- 
plexing. 

In these uneasy reflections time passed on. 
He had never attempted to go to bed — nor, 
still more singular, had his valet given him 
the slightest intimation that he was ex- 
pected to do so. In short, he had been left 
completely to himself. At last he seemed 
suddenly awakened to a consciousness that 
pacing up and doA\Ti a room was not the best 
way of meeting the difficulty in which he 
found himself. 

He looked for the trusty Fibbs. Great was 
his astonishment to find him apparently 
straining every nerve to pack up all the 
things he had brought to Bath, with as much 
celerity as silence. He stared with wonder : 
and well he might. Fibbs was absorbed in 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 157 

his occupation — he seemed to feel that 
unusual responsibihty rested on his shoulders, 
and that he would shew himself equal to the 
emergency. If the fate of a nation had de- 
pended on his quickness in packing, he could 
not have exhibited greater despatch. 

" Fibbs ! " he cried, after observing him 
some time in silence. 

"Yes, your Honour," replied the other; and 
then with a face full of mystery, not un- 
mingled with a due share of importance, he left 
his work, and approached his master, in the 
fullest conviction that the latter had at last 
determined to communicate to him his mis- 
adventure. 

" I shall soon have everything ready, your 
Honour," observed he, in a whisper intended 
to be extremely confidential; "and in mat- 
ters of this kind, your Honour may beheve me, 
it is of the first importance to have a good 
start, when we are reduced to such a dernier 
ressort^ as we said in France." 

"AMiat in the world are you thinking 
about?" cried his young master, in fast- 



158 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

increasing amazement, as he more closely 
regarded his servant's proceedings. 

" Be under no alarm," whispered the 
travelled valet ; " accidents, you know, will 
happen, in the best regulated families; but 
at any rate we are not going to run away 
for a trifle. Eespice Jinem^ your Honour, as 
we said at Eton." 

" We I who told you we were going to run 
away at all. Sirrah? " 

'' Oh, not exactly run away. We are 
merely going to retire — an honourable re- 
treat, your Honour — nothing more. Dum 
vivimus vivamus^ as we said at Cambridge." 

" Zounds, fellow, what d' ye mean ? If 
you choose to retire, retire and welcome — 
you may make your retreat as soon as you 
like, and as honourably as you can. But 1 
am neither going to retire nor retreat, I 
promise you ; so just be so good as to let my 
things remain where they are." 

" Xot going, your Honour ! " exclaimed Mr. 
Fibbs, in unaffected amazement. " Cede mag- 
nis^ as we said at Eton. But, beg pardon. 



STRA\YBERRY HILL. 159 

your Honour — may I ask, — are you aware of 
the consequences you incur by remaining?" 

The Minister's son opened his eyes to their 
fullest extent at this query. He was not 
prepared for an answer, simply because he 
was puzzled to account for such a question. 
His first thought was, that his servant had 
been making too merry amongst his friends 
below stairs; but a scrutinizing glance as- 
sured liim the young man was perfectly sober. 
His next thought was, that his intellects 
had become affected ; but another penetrating 
glance assured him that he was as sane as 
himself. 

" In the name of heaven ! " he impatiently 
cried, at last, " what is the meaning of this 
nonsense? What consequences have I to 
fear?" 

" Perhaps, after all, the Prince is only 
wounded, your Honour," observed Mr. Fibbs, 
" that is quite une autre affaire^ as we said in 
France. Still, allow me to say, your Honour, 
inflicting a wound on the Heir Apparent, I am 
afraid, is regarded in the light of an offence. 



160 STRAWBEERY HILL. 

the penalty of which is rather heavy, and 
cannot be escaped. Judex damnatur cum 
nocens ahsolvitur^ as we said at Cambridge." 

Horace AValpole began to have a glimpse 
at the idea so mysteriously presented to him. 
At any other time he would have laughed 
heartily at such a misconception; but his 
mind was heavy — he had too many and too 
serious troubles, to allow his indul"fin2^ in 
mirth. He, however, quickly undeceived 
his companion ; and vast was the disappoint- 
ment of Mr. Fibbs, at discovering that his 
master had not fought with Prince Frederick 
— no, had not even committed so trifling an 
offence as killing the husband of the lady he 
had been to visit. 

It is impossible to say how far this sur- 
prise might have gone to disgust the travelled 
valet with serving a gentleman of gallantry, 
who fouo'ht neither the husbands of the ladies 
with whom he had assignations, nor their 
princely protectors, — had not our hero very 
udiciously made him acquainted with so 
much of what had occurred as was necessary 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 161 

to secure his services. Fibbs listened with 
great interest; and when he became aware 
that the adventure in which his young master 
had been engaged was a very unusual one, 
and learned that the heroine of it was the 
noble beauty at Rome, of whom he had so 
often thought since the, to him, unaccountable 
termination of that intimacy, he seemed in 
some measure to grow reconciled to his dis- 
appointment ; and was quite as eager to go 
in search of Miss Falkland, as soon as he 
could commence his inquiries, as he had 
been to hurry his departure from Bath, di- 
rectly he became satisfied his master had ven- 
tured to run a King's son through the body. 
After arranojinc: Avith his valet what was 
to be done, and giving directions to be called 
early, our hero sought his bed for a few hours' 
repose. His sleep was troubled and broken 
— full of confused images and unnatural 
combinations — now affecting the life of Ara- 
bella Falkland, and now that of his father ; 
and then, in some unaccountable way, involv- 
ing both. 



162 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

Almost immediately on his waking in the 
morning, the follomng letter was placed in 
his hands: 

^' I ^^^ite to you under the impression that, 
although you are so far lost to all sense of 
honour as to play the spy, you may be acces- 
sible to arguments that should prevent you 
from playing the informer. The lives of 
many honourable gentlemen are in your 
hands ; and, when I allowed you to escape 
what they would have deemed the just reward 
of your treachery, I felt an assurance that 
you would, under such circumstances, refrain 
from betraying them. 

" I trust I have not been deceived in this, 
as completely as I have been in my estimate 
of your character. The esteem I had for 
you could never have suffered diminution, 
had I not ascertained that you were the 
paramour of Lady Archibald Hamilton. The 
degradation I felt in hearing this publicly 
stated, became a thousand-fold more humili- 
ating when I heard you make such an ac- 
knowledgment of your intimacy with that 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 163 

bad woman, as corroborated the confident 
statements of your friends. 

'^ Adieu, Sir. Perhaps I was wrong in 
placing so much confidence in a Walpole; 
but it is a wrong of which I have since deeply 
repented. Before you receive this, I shall 
have left Bath — but not without insuring 
the safety of those high-minded friends in 
whose company you found me. 

" Thank heaven there is no probability of 
our meeting again! If that misfortune 
should occur, be assured that the daughter 
of Lord Falkland will know how to treat 
the man who has dishonoured her pre- 
ference." 

The murder was out. Horace Walpole 
saw that he had been ruined in the opinion 
of the proud and pure-minded Arabella 
Falkland by the slanderous gossip of some 
empty-headed fools of fashion. He recalled 
the words he had uttered respecting his 
acquaintance mth Lady Archibald, and 
wished his babbling tongue unending punish- 
ment. 



1G4 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

He was not the man to sit down tamely to 
digest such a letter as that he had just read. 
He was soon actively engaged in pursuing 
inquiries after the writer. He could not 
rest a moment without making every possible 
effort to undeceive her. His pride might 
be wounded by this summary way of 
dealing with him; he had been too hastily 
condemned — too sharply dealt with : but he 
felt that wounded pride should not prevent 
him from endeavouring to justify himself to 
such a woman as Arabella Falkland. 

His own exertions were unremitting; and 
he was well seconded by his active emissary, 
who seemed quite in his element in a business 
requiring so much delicacy and tact: but 
thouijh he succeeded in findino; the house in 
which he had met ^vith the adventure of the 
preceding night, which he ascertained to be 
the next to the one he had intended to enter, 
he could learn no intelligence whatever of the 
lady of whom he was in search. Her com- 
panions, as he had been informed, had left 
Bath — most probably in consequence of some 



STEAWT3ERRY HILL. 165 

alarming intimation from her — but to her 
movements there was not the sHghtest clue ; 
and at last both master and man were obliged 
to abandon the inquiry in despair. 



166 STRAWBEERY HILL. 



CHAPTER VIII. 



THE PRINCE OF WALES'S PARTY. 



Among the company at Bath, we have 
ah^eady mentioned his Royal Highness the 
Prince of Wales; but with the Prince at 
this eventful period there happened to be an 
unusual number of his Royal Highness's 
])olitical partizans. It was singular that the 
very place appointed for a rendezvous of the 
'lacobites, should have been selected for a 
rendezvous of the Tories ; yet so it was, and, 
to make the matter more strange, at the 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 167 

identical time chosen by the partizans of the 
Pretender for discussing their plans for 
driving the King out of his dominions, my 
Lord BoHn^broke had selected for callino: a 
meeting of the opponents of the King's 
government, for the purpose of getting rid 
of the King's Mnister. 

The Philosopher of Battersea had left the 
cultivation of his paternal fields, to devote 
his noble mind to the more congenial pursuit 
of political intrigue ; and never did the genius 
of discord appear to smile more kindly upon 
his labours, than when he joined the congress 
of discontented spirits he had collected to- 
gether at this fashionable Spa, for the grand 
object of ruining his hated school-fellow. 

They had assembled by agreement on the 
evening following that which had been so 
eventful to our hero, in one of the drawing- 
rooms of the house that had been taken by 
Lady Archibald Hamilton. It was prettily 
fitted up — though not in style equal to any 
modern-furnished house of the best descrip- 
tion, now standing in that gay city of nasty 



168 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

potations. There was a due allowance of 
chairs and tables, heavy draperies at the 
Avindows, and ugly carpets on the floors, a 
chimney glass in a clumsy gilt frame, with 
projecting branches which held w^ax candles, 
and a few uncouth ornaments in Chelsea 
china on the shelf that supported it. There 
was also among the features of the room, a 
china closet, with a glass door half covered 
with a curtain, which prevented the spectator 
from observing that one of the small panes 
had been taken out. 

We must not wait to describe more par- 
ticularly the furniture of this a23artment: 
sufficient has been said to convey an idea of 
the scene. AVe must now say something of 
the actors in it. We begin with the person 
of greatest consequence — or rather of greatest 
rank. It was a remarkable coincidence, that 
Prince Frederick was scarcely ever seen in 
an evening at any house where he might 
consider himself at home, ^vithout a pack of 
cards in his hand. This was the case at the 
present moment ; and although he was so en- 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 169 

gaged in conversation, as to render any regu- 
lar game impossible, he shewed how wedded he 
was to his favourite source of amusement, by 
tilling up the pauses of the conversation, 
taking advantage of every momentary break, 
by cutting for the highest card against Lady 
Archibald, Bubb Doddington, or any of his 
Boyal Highness's especial favourites, who 
chose to risk a certain stake; and it was 
evident by the animation that lit up his 
rather inanimate royal countenance, that he 
felt a vast deal more interest in thus test- 
ing his luck, than in the important affairs 
that were being debated by the clever or 
ambitious politicians around him. 

Prominent amongst these, stood the hand- 
some and clever Bolingbroke. His Lordship 
appeared to have become quite as much a 
courtier as he had previously been a philo- 
sopher. He looked as obsequious as the 
supple aspirant for a peerage, who stood at 
his elbow; and the shadow that had often 
made his noble physiognomy so gloomy, was 
rapidly disappearing before the smiles of 

VOL. II. I 



170 STKAWBERRY HILL. 

complacency and anticipated triumph, which 
now made his aspect so expressive. 

To observe his Lordship elucidating in 
that courtly atmosphere his ideas of govern- 
ment, propounding axioms of political wis- 
dom, and giving forth apophthegms of tran- 
scendental statesmanship, whilst engaged in 
a sentimental flirtation with Lady Archibald 
Hamilton on one side of him, and an occa- 
sional experiment on the chances of the 
cards with the Prince of Wales on the other, 
was enough to cause the spectator to inquire 
what extraordinary change had come over 
the dream of the noble philosopher, and 
where had flown all those disgusts of the 
world, all those determinations for a life of 
solitude and abstraction, which he had thrice 
at least so loudly avowed. 

There was an individual close to his Lord- 
ship, to whom he paid as much court as he 
did either to the Prince or the Prince's 
Mistress. If we had not been in the secret 
of the visit of that philosophic statesman we 
have just been noticing, at the levee of his 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 171 

Grace of Newcastle, we might have expe- 
rienced a great deal of astonishment at be- 
holding the Duke, whose vis-a-vis in his 
cabinet declared his Grace so completely the 
servant of the King, leagued ^\ith the leaders 
of the Opposition in an attempt to remove 
the King's favourite Minister. But in the 
hands of such a man as Bolingbroke, the 
empty, pompous Duke of Newcastle proved 
a most ready tool ; for his Grace was a man 
possessed of that looseness of principle and 
shallowness of understanding, which so deep 
and able a schemer as St. John was sure of 
turnino^ to his advantaofe. 

There his Grace stood, his face full of that 
inexpressive gravity which it invariably wore 
on occasions of more than ordinary import- 
ance. He had entertained some intention 
of embarkinc: in the same boat with a set of 
men to whom he had long been opposed; 
and only the prospect this afforded him of 
getting rid of the man he had the presump- 
tion to consider his inferior, and elevating 
himself to the lofty pedestal he would leave 

i2 



172 STRAAYBERIIY HILL. 

vacant, could reconcile him to such co- 
adjutors. 

By the side of his Grace, the patriotic 
Pulteney took his share in the political de- 
bate that was going forsvard, in a manner 
not quite satisfied with the subordinate 
part it seemed expected he should play. 
Possibly he thought Bolingbroke was making 
himself a little too prominent. Pulteney 
had been too active as a political leader 
opposed to Sir Robert Walpole, to rest con- 
tent with an inferior position ; and, patriot as 
he pretended to be, he had his ambition to 
gratify by the downfall of the obnoxious 
Minister, quite as much as either of the 
noblemen just named. 

The next one in the privileged group we 
feel bound to notice, is Sir William Wynd- 
ham, — perhaps the wisest and best man 
amongst them. His hostility to Sir Robert 
Walpole must have been great indeed, if it 
made him blind to the unworthiness of the 
tools with which he found himself obliged to 
work, in his efforts to remove him from the 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 173 

government. But in politics, it is not as in 
other things : an honourable mind once plunged 
in the waters of faction, becomes invulnerable 
to all honourable feelings — even in the heel. 
A sense of shame, a susceptibility to natural 
impressions, cannot be expected under such 
circumstances, even in a Wyndham; or he 
would never be seen stooping to alliances, 
and countenancing sentiments and conduct, 
which under other circumstances he could 
not avoid considering disgraceful. This in- 
sensibility is a barbarous characteristic. It 
appears as though Politics stalked along like 
the savage with his club; and stunned its 
victim, with a view to render him at first a 
more easy prisoner, and then a more tranquil 
drudge. 

There were a few others belonging to the. 
same confederacy, in the ajoartment — influen- 
tial members of the Lower House, and some 
few individuals belonf]^inor to the House of 
Peers. Conspicuous among the former, was 
a young man whose features did not exactly 
satisfy the idea of manly beauty, neverthe- 



17-4 STILUVBEKRY HILL. 

less they bore a singular expression of in- 
tellijrence: the teemino; brow neutralized 
the vulgar nose — the brilliant eyes made 
amends for the inexpressive mouth. This 
was a young member of great promise, then 
but little known in society, but who, a few 
years subsequently, filled the civilized world 
with his fame — he was William Pitt, the first 
Earl of Chatham. 

By him was another celebrated legislator 
— a name which carried a vast deal of weight 
with it, in the same manner as such light 
things as balloons require a great deal of 
ballast, to enable them to gain a proper ele- 
vation by disposing of it. This was Henry 
Pelham, the brother of the Duke of New- 
castle, a man adjudged to possess some at- 
tainments — they might be thought consider- 
able, when compared with those of his 
brother. There was something resembling 
cleverness about him, but it was estimated 
at a very extravagant rate, simply because 
it came from the Pelhams. To find a crab 
bearing golden pippins, was not thought 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 175 

more extraordinary, than to discover a 
brother of his shuffling, scrambling Grace of 
Newcastle a person of respectable — of even 
ordinary attainments. 

Like Bolingbroke, Henry Pelham cared 
only for the people with whom he was con- 
necting himself, as long as they could be 
stepping-stones to his ambition : he used them 
to carry him on in his career ; he cared not 
if any sudden flood swept them away as soon 
as he had passed. He, however, let it be at 
once admitted, possessed little of that pomp- 
ous self-sufficiency that made his brother so 
ridiculous — he was merely ambitious to rise, 
and make the most of his family interests, 
to secure such elevation as would content 
him. 

It was obvious from the tenor of the con- 
versation that was going on with the Prince's 
card-cutting accompaniment, that certain 
measures had been resolved upon relating to 
the obnoxious Minister. Thev were about 
to attack him boldly in the House of Com- 
mons; and on reviewing their forces, they 



176 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

felt tliemselves in a condition to do so with 
the most sanguine anticipations of success. 

Bolingbroke, in his most seductive man- 
ner, enumerated the votes they had secured. 
His exposition proved, that many who had 
been wavering had seceded to tlie party of 
the Heir Apparent — while many who had 
long favoured the ]\Iinister had now aban- 
doned him, to make friends of persons they 
fondly imagined more inclined to favour 
their particular interests. 

The names of Sandys, AVortley Montagu, 
Lord Limerick, Bootle, Fazakerly, and a 
great many more, amongst whom were 
various distinguished members of the Upper 
House, were confidently spoken of as indi- 
viduals whose co-operation had been secured. 
Li short it was very plain, according to his 
Lordship's plausible statements, that the days 
of the Minister were numbered. 

Mixed mth the confident assertions and 
grandiloquent expressions which were escap- 
ing from the well satisfied plotters, there 
was no slight amount of personal animosity. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 177 

But in this, it was curious to notice, the 
Pelhams did not share. 

It would not have suited them, just then, 
o^^enly to take part against Sir Kobert 
Walpole. It was the object of the more 
clear-sighted younger brother, to learn tho 
designs of the ^Minister's enemies, that they 
might be able to take advantage of them 
whenever they chose: they held too great 
a stake to risk it rashly — the Duke being 
a Member of the Cabinet, and his brother 
Paymaster of the Forces. 

^' Walpole wiM be driven to his wits' end," 
said Lord Bolingbroke; '' and yet I fancy he 
vdll do anything rather than resign the 
supremacy he has held for so long a time. 
Power, if it be hard to gain, is equally hard 
to part with. In my Lady Hamilton's case, 
now," added his Lordship, very gallantly 
turning to his fair companion, " it would be 
a monstrous difficulty — not to say a word of 
its monstrous hardship — to part her Ladyship 
from the influence that naturally belongs to 
her attractions. Beauty and merit are as 

I 3 



178 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

inseparable from her, as the power she ex- 
ercises over our hearts." 

" A thousand thanks, my Lord ! " replied 
Lady Archibald, laughingly. " It is mighty 
civil of you to say this, and of course affords 
me wondrous satisfaction : but the most 
satisfactory part of it, after all, I 'm think- 
ing, is the knowledge your Lordship has 
been so good as to afford me of the dura- 
tion of my charms." 

" Why, yes — that cannot help being pleas- 
ing, Archy," said the Prince to her. '' I 
should think my Lord Hamilton must like 
such an idea mightily. Cut, Bubby ! Knave 
to my ace ! Ace, of course, counts for highest. 
Mine, Bubby ! " 

" But surely your Royal Highness cannot 
have forgotten," interposed Bubb Dodding- 
ton, "the assertion made by your Eoyal 
Highness scarcely a minute since, that the 
ace only counted for one in cutting." 

" Nonsense, Bubby !" replied the Prince, 
sharply, " the ace is the highest card of its 
suit, of course." 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 179 

The aspirant for a peerage knew better 
than to contradict the Heir Apparent; yet 
he was but too well aware that, only a few 
minutes before, he had lost a tolerable suni, 
by the Prince insisting that the ace, in 
cutting, never numbered more than one. 

" This measure will quite confound Wal- 
pole," said Pulteney, in a confident tone. "We 
shall come upon him so by surprise, and so 
overwhelming will be our attack, that it is 
scarcely possible he should escape. It ^yl\l 
be some satisfation to knoAv that our patriotic 
exertions have at last been attended vnth 
success. We have done much to rescue the 
country from the desperate state of bondage 
under which it has groaned for the score of 
years this reckless and unprincipled man 
has had influence in the Iving's councils, and 
it will be among the greatest of human gra- 
tifications to remember what stamich patriots 
we have been." 

" Faith, Pulteney, we have all been 
staunch patriots," observed the Prince, "and 
a mighty good thing it is to be a patriot. 



180 STRAAYBERRY HILL. 

Cut, Bubby — Ace to my King ! Mine again, 
Bubby ! " 

" Your Royal Highness forgets what you 
just now stated," exclaimed his amazed 
companion, as he noticed the Prince sweep 
up the stakes. " I thought your Royal 
Highness just now declared the ace to be 
the hio^hest of the suit ? " 

" Don't be a fool, now, Bubby," replied 
Prince Frederick, coolly; " Of course the ace 
counts but for one, as having but one pip on 
the card." 

The peer-expectant looked rather blank at 
this announcement. It was tolerably pro- 
voking that the value of the card should 
shift so — should be of no value whilst in his 
hands, and beat everything when in the 
hands of his opponent; but he felt it was 
not for an apothecary's son to argue with a 
king's heir; and taking such a freedom 
might damage his hopes of nobility. He 
thought it best to submit to so one-sided an 
arrangement; yet his remembrance of the 
very many trials of the kind he had under- 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 181 

gone, gave liim the idea that he was likely 
to buy his barony at a ducal price. 

" I often reflect on the vast advantages 
that are in the hands of the statesman," 
said Lord Bolingbroke, in his oracular way ; 
" no man can possess more responsibility — 
no man can effect more harm or good. He 
is amono; men, as is the diamond amon<2r 
jewels — the more gloomy his position, the 
more he is made to shine in it. Even Lady 
Archibald, brilliant as she is, would be 
obliged to give way to the great statesman ; 
she only takes our hearts, but he runs away 
with our understandings ; and, when he pos- 
sesses suflicient audacity to direct his power, 
he controls our bodies." 

" Your Lordship's compliments are worthy 
of your Lordship's reputation," said Lady 
Archibald ; " Gallantry mingles so prettily 
with your politics, as to render the combina- 
tion a mighty elegant material to be applied 
to ordinary social purposes. Your Lord- 
ship should have lived under the reign of a. 
Queen — when you would have been sure at 



182 STRAWBERIIY HILL. 

least of tlie royal ear. If Maria Theresa 
would have you, there would be no fear of 
your statesmanship being sufficiently appre- 
ciated." 

Bolingbroke gallantly replied Avith a com- 
parison between the Empress of Austria and 
the lady who had just addressed him — of 
course very much in favour of her ladyship 
— and in this he contrived to bring in an 
equally ingenious compliment to the Prince 
Lady Archibald had subjugated. This led 
to his Hoyal Highness taking off his attention 
from his important employment with Bubb 
Doddington, to make a proper acknowledg- 
ment of his Lordship's flattery. 

The speech was not more felicitous than 
were his Royal Highness's observations in 
general ; and, agreeable as must have been 
the cause of it, the pleasure it affi^rded was 
not powerful enough to detain him a minute 
l)eyond the time absolutely necessary to ex- 
press his ideas, from the princely occupation 
to which he gave so much of his time. 

Poor Bubb Doddington had substantial 



STKAWBERRY HILL. 183 

reasons for hoping that the mtermption was 
a lasting one. It was inexplicable to him, 
that whenever he had the honour of playing 
with the Heir Apparent at any game of 
chance, he should have to pay for it so 
dearly. To play at cards with a prince, he 
was quite conscious, was, for him, a very 
rare distinction indeed : but to find it inva- 
riably lead to an empty purse, was, to say 
the least of it, a little unsatisfactory. 

Such were his reflections ; but the " Now, 
Bubby ! " from his illustrious opponent, soon 
dispersed them. He resumed the interesting 
amusement with the readiness of a courtier 
and the patience of a martyr; and took it 
quite as a matter of course when he disco- 
vered he had cut the lowest card in the 
pack. 

The politicians were not long in " harking 
back" to the subject that engrossed their 
thoughts, and a vast deal of abuse of Walpole 
came out, with the whole detail of their 2:>lan 
of attack. Some of them chose to lauo-h a 

o 

good deal at the cleverness ^nth which thev 



184 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

had contrived to keep their object in assem- 
bUng at Bath a secret from the Minister. 
They were all quite sure he had not the 
most remote idea that anything more than 
usual was in progress. They were confident 
he believed himself as secure in his position, 
as the earth in its place, and did not so much 
as dream of being disturbed. Indeed, one 
or two who were on intimate terms with him 
professed to know, that the state of his 
health, which had induced him to seek the 
Bath waters, was so critical, as to have made 
it necessary he should refrain from business 
of any kind. 

The Duke of Newcastle and his brother 
did not, it is true, join in any of these 
animadversions upon their distinguished 
coadjutor. The former, perhaps, was a de- 
gree more owl-like in the gravity of his 
physiognomy than at any other period of 
the debate ; but it was well understood, that 
whatever their opinions on the subject were, 
they were present as the Prince's friends, 
rather than his partizans. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 185 

Lady Archibald, also, was less severe than 
her guests. Perhaps she was too much 
engaged, either in attending on the Prince, 
or to the covert gallantry of Lord Boling- 
broke, to join in the discussion respecting 
the transgressions of the obnoxious Minister. 
But though she said little about him, she 
seemed extremely anxious to elicit the 
opinions of every one around her, and 
induced, with the exception of the Pelhams, 
the most reserved of the company to declare 
their hostility. 

In this way she contrived, as if for the 
Prince's exclusive satisfaction, to make Pul- 
teney and Bohngbroke, as well as the less 
influential of his Royal Highness's friends, say 
a great deal more than they might have 
thought was absolutely necessary; so that 
when the party broke up, nothing had been 
left unsaid that was essential to a complete 
knowledge of this secret plot against the 
Minister, in all its ramifications. 

The Prince's Mistress had heard the door 
close upon the last of her guests, when she 



186 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

hastened with a quick step, and a face radiant 
with smiles, to the china-closet. She threw 
open the door with a sharp, merry laugh, 
that appeared to find an immediate echo 
from within the closet. The next moment, 
the figure of a man appeared before her. It 
was Sir Robert Walpole. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 18' 



CHAPTER IX. 

THE CASTLE OF OTRANTO. 

Lady Furbelow was one of those curious 
specimens of female humanity, that puzzle 
the best skilled in classification. As Falstaff 
said of Mistress Quickly, she was " neither 
fish, nor flesh, nor good red-herring." She 
was neither one thing nor the other, but a 
kind of jumble of all. 

She was generally considered to be as 
obstinate a Jacobite as other members of her 
family, most of whom had found it neces- 



188 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

sary to leave the country; and one, Lord 
Falkland, was kno^vn to be in the service of 
the Pretender; yet she prided herself on 
always being able to secure one member, at 
least, of the House of Hanover, to grace her 
assemblies. 

She professed to be a zealous Tory, yet 
Sir Robert Walpole was one of her most 
intimate friends ; she warmly espoused the 
cause of Prince Frederick in his quarrel 
with his father, yet never failed to present 
herself at St. James's on state occasions, and 
associate A\ith those whom his Poyal High- 
ness regarded with the bitterest animosity ; 
she affected a vast contempt for the frivoli- 
ties of fashion, yet was no lady in the land 
more eager in obtaining her pleasure from 
such sources. 

Lady Furbelow was, in short, a perpetual 
contradiction — apparently stern and selfish, 
yet often doing the kindest actions — sharp 
and abrupt in her speech, yet continually 
betraying extreme considerateness for the 
claims of others — very often seeming ab- 



STII.VWBEIIRY HILL. 189 

sorbecl in the most wortUess pursuits, yet 
ever having some great object in view. It 
^\dll not be thought very surprising, there- 
fore, that she continued to be as much mis- 
understood, misjudged, and misquoted, as 
ever was any poor lady in this land. 

Nevertheless, it was extraordinary to 
notice how generally her company was 
sought. Persons of all shades of political 
opinion met at her house, as at a kind of 
neutral ground, where they knew themselves 
to be perfectly safe. There might be seen, 
almost side by side, the furious Jacobite, the 
reckless Tory, the patriotic ^Yhlg — High 
Churchmen and Low Churchmen — Catholic 
Priests and Methodist converts — the un- 
popular minister beside the pamphleteer 
who had so lavishly abused him — and the 
author of the last volume of poems, in close 
contact with the ^Titer of its bitterest re- 
view. 

In short, Lady Furbelow's parties formed 
a sort of social punch, where the extreme 
sweetness of one set of people neutralized 



190 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

the acidity of another, and the weakness of 
some qualified the excessive spirit of the 
rest — the combination of such opposite qua- 
lities forming a result of a very agreeable 
description. 

Xo person was more talked of than Lady 
Furbelow. There was scarcely a thing she 
did, or a thing she said, that was not sure 
of being discussed all over what was de- 
signated as '' the town," for the next four- 
and-twenty hours after it had transpired. 
We believe this was because her doings and 
sayings were always said and done in a 
manner so very different from those of other 
people. She was pronounced "an original;" 
and all her eccentricities obtained as much 
attention, as though they were ihe distin- 
guishing traits of an animal of an entirely 
new species. People thronged to her door 
in their carriages and chairs, whenever she 
threw her house open for their accommoda- 
tion, till the street was blocked up with 
their several equipages. 

One evening, soon after the fashionable 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 191 

world had taken its annual mioTation from 
Bath to To^vn, there seemed to be a greater 
mob of vehicles proceeding towards Lady 
Furbelow's door than had been seen in the 
memory of the oldest link-boy. Indeed, 
there was as much noise and confusion ffoinor 
on, as distinguished the most crowded state 
entertainment at the palace. Gentlemen 
swore, ladies screamed, watchmen bawled, 
constables shouted — coachmen and chairmen, 
footmen and link-boys, addressed one another 
in their most emphatic rhetoric, as the gaily 
dressed company were seen rapidly obscuring 
the stream of light, at the open door of the 
well lit-up mansion. 

There must have been an immense increase 
in Lady Furbelow's unpopularity, to have 
occasioned such an immense increase in the 
attraction of her Ladyship's entertainments. 
Had she done something very shocking to 
the King? had she sent an invitation to the 
Pretender ? or was the Pope staying at her 
house on a visit ? It was evident something 
unusually flagrant had occurred, to have 



192 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

sent such a flood of fashionable life towards 
her doors. 

For a wonder, Lady Furbelow had not 
done anything so remarkably extravagant. 
The King had not been insulted — the Pope 
was quiet in the Vatican — the Pretender 
was equally tranquil, counting his beads in 
the comfortable oratory of his Italian villa. 
Then she must have got some very remarka- 
ble person to show himself at her assemblies 
— and it was a difficult point to deter- 
mine whether he was Frederick the Great, 
Brouo^hton the bruiser, or ]\Iaclean the hio^h- 
wayman — heroes her ladyship was equally 
likely to patronise; or Avhether he was 
Sampson Gideon the rich Jew, Duncan 
Campbell the deaf-and-dumb fortune-teller, 
or Faux the conjuror — remarkable persons, 
who, it was believed, had the honour of 
standing equally high in her estimation. 

Those who knew what was the cause of 
Lady Furbelow's house being so much more 
crowded than usual, were aware that none 
of these sources of attraction had collected 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 155 

her guests. The Hon of the evening was 
neither King nor pugilist, neither highway- 
man, Jew, astrologer, nor slcight-of-hanclman : 
all which lions her ladyship had produced, 
till they had ceased to be attractive. The 
lion she was about to exhibit, was one very 
much less familiar to her friends. He took 
the shape of an author of the most interesting 
work that had issued from the press for a 
vast number of years. A romance had 
recently been published, that had taken the 
whole town by storm. Every one was 
reading it, or waiting to read it. Those 
who could not succeed in getting possession 
of the book, kept talking of it ; and those who 
were so fortunate as to secure it, talked of 
it a great deal more. 

There were some amongst the crowd who 
very well remembered the advent of " Sir 
Charles Grandison " — they doubted that this 
book, fashionable as it was, had been so well 
received at first, as had been the new 
romance. Others a":ain thouirht of Tom 
Jones with a like impression ; and some of 

VOL. II. K 



194 STKAWBERRY HILL. 

tlie seniors went so far back in their recollec- 
tions as the publication of " Robinson Crusoe," 
and were quite as firmly convinced that the new 
romance was a greater favourite than Crusoe, 
and his man Friday into the bargain. 

Lady Furbelow had stated to her most 
particular friend, in what is called the strict- 
est confidence, that the author of this mon- 
strous fashionable work would be present 
at her next assembly; and her most par- 
ticular friend had of course stated the same 
interesting intelligence, also in the strictest 
confidence, to her most particular friend. 
This process of communication had gone on 
T\ith such rapidity, that in the course of 
three days the whole town were in possession 
of the same information ; and every one who 
could lay claim to the acquaintance of Lady 
Furbelow, had helped to swell the well- 
dressed mob, w^ho, on this particular evening, 
filled her rooms to an overflow. 

As may readily be imagined from what 
we have just stated, her ladyship's assembhes 
were of a singularly mixed character at all 



STRATVT3ERRY HILL. 195 

times ; but on the present occasion, the mis- 
cellaneousness of the company was more 
obvious than ever it had been. In one place 
was a group of artists, composed of Rou- 
billiac the sculptor — Hogarth, then in the 
zenith of his fame as a designer of humorous 
pictures — and the celebrated painter of Vene- 
tian scenes, Canaletti, who had but lately 
arrived from Italy. 

At a little distance was the distinguished 
astronomer, Bradley, in animated discourse 
with Nicholas Rowe and Colley Gibber, 
two of the illustrious obscure among the 
literary celebrities of the age. In another 
place might be observed a knot of authors of 
various degrees of talent ; the ^Titer of the 
last poem — of the last play — of the last ser- 
mon — of the last novel, in a very amicable 
spirit criticizing the work that had brought 
them together. In one part of the room was 
Handel, the popular composer, conversing 
with marked animation with the celebrated 
opera singer, Signora Frasi, having several 
admirers of the tuneful art, attentive listeners. 

K 2 



19G STEAWBEKRY HILL. 

In another part there was a little circle of 
well kno^vn actors and actresses, all earnestly 
engaged with the same topic. 

The centre of the largest apartment ap- 
peared to be filled with such ladies of quality 
as might consider themselves of the greatest 
influence in all the great concerns of fashion. 
There was a most imposing display amongst 
them, of dresses and jewels — they all wore 
powder in their high head-dresses — all wore 
hoops — the majority were well rouged, and 
many had patches. 

The most important person in the group was 
a little shrivelled old woman, with pecuHar 
vivacious eyes and a sharp nose, well rouged 
cheeks, and a vast hoop, who was easily dis- 
tinguishable from her companions, not only 
by her singular appearance, but by an un- 
commonly ugly little pug dog that she 
carried under her left arm — the hand be- 
longing to which held a handsome snufF-box, 
and the other was constantly employed in 
supplying her nostrils with its contents. 

She talked incessantly, in a loud, sharp. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 197 

tone, something between scolding and com- 
plaining; and her penetrating eyes darted 
from one to another of her fair associates, as 
she spoke, with a look that seemed as unin- 
viting as that of the disagreeable little beast 
tucked so close to her side. 

It was very evident that this was '' the 
original," who was so universally abused, 
and so universally run after. Yes, she was 
Lady Furbelow, and it was Lady Fur- 
below in her glory. She knew herself to 
be the envy of all the stately dowagers, who 
had rushed to her assembly on hearing the 
attraction it would possess; and she took 
more snuff, and looked more spiteful at them 
than ever, as she chuckled over her own 
superiority in the valuable art of attracting 
company to her house. 

The stately old dowagers, to do them 
justice, behaved themselves extremely well : 
they were bursting with spleen at the 
thought of Lady Furbelow having so great 
an advantage ; and a plethoric Duchess, who 
had with incalculable difficulty procured, to 



198 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

orace her routs, a North American chief and 
his squaw — and a dropsical Countess, who, 
at great expense, had secured for her parties 
the Russian prince Bamboozleumoff, and two 
genuine train-oil-drinking aide-de- camps, — 
only by incessant fanning could keep them- 
selves from hysterics. 

The younger ladies of the party appeared 
to regard their friend's advantage with more 
philosophy. The fact was, they were so 
eager to experience the gratification they 
had been promised — an introduction to the 
popular author — that all minor feelings were 
swallowed up in that of curiosity. 

Ladies of fashion, in the days we are illus- 
trating, had not the most remote thought 
of putting their fashionable thoughts upon 
fashionable paper, for the purpose of their 
being published in some fashionable annual. 
The dear creatures would not give themselves 
the trouble of writing, nor their friends the 
much greater trouble of reading their lucu- 
l^rations — in marked contrast to their suc- 
cessors in this scribbling age, when every 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 199 

lady takes to her three volumes post octavo, 
as naturally as a poodle takes to the water. 

The diiFerence was very much in favour 
of the ladies of the last century. Instead of 
exhausting paper and print, the funds of 
publishers, and the patience of the reader, 
the helles-esprits of 1744 had time to look at 
works of merit and genius — they being then 
the rarest of existing luxuries. The book 
that took the taste of the town was sure of 
being in universal request ; and the fortunate 
author was flattered, feasted, and feted^ by 
all the great people who could secure him as 
a guest. 

Those golden days have long since va- 
nished; the merit which would have obtained 
for its possessor an animated rivalry of every 
person of quality to shew him attention, 
passes by almost unheeded. Some rare 
instance of good fortune may occur, to place 
the successful author a guest at great men's 
feasts — or an instance equally rare may be 
found, of sympathy and appreciation among 
ladies of fashion : but, unfortunately, men 



200 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

of letters have quite gone out of fashion smce 
Tom Thumb came in. 

We cannot stop to inquire whether the 
change which has made their patrons and 
patronesses their rivals, has, or has not, been 
advantageous to the community at large: 
we are, however, quite certain, that if litera- 
ture has lost anything, fashion has gained 
nothing by it. 

Sir Walter Scott was the last author by 
profession for Avhom people of fashion 
affected to feel anything like the interest 
which such genius as his ought to excite ; 
but then it is believed that he owed this 
much more to his rank as a baronet, than to 
his distinction as a liter ateur. He was one 
of their own order, therefore they could 
indulge in a little enthusiasm. 

In the middle of the last century, there 
is no doubt that this enthusiasm was often 
very extravagant, and quite as frequently 
very much misplaced. Authors of the 
smallest calibre passed for guns of prodigious 
weight ; but this is a common mistake, even 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 201 

in the better-read nineteenth century; for 
now the only qualification society can claim 
for the most ponderous pieces of its literary 
artillery, exists in their undoubted right to 
be classed among the great bores. 

With Lady Furbelow, literature was a 
passion. She was enthusiastic in its cause 
— at least as far as poetry and romance were 
connected Avith it — and a popular poet or 
romancist was sure to be patronized by her 
ladyship with a zeal which shewed the excess 
of her admiration. It is true that literature 
was not her only passion — pug-dogs and 
point-lace — Chelsea-china and Louis Quatorze 
snuff-boxes — had as ample a place in her 
heart; but there were certain things that 
rendered her ladyship's passion for the Belles 
Lettres^ at this period, more deep and pow- 
erful than any passion she had ever before 
experienced. 

The author of the romance which had so 
much taken with the town, had placed entire 
confidence in her ladyship ; and, as he hap- 
pened to enjoy the rare distinction of being 

K 3 



202 STIIA\7BERRY HILL. 

an especial favourite with her, and was, more- 
over, the son of a man with whom she had 
carried on a flirtation of twenty years^ 
standing, her zeal for the author, and enthu- 
siasm about his work, are readily accounted 
for. 

We must leave Lady Furbelow to expend 
her high-flown panegyrics with her peculiar 
liberality, while we mark the entrance into 
the suite of apartments of Sir Robert Wal- 
pole. Although he was thoroughly ac- 
quainted with the powerful combination of 
politicians of various shades, that the next 
day were to put their designs against him 
into execution, his cheerful features were 
more cheerful than ever; that countenance, 
so expressive of good humour, never had 
looked so pleasant. With a great portion of 
the company he was regarded as a doomed 
man. The strength of the opposing faction 
had latterly so increased, that they con- 
sidered themselves too powerful to care 
about secrecy — indeed, the disgrace of the 
Minister was spoken of as such a certain 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 203 

tiling, that many persons who would have 
been but too proud of gaining the slightest 
notice from him, now were nervously 
anxious to avoid his recognition. 

If Sir Robert saw this, it evidently did 
not trouble him, for he proceeded on his 
course apparently in the most jovial humour 
with himself and everj^body, stopping occa- 
sionally to exchange a few words with an 
acquaintance, or expend a jest or two Avith a 
boon companion. It was observed that the 
Minister made the longest stay with gentle- 
men who were Members of Parliament ; and 
what was more extraordinary, they were 
known to be opposed to the Minister's pohcy. 
In most instances his advances were but 
coldly received; but, strange to say, this 
coolness passed off very rapidly, and when 
Sir Robert moved away, their parting salu- 
tations were of the most cordial description. 

" How do, Solemnchaps? Monstrous glad 
to see you." 

" Your servant, Sir Robert," replied a 
sullen looking personage, with a stiff bow. 



204 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

"Wanted to tell you, my dear Solemn- 
chaps, some prodigious good news I have 
for you, respecting that situation in the 
Excise, I've been trying so long to get for 
your son." 

" Thank you. Sir Robert," said the stiff 
old gentleman, his features, however, relax- 
ing considerably. 

" Very glad to say I've succeeded at last, 
my dear friend. There were two hundred 
applicants — for it is well knoAvn to be a 
place of eight hundred a year, and nothing 
to do, my dear Solemnchaps : but I remem- 
bered my promise to an old friend, and I 
feel the greatest pleasure in the world in 
being the first to teU him of his son's good 
fortune." 

" Well, that 's mighty civil of you. Sir 
Robert, I must say," exclaimed the delighted 
father, " and you may depend. Sir Robert, 
I'll not be unmindful of your goodness." 

The Minister, with a cordial shake of the 
hand, which secured him a vote he much 
wanted, passed on to another Member, who 



STEAWBERRY HILL, 205 

received liis advances more stiffly than tliey 
had been received even by the greatly grati- 
fied personage from whom he had just 
parted. 

" One word, my dear Sir Gregory Bump- 
tious, one word for your private ear, my ex- 
cellent friend, respecting your nephew, the 
Dean. I took the earliest opportunity to 
speak to his Majesty about the vacant 
bishoprick. Make your mind easy, my dear 
Sir Gregory ; I am happy to inform you the 
worthy Dean will be Bishop Bumptious be- 
fore the week 's over : and if I can serve you, 
my dear friend, in any other way, I beg you 
will let me know at once." 

If Sir Gregory had heard the King prefer 
his eloquence to that of Cicero, he could not 
have been more gratified than he was at 
hearing that his favourite nephew was a 
Bishop. From that moment the vote of Sir 
Gregory Bumptious, and those of the friends 
he could influence by his example, were the 
undoubted property of the Minister. 

Sir Robert again proceeded on his way. 



206 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

unquestionably in a rejoicing mood. He 
had not got far before he was seized by the 
button by a very influential and very tire- 
some Member of the Lower House, whom 
Bolingbroke's party had counted as their 
own. 

Colonel Fribble at once proceeded to 
pour out all he knew and all he fancied 
about the new romance and its author. 
Sir Robert had already heard a good deal 
about this popular work, of which he had 
read a portion, and he professed to be 
greatly delighted. He listened with mar- 
vellous patience to all the tiresome conjec- 
tures and tedious remarks of the Colonel; 
and did not succeed in emancipating his 
button until he had averred, with the most 
becoming gravity, it was the opinion of a 
certain exalted personage, that no one could 
have written so admirable a story but his 
amusing old acquaintance. Colonel Fribble 
himself. 

As Sir Robert went laughing aAvay, he 
felt the pleasant conviction that he had again 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 207 

bagged his game ; for the Colonel would have 
suffered martyrdom, rather than have voted 
against a Minister who had given him such 
agreeable intelligence. Walpole knew that 
he had a vast deal of this kind of work to go 
through, and that his time was limited. 
He crossed the room, and, after an extraor- 
dinary display of diplomacy, secured the 
hearty co-operation of certain waverers, who 
were only to be purchased by important 
honours, for which they had long languished 
in vain. 

There again the popularity of the new 
romance was forced upon his attention, by 
his overhearing a very animated discussion 
upon its merits, in which an Archbishop, 
two noble Dukes, and the Lord Chancellor 
were busily engaged. For a few minutes he 
joined in the discussion, and managed very 
adroitly to secure six votes, by testifying his 
admiration of the identical passages that 
had just been so warmly approved of by a 
very distinguished Member of the House of 
Peers. 



208 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

Wliile he is proceeding more cheerfully 
than ever to another group, we will say a 
word or two for his younger son, who had 
stepped out of his chair and entered the 
house as his father's carriage was driven 
away. It was not long before he was recog- 
nised by a circle of his Avitty associates, who, 
as usual, were exercising their privilege of 
uttering smart things at the expense of the 
company. The torpid George Sehvyn, the 
brilliant Charles To^vnshend, the facetious 
Hanbury Williams, the friendly Colonel 
Conway, and the rest of the coterie, were in 
full flow. Imperceptibly the Colonel had 
led the conversation to the new romance, 
and smart indeed was the running fire di- 
rected against it. In their hands every 
character was a jest — every scene was a 
source of amusement — and the whole story 
was the greatest burlesque that had ever 
been printed. 

Horace Walpole was called in to share in 
their pleasantries ; and his cousin contrived 
that he should hear all the hon mots that had 



STKAWBERRY HILL. 209 

been expended on the subject. The Minis- 
ter's son laughed very heartily at the 
facetiousness of his friends, and joined T\dth 
great spirit in ridiculing the romance writer. 
It seemed evident enough, that he was not 
more favourably impressed towards him than 
themselves; and after expressing one or two 
epigrammatic ideas on the said romance, 
worthy of a Sehvyn, he was allowed to es- 
cape, and pay his respects to the hostess. 
It is impossible to convey any adequate idea 
of the intensity of the welcome he received 
from Lady Furbelow, immediately he pre- 
sented himself. So completely did the sight 
of him render her regardless of aU other 
mundane affairs, that had not the unfortunate 
pug under her arm given an admonitory 
yelp, there is little doubt he would have been 
squeezed to death, during the vigorous de- 
monstrations she was giving her young friend 
of her satisfaction at his appearance. 

As soon as the eiFervescence of her lady- 
ship's enthusiasm had sufficiently abated to 
enable her to shew a little common sense, 



210 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

she turned to her dowager friends, with a 
glance of spiteful triumph not one of them 
ever forgot, and taking the Minister's son 
by the hand, introduced him to them in a 
most grandiloquent speech, as her inesti- 
mable friend, the author of '' The Castle of 
Otranto." 

The dowagers were deeply impressed with 
the agreeable distinction of having before 
them the "^vriter of the fashionable romance ; 
and many eloquent exclamations, and many 
still more eloquent looks and gestures were 
expended, in shewing the high sense they 
entertained of the honour conferred upon 
them. Before they had quite recovered their 
astonishment. Lady Furbelow introduced him 
to the other members of the conclave, who 
were equally impressed with the extraordi- 
nary favour they were receiving at her lady- 
sliip's hands. 

In the group around her, she had omitted 
one lady — unquestionably much the youngest 
and much the loveliest of the company : but 
the latter seemed to hang back, either as if she 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 211 

cared less for the compliment than her com- 
panions, or was so shy she would rather 
avoid it. AMiatever were her thoughts and 
feelings on this point, she was allowed very 
little time for their indulgence. Lady 
Furbelow, \\'ith immense unction, and an 
overwhelming sense of her own dignity, ad- 
dressed herself to the apparently cold, un- 
impassioned girl, as she led her valued 
friend towards her. 

" Well, child, '^ she exclaimed, in a tone of 
exultation, " I have here a vast honour for 
you — an honour you mil be glad enough 
to quote, I will wager a guinea to a copper 
token, when you have become as old in the 
world as I am : — I present to you one of the 
most truly illustrious characters of the age 
— I bring before you the author of the most 
admired work that has ever been seen in this 
country or in any other — I have the happi- 
ness of introducing to you ^Ir. Horace Wal- 
pole. Mr. Walpole, allow me the pleasure 
of making you known to my niece, Arabella 
Falkland." 



212 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

If a bomb-shell had fallen between them, 
it could not have created more surprise than 
did this unexpected meeting of the separated 
lovers. Lord Falkland's daughter had shared 
in the general enthusiasm for the author of 
the new romance, which she had read with 
intense enjoyment; and the surprise she 
experienced on finding who was the indi- 
\ddual who had been the object of her aunt's 
furious praises, made her quite forget her 
indignation. 

But the next moment, the repulsive idea of 
the man she had so fondly loved, intriguing 
with so discreditable a woman as Lady Ar- 
chibald Hamilton, presented itself to her 
mind, and she assumed a cold and stately 
carriage — very different indeed to the cor- 
dial ecstasies with which the gentleman had 
just been received by her associates. 

Our hero quickly found the pleasure he 
experienced on beholding thus unexpectedly 
the stately beauty he had lost sight of so 
mysteriously at Bath, disappear before the 
frigid reception she thought proper to give 



STKAAVBERRY HILL. 213 

liim; and then came the recollection of the 
circumstances under which he last beheld 
her — the T\dthering scorn she so curtly ex- 
pressed when his name was mentioned — and 
the contempt that lurked in every line of her 
letter. These recollections readily enabled 
him to exhibit a degree of hauteur towards 
her, quite as marked as was her chilling 
reser^^e towards him. 

Lady Furbelow assumed to be prodigi- 
ously astonished at beholding what she called 
the unaccountable conduct of her niece and 
her inestimable friend towards each other. 
She looked her sharpest look, and spoke in 
her sharpest voice, to her young kinswoman : 
but this was not hkely to be of any advan- 
tage to the other party. 

" My dear Lady Furbelow," said he to 
his offended hostess, " I think your charm- 
ing niece is labouring under some misappre- 
hension. When I last had the happiness of 
seeino; her, I was orieved to find that she 
had been led into an error respecting me, 
which error I have never had an opportunity 



214 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

to remove, though this might be done in the 
most satisfactory manner in a very few 
minutes." 

" You have met my niece before, then? " 

" I had the honour of forming her ac- 
quaintance in Italy." 

Lady Furbelow took a copious supply of 
snuff on hearing this reply to her question 
— the old dowagers looked very inquisitive 
— the younger ladies very mystified, Ara- 
bella Falkland wore an air of the most per- 
fect indifference : to all appearance, the affair 
did not concern her in the least. 

Lady Furbelow continued to glance search- 
ingly from her literary protege to her beau- 
tiful niece, and continued to take snuff with 
a vast deal of vehemence, that must have 
much incommoded her four-footed com- 
panion ; but she was not the least enhghtened 
by either process. All that was plain to 
lier was, that there was something wrong, 
and that her chief surprise of the evening 
had miscarried, through some unaccountable 
vagary on the part of her kinswoman. She 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 215 

saw that something must be done imme- 
diately, to repair the mischief already com- 
mitted. Her two great attractions — the 
greatest beauty in town, and the most 
popular wiiter — must not be suffered to fall 
into a misunderstanding, which might, in 
the eyes of her dowager rivals, mar the 
triumph of the night. 

" Arabella, my love," exclaimed her lady- 
ship, doing her best to look affectionate and 
amiable, " I am positive you have fallen into 
some mistake respecting my dear young 
friend here. He has long been known to me 
as the most truly honourable gentleman I 
ever met mth; and as the author of the 
admirable romance you have lately been 
reading with such intense pleasure, he is 
entitled to every praise for talent and clever- 
ness so warm an admirer of both can confer 
upon him. I trust, child, you will at once 
get rid of any foolish prejudice political 
animosity may have engendered, and that 
you will learn to esteem him according to 
his deserts." 



216 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

" Of tliat^ be assured, there is no fear, my 
dear aunt," replied the young lady, with 
considerable emphasis. " The source from 
which I received my last impressions of 
Mr. AValpole, very possibly was not entitled 
to much consideration, as it happened to be 
himself." 

Miss Falkland with a proud step walked 
to another part of the apartment, without 
casting another look at her former lover. 
This movement caused various effects in the 
little circle. The old dowagers exchanged 
looks of considerable significance; their ju- 
niors appeared much astonished; and Lady 
Furbelow took snuff as though she had deter- 
mined to clear the box at once. The gentle- 
man was the first to break the awkward silence 
that ensued ; and he, in a few words, lamented 
that Miss Falkland should have misjudged 
him, but added, with an air almost as dis- 
dainful as her own, as it was a matter of no 
importance, and one that must very soon be 
set right without any trouble on his part, he 
did not think it worth any further notice. 



STRAWBERKY HILL. 217 

He then addressed liimself to his hostess, 
vrho, as though to make amends for the 
rudeness of her niece, was amazingly atten- 
tive and complimentary : the old dowagers 
immediately fell into the same vein, the rest 
of the group shewed themselves no less 
favourably disposed towards him, and in a 
very few minutes he was enjoying as liberal 
a share of incense as ever was showered by 
the High Priestesses of Fashion upon their 
temporary idols. 

He was paying every possible respect to 
the flatteries of two duchesses, a countess 
in her own ri^rht, and the three irreatest 
heiresses in Emiland, when his attention was 
drawn from them by overhearing a most 
extravagant eulogy spoken by Lady Furbe- 
low. Believing he was about to be pre- 
sented to another of her ladyship's fashion- 
able lady friends, he turned round with due 
alacrity. His surprise may be imagined 
when he met the features of his father, 
wearing a look of such intense pride and 
gratification, as assured him the despised 

VOL. n. L 



218 STllAAVBERRY HILL. 

younger son had at last completely suc- 
ceeded in his appeal to his sympathies. 

It is impossible to say which experienced 
the most satisfaction at that moment. The 
^linister's delight was as deep as it was fer- 
vent. It was a surprise for which he was 
totally unprepared. It appeared to have 
awakened him from a long and troubled 
dream, to a consciousness of real happiness 
it was impossible to appreciate too highly. 
The congratulations he expressed to his son, 
as he warmly shook him by the hand, at 
once dissolved an avalanche of unpleasant 
memories that had so long been collecting 
upon the mind of the latter. He forgot all 
he had suffered — he forgot even Arabella 
Falkland, and what he believed to be her 
caprice — he forgot Lady Furbelow and her 
friends — he forgot everything but the happi- 
ness his father's commendations had created. 

Lady Furbelow, however, did not forget 
herself. The complete success of this grand 
feature in her surprises of the evening she 
looked upon as her crowning triumph ; and 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 219 

took her last pinch of snuff with a glance at 
her dowager rivals, which told them, plainer 
than any language could have done, that 
now they were at perfect liberty to go home 
and die of envy as soon as they pleased. 



L 2 



220 STRAWBERRY HILL. 



CHAPTER X. 
THE GREAT DEBATE. 

Sir Robert Walpole had taken up his 
residence in the house he had provided for 
Horace; and an arrangement more satis- 
factory to both parties could not by any pos- 
sibility have been thought of. The Minister 
had now learned how active a partizan he 
had in his younger son — how affectionately 
he had watched over his interests. He had 
learned also to whom he was indebted for 
tliose masterly pamphlets which had so ably 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 221 

defended his administration, and so cleverly 
exposed the unprincipled conduct of liis 
enemies. 

To this was added the satisfaction of dis- 
covering, that in this secret friend he beheld 
the favourite author of the gay world to 
which he belonged, and that this favourite 
was his own son. His happiness was some- 
times dashed with a few uncomfortable re- 
flections concerning the indifference he had 
manifested towards him. How much he had 
shewn himself the Minister, and how little 
the father ! But, as he found out the value 
of the treasure he had so neglected, he hoped 
there was yet time for him to retrieve his 
error. 

Yet he was not without some mis o^i vinous. 
It was unfortunate that he should have made 
this happy discovery at a time of so much 
difficulty to him — at a time that even he 
had been forced t-o consider as almost the 
last hour of his political existence. He had 
found the confederacy much stronger than 
it had at first appeared to him ; and although 



222 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

the timely information he had obtained of 
their plans had enabled him to make prepa- 
rations to defeat them, on a thorough know- 
ledge of the great strength of the Opposition, 
he could not help doubting the issue. 

Horace enjoyed a serenity of mind he had 
never enjoyed before, as his father, after a 
long mterview of the most confidential cha- 
racter, seemed to ask his counsel, whilst he 
granted him his fullest confidence. He was 
sensible of the very critical position in which 
the Minister stood ; but the happy atmosphere 
of his own mind reflected a portion of its 
brightness on the gloomy state of his father's 
affairs, and he felt assured the ground that 
had been lost might be retrieved. 

They sat in the library together, in af- 
fectionate proximity ; the son's hand in that 
of his father, whose good-humoured face 
expressed unusual emotion. 

" Ah, my dear Horace ! " he exclaimed, 
" you little know the troubles and difiiculties 
that beset the path of a statesman who holds 
the first place in the confidence of his 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 223 

sovereign. He must have no feelings, no 
ties, no predilections, that do not belong 
to the state. For him the affections of 
the heart are as in one vowed to celibacy. 
The Minister must have no affections, he 
must have no heart. He is a monk, whose 
God is his King, and whose Church is his 
Government. 

" The man who holds an independent 
position in society, can cultivate the best 
and kindest relations with liis fellow-men — 
can regard them as brothers, and apply to 
them as friends; but the position of the 
Minister is exactly the reverse — it far more 
nearly approaches that of the Arab of the 
desert, whose hand is against every man, 
and every man's hand against hmi ; for such 
is his position vdih those who are not bound 
to him by the strong ties of self-interest, or 
the hollow friendship of political partizan- 
ship. From the rest of the world the 
Minister must anticipate an endless conflict. 
Misrepresentation, abuse, contempt, slander, 
and ridicule, will meet him at every turn. 



224 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

Let his measures be based on the most com- 
prehensive philanthropy, he must expect to 
have them denounced as the most selfish 
upon record. Ay, let him do all that human 
wisdom and human foresight can effect for 
the good of his country, he must reconcile 
himself to impeachment for having betrayed 
her interests. 

" He may, perhaps, take unusual pains to 
recommend himself to men of all parties — 
he may patronize merit, wherever he can 
find it, without regard to political opinion 
— he may pay as much respect to the 
su^^o^estions of his enemies as to those of his 
friends — and what will be the result? He 
must make up his mind to be burned in 
effigy, caricatured, lampooned in private, 
and hooted in public, to an extent never 
experienced by the most unpopular of his 
^predecessors. 

" He ultimately finds it to his advantage 
to act upon a more selfish line of j)olicy — 
he studies the vices of men instead of their 
virtues — he relies upon their follies instead 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 225 

of their wisdom — he tests their principles by 
the touch- stone of interest, and soon dis- 
covers how strong he can n:iake himself by 
a sufficient appreciation of their weakness. 
Every one has his price, my dear boy ; and if 
you can only afford to buy him at his own 
appreciation, you may drive a bargain with 
the sternest patriot, as easily as with the 
most venal placeman." 

" Your view of human nature, my dear 
father," said his son, " is verv humiliatino:." 

" Not more humiliating than it is just, 
Horace," replied the Minister, with bitterness. 
" It is the result of a pretty extensive ex- 
perience of mankind; and the last evidence 
is to be found in my being left to the 
uninterrupted enjojmient of this prolonged 
interview. Often has it occurred to me 
in a morning, Avhen receiving visitors, to 
have every reception room crowded with 
eager candidates for my favours: then it 
was kno^vn, Horace, that I was the most 
powerful subject in the realm, and had at 
my disposal more patronage than any ten 

L 3 



226 STRAWEERRY HILL. 

men in the kingdom : now that it is believed 
I am powerless, and on the brink of disgrace, 
all my troops of friends avoid me like a 
pestilence. Horace, my dear boy, never 
desire to be a Minister — never seek the pos- 
session of political power." 

" Yet, such has been for years my cloud by 
day, and pillar of fire by night," observed 
the younger Walpole, impressively. " I 
have always thought that nothing could be 
so covetable in this world, as the position of 
the most influential member of a great 
government. I have long accustomed my- 
self to look forward to the possession of high 
rank, great wealth, and vast political in- 
fluence, as the greatest desiderata of human 
ambition." 

" If you live to find your ambitious dreams 
realized — which is not unlikely," said the 
father, gravely, " you mil quickly waken to 
a sense of their insufliciency. But in talk- 
ing, I must not forget the necessity there is 
for my doing. This afternoon, my enemies 
are to make their grand attack in the Com- 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 227 

mons : all the craft of Bolingbroke, all the 
hypocrisy of Pulteney, ^vill now be permitted 
to display itself. I have much to do before 
we meet in the House." 

The father and son parted with that 
degree of mutual confidence and mutual 
s}Tnpathy, which could only exist in such 
near relatives drawn together by some very 
pressing danger. Horace could see that his 
father was much less sanguine of the result 
of the impending contest than himself; but 
mth the intense admiration he felt for the 
Minister's talents, it seemed impossible to 
doubt he would triumph over his enemies, 
strong as they were : and, this result accom- 
jDlished, what a golden dream of honour and 
greatness visited him ! — a grateful Sovereign, 
an applauding senate, a delighted people, 
seemed to rival each other in testifying their 
admiration of the genius of AValpole ; and he, 
as the great Minister's coadjutor and suc- 
cessor, would be regarded as wortli^ to share 
mth him a nation's respect and affection. 

Having passed a sufficient time in amusing 



228 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

himself with these agreeable chimeras, Horace 
hurried to the House, resolved to watch the 
movements of his father's adversaries, with 
the fullest determination to take advantage 
of anv circumstance favourable to his cause, 
that ini<T:ht occur in the course of the comincj 
struo:<i:le. 

There could not be a question, when he 
entered the walls of St. Stephen's, that 
somethmg of very unusual importance was 
there about to take place. The Members 
were thronging in, with every appearance of 
being engaged in a business of extraordinary 
interest. The leaders of the Opposition 
were surrounded by anxious groups of their 
followers, to whom it seemed as though they 
were explaining the order of the approaching 
proceedings. In some places a knot of county 
members might be seen rehearsing amongst 
themselves the grand business of the day ; 
and it was easy to distinguish amongst them 
the decidjpd, the vacillating, the lukewarm 
Ministerialist, and the hesitating Oppo- 
sitionist. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 229 

The great men of the Pulteney party 
seemed confident and exulting, while the 
members of the ]\Iinistry wore generally an 
anxious look, that appeared to foretell their 
own defeat. Each party had made the most 
strenuous exertions to collect all its available 
forces ; from which circumstance it frequently 
happened, that the crowd had to make way 
for some desperate invalid wrapped in a 
blanket, or some tottering octogenarian 
trembling upon crutches. The galleries 
were crowded, and there was a considerable 
number of spectators below the bar — promi- 
nent amono; whom mio-ht be seen the 
handsome features and stately figure of 
Lord Bolingbroke. He had placed himself 
there to feast his eyes with the disgrace of 
his hated schoolfellow; he was convinced 
Walpole's hour had come, and he could not 
resist the temptation of triumphing over his 
enemy. 

Horace looked for his father. He ex- 
pected to see him with an anxious counte- 
nance, busily drilling his followers. He 



230 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

glanced around the spacious chamber in 
vain. Sir Robert was not to be seen. Per- 
haps he was engaged in expediting the 
approach of some dilatory adherents, whose 
presence he felt essential to his interests. At 
last he espied him in a corner, with an in- 
veterate joker, laughing as though he had 
not a care in the world, evidently as though 
all ideas of impeachment had been blown to 
the winds. 

Presently the Minister left that obscure 
place, and made his way to his usual seat in 
the House, exchanging greetings with those 
of his friends who still affected to be true to 
him, with a happy indifference, that caused 
many who had made up their minds to his 
disorace, to have considerable doubts of it. 
Had Sir Robert had the whole House at his 
disposal, he could not have appeared on 
better terms mth himself and them, than he 
did at that moment. 

As Bolingbroke caught the happy expres- 
sion of his rival's features, a ghastly smile 
deformed his own. But the conviction he 



STKAWBERRY HILL. 231 

had of the overpowering force he had brought 
to the contest, re-assured him. He would 
not allow a doubt of his coming triumph to 
disturb his gratifying reflections. 

The debate was opened by Sandys, a small 
patriot of the last century, in a speech of 
considerable length and equal acrimony, 
reviewing the measures of Walpole at home 
and abroad, and accusing him of all the 
faults and crimes it was possible for a bad 
Minister to commit. In conclusion, he 
stated, " If it should be asked why I impute 
all these evils to one person, I reply, because 
one person has grasped in his own hands 
every branch of government; that one per- 
son has attained the sole direction of affairs, 
monopolized all the favours of the Crown, 
compassed the disposal of all places, pen- 
sions, titles, ribands, as well as all prefer- 
ments, civil, military, and ecclesiastical; 
that one person has made a blind submission 
to his will, both in elections and Parhament, 
the only terms of present fiivour and future 
expectation." 



232 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

Horace felt every nerve in his body vibrate 
as he heard these accusations hurled at his 
father; nor was his indignation lessened by 
the loud cheers which encouraged the attack. 
Sandys ended with a motion, " That an 
humble address he presented to his Majesty^ 
that he would he graciously loleased to remove 
the Right Ilonourahle Sir Robert Walpole 
from his Majesty^ s 'presence and counsels for 
every 

The young Member experienced an agony 
of impatience to reply to this audacious 
motion, but the deep interest he felt in the 
question seemed to take from him all ability 
to express his thoughts ; and he heard 
Lord Limerick second it, and old Mr. 
Wortley Montagu, following on the same 
side, propose that Sir Robert should retire 
from the Plouse, like a criminal, while his 
conduct was being examined. 

What would his son then have given for a 
flow of language to have covered the insulter 
with the contempt he merited! But he 
found himself powerless — bound like a vie- 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 233 

tim to the stake, and was doomed to hear 
the atrocious proposal gravely debated, till 
the sense of the House was found to be 
against it. 

Pulteney then resumed the general ques- 
tion — and it was easy to see, from the simi- 
larity existing in the speech of Sandys and 
his own, that they were from the same mint. 
It was true Pulteney had once been a warm 
friend of Walpole, but political rivalry had 
turned their friendship into enmity; and, 
notwithstanding all his professions in favour 
of freedom, as in the instance of Bolinofbroke, 
envy of the better fortune of his friend was 
the main-spring of his opposition. 

He was followed in the same spirit by 
Pitt, whose first advances on the ladder of 
political greatness were made to pull down 
the only man the country had produced who 
deserved to precede him in its highest eleva- 
tion. Various orators of less eminence took 
up the same strain, and Bolingbroke smiled 
triumphantly as he observed how many 
influential persons were among them. 



234 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

All tills time the Minister stood unmoved ; 
not a fro-wn disturbed the haj)py serenity of 
his features — not a care clouded the good 
humour of his jovial countenance. He smiled 
at the charges of Sandys, as at the gestures 
of a puppet, the source of whose movements 
he readily detected; he smiled stiU more at 
the accusations of Pulteney, like a schoolboy 
at a difficult problem, of which he has the 
key in his pocket. 

Such of his father's friends as ventured 
to volunteer a defence for him, Horace 
thought feeble and constrained. A new 
feature appeared in the debate when Edward 
Harley, the brother of the late Lord Trea- 
surer, ventured to make some allusions to 
the part Walpole had formerly taken against 
his relative; and professing he would not 
descend to retaliation, left the House with his 
brother. This example was followed by 
Shippen — a very influential member — but 
from a very different cause. Though an 
opponent, the Minister had once conferred 
an eminent service on a friend of his. The 



STEAWBERRY HILL. 235 

recollection of this induced him to leave the 
House, in company vdth twenty-three per- 
sons who usually voted with him. 

This movement the leaders of the Opposi- 
tion regarded with anything but satisfaction. 
Pulteney looked annoyed, and Bolingbroke 
fro'svned menacingly. They, however, com- 
forted themselves with the conviction, that 
they were still strong enough to carry their 
measure. If any one felt real pleasure at 
this demonstration in favour of the unpo- 
pular Minister, it was his son. But no time 
was left him to indulge in such feelings. He 
saw his father rise, and immediately a pro- 
found silence reigned in the House. 

The mass of the Opposition could not help 
regarding with some respect a member of 
their own body, who for so long a period had 
been the first man in the country — had been 
the moving power of all the machinery of the 
State, and had so long continued to infuse 
the spirit of life into their deliberations. 
Many, too, had enjoyed his sumptuous hos- 
pitality — had experienced his friendly cour- 



236 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

tesy — had received his favours; and they 
felt that the least they could do, when he was 
thus put upon his defence before the country, 
was to listen decently to what he had to say 
for himself. 

As soon as the Minister found he had 
secured an attentive audience, he commenced 
a masterly defence. He began by classifying 
his opponents into three divisions — the 
Whim's — the disaffected Tories, callin<]: them- 
selves "patriots," — and the hoys^ or what 
would now be styled "the New Generation;" 
— for, as it often happens, the youngest men 
in the House were the noisiest of the Minis- 
ter's opponents. Of the first class he spoke 
indulgently, as if with a ^vish to conciliate, 
rather than to widen the breach that existed 
between him and them. But with the 
second class he exhibited no such tenderness. 
He exposed the paltry motives of their oppo- 
sition to him in the most masterly manner, 
and laughed to scorn their assumption of 
the name of patriots. 

'* Gentlemen have talked a great deal of 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 237 

patriotism," he exclaimed; — " a venerable 
word, when duly practised. But I am sorry 
to say, that of late it has been so much 
hackneyed about, that it is in danger of 
falling into disgrace ; the very idea of true 
patriotism is lost, and the term has been 
prostituted to the very worst of purposes. 
A patriot. Sir!" he continued, addressing 
the Speaker, with marked emphasis. " Why, 
patriots S]3ring up like mushrooms. I could 
raise fifty of them within the four-and- 
twenty hours. I have raised many of them 
in one night. It is but refusing to gratify 
an unreasonable or an insolent demand, and 
up starts a patriot. I have never been 
afraid of making patriots, but I disclaim and 
despise all their efibrts. But this pretended 
virtue proceeds from personal mahce, and 
from disappointed ambition. There is not 
a man amongst them, w^hose particular aim 
I am not able to ascertain, and from what 
motive they have entered into the lists of 
Opposition." 

Many shrank under this well-merited 



238 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

castigation, but Bolingbroke and Pulteney 
were stung to the quick by the allusions to 
them in its concluding sentences. 

The Minister then entered into an elabo- 
rate defence of his foreign policy, exposing 
at every step the ignorance of his enemies, 
as well as their malice. From this he pro- 
ceeded to the consideration of affairs at 
home, in which he was equally successful in 
proving that he had neglected nothing that 
was proper under the circumstances, and 
had done nothing which could with justice 
be pronounced injurious to the State. 

There was no doubt, from the profound 
attention with which the whole House were 
listening, that he was carrying mth him the 
convictions of all who were free from the 
trammels of party. But few could look 
^nthout deep interest upon the spectacle 
before them, of the great jMinister, whose 
name had been so powerful throughout 
Europe, turning, like a noble stag at bay, 
upon his hunters, and while defending him- 
self from their attack, goring those of his 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 239 

assailants who ventured to make tliemselves 
most conspicuous. 

He finally proceeded to the charges against 
himself — which, by the way, were of a very 
general character. " AVhat have been the 
effects," he inquired, "of the corruption, 
ambition, and avarice, with which I am so 
abundantly charged ? Have I ever been 
suspected of being corrupted? A strange 
phenomenon — a corrupter, himself not cor- 
rupt ! Is ambition imputed to me ? Why, 
then, do I still continue a Commoner? I, 
who refused a white staff and a Peerage ! 
I had, indeed, like to have forgotten the 
little ornament about my shoulders (the 
ribbon of the Order of the Garter), which 
gentlemen have so repeatedly mentioned in 
terms of sarcastic obloquy. But sure, 
though this may be regarded with envy or 
indignation in another place, it cannot be 
supposed to raise any resentment in this 
House, where many may be pleased to see 
those honours which their ancestors have 
worn, restored again to the Commons. 



240 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

Have I given any symptoms of an ava- 
ricious disposition ? Have I obtained any 
grants from the Crown, since I have been 
placed at the head of the Treasury? Has 
my conduct been different from that which 
others in the same station would have fol- 
lowed ? Have I acted wrong in giving the 
place of Auditor to my son, and in providing 
for my own family ? I trust that their ad- 
vancement will not be imputed to me as a 
crime, unless it shall be proved that I placed 
them in offices of trust and responsibility 
for which they were unfit. 

"" But while I unequivocally deny that I 
am sole and prime Minister, and that to 
my influence and direction all the measures 
of Government must be attributed, yet I ^vill 
not shrink from the responsibility whicli 
attaches to the post I have the honour to 
hold ; and should, during the long period in 
which I have sat upon this bench, any one 
step taken by Government be proved to be 
either disgraceful or disadvantageous to the 
nation, I am ready to hold myself account- 
able. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 241 

" To conclude : though I shall always be 
proud of the honour of any trust or confi- 
dence from his Majesty, yet I shall always 
be ready to remove from his councils and 
presence when he thinks fit ; and, therefore, 
I should think myself very little concerned 
in the event of the present question, if it 
were not for the encroachment that will 
thereby be made upon the prerogatives of 
the Crown. But I must think that an ad- 
dress to his Majesty to remove one of his 
serv^ants, without so much as alleging any 
particular crime against him, is one of the 
greatest encroachments that was ever made 
upon the prerogatives of the Crown; and 
therefore, for the sake of my master, Avithout 
any regard for my own, I hope that all 
those that have a due regard for our consti- 
tution, and for the rights and prerogatives 
of the Crown, without which our constitu- 
tion cannot be preserved, will be against this 
motion." 

Sir Robert did not conclude his speech 
till four o'clock in the morning. A division 

VOL. II. M 



242 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

was instantly called ; and some minutes of 
anxious suspense were passed by the leaders 
of both parties, and particularly by the 
^linister's son, while waiting for the tellers 
to go through their labours. It was impos- 
sible for Walpole's friends to say how the 
question would be decided ; but Bolingbroke 
was still confident he had so skilfully under- 
mined the influence of his old schoolfellow, 
that there would be an overwhelming ma- 
jority on the side of the Tories — and Pul- 
teney had too strong a reliance on the 
patriotism of the House, to doubt such 
would be the result. 

The division was presently announced : — 
for the motion to remove Sir Robert Wal- 
pole, 106; against the motion, 290; majority 
for Sir Robert Walpole, 184. When Boling- 
broke heard this complete overthrow of all 
his schemes, he rushed from the House, 
overwhelmed with mortification, and in fit 
of disgust of political life No. 4, hastened to 
bury himself once more in solitude, and learn 
consolation in his hermitage at Battersea. 



STRA^VBERRY HILL. 243 

A similar measure had been brought for- 
ward that evening in the House of Lords, 
which, despite the influence of the Prince of 
Wales, was disposed of by a majority of 
nearly two to one. The Minister, so far 
from being sent in disgrace from his post, 
was thought to be more powerful than ever, 
and at his levee the next morning he had no 
reason to complain of being neglected. The 
house would hardly contain the immense 
multitude that flocked to assure him of their 
cordial support. Even Bubb Doddington 
thoufjht it mio^ht be conducive to the in- 
terests of his expected peerage, to go and 
conofratulate his "excellent friend" on his 
success. 



M 2 



244 STRAWBERRY HILL. 



CHAPTER XI. 

A ROYAL FR]:E]ST)SHIP. 

Though Sir Eobert Walpole had once 
more triumphed over his enemies, and the 
clever Bolingbroke had been again driven to 
cahn his restless spirit in the rural solitudes 
of Battersea, the position of the former was 
soon found to be daily becoming more inse- 
cure. His adversaries appeared to gain 
strength at every defeat ; and the more they 
were beaten, the more fierce they became in 
their attacks. 



STRAWT3ERRY HILL. 245 

Pulteney's patriotism burned fiercer than 
ever: the recent debate smothered the fire 
for a time, but, like all ineffectual attempts 
to check a great conflagration, they only 
caused the flame to blaze more furiously. 
The Prince was easily induced to look upon 
the Minister's success as a personal affront 
to himself, and taught to regard him as an 
obstacle in the way of his interests, that must 
be o^ot rid of at any hazard. Even Bubb 
Doddington, finding that he was not nearer 
the desired peerage than before, was again 
becoming very busy as man-of- all- work for 
his royal master, in losing his money and 
his time. 

Like the sound of the trumpet to the war- 
horse turned out to graze, was the rumour 
of new political combinations against his 
hated rival, to the mortified BoUngbroke. 
The wrestler thrown by his antagonist 
while over-confident of his strength, was 
not more disposed to begin a more dangerous 
rivalry, than was the philosopher, after the 
heavy fall he had received from his political 



246 STRAWTBERIIY HILL. 

opponent, to commence with him a combat 
a Voutrance. The reflection that all his 
scheming, all his cleverness, all his under- 
handed intrigues against his early friend and 
schoolfellow, had had no other result than 
to cover himself with shame, stung him 
almost to frenzy. He eagerly responded to 
the advances of the still condescending 
Prince of Wales, and he was readily con- 
vinced by the arguments of the still patriotic 
Pulteney. His last fit of disgust of pubhc 
life was soon found to be the shortest of 
them all ; for in one brief month philosophy 
was once more cast aside, and plotting, schem- 
ing, and intriguing, were again in earnest 
requisition. 

During this period, Plorace Walpole was 
enjoying himself entirely after his heart's 
content. Tlie most complete confidence 
existed between him and his parent ; and the 
latter, proud of his son's talents, and of the 
attention they Avere exciting, held out hopes 
to him, which even his ambition, high as it 
had sometimes soared, had never pictured. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 247 

But Horace was too happy in his present 
position to care much for any future, how- 
ever brilliant. The content he experienced 
in seeing his father retain the greatness he 
believed he had supported vrith. so much 
advantage to the country, caused hun not to 
want to be disturbed by the cares and anx- 
ieties inseparable from embarking in a career 
of his own, however advantageous it might 
appear. 

All those humiliating reflections which 
had arisen out of his apparently unimportant 
position in the family were now forgotten ; 
he had either ceased to remember that he 
was a younger son, or entertained a different 
view of the case. For what was it now to 
him that he was born after his brothers ? 
Thouech this fact mio^ht be advantag:eous to 

CO c 

them in pecuniary matters, he perceived 
that he had become heir to his father's affec- 
tions, and was indifferent to any other heri- 
tage. His elder brothers might assume as 
much consequence as they pleased ; he would 
leave them to the enjoyment of their fancied 



248 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

superiority. He knew that he was next his 
father's heart — he cared not how much 
nearer they were to his estates. 

There was one thing, however, which did 
sometimes disturb the even current of his 
thoughts. Pride is a powerful agent, but 
Love is omnipotent. Our hero felt suffi- 
ciently indignant at the treatment he had 
received from Arabella Falkland; it was un- 
pardonable, he thought, that she should per- 
sist in a misconception, when a most satisfac- 
tory explanation might at once be obtained. 
Then his wounded self-love would give way a 
little, before his apprehensions for her safety, 
arising from the perilous manner in which she 
had committed herself with the conspirators 
at Bath; and he could not avoid recurring 
to the striking proof she had then betrayed 
of her anxiety for his safety, when assisting 
his escape. 

These recollections would soon become 
more retrospective. Again would he retrace 
those moonlight walks in the orange grove, 
when her ivory arms rested on his shoulder, 



STRAWBERRY HILL* 249' 

and her noble figure was supported by his 
embrace — when her speaking eyes, eloquent 
with passion, were appealing to his own, and 
her mellow voice breathed its tender music 
into his ear — when the balmy Italian air 
was impregnated with perfume, and all 
around was a scene of overpowering beauty 
and exquisite quietude, worthy to form the 
paradise of two passionate hearts. The thrill 
of ecstasy which this vision of past happi- 
ness created, recalled him to the painful 
consciousness that the demon of politics had 
entered that Eden, and of its rare and con- 
vsummate bliss left him nothing but the 
recollection. 

He imagined the proud daughter of Lord 
Falkland still nursino- her indio:nation at 
the proof of her lover's unworthiness she 
considered he had displayed — still obdurate, 
still irreconcileable, still haughty and con- 
temptuous. In this, however, he was some- 
what in error. On further reflection, the 
young lady entertained an impression that 
she might have been too hasty. She recalled 

m3 



250 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

his words; more than this, she recalled all 
the deep impressions of his sincerity and 
honour he had left there, on their forced 
separation at Rome, which she knew could 
not be effaced from her heart — she weighed 
them well, and she began to doubt she had 
done him justice. 

She even condescended to make inquiries 
of her aunt, respecting the assumed intimacy 
of her lover with Lady Archibald Hamilton ; 
and though Lady Furbelow loved a little 
scandal, and any thing but loved Lady 
Archibald, and was too much a woman of 
the world to heed such intimacy, had it 
existed, she w^as too well conversant with 
the real state of the case, and too much the 
friend of Horace Walpole, not to endeavour 
to remove the prejudices against him her 
niece had contracted. 

The result was as we have just intimated 
— ]\Iiss Falkland began to suspect that she had 
wronged him. It was unfortunate for him at 
this time that he had ceased to mix as much in 
society as he had been in the habit of doing. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 251 

He spent most of his leisure mth his father, 
and the rest of his time was occupied either 
with important state business, or in literary 
occupations. He did not show himself at 
Lady Furbelow's assemblies for several 
weeks. 

But Miss Falkland had other prejudices 
to get rid of. She went heart and hand in 
the conspiracy in which her beloved father 
was engaged. She had been taught to 
regard Sir Robert AYalpole as his most 
formidable enemy; and the more deeply she 
saw her parent involved in the perilous 
intrio^ues of the Jacobites to restore the 
Pretender, the more vindictive she believed 
the Minister to be disposed towards him. 
Her filial love caused her to fancy the con- 
fidential Minister of the Usurper, as her 
friends invariably styled George 11. , thirsting 
for his blood. The animosity with which 
she rejiarded the father, in course of time 
prejudiced her against the son. With all 
the power which the tender associations of 
the past exerted over her, her devotion to 



252 STRA^VBERRY HILL. 

her parent was such, that she would not 
entertain a thought, or encourage a feeling, 
that seemed opposed to his security or hap- 
2)iness. 

There is no knowin": what mio'ht have 
ensued, had she come to a proper under- 
standing with her lover; but his absence did 
him great disservice. The mood for recon- 
cihation lasted only till she began to suspect 
he had become quite indifferent to her, and 
purposely kept out of her way. When 
Horace again visited Lady Furbelow, he 
learned that her niece had, the day previous- 
ly, received a communication, believed to be 
from Lord Falkland, which caused her to 
leave London instantly. 

He could obtain no information of her 
destination, for her Ladyship would talk of 
nothing but romances. There appeared 
some mystery in this hasty departure of 
Miss Falkland, and he could not avoid en- 
tertaining fears that it was connected with 
the conspiracy of the Jacobites he had so 
strangely discovered. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 253 



But he had business of still greater ur- 
gency pressing upon him — business that he 
dared not neglect, even to look after the 
safety of the woman to Avhom he was so 
devotedly attached. The Whigs were again 
divided, and jealous of the Minister's 
influence — the Tories again furiously 
j)atriotic — "the boys" becoming more auda- 
cious in their declamations. The Opposition 
daily gained strength, and with a pertinacity 
that would be satisfied with nothing that 
fell short of their object, they harassed the 
Government with perpetual divisions : grown 
wiser by defeat, they took care not to make 
their demonstrations till there could be no 
doubt they were in a condition to make them 
with the effect they desired. 

They waited their opportunity ; they hus- 
banded their resources ; they availed them- 
selves of every advantage to weaken the 
ranks of the Ministry, and strengthen their 
own. These tactics were successful in one 
or two instances — on one occasion Pulteney 
obtained a small majority. Small as it was, 



254 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

it was quite sufficient to give confidence to 
his party, and render the waverers among 
the Whigs more inclined to abandon their 
leader. 

The Duke of Newcastle was intrif^uin": ; 
and so was Lord Hardwicke, the Lord 
Chancellor; and so were a good many more 
of the Whig Peers. 

Walpole, finding from a quarter in which 
he placed considerable confidence, that the 
Prince of Wales was still the active head of 
this powerful confederacy, sought to silence 
his opposition with a bribe of £50,000 per 
annum ; but, unfortunately for the Minister, 
the patriots were around his Royal Highness ; 
and disposed though he was to obtain this 
important addition to his income, their re- 
presentations, that they in a very short 
time would be able to secure for him a much 
larger sum, induced him to withstand the 
temptation, and return the marvellously dis- 
interested reply, that he would listen to no 
proposals as long as Sir Robert Walpole 
remained in his Majesty's service. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 255 

The Minister tried his never-failing ex- 
pedient in other high quarters, and, strange 
to say, with the same want of success. 
This result would have surprised him less, 
had he known that in each instance his own 
tactics had been employed against him. 

The Minister continued to be attacked 
with greater inveteracy — the young patriots 
were becoming frantic, and the old ones 
more furious; the divisions followed each 
other in rapid succession, and it at last 
became evident he could no longer command 
a majority. His colleagues now refused to 
act with him ; the public business was at a 
stand-still, and even to the warmest of his 
admirers, and the steadiest of his supporters, 
it was painfully clear there was but one course 
open to him — He must resign. 

Horace had been indefatigable in endea- 
vouring to stem the torrent that threatened 
to annihilate his father's political greatness. 
All day, and almost all night, he was engaged 
in making arrangements with his friends to 
sustain the Walpole interest. But he was 



256 STRAAYBERRY HILL. 

at last made to understand the bitter truth, 
that the iiat had gone forth — that tlie Minis- 
ter, whose greatness had appeared so truly 
glorious, must cease to exercise those covet* 
able functions. A resignation was inevitable. 

Sir Robert had had power in his hands 
too long, to be easily disposed to give it up. 
He had fought a good fight — he had chal- 
lenged his opponents to bring any specific 
accusation against him; but they did not 
want accusations — they wanted place, and 
would have it. He saw no advantage could 
be obtained by continuing the contest; but 
with the tact of an old campaigner he con- 
trived to end his days of power by a graceful 
surrender to his enemies; and his last act 
was to bestow on the Prince of Wales the 
promised £50,000 per annum, with valuable 
posts to two of his friends — which so mollified 
his Royal Highness, that he vowed hence- 
forth to do him all the service in his 
power. 

We may as well add here, that the over- 
throw of Walpole was the cause almost of as 



STRAWBEKRY HILL. 257 

much disappointment as satisfaction to his 
assailants. Those who expected to profit 
by it most, were signally disappointed. 
Bolingbroke found himself just where he 
was: he had hunted the game for the 
advantage of others. The patriotic Pul- 
teney was induced to refrain from taking 
office, but affected to be satisfied with a 
peerage and the disposal of much govern- 
ment patronage; and the Duke of New- 
castle, finding there was no chance just then 
of his becoming premier, was glad enough to 
retain the post he had hitherto been allowed 
to fill. Bubb Doddington was equally un- 
fortunate: his promised peerage proved a 
most tantalizing mirage — the nearer he ap- 
proached it, the further it always receded. 

There is one person who, although very 
little has been said of him, was more afiected 
by this change in the government than any 
one. This was the King. Even the Minis- 
ter's son did not take his doAvnfall so much 
to heart as did his royal master. His 
Majesty could not forget the terms in which 



258 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

he had been recommended to Sir Robert by 
the dying Queen : and the forced separation 
of that union, which had existed ever since, 
he could not help regarding as a most cruel 
divorce. 

Finding the retrograde movement of his 
favourite inevitable, he endeavoured to con- 
vert it into a retreat, with all the honours 
of statesmanship. A day or two previously 
to AYalpole's retirement from his councils, 
the latter was raised to the peerage with the 
title of Earl of Orford, and a pension of 
£4,000 a year. The King's interest in him 
was still further shewn, by his Majesty 
interfering personally to prevent his suffer- 
ing from the vindictive hostility of his 
triumphant enemies. 

But even these testimonies of his regard 
did not satisfy his Majesty. A lover forcibly 
parted from his mistress could not have 
regarded it as a greater calamity, than did 
George 11. this deprivation of his old friend 
and counsellor. From the time the painful 
intelli":ence was communicated to him, that 



STRAWBERRY KILL. 259 

the intimacy so agreeable to both parties 
must be dissolved, he seemed like a man to 
whom comfort must henceforth be a stranger. 
All his old habits were to be broken up, and 
he had to transfer his confidence to indivi- 
duals whom he particularly disliked. Surely 
never was a monarch in his old age placed 
in such extremely disagreeable circum- 
stances. 

All his thoughts that were not given to 
" the Wallmoden," — the German chere amie^ 
whom he had raised to the dignity of 
Countess of Yarmouth, after the precedents 
left by his royal father — were bestowed on 
objects of a martial character or tendency. 
George II. in his old age, seemed striving to 
recommend himself at the court of Venus 
by assuming the character of Mars. He had 
heard the battle's roar, and preferred it to 
Handel's most spirited chorus. He desired 
to be a great general — he wished to become 
a hero. 

His Majesty was alone in his cabinet, 
which at this period of his history had all 



260 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

the appearance of a small arsenal: every 
corner was filled with sabres, muskets, and 
halberts; helmets and military caps of dif- 
ferent fashions were suspended from the 
walls, by the side of pictures of great battles, 
and diagrams of celebrated campaigns; 
models of pieces of ordnance were half con- 
cealed by maps, partly unrolled, of the coun- 
tries in which the game of war was now 
being played; and a few books, half hid 
amongst a mass of despatches, letters, and 
military documents, were spread confusedly 
over a table, by which was placed a richly 
embroidered chair, surmounted by a royal 
crown. 

The King was dressed in a field mar- 
shal's uniform — a dress he liked a vast deal 
better than his kingly robes — and with a 
grave and scrutinizing glance was standing 
near a window, examining the accoutre- 
ments of one of his best regiments. His 
heavy features, which had been rendered 
gloomy by regret for the loss of his Minister, 
lighted up now and then with an approving 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 261 

smile, as he observed that the belt, or car- 
touch-box, or bayonet-sheath, was exactly 
what it ought to be. 

A knock was heard at the door. 

" Come in ! " cried the Kins:, without takinof 

CD' O 

his eyes off the object he was examining mth 
such intense interest. 

One of the pages of the back stairs entered, 
and with the usual formalities announced 
that a painter, one Hogarth, waited in the 
ante-room, to have the honour of exhibiting 
to his Majesty his picture of the March of 
his Majesty's Guards to Finchley. 

" Bicture! " exclaimed the King, who 
still adhered to his Westphalian pronuncia- 
tion of English, '^ A bicture of my guards 
marging to Yinchley! Bring in der bic- 
ture, and let der bainter stay where he is ! " 

In a few seconds two pages entered the 
cabinet, bringing the production alluded to. 
His Majesty conmianded them to place it in 
the light, and then with his hands behind 
him, stooping his body towards the chair on 
which the frame rested, he began to scru^ 



262 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

tinize it in the same manner he had just 
done the accoutrements. 

The first object that attracted his atten- 
tion, was one of the soldiers in the well- 
known sugar-loaf cap: he recognized the 
regimentals with a smile of approval; but 
whether it was the King expected the artist 
would have delineated his crack regiment 
engaged in some heroic enterprise, or fancied 
that the humour with which the subject was 
treated was intended to ridicule the military 
art, his Majesty's face suddenly assumed a 
tint as scarlet as his regimentals ; and turn- 
ing to the astonished pages, with a loud 
voice he bade them carry it away. 

As they proceeded to execute the royal 
commands, they were indignantly bade to 
" tell der bainter to take away his drumpery, 
and not no more never bresume to garigadure 
his guards." With this ungracious message 
were added directions for Sir Robert Walpole 
to come to him directly he entered the 
palace. 

The King returned to the examination of 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 263 

his military accoutrements, muttering a pro- 
digious anathema in German on the audacity 
of this English painter, Hogarth, in seeking 
to hold soldiers up to ridicule, and half in- 
clined to have him tried by a court-martial. 
In due time his anger subsided, and then he 
was reminded that his old friend and coun- 
sellor was coming to take leave of him. 
This gave him very melancholy thoughts. 
He soon forgot the displeasure the March to 
Finchley had excited, in his grief at the 
approaching separation. 

Presently the door opened, and the new- 
made Earl of Orford was announced. He 
entered — his good-humoured countenance 
impressed with as much sorrow as it 
was possible to express, with such very 
jovial features. For twenty years he had 
been a statesman — he had enjoyed the 
confidence of his Royal Master without in- 
terruption; and, in short, he had been 
sovereign in everything but name: for 
George 11. , satisfied with the AYallmoden, 
and the study of the art of war, willing!}- 



2G4 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

left all the trouble of government to his 
able Minister. Now the great man was 
about to bid adieu for ever to aU this 
greatness, and to a Master who had been 
so wonderfully indulgent. It required more 
philosopliy than any statesman could be ex- 
pected to possess — more, even, than could be 
claimed by the deeply disappointed philo- 
sopher of Battersea — to abandon mthout 
regret a state of things so exceedmgly 
agreeable. 

But if the favourite Minister was deficient 
in philosophy, his Royal Master was in a 
still more lamentable condition. Visions of 
endless trouble haunted h m; he saw that 
he could no longer hope for the uninter- 
rupted enjoyment of his two great sources 
of happiness; he had the fear before his 
eyes of never being safe from intrusion. 
What was to become of his army ! and, oh, 
what was to become of the Wallmoden ! 

These questions presented themselves to 
the disturbed mind of the King, as he 
beheld the friendly face of his favourite. 



STEAWBERRY HILL. 2G5 

Dropping with a cry of joy the gaiter of a 
grenadier, the button-holes of which he had 
been carefully counting, he hastened to 
meet his faithful counsellor, and grasped him 
affectionately by the hand. Lord Orford 
bent one knee to the ground, but the poor 
old King was too much overcome by his 
feelings to attend to ceremony. He fell on 
his neck, and absolutely cried like a child. 

It would be doing the fallen Minister 
great injustice to state that this proof of 
sympathy from his sovereign did not affect 
him. His eyes were humid — they spoke of 
emotion — his heart was beating disturbedly, 
and from the same influence. 

This was a curious spectacle: two old 
men — one a monarch, long believed to pos- 
sess as little sensibility as sense — and the 
other his servant, who had obtained the 
reputation of being a mere machine for the 
service of the government, were weeping 
in each other's arms, displaying, under an 
influence that swept away the long ac- 
customed barriers of ceremony, like a crumb- 

VOL. II. N 



2(i6 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

ling mud-bank before an inundation of the 
sea, the presence of that touch of nature 
that not only '^ makes the whole world kin," 
but creates in human hearts a brotherhood 
more endearing even than that of birth. 



•STRAWBERRY HU.L. 267 



CHAPTER XII. 

AN ADVENTURE ON THE COAST. 

On the coast of Kent, opposite to the 
French shores, a natural cave had been 
formed in the cliff, of such extent as to 
make an excellent hiding-place, not only for 
a numerous band of smugglers, but for a 
vast quantity of goods which had been de- 
posited there till an opportunity served for 
conveying them into the interior. The 
place had a singular aspect: innumerable 
kegs of spirits were heaped confusedly with 

n2 



2G8 STRAWBERKY HILL. 

barrels of tobacco, and large packages of 
French manufactures — while here and there 
were hung cutlasses, blunderbusses, pistols, 
and boarding-pikes, each ready for use the 
A'ery moment it was required. 

A hundred years ago, and even much 
later, the smuofo-lers on the coast were as 

' CO 

numerous as they were daring. They were 
often assisted by the farmers of the neigh- 
bourhood, who of course found their profit 
in it ; and the tradesmen were frequently, in 
some way or other, more or less engaged in 
the unlawful traffic. It was not unusual for 
a gang to be commanded by a person holding 
the position of gentleman — a small squire, 
who having wasted his patrimony in riotous 
indulgences, obtained the command of a 
vessel, and the assistance of a picked crew, 
and went on a trading voyage to France, 
Holland, or Spain, bringing back a valuable 
cargo, which he took particular care should 
never approach a Custom House. 

Becoming bolder by success, and more 
skilful by experience, the amateur captain 



STRAWBErtRY HILL. 2G9 

would venture upon longer voyages; and it 
was not an uncommon thing for the bold 
smugglers to become equally bold pirates; and 
the reputation which had commenced with a 
successful run in a fast-sailin'^: luo^orer from 

o CO 

Rotterdam to Dover cliffs, often concluded 
with a tranquil sail into some secret bay in 
the island of Cuba, after a daring cruise in 
an armed schooner in the track of the mer- 
chant vessels trading to the West Indies. 

These smugglers were equally obnoxious 
to the government in another way. They 
were the medium of communication between 
the disaffected Jacobites in England and the 
adherents of the Pretender abroad. Througli 
their agency the leaders of the Jacobites 
were made acquainted with the projects of 
the exiled Stuarts, and in the same manner 
those unfortunate princes learned to what 
extent their followers in England were de- 
voted to their cause. 

Through their agency, also, many an ex- 
patriated gentleman, on vhose head a price 
had been set, had been enabled to land in 



270 STEAWBERRY HILL. 

Enixland in concealment, had communicated 
with individuals kno^vn to be unfavourably 
disposed towards the existing government, 
and after having securely spread the seeds 
of disaffection in the land, had again gone 
on board some fast-sailing smuggler, and in 
a few hours would be in safety on the oppo- 
site coast. 

In one of the caves to which we have just 
referred, two persons were sitting, evidently 
engaged in earnest discourse, in a foreign 
lano:uao:e. One was a female, rather above 
the medium height, but so wrapped up in a 
large coarse boat-cloak that her figure could 
not easily be defined; her companion was of 
the other sex, and his sleek visage and keen 
dark eye declared him a priest of the Roman 
faith, though he was disguised as a foreign 
pedlar. 

What occasion two such persons could 
have there, in a cold moon-light night, was 
not very clear. They certainly were not 
smugglers — nor was it very likely they 
were customers — indeed, they looked of a 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 271 

totally different class to the adventurous 
individuals from the interior, who sought 
the smugglers' cave upon speculation. 

The female, apparently, had been listemiig 
to her companion with earnest attention, 
and, as he believed, with a good deal of 
amusement. It appeared that he had but 
just arrived in that part of the country, 
direct from London, and was pouring out 
the budget of intelligence he had picked up 
in the great city. 

" Holy Mother ! " he exclaimed with Catho- 
lic fervour, " it is a wonderful piece of good 
fortune ! I know not anything that could 
have happened so favourable to our cause, 
as this downfall of Walpole." 

" Then Sir Robert AValpole is no longer 
in the Usurper's service? " inquired his fair 
companion, earnestly. 

" He has been sent about his business 
in the most summary way," said her in- 
formant, exultingly. " Deprived of all hi^ 
employments, hurled from power, and strip- 
ped of his ill-got wealth; he has nothing 



'>"''> STRAWBERRY HILL. 



^ i ^ 



for it but to end the remnant of his days 
in ignominy, poverty, and disgrace — all 
glory be to God, and the blessed Virgin ! " 

" I am sorry for him, father," replied the 
other, in a low voice. 

'' ^Vhat, daughter! did I hear aright?" 
sharply inquired her associate, " Sorry for 
the disgrace of Sir Robert Walpole ! Sorry 
for the overthroAV of the greatest obstacle 
in the way of your King, and the most 
dangerous enemy to your parent ! A Falk- 
land sorry for the ruin of a Walpole? 'Tis 
incredible ! " 

* 'Father Michaeli!" said Miss Falkland, 
for there now could be no mistake as to her 
identity, " I trust I know my duty, both to 
my King and to my parent. Nevertheless, 
I cannot but regret that such a man as Sir 
Robert Waljoole should be driven with dis- 
grace from a position, no one who sought 
the service of the Elector of Hanover could 
have filled more worthily." 

" Santa Maria ! what strange stuff is this ! " 
cried the ecclesiastic, his face purpling with 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 273 

rage. " AYalpole — a rebel, a corrupt, profli- 
gate, tyrannical despot, who held nothing 
before his eyes but his own interests, and 
cared not how the wealth of the crown was 
squandered, so that sufficient of it went to 
the aggrandizement of his own family! I 
know not, daughter, what there can be in 
this man to call for your pity, unless it is 
because his hopeful son, whose character, by 
all accounts, is not more creditable than his 
father's, is involved in the same ruin." 

" Father Michaeli ! " exclaimed the young- 
lady proudly, as she rose from her seat, " I 
think it proper to state to you, that your 
insinuation respecting myself is not more 
creditable to you than your charge against 
Mr. Walpole. You would have shewn more 
judgment, had you refrained from casting 
unworthy suspicions upon the daughter of 
Lord Falldand; you would at least have 
exhibited your charity, had you refrained 
from speaking harshly of a man who can no 
longer be his enemy — if, as I have every 
reason to believe, he has no longer either the 

N 3 



274 STRAWBERRY HELL. 

power or tlie inclination to injure him. 
What his son can have done to have excited 
your hostility, I know not — I only know, 
that according to common report, a man of 
purer honour or of higher talent than Mr. 
Horace Walpole is not easily to be found in 
the King's dominions." 

Here was a change! When Arabella 
Falkland last met the gentleman she was 
now so warmly eulogizing, his position was 
as low in her estimation as it could possibly 
be. But she had thought a good deal since 
then — she had been convinced that she had 
done him injustice. There was something 
that was even still more in his favour. 
Then^ Horace Walpole was the son of the 
most powerful man in Europe, and was the 
idol of popular acclamation; under such 
circumstances she could be as indignant as 
she pleased : l)ut Horace Walpole was at 
the present moment nothing but the son 
of a disgraced favourite — his ambitious as- 
pirations bloAvn to the winds, and his pride 
humbled to the dust. Under these circum- 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 275 

stances, not only she could not say — she 
would not hear a word to his disparage- 
ment. 

Father Michaeli was a great deal aston- 
ished at the rebuke he had just heard. He 
had not forgotten several speeches that had 
proceeded from the same mouth, of a won- 
derfully opposite tendency. Another man 
might have remonstrated — another priest 
might have had recourse to more severe 
Isinmsi^e. But the Padre Michaeli was a 
wise man, and an indulgent priest. He had 
known his patron's daughter from child- 
hood; and preferred changing the subject, 
to continuing: one that she thouo:ht dis- 
agreeable. 

" Are you certain my father intends to 
cross the channel to-night?" Miss Falkland 
inquired, as she resumed her seat. 

" Such was his Lordship's intention, if he 
found it could be done with safety," was the 
reply ; " matters of the greatest consequence 
have occurred in France, which renders a 
personal conference with you necessary, how- 



276 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

ever dangerous, as such is highly essential 
to the success of the important undertak- 
ing m which his Lordship is engaged." 

"At what hour are we to expect him? " 

" At twelve : a large piece of sail-cloth 
hoisted on a pole — which lies ready for use 
in yonder corner of the cave — will give my 
Lord notice that you are here. He ^vill, 
immediately on beholding this signal, jump 
into a boat and be rowed ashore. But his 
stay must be very brief; for as soon as his 
Lordship has acquainted you with what he 
desires you should learn, he must return to 
his vessel, and get back to France as quickly 
as he can." 

Miss Falkland went to the opening of the 
cave where the light was strongest, and 
looked at a watch she wore in her dress. It 
^v^s midnight. 

" Quick, Father ^lichaeli ! Let us hoist 
the sio^nal ! " she exclaimed. 

The pole was a heavy one, but the daughter 
of Lord Falkland, with a zealous alacrity, 
set about assisting the priest in carrying 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 277 

it from its hiding place out upon the sands. 
The sail-cloth was easily made fast to the 
top, and, by their united exertions, the pole 
was raised, and the base securely fastened 
in the sand. The temporary flag was rapidly 
unfurled, and flapped noisily in the wind. 
Father ]\Iichaeli feared the unusual sound 
might attract some straggling spy to the 
neighbourhood ; and, knowing what his fate 
would be were he caught in his present occu- 
pation, requested his companion to return to 
the cave for his pistols. 

Arabella at once departed on her errand. 

She reached the cave, in which she re- 
mained some time before she could discover 
the object of her errand. When she quitted 
it, the sail was still flapping in the breeze, 
but a sight met her gaze that seemed to turn 
her blood to water. Her eye fell upon the 
forms of two soldiers in the peculiar uni- 
form of the Grenadiers of Georo-e II., with 
fearful oaths and ribald jests driving the old 
priest into the sea, as they rushed upon hun 
with fixed bayonets. 



278 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

She stood like one transfixed, unable to 
move or speak. The shrieks of the victim, 
as the weapons of the brutal soldiers were 
thrust into his flesh to quicken his retreating 
steps to the waves that came bounding to- 
wards him, nerved her to desperation. She 
made a quick movement forward — but a 
fearful shriek and a heavy plunge soon 
assured her she had come too late. 

Too late to save, but not too late to 
avenge, as his murderers quickly disco- 
vered; for on turning \vith a ferocious 
laugh to retrace their steps, their bayonets 
reeking with the blood of their victim, 
they were amazed at beholding a tall 
figure in a long cloak, with a face of deadly 
pallor, standing in their path, Avith pistols 
levelled at their heads. They gave one 
shout, and rushed on, with their steaming 
bayonets thirsting for a second victim.. 

Another moment, they would have borne 
her lovely body mangled to the ground; 
but when the points of their deadly steel 
almost touched her person, two quick flashes 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 279 

were followed by as many sharp reports, and 
the two soldiers fell back on the sand, shot 
through the heart. 

A few minutes afterwards, Lord Falkland 
landed with his boat's crew, and found his 
daughter supporting herself mth one arm 
round the flag-staff, with a discharged pistol 
clenched in each hand, in a state of stupor, 
staring at the bodies of two soldiers weltering 
in their blood, extended mthin a few feet of 
her. 



280 STRA^TBEPvKY HILL. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

LIKE MASTER, LIKE 'MAN. 

When the great dignitary of the Spanish 
Church dismissed Gil Bias from his service, 
for fulfilling his own wishes in pointing out 
to his attention a falling off in his powers of 
preaching, there was an example ol one of 
the most universal of human failings. The 
ecclesiastic was too prejudiced in his own 
favour to submit to a criticism he had in- 
vited, and this prejudice is at the bottom or 
the top of all mundane affairs. Archbishops 



STIJAWBEKKY RILL. 281 

are not more subject to it than the humblest 
of the priesthood, and Spain is as far from 
being the only country where it flourishes 
in undisturbed luxuriance. Let us inquire 
a little into the nature of this very catholic 
quality. 

Prejudice is as much the result of habit 
as of education; and consists in an attach- 
ment to persons, opinions, or things, adopted 
without sufficient evidence of their value, 
and defended against every effort to disprove 
their inefficiency. With some, this goes by 
the name of partiality; but this is but a 
delusive alias to a quality in bad repute 
— like the more respectable designation 
which old offenders have recourse to in pre- 
ference to their own. 

Prejudice is so general, that the man or 
woman would deserve to be considered an 
eighth wonder, who should be found without 
it. It comes as natural to us as our arms 
and legs. We are early inoculated with its 
virus, and are pretty sure of having it dif- 
fused throughout our whole system. In 



282 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

short, no adult can be perfectly unprejudiced, 
unless he unlearn all that has been tauo^ht 
him, and apply himself to the study of the 
truth with no other object than the general 
good. 

Prejudices surround us at every period of 
life, and are not unfrequently carried with 
us to the grave. They are thrust down our 
throats mth the pap-spoon — physic us in the 
conunon infirmities of our nature — and form 
as common an ingredient in our ordinary 
gratifications. Prejudice is universal: we 
have as much of it lolling in a carriage as 
dawdling behind a counter; and it is as 
conspicuously seen sitting in full state when 
on the woolsack, as trudging in rags along 
the road. We are as careful of it as our 
railway legislators are of their o^vn interests. 
We carry it to church with the prayer-book, 
and bring it home with the text. 

And yet, how we sufi'er for it ! Suicides 
rush on death from prejudice — through the 
same influence, martyrs have been consumed 
at the stake. Juggernaut is not the only 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 283 

idol under whose groaning chariot-wheels 
countless victims of prejudice have been im- 
molated; and numberless are the pyres it 
has liofhted, besides those of the Suttee. If 
we would see one of unusual extravagance, 
we may behold it in the brazen monster that 
has lately frightened all Piccadilly; if we 
choose it for its most trivial shape, we have 
nothing to do but to go to Tom Thumb. 

We have it in every form. Wars are 
horrid prejudices — superstitions are silly pre- 
judices — the Game Laws are t3a'annical pre- 
judices — and ordinances that give particular 
advantages to particular classes, are preju- 
dices that are foolish, unprofitable, and 
unjust. It is only at the end of a lawyer's 
letter, when negotiating a settlement, that 
we are likely to find we can entertain a pro- 
posal "^vithout prejudice." 

People put all their faith in their preju- 
dices, as if they hoped to be saved by them : 
like a ship's crew, who fancy themselves 
secure in the wildest storm, because there is 
a child's caul in the captain's cabin. You 



284 STKAWBERRY HILL. it 

may tread on a person's toes, and may get 
off with an apology : but tread on his pre- 
judices, and you are a lost man. This 
hostile influence once exerted, it extends it- 
self, like an ill weed as it is, so rapidly, and 
takes such deep root in the soil, that there 
is no getting it out, no prophesying where it 
will cease. If our neighbour has excited it — 
no unusual occurrence — it spreads to his 
family, to his friends, and to his servants. 
His favourite dog becomes an ill-conditioned 
cur, and his wife's cat bears the most dis- 
creditable of feline characters. 

If there was one person in the world to 
whom this sinister influence applied more 
strongly than any other, it was to the dis- 
o^raced i\Iinister's old and faithful steward. 
When he heard that his master was dis- 
missed, he resolutely determined not to be- 
lieve it. The thino^ was altoj^ether unnatural. 
It would be much more likely that Sir Robert 
would dismiss the Kin<r, than that the Kin<]f 
would dismiss Sir Robert. Oswald, too, had 
for so long a period, as a confidential domes- 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 285 

tic of the Minister, been connected with the 
State, that he beheved himself to be as com- 
plete a fixture in it as his master; and 
when he had orders to quit Whitehall, he 
felt as much wi^onged as if he had been 
deprived of a rightful inheritance. 

All the time he superintended the removal 
from the official residence he had occupied 
for such a length of time, he could regard 
the change only as resulting from a sort of 
earthquake, which rendered the place un- 
safe. Every now and then he held up his 
hands, or shook his head, or displayed some 
of those telegraphic signs which people of 
his class refer to, when subjected to some 
sudden shock, which perj)lexes them beyond 
the power of words to express. 

He hadbecome so habituated to a ministerial 
atmosphere, that it seemed as though he could 
breathe in no other. Indeed, his nature, by 
this protracted service, like the dyer's hand, 
had contracted in some respect the tone of 
what it worked in. It was not unusual for 
him, towards his subordinates, to assume 



286 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

something of the bearing of a First Lord 
of the Treasury towards his clerks and secre- 
taries; and there were occasions when, in 
his own ^' Cabinet," as he styled a little sit- 
tinsr-room in the official residence that was 
set apart for his particular use, he affected, 
in the society of a favoured friend, a little 
of that diplomatic phraseology with which 
his ears had been made famihar through the 
medium of the keyhole, during official con- 
ferences and ministerial interviews. 

The ingenious and ingenuous Fibbs he 
had selected as his sole friend and scholar ; 
for he was much in the habit of opening be- 
fore the travelled valet the vast store of his 
experience, and seemed anxious to initiate 
him in all the mysteries of secret service, the 
flummery of embassies, and the rigmarole 
of negotiation. If Fibbs was not thoroughly 
qualified to become a first-rate statesman, 
or prepared to enter upon the duties of an 
ambassador to a foreign court, it was not 
the fault of his communicative friend. We 
are obliged to acknowledo^e that these lessons 



STKAWBERRY HILL. 287 

were not entirely -without effect ; the inge- 
nious Fibbs fancied he could shine in Par- 
liament ; and more than once, at their weekly 
supper at the Admiral Vernon, was heard 
to address the President as " Mr. Speaker." 
The two worthies were again together. 
They were sitting in close conference in 
the snug parlour of the Admiral Vernon, 
smoking long pipes, and drinking purl out of 
tall glasses; and whether it was that they 
had drunk so much, or that they had 
smoked so much, had talked so much, or 
thought so much, their looks were much 
less sober than usual. The old man's wior, 
too, was almost off his head — and the dress 
of the travelled valet betrayed signs of a 
carelessness respecting his appearance, very 
uncommon in a gentleman's gentleman of 
his pretensions. 

A hundred years ago, drinking was very 
much the fashion, in high places as well as 
in low. While their Lords got drunk on 
claret, it was customary for their servants 
to get equally drunk on purl. The decanter 



288 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

and the tankard were had recourse to on all 
occasions. If a gentleman won a wager, or 
lost his wife, he made it a point to drink 
himself under the table ; if he held a prize 
in the lottery, or heard of the failure of 
his banker, he felt equally bound to render 
it necessary for his servants to carry him 
to bed. 

Inebriety being so respectable, we need 
make no apology for our friends having 
followed the fashion. Their reason for 
being in such a state was, however, rather 
an unusual one ; for they had been brought 
together by a common sympathy in the dis- 
grace of the head of the House of Walpole, 
and they had been encouraging each other in 
washing it down, as they communicated their 
sentiments on the awful state of things 
which had led to such a catastrophe. 

Notwithstanding that Fibbs was so much 
in the habit of giving the reins to his 
tongue, the volubility of his senior, im- 
pelled as it was by his overwhelming sense 
of wrong, left him scarcely an opportunity 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 289 

of opening his mouth — indeed he found 
himself unable to finish a single sentence. 

" I have given in my resignation," said 
the old man, with a most statesman-like 
gravity, after he had replenished the glasses, 
and drunk to his companion with the usual 
ceremonies. " The club will now, T s'pose, 
call to the helm that old rascal M'Foxie. 
As for myself, I have done with state affairs. 
I have no intention whatsomever of med- 
dling with politics again. Things is come 
to such a dreadful pass, that nothing but 
revolution, and anarchy, and the utter dis- 
organization of society, can be expected. 
When such scum as that sneakino^ Scotchman 
has the conducting of our affairs, it 's high 
time for them as has a regard for themselves 
to get out of the whole concern as quick as 
thev can." 

'' A very necessary conclusion. Old Cock! " 
exclaimed the other, who was much the 
freshest of the two. " As we said at 
Cambridge, its arguing from right premises 
to—" 

VOL. II. 



290 STRAWBEERY HELL. 

" But we retires with honour, Fibbs," 
continued the steward of the discarded 
Minister. 

" Of course we does," readily responded 
his friend, trying, as he smoked his pipe, to 
look extremely consoled. '^ Honour, as I 
said to the charming Madame Pomme de 
Terre — " 

" They can't deprive us of the commen- 
dation of our own consciences," he added. 
" We have always stood up for Church and 
State — we have supported the Monarchy — 
we have advocated the best interests of the 
Is^ation." 

" Hear ! hear ! " cried Fibbs. 

" AVe haven't obtained no improper grants 
— we an't profited by no monopolies — we 
never took no advantage of nobody — and 
always kept ourselves within the pale of the 
constitution." 

" To be sure we did." 

" And now we quits public life altogether. 
We abandons speeches and protocols, and an 
ungrateful countr}^ — we bids adieu to the 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 291 

tumults of party, and the slanders of political 
rivals — we quits the stormy atmosphere of 
St. Stephen's, and the false friendships of a 
Court, for the pure air of our native Hough- 
ton, and the solid pleasures of Norfolk 
turkeys, Norfolk dum^^lings, and Norfolk 
sausasres." 

" Fortunate senex ! — as we said at Eton," 
cried Fibbs, in ecstasy. " Hie inter — " 

" But the time will come — there's not a 
doubt on't — it's obvious to any one who 
regards the unnatural aspect of the political 
horizon — the time 'v\ill come, when the 
vessel of the State, tossed to and fro in the 
stormy waves of faction, will want the ser- 
vices of an experienced pilot to rescue it 
from the quicksands of revolution; then^ 
mayhap, some folks may remember the hand 
that for twenty mortal years directed the 
helm, the voice that commanded the crew, 
the eye that discovered the hidden dangers 
of the navigation, and the head that found a 
resource for every difficulty, a refuge from 
every peril, a security in every danger — then 

2 



292 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

they may think of recalling the man who 
had served them so long and well, and got 
so little perquisites, to bring them back to 
safety and honour; but liPd ever take any 
manner of notice of sich a horrid set of un- 
grateful wretches, as after so long a service 
had infamously discharged me without a 
character — if I'd ever work for them again 
under any circumstances whatsomever, I'm 
BLOWED ! " 

The emphasis given to the last expressive 
words was accompanied with such a pro- 
digious thump on the table, that it made 
the tankard, the candlestick, and the glasses, 
jump in a style that very much threatened 
their centre of gravity. 

" That 's my idtimatum^^ added the late 
attendant at the Treasury, as he proceeded 
to relight his pipe. 

" Non pub far meglio, as we said in Italy," 
replied his friend, striving to refiU his o^^oi 
glass, in which he contrived to pour as 
much outside as in. " By the way, that re- 
minds me of a mighty interesting conversa- 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 293 

tion I had with the fascinating Baroness 
]\Iaccaroni, who said to me, ' Signor Fibbs,' 
says she, ' idolo mio^ says she, in her soft 
way, 'I'—" 

''I hates ingratitude!" sternly exclaimed 
the discarded Minister's faithful domestic; 
" I loathes it. It 's worse than board wages, 
or a Methodist housekeeper. And ingrati- 
tude to so unrivalled a statesman — so match- 
less a Minister — so incomparable a man as 
Sir Robert Walpole, an't to be tolerated in 
a Christian community." 

"And we z^/'t'n^ tolerate it, old fellow!" 
cried the ingenious Fibbs, making an effort 
to preserve his equilibrium, as his head kept 
falling forward, mth a decided inclination 
for the sanded boards. 

'' When I thinks of the merits of that great 
man," resumed the other, with increased 
solemnity, " when I calls to mind the extent 
of his services, the vastness of his talents, 
his marvellous eloquence, his wonderful 
skill, his extraordinary knowledge of our 
affairs at home and abroad, and compares 



294 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

him with the sneaking Pelhams who betrayed 
him — the crafty Bolingbroke, who plotted 
against him — the hypocritical Pulteney, who 
strove to supplant him — and the rest of the 
worthless crew who joined in hunting him 
out of his place, I owns my very blood boils 
again such injustice, and I am eager to 
publish my protest again ' a proceeding 
so injurious to the best interests of the 
country." 

" Hurrah for Walpole ! " shouted the 
excited Fibbs. 

" We '11 drink his Honour's health," said 
the old man, rising to reach the tankard, 
and parting company with his wig, " and 
then we must make the best of our ways 
home, as it 's getting late, and we starts 
for Houghton the first thing in the morning." 

"' Drink his health? Of course we 11 drink 
his health," repeated the other, taking up 
his empty glass, which he had just before 
upset, and, placing it bottom upwards, was 
about to pour the liquor on it, when his 
soberer friend interposed, and filled it for him. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 295 

''Upstanding, with three times three," 
exclaimed Oswald, as he held out his glass ; 
" Here 's our new Lord, and old master. Sir 
Robert Walpole, now Earl of Orford ! Health 
and happiness to his Honour wherever he 
goes, and confusion to his enemies!" 

" Confusion to him wherever he goes," 
slowly repeated the travelled valet, as he 
made an attempt to rise from his seat, " and 
health and happiness to his enemies." 

" Hurrah ! " 

"Hurrah!" 

" Hurrah — Hurrah — Hurrah ! '' 

" Hurrah — Hurrah — Hurrah ! " 

" One cheer more ! " cried the tipsy 
steward, after the usual quantity of noise 
had been performed by his friend, with a 
marvellous unsteady footing, and with the 
wine running over a glass held nearly at 
rio^ht ano;les with his arm. 

" One cheer more. Old Cock — as I said to 
the exquisite Madame Pomme — " 

His final attempt at a sentimental revela- 
tion was cut short by a vociferous shout 



296 STRAWBERKY HILL. 

from his companion, as he whirled his glass 
over his head; in which he joined with a 
similar demonstration, that, hoAvever, had 
the effect of sending his glass flying to one 
end of the room, while he measured his 
length at the other. 



STRAWBERRY HELL. 297 



CHAPTER XIV. 

ALL 'S WELL THAT ENDS WELL.' 



In a smaU chamber, rudely furnished, 
apparently belonging to some cottage, not 
far from the sea shore, two persons were 
seated on a large sea-chest, that took up a 
considerable portion of the space left vacant 
by the fishing-nets, the cutlass and pistols, 
the dried haddocks, the spirit-keg, the boat- 
sail, and the pair of oars, that so incommo- 
diously furnished it. Both were closely 
wrapt in boat-cloaks, yet, despite of such 

o3 



298 STRAWBEERY HILL. 

diso-uise, it soon became obvious that neither 
was a reirular resident with the half-fisher- 
man half-smuggler proprietor of the place 
— indeed, the bright clear face, proud and 
pale, that rose above the coarse cloak worn 
by one of them, like a planet over a dark 
cloud, disclosed the features of Arabella 
Falkland, and it very soon became evident 
that her companion was her father. 

" Our time is precious, my child," he ex- 
claimed, as he gently drew her towards him 
and kissed her forehead ; " the boat waits to 
carry me back to the ship, and I believe I 
cannot return too soon, for the luckless 
homicide of the two soldiers of the Usurper 
— richly as they merited their fate, by their 
unprovoked slaughter of our martyred Padre 
— ^will no doubt cause a considerable stir in 
the next town, where their regiment is quar- 
tered ; and it would go ill with me, as well 
as with the cause we are so earnestly en- 
deavouring to forward, were any of their 
detachments to take me prisoner." 

" God forbid !" she murmured fervently. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 299 

" I shall not fail to make the Prmce aware 
of the incalculable service you have rendered 
him. You see, my love, I did not overrate 
your ability when I first proposed this dan- 
gerous service ; but I will own, you have far 
exceeded my most sanguine expectations." 

Miss Falkland smiled faintly at her 
father's eulogy; but there did not seem 
in her features the expression of any exces- 
sive satisfaction. Perhaps the approaching 
parting with her parent took away all 
sense of gratification. Perhaps her spirit 
was rendered more melancholy than usual 
by the recent slaughter of her attendant, 
and the dreadful scene that immediately fol- 
lowed. Her thoughts, however, appeared just 
then to have wandered to a different quarter. 

" I have beheld our beloved Falkland 
Court," she said, with a sweet and solemn 
interest in the tones of her most musical 
voice. " I have seen the owls flying from its 
deserted casements, and heard the Hnnet war- 
ble in its porch. If it is not permitted that I 
should live there, I trust I may have the pri- 



300 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

vilege of being placed among its honoured 
dead!" 

" Rest assured, my child, that Falkland 
Court shall soon be our own again, never 
more to be divided from us," he replied ear- 
nestly. '' But there is no time now to talk 
of this." 

" Have you no message for his Royal 
Highness?" after a short pause, inquired 
Lord Falkland, tenderly. 

The young lady hesitated ; she smiled ; 
but her smile was still melancholy. 

" The Prince will be disappointed if I 
bring back with me no communication from 
his most trusted — from his most skilful 
agent." 

" Tell his Royal Highness," she replied 
gravely, '' I pray daily for his success ; and 
that he may always count on my best exer- 
tions towards obtaining it." 

His Lordsliip appeared not quite satisfied 
with this message ; but it was neither time 
nor place for remonstrance. A pecuhar 
whistle warned him to hasten his departure. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 301 

He rose from his seat, and for a few seconds 
they were locked in an affectionate embrace. 
Another whistle of a totally different kind 
made both pause. It was a signal of some 
menacino^ danorer. Miss Falkland stood in 
an attitude of profound attention — with 
an alarmed look, certainly — but evidentlv 
with a spmt ready for any emergency. She 
well knew that her father was an outlaw, 
and that, were he to fall into the hands of 
the existing govermnent, his life would be 
in imminent danger. She knew, too, that 
he had just furnished her with papers which, 
if discovered, would not only forfeit theu^ 
own lives, but would be the ruin of the 
noblemen and gentlemen she had induced to 
join in the conspiracy, and would be the 
total destruction of the grand enterprise 
the young Prince of AVales had so much at 
heart. 

A stealthy footstep was heard approach- 
ing. Presently the little window was thrown 
open, and a rough, weather-beaten face was 
thrust into it. 



302 STRAWT3ERRY HILL. 

''Make sail, your Honour, or the land- 
sharks '11 grab ye afore ye can get afloat," 
exclaimed a gruiF voice. "The red-coats 
be bearing do^vn upon us, and we shall be 
obliged to fight or strike. So if so be your 
Honour doesn't mean to knock under, you'd 
better be prepared for close quarters. Hist ! 
there goes the Cap'n's signal for all hands. 
The lady had better come with us; but 
there arn't no tune to lose." 

One hurried embrace was all they per- 
mitted each other ; for both were well aware 
of the peril in which they were involved. 
The latch was lifted, and they were 'outside 
the hut, apparently in the outskirts of a 
straoftjlino; villa^re; but the nio^ht was so 
dark, though the moon did occasionally 
afford such glimpses of the huge cliffs before 
them, whenever she burst from the dense 
masses of cloud that hid the sky, as allowed 
of a very imperfect knowledge of the 
neighbourhood. 

Lord Falkland was well armed, and sternly 
resolved not to be taken alive. The prox- 



STRAAVBERRY HILL. 303 

imity of liis daughter embarrassed him ; it 
seemed that a desperate contest was about to 
take place, in which her young life might be 
sacrificed. Yet it was equally hazardous 
to leave her behind, as it was known that 
the soldiers were approaching in that direc- 
tion ; and her liberty was of the most vital 
importance to the Jacobite cause at that 
moment. If she could be got safely into the 
boat, it would be easy to land her on ano- 
ther part of the coast. With this idea he 
hurried her along by the side of his guide. 
They kept an unbroken silence as they cau- 
tiously descended the cliff. Suddenly the 
man stopjDcd, and they did the same. He 
appeared to be listening. A whistle was 
again heard, followed by straggling shots, 
and then a heavy fire, as of musketry. 

"Push on, your Honour!" cried the 
smuggler, loosening a pistol from his belt 
with one hand, as he drew a cutlass with 
the other ; " There '11 be hot work afore lono-. 
Lots of our friends be hereabouts, so the 
red-coats are like to have enough to do. 



304 • STRAWBERRY HILL. 

Howsomever, I wishes the lady was safe 
somewhere else, for it an't no place for 
women-folk." 

Miss Falkland calmly bade him be under 
no alarm for her. It was plain they must 
reach the boat, at any hazard ; and all she 
wished was to get there as speedily as pos- 
sible. 

" Ay, ay. Miss," answered the man 
roughly, unaware that her sole object in 
desiring dispatch was to place her father in 
safety. " But with breakers around us, we 
an't such lubbers as to carry too much sail. 
Howsomever, if I bean't mistaken, there 's 
the boat as is waiting to put ye aboard the 
' Lively Sally ; ' there she floats in the little 
bay down below." 

Lord Falkland and his dauo^hter orlanced 
in the required direction, and readily disco- 
vered the buoyant cutter that had landed 
him in the morning. Their guide now put 
his fingers into his mouth, and blew a 
whistle so piercingly shrill, that Miss Falk- 
land was startled by it. There could be no 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 305 

doubt it was heard in the proper quarter, for 
the crew, who had previously been resting 
on their oars, now pulled, with lusty strokes, 
in the direction of the shore. 

" Now, your Honour ! now. Miss ! " whis- 
pered the man ; "Be pleased to follow me 
down this here narrow path. You can hear 
by the firing that there 's sharp work going 
on: but if so be our Cap'n be strong 
enough, he '11 be able to keep the rascally 
lobsters in play till you be out of their 
reach.' ' 

There was a contingency in this, that 
neither father nor daughter liked. Their 
nerves, however, were strung to meet the 
apparent danger, and without saying a word 
they proceeded to follow their guide down 
the difficult and very tortuous path he had 
selected. The necessity of carefully minding 
their footing, for some time took off a good 
deal of their attention — nevertheless, both 
believed that the firing was rapidly approach- 
ing them : the roaring of the sea in some mea- 
sure consoled them for this. They were 



306 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

descending a steep cliff, and the boisterous 
waves were almost at their feet. 

The moon now shone out, and rendered 
their descent less hazardous. They reached 
the bottom in safety, and found themselves 
on a soft sandy beach, within a few yards 
of the sea; within, too, a trifling distance of 
the friends they were so anxious to join. 
But the light that appeared so friendly, was 
full of danger. As they reached the sands, 
they beheld a confused multitude — whose 
shouts and execrations they could distinctly 
hear — approaching them. They soon dis- 
covered that it was a large body of smug- 
glers, in full retreat, yet keeping up a 
running fire upon a detachment of soldiers 
and Custom- House officers, who were pur- 
suing. It was evident the authorities were 
aware of some unusual movement on this 
part of the coast, which was crowded with 
a lawless Jacobite population, and had de- 
termined on making an important seizure. 
The officer in command of the detachment 
of soldiers had discovered the boat, as well. 



STRiVWBERRY HILL. 307 

as the fugitives making towards it, wliom he 
rightly judged to be persons he ought to 
secure. He hurried on his men to inter- 
cept them. But the cliffs seemed alive with 
smuiTjT^lers, whom the iirinor had attracted 
to the spot, and they were rapidly descend- 
ing every possible path to reinforce their 
comrades. 

It was a position of extraordinary danger 
for the Falklands. Every step they took 
towards their friends, carried them nearer to 
their enemies; and the same wind that 
brought them the encouraging shouts of the 
boatmen, wafted to them the clear command 
of the King's Officer to seize their persons. 
The struggle was evidently becoming more 
fierce — bullets were whistling over their 
heads, and the loud clashing of the steel 
was drowned in the wild roar of musketry. 

" Now, your Honour!" cried the guide, 
" we shall be in the midst of the fi^rht in 
half a second. But you mind nothing but 
getting yourself and the lady safe aboard. 
I and my mates '11 look arter the red coats." 



308 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

They were soon surrounded by stragglers 
from amonorst the retreatino: smu<ro"lers, 

o o Co / 

bearing their wounded, who urged them to 
quicken their steps. Lord Falldand rushed 
forward with his daughter — a few yards 
brought him to the water-side, on a piece of 
jutting cliiF, a little above the sea; the fight 
raged around him with a maddening fury — 
oaths, execrations, the flashing of pistol-shots, 
and the clashing of swords, rung in his ears. 

" Seize that traitor ! Surrender, in the 
name of the King," cried the oflicer, who, 
though fighting furiously, had never lost 
sight of the fugitives. 

^' Down with the lubbers ! " exclaimed their 
guide, and made a spring forward to join 
in the inelee, in which he was soon as 
actively engaged as the boldest of his com- 
rades. 

Lord Falkland arrived at the head of the 
boat. He turned round to lift his daughter 
in, when he felt himself seized by the 
brawny arms of two of the boatmen, and she 
was shoved off amid the cheers of her crew. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 309 

" Fire ! " shouted the King's Officer, di- 
rectinir the attention of his men to the 
attempted escape. Arabella Falkland heard 
the quick rattle of the muskets, and the 
sharp clicks of the locks ; and as the smug- 
glers divided to avoid the coming discharge, 
she saw the line of deadly tubes pointed 
in the direction in which she stood. 

The men hesitated when they discovered 
a lady, her cloak having fallen down, 
standing pale, yet tranquil and self-pos- 
sessed, in the line of their fire; and the 
smugglers stood still, from a general sense 
of her danger. In a moment, the young 
officer mth his drawn sword had dashed 
aside his men's guns, and before the smug- 
glers had recovered from their surprise, 
he had led the young lady into the centre 
of his detachment. A fire was then opened 
upon the fast receding boat, but it was 
irregular, and apparently did no mischief, for 
it was answered with a cheer, as the rowers 
shot by a bend of the cliff that placed them 
completely out of danger. 



310 STRAWBERRY HELL. 

AYhether it ^Yas that the smugglers were 
satisfied with what they had effected, or 
were fearful ]\Iiss Falkland might be killed, 
or were alarmed by the approach of another 
detachment of the same regiment that had 
taken a different road, they gave no further 
opposition to the troops, and in a few 
minutes had all dispersed to their homes. 

On reaching a place of security with 
his fair prisoner, the commanding officer 
was very much puzzled what to do with 
her. His handsome features wore an ex- 
pression of considerable perplexity, mingled 
with a deal of arch humour, when, after sum- 
moning the young lady into his presence, 
he beheld before him the niece of his old 
acquaintance Lady Furbelow, and the mis- 
tress of his friend and cousin Horace 
Walpole. Colonel Conway was under the 
impression that the person in whose com- 
pany he had seen her, was one of the 
innumerable admirers it was natural for 
a young lady of her attractions to possess; 



STKAWBERKY HILL. 311 

and he believed it was no very lieinous crime 
for such a young lady toAvitness the departure 
of her lover, even if the gentleninn proved to 
be a desperate Jacobite. He had no warrant 
for her apprehension, and as she had done 
nothing against the laws, he had no autho- 
rity to detain her. 

This, in a particularly gallant speech, the 
handsome Colonel thought proper to lament 
extremely — in some respects, he said, on his 
own account, but mostly on account of a 
near and dear friend of his, whom he knew 
to be the most devoted of her slaves. Miss 
Falkland was quite ahve to the very critical 
position in which she stood. She carried 
about her documents, the discovery of which 
would ruin every distinguished Jacobite in 
England. She was therefore desirous of 
keeping her captor in good humour. She 
did not fail to make the necessary inquiries 
after this devoted slave. At first she exhi- 
bited a little astonishment, on hearins: the 
name of her lover, and possibly more 
increduhty; but one inquiry leading to 



312 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

another, and entertaining no doubt of the 
sincerity of her informant, the warm 
praises of his affectionate kinsman had their 
natural effect. 

Colonel Conway handed Miss Falkland 
into a chaise, ^\ith no heavier penalty for 
having been mixed up with such monstrous 
improper company, than listening to an as- 
sertion he had several times repeated to her, 
that he always " looked on the bright side of 
things," and trusted, notwithstanding her 
unpleasant adventure, that she did the same. 

She fervently assured him she then felt 
the fullest appreciation of such a practice. 



END OF VOL. II. 

STRAWBERRY HILL. 



CHAPTER I. 

THE ROBIN HOOD CLUB. 

" Now Horace, my boy, away with your 
melancholy," exclaimed the cheerful voice 
of Colonel Conway, as he burst into his 
cousin's study. The young Member was 
surrounded, not only with books, the ordi- 
nary ammunition of scholars, but with quaint 
relics, illegible MSS., grotesque pictures, and 
a vast number of other memorials of a time 

VOL. III. b 



2 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

long since past, much in favour with those 
who profess the study of antiquities. 

Our hero was not satisfied with the repu- 
tation of a man of letters — he aspired to be a 
man of black letters. Books were hardly 
thought to deserve the title, unless they 
were editiones principes — coins, medals, and 
engravings, were valued, not in proportion to 
their beauty, but to their rarity. A bronze 
disfigured by verdigris, or a fragment of 
marble weather-stained and time-worn, out 
of all resemblance to what it was originally 
intended to represent, was sure to excite the 
most profound raptures; and an elaborate 
specimen of carved furniture, in which 
nothing was so clear as that something of 
the same kind, infinitely more convenient, 
could have been made at half the cost, 
created the most extravagant ecstasies. 

A hundred years ago the knowledge of 
antiquities was extremely limited, and many 
of its professors made themselves ridiculous 
by laborious trifling, and by affecting en- 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 3 

thusiasm for what was scarcely worthy of a 
sensible man's attention. Though he after- 
wards despised such follies, Horace Walpole 
at this time seemed pretty far gone in the 
antiquary mania. He had abandoned ro- 
mance writing, as a pursuit scarcely credit- 
able to a scholar; and earnestly took to the 
study of mediaeval objects, and the collection 
of works illustrative of the fine arts, from 
the same period. 

But though he had on the table before 
him a rare missal, whose bright illumina- 
tions might have been a tolerable apology 
for his looking so far back for objects of ad- 
miration, it was plain enough he was not 
examining it; nor did the strange stiff oil 
painting, on very worm-eaten panel, of 
sacred personages — each having his head 
surrounded with its appropriate nimbus of 
gilding — which stood on a chair beside him, 
any more attract his observation. 

His thoughts had been given up to the 
melancholy termination of his ambitious 

b2 



4 STRAWBERRY HELL. 

aspirations. In the disgrace of his father, 
his occupation was gone. Ambitious as he 
had been — deeply as he had yearned for 
power and distinction, it was that he might 
be associated with his parent in the greatness 
that seemed inseparable from the position of 
so influential a statesman. All that goodly 
edifice of anticipation he had reared with so 
much affection, had crumbled into dust at 
the downfall of Sir Eobert, and could never 
be built up again. 

It was not this reflection alone, that had 
caused him the uneasiness that was impressed 
on his features. His father had been hurled 
from the eminence which had so long excited 
the malevolence of his enemies ; but this, in 
their opinion, was far from being sufficient 
punishment, and the rank which he had 
gained by his retirement still further exaspe- 
rated them against him. He could not be 
allowed so to escape the long-hoarded malice 
of the most vindictive of his foes. An im- 
peachment was threatened; and there was 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 5 

every reason to dread, from the majority in 
the House that could now be obtained by 
his triumphant opponents, that they were 
likely to put their threats into execution. 

" Rouse yourself, my dear fellow!" con- 
tinued Colonel Conway, " I have rare sport 
in store for you. Zounds, what should 
make you so dismal? Look at the bright 
side of things, as I often tell you. Your 
father, to be sure, is not Prime Minister — 
but then he 's Earl of Or ford ! An earldom, 
in my humble thinking, is a capital position 
to fall back upon after a defeat. They can't 
force him from that, as they did from the 
other. So cheer up, my boy, and come 
with me to the Eobin Hood Club, where I 
am told mighty pretty amusement is going 
forward." 

Horace tried at first to be excused, but 
his lively cousin would not listen to any- 
thing of the kind. He repeated a jest of 
Charles Townshend, which somewhat les- 
sened the remarkable gravity of his friend's 



6 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

visage. He followed up his advantage with 
the last witticism of the torpid Selwyn on 
the new Ministry, which caused a very 
obvious smile. The Colonel, like the good 
campaigner he was, continued to advance, 
gaining ground with his melancholy kins- 
man at every speech. Finally, he brought 
out of his pocket, and read, a humorous 
ballad, by Sir Charles Hanbury Williams, 
upon the Prince of Wales, so full of point, 
that the dull man laughed outright. In a 
very short time afterwards they were seen 
walking together in the direction the Colonel 
had proposed proceeding. 

The Robin Hood Club, in Essex Street, 
was an early example of a debating society, 
in which questions admitting of two lines 
of argument are given out for discussion, 
and it is at the option of any would-be 
orator to take which side he pleases. He 
may shew that Oliver Cromwell was a bene- 
factor to his country, or he may shew exactly 
the reverse — he may prove that Queen 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 7 

Elizabeth was justified in her execution of 
Mary Queen of Scots, or he may prove that 
measure to be arbitrary and cruel — if he can 
find arguments sufficiently convincing for 
his purpose. 

At this period there was a great deal of 
political debating going on. Politicians 
were not satisfied with the kind of audi- 
ences they obtained at coffee and chocolate- 
houses; even the privileged few who had 
been in the habit of delivering their opinions 
on the state of the nation in public-house 
parlours, panted for a more public arena. 
Then the small orators of select vestries, 
and the would-be statesmen of Common 
Councils and Parish Boards, eagerly sought 
the Robin Hood Club, as a preparatory 
school for civic Demosthenes and parochial 
Ciceros. 

It will therefore easily be believed, that 
when Colonel Conway and Horace Walpole 
entered the large room in Essex Street 
in which the Club assembled, they found a 



8 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

pretty numerous audience. There was a 
raised platform at one end of the room, in 
the centre of which stood an immense black 
leather chair studded with brass nails, with 
a little table before it bearing a tumbler of 
gin-and-water — a glass bottle containing 
spirit — a jug of hot water — two halves of a 
lemon — and a blue-rimmed delft basin of 
suo-ar. There was also a silver watch con- 
spicuously displayed there — of a size that 
made it appear as though, upon an emer- 
gency, it could have done duty as a drip- 
ping-pan. 

A little man with a large wig and a very 
mealy complexion, whose flour-powdered 
coarse cloth coat with hu^re metal buttons 
pointed him out as a baker, sat behind the 
table, with an auctioneer's hammer in one 
hand, the other being employed in stirring 
the contents of the tumbler, or lifting it to 
his lips. He was the President of the Eobin 
Hood Club ; and he it was who arranged the 
order of the debate — called upon the speakers 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 9 

— allowed each a certain time — and, when 
their arguments were exhausted, made a 
brief recapitulation of what had been said, 
and gave his opinion as to which orator was 
most in the right. 

He was a very eccentric character; and 
had his own notions of eloquence, and his 
own system of logic — a style of language as 
strange as it was emphatic — and a method 
of performing his duties, as President of the 
Club, it was not likely he had learned from 
any other assembly. On one side of him 
sat those who intended to advocate the ques- 
tion of the clay — on the other, those who 
were to oppose it. They were not many in 
number, nor were they very select in appear- 
ance ; but some of the best speakers had not 
arrived. 

When Horace and his cousin had suffi- 
ciently scanned, from a back row of benches 
that filled the room to the platform, the 
curious scene before them, they began to 
turn their attention to their fellow-specta- 

b3 



10 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

tors, whom they found to consist chiefly of 
tradesmen or clerks, with here and there a 
fellow of more dashing exterior, of whom it 
was difficult to say with certainty, whether 
he was thief-taker or thief. 

Close to them was a man of an immense 
round vulgar face, who had taken off his 
wig to wipe his shaven crown with a large 
cotton handkerchief; and, observing the re- 
spectable apparel of his companions, ad- 
dressed them with the usual prefatory re- 
marks of persons of a communicative 
turn. This familiarity young Walpole did 
not seem to approve of; but the Colonel 
— who was intensely fond of a practical 
joke — there was no doubt, enjoyed it ex- 
tremely, and encouraged his new acquaint- 
ance to continue his observations, by appear- 
ing to take a monstrous interest in them. 

The President rose, took a good gulp of 
his beverage, and then knocked sharply on 
the table with his hammer. This was an 
infallible signal that his duties had com- 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 11 

menced. The buzz of conversation, that had 
been going on pretty briskly on all sides, 
ceased at once. 

" Gemmen! " said he, with a very husky 
voice, that sounded as though it came from 
a very deep cellar, "It is my pleasant duty, 
as President of this here honourable Society, 
to announce to you, that the question for 
discussion is " — here he took up a written 
paper, which he looked at, in one hand — 
with the other he raised his glass to his lips ; 
then putting down the glass, and drawing 
his enormous cuff hastily across his mouth, 
he continued : 

" The question is, Whether Caasar or 
Pompey was the greatest general? Now, it 
an't my duty to prejucfe the question, by 
taking one side or t'other. My biznez is to 
hear every member say what he has to say, 
in the exact time and order he is obligated 
to say it in. For the Robin Hood Club has 
particklar reggleations, which, like the laws 
of the Mids and Pursers, altereth not. And, 



12 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

when both sides of the question has been 
heard, and there an r t no more to say, I sums 
up the hargument, and declares which has 
the best on't. 

" This here batch on my right," continued 
the baker, pointing to the orators on that 
side of him, "is the Caesars: them there 
on my left," he added, pointing in the oppo- 
site direction, " is the Pompeys. Now, Mr. 
Scroggins, I calls on you to hopen the 
debate." 

A little man in a snuff-coloured suit, and 
a snuffy nose to correspond, rose on his 
right. " You stands up for Caasar ? " inquired 
the President. The orator nodded. " Then 
mind you keeps to the question, speaks up, 
and remembers the reggleations." 

Mr. Scroggins began his speech. It was 
soon evident that his knowledge of Roman 
history was extremely limited — possibly all 
he knew of Caesar and Pompey came from a 
representation of Shakspeare's play, added 
to a recent reference to a biography of half-a- 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 13 

dozen lines in a classical dictionary. He 
appeared to know nothing of their general- 
ship ; he had learned that one had been the 
more fortunate of the two, and he thought 
that a very good proof of his being the 
greater man. Having, in a few magniloquent 
sentences, expressed his sentiments on this 
point, he sat down amid considerable applause. 
" Mr. Blossom ! ' : cried the President, di- 
recting his attention to a red-nosed member 
on his left, " You stands up for Pompey, I 
know. Keep to the question, speak up, and 
remember the re^srleations." 

(DO 

Mr. Blossom did speak up. He had a voice 
that would have been a fortune to a showman. 
It would have saved him in speaking- 
trumpets enough to keep him in clean linen 
— of which, to tell the truth, the orator 
stood sadly in need. Gulliver addressing the 
Lilliputians, might have spoken with such a 
voice . But it was painfully apparent that there 
was more sound than sense in his eloquence. 

He abused Mr. CaBsar in good set terms, 



14 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

very much in the style an indignant creditor 
would speak of a person rather deep in his 
books, who lived in the rules of the Bench, 
and set him at defiance. He made it appeal' 
that Mr. Pompey was quite another sort of 
character, that he paid his way like a gen- 
tleman, and belonged to a highly respectable 
family. Mr. Blossom was not a more pro- 
found historical scholar than Mr. Scroggins. 
How much he knew of Roman history, was 
not very clear — and to state how much he 
he did not know, was still more difficult. 

"Mr. Blossom is an eminent drysalter, 
and Mr. Scroggins is a wholesale leather- 
seller," was the reply Colonel Conway re- 
ceived from his communicative neighbour, 
to a question of his as to the calling of those 
two worthies. " May be you 'd like to know 
who I am, Sir?" he added; "my name's 
Blakeston — very much at your service, Sir. 
Blakeston, grocer, in the Strand. Families 
supplied on the shortest notice, and on the 
most reasonable terms." 



STRAWBERRY HILL. [ ,15 

The Colonel courteously thanked him for 
his information, and as if to humour him, 
asked the price of sugar. 

" Sugars is riz, Sir," replied he, " Mus- 
covados are looking up, and — " Here the 
threatened exposition of the state of the 
sugar trade was cut short by the com- 
mencement of another attempt at oratory. 
Horace Walpole entertained an impression 
that he had already made the acquaintance 
of the orator, but he could not recall to his 
mind under what circumstances. 

The new speaker was smartly though 
somewhat vulgarly dressed, and held a blue 
cotton handkerchief in his hand, which he 
used with a degree of energy that denoted 
a very inconvenient catarrh. 

" Friends and fellow-countrymen ! " ex- 
claimed he. " Free and enlightened English- 
men! Men worthy of the glorious name 
of free-born Britons ! " 

" Surely I have heard this before ! " said 
Horace to his cousin. 



16 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

" A thousand times at least ! " replied the 
Colonel. " I never yet knew a speech at a 
public meeting that did not begin exactly in 
that way." 

" The eyes of the whole country are upon 
you," continued the orator; "fail not to 
shew that you are worthy of the high opinion 
the world has of your public spirit, and ever 
bear in mind the glorious cause for which 
we are stru^glino; — the cause for which 
Russell died on the field and Hampden 
perished on the scaffold." 

" Zounds, it 's my old opponent from Corn- 
wall," exclaimed Horace Walpole in extreme 
surprise. 

" Brisks, as I live ! " cried Colonel Con- 

CO ' 

way with a laugh, " with his old speech 
revived for a London audience. Dost know 
anything of this fellow, Mr. Blakeston?" 
he inquired of his neighbour. His neigh- 
bour knew very little of him, only that he 
was a strange gentleman from the countrv, 
who had lately joined the meetings of the 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 17 

club; invariably began an oration in the 
same words, till the President called him 
to the question, when he endeavoured to 
say something more pertinent, and rambled 
on in a confused manner, till he had ex- 
hausted his ideas — which did not appear to 
be a very extensive stock. 

The same fate now attended him: the 
President loudly called " Question ! " which 
stopped any further utterance of his cut- 
and-dried sentences. He then attempted to 
say something in relation to the subject of 
debate, but Caasar and Pompey were not 
so well known in Cornwall as Hampden and 
Russell ; and it so happened, let him try as 
much as he could to confine himself to the 
generalship of the Roman heroes, and fill 
up his pauses as dexterously as he pleased 
with the assistance of his handkerchief, he 
invariably got back to his perverted 
reading of the well known passage concern- 
ing the English patriots. 

" I don't call him one of our best orators, 



18 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

Sir," observed the communicative grocer. 
" In short, he an't fit to hold a candle to 
a gentleman as comes here sometimes. A 
monstrous fine scholar, Sir — educated at 
college, Sir. Has been in foreign parts, too, 
and speaks their languages as plain as can 
be. He 's our great speaker, Sir; and some 
folks do say he 's a great parliament man in 
disguise." 

Here the party were interrupted by two 
females, who pressed passed them to a seat 
a little beyond. 

" Mrs. Jenny, my dear! " cried one. " I 
am positively quite enraptured with the 
idea of coming here. I hope, child, you and 
I are perfectly inconsistent with each other." 

"Yes, my dearest Mrs. Susan, 'tis pleasant, 
I can't but own," replied the other, languidly. 
" But Punch's Theatre, in the little Piazza, 
is to me a vast deal more pleasanter." 

" Tush, child ! you have no soul for the 
Belly' 's Letters! " exclaimed her elder com- 
panion, indignantly. " But I forgot, your 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 19 

education, my dear, did not afford you the 
advantages of which we, as is better bred, 
may lawfully make concession." 

" I an't quite sure of that, Mem," said 
the abigail, tartly. " I knows what I knows, 
and I don't pretend to know what I 
doesn't." 

The attention of the two gentlemen was 
diverted from this dialogue by the ap- 
pearance of another orator. As soon as 
they beheld him, one nudged the other; 
then they exchanged looks, in which it was 
impossible to say whether astonishment or 
mirth predominated. 

The new speaker was smartly clad in a 
puce-coloured coat, and waistcoat of a very 
lively pattern, with the rest of his apparel 
in keeping — even to smart ruffles and a 
dress sword. He carried a three-cornered 
cocked hat under his arm, and held a roll 
of paper in one hand, which he flourished 
about in a manner extremely oratorical. 

" There 's our great gun, Sir ! " exclaimed 



20 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

the Strand grocer, with considerable ex- 
ultation, " and he '11 soon let you know 
how prodigious clever he is. For my part, 
I don 't suppose there 's a man in parliament 
as can come up to him." 

The new orator threw himself into a very 
imposing attitude, and began to address his 
audience. It soon became manifest that 
he was an advocate for the conqueror of 
Britain, whose martial abilities he extolled 
to the skies : he had recently been making- 
acquaintance with the Roman historians, 
and had obtained a tolerably correct know- 
ledge of the relative merits of these cele- 
brated classic rivals. He spoke with fluency, 
with a choice of words extravagantly im- 
posing, larded with quotations in more than 
one foreign language. 

He was evidently a favourite with the 
club, and like most favourites, was a little 
spoilt. He received a great deal of hand- 
clapping, and stick-thumping ; and the more 
extravagant he was in his attitudes, and 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 21 

the more obscure in his phrases, the greater 
was the applause awarded (o him. 

" There is no doubt, gentlemen," said 
the orator, " that both Caesar and Pompey 
were great men. Par nobile fratrum, as we 
said at Eton." 

" Confound his impudence !" whispered 
Horace. 

There could be no question that the dis- 
tinguished speaker was his lively valet. 

" But then, gentlemen," he continued, 
" there are various gradations of greatness. 
What would form a great coat for a small 
man, would scarcely make a jacket for a 
giant. There is much of this in the com- 
parative greatness of Pompey and Csesar. 
As we said at Cambridge, Palmam qui 
meruit ferat The palm was due to Caesar. 
He was successful in the struggle of the two 
for superiority. Pompey went to the wall, 
where he remained like a ballad out of date. 
Cresar was a grand homme, as we say in 
France, a very grand homme indeed; and if 



22 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

he hadn't had the honour of getting stabbed 
by several of his most particular friends — 
a kind of distinction conferred only on very 
great men — he would have been a greater 
man among the Romans than the Pope." 

" I never knew him in greater force," 
said the communicative grocer to his much 
amused companions. " Wonderful speaker, 
Sir ! talks of Italy and France as familiarly 
as I should of Hackney and Homerton. 
Astonishing clever speaker, Sir!" 

"In conclusion, gentlemen," said the 
great orator, after a discourse that had lasted 
several minutes, u Caesar was uppermost in 
all things : if Pompey was a good general, 
Caesar was a better ; if Pompey was a good 
citizen, Caesar was a better; if Pompey was 
a good man, Caesar was a better ; — in short, 
in whatever one was good, the other was supe- 
rior; one was eccellentissimo, the other 
grandissimo — as we said in Italy. I can 
give you a remarkable proof of Caesar's ex - 
celling his famous rival. On one occasion," — 



STKAWBEKRY HILL. 23 

" Time 's up ! " cried the President, in a 
load voice, as he pointed with outstretched 
finger to the dial of his large watch, and 
stirred his fresh-made beverage with marked 
vigour with the other hand. " No gemman 
can be allowed to speak longer than seven 
minutes; that 's one of the reggleations, that, 
like the laws of the Mids and Pursers, 
altereth not. Mr. Fidcllefaddle, it 's now 
your turn. There 's only two or three more 
to speak, and then I shall sum up." 

" Deary me, Mrs. Jenny," cried Mrs. 
Susan, in an apparent ecstasy, " Would any 
one have supposed that Mr. Pibbs had stu- 
died the Belly's Letters as he has done ! He 
really speaks like a printed book ; what he 
says is vastly learned, yet quite ineligible to 
the plainest apprehension." 

" Oh, I dare say it 's all prodigious fine ! " 
replied the abigail, who thought her elderly 
friend's ecstasies monstrous affectation, " but 
for my part, I prefers a very different kind 
of speech from Mr. Pibbs. I don't think 



24 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

Mr. Pompey, or Mr. Caesar either, will do 
him much good. I '11 be bound neither on 
'em would give him a character, if he was 
out of place ever so long." 

Mrs. Susan tossed her head, and looked 
ineffable scorn. She would not cast away 
another word upon a creature so ignorant of 
the " Belly's Letters " as to imagine that two 
such great men as formed the subject of the 
evening's discussion, had nothing better to do 
than to give recommendations to servants in 
want of a situation. 

Mr. Fiddlefaddle now made his appear- 
ance. He was a fashionable tailor, with a 
taste for politics, who dressed in the extreme 
of the mode, and affected to be prodigiously 
patriotic. He denounced Caesar as a tyrant, 
in language that would have frightened his 
apprentice into convulsions; and defended 
his assassination, as an action as meritorious 
as paying a bill immediately after it had 
been sent in. Then he alluded to Pompey, 
eulogizing his military services in a strain 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 25 

appropriate to the extensive orders of an 
excellent customer ; and defending him from 
the accusations of those who favoured his 
illustrious rival, as zealously as though he 
was speaking of a bankrupt relation who 
had paid twenty shillings in the pound. 
He had just wound himself, to the vast 
amusement of Horace Walpole and the 
Colonel, into a most patriotic fervour, when 
the impatient announcement of the Presi- 
dent, that time was up, brought his oration 
to an abrupt conclusion. 

The other orators were soon disposed of. 
One uttered his first sentence, and then 
stuck fast. He hemmed and hawed with 
great vigour, but not a word more could he 
bring to bear upon the subject, and then 
made a hasty retreat from the place ; and 
the other was so disconcerted at the failure 
of his associate, that his memory proved 
equally treacherous, and after making two 
or three rather amusing blunders, and utter- 
ing several sentences, the meaning of which 

vol. in. c 



26 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

neither he nor any one else could have dis- 
covered, he also retired. 

The worthy President now began to stir 
the contents of his glass with remarkable 
vigour, and to look as overflowing with 
eloquence as it was possible for such a func- 
tionary to look, after so liberal an allowance 
of gin-and-water. He took an earnest pull 
at the glass, and then wiping his mouth, after 
the picturesque fashion already described, 
rose to address his audience. 

" Gemmen ! " said he, " I've no doubt 
you've paid proper attention to this here 
discussion. If so be you have, you must be 
very well aware it related to two individuals 
as flourished at Rome, a monstrous long 
time ago, as rivals in the general line. I 
don't mean to say they kept little shops, 
such as may be seen in any back street, as 
contained everything from a sugar-plum to 
a side of bacon. They dealt in victories, 
not in small beer — they looked for their 
profit from battle fields, not from ha'portbs 
of snuff. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 27 

" Howsomever, as two of a trade can 
never agree, it so happened that these two 
Romans chose to quarrel, and then to ruin 
themselves in the way of business. One, 
assisted by his friends, tried to undersell the 
other, and run him down ; and his opponent, 
with two or three associates, did all in his 
power to take away t'other's custom. In 
the end, Caesar and Co. carried all before 
them, and the rival firm went to smash. 

" Now the point in dispute is, Which of 
the two was the best man. You all know 
that two loaves may come out of the oven at 
the same time, both made from the same 
dough, yet there shall be a vast deal of dif- 
ference atween 'em ; and many people as shall 
like one, won't have the other at no price. 
So it was with Pompey and Cassar. By all 
accounts they was the primest loaves of the 
batch — only Pompey was a crumby one, 
and Caesar was uncommon crusty, and the 
Romans took a fancy just then to what was 
high-baked. Pompey was left on the 

c 2 



28 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

shelf, and everybody wanted to have 
Caesar." 

Here the orator took another prodigious 
pull at the friendly glass at his elbow, and 
after the usual cleanly application of his 
hand, he proceeded. 

" It appears to me, in this here debate, 

that the Pompeyites haven't quite proved 

their case. It is one thing for a man to 

command soldiers, and another to make them 

win a battle. General Pompey was a mighty 

clever fellow in his way, I haven't the slightest 

doubt. He marched and countermarched, 

and drilled and manoeuvred his troops in 

high-price style; but then, you know, the 

proof of the pudding's in the eating. General 

Caesar marched against him, and it was soon 

found to be a peck loaf to a half-penny 

buster. 

" Therefore," concluded the President, as 
he drained his glass, after a similarly cha- 
racteristic recapitulation of the arguments 
on both sides, "there can't be no question 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 29 

that the Csesarites have the best of it in this 
matter; and accordingly I adjudge and de- 
cide that Caasar has proved himself the best 
general, and that they who advocated his 
cause have proved themselves the best 
speakers." 

A round of applause, mingled with a good 
deal of stamping, testified that the President's 
verdict was considered a proper one — all 
which the great functionary received with 
the air of one who looked for such favours 
as a matter of course. 

The young Member and his friend ap- 
peared very much to enjoy these eloquent 
demonstrations. Indeed the Colonel recom- 
mended their immediate enrolment as mem- 
bers of the Robin Hood Club; pointing to 
the great examples that had been set be- 
fore them of the advantage of such a school 
of elocution — particularly instancing those of 
his former opponent at the election, and his 
Ciceronian valet. 

This last citation brought to the recollec- 



30 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

tion of both, the individual they had recog- 
nized as the most popular orator of the Club, 
just as they observed him, with a vast deal 
of condescension to different persons among 
the audience, who ventured to congratulate 
him on his successful speech, moving towards 
them, evidently with the intention of passing 
to a seat kept vacant for him between Mrs. 
Susan and Mrs. Jenny, who regarded his 
approach with rather an ostentatious display 
of interest. 

" Werry fine speech of yourn, Sir," ex- 
claimed a fat Common Councilman. 

" Prodigious fine speech," added an- 
other. 

" I never heard a better one in Parlia- 
ment, Sir," observed the grocer from the 
Strand, very seriously, " and I've said as 
much to my friends here." 

Mr. Fibbs turned to make his acknow- 
ledgments to the new acquaintances so 
obligingly pointed out to him, and started 
back with a look of the utmost bewilder- 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 31 

ment and confusion, as he noticed who they 
were. 

" Stupendous fine speech, Sir," observed 
the Colonel, with a heartiness of approval 
that far exceeded that of any compliment 
that had yet been addressed to him. 

" Monstrous fine speech, indeed, Sir," 
said his master, in exactly the same man- 
ner, ' c and this coat is a monstrous fine 
coat, and this sword is a monstrous fine 
sword." 

" An amazing fine waistcoat you have 
too, Sir," added Colonel Conway, now re- 
cognizing the borrowed plumage in which 
the orator had thought proper to appear. 

" And that pair of breeches is really 
prodigious fine," continued Horace Wal- 
pole. 

" In short, I am bound to say you are a 
prodigious fine fellow altogether, Sir." 

" Positively one of the finest fellows I ever 
beheld," rejoined his master, enjoying the 
signs of confusion the detected daw in pea- 



9 



2 STRAWBERRY HILL. 



cock's feathers betrayed ; "but I hope you will 
pardon the liberty I am taking when I say, that 
as soon as you have quite done with your pre- 
sent superlatively fine character, and quite 
done with the fine costume belonging to it, I 
should like to try the experiment how far 
they may be made to suit me. I beg to 
wish you a good day, Mr. Fibbs." 

" Your most obedient, Mr. Fibbs, " added 
the Colonel, with the same ceremoniousness, 
as he rose with his cousin to leave the place ; 
" I shall be delighted to resume your 
acquaintance under circumstances more con- 
genial to a mind of your classical attain- 
ments. Your very humble servant, Sir." 

" Well to be sure ! " exclaimed Mrs. Susan, 
as soon as the two gentlemen had retired. 

"It 's monstrous strange they should 
have been sitting here ever since we came 
in, and we not know it," observed Mrs. 
Jenny : " How uncommon aggravating, to 
be sure !" 

" To find his master in this dietical spot ! " 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 33 

cried the Housekeeper, " after he 'd just 
made himself so perspicuous, too. I quite 
feels for him." 

" I can't but confess I feels for him, too. 
Poor Mr. Fibbs ! " cried the sensitive abi- 
gail, putting her hand in her pocket, to 
search for her usual restorative. Mrs. Susan 
looked offended. It seemed to her that it 
was quite superfluous — and not a little pre- 
sumptuous — for a lady's-maid to feel for any 
one more than she thought proper to do. 

The abashed valet had taken advantage 
of a move in a part of the audience near 
him to slip out of the room as quickly as he 
could; leaving his two female friends, whom 
he had persuaded to go to the Kobin Hood 
Club to hear his elocution, to find their way 
home again unattended. 

"It 's very plain he don't intend to come 
back," said the youngest of the two, after 
sufficiently indulging in her sensibility. " If 
I 'd left a young woman in a public place, 
I 'd have seen all the masters in the world at 

c 3 



34 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

Jericho, afore they should have prevented 
me seeing her home." 

" Mrs. Jenny ! " cried the Housekeeper, 
in a stern voice. 

u Yes, Mrs. Susan ! " replied the Lady's- 
maid, with a proud lifting up of her head. 

u Was it not by my invitation you came 
here?" 

" Yes, Mem. But Mr. Fibbs had axed 
me fust, Mem." 

The Housekeeper rose from her seat with 
an air of offended dignity, that would have 
looked well even with ermine and point 
lace. She had been deceived. She thought 
she had been conferring a favour on the 
Lady's-maid by requesting her company — as 
the presence of a companion would render 
the attentions of Mr. Fibbs less open to 
scandal. She made the humiliating discoverv, 
that she it was who had been made a conve- 
nience of. 

" Mrs. Jenny ! " again exclaimed the 
senior. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 35 

" Yes, Mrs. Susan ! " replied tlie other, 
evidently with a spirit not to be put down. 

" Henceforth, young woman, our paths is 
diamedically opposit e . " 

" If you please, Mem." 

Mrs. Susan swept indignantly by her 
bosom friend, muttering something that 
sounded very much like the word " viper ! " 
to which Mrs. Jenny responded by an excla- 
mation equally cordial, that as strongly 
resembled " old fool ! " 



36 STRAWBERRY HILL. 



CHAPTER II. 

A RENCONTRE ON THE ROAD. 

A group of individuals had assembled in 
the kitchen of " the Barley Mow;" a respect- 
able inn and post-house on the Norwich 
road. They consisted of a bandy-legged 
post-boy — old enough to have been grandsire 
to half-a-dozen post-boys; a great thick- 
armed, broad-faced chambermaid, to whom 
he was gossiping respecting the fare he had 
brought to the inn; a tall, sharp-nosed, 
active waiter, apparently engaged in wiping 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 37 

some glasses, yet all the while having both 
organs of hearing fully employed — one listen- 
ing to the communication of the elderly post- 
boy — the other equally intent on the conver- 
sation of two tall, very showily-dressed per- 
sonages, who sat at a table at a little distance 
from the bandy-legged gossip, drinking purl, 
and conversing in a low voice. 

One had a green coat, the other a scarlet ; 
and there was a marked flashy air about 
their dress, from the gold lace on their 
cocked-hats, to the glittering brass spurs on 
their great well-polished boots, that reached 
half up their legs. They might be the sons 
of wealthy squires, bent on enjoying life in 
boozing their money and brains away in the 
intervals between the intellectual enjoyment 
of skittles and cock-fighting. They might 
be the exciseman and the lawyer of the 
town, meeting at the inn on that " particular 
business " they Avere in the habit of trans- 
acting together, which invariably led to 
drunkenness, and sometimes to riot. 



38 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

They might be a young doctor and a 
young undertaker, arranging a method of 
conducting their several professions as much 
as possible to their mutual benefits. They 
might be such persons, and they might be 
many other such persons; but all that was 
known of them at " the Barley Mow " was, 
that they had lately put up there with their 
horses, and were young men with plenty of 
money, who seemed wonderfully careless as 
to how they spent it. Extremely free-and-easy 
they were in their manners generally, though 
one seemed bent on being thought some- 
body of vast consequence — which fancy 
his companion treated with becoming re- 
verence. 

" La, John, how you talk ! " cried the 
chambermaid; "the young lady must be 
quite a nonsuch, by your description ! n 

" So she be," replied the post-boy stoutly; 
" I never see nothing to come up to her in 
the way of looks since I first crossed osses ; 
which is such a plaguy long time, it be 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 39 

a'most out of memory. She be one of the 
tip- top quality, I '11 be bound." 

" What makes you think so? " 

" What makes I think so? Why, I thinks 
so because nothing can be plainer. She 
stepped into the old chariot for all the world 
as though she were a queen entering her 
state-coach; and looked so gracious and so 
beautiful, I felt ready to kiss the steps her 
dainty foot had trod upon." 

" Go along with you for an old fool ! For 
my part, I didn't see nothing particular 
in her. But I suppose as how they 're 
vastly rich, and riches is everything in this 
world." 

" She 's got a purse as chock full of 
guineas as a miser's old stocking; a gold 
watch at her side as big as a salt-cellar ; and 
as for rings ! bless your heart, there 's ne'er 
a one on those delicate fingers of hern, as 
wouldn't be a fortune to anybody." 

Such was the discourse of one of the par- 
ties to whom the waiter was listening : a few 



40 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

fragments from the opposite quarter will soon 
enlighten the reader as to the characters and 
views of the other. 

" We must look about us, and see if we 
can't do something of consequence," observed 
one; "We an't known here, which I 'm 
inclined to think is rather an advantage to 
us. What do you say, Duke?" 

" Of coorth it ith, Marquith," replied the 
other. 

There could be no doubt who these flashily- 
dressed personages were. But what strange 
tide in the affairs of men could have brought 
this Damon and Pythias in livery so far 
from their proper haunts? and what could 
have effected the extraordinary change that 
had evidently taken place in their positions? 

The reader should be told that they were 
no longer members of " the Upper Servants' 
Supper Club." They had ceased to be do- 
mestic servants. 

This abandonment of a vocation for which 
they seemed so well fitted, was as sudden as 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 41 

it was extraordinary. It seemed that the 
plate chest of the Marquis was found to lose 
its contents in so very mysterious a manner, 
that it might never have been discovered to 
this day, had not the faithful companion of 
his Lordship's State-footman been stopped 
in the act of pawning a tankard, from which 
that nobleman's arms had been partly 
erased. 

It soon came out that the Duke of New- 
castle's footman had very little to do with 
the transaction in which he appeared in so 
undesirable a light ; he having merely gone 
to the pawnbroker's, at the suggestion of his 
brother in livery, to raise money for him on 
some old silver " his grandmother had left 
him," according to his statement. He how- 
ever, absconded, the moment he learned 
his friend's detention ; as he said he did not 
choose to have his domestic affairs pried 
into by such vulgar people as magistrates : 
and the other having been discharged from 
prison for want of evidence, with a character 



42 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

that was not likely to suit any one in want 
of a servant, he was easily prevailed upon 
to join his friend in a country excursion, 
that promised to be as beneficial to his 
health as to his pocket. The object of the 
residence of these worthies at the Barley 
Mow, under the titles of Captain Kite and 
Squire Greenfinch, may now be easily sur- 
mised; but a little further attention to their 
conversation will make this considerably 
more apparent. 

" Do you hear what that old fool says ? " 
inquired the fellow who called himself Cap- 
tain Kite. " It promises well, eh ? Plenty 
of plunder, and little difficulty in getting 
it. I haven't heard whether the young 
woman in the chaise goes by herself; but 
as I didn't see any one go in with her, I 
dare say she travels alone. Well-filled 
purse, gold watch, handsome rings — worth 
looking after, eh, Duke?" 

" Of coorth they are, Marquith," was the 
ready reply. " I shouldn't think there 



STEAWBEERY HILL. 43 

could be much trouble or danger either, in 
divethting the lady of her valuablth." 

" Hush, Duke ! " cried the Captain, in a 
low voice. " Don't you see that fellow 
yonder ? If I 'm not monstrously mis- 
taken, that everlasting rascal of a waiter is 
listening to us. Talk low, and don't say 
more than is absolutely necessary." 

" Yeth, Marquith; " said the other, "but 
if that rathcal hath been lithning, hadn't we 
better thilenth him ath quick ath pothible? " 

" I may be mistaken," said the Captain, 
beginning to doubt he had judged correctly ; 
the waiter seemed so intent upon his occu- 
pation. " But I am bent upon this enter- 
prise, and I '11 tell you how we '11 accomplish 
it." 

" Yeth, Marquith?" 

" We '11 first have out of old Bandy -legs 
the road my young madam is going to take ; 
we will then get our horses ready, and ride on 
to a convenient spot, where we can wait till 
she comes up ; and we won't be long in 



44 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

doing the job, I '11 lay any wager — eh, 
Duke?" 

" I 'm ready, Marquith." 

" Waiter ! " shouted the assumed Captain, 
rising from his seat, with that imposing 
frown that used so to disconcert the humble 
landlord of " The Admiral Vernon." The 
postilion and chambermaid were startled 
out of their gossip, and the waiter nearly 
broke all the glasses by the shock given to 
his nervous system by a summons so loud 
and unexpected. 

" Here, noble Captain ! " replied he, skip- 
ping to his customer with a vast display of 
alacrity. 

" The bill ! " was all his great customer 
condescended to say — and that in a voice 
likely to stifle in the birth the slightest ap- 
proach to familiarity. 

" Here it is, ready for your Worship's 
perusal," said the waiter, presenting a slip 
of paper of considerable length, in which 
various sentences, very ill written, preceded 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 45 

sundry figures quite as ill designed. The 
Captain held it with one hand, as he care- 
lessly arranged his long curls with the other. 
There is no doubt he would have con- 
descended to read it, had not one little 
obstacle been in his way— reading was not 
one of his accomplishments. 

" Well, fellow! " exclaimed he, after 
staring at the document for several minutes, 
whilst the rest of the party were quite as 
intently staring at him ; not knowing exactly 
what to say in such a dilemma, and yet 
desirous of not betraying what Mrs. Susan 
would have called his ignorance of "The 
Belly's Letters." The waiter thought the 
exclamation he had heard was intended to 
call in question the correctness of the 
account. 

" Quite right, noble Captain ! " he replied, 
" Pork chops and kidneys for breakfast — the 
same for his worship Squire Greenfinch — 
ditto for lunch — ditto for dinner — ditto for 
tea — ditto for supper — ditto for breakfast 



46 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

yo-ain. Pickles and bread, taters and cauli- 
flower, double bedded room, beds and stabling 
for two horses. Then for liquors : — ale, purl, 
punch, and two bottles of master's best old 
Burgundy, with brandy afterwards. Allow 
me to shew your Worship. — Beg pardon, 
your Honour 's reading it upside down." 

" And suppose I choose to read upside 
down?" demanded the other, with his fiercest 
air, " do you suppose I am forced to read 
after the fashion of such a low fellow as 
yourself? Here, Squire," he added, turning 
to his confederate, " see what you can make 
of this rascal's pot-hooks ; he writes such a 
d — d vulgar scrawl, there's no making out 
a word on't." 

" What a thocking bad hand, to be thure," 
Captain!" exclaimed his companion, whose 
education had not been a bit further ad- 
vanced than, it was evident, had been that 
of his friend. 

" Itth quite impothible to be read by any 
one who hath pretenthions to be conthidered 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 47 

a perthon of fathion." The assumed Squire 
gave back the paper with a look of profound 
contempt, and he resumed the operation of 
picking his teeth, in which he had been 
disturbed. 

" The sum total is two pounds, sixteen 
shillings, and sixpence half-penny ; and mas- 
ter doesn't allow any abatement," said the 
waiter, rather determinedly. 

" Abatement, fellow ! " cried the Captain, 
scrutinizing the man contemptuously from 
head to foot ; "do you suppose, rascal, a 
gentleman of my quality condescends to 
haggle about a few shillings, more or less ?" 

" Goodneth grathiouth, what an idea, 
Captain ! " drawled out the pretended Squire. 

" Here, rascal!" resumed his confederate, 
drawing out a recently stolen purse from his 
pocket, " here are three guineas as full pay- 
ment of your beggarly account ; and another 
time, fellow, whenever you have to present 
a bill to a gentleman, take care you write 
a more genteel hand." 



48 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

After throwing the money on the table, 
Captain Kite strode with a careless swagger 
out of the room to the stable-yard. As he 
passed the postilion and chambermaid, he 
chucked the latter condescendingly under 
the chin, and magnificently gave her half-a- 
crown. At this instant another door opened, 
and a sharp voice was heard to tell the 
post-boy to get the chariot ready for his 
mistress directly. In a moment the latter 
hastened to the stables, where he was quickly 
followed by the two highwaymen, who, 
having obtained from him the communica- 
tion they required, mounted their horses and 
rode away. 

" I don't at all like the looks of those 
gentry," said the waiter. 

" La, John, how can you say so ! " replied 
the conciliated chambermaid ; "the Captain 's 
quite the gentleman, I declare; and as for 
the Squire, I don't think there 's more harm 
in him than in a child." 

The argument could not be further dis- 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 49 

cussed at that moment, as just then the 
inner door opened, and a young lady equip- 
ped for travelling, attended by the landlady 
in a clean apron and best bib and tucker, 
with the usual fussiness of such people wait- 
ing upon the great, entered the room to pass 
out into the stable-yard, where the post- 
chaise was waiting. A sharp summons 
brought both chambermaid and waiter to 
render assistance, and then the fair traveller 
stepped gracefully into the vehicle, and it 
rumbled out of the vard into the high- 
road. 

A few minutes afterwards a gentleman 
and his servant rode up to the inn door, 
apparently to water their horses. The 
gentleman alighted, and was passing through 
the kitchen into the parlour, accompanied 
by the cordial invitations of the blooming 
landlady, when their progress was suddenly 
arrested by the chambermaid bouncing into 
the room, apparently in a great flurry, bear- 
ing a small basket in her hand. 

VOL. III. d 



50 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

" Oh, Marm ! the young lady, Marm ! " 
was all she could at first ejaculate; but pre- 
sently she found words to say, that the 
young lady, who had just quitted the house 
in the post-chaise, had left behind her the 
little basket she then carried in her hand. 
The landlady lost no time in possessing 
herself of the abandoned property, merely 
waiting to read the name that was legibly 
written upon it. 

The traveller stopped short immediately 
he heard the name pronounced; and, not 
without betraying emotion, begged to be 
allowed to look at the writing. The gentle- 
man ivas a gentleman — was young, too ; and 
there was an appearance in him of fashion 
and high breeding, which prepossessed his 
hostess greatly in his favour. She at once 
brought the packet for his inspection. 

"Arabella Falkland !" he exclaimed, as 
he perused the familiar name in her well- 
known hand- writing, " Did you say, Madam, 
she had just quitted this house?" 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 51 

"Yes, your Worship," said the waiter, 
who had entered the room in time to learn 
what the chambermaid had discovered, and 
to whom the article belonged; " and I can't 
help having some fears for the young lady's 
safety." 

This observation added fuel to the fire 
already blazing, and the man was soon in- 
duced to explain the cause of his apprehen- 
sions. He related some suspicious circum- 
stances respecting his late customers, and 
their speedy departure upon learning that 
Miss Falkland was about leaving the inn. 
The landlady seemed inclined to treat his 
impressions lightly, and the chambermaid 
very stoutly maintained the Captain's re- 
spectability. But the gentleman rapidly 
took the alarm; and inquiring with great 
earnestness the road the postilion had taken, 
he rushed to his horses, and calling his asto- 
nished servant to follow him without a 
moment's delay, he mounted and went off 
at full gallop. 

d2 

u„ of iul 



52 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

For a considerable distance the road kept 
winding up a hill ; and so many turnings 
occurred, and it was bounded on each 
side by such high hedges, that it was im- 
possible to obtain a prospect of any extent. 
In one part the hill became so steep, that 
the gentleman was obliged to moderate his 
impatience. Here he was overtaken by his 
servant, who had barely time to learn from 
the waiter the cause of his master's abrupt 
departure, when he started at full speed in 
pursuit of him. 

" Fibbs," cried his master, " look to your 
pistols. If I mistake not, there is work be- 
fore us a little more dangerous than playing 
the orator, in borrowed plumes, at the 
Robin Hood Club." 

" Your Honour promised you would look 
over that petite indiscretion, as we said in 
France," replied the man, deprecatingly, as 
he began to examine the contents of his 
holsters — without which no traveller rode in 
those days. " My speechifying was Vox et 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 53 

prceterea nihil, as we said at Cambridge. 
But if we are about anything serious, your 
Honour shall see the same spirit that stood 
by you in many a hard struggle in our 
school and college days." 

"Are your pistols fit for service?" in- 
quired our hero, as he carefully examined 
the pans and flints of his own. 

" Both in excellent order. They are 
the very weapons which, when we were in 
the Abruzzi — " 

" Oh, d — the Abruzzi ! " cried his master 
impatiently. " I wish to Heaven we were 
at the top of this hill." 

" D — the Abruzzi, certainly, if your 
Honour wishes it," said the man. " But 
assuredly, it would not be prudent to blow 
our horses, if it should be necessary to pur- 
sue these highwaymen. Medio tutissimus 
ibis, as we said at Cambridge." 

Great indeed was the disappointment of the 
ardent lover, on reaching the brow of the hill, 
at beholding the whole course of the high road 



54 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

before him, without a vestige of the party 
of which he was in search. He observed, 
however, at the distance of half a mile, a 
cross-road, which it was possible they might 
have taken. He spurred his horse, and 
away he went down the hill at a tremendous 
pace, his valet following within a very short 
distance. A loud scream, before they had 
passed half the distance, appeared to give 
the intimation they wanted that they were 
on the right track. 

With amazing rapidity the first rider 
turned the corner. One glance took in the 
whole scene. The chaise had been stopped 
at the bend of the road — one of the high- 
waymen had a pistol presented to the head 
of the postilion, the other was dragging Miss 
Falkland out of the vehicle. 

Our hero rode at the first of these 
scoundrels, and the astonished Squire was 
hurled to the ground, with his horse rolling 
over him. 

"Let go her hand, you rascal, or I '11 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 55 

blow your brains out ! " shouted the traveller, 
as he rapidly approached the other, pistol in 
hand, but afraid to fire while the fellow was 
so near his mistress. The Captain promptly 
replied, by firing at his opponent. Fortu- 
nately, it was not necessary that a Marquis's 
state footman should know much about the 
use of fire-arms ; and before he could make 
use of another weapon, a sharp blow on the 
head, from the butt end of a heavy horse- 
pistol, sent him sprawling on the earth. 

Fibbs came upon the scene of battle just 
in time to discover the young lady in the 
arms of her deliverer — the postilion dis- 
arming one of the highwaymen — and the 
other trying to mount his horse, with the 
object of making his escape. In this, how- 
ever, he was completely frustrated by the 
appearance of this new enemy on the field, 
who, putting a pistol to his head, called to 
him to surrender, before he could get into 
his saddle. Captain Kite had just received 
an argument, not less painful than convinc- 



56 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

ing, that he was not so well fitted for his 
new vocation as he fancied he was; and 
dreading a repetition, he very submissively 
gave up his arms, and then allowed his hands 
to be tied behind him. 

Whilst the travelled valet was engaged in 
this operation, expressing an abundance of 
pithy remarks, enriched with various well- 
worn quotations, he noticed that his cap- 
tive kept continually striving to turn his 
head away. At this moment up came 
the old post-boy, driving before him the 
equally crest-fallen Squire Greenfinch. 

Fibbs had now an opportunity of ex- 
amining their features. He looked at one 
very hard, and then at the other very 
hard, as if he fancied he beheld something 
familiar to him in the faces of both. On 
closer scrutiny, he recognised his old ac- 
quaintances in spite of their disguise. He 
burst into a hearty peal of laughter; and 
the old post-boy, feeling satisfied that the 
joke was extremely good, of seeing two high- 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 57 

waymen made prisoners, joined him with 
equal intensity. The lugubrious aspects, 
all this time, of the heroes in livery — who 
looked at each other, notwithstanding their 
fine apparel, very much with the mutual 
commiseration of two culprits, having an 
extremely dismal perspective with Tyburn 
in the distance — only served to increase the 
mirth of their unsympathizing captors. 

Mr. Fibbs could not refrain from hailing 
his associates in a style that made the an- 
cient post-boy aware of the former calling 
of his swaggering friends ; and the mirth 
that this occasioned was so loud and long, 
that it roused from a very delicious reverie 
the pair of happy lovers, who had been so 
delightedly sitting together on the green 
bank since the conclusion of the affray. 

In a few minutes afterwards, the two 
highwaymen were bundled into the chaise — 
one of their horses was mounted by Miss 
Falkland, and the other by her lover, who 
rode by her side, leaving his own horse 

d 3 



58 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

to be led by his servant. The post-boy 
smacked his whip, and in less than an hour 
the whole party returned to the inn yard 
which they had so recently quitted. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 59 



CHAPTER III. 

LOVE AND POLITICS. 

If ever there were two young persons who 
seemed to have a right to consider themselves 
supremely happy, undoubtedly they were 
Horace Walpole and Arabella Falkland — as 
they sat together, most conveniently close 
for all allowable affectionate demonstrations, 
in the comfortable parlour of " the Barley 
Mow." On the three-legged round walnut- 
wood table before them, was a tray covered 
with a delicate white cloth, bearing the usual 



60 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

articles of a tea- service, as well as a few of 
the delicacies their very obliging hostess 
thought most likely to tempt such guests ; 
for there was no doubt the good woman 
understood their position exactly, and saga- 
ciously thought that Love required a gene- 
rous diet. 

Had she entered the room at that moment, 
she would have been in no slight degree dis- 
mayed by finding her pigeon-pie untouched, 
her chicken neglected, her sweet cake uncut, 
and even the excellent smuggled tea she had 
prepared, almost cold in the cups into which 
it had been poured. 

The lovers were too much in love to eat 
or to drink ; they were raised, by the feel- 
ings of enjoyment in each other's society to 
which they had abandoned themselves, far 
above common-place wants. Besides which, 
there was much to say ; there were explana- 
tions to be given on both sides : and these 
were so very satisfactory, that they appeared 
to prolong them, as though they were con- 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 61 

sidered a source of happiness too delightful 
to be got rid of without regret. 

Then they began to recall the happiness 
they had known before these misunderstand- 
ings occurred ; and the whole birth, life, and 
character of their passion was mutually 
recapitulated. There was not a moon-lit 
walk, a stolen conference, or a tender avowal, 
that had not full justice done to its memory. 
It must not be thought either strange or 
improper, that these ardent reminiscences of 
loiterings in Italian groves, beneath an 
Italian sky — or receptions at Italian win- 
dows conveniently near the ground — should 
be acted over again with a fidelity that 
rather exceeded, if anything, the fervour 
of the original performance. 

Horace Walpole lacked nothing of a lover's 
warmth. He was young, and full of 
enthusiasm — intellectual, and teeming with 
romance. His passion had been dammed 
up so long, that its impetuous stream had 
obtained the volume of a river. He saw no 



62 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

obstacle now, and he allowed it to flow on 
in a full tide in its proper channel. We 
are obliged to say, that notwithstanding the 
depth and intensity of his filial affection, 
his father was as completely forgotten as if 
the Earl of Orforcl had been a personage of 
another century. 

There could scarcely have existed a better 
excuse for this forgetfulness, than the very 
beautiful young creature by his side. Lovely 
as she was at all times, he thought he had 
never seen her looking half so lovely as she 
appeared at the present moment. Her eyes 
were so radiant with animation, her cheeks 
so glowing with health — the whole expres- 
sion of her features were so full of excessive 
happiness — that it was quite impossible he 
could sit by her side, with her hand clasped 
in his — gaze upon her perfect beauty — and 
think of any one else. 

Miss Falkland was indeed as happy as she 
looked — as perfectly happy as such a very 
enthusiastic young lady could hope to be. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 63 

She knew she was beloved by the object of 
her first and only affection ; she had seen him 
honoured and caressed for talents which, 
despite of her prejudices at the time, raised 
him still higher in her estimation than he 
had ever been, and made him an object of 
pride as well as of affection. No one but 
herself knew how long she had lingered over 
every page of the popular work he had 
written, and how excessive had been her 
gratification on hearing the praise lavished 
upon it. 

Then came the recollection of the impor- 
tant service he had just rendered her — her 
timely rescue from the violence of the high- 
waymen — an act as bravely, as it was 
promptly done — an act that, with a young 
lady of her peculiar spirit, was sure to raise 
him in her estimation to the elevation of a 
hero. 

No wonder she smiled so sweetly, and 
looked so fondly — no wonder that she resisted 
so very little all the practical manifestations 



64 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

of her lover's passion which ever and anon 
he chose to append to those endearing 
speeches and passionate exclamations that 
were murmured into her ear. Arabella 
Falkland was very much in love — very 
grateful for the service she had received — 
very much inclined to recompense her lover 
for her recent unworthy treatment of him ; 
and felt as perfect confidence in his honour 
as in his affection. 

It would appear from so smiling an horizon 
as they now had around them, that nothing 
could by any possibility dim the soft and 
happy atmosphere in which they existed. 
But, warm and sunny as was that horizon, 
there was a cloud in the distance — a mere 
vapour, as it were, scarcely apparent in the 
bright sunshine — that was fated, in a very 
short time, to envelope them in an impene- 
trable darkness. 

Had her lover still remained in the proud 
position in which she found him on her 
arrival in England, not even his literary 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 65 

fame — not even his daring courage, would 
have so securely advanced him to that place 
in her affections which there could be no 
doubt he now enjoyed. 

His father was no longer the obnoxious 
Minister she could not help considering him 
as having been when engrossing the favours 
of the personage she chose to style " the 
Usurper," and when actively employed in 
frustrating the plans of the friends of the 
exiled princes. It appeared to her, not- 
withstanding the title which had been be- 
stowed upon him, that the once omnipotent 
Walpole was now a disgraced man ; and that 
his son, feeling that disgrace, must have so 
completely detached himself from the govern- 
ment which had so vindictively sought his 
parent's destruction as well as disgrace, that 
there could no longer exist the vast differ- 
ence in their political sentiments, which had 
seemed so impassable a barrier between 
them. 

At this particular period Arabella Falk- 



66 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

land was disposed to cling more tenaciously 
to her Jacobite principles than ever. She 
believed that now, more than at any other 
period, had she cause for such adherence to 
those principles; she was well acquainted 
with the proceedings of the Pretender and his 
advisers, and was aware of an extraordinary 
movement, from which the most important 
results were anticipated. She was sanguine 
as well as enthusiastic. She could not doubt 
that the plans of which she was cognizant 
would be attended with such complete suc- 
cess, that a very short period would elapse 
before the expatriated son of James II. was 
firmly seated on the throne of his ancestors ; 
and she was satisfied there could be no diffi- 
culty in reconciling that Sovereign to her 
lover ; nor could she believe that her lover 
could withstand her arguments for joining 
her in the good work of restoring to the 
people of England their legitimate princes. 

The whole process of gaining the son of 
the disgraced Minister as an adherent to 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 67 

the unfortunate family to whom she was so 
ardently devoted, passed in review before 
her, as she was receiving his endearments, 
as so simple a matter, it required but her 
exposition of the facts of the case, and her 
expression of her wishes to have him by her 
side in so great and honourable an under- 
taking, to obtain his acquiescence: that 
gained, it was impossible for their future 
life to be otherwise than a course of uninter- 
rupted felicity. 

Of her father's consent to their union she 
was sure, under such circumstances : she 
did not anticipate any opposition from Lord 
Orford : in short, in her very sanguine and 
very enthusiastic temperament, she antici- 
pated nothing but glory, honour, happiness, 
prosperity, and everything else she thought 
most desirable. 

And yet these bright anticipations formed 
the very cloud that was to cause her affec- 
tion, that had re-arisen in such splendour, to 
suffer an utter eclipse. 



68 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

" What can you be thinking of, dearest ?" 
inquired her lover earnestly, with a pas- 
sionate gaze upon her very thoughtful 
countenance ; " you smile, and seem to feel 
the happiness you are creating ; and yet in 
that lofty brow, and in those exquisitely 
bright eyes, there are evidences not to be 
mistaken, that your thoughts are straying 
from this happy place." 

" I was thinking of Lord Orford, Horace," 
replied Miss Falkland. 

" My father!" exclaimed he, in a tone of 
surprise not altogether pleasing ; for somehow, 
he could not tell why, it seemed strange she 
should be thinking of him, though he had 
entirely forgot his existence ; then added, 
with a smile, as though he at once divined 
her meaning, " I think we need have no 
misgivings in that quarter; my father will 
readily agree to anything likely to secure 
my happiness." 

" I am very glad of that, Horace. But 
my thoughts were not then directed to that 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 69 

point, interesting as it undoubtedly is : I was 
thinking of the infamous manner in which 
Lord Orford has been treated." 

" Infamous indeed ! " cried our hero — his 
affectionate gaze now expressive of the 
deepest indignation ; and then, delighted 
with this evident sympathy of his beautiful 
mistress for the parent he regarded with so 
much pride and attachment, he added, " Oh, 
you little know, dearest, how grossly he has 
been maligned — how shamefully he has been 
misjudged — how villainously he has been 
persecuted! A man of greater integrity of 
character, of more enlarged mind or states- 
manlike views, of kinder heart or warmer 
feelings, never watched over the interests of 
any country — certainly never so successfully 
presided over the government of England 
at a season of similar difficulty and danger. 
And to see so great a man and so able a 
Minister driven from office by the herd of 
the envious, the incapable, and the conceited, 
to whom he had made himself obnoxious by 



70 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

the honest and fearless discharge of his duties, 
must make one almost ashamed of one's 
country — assuredly very much ashamed of 
its politics." 

" I do not doubt his Majesty is very much 
concerned at the unworthy treatment of a 
subject whose name has become so celebrated 
in Europe." 

"To do him justice, I believe the King 
has taken his dismissal very much to heart. 
But he is, as it were, powerless, and destitute 
of friends who can be of any service to 
him." 

" I have reason to believe that his Majesty 
is not so powerless as you imagine, Horace — 
nay, that he has more poAverful friends at 
present than ever he had; and that he is 
both willing and able to reward those who 
serve him with fidelity." 

Our hero stared. He was surprised that 
she should be so much better acquainted 
with the King's condition than himself. 
Possibly Lady Furbelow had been her 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 71 

niece's authority for this piece of intelligence, 
which, like many other things emanating 
from her Ladyship, was much more curious 
than authentic. 

" His Majesty, I have reason to believe, is 
much inclined to stand Lord Orford's friend 
in this very disagreeable affair. Of course, 
I mean his Majesty James III." 

Horace Walpole nearly perpetrated a 
whistle, so much was he taken by surprise 
at discovering that the King meant by his 
beautiful mistress, was no other than "the 
Old Pretender." He heartily wished him 
at the bottom of the Red Sea; for the men- 
tion of his name recalled to his mind a cir- 
cumstance he would gladly have had buried 
in oblivion. This was Miss Falkland's 
connection with the Pretender's adherents, 
which he had, in so singular a manner, 
discovered at Bath. He would have avoided 
the subject, had it been in his power, but 
he saw it was forced upon him ; and with 
the fullest conviction of the very tender 



72 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

ground he was upon, lie prepared himself to 
meet its difficulties. 

" I have no doubt Lord Orford -will fully 
appreciate such obliging considerateness," 
said his son. This was not the sort of 
reply the young lady required ; nevertheless 
she proceeded. 

" I suppose you are aware, my dear 
Horace," she added, as affectionately as 
though entering upon a discussion in which 
it was impossible for their mutual harmony 
to be disturbed, " of the extremely favourable 
change affairs have taken in that quarter." 
She saw in his face, as she regarded it at- 
tentively, no indication of such knowledge; 
and then continued — "His most Christian 
Majesty of France has taken a very lively 
interest in the cause of his faithful ally, and 
every arrangement has been completed by 
his Ministers, for sending an expedition, 
worthy of the occasion, to secure to James 
III. the throne of his ancestors." 

Her lover was still silent. This slightly 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 73 

disturbed the fair Jacobite's equanimity; 
but she felt that she had too much at stake 
to risk it by any display of displeasure. 
She therefore proceeded on her task in 
exactly the same endearing tone and 
manner. 

" There can be no doubt, dearest Horace, 
of the fullest success of these measures for 
the restoration of our beloved monarch; a 
restoration which I cannot but think you 
will, like myself, and all whose hearts have 
been touched by his undeserved misfortunes, 
hail with the most lively gratitude to Heaven. 
To many it will bring great and manifold 
blessings — to the poor oppressed people of 
this country, groaning under the yoke of a 
foreigner and an usurper, it must be wel- 
comed as a wonderful interposition of a 
iust Providence in their favour — but to our- 
selves, Horace, it will be more even than 
this ; it will bring us happiness unbounded — 
the fullest realization of all our most 
cherished hopes — the most perfect completion 

VOL. III. e 



74 STKAWBERRY HILL. 

of every wish that has ever entered into our 
hearts. 

" To you, dear Horace, I am sure I need 
not dwell upon the unquestionable claim our 
beloved Sovereign has to the throne of these 
realms : an honourable mind like yours 
will as readily recognise the additional claim 
which endurance of wrong, and of the greatest 
calamity which can happen to a Prince, 
must have given him to the affections of his 
subjects. I feel such entire confidence in 
the integrity of your judgment, and the 
generosity of your feelings, that T cannot for 
a moment doubt your disposition to afford 
him all the assistance in your power." 

Still our hero refrained from making any 
remark. The young lady had either heard 
that " silence gave consent," or, finding no op- 
position was attempted, was ready to believe 
none would be offered. Her lover, however, 
was very far indeed from acquiescing in any- 
thing she said. He thought himself too well 
acquainted with public opinion in England, as 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 75 

well as with the intentions of the French 
government, to believe that the Pretender had 
the slightest chance of driving George II. from 
the throne. But the confidence of his fair 
companion embarrassed him. Every minute 
seemed to make the question more hazard- 
ous. He hesitated about undeceiving her; 
but to leave her in her present error was, 
he felt, to leave her on the brink of a pre- 
cipice. 

" I have had despatches as late as the 
20th ultimo, stating that the expedition from 
a French port, which was to accompany the 
Prince of Wales in a descent on these shores, 
was preparing to set sail immediately," said 
the lovely Jacobite, in a confidential whisper, 
evidently intended to settle any scruples, if 
any scruples should still remain. 

" I have seen despatches of a much later 
date," replied her lover, quietly, " which 
place beyond a doubt the impression which 
all well-informed men in this country have 
received, that the French government will 

e 2 



76 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

do nothing for the young Prince you have 
mentioned, and that it is very far from their 
intention to risk any of their ships in assisting 
him to invade this country." 

The cool and confident manner of this 
reply, was not at all encouraging to the 
young lady. It shewed to her what very 
little effect her appeal had produced. But 
little daunted by such a repulse, she was 
about to resume her labour with increased 
earnestness, when she was stopped by a 
speech from her lover, that greatly increased 
its difficulties. 

" Dearest Arabella ! I implore you to listen 
to me, and to well weigh what you hear; 
for, believe me, it comes from one who, for 
your sake, has left nothing undone to arrive 
at the truth. It is evident to me that you 
are quite ignorant of the military and naval 
resources at the disposal of the ruling 
sovereign of this country. Be assured that 
they are more than sufficient to crush any 
effort, either by land or sea, to disturb the 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 77 

government, settled by the laws of the king- 
dom, passed by an overwhelming majority 
of the Lords and Commons. 

" You are totally misinformed as to the 
feelings of the people towards the exiled 
family : save here and there a few, who ob- 
stinately adhere to opinions that have gone 
out of date nearly half a century, the mass of 
the people care nothing about the expatriated 
Stuarts, and certainly, with a knowledge of 
the strength of the present Government, 
would not risk certain destruction, to stir a 
step in their favour, were the Young Pre- 
tender and his French expedition to land to- 
morrow. 

" I am afraid," he continued, earnestly, 
as he noticed an anxious frown gathering on 
his mistress's brow, " that advantage has 
been taken of your enthusiastic and generous 
sympathy for the unfortunate, to draw you 
into schemes of the most hazardous descrip- 
tion, set on foot by a few reckless adven- 
turers and dissatisfied politicians in this 



78 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

country, who have nothing to lose, and 
every thing to gain by a change. Let me 
urge you, with all the strength of affection, 
to abandon a conspiracy which it is impos- 
sible should succeed, and which must, sooner 
or later, bring destruction on all those en- 
gaged in it." 

" A daughter of Lord Falkland is not 
capable of abandoning her friends," observed 
the young lady, with a good deal of dignity, 
" even were she engaged in projects as 
desperate as you are pleased to describe 
them." 

" I cannot look upon them as your friends, 
Arabella," replied her companion, " and I 
know their projects to be as desperate as 
their fortunes." 

" You do not think, then, there is any 
prospect of the landing of the Prince in this 
country? " 

" Not the slightest." 

" What would you say," she added, with 
a triumphant smile, as she iixed her bright 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 79 

eyes upon him, " were I to tell you that this 
landing had taken place? " 

" I should consider that you had been mis- 
informed," he replied. 

" You would not believe it? " 

" Not a word." 

" Then I tell you that I have a letter 
from my father, who is with the Prince, 
giving an account of the landing of his Royal 
Highness on the coast of Scotland." 

" On the coast of Scotland ! " exclaimed 
Horace Walpole, in a tone which seemed to 
admit that so incredible a circumstance was 
barely possible. 

" At Erisca — one of the Hebrides — since 
when he sailed to the Bay of Lochnannagh, 
in Invernesshire ; where, having been joined 
by all the Highland chiefs, with their clans, 
he intends, as soon as possible, to march 
towards Edinburgh, and then invade Eng- 
land with all his disposable force." 

Seeing- her lover look more astonished than 
credulous, Miss Falkland placed a letter in his 



80 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

hands, which she bade him read. He took 
it without making an observation — read it 
attentively — noted that its contents fully 
confirmed the extraordinary statement he had 
heard — then, carefully refolding it, gave it 
back to her. 

" I deeply regret your father should have 
lent himself to this most foolish enterprise," 
said he : " He is too good and able a man to 
cast away his life in the thoughtless manner 
of those who have nothing to lose in getting 
rid of theirs. There is a powerful military 
force in Scotland, which will soon be marched 
against this quixotic enemy." 

" Now, Horace, do not be so over-confi- 
dent ! " exclaimed the fair Jacobite. " I be- 
lieve I know a great deal more about the 
state of political feeling in Scotland than you 
can do. You may rest assured that the 
march of the Prince to Edinburgh will be a 
triumph, from beginning to end. Let me 
implore you to be reasonable. Remember 
that timely submission will remove all recol- 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 81 

lections to your prejudice. Be wise, and 
send your submission to his Royal Highness 
without a moment's delay." 

"I am a subject of George II., and one 
of the last persons likely to take up arms 
against him," was the quiet but resolute 
rejoinder. 

" As you please, Mr. Walpole," said Miss 
Falkland, in a tone very different to the 
persuasive one she had hitherto used. " It is 
apparent enough you have very little regard 
for me, or you could not have withstood 
my solicitations. I deeply regret having 
made use of them. You have made your 
own selection, and I have made mine. You 
have thought proper to cast away a happi- 
ness of which no one could have deprived 
you. It is plain you did not value it. Here, 
then, ends our intimacy for ever." 

Our hero bitterly cursed the infatu- 
tion that had made his beautiful mistress 
so determined a partisan in so desperate a 
cause. It was clear she was displeased. She 

E 3 



82 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

had withdrawn the hand that had hitherto 
been allowed to rest so affectionately in his 
own ; she had pushed her chair back a 
considerable distance, and appeared to be 
busying herself in stirring and tasting one 
of the cups of cold tea. 

Annoyed and distressed as her lover was 
by this deplorable change from the passionate 
attachment which, a short half-hour before, 
had given so perfect a harmony to their 
thoughts, it was evident to him, despite of her 
proud carriage and indifferent manner, that 
her own feelings were touched. There was 
a moisture about the eyes, and an occasional 
quivering about the lip, that declared the 
sentence of separation she had pronounced 
was a greater sacrifice to her than she wished 
it to appear. But the daughter of Lord 
Falkland was of too proud a spirit to betray 
her feelings if she could avoid it ; and, to 
prevent this, she was hurried into expres- 
sions which, under different circumstances, 
she never would have uttered. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 83 

" Am I to consider that your final resolve, 
Miss Falkland ? " inquired her lover, observ- 
ing her earnestly ; " Am I doomed to see you 
throwing yourself headlong to destruction, 
and remain powerless to save you?" 

14 1 consider it, Sir, as my duty," she 
replied, haughtily, " to assist, as much as 
may be in my power, in aiding an unfortu- 
nate Prince to gain back the birthright of 
which he has been robbed. You may con- 
sider it your duty," she added, scornfully, and 
not without a tinge of bitterness, " to betray 
me, by divulging the information you have 
just dow acquired, to those who, at present, 
have the power to reward such important 
services. You, no doubt, would acquire 
great distinction as a traitor, having, at 
least on two occasions, so well qualified 
yourself as a spy." 

" Zounds, Madam!" cried her companion 
in a loud voice, as he rose indignantly from 
his chair. Probably he might have ex- 
pressed himself still more forcibly, but just 



84 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

then the attentive landlady made her ap- 
pearance at the door, with her best curtsey. 
She had ventured into the room, fully ex- 
pecting to see the young lovers — for so she 
was certain they were — delightfully em- 
ployed in arranging their plans of future 
happiness, after enjoying the good things 
she had taken care to place before them. 

The poor woman's astonishment was of 
the most intense description at discovering, 
as she soon did, that all her delicacies were 
untouched, and that the lovers were in a 
position, and had assumed an aspect, as 
different as possible from that of all the 
lovers she had ever come near. 

She was certainly very much puzzled. 
She could not understand why they had 
neither eaten nor drunk — why they had been 
speaking to each other, just as she entered, 
with so loud a voice. She was about to ex- 
press a hope that they had not been dis- 
satisfied with what her larder afforded, and 
to hint the happiness she should feel in 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 85 

keeping such respectable customers for 
several days, when she was stopped short 
by a speech from the young lady, that 
appeared almost to take her breath away 
with surprise. 

" Be so good as to let the chariot be in 
readiness for me in a few minutes, at latest," 
she said; " I wish to reach the next town 
with as little delay as possible." 

" And do me the favour to order my 
servant to get my horses ready," added the 
gentleman; "it is absolutely necessary that 
I resume my journey immediately." 

The good woman looked from one flushed 
and angry countenance to another, and ac- 
knowledged to herself that people of quality, 
when in love with one another, had the 
oddest way of shewing their affection she 
had ever heard of. Puzzled and disappointed 
as she was, she knew there was no help for 
it ; and at once made her curtsey and went 
her way. 

" Do not let us part in anger," said our 



86 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

hero, as he approached her respectfully; 
" it is by your wish that we should part, but 
I trust that Miss Falkland, if she should find 
herself in any position of danger or difficulty, 
will apply to me for assistance.' ' 

" I shall want nothing of the kind, Sir, be 
assured," replied the lady, still a little scorn- 
ful ; " it is much more likely that I should 
be in a position to afford, rather than want 
assistance." 

The next moment she had passed by him, 
and entered an inner room. 



STRAWBERRY HILL, 87 



CHAPTER IV. 

HOUGHTON HALL, AND THE OLD MASTERS. 

The Earl of Orford, in the opinion of his 
political opponents, was a disgraced Minister 
— fretting himself to death at the loss of the 
vast influence he had so long exercised. 
Indeed, in all his terrible vexations and 
disappointments, the great consolation of 
the neglected Bolingbroke, was the know- 
ledge that he had reduced his hated rival 
from the eminence that had so excited his 
enmity, to a state of insignificance so humi- 



88 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

Hating, it seemed quite impossible the fallen 
statesman could long exist under it. And 
that patriot turned peer — Pulteney, Earl of 
Bath — derived quite as much satisfaction 
from a similar impression. 

Never were men more decidedly wrong in 
their calculations. Instead of fretting him- 
self to death, the whole neighbourhood of 
his fine family mansion, where he spent the 
most of his time, were well assured so jovial 
a personage as the Lord of Houghton was 
not to be found in the whole county. Not 
in the days of his greatest power had he 
been so surrounded by friends — not in the 
most successful period of his Ministry was 
he so cheerful. The people who came within 
the influence of his hospitality — and their 
name was Legion — talked more of the Earl 
of Orford, disgraced though he might be, 
than ever they had done of Sir Robert 
Walpole, when he was the fountain of honour 
and reward. 

The change for the worse, paradoxical as 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 89 

it might seem, was to him a change for the 
better — he enjoyed better spirits, better 
health, and better reputation, when pre- 
siding over the princely hospitalities of 
Houghton Hall, than he had known when 
he had at his disposal all the patronage of 
the Crown. He had grown much stouter : 
the persecution he had met with, and the 
indignities that had been lavished upon him, 
had added several inches to his girth, and 
given to his good-humoured countenance a 
breadth of surface and freshness of colour, 
that made it the very beau ideal of ease and 
jollity. No desperate sinner, seeking the 
retirement of the cloister, ever came from 
the exercise of the necessary mortifications 
in so sleek and rotund a state of holiness. 

In this metamorphosis nothing was so 
apparent, as that his Lordship had quite 
forgotten his former state. Instead of having 
his mind harassed by the measures of his 
enemies, the difiiculty was to provide ac- 
commodation for the immense number of 



90 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

his friends. The great Minister was now a 
great sportsman. Instead of being over- 
whelmed with cares to maintain a majority 
in the House of Commons, his whole soul 
was devoted to the object of possessing the 
best pack of fox-hounds in the county. He 
looked no longer for the annoying reports of 
jealous subordinates : the whole source of his 
anxiety was the daily statement of his game- 
keeper. In place of considering the division, 
his thoughts were on "the meet." In short, 
the affairs of " the Houghton Hunt" had 
quite superseded all interest he had in those 
of his country. 

There was, however, one pursuit which he 
had regarded with affection in his days of 
political greatness, to which, now he had more 
leisure, he gave all the time he could spare 
from his sporting occupations. Engrossed by 
the business of the State, the interest he could 
take in works of art was extremely limited, 
and was indulged in as though it was a 
stolen pleasure. Xow he could examine, 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 91 

select, and purchase all the desirable pic- 
tures that came in his way ; and very exten- 
sive indeed became the additions he made 
to his collection. 

There was an incongruity in the two 
pursuits of fox-hunting and picture-hunting, 
which, to any one less enthusiastic in both 
than the retired statesman, must have ap- 
peared eminently ludicrous. It often hap- 
pened that the Lord of Houghton had to 
choose two or three couple of new hounds, 
and two or three pairs of old paintings, at the 
same time ; and his thoughts would become 
confused between his care for a litter of pup- 
pies from a favourite bitch, and his anxiety 
for the safe arrival of a fresh batch of the 
Old Masters from a confidential agent. His 
ideas were in a state of constant transit from 
the Houghton kennel to the Houghton gal- 
lery : and not unfrequently, Juno and Csesar, 
and Vixen and Towzer, would get mixed up 
in his mind with Eaffaelle and Titian, and 
Rubens and Vandyck, to the fruitful pro- 



92 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

duction of some very singular and ludicrous 
mistakes. 

At the time to which we are referring, 
his Lordship was in the gallery, in his cus- 
tomary hunting costume, extremely busy, 
flushed, and anxious, with a hammer in his 
hand, assisting in opening a large packing- 
case. Several pictures had found places on 
the walls — more were waiting to be hung — 
a heap lay sloping against one corner ; an- 
other lot in another place; every chair, 
every table, every available place, contained 
a picture of some kind. 

The only attendant with him was our old 
acquaintance Oswald. He did not appear to 
have suffered more by his forced abdication 
of the presidential chair at " The Upper Ser- 
vants' Supper Club," than had his master by 
his ejectment from his more important post 
of Prime Minister. Honest Oswald looked 
as fresh as a rose. The air of Houghton 
evidently agreed with him better than had 
that of Downing Street ; and the attention 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 93 

he found himself now obliged to pay to his 
master's hunting establishment, was more 
healthy, if not more agreeable, than his for- 
mer superintendence of the minister's levees. 
Like his master, he had got stout — espe- 
cially about the stomach, which rivalled that 
of his lord in being aldermanic in its propor- 
tions : but he had also grown to a similar 
extent in his master's favour. He was 
made acquainted with his most secret affairs, 
sporting and artistical, and was the medium 
through which his lordship communicated 
with his agents and dependents in both. 
The kindness of Lord Orford's disposition 
was never more agreeably displayed than 
when in company with his old servant, 
whose opinion he would ask, and whose taste 
he would seem to consult, as though he were 
not only a friend, but a particularly valuable 
one. 

" Now, Oswald, we must be careful how 
we take out these nails," observed his Lord- 
ship, applying his hammer very scientifically 



94 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

to detach the fastenings from the top of the 
case. 

" Yes, my Lord." 

" I would not have the contents of this 
packing-case damaged for the world." 

" No, my Lord." 

" 1 have reasons to believe it to be one of 
the finest specimens of the master, in En- 
gland." 

" Yes, my Lord." 

" And as an ornament to this gallery, it 

will raise its reputation to a pitch of 

By the way, Oswald, did you tell Dixon he 
might buy those hounds, if he was certain 
they were of the breed they were repre- 
sented?" 

" Yes, my Lord ; and I '11 be bound to say 
they are all snug enough in the kennel by 
this time." 

" That 's right. This picture is reckoned 
by the best judges a chef tfceuvre, Oswald — a 

miracle of art — a Oh ! I hope Dixon 

did not forget to physic Juno; the poor 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 95 

bitcli is evidently in a bad state — I should 
say in a very bad state indeed." 

" She 's got the bots badly, my Lord ; but 
Dixon says he '11 soon bring her round 
again." 

" Nobody knows how to treat hounds 
better than Dixon. But I was speaking of 
this unrivalled painting." 

" Yes, my Lord." 

" It was painted for one of the Cardinals 
of the Roman Church, who was so en- 
raptured with its extraordinary beauties, 
that he promised to have masses sung for the 

souls of all the painter's relatives, and 

You did not tell me, Oswald, how Pincher is 
getting on? " 

" Oh, poor beast! Dixon says she is 
doing as well as can be expected, my Lord." 

" I 'm glad to hear it. Now, gently with 
this top. We must take it off very care- 
fully. There — what do you think of that 
for a picture ? " 

The top of the packing case had been 



96 STEAW T BEEEY HILL. 

cautiously removed, and placed on one side, 
and a glowing Venus, by Titian, large as 
life, lay exposed to the inspection of the two 
connoisseurs. Lord Orford stood gazing 
upon it in a seeming ecstasy; and his hum- 
ble companion, with humbler tastes, stared 
with a totally different expression of coun- 
tenance. 

" There 's a wonderful example of what 
art can accomplish ! — There 's a prodigious 
effort of genius ! What flesh ! What colour ! 
What extraordinary artistical skill! Now 
Oswald, my good fellow, tell me honestly — 
don't you think it the finest picture you ever 
saw in your life? " 

" Why, my lord," replied the man, a little 
puzzled what to say, after hearing such ex- 
travagant encomiums, " It 's certainly mon- 
strous fine ; but it seems to me, my lord, 
that the lady must be terrible badly off 
for feminine garments, to enter a picture in 
that shocking indecorous state." 

" Oh, Oswald, that 's all a prejudice. The 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 97 

subject is Venus, my good friend. Venus 
is always represented in a state of nudity." 

" Oh! is she, my lord? Then all I can 
say is, that the Cardinal as had her picture 
taken, might have found something more 
decent to put upon his walls." 

" I 'm afraid you don't quite understand 
these things, Oswald," said his Lordship, 
taking a wet sponge, and more clearly bring- 
ing out the beauties of the painting, by rub- 
bing it gently over the darker portions of 
the canvass. " Those who are genuine lovers 
of art can perceive nothing in a painting but 
the beauties of that painting. Their ideas 
are too refined — too intellectual — to have 
anything to do with whatever there may be 
gross or vulgar associated with the object 
represented. For them the veil may bv. 
drawn from the beauties of nature without 
the slightest fear of their minds being in any 
way the worse for the disclosure thus pro- 
duced. Nay, so sublime — so purely intel- 
lectual, are the emotions such delineations 

VOL. III. F 



98 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

are sure of creating, that By the way, 

Oswald, did you inquire whether Towzer 
has sulphur in his water?" 

It is not of much consequence what reply 
was given, but just at that moment the 
colloquy was interrupted by the entrance of 
a servant, announcing " The Honourable 
Horace Walpole." The butler thought that 
the father and son might wish to be left to 
themselves ; he also felt a particular desire 
to welcome his friend Mr. Fibbs to Houghton 
in a proper manner; and, not caring for 
further instruction in the sublime and the 
beautiful, he respectfully retired as our hero 
entered the gallery. 

" Ah, Horace, my boy, you Ve come in 
the nick of time ! " exclaimed Lord Orford, 
welcoming his favourite son with the warmest 
demonstrations of affection. " You shall 
change your dress presently, for I see you 
have ridden hard — but I must first have your 
opinion of this Titian — a chef-d'oeuvre, as 
you see. Prodigious fine ! isn't it ? " 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 99 

Horace wished to converse with his father 
on another subject. He was at that moment 
even less inclined to favour Yen uses than had 
been the humble critic who had just left the 
room. He was very much out of humour 
with the sex; but the appearance of the 
Goddess of Love at that particular moment 
was marvellously ill-timed. He, however, 
honoured his father's judgment to that de- 
gree, it was impossible he should not admire 
what excited his admiration. Consequently, 
he commended the painting in very warm 
terms. 

" Ah ! I knew you would be in raptures ! " 
exclaimed his Lordship ; then, catching him 
hastily by the arm, drew him suddenly to a 
little distance, " There — now you see it in 
the best light. What wonderful force ! What 
extraordinary harmony ! There never was 
anything like the colouring of Titian. By 
Jove, I believe this to be the finest picture 
in the world ! 

" But I have made vast additions to my 

f 2 



100 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

collection since you were here last," he added ; 
then drawing him to a Dutch picture resting 
on a chair, he cried in the same tone of 
transport, " Look at that, look at that, 
Horace. David Teniers ! There 's breadth ! 
There J s character ! Look at those boors ! 
Look at that old woman ! Was there ever 
anything so expressive of Dutch jollity ? " 

Although it was a great stride in art from 
Titian to Teniers, our hero readily fell 
into it at his father's suggestion. But 
more extraordinary strides were in store for 
him. He had hardly observed the drunken 
scene so ably depicted on the invaluable bit 
of panel before him, when he was abruptly 
pulled to the next chair to behold a Virgin 
and Child by Correggio. Here the raptures 
of Lord Orford were more extravagant than 
ever. It was a gem — priceless — matchless 
— unique — breathing devotion and purity — 
faultless in drawing — unrivalled in chiaro- 
'scuro — a miracle, &c. &c. 

Then he was hurried to a large subject 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 101 

by Hondikoeter. The transition from the 
representation of the divine goddess to that 
of a company of ugly Dutch drunkards was 
awkward ; but that from the blessed Virgin 
and her glorious Child, to an innumerable 
company of cocks and hens, turkeys, pigeons, 
geese, and the usual tenants of the farm-yard, 
was a great deal more so. Nevertheless, 
Lord Orford was now quite as enthusiastic 
about the feathers of a goose, as he had pre- 
viously been upon the grace of the Venus, 
and the purity of the Madonna. 

The same facility of bursting into raptures 
attended his Lordship throughout his pro- 
menade — now elicited by a Holy Family by 
Caracci — now by a birch-broom by Gerard 
Dow — at one moment soaring into extra- 
vagance at the sight of a Crucifixion by 
Rubens, the next quite as far beyond 
reasonable praise at the appearance of an 
earthenware pitcher by Ostade; here out 
of breath by the ardour of his enthusiasm 
for a sunny Hobbima — there quite as much 



102 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

exhausted by the commendations of a savage 
Salvator Rosa; now enthusiastic on sea with 
Vandervelde and Backhuysen — then as 
enthusiastic on land among the cows and 
horses of Paul Potter, Berghem, and Wouv- 
ermans; at one time in a transport before 
the classic creations of Poussin — in a few 
seconds wonderstruck before the divine 
efforts of a RafFaelle. 

His son was fond of art, and was pos- 
sessed of both taste and judgment, which had 
greatly been improved by his sojourn in 
Italy; but he had now upon his mind a 
matter which he thought of a vast deal more 
importance than the indulgence of his taste. 
He longed for an opportunity when he 
might communicate the intelligence which 
had sent him, covered with splashes, to break 
in upon his father's privacy. But Lord 
Orford was in no humour for anything but 
doing the honours of his collection. On he 
went, singing in the same high key the 
praises of Mieris and Michael Angelo — Rem- 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 103 

brandt and Claude — Vandyck and Sebastian 
del Piombo — Both and Lucatelli — Parme- 
giano and Tintoretto — and a score or two 
of others equally celebrated in the annals 
of art. 

Nothing was so clear, as that his whole 
soul was in his pictures. Even his rival 
passion had, for the time being, given way 
to this demonstration in favour of art. In- 
deed, as he stood before about the hundredth 
marvel he had pointed out, he burst into a 
passionate declaration of his entire aban- 
donment of the noisy world of politics, and 
his determination to devote himself to the 
grand object of forming the finest gallery of 
paintings in the kingdom. 

" Thank Heaven ! " he exclaimed, with a 
great deal of fervour, " I have nothing to 
do with State affairs. I have no interest 
whatever in the tactics of parties, or the stir 
of politics. Here, in my calm retreat among 
the masterpieces of human genius, I can 
set faction at defiance, and enjoy my love for 



104 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

what is rare and beautiful in painting with- 
out fear of being disturbed by the turmoil 
of contending principles. My country has 
done with me — I have done with my 
country." 

" I extremely regret to hear this," observed 
his son, taking advantage of the opening, 
" for I believe never did she want your ser- 
vices so much as at present." Seeing Lord 
Orford about to interrupt him, apparently 
with some stronger expressions of the same 
kind, our hero hastily proceeded, " I have 
just heard the most extraordinary, the most 
unexpected intelligence — intelligence likely 
to change the whole aspect of affairs — to 
create vast confusion — and probably to be 
attended with a great deal of bloodshed." 

The retired Minister was gazing at a fine 
landscape by Ruysdael, through his closed 
hand, to all appearance wrapt in admiration 
of its beauties ; but there could be no doubt 
that his attention had been excited by the 
sentences that had just been spoken, and 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 105 

that he was beginning to feel a little curious 
to learn what was the very extraordinary in- 
telligence to which his son was alluding. 

" We have been considering ourselves 
perfectly secure," continued our hero. 
"We have felt assured that the danger 
was too remote to cause any apprehension, 
and lo ! the enemy is on our shores." 

"Eh? what is all this about, Horace?" 
inquired Lord Orford, taking his gaze off 
the painting to transfer it to the speaker. 
"What enemy? We cannot have been in- 
vaded, surely! " 

" The Young Pretender has effected a 
landing on the coast ! " said the other with 
due emphasis, " and has come to fight 
for the kingdom to which his father lays 
claim." 

" The Young Pretender in this country, 
with an armed force ! " cried his lordship, so 
oblivious of his connoisseurship as uncere- 
moniously to thrust aside two cabinet gems 
of incalculable value, from chairs that were 

e 3 



106 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

nearest him; and placing one for his son, 
put the other exactly in front of it, and 
seated himself with an air of profound at- 
tention and extreme interest. 

Horace did not make any remark on this 
sudden change. He, perhaps, was not 
astonished at it, knowing that habits of 
twenty years' growth were not to be dis- 
posed of quite so rapidly as his father fancied 
they could be. 

" Now, Horace, my boy," he said, eagerly, 
"let me hear distinctly the whole of this 
astounding news of yours, and the source 
whence it was derived." 

" Don't you think that picture will fall ? " 
inquired his son, pointing to one of the 
miracles of art on which he had so lately 
expended his enthusiasm. 

a Oh, curse the picture! " cried his lord- 
ship, impatiently ; " tell me, at once, where 
you heard this story, and who was your 
authority." 

Horace then gave his father all the par- 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 107 

ticulars he had learned of the landing of the 
Young Pretender, and had not the slightest 
difficulty in assuring him of the trust- 
worthiness of the channel through which he 
derived it. 

" And you are satisfied that the govern- 
ment knows nothing of this enterprise ? " he 
inquired. 

" Nothing whatever." 

"And that the King is equally unin- 
formed of a movement that so nearly 
threatens his authority?" 

" He does not dream of such a thing." 

" Horace, my boy, this is a serious busi- 
ness — more serious than it appears. I 
know the state of the Highlands of Scotland 
well ; the flame of rebellion has been burning 
there since the year '15, and only wants 
such an occasion as this, to blaze from one 
end to the other. I must post to town with 
as little delay as possible. It is of the 
utmost necessity I should communicate with 
his Majesty forthwith. I will at once dis- 



108 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

patch a running footman, to procure relays 
of horses at every stage, and will start this 
night, as rapidly as four horses can carry 
me." 

The Statesman, who a few minutes since 
had so completely abandoned public affairs, 
had now all his faculties absorbed by the 
interest of this sudden intelligence. He 
was impatient to leave Houghton — ay, his 
rare gallery and his beloved kennel included. 
The news had awakened all his old political 
impulses, and he was again as much a 
statesman as ever. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 109 



CHAPTER V. 

A NIGHT AT RANELAGH. 

There was a considerable commotion 
amongst parties. The feverish antagonism 
of politics appeared suspended: the Whigs 
and Tories stood like contending armies, re- 
fraining from hostilities, to watch the ap- 
proach of a hurricane. The Young Pretender 
had been making rapid strides. He was at 
the head of an army of upwards of 6,000 
men; though at his first landing he had 



110 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

with him no more than seven followers. 
Without cavalry or artillery, he had fought 
a battle with one of King George's generals, 
having three thousand foot, and two regiments 
of dragoons, and ample artillery; and had 
overthrown them horse and foot, destroying 
by far the greater portion. Nearly the whole 
of Scotland might be said to be at his dis- 
posal; and he kept a court at Edinburgh, 
which, if not as splendid as that of St. 
James, was much more harmonious in its 
ingredients. Having collected a powerful 
force, it appeared to be his intention to 
cross the border, that the English Jacobites 
might avail themselves of an opportunity to 
flock to his standard. 

All England was ringing with the exploits 
of the Young Chevalier. People who a 
short time before would not have cared a 
rush had the whole Stuart dynasty been 
hanged, now appeared to take a vast interest 
in the romantic narratives of the young 
Prince's successful career. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. Ill 

It was in vain that the staunch partizans 
of the Hanoverian succession affected to 
undervalue the triumph he had achieved, 
and prophesy speedy annihilation to him 
and his cause, as soon as an English army 
could be sent against him. There were 
many earnest well-wishers in all parts of 
the country — songs were sung in his praise, 
pamphlets circulated in support of his claim ; 
and the Jacobites, notwithstanding that the 
Government kept a jealous eye upon their 
movements, were indefatigable in getting 
ready for taking part in the struggle which 
they expected would be fought out on their 
own soil. 

In London, the stir seemed to be as great 
as in the provinces. Jacobite sentiments, 
Jacobite toasts, and Jacobite songs, were 
more and more openly expressed and sung. 
The chocolate-houses, the coffee-houses, the 
taverns, abounded with Jacobites, who be- 
came every day more audacious in their 
conduct. The various political parties seemed 



112 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

undecided ; each abused the other, and each 
strove to conceal from the other the interest 
it felt in the intelligence from the North. 

The political leaders could not view the 
menacing attitude now assumed by the young 
adventurer, without interest. The stirring 
news even roused the philosophic Boling- 
broke in his peaceful retreat, and caused him 
to consider the* feasibility of once more 
rushing into public life — not in the service 
of the King de facto, but in that of the King 
de jure, according to Jacobite ideas. But 
he entertained some misgivings that the 
Stuarts had as unpleasant an opinion of 
him as the Guelphs. At any rate, he thought 
he would look about him. In such a crisis, 
such a statesman could not be overlooked. 
He was soon in the midst of Opposition, 
intriguing as actively as ever. 

The head of the Government at this time 
was Mr. Pelham, the brother of the pomp- 
ous Duke of Newcastle we have elsewhere 
described — a man very far from adequate to 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 113 

such an emergency; and his incompetency 
was rendered more glaring, through the in- 
decision and difference of opinion of his 
colleagues. At one moment they affected 
to treat the rebellion with contempt; at 
another it appeared to overwhelm them with 
alarm. The King had hurried from Han- 
over, where he was when the Young Pre- 
tender first invaded his dominions, after 
negotiating for several Dutch batallions, to 
assist him in getting rid of his daring com- 
petitor. He met with divided councils at 
home; and such assistance as he could ob- 
tain from his most powerful subjects was 
given in a very niggardly spirit. There 
seemed no one around him in whom he 
could place any confidence. He yearned 
for the assistance of that counsellor whose 
sagacity had so often done him good service ; 
but the jealousy of his Ministers forbade his 
having recourse to him. 

Lord Orford greatly distinguished himself 
in his place in the House of Lords, by his 



114 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

energetic support of the House of Hanover. 
On one occasion this so much affected Prince 
Frederic, who was present, that at the con- 
clusion of the speech he shook hands with 
the orator, and exhibited such excessive cor- 
diality, that Bubb Doddington, when he 
heard of it, began to consider the pro- 
priety of once more paying court to the ex- 
Minister. 

The sense of danger threw a good deal of 
light on his Royal Highness' s rather murky 
intellects; and he could distinguish the 
friend of his family, when his position as 
Heir Apparent was menaced by the success 
of the adventurous Prince who had assumed 
this title. He still, however, continued to 
delight Bubb Doddington by winning his 
money; and that very sanguine gentleman 
flourished so much upon his losses, that 
nothing in the world but his yearning for a 
peerage would have made him think for a 
moment of quitting the service of so con- 
siderate a master. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 115 

His Boyal Highness, in a moment of ex- 
treme confidence, after " doing," as he very 
justly termed it, his aspiring friend out of 
£5,000, made known to him the names of 
those persons he had selected to be his prin- 
cipal Ministers when he came to the throne ; 
and as the said Bubb Doddington was very 
handsomely provided for in this arrange- 
ment, he of course was proportionately gra- 
tified. Unfortunately, the King obstinately 
chose to retain a most provoking state of 
health, and the elevation of the apothecary's 
son continued to be kept at a most tantalizing 
distance. 

The proverb, however, which declares that 
"while the grass grows the steed starves," 
was far from being realised in this instance. 
Indeed, the case was as completely the re- 
verse as possible : Doddington' s losses and 
disappointments had made him so fat, and 
the changes in his prospects had made him 
so gay, that if any one had desired to see a 
particularly fine example of a prosperous 



116 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

courtier, he had only to allow his eyes 
to fall on the ample cheeks, the swelling 
corporation, and the showy dress, in which 
the future peer chose to display himself. 

In the alarm occasioned by the disturb- 
ances in the North, the King could place 
very little reliance upon his eldest son. 
The behaviour of the royal relatives towards 
each other had by this time become a little 
more respectable, but there was no affection 
between them, and quite as little respect. 
The King's second son, the Duke of Cumber- 
land, who had distinguished himself beside 
him at the battle of Dettingen, and had seen 
a good deal of military service on the Conti- 
nent since — though the battle of Fontenoy 
did not display his generalship as promi- 
nently as might have been desired — engrossed 
all the attachment he had at his disposal. 

As Colonel Conway was attached to the 
staff of his Royal Highness, who had been 
appointed Commander-in-Chief, our hero 
had the means of knowing what military 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 117 

measures were in contemplation. He took 
no ordinary interest in the subject, for it 
had strong claims upon his attention. Since 
his father's return to public life, he had 
entered deeply into the intrigues of the 
political parties of the day; and employed 
all the talent he possessed, in endeavouring 
to organize a party at the present juncture, 
which should return the Earl to his old 
position at the helm of affairs. He was 
therefore so deep in the war of pamphlets, 
the conflict of opinion, the maze of policy, 
that there was scarcely to be found, even 
in that stirring time, a more active poli- 
tician. 

This made him take very great interest in 
the proposed campaign against the Young 
Pretender: his attachment to his cousin 
was a second link of the same chain; and 
his anxiety to learn some tidings of the 
object of a more romantic attachment, was 
another. As Colonel Conway was about to 
join his regiment, which had been ordered 



118 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

against the rebels, the cousins had determined 
to spend their last evening in town in en- 
joying the entertainments of Ranelagh. 

A hundred years ago, Chelsea boasted 
what was then considered a garden — that is, 
a considerable piece of land planted out with 
trees and shrubs, in long alleys, and open 
promenades, where a combination of coloured 
lamps gave an agreeable light ; a tolerable 
orchestra, with the addition of two or three 
tolerable singers, offered the welcome addi- 
tion of both the song and the dance ; and a 
numerous company of fashionables of both 
sexes, in the handsome dresses then in vogue, 
added to the dish the seasoning of wit. 
beauty, scandal, and mischief. 

In short, Ranelagh was a superior Vaux- 
hall, the company being much more select. 
A large building called the Rotunda, the 
favourite promenade of what was styled the 
beau monde, was usually full to overflowing 
of ladies of fashion, with swelling hoops, 
powdered hair, and high-heeled shoes — in 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 119 

the richest brocades and satins, and wearing 
very handsome jewels — their complexions 
usually heightened by cosmetics, and set off 
by one or two patches. Their beaux made 
almost as much display, for their suits were 
often of equally rich materials, and varied 
quite as much in colour. They promenaded 
side by side ; the lady flirting her costly fan, 
the gentleman dangling his equally costly 
cane, and both indulging in the smart chit- 
chat of the day, and laughing at each other's 
sallies with as much freedom as if, instead 
of being in so public a place, they were in 
the quiet drawing-room of some card-playing 
dowager in Cavendish Square. 

On the present occasion the entertainment 
was a masquerade — a foreign amusement, 
which had been fashionable in England for 
nearly half a century. A considerable 
number of persons appeared in the mask 
and domino, which was generally quite suf- 
ficient for concealment; but others, who 
were often the gayest spirits of the company, 



120 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

assumed the costumes of other nations — they 
were Turks, Swiss, Spaniards, and other 
people, whose style of dress was thought 
sufficiently picturesque to tempt them to 
its assumption; — the assumed Turk or 
Spaniard, let it be remembered, possessing 
the disadvantage of not knowing a word of 
his own language. 

The occurrence of a masquerade afforded 
a capital opportunity for carrying on love 
affairs : it was equally available for pro- 
ceeding with other intrigues; and, in the 
present disturbed state of the country, it 
was anticipated by the more observant 
lookers-on, that it would be had recourse to 
by the numerous influential Jacobites then in 
town, for communicating confidentially with 
each other. The Ministry, however, did 
not seem to apprehend any danger, for they 
had taken no precautions. Apparently, 
they were too busy differing amongst 
themselves, to heed what was going on so 
close to them ; or, perhaps, did not think it 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 121 

suited with their dignity to interfere with a 
matter of so trifling a nature. 

When our hero, in an ordinary mask and 
domino, entered the gardens, he observed 
that it was unusually crowded, and that a 
great portion of the company — instead of a 
gentleman and a lady, as was customary, 
promenading together — had formed into 
groups of half a dozen to twenty, that 
seemed engaged in conversation, which, how- 
ever, invariably ceased as he approached, 
and all eyes were turned upon him till he 
went out of earshot, when the parties re- 
sumed their discourse. Most of these groups 
he met in the retired walks, but others were 
to be seen in more public places. 

He noticed that the persons forming these 
groups invariably wore a white rose at the 
left breast. He remembered that this was 
a favourite symbol of the Jacobites, and 
could not doubt that they employed it now 
as a means of more easily recognising each 
other; and that the scrutiny with which 

VOL. III. G 



122 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

he was regarded on approaching them, 
arose from his not having that treasonable 
emblem. 

Just as he had come to this conclusion, 
he discovered one of these roses lying in the 
path before him — most probably it had 
dropped from some careless Jacobite. A 
few seconds only elapsed, before it was fixed 
in the exact position he had seen it worn. 
This had scarcely been effected, when he 
observed a lady, dressed as a shepherdess, 
approaching him, looking carefully upon the 
ground, as she came. The gentleman quickly 
divined her errand. 

" Fair Shepherdess ! ' ;I said he, as she ap- 
proached him, " art thou seeking flowers ? — 
a pursuit well becoming one of thy rustical 
nature, I freely own; but thou shouldst 
know, child, that in these times there is but 
one flower worthy to grace thy delicate 
bosom, and much I regret that I see it not 
in its appropriate resting-place." 

The Shepherdess gave a quick yet care- 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 123 

ful scrutiny of the speaker, and then, as if 
assured by recognising the well-known sign, 
she said, in a manner half of mortification, 
and half of mirth, " That 's the very flower 
I am looking for, Mr. Wiseacre — for you 
must know that my delicate bosom, be 
hanged to it! could not hold fast what, 
as your sapience observed, graced it so 
worthily." 

Our hero recognised the voice of the ec- 
centric and witty Lady Townshend, who had 
the reputation of being deep in the councils 
of the Jacobites. He thought, if he could 
detain her in conversation, he was more 
likely to get from her Ladyship the intelli- 
gence he wanted, than from any one else. 
Lady Townshend, he knew, was an intimate 
friend of Lady Furbelow, and was well ac- 
quainted with her niece. 

" Ah, incomparable Chloe ! " exclaimed 
he, "If you have had the misfortune to 
abandon the white rose, how much greater 
is the loss it has sustained, in parting 

G 2 



124 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

company with, so blooming a flower as 
yourself !" 

" Oh, your humble servant ! " cried the 
lady, with a loud laugh. " But blooming 
as I am, I beg to assure you, that I have 
not yet come to my full perfection, so you 
had better let me alone. And as for my 
abandoning the white rose, at a season so 
propitious to it as the present, I should be 
almost as great a fool as your worship — if 
that isn't being too presumptuous. 

" Plague take the flower ! ' ; she added, 
looking about her. " Where can it have 
got to?" 

" Ah! most adorable Shepherdess! " he 
resumed, highly amused by her ladyship's 
characteristic manner; "how is it possible 
for any man to hear of a separation of 
objects, so formed by nature for the most 
intimate association, and not wish to assist 
in re-uniting them ! The friends of the 
white rose cannot help being the slaves of 
one, under whose sunny smiles it has grown 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 125 

and flourished. Suffer me, dearest Lady 
Townshend — " 

" Well ! " exclaimed the lady, apparently 
astonished, " You have got the start of me. 
Tom Fool knows me, better than I know Tom 
Fool. My name seems familiar to you." 

"Would I could say I was as familiar 
with your Ladyship — " 

" You are too familiar by half, Sir." 
" As familiar as might encourage me — " 
" Oh, you don't want encouragement." 
" As should encourage me to attempt 
what might be considered a liberty — " 

" I beg, Sir, you wont attempt any liber- 
ties with me ! " 

" Merely to ask a question or two." 
" Oh, your most obedient ! I protest I 
thought you were, unquestionably, one of the 
most impudent fellows I ever met with. 
But what do you want to know, Mr. Inter- 
rogator? As far as I can see, you are a 
vast deal too knowing, or you would not 
have recognised me so readily." 



126 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

" Ah, Lady Townshend, how is it pos- 
sible for those who have once had the 
felicity of being in your company, not to 
detect that shape, that air, that carriage, 
under any disguise ! " 

" The deuce is in the fellow ! Pray, is 
this one of your questions? because, if so, it 
is very soon answered." 

" I beg to inform your Ladyship, it is not 
one of the questions to which I alluded." 

" Then I beg to inform your Lordship, 
that you had better let me hear them, if 
you desire to be answered; for I would 
rather answer you, and get rid of you, than 
detain you near me — being at this present 
moment hugely in doubt whether you are 
a footpad or a dancing master, as you 
possess all the natural audacity of the one, 
and all the assumed gentility of the other." 

" Your Ladyship does me honour." 

" Not a bit of it." 

" The questions I am about to ask, re- 
late to the White Rose." 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 127 

"Deuce take it! Where can it have 
dropped ? " 

" I am deeply interested in a Nobleman, 
who is well known for his devotion to that 
flower. I mean my Lord Falkland." 

" Are you a friend of his ? I shall be very 
glad to hear that you have been keeping 
such good company." 

" I was a frequent guest at his villa near 
Rome, and feel a deep interest in his family. 
I should be grateful for some certain in- 
telligence of his safety, from one of whom I 
have often heard him speak with such re- 
gard, as my Lady Townshend." 

" Well, it so happens, I can tell you 
all that is possible to be known, having 
this very day received a letter from his 
daughter." 

"She is with him, then?" inquired the 
gentleman, anxiously. 

" With him ! " cried the lady, in some 
astonishment. " She is the star of the 
Prince's Court. The young Scottish Lords 



128 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

and great chiefs are ready to hack each 
other to shreds with their claymores, to 
gain a smile from her; and since the army 
entered England, I know not how many 
duels have taken place between them and 
the English gentlemen who have joined the 
Prince's standard." 

" Is she allowed to accompany the army ? 
to be mixed up with those half savage 
Highlanders?" cried the gentleman, impa- 
tiently. " How irksome it must be to a 
being of her sensibility and refinement ! " 

" She tells me quite the contrary. She 
expatiates with enthusiasm on the attention 
she receives, when riding in the midst of 
the regiment which her father commands; 
and does not forget to dwell sufficiently on 
the handsome young Scottish chiefs, who 
are but too happy to walk beside her horse. 
Indeed, I have no doubt from what she 
tells me, that, before the Prince reaches 
London, she will either have become Lady 
Clan-something, or Mrs. Mac-somebody." 



STRAWBERRY HELL. 129 

Notwithstanding the manner in which he 
had parted from Miss Falkland, our hero 
felt annoyed at hearing this account of 
her. There seemed to him an inexcusable 
levity in such conduct, which he never 
should have expected in a woman of her 
superiority. 

" I am glad that she is so well, and appa- 
rently so happy," he at last observed. 

" Apparently happy ! " cried his informant, 
" I should think there could be no doubt of 
her happiness. The Prince would do any- 
thing in the world for her; indeed, I have 
as little doubt that she has as good a chance 
of the heart of his Royal Highness, as of 
that of any of his officers. When he forms 
his Court, you may take my word for it there 
will be some distinguished post in it 
reserved for her." 

" And Lord Falkland — does he approve 
of all this ? " inquired the still more dissa- 
tisfied lover. 

"My Lord Falkland, of course, is as happy 

g 3 



130 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

as herself — nay, I believe he is the more 
happy of the two ; for the present favourable 
position of his daughter, assures him of the 
complete termination of a girlish passion she 
some time ago was thoughtless enough to 
entertain for a person very undeserving of it." 

" Oh, indeed ! " exclaimed the gentleman, 
feeling a little mortified at the intelligence, 
" I was not aware of that." 

" The poor man had some good qualities, 
I dare say," resumed the lady, " and his 
position, perhaps, might be called respect- 
able — for I can't say but what he always had 
a decent coat on his back, and seemed to 
possess a fair allowance of clean linen." 

" That must have been vastly consolatory 
to her friends," cried the other, and not 
without a tinge of bitterness. 

" Yes," she replied, carelessly playing with 
her fan ; " But then the fellow was such a 
shallow coxcomb." 

" Is it possible?" he exclaimed, in a tone 
of intense mortification. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 131 

" True, upon my honour ! He had the 
assurance to write a book, which shewed 
clearly enough what immense conceit he 
must have had." 
" No doubt it did." 

" And the book was so monstrous ridi- 
culous ! " 

" Was it, indeed ! And the young lady 
— did she think so?" inquired the lover, 
with a feeling of anxiety he found it in vain 
to suppress. 

" I thought it would have been the death 
of her," cried Lady Townshend, laughing 
heartily. " She laughed at it from begin- 
ning to end." 

" Laughed at it ! " exclaimed he, as though 
horror-struck. 

" Oh, those sentimental passages ! " con- 
tinued the lady, indulging in immoderate 
mirth, " What exquisite jests she made of 
them! " 
"Jests!" 
" If the poor fellow had only heard what 



132 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

sport she made of that precious production 
— how cleverly she turned the adventures 
of the hero into ridicule — how provokingly 
droll she made the passion of the heroine — 
I am sure he must have parted with what 
little sense he possessed." 

"Here, my Lady Townshend, is your rose," 
said the gentleman, in a grave tone, as he 
presented her with the flower, " I have no 
further use for it." 

" Eh! What, you don't mean to say you 
have nothing to do with the White Rose?' 
demanded her ladyship. 

" Nothing whatever." 

" Then how came you by this, Sirrah?" 

" I picked it up soon after I entered the 
gardens; and, finding it belongs to your 
ladyship, I restore it." 

"lam prodigiously obliged to you," she 
replied, with a profound curtsey; then 
resuming her mirthful tone, she added, as 
she fastened the flower at her breast, "I 
protest to you I regard it as a very proper 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 133 

exchange : / have got the flower I looked 
upon as lost, and you have got intelligence 
of the lady you looked upon as lost. Your 
humble servant, Mr. Horace Walpole ! " 

Lady Townshend indulged in a hearty 
burst of laughter behind her fan, as she once 
more made him a parting curtsey. 

He saw, too late, that he had betrayed him- 
self; and it was evident that her eccentric 
ladyship had been amusing herself at his 
expense. This was provoking. He was 
conscious, too, of being as much in the dark 
about the fair object of his solicitude, as 
when he entered the gardens. And though 
he was almost immediately joined by his 
light-hearted cousin, he could not divert his 
thoughts into any other channeh 



134 STRAWBERRY HILL. 



CHAPTER VI. 

UNEXPECTED NEWS. 

Nothing could exceed the consternation 
into which the Government were thrown by 
the news which had just been received of 
the advance of the Rebels. The Young- 
Pretender was in possession of Derby. He 
had entered England at the head of the 
bravest men of Scotland ; city after city had 
fallen before him — he had met with scarcely 
any opposition — it was said that the English 
Jacobites were thronging in crowds to his 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 135 

standard, and that in a few days he would 
appear before London with an overwhelming 
force. 

In that city all was confusion and alarm. 
The most extraordinary statements were 
made by one party, of the ferocity of the half- 
naked Highlanders — and, by the other, of 
the clemency and generosity of the hand- 
some young Prince who commanded them. 
All the disposable force was collecting for 
the defence of the city; and the King and 
the Duke of Cumberland were striving to 
infuse as much loyalty in these hastily formed 
levies as would make them stand the shock 
of the dreaded Scotchmen. 

Large reinforcements were anxiously 
expected, but at the same time the friends 
of the Stuarts, who were daily becoming 
more bold, looked for the landing of a 
powerful French force which would put 
down all opposition. England seemed to 
be perfectly powerless. If the rebels con- 
tinued their triumphant march to the capital, 



136 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

great apprehensions were entertained that, 
from the number of secret friends they pos- 
sessed in the city, and the want of any 
settled plan of defence among the members 
of the government, they would easily ac- 
quire possession of it. 

Prince Frederic thought so too, and pri- 
vately made arrangements to transport him- 
self and his family to Hanover, as soon as 
his father's affairs should look sufficiently 
desperate. To be Crown Prince of Hanover 
he thought a very good thing to fall back 
upon, especially if he could manage a game 
now and then with some convenient Bubb 
Doddington. 

As for that gentleman, he saw that his 
chance of the high position in a new King's 
Ministry he had been promised, like his 
chance of a peerage, was now so very dis- 
tant, that he would have been disposed to 
part with both for a restoration of the large 
sums he had lost in their pursuit : but he 
found that if he had but a slight hope of his 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 137 

dignities, he had less of his money. In his 
despair, one chance still remained. With 
the instinct of those rats who quit a falling 
house, he began to make inquiries as to the 
most convenient way of reaching Derby ; not 
doubting, that if his ambition could not be 
gratified by the House of Brunswick, it 
could scarcely fail in the hands of the House 
of Stuart. 

Lord Orford was very far indeed from 
despairing. So strong a naval force was 
kept in the Channel, that all reinforcements 
and supplies to the rebels were almost sure 
of being intercepted ; and the French found 
it quite impossible to send an expedition to 
the English coast, without almost the cer- 
tainty of its being destroyed or captured. 

Though the English vessels prevented 
any assistance reaching the Pretender from 
foreign shores, they facilitated the approach 
of such assistance to George II. ; and a large 
force of Dutch, Danes, and English, that 
had been en owed in the wars of Flanders 



138 8TRAWBEBBY SILL. 

under the Duke of Cumberland, were safely 
landed, had proceeded in search of the 
enemy, and were now within two days' 
march of Derby, whilst another army under 
Marshal Wade was not far off. There w 
at least 25,000 men in arms against the 
young adventurer and his adherents; a force 
quite sufficient to disperse them. 

Our hero assisted Lord. Orford in en- 
couraging the friends of the reigning family. 
In short, he was as active in his loyalty as 
though his lather still retained his former 
proud position in the Government. Never- 
theless, there were times when, observing 
the supineness and incapacity of the Ministry, 
he could not avoid entertaining doubts of 
the issue. 

When reflecting upon the alarming in- 
telligence of the progress of the Scotch, he 
experienced considerable anxiety concerning 
Miss Falkland. lie could gain no certain 
tidings of her. Lady Furbelow had got a 
new favourite, in the shape of a celebrated 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 139 

singer from Italy, and the fashionable ro- 
mancist was quite out of date. It was with 
great difficulty he gained access to her. He 
gained no more. 

Her ladyship affected an air of mystery — 
talked obscurely of an illustrious alliance for 
her niece — looked at her watch, and vowed 
she should be too late for the divine Signor 
Squallini's morning concert. He would 
have tried Lady Townshend, but knowing 
her Ladyship as he did, he could expect 
nothing from her but a trick, and that he 
did not desire. 

He saw little of his old friends. Most of 
them had dispersed in different directions. 
Colonel Conway was with his regiment — 
George Selwyn had left town on a jesting 
tour through the Provinces — Charles Towns- 
hend was engrossed with his own pleasures ; 
all his old school-fellows and college chums 
appeared to have abandoned him. He was 
leading a dull life — one hour pretending 
to be very busy upon a history of the 



140 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

troublous times in which he was existing — 
in another poring over a tedious MS. of a 
time still more barren of interest. He would 
have thought the house in Arlington Street 
the stupidest place in the world, had his 
father not taken up his residence there. 

Our hero had been yawning through the 
best portion of a very gloomy day, when 
his unsatisfactory reverie was disturbed by 
the entrance of his valet, with a letter which 
he said had just been left at the door by a 
running footman. The superscription was 
in the handwriting of the once adored 
Arabella. In a moment the seal was broken, 
and the page lay unfolded before him, as he 
read the following epistle : — 

" Derby, 1745. 

" Dearest Horace, — You will of course 
have heard of our triumphant progress — our 
entrance into this city, and our intended 
march to London. I am happy to be able 
to inform you in addition, that my father is 



STEAWBEEEY HILL. 141 

in surprising health, and that he holds a 
very high place in the confidence of his 
Royal Master. The Prince is in excellent 
spirits, and I am sure, were you to see him, 
he would completely satisfy your notion of 
the beau ideal of a young hero. 

" His Royal Highness considers himself 
indebted to me for the great success which 
has hitherto attended this expedition, as it 
was undertaken at my suggestion. I have 
no hesitation whatever in stating, that he 
would readily concede any reasonable wish 
I might venture to express to him. This 
has induced me to write to you, my dear 
Horace, to implore you to forget what passed 
between us at our last interview, except 
my earnest desire that you and I, with 
one heart, should be united in the same 
cause. 

"I think nothing can be so certain as 
the speedy retirement from the country, 
whose throne he usurped, of the Elector of 
Hanover. I wish him no harm, and I think 



142 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

I display my good feeling towards him, by 
desiring his return to a place where he will 
be safer than he is likely to be in his present 
quarters. Let me entreat you, then, my 
dear Horace, to give up the service of a 
person so little worthy of your devotion; 
remember, that this alone can insure our 
happiness; and that to so honourable and 
esteemed an adherent of his Royal High- 
ness the Prince of Wales, who is, I assure 
you, very much disposed to become your 
friend, nothing rational is likely to be 
denied. 

" For your own sake, then, dearest Horace, 
as well as for the sake of her who feels so 
deep an interest in your welfare, let me 
conjure you to lose not a moment in putting 
yourself in communication with my father. 
He will be most happy to facilitate the ac- 
complishment of your wishes, not only in 
reconciling you to your true Prince, but 
in assisting to afford you the felicity you 
used to anticipate with his daughter. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 143 

" Trusting that I may shortly see re- 
alised the fervent prayer of my heart, I 
venture to subscribe myself, 
"Dearest Horace, 
" Your most sincere and truly devoted 
<4 Arabella Falkland." 

"To the Honourable Horatio Walpole, M.P. 
Arlington Street, London." 

He read this epistle, and read it again ; 
and the more he read, the more he pondered 
upon its contents. There was something 
pleasing in that lofty pride of the writer, 
which must have induced her, when under 
the conviction of the complete triumph of 
the cause she had embraced with such 
ardour, to stretch forth her arm, not only to 
save her lover, but to secure his prosperity 
and happiness. But, however gratified he 
was at this evidence of the deep interest she 
took in his welfare, knowing her disposition 
as he did, he could regard it only as another 
proof — if any were wanting — of their unsuit- 



144 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

ableness for each other. Though he did 
not like the present aspect of affairs, he was 
very far indeed from looking upon it as so 
advantageous to the Young Pretender as his 
fair correspondent chose to consider it ; and 
moreover, he had not the slightest inclina- 
tion to change his allegiance from George 
II. to James III. 

He walked out to take a stroll in the 
Park, and was much astonished, whilst pass- 
ing through one of the great thoroughfares, 
at hearing the discordant horns of two or 
three rival newsmen ; and presently, in an 
equally intolerable din of shouting, he heard 
them sing out, "Great news! Wonderful 
news ! Ketreat of the rebels from Derby ! " 

Our hero immediately proceeded to the 
nearest coffee-house, to learn what confidence 
could be placed in this new rumour. The 
unexpected intelligence was quite true. The 
coffee-houses were ringing with it. The 
Jacobites, who had been so audacious, now 
began to exhibit a little prudence ; and the 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 145 

Whigs, who had been so despairing, now 
plucked up a little courage. The apprehen- 
sions which had been so general the day 
before, changed to as general a vapouring. 
The gallant adventurer, whom timorous 
politicians had begun to speak of with 
respect, was again nothing more than the 
" Young Pretender," and his Highland army 
were stigmatized as a thievish rabble. 

Our hero was extremely desirous of 
communicating with the fair writer of the 
letter ; but he felt quite satisfied, that if the 
Prince's army had left Derby, she had left 
it also ; and he had no clue to guide him in 
discovering her present residence. He found 
that he should be obliged to await a second 
communication from her, and anticipated this 
with great anxiety; for every day increased 
the criticalness of the position in which the 
Young Pretender was placed. 

The Scottish force made their escape out 
of England with all possible speed, closely 
pursued by an army under Marshal Wade, 

VOL. III. H 



146 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

and by another under the Duke of Cumber- 
land. Our hero had constant accounts of 
their movements from his cousin, whose 
regiment was often close upon their rear. 
Of these the last only is of sufficient import- 
ance to find a place here. 

" Carlisle, Jan. 1st, 1746. 

Dear Horace, — Our Scottish friends have 
led us a hard gallop ; and though we have 
done all we could to overtake them, we have 
been forced to acknowledge that they beat 
us in running. It was a capital hunt, I 
must say — the scent lying very strong all 
the way from Manchester to Carlisle. We 
thought to have taken them by surprise at 
Clifton Moor ; but the rascals had got notice 
of our coming, and had prepared to receive 
us in such numbers, that, after a smart skir- 
mish, our advanced guard were obliged to 
fall back upon our main body. We, how- 
ever, were soon again in full chase, but 
scarcely soon enough for our friends, who 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 147 

did not appear as though they liked our 
fighting, well enough to wait for any more 
of it. 

"We followed them to Carlisle, which 
they quitted only a few hours previously to 
our entering it. Here they had left a con- 
siderable portion of their baggage and artil- 
lery; and, what was more, a garrison of 
some four hundred men, who blazed awav 
at us from their batteries, as though they 
intended to pound us all to mince-meat. 
The Duke, however, astonished them im- 
mensely, when, in reply to their small pieces, 
he opened a furious cannonade of six 
eighteen-pounders, which had been brought 
from Whitehaven by harnessing about 
eighteen horses to every gun ; and we soon 
saw the wholesome effects it produced, by 
the display of a flag of truce. 

" Our adventurous friends wanted to re- 
present themselves as a French garrison, 
and were desirous of making terms for 
themselves; but his Koyal Highness insisted 

h 2 



148 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

on an unconditional surrender ; and lo ! on 
their submission, the French force mustered 
just three officers and five men! "When 
the names of the prisoners were given in, 
one of the officers was discovered to be a 
person known to be much in the confidence 
of the Young Pretender. I grieve to say he 
bears the title of Viscount Falkland. It ap- 
pears that his Lordship has his daughter with 
him — a matter equally to be lamented. I ex- 
tremely regret that he should have fallen into 
our hands, for I do not think there exists the 
slightest chance of his escaping the usual 
penalty of being found in arms against his 
King. He is to be sent up to London without 
delay, that he may take his trial. The Duke 
is mighty severe upon him ; and if he finds 
no one more favourably disposed towards 
him, his case is hopeless indeed." 

His cousin read no further. This was 
a contingency on which he had not cal- 
culated; — a contingency full of the most 
disastrous consequences. She who had so 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 149 

recently and so generously offered to save 
him from the destruction she thought im- 
pending over his house, was now herself 
overtaken with irretrievable ruin. 

He could scarcely endure the thought of 
this proud-spirited, noble-minded creature, 
reduced to so melancholy a position. Her 
father's fate, he had too much reason to be- 
lieve, might readily be predicted. The Go- 
vernment had been too thoroughly frightened 
to be able to display any generosity ; and the 
Koyal Family had looked on the rebellion 
with too much alarm, to be capable of a 
kindly feeling towards any one in any way 
implicated in it. 

Lord Falkland's chance of escape was very 
remote — but what chance had his daughter ? 
If her father perished on a public scaffold — 
the fate with which he was menaced — what 
would become of her? Our hero was aware 
of the strong sympathy that bound father 
and daughter together — a sympathy that 
misfortune was sure to strengthen. No 



150 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

doubt this would make them cling more 
powerfully to their political opinions, and 
render the distance which opposite politics 
had created between the young lady and 
himself, greater and more impassable than 
ever. 

If his chance with her was so remote when 
she was in prosperity, when in adversity it 
was inconceivably less encouraging. The 
letter he had received from Derby he looked 
upon as a charming specimen of feminine 
devotion — just such devotion as Arabella 
Falkland would be sure to display ; but he 
could not divest himself of many misgivings 
when he called to mind the unsatisfactory 
state in which she was now placed. He 
dared scarcely hope for a smile. He almost 
doubted he should obtain a recognition. 
No merit, no worth, no amount of true affec- 
tion, would move her towards him, if her 
own fortunes were humble, and his exalted. 

Nevertheless, he felt that something must 
be done, and that immediately. He must 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 151 

see whether there was any possibility of 
serving Lord Falkland. There was his 
father, whose influence over the King, he 
had reason to believe, was still very great. 
He would apply to him on the subject. 
There were his own political friends, many 
of them persons of great weight and influence 
— he would canvass them all in favour of the 
imprisoned Jacobite. Lord Falkland, he 
resolved, should not be lost, if he could save 
him. 

Soon after he had received this unwelcome 
information, our hero proceeded to the man- 
sion of Lady Furbelow. On giving his 
name, he was at once admitted into her 
ladyship's boudoir — a very curious chamber, 
with a large Chinese screen standing up be- 
tween the fire-place and the door. The room 
seemed a general repository for specimens of 
Chelsea china ; many of them hideous things 
— griffins, and nondescripts, and monsters of 
the most unimaginable shapes. A large 
mirror, in an uncouth black frame, was 



152 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

hung over the mantel-piece, and the picture 
of a young girl, in the conventional disguise 
of a shepherdess, before sundry very apocry- 
phal sheep, hung exactly opposite. 

A monkey was perched on a cross-bar, 
opposite the lady's chair; two cats lay on 
stools before the fire, and a parrot was on 
another perch before the window. The 
ugly little pug-dog was in his accustomed 
place, under her ladyship's arm, and the 
snuffbox was on the table beside her. 

The old lady was evidently aware of the 
evil tidings, for her eyes looked humid, and 
her features unusually grave and over-cast. 
The handkerchief beside her snuff-box shewed 
also that her eyes wanted attention as well 
as her nose. 

Her visitor, after carefully steering dear 
of the chattering monkey on one side, and 
the snappish macaw on the other, approached 
his old patroness, to pay his compliments. 
She was a little abrupt, as usual, but it was 
evident she wished to receive him kindly, 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 153 

for she presently motioned him to a chair; 
and after having recourse first to her snuff- 
box, and then to her handkerchief, she began 
to talk. 

" Well; I told them how it would be, Mr. 
Walpole," said her ladyship, giving her 
favourite pug a tap on his ugly head, be- 
cause he ventured to bark at her visitor. 
" I was certain it must end in this way. 
But it is a sad thing for my young niece. 
I have no doubt at all it will be the death 
of her." 

" Indeed, I hope not, Lady Furbelow. I 
feel assured there is much happiness in 
store for her." Her visitor said this in the 
way of consolation; but it was consolation 
he failed to afford himself. 

" There is nothing of the kind in store for 
her," sharply replied the old lady, taking a 
huge pinch from her box. " She is likely 
to become as miserable a creature as any 
poor woman I know. As far as she is con- 
cerned, the cause of the Young Chevalier is 

h3 



154 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

irretrievably ruined. His army is retreat- 
ing into Scotland; and the runaways are 
no doubt desirous of getting the shelter of 
their own firesides in their native Highlands. 
I don't know what my Lady Townshend 
will think of this change in the affairs of 
her friends, though it was but yesterday she 
declared she would wager her Persian cat 
against my large china punchbowl, that the 
young Prince would be in St. James's 
in a week, and that my Lady Hamilton 
would be the first person to welcome him 
there." 

" Have you thought of any plan likely to 
be of advantage to Lord Falkland and his 
daughter, in their present distress? r in- 
quired our hero, anxious to learn if their 
kinswoman intended to attempt anything in 
their behalf. 

"Plan!" she exclaimed, making another 
application to the snuff-box, as she rose to 
check a kind of skirmish that had com- 
menced between the monkey and the parrot. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 155 

" What can a useless old fool like me do 
in such a case as this? (Down, Bijou!) 
I am afraid my brother is in monstrous 
bad hands. They will only be too eager 
to take his life." Here the old lady made 
a hurried application of her handkerchief 
to her eyes. " And that poor child of his ! 
How shocking it will be ! Mourning won't 
become her complexion at all ! " 

Finding that he could obtain no intelli- 
gence from this quarter, and that her lady- 
ship was bewildered by her apprehensions 
for the life of her kinsman, and her fears 
for the beauty of her niece, Horace Walpole 
soon took his leave. There was another re- 
source. He called upon a Member of the 
Government, to learn how their prisoner was 
to be disposed of. Here he met with as 
little consolation. It was plain he had to 
fear the worst. 



156 STRAWBERRY HILL. 



CHAPTER VII. 

THE PRISONERS IN THE TOWER. 

There were two persons in a cold, cheer- 
less apartment, evidently of no modern con- 
struction. The place had a most comfortless 
look. Heavy, sombre, old-fashioned furni- 
ture, and that scantily provided, stood here 
and there, with as little of ornament in their 
appearance as of uniformity in their arrange- 
ment. The window was narrow, admitted 
but little light, and seemed built after a 
strange construction, intended perhaps to 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 157 

assist in conveying some characteristic to 
the building, whilst of the least possible use 
to the chamber to which it belonged. 

It was impossible to enter that strange- 
shaped, gloomy -looking room, without feel- 
ing satisfied that you were in no ordinary 
structure. In truth it formed a portion of no 
ordinary edifice ; it was a chamber in the 
Tower of London — one of those in which 
prisoners of State were confined ; and its in- 
mates were Lord Falkland and his daughter. 

The former, carefully guarded, had been 
brought to town. Some time had elapsed 
since he had been made to pass under the 
Traitors' Gate, but it had not tended in any 
way to brighten his prospects. The battle 
of Falkirk, though it once more raised the 
spirits of the desponding Jacobites, increased 
the bitterness with which the Government 
regarded such of the adherents of the Pre- 
tender as had fallen into their hands. The 
glimpse of sunshine that fell upon the career 
of the young Prince by his defeat of General 



158 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

Hawley, was shortly afterwards lost in the 
profound darkness which enveloped his for- 
tunes on the decisive battle of Culloden. 

The princely Adventurer, after having 
filled Europe with his fame, and made his 
name a popular theme throughout the island 
from one extremity to the other, was now a 
solitary fugitive, skulking about among the 
islands of Scotland, with a price set upon 
his head, and reduced to the most unro- 
mantic shifts, to enable him to subsist till 
he could find an opportunity of escaping to 
France ; which, after the endurance of much 
suffering, he at last effected, leaving his 
followers to the tender mercies of the Duke 
of Cumberland, whose severities towards 
them procured him the coarse soubriquet of 
" the Butcher." 

Such as escaped the ravages of war were 
reserved for the equally relentless ravages of 
justice. The common prisons were crammed 
with the meaner criminals, who were hanged 
off as fast as sentence could be pronounced 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 159 

upon them. The Tower was equally full of 
prisoners of rank, who only waited the sen- 
tence of a tribunal likely to be equally 
merciless, to obtain the honour of the heads- 
man's axe. 

Nearly all those who had assembled at Bath 
under the auspices of their beautiful coad- 
jutrix, might now be found assembled once 
more under one roof, but that roof was their 
prison; and though every exertion was 
made by their friends in their behalf, and 
no slight degree of commiseration was felt 
in the public mind for some of them, the 
immense number of executions that were 
daily taking place in different parts of Eng- 
land, ought to have prepared them for the 
scaffold. 

Of all the rebel lords, as they were de- 
signated, the capture of Lord Falkland ap- 
peared to afford most gratification to the 
Government. They knew that he had been 
the main spring of the whole conspiracy — 
that his talents had given its discordant 



160 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

materials shape arid cohesion ; and they were 
well aware of the advantage of depriving 
the Jacobites of so skilful a counsellor, and 
the Pretender of so able a servant. It was 
intimated to him, in a way not to be mis- 
understood, that all applications for pardon, 
or interpositions of any kind in his favour, 
would be perfectly useless. The Whigs 
knew their own interests too well to let him 
escape, now they had him at their mercy ; 
and the Tories were afraid of committing 
themselves by any interference. 

He, like many others, had still to undergo 
the ordeal of a trial ; for there were such 
an extraordinary number of captives waiting 
for the decision that was to dispossess them 
of their lives, that it took the ordinary tri- 
bunals a great deal of time to dispose of 
them. Lord Falkland did not appear to 
have suffered much in consequence of this 
awful change in his fortunes. In short, 
there was a serenity in his aspect, and a 
loftiness in his bearing, that declared how 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 161 

little the fear of death had touched his 
spirit. 

His daughter looked somewhat paler than 
usual, and there was a dazzling brightness 
in her eyes that betrayed the workings of 
some deep- seated feeling. But her language 
was lofty, and full of a quiet dignity, that 
seemed better fitted for the ungraceful mouth 
of a Socrates about to take the fatal draught, 
than the attractive lips which appeared to 
have been created for much less serious 
employment. 

She sat close to her father, holding his 
hand in hers, and looking steadily, with a 
concentrated interest and intense admiration, 
upon his countenance. The colloquy was 
apparently one of unusual importance — ele- 
vating and philosophical, deep and refined. 
There were minds of no ordinary stamp in 
that quaint old room : the thoughtful states- 
man, pious and wise, with noble views and 
high and honourable thoughts ; and his en- 
thusiastic daughter, overflowing with senti- 



162 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

ment and romance, proud as an empress, 
yet full of woman's gentlest and most femi- 
nine sympathies. 

" Death, my child, is the penalty mortality 
must pay for immortality," observed the 
father, as though in reply to some question 
from his daughter. u Our lease is run out, 
and the soul must give up possession of the 
body, to enter upon a freehold which can 
never pass away from it. It is subject to 
no forfeiture, if the flaw of sin cannot be 
found in the parchments ; it is liable to no 
mortgage, after once obtained and entered 
upon by permission of our Sovereign Lord. 
Why should we then grieve at a deprivation 
so advantageous to us? If a servant of his 
King resign an Under- Secretaryship, does 
he grieve, when it is preparatory to his 
becoming First Lord of the Treasury? 
Why should we allow others to lament, 
upon what ought to be to them a source of 
such extraordinary satisfaction? We are 
not wont to be disheartened upon learning 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 163 

that our clearest friend has quitted a humble 
habitation, when we have been made aware 
that he has transferred himself to a man- 
sion." 

" Yes, my father, that is true — most true," 
replied his companion, evidently striving 
to control her emotion; "I could not ven- 
ture to call in question so holy a truth. 
But human nature is humane — our intelli- 
gence cannot always be superior to our 
feelings — indeed, I believe that the divinity 
we share may be as clearly traced in the 
sanctity of our sympathies, as in the eleva- 
tion of our thoughts. If we did not feel, 
my dear father, for human suffering, for 
human disappointment, for human wrong, 
where would be our humanity ? where would 
be our philanthropy? where would be that 
corner stone of our religion, on which was 
inscribed those imperishable words, ' Love 
thy neighbour as thyself!' " 

Lord Falkland paused, and gazed at his 
daughter for a few seconds — perhaps to col- 



164 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

lect his thoughts previously to resuming his 
argument — perhaps to notice the struggle 
which was going on in that fair countenance, 
where the humid eye and quivering lip were 
often much at variance with the lofty look 
and tranquil determination to maintain the 
passive aspect it wore. 

" You are right, my child," he said at 
last, " But it may be that our feelings are 
too much with us ; and there may come times 
and seasons when we should forget those 
fine links that bind us so forcibly to our 
species. In this very chamber have been 
confined men — ay, and women — who have 
been forced to submit to the tyranny which 
placed them here. Can I believe myself more 
virtuous than the youthful Lady Jane Grey ? 
can I fancy myself more noble than the patrio- 
tic Algernon Sidney ? They have made holy 
this neighbourhood ; their innocent blood 
has consecrated every stone of this state 
slaughter-house. Their martyrdom has 
sanctified the whole building. AVhere they 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 165 

have gone cheerfully and fearlessly, it is not 
for me to think of lamentation and tears ! " 

" No, my father, it is your daughter who 
must lament; it is she who must put to 
shame those holy examples ; it is she who 
must shew herself indifferent to those 
glorious sacrifices. But the claim of fellow- 
ship is one thing, and the claim of blood is 
another. Were my part in this tragedy that 
of the victim, I would shew how apt a pupil 
I could be of the lady you have named. 
But the ministers of the Usurper do not 
think me worthy of martyrdom. They 
would not trouble themselves to take so 
insignificant a head. Yet they condemn 
me to a punishment a thousand times less 
easy of endurance, by putting my heart upon 
the rack, in wreaking their vengeance upon 
what is dearest to it." 

" You take much too gloomy a view T of 
our affairs," observed his Lordship, calmly. 
" Remember that I am not yet tried; that I 
must be condemned before I am executed ; 



166 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

and, although it may be the duty of a wise 
man to prepare for the worst, it is not im- 
possible that I may escaj^e the evil that 
threatens me." 

" Would I could see a hope of this ! " she 
exclaimed fervently. " But I have learned 
that mercy is a portion of the royal prero- 
gative unknown to the Elector of Hanover." 

" We shall be under the less obligation to 
the Elector if he withhold it," said her father. 
" Were I to repine at anything, it would 
most certainly be the evil fortune of our 
gallant Prince. For in truth it was most 
lamentable to see so noble an enterprize fail 
just when all its greatest difficulties had been 
surmounted. Another week of triumphant 
progress, or the landing in England of the 
succour expected from the French King, and 
the Guelphs would have been obliged to 
vacate the seat they have so unworthily 
occupied. 

" But the issue of such events are in the 
hands of the Most High. All our wisest 



STEAWBEEEY HILL. 167 

schemes — all our grandest undertakings, are 
liable to His all-powerful influence. It is sad 
to know that so much noble blood has been 
spilled, and spilled in vain ; but though it may 
be in vain for the cause of legitimacy, it would 
be as impious to imagine that the innumer- 
able martyrs who preceded them suffered to 
no advantage to the christian community, 
as that the great and good spirits who were 
thus violently separated from their earthly 
tenements, gave up their lives without 
the slightest prospect of benefit here or 
hereafter." 

" We have, at least, one consolation, in 
knowing that the Prince is safe," observed 
Miss Falkland; " though I am inclined to 
believe that his Royal Highness has not ad- 
vanced the cause of his family, by the com- 
plete failure of this expedition." 

" I am fearful that such a blow may be 
fatal to the Stuart cause," replied her father, 
who was endeavouring to lead his daughter 
away from the subject of her painful con- 



168 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

templations, to one in which she took a 
more romantic interest. " The Court ol 
France will now risk nothing ; and no other 
power is likely to draw upon itself the 
hostility of a powerful nation like England, 
for the sake of so feeble a family." 

" Ah, how different was the aspect of our 
affairs at Derby ! " exclaimed his companion. 
" Who could have supposed, that in so short 
a time we could have suffered so complete 
a shipwreck? All things, then, seemed to 
combine to convince us that a most glorious 
termination of our labours awaited us. 
Indeed, I felt so assured of the stability of 
our good fortune, that I thought I could 
afford to offer the same happy prospects 
to others. Alas, how thoroughly helpless 
we have since become ! " 

Lord Falkland knew that his daughter al- 
luded to her communication with the son of 
the fallen Minister, and recalled the san- 
guine anticipations with which she had ob- 
tained his consent to her attempt to win him 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 169 

as an adherent to the cause which then looked 
so triumphant. 

" You had no reply to that letter, I think ? " 
he observed; more to continue to divert 
his daughter's attention from his own fate, 
than from any interest he took in the 
subject. 

" Xone ! " was the brief reply. 

" Perhaps it never reached its destina- 
tion?" 

" I hope such has been the case. I should 
not like the humiliating comparison that 
must arise from its perusal, between the 
state of things with us then and now. It 
might be a subject of congratulation, that 
the reader attended to the dictates of pru- 
dence, in not committing himself even when 
the temptation was so great. But I heartily 
wish it had never been written." 

" Nay, my child ! " said his lordship, 
" there is nothing in it to regret. It can 
only shew that when you had the power to 
benefit another, you were ready to exercise it." 

VOL. III. i 



170 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

" From which no other inference can be 
drawn," replied the young lady, proudly 
and somewhat bitterly, " than that the per- 
son so obliged is now bound to make a re- 
turn of similar good offices." 

The dialogue was here interrupted by the 
entrance of one of the officers of the Tower, 
with an intimation that a gentleman who 
had obtained the requisite permission, re- 
quested the honour of an interview with 
Miss Falkland. Her father rose, as if to 
receive the expected visitor, but his daugh- 
ter did not. Her heart beat a little more 
rapidly, but the expression of her countenance 
was calm and indifferent. 

" I think there must be some mistake, 
Sir," she replied, coldly; "I do not expect 
any visitor." 

" Perhaps this note may explain the busi- 
ness the gentleman comes upon," said the 
man, offering a billet. The young lady 
waved her hand, as if she did not intend to 
receive it. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 171 

" Nay, even in our deepest misfortunes, let 
us not forget the laws of courtesy!" ex- 
claimed Lord Falkland, taking the note from 
the man, and giving it to his daughter. He 
then walked to the window, as though it 
was a matter in which he could have no 
further concern. The young lady mechani- 
cally opened the note, and with an air of 
studied indifference commenced its perusal. 
The sight of the well-known characters at 
first disturbed her, and so much so that for 
some seconds she could not read; but she 
exercised such strong control over her feel- 
ings that she was soon enabled to peruse 
it throughout. It was brief, and thus ex- 
pressed : — 

" I have been using every exertion, and 
employing every possible device, to obtain 
admission to you. Thank Heaven, I have at 
last succeeded. Suffer one whose every 
faculty is profoundly devoted to you, to offer 
those services which } r our own generous 

i 2 



172 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

nature has so readily and so gracefully shewn 
him how to propose. 

" Yours eternally, 

" H. W." 

The letter was presented in a most in- 
auspicious moment — its prayer too contained 
an ill-timed reference. The young lady 
quietly folded the note, rose with an air of 
dignity from her seat, and returned it to the 
person awaiting her answer. 

" Tell the gentleman who gave you this," 
she said, in a constrained tone of voice, 
" that he is mistaken in thinking he can be 
of service to me. Tell him, I thank him for 
his civility, but will not allow, for a moment, 
a person so unfortunate to have the slightest 
claim upon his attention." 

The man took his departure. Miss Falk- 
land joined her father at the window, and 
threw her arm around his neck. 

" I think it is time, my dear Father, you 
should prepare your defence," she said ; as if 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 173 

the readily dismissing her lover from her mind 
was of much less importance than the 
interests of her parent. " It is not unlikely 
that your trial will come on very shortly; 
and although we have little enough to expect 
from the justice of the court, that is no 
reason why you should not avail yourself of 
every opportunity to place upon record the 
legality of your own proceedings." 

" My defence is soon prepared," replied 
he. "I have but to speak the truth. It is a 
labour that requires the least reflection. It is 
those who most depart from truth, who give 
themselves the most trouble. But, knowing 
as I do the temper of my judges, I think it 
would be more rational to desire the services 
of a priest than those of a lawyer." 

At this intimation of the catastrophe he 
expected, he could feel his daughter shudder. 

" Ah, my father ! " she exclaimed, gazing 
fondly, yet tearfully, upon his face, " I am 
afraid all the pains you have kindly taken to 
prepare me for this fearful tragedy have 



174 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

been unavailing. I listen to your philo- 
sophy, but it goes to my ears rather than 
to my heart. I learn that those who peril 
their lives in great undertakings, must be 
prepared to pay the penalty of failure — but 
I know that I am about to lose a father ; 
and it is so overwhelming, so irreparable a 
loss, that when I think of it, it comes upon 
me like a dissolution of the world — some- 
thing to my feelings so vast, so terrible, 
that my mind seems to sink under the idea." 
" Yet this loss you would some day have 
to endure, in the ordinary course of nature," 
remarked her father. " As the evil must 
be met, and we know not when we may 
be called upon to meet it, surely there can 
be no great hardship in anticipating such a 
contingency. As for the form in which it 
comes, it is nothing — a matter not worth 
a moment's consideration. Indeed, to know 
that we escape the prolonged pangs of dis- 
ease, ought to be as much a subject of con- 
gratulation as our conviction that we are 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 175 

sealing with our blood a testimony of our 
faith, honour, and courage, which must bear 
evidence for us to the world, to the end of 
time." 

There was a half-suppressed sob faintly 
heard at the end of this sentence; but it was 
a symptom of weakness that was stifled 
almost in the birth. Arabella Falkland pos- 
sessed an elevated mind — one fully corre- 
sponding with the nobility of her lineage ; 
she was proud of her noble birth — proud of 
her noble father — proud of the responsible 
and confidential position she had filled in the 
great conspiracy to obtain a kingdom, which 
had so signally failed. All her aspirations, 
all her enthusiasm, all her romance, was for 
great and glorious things. Hitherto she had 
thought herself possessed of a giant's strength, 
when linking herself so completely with 
what she believed to be so grand and durable. 
She had fallen into the delusion that her 
nature had partaken of the massiveness of 
the majestic things among which she had 



176 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

been reared : but this daughter of a Princess 
— this dreamer of the lofty and everlasting 
— this actor in glorious dramas — felt herself 
to be amongst the weakest, the humblest of 
all God's creatures, when an evil destiny 
menaced those ties which she possessed in 
common with the poorest and feeblest of her 
fellow-beings. 

And such is nature. What are the great 
ones of the earth, divested of those humane 
emotions which link the ermined robe to the 
rags of beggary ? They are but machines 
clothed in purple and fine linen. Their 
moving, and breathing, and thinking power 
may come from steam, or electricity, or from 
any similar artificial impulse — but not from 
humanity. Let them go on .their way, with 
all their mechanical contrivances to raise 
themselves above the flesh- and-blood sym- 
pathies that afford them their claim to sal- 
vation : our business is not with them. Our 
heroine is not of their order, though she had 
long deceived herself with thinking so. Her 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 177 

fair breast could boast of a heart whose 
warm current ebbed and flowed in those 
regular tides which declare the influence of 
a presiding nature. She tried to check 
these impulses; like Canute to the wave, 
she bade the tide keep back, No wonder, 
then, that the stifled sob was, in a short 
time, succeeded by others more audible — 
that they gradually grew more distinct — 
that less and less exertion was used to check 
their utterance — and that, in a few minutes, 
her arms were thrown convulsively around 
her father's neck, her cheek resting close to 
his breast, and a resistless flood of tears 
declared how completely the sources of affec- 
tion had overflowed those artificial dams 
which pride and ambition had so long united 
to maintain. 



I 3 



178 STRAWBERRY HILL. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

LORD FALKLAND BEFORE HIS JUDGES. 

The neighbourhood of Westminster Hall 
was densely thronged. Evidently some 
business of unusual importance was trans- 
acting there, by the eager curiosity observ- 
able in the countenances of the groups who 
stood about the entrance, as well as by the 
movements of those who were flocking in. 
It was indeed a business of uncommon 
interest that was proceeding within that 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 179 

spacious hall. It was the trial of the rebel 
lords by their peers. 

The rebellion was completely at an end, 
and now the victors were employing them- 
selves in crushing, with the customary form 
of justice, such of its leaders as had had the 
misfortune to fall into their hands. The 
public had been so satiated with ordinary 
executions, that they would not have gone 
out of their way to have beheld the condem- 
nation of a vulgar rebel. But the trial of a 
nobleman was a spectacle of a very different 
description, and the multitude had nocked 
from all parts of the Great Babel, either to 
get a glimpse of the ceremony, or to learn 

the result. 

Although the insurrection was virtually 
over, it was thought that the Jacobites 
might avail themselves of the opportunity 
the judicial ceremony at Westminster af- 
forded for congregating, to make a move- 
ment in favour of the prisoners ; and that 
the sympathy of the crowd in their fate 



180 STRAWBERRY HELL. 

might be likely to induce them to lend their 
assistance in favouring a rescue, should any 
attempt of the kind be made. In conse- 
quence of this, a strong force of the con- 
stabulary was in attendance, besides which 
a considerable detachment of the Foot- 
Guards were distributed at different places. 

There were two soldiers stationed at a 
point a little apart from the rest, who 
wore the usual sugar-loaf caps and long 
black gaiters of the King's grenadiers. It 
was their duty to keep the people back; 
but as in this quarter the mob did not at 
that moment present themselves in any 
number, they had availed themselves of 
their freedom from occupation, and the ab- 
sence of their officer, to enjoy a little confi- 
dential gossip. 

" These rascally rebels don't seem to have 
any vast respect shewed to their titles," ob- 
served one. " Some of 'em, I should say, 
won't be much loss to the great folk who 
own them — as, for instance, that crafty old 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 181 

fox, my Lord Lovat, who has been playing 
fast and loose with the Government for a 
long time past ; and then there 's Cromartie, 
who seems to have no more spirit in him 
than a hunted hare. And yet I doubt the 
heads of either to be worth taking — eh, 
Duke?" 

" Of coorth they aint, Marquith," replied 
the other. 

It was now evident that the two stalwart 
grenadiers were the reader's old acquaint- 
ances of the shoulder-knot — more recently of 
the horse-pistol and crape mask. Their 
transformation into foot -soldiers, after their 
last luckless adventure on the highway, is 
accounted for by an arrangement which was 
often had recourse to in those days to in- 
crease the King's forces. 

" Some of these chaps are altogether of a 
different kidney," said the ci-devant Captain. 
" But the greatest man of the lot, by all ac- 
counts, is my Lord Falkland. He's a sort 
of philosopher too. Now a philosopher is 



182 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

— but you know what a philosopher is— eh, 
Duke?" 

" Of coorth I do, Marquith," was the 
ready reply. 

"Well, what is a philosopher?" inquired 
the other, evidently in much doubt that 
his comrade was as well-informed as he pre- 
tended. 

" Why a philothopher, Marquith," replied 
he, hesitatingly, " to be a philothopher ith a 
thort of perthon — that ith to thay, a philo- 
thopher ith one who ith uthed to acting in 
that thort of way that philothopherth ith 
motht in the habit of acting, when they 
dethire to path themthelvth off for philo- 
thopherth." 

His comrade laughed. " I 'm afraid," said 
he, "you didn't make such a very prodigious 
figure at College. Now I was at Oxford 
three terms, as valet- -de-sham to a Gentleman 
Commoner, and therefore it stands to reason 
that if anybody should know of what philo- 
sophy consists, I am he." 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 183 

"Well, Marquith; I alwayth thaid you 
were a monthrouth fine thcolar, and alwayth 
gave way to your thuperior dithernment." 

" Ah, my boy, you would have got your- 
self into some terrible scrapes, if I hadn't 
helped you." 

" Yeth, Marquith; but I 'm thorry you 
perthuaded me to be a tholdier. I don't 
like being a tholdier, Marquith. I feel very 
tholitary when I 'm a thentry, and often 
think how much happier I felt in the 
thervantth hall." 

" Why, didn't I make a gentleman of you? 
Didn't you afterwards ride about the country 
like a Squire, on your own horse? " 

" Yeth, Marquith ; and if I hadn't en- 
lithted, Imutht have been hanged for thtealing 
it. But I don't at all like being a tholdier ; 
and I often with I could onth more be- 
hold that never-to-be-forgotten Miththreth 
Thuthan." 

" D — Mrs. Susan ! " exclaimed his com- 
rade, with considerable wrath. " A soldier 



184 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

who fights for his country deserves the 
favours of every pretty woman who comes 
in his way. When I found Mrs. Jenny 
insensible to the claims of a Duke's State 
Footman, and keeping company with such a 
low fellow as a Commoner's valet-de-sham, 
I gave the jade up, as unworthy the 
attentions of a gentleman of my prodigious 
merit." 

"Ofcoorthyou did, Marquith; yet — But 
grathiouth heaventh ! " suddenly exclaimed 
the soldier in the middle of his sentence, as 
he observed two gaudily dressed females ap- 
proaching, at the sight of whom the two 
men shouldered their firelocks, and began 
to pace up and down their post, as regularly 
as though they beheld the corporal's guard. 
The cause of this sudden movement was soon 
made sufficiently manifest. 

" Soldier! " cried the stoutest of the wo- 
men, apparently panting for breath; and 
then, turning to her somewhat attractive 
companion, added, in a lower voice, " If I 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 185 

have a preference at all, my dearest Mrs. 
Jenny, for any of the male speeches, it 's for 
the military. The military regularly makes a 
point of shewing a regard for us of the fair 
sex. They knows our weak and unprotected 
natures, and suspects us accordingly." 

" Yes, dearest Mrs. Susan," replied the 
other, " I thinks soldiers is just suited to our 
particular tastes ; and I dares to say as how 
that 's the reason why red herrings is called 
arter 'em." 

" Soldier ! " again cried Mrs. Susan, ap- 
proaching the nearest sentinel with her 
most seductive manner, " I should esteem 
it as a mighty great favour, and as a 
remarkable instance of your politeness, if 
you would inform us — if you would inform 
us, I say, Mr. Soldier, the place where the 
Rebel Lords are undergoing the awful sen- 
tence of the law?" 

" Bless me, Mrs. Jenny, the poor man's 
deaf ! " exclaimed Mrs. Susan, as she ob- 
served the soldier continued his limited 



186 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

march, without taking the slightest notice 
of her. " I have no doubt in the world the 
firing of those prodigious cannon has injured 
his ocular nerves. Mr. Soldier ! " she now 
shouted at the top of her voice, as she seized 
hold of his arm, too vigorously to allow of 
her escaping his attention. 

" Stand off ! " shouted the man in a voice 
of thunder, that made the portly House- 
keeper jump higher than she had ever 
jumped since she had possessed legs so very 
unfitted for taking any violent exercise. 

" Well to be sure ! " she cried, turning to 
her companion, with as much astonishment 
expressed in her fat face as fright. " I 
could not have believed that any of the 
male speeches could have behaved to me so 
rudely. Now child, try what you can do. He 's 
quite at variance with my expectorations." 

Her companion proceeded at once to the 
other sentry, and in much less refined lan- 
guage asked him a question similar to the 
one which Mrs. Susan had put, with so little 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 187 

profit, to his comrade. The result was much 
the same: the soldier continued pacing up 
and down his beat, and took no more notice 
of the mortified Mrs. Jenny than if she had 
been a post. 

"Oh, Mr. Soldier!" exclaimed Mrs. Susan, 
rushing towards him, — for on the repulse of 
her friend she could not refrain from making 
one more attempt to obtain the desired in- 
formation, — " Can it be possible you are so 
insensible?" 

" Adorable Mithtreth Thuthan, am I tho 
happy ath to meet you again!" cried her 
sensitive swain, losing his presence of mind 
at the sound of the voice whose tones were 
so dear to him, as he clasped his hands in a 
seeming ecstasy. 

In doing this he let fall his firelock, the 
butt end of which fell on the broad foot of 
the object of his idolatry, with such force as 
to make her scream lustily with the pain. 
At this time came up the corporal's guard. 
Finding him disarmed, they put him under 



188 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

arrest, and marched him off with his com- 
rade to the guard-house ; whilst the attention 
of Mrs. Jenny was diverted by the extra- 
ordinary gesticulations and exclamations of 
her suffering friend, who was making herself 
the subject of jokes innumerable from a very 
unsympathising circle of spectators. 

But we can no longer dally with those 
outside the walls, while so much is going on 
inside worthy of our most attentive con- 
sideration. Leaving, therefore, Mrs. Jenny 
and Mrs. Susan to find their way to West- 
minster Hall at their convenience, we at 
once proceed to transport the reader there. 

All the peers had taken their seats in 
their robes ; there was also a grand show of 
the dignitaries of the law, in their gloomy 
habiliments. The Lord Chancellor sat sur- 
rounded with all the insignia of office, acting 
in the responsible office of President of that 
dignified tribunal. The Ministers also re- 
tained conspicuous positions, and seemed 
duly impressed with the importance of the 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 189 

case that required their assistance in form- 
ing the highest court of trial in the king- 
dom. 

Possibly a sharp-sighted observer might 
have detected, under the serious air which 
some of their lordships affected, a unanimity 
as complete as though they had all fashioned 
their looks after one pattern — a smirk of 
satisfaction at their superior good fortune in 
not having had to change places with the 
prisoner at the bar ; a result by no means im- 
probable, had the Young Chevalier marched 
his army from Derby to London, instead of 
retreating to Scotland. There could be no 
doubt that their good stars had been in the 
ascendant, whilst those of the less fortunate 
Jacobites had waned into irrecoverable dark- 
ness. They therefore took their seats amongst 
their brother peers as indignantly loyal as it 
was possible for Whigs to be, who had wit- 
nessed the great attempt that had been made 
to drive from the throne the Sovereign of 
their adoption. 



190 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

In a conspicuous place, divided off from 
the body of the court, was the compartment 
for the accommodation of the prisoner. On 
the present occasion it contained the hand- 
some and stately form of Viscount Falkland. 
He had gone through the usual ceremony of 
kneeling to his judges, and was now standing 
upright, taking a scrutinizing view of the 
assembly by. whom he was about to be 
tried, surrounded by the proper attendants, 
amongst whom it was easy to perceive the 
bearer of the axe, with its edge turned from 
the prisoner. 

The space that might be considered to be 
below the bar, was occupied by a dense mass 
of individuals, composed almost entirely of 
the male sex, who had been led by curiosity 
or interest to become spectators of this im- 
portant trial. There were several influential 
members of the Lower House, amongst 
whom our ingenious friend Bubb Doddin^- 
ton looked as intensely gratified as though 
his long-promised coronet had at last been 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 191 

placed within his grasp ; but the great source 
of his satisfaction lay in the recollection of 
his good fortune in not taking the Derby 
road, when the prospect of things in that 
direction was so extremely enticing. 

In his immediate neighbourhood was no 
less a personage than Bolingbroke. His 
lordship was well acquainted with more 
than one of the rebel lords — indeed he had 
been peculiarly intimate with some of them ; 
and he had left his hermitage at Battersea, 
partly from concern to learn what would 
become of his old associates, and partly from 
anxiety to know what would become of 
himself, in case they should divulge what he 
believed they knew. It did not appear from 
his aspect that his solitude had agreed with 
him more than usual ; but possibly the sight 
of his old schoolfellow, whom he observed 
conspicuously among his brother peers, re- 
ceiving some confidential communication 
from the Prince of Wales, gave that tinge to 
his complexion, which made his peculiarly 



192 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

handsome features look so singularly un- 
healthy. 

His feelings could not have been very 
agreeable, if he possessed the ambition which 
has been so generally attributed to him, 
when he considered that, after all his strenu- 
ous efforts to ruin his great rival, and elevate 
himself at his expense, Viscount Bolingbroke 
was still without authority — distrusted, 
feared, and, where not feared, despised; 
whilst the discarded Walpole, as Earl of 
Orford, was his superior in rank, and seemed, 
despite of all that has been said or done 
against him, more than ever to enjoy the 
respect of the great men of both parties. 

At a little distance from his Lordship 
stood a group who were so often seen toge- 
ther, as to have formed, as we have said, a 
kind of fashionable constellation. These 
were "the Wits," as they were styled; who, 
wherever or whatever the attraction of the 
hour, were sure of gracing it with their pre- 
sence, and enlivening it with their pleasantry. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 193 

It mattered little, to some of them at least, 
that the spectacle before them was one in 
which the life of a fellow- creature was at 
issue; it was made to afford as much mate- 
rial for their sprightly sallies as though it 
had been an affair of ordinary amusement. 

So it seemed to George Selwyn. Though 
the prisoner at the bar, like a lion in the 
meshes of a net that held him too fast to 
afford the slightest hope of escape, took up 
an attitude that made his surrounding ene- 
mies regard him with respect, the habitual 
jester, roused for once in his life to perfect 
wakefulness, could not refrain from launch- 
ing his light arrows against him — could not 
resist the temptation of an occasional joke 
at his expense. 

Charles Townshend was with him — indeed, 
they formed the Castor and Pollux of the 
gay world in which they moved. Charles 
was a congenial spirit, who chose to live as 
fast as life could go, when pursuing its most 
heedless and thoughtless course. He must 

VOL. III. K 



194 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

needs have his fling at the Jacobite; 
although, too, his nearest relative was known 
to have entertained similar opinions to those 
which had placed the prisoner in that unen- 
viable position. But Charles Townshend 
was one of those irreverend sportsmen, who 
would beat up their game as readily in a 
churchyard as in a stubble field. 

Hanbury Williams was also of the party. 
The scene before him afforded an admirable 
subject for one of those humorous political 
ballads with which he had been in the habit 
of delighting the town for the last ten years ; 
doing yeoman's service to his old friend and 
patron Walpole, and establishing a character 
for cleverness, which was soon afterwards 
rewarded with high official distinction. 

A little apart from these, though evidently 
forming part of the same group, appeared 
the fine figure and intelligent countenance 
of Colonel Conway. A shade of distress 
seemed to cloud his handsome features, not- 
withstanding he appeared to give his atten- 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 195 

tion to the piquant conversation of his friends, 
and occasionally to adventure a sprightly 
contribution to the pleasantries they were 
throwing off; but this appeared to be done 
rather to divert their attention from the 
individual with whom he chose to remain in 
more earnest communication. 

This was Horace Walpole — but Horace 
Walpole apparently in too grave a mood for 
his company. He was listening — with every 
faculty absorbed in the task — to the man to 
whom he had so long been in the habit of 
looking as the great obstacle to his happi- 
ness ; but, despite of the prejudices he had 
conceived against this able leader of his 
party, this powerful rival in the affections 
of his mistress, he watched with the highest 
admiration, mingled with the deepest interest, 
the display of courage, amounting to sub- 
limity, with which he withstood the relent- 
less hostility of the law-officers of the Crown, 
as they developed their case against him. In 
truth, Lord Falkland defended himself with 

K 2 



196 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

masterly skill; he addressed his judges with 
an eloquence that appeared to draw his 
acquittal from their sense of justice, through 
all the doors that political hatred had closed 
against him. 

In that imposing assembly, it was evident 
that a powerful interest was developing itself 
for the prisoner amongst the audience, what- 
ever doubt might exist of its affecting the 
court. Those who had gained admittance 
were struck with his lofty bearing and won- 
derful placidity. He had more of the dig- 
nity of a philosopher discoursing to a friendly 
audience, than the apprehension of a culprit 
about to receive sentence of death. None 
of the rebel lords had created half the 
sympathy his case had excited; and many 
who observed him began to watch the un- 
equal contest in which he was engaged, with 
an interest that increased as the proceedings 
drew to a close. 

Our hero, if he thought of the position of 
the father in this crisis of his fortunes, 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 197 

thought no less painfully of that of the 
daughter. The sword of Damocles, in the 
shape of the headsman's axe glittering so 
near Viscount Falkland, he was too well 
acquainted with the state of party feeling 
amongst the Whigs, not to see impending 
over his head. At such a moment, he 
thought, what must be the feelings of the 
sensitive and devoted child, who had been 
ready to sacrifice her affections at the altar 
of filial feeling! His Lordship's danger 
he knew to be imminent; and, what was 
worse, he had been debarred from making 
any attempt to avert it. The arms that had 
so endearingly been opened to him in pros- 
perity, in adversity repelled him as a stran- 
ger, whose presence would be an intrusion. 
Our hero, therefore, with the fullest convic- 
tion of her sufferings, and an unbounded 
admiration for her father's character and 
conduct, was reduced to the miserable neces- 
sity of standing by quietly, and witnessing 
the victim given over to the executioner. 



198 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

For, notwithstanding all Lord Falkland's 
skill, his eloquence, the impression of his 
greatness of soul, the conviction of his unri- 
valled acquirements, he was condemned to 
suffer the customary pains and penalties of 
High Treason, and was led back to his 
prison with the blade of the axe towards 
him — an infallible sign that his head was 
forfeited to the block. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 



199 



CHAPTER IX. 

A LAST APPEAL. 



The Earl of Orford had, as we have seen, 
left his belovel Houghton— his beloved pic- 
tures—ay, even his beloved hounds, at what 
might be termed a moment's warning; and, 
notwithstanding his indifference to politics, 
had, at the first intimation of danger to the 
State, flown to its citadel, to volunteer in its 
defence. History is nearly silent as to his 
services at this crisis. From the little that 
is to be gathered from what is there stated 



200 STRAWBERRY HELL. 

of him, the reader might imagine that if he 
threw his influence into the scale of Govern- 
ment, neither the King nor the Ministry ap- 
preciated his assistance. 

In short, there is scarcely any trace of the 
experienced and once omnipotent Walpole 
being recognised as a person worth con- 
sulting in these perilous times. Neverthe- 
less, he was consulted, and by the highest 
personage of the State. His Royal Master 
was too much shackled by courtly etiquette, 
openly to favour or communicate with the 
Minister he had been obliged to discard; 
but if in ordinary cases " where there is a 
will there is a way," where there is a Royal 
will, the way is a thousand times more 
practicable. 

The existing Ministers, though jealous of 
each other, even at a period that called so 
imperatively for union, were united by a 
common apprehension, as soon as they dis- 
covered that the man they had with Bach 
difficulty got rid of, was hovering about 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 201 

their camp — undoubtedly, as they thought, 
with some sinister intentions. The name of 
the Pretender, when most powerful, had not 
half the fears for them they found in that of 
the Lord of Houghton ; and they were much 
more careful of guarding every avenue to 
the Royal ear from the encroaches of the 
latter, than they were in defending the ap- 
proaches to the metropolis from the advances 
of the former. Nevertheless, their vigilance 
was insufficient for the contingency. They 
little dreamt that, while they watched the 
palace, to detect the first appearance of an 
understanding between any of the officials 
and the dreaded Walpole, as a channel of 
communication with the King, the King 
had himself established, at a distance, a 
medium of communication as perfect as it 
was secret. 

In the neighbourhood of Soho, there was a 
quiet unpretending house, inhabited by a quiet 
unpretending man, and his two quiet unpre- 
tending daughters. The man was one of the 

k 3 



202 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

late Minister's innumerable agents; but he 
appeared to have abandoned the service of 
the State, and gained a livelihood as a dealer 
in pictures and other works of art. It is not 
at all surprising that this trade of his should 
have brought as a customer his old patron, 
whose love of pictures had become so ex- 
travagant. But it was a little surprising, that 
previously to Lord Orford walking into the 
house of Mr. Titian Smith, the Misses Titian 
Smith invariably walked out. 

It was indeed astonishing it should always 
occur, that whenever this noble connoisseur 
called upon the dealer, there should be no 
one in the house to receive him but the 
dealer himself; — that these visits should never 
be made till after dark — a very bad time for 
picture dealing; and that shortly after the 
entrance of his customer, a hackney coach 
should always be driven up to the door, out 
of which a little man, too closely wrapped 
up to be recognised, would hastily make 
his way to the back parlour, where the noble 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 203 

connoisseur had preceded him; — that after 
shewing the aforesaid little man into this 
room, with every possible show of respect, 
the dealer, instead of remaining with his 
mysterious customer to display his stock-in- 
trade, invariably shut them in together, and 
took his stand in the passage, and would 
allow no one to enter the house on any pre- 
tence whatever ;— -and that as soon as Mr. 
Titian Smith had closed the parlour door, 
the noble connoisseur received the little man 
from the hackney coach with as much respect 
as cordiality; whereupon the little man 
hastily threw off his cloak, and discovered — 
the favourite page of the King. 

Of what passed at these secret interviews, 
all we know for certain is, that two or 
three hours passed ; but we are left at liberty 
to surmise that a great deal of good advice 
reached the Royal ear, and many testimonies 
of attachment were sent to the fallen Minis- 
ter. He, however, was too shrewd an 
observer, not to discover that his occupa- 



204 STEAWBEEEY HILL. 

tion was gone ; and he had no difficulty in 
reconciling himself to the political inactivity 
into which he was forced. The enemies of 
the name of Walpole were too numerous 
to allow of his resuming the noble position 
he had so long maintained in the Govern- 
ment ; and he now appeared to entertain but 
one ambitious wish, which was to see his 
favourite son Horace obtain, by the exercise 
of his own talents, a similar elevation to that 
from which he had so recently descended. 
To fit the embryo statesman the better for 
this, he afforded him the advantage of his 
experience, whenever he found himself tSte- 
a-tete with him. In this way there came to 
the young legislator many an axiom of vast 
political sagacity, many a shrewd estimate 
of human worth, and many a characteristic 
anecdote of human weakness. 

But unfortunately for our hero, he was in 
no mood to profit by this experience. Their 
breakfast-table talk, pregnant with truth 
and personal observation as it was on the 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 205 

part of the ex- Minister, passed unheeded by 
a mind too absorbed in the present, to give 
so much as a glance at the past. There was 
a curious contrast between the father and 
son on these occasions. The jovial well- 
contented countenance of the old Minister 
on the one side, carefully and gaily dressed, 
his vivacity, his freshness, his heartiness 
of feeling — and the care-worn, anxious, 
gloomy look of the miserable lover opposite 
to him, negligently appareled, silent, re- 
served, and painfully thoughtful. 

Now, Lord Orford was perfectly well 
aware that his son's evident distress of mind 
arose from his knowledge of the approach- 
ing execution of the father of his adored 
Arabella, and from the repulses that had 
been given to his well meant offers of as- 
sistance and sympathy. He was far from 
having been an indifferent observer of his 
son's sudden distaste for society, that not 
only caused him to avoid his fashionable 
acquaintances, but made him feel an equal 



206 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

distaste for the society of his dearest friends ; 
for as well as studiously keeping aloof from 
Selwyn, Townshend, Hanbury Williams, and 
the rest of that rackety set, he was rarely ac- 
cessible to his affectionate and light-hearted 
kinsman, whose practice of looking at the 
bright side of things might perhaps have 
afforded him some consolation. 

But nothing now afforded the young 
Member either consolation or occupation — 
his books were neglected, his manuscripts 
unopened, and his curiosities unregarded. 
The fond father saw that his son had ceased 
to take an interest in everything that had 
been wont to give him satisfaction, and that 
his mind was dwelling uneasily on the 
dreadful fate awaiting Lord Falkland. The 
ex- Minister had plainly perceived all this, 
and was well aware of the extent to which 
his son's affections had been engaged by 
Miss Falkland; but he made no effort to 
turn them into another channel — he did as 
little in the way of assisting in forwarding 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 207 

his son's views upon the young lady. The 
truth was, that he did not like the connec- 
tion. He believed that an alliance with a 
member of the family of a notorious traitor 
would be extremely injurious to his son's 
political prospects ; for there was too mighty 
a prejudice at work in the heads of the 
reigning family and their offspring against 
Lord Falkland, to render a union of his son 
with the daughter of the latter either judi- 
cious or safe. 

Diplomacy he knew to be as necessary 
under his own roof, as in the councils of 
his Sovereign ; and he put forth all his tact 
to keep the mind of his son cheerful with 
occupation, and provide against its dwelling 
too much upon a misfortune it was impossible 
to avert. He grieved to see the distress of 
his son, and was ready to do anything to 
alleviate it, except bringing the lovers again 
together. 

" Come, Horace, my boy," he said, after 
vainly endeavouring to divert his mind, " I 



208 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

don't think this overgrown place agrees with 
you just now : you must come and join our 
hunt. You are tired of the turmoil of 
politics as completely as myself. Come 
with me to Houghton : I will make a man 
of you : I long to get back there myself. I 
have got to find places for the Leonardo da 
Yinci, the Tintorettos, and the rest of my 
recent acquisitions, which I think will go 
far to make the Houghton gallery the finest 
in England. Then I have a vast deal to do 
in the kennel. Things, I am afraid, are not 
going on there so well as I could wish. 
But one can't be everywhere at once, you 
know. Dixon sends me word that Sappho 
and Flora have got the distemper very bad. 
You remember Flora, Horace ? splendid 
bitch!" 

Horace appeared as if he did not remember 
the animal so emphatically recommended to 
him by its noble owner. 

" By the way, have you seen the Caracci, 
Horace?" continued Lord Orford; " my 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 209 

inimitable Armibal — ' Venus attired by the 
Graces.' Wonderful picture! Monstrous 
well done, I assure you. I gave a prodi- 
gious price for it. I expect it will arrive at 
the same time as the twelve couple of crack 
hounds I bought of the Duke of Rutland. 
Matchless hounds, Horace ! Such magnifi- 
cent heads, such glorious sterns ! You never 
saw such sterns in your life." 

Horace was evidently quite as indifferent 
to the expected acquisition to his father's 
kennel, notwithstanding the glorious cha- 
racteristics of which they could boast, as he 
had been a minute before to the threatened 
loss. 

" That was a charming specimen of Ruys- 
dael I had of that snuffy old Dutchman," 
resumed his lordship, point iug to an admir- 
able landscape by that esteemed master, 
which stood on a chair at a little distance. 
" Can you imagine anything more fresh and 
transparent ! Look how magical is the vista 
through the trees, and the water of the mill- 



210 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

stream ! Can anything in a picture look more 
like natural water?" 

Horace Walpole, as though out of defer- 
ence to his father, rather than from his own 
inclinations, took a glance at the painting. 

" 'Tis an excellent picture," he replied, in 
a manner very unlike his usual vivacity 
when directing his attention to such sub- 
jects; "but, my dear father, you must ex- 
cuse me if I appear not so sensible of the 
value of your purchases as I ought to do: 
my mind is very much oppressed. I am 
thinking of the fate of poor Lord Falkland. 
I most fervently wish there was some way 
open to save him." 

" I second that wish with all my heart !" 
exclaimed Lord Orford, with fervour. " I 
was intimate with Viscount Falkland many 
years ago, before he quitted England, and 
entertained a high esteem for his great 
talents and noble qualities. But, my dear 
boy," continued his lordship, as though 
anxious to meet the subject properly, now 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 211 

there was no chance of escaping it, " my 
Lord Falkland was possessed of that supe- 
riority of understanding which renders his 
guilt inexcusable. He, with his eyes open 
to the consequences, with a perfect know- 
ledge of the risk he was running, chose to 
exercise his talents in endeavouring to de- 
throne his Sovereign. It is nothing to the 
question that he was satisfied that the Pre- 
tender had a better claim to the throne of 
England than the present King : he was a 
subject of George II., and having taken up 
arms against him, must pay the penalty of 
his treason." 

" Unfortunately, what you say is too true," 
said his son, in a melancholy tone, "but 
surely no advantage can accrue to his 
Majesty by taking his life, and it would 
redound very much to his honour to spare 
him." 

" I am sorry to say that such clemency 
in this instance would be very impolitic," 
quietly replied his Lordship. " My Lord 



212 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

Falkland's case is a very aggravated one ; 
and many individuals have already forfeited 
their lives for this rebellion, whose guilt was 
less in a very great degree." 

" His fate will be a dreadful blow to his 
family," added Horace Walpole. " And his 
daughter is so devoted to him. I very 
much fear the axe will take two lives when 
it takes his." 

"It is very deplorable, certainly," said 
Lord Orford, in a sympathising tone. " I 
have heard of the young lady, and can feel 
for the melancholy position of a daughter so 
full of grace and genius." 

" Gracious God ! can nothing be done to 
save them? " cried his son, passionately. 

"lam afraid not," replied his Lordship. 
" My Lady Yarmouth is, I believe, the only 
channel through which any petition for my 
Lord Falkland's life would reach the King ; 
and it is barely possible that a large douceur 
Avould induce her Ladyship to take the mat- 
ter in hand " 



STRAWBERRY HILL 213 

" I will go to the Countess this instant," 
exclaimed our hero, rising from his chair, 
much excited. 

" You would do no good, my dear boy," 
said Lord Orford, affectionately taking him 
by the hand, " as you would have under- 
stood, had you waited till I finished my sen- 
tence. There is little doubt her Ladyship 
would take your money, but I have reason 
to know that the feeling in the King against 
my Lord Falkland is so strong, that all 
interposition of the kind would be perfectly 
useless." 

His son sank into his chair in an agony of 
grief. He felt grievously the helpless posi- 
tion in which he was placed; and, recalling 
to mind the generous conduct of Arabella 
towards him at Derby, felt more acutely 
how completely her own pride and his help- 
lessness rendered him incapable of doing her 
any benefit, now their relative positions were 
so thoroughly changed. 

Lord Orford perceived his son's distress ; 



214 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

but, being possessed with the impression that 
the case was a hopeless one, thought it wisest 
to take no further notice of it ; and, taking 
up a newspaper, seemed absorbed in an 
account there published of a daring highway 
robbery on Hounslow Heath. Horace was 
notlong left to his reflections; they were 
disturbed by the entrance of his valet, who, 
with a face that betokened something very 
much more than ordinary, walked up to his 
young master, and told him that there was 
a person in the dining-room who desired to 
see him. 

An impatient answer would quickly have 
dismissed the visitor, had not Mr. Fibbs 
made certain telegraphic signs which excited 
his curiosity. Imagining that his cousin 
wanted him on some occasion that it was 
not desirable should reach his father's ears, 
he followed his man to the dining-room. 
He had, however, scarcely entered it, when 
a female figure rushed forward and fell at 
his feet, clasping his knees, evidently in a 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 215 

state of vehement grief, that left the mind 
scarcely capable of fulfilling its functions. 

" Oh, save him, Horace ! " she exclaimed, 
in the most moving tones. " Save him, or 
the remorseless wretches will murder him 
before my eyes ! " 

" Gracious Heaven ! Can it be Arabella 
Falkland?" said her lover, with the most 
lively demonstrations of astonishment, as he 
endeavoured to raise the frantic girl from 
the ground. 

" Yes, Horace, it is I — a miserable, heart- 
broken wretch — crushed to the earth — cling- 
ing to your feet like the most abject of God's 
creatures — imploring you, by all your hopes 
of peace in this world, and mercy in the 
next, to have pity on me, and save my father 
from the horrid death that awaits him ! " 

It was even so. The dread of her beloved 
parent's approaching fate had crumbled to 
dust the lofty fabric of her pride; the 
daughter of a princess had felt the humili- 
ating lesson of misery, and, almost maddened 



216 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

with terrible apprehensions, had, in an im- 
pulse of frantic excitement, rushed to the 
man, of all men whom, in her distress, she 
had most jealously excluded from her pre- 
sence, and, at the eleventh hour, prayed his 
interposition. 

As our hero gazed upon the pallid fea- 
tures, and eyes dim with anguish, that he 
had once been wont to look upon as on a 
face the most gloriously beautiful in the 
world, and clasped the frail form that clung 
so convulsively, so despairingly, to his limbs, 
he felt how much suffering must have over- 
powered her noble nature, before she would 
have presented herself in this manner before 
him. He felt, too, the dreadful conviction 
resulting from the conversation he had so 
lately had with Lord Orforcl — that it was out 
of his power to be of the slightest benefit. 

" You will save him, Horace, I know you 
will ! " she cried, still more frantically, M you 
will present yourself to these merciless men. 
You will implore the precious life they 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 217 

would take away, as I implore it of you. 
You will tell them how noble it is to be 
merciful — how magnanimous it is to spare. 
Supplicate them on your knees, Horace, as I 
supplicate you. Tell them of the blessings 
in store for them hereafter ; the prayers, the 
benedictions, the heartfelt gratitude that 
awaits them here ;— tell them that the life of 
a heart-broken, wretched, miserable creature 
is in their hands, as well as that of him who 
has so grievously offended them ; and urge 
them to have pity on her ; for indeed, indeed, 
the misery they are heaping on her head is 
too heavy to bear. Horace, dear Horace, I 
will not move from this spot till you promise 
to save my father ! " 

Her lover could offer her no hope of suc- 
ceeding in such a mission as she proposed 
to him; and his look of despair, as he un- 
availingly endeavoured to raise her from the 
unworthy position she frantically persisted 
in retaining, was not long before it attracted 
the attention of the miserable girl. Directly 

VOL. III. l 



218 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

she understood its purport, she fell power- 
less, crouching to the ground, with her hands 
clasped and her eyes upturned to him with 
an expression the most agonizing that can 
be conceived. 

" Calm yourself, dearest Arabella," he 
said in a soothing tone, as he once more 
attempted to raise her from the floor. 
"Be assured I will leave nothing in his 
behalf undone, that can be attempted." 
His assurance, consolatory though it might 
be, seemed to fall upon heedless ears. She 
did not now resist his attempts to raise 
her to her feet, but her state of quietude 
was more deplorable than her most frantic 
actions. She still continued to fix her eyes 
on her lover; and this fixedness of gaze, 
coupled with the ghastly paleness of her 
complexion, moved him to a state almost as 
sad as her own. 

He managed to place her on a chair, and 
a sharp pull at the bell-rope soon brought 
Fibbs to his assistance. He was despatched 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 219 

for the housekeeper, who lost no time in 
using such remedies as were necessary in 
such a case. Having heard her assurance 
that the young lady would presently be 
better, he hastened, in a state of the most 
violent excitement, into the library, where 
he had so recently left Lord Orford. 

What passed between them did not trans- 
pire; but after the lapse of about half an 
hour, Horace returned to the dining-room 
with his father. Apparently his appeal had 
been unprofitable, for he displayed a most 
deplorable expression of countenance. His 
Lordship, however, wore a very different 
look. Whether it was that his cheerful 
physiognomy could not express commisera- 
tion, or that the nature of the case was 
such, he could not conscientiously throw 
away any pity upon it, certain it is that his 
features were expressive of anything but 
sympathy. 

His actions, however, there could be no 
dispute about. He expressed himself kindly, 

l2 



220 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

and even affectionately, to Miss Falkland; 
who seemed recovering from the swoon into 
which she had fallen, yet without being 
quite conscious of where she was. The 
friendly and delicate proffers of kindness 
from Lord Orford, no doubt assisted in 
tranquillizing her spirits ; and the sight of 
her lover evidently calmed the feverish dis- 
quietude of her mind : but it was soon found 
she was quite incapable of leaving the house. 
Lord Orford did not stay long in the 
room — he pleaded pressing business; and 
as he went out he affectionately put his son's 
arm within his own, and took him away 
with him. Possibly he might consider our 
hero's proximity to the lovely daughter of 
the condemned traitor, too dangerous to be 
tolerated. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 221 



CHAPTER X. 

THE TRAITORS' GATE. 

"We now return to the cell of the im- 
prisoned statesman. There was but one 
person in it, and he was quietly engaged in 
the perusal of a volume of Guicciardini. 
He was so interested in the book, to the 
attractions of which he had abandoned him- 
self so completely — smiling at this passage, 
commending that, and remarking on another 
— that it would not have been easy to have 
convinced an indifferent spectator that the 



222 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

head of that quiet, thoughtful, and studious 
gentleman was forfeited to the block. 

He, it was very plain, troubled himself but 
little about his approaching execution. The 
fear of death had no place in his mind. His 
grand scheme had failed : he had fallen into the 
hands of his enemies, and they had resolved 
to take his life. He seemed to consider the 
affair arranged, and that he need not trouble 
himself any further about it. The maxims 
of the philosopher were much more to his 
taste, than idle complainings and useless re- 
grets. He therefore turned over the page 
without once drawing off his mind to the 
contemplation of the death that awaited 
him. 

In the midst of his study he was dis- 
turbed by a knock. Lord Falkland imme- 
diately rose from his chair, and proceeded to 
open the door, as a matter of course. He 
bowled reverently, as he gave admission to a 
person in the habit of a Catholic priest. He 
was a slight short man, of pale features ; and 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 223 

appeared so wrapped up in his garments, it 
was difficult to say what age he was. 

" Holy father, I am delighted to see you," 
he exclaimed at last, quite joyfully; and as 
the priest gave his blessing, did the honours 
of his comfortless chamber with the air of a 
Prince receiving some honoured visitor into 
his palace. " You are doubtless the estim- 
able ecclesiastic, Father Petres, of whom 
my Lady Furbelow, my sister, spoke to me 
so eloquently." 

Father Petres bowed. 

" I would I had made the acquaintance of 
my Lord Falkland under more agreeable 
auspices," said he; " but probably even at 
this most momentous period I may be en- 
abled to do your Lordship more service than 
could have been in my power at any other 
time." 

" Undoubtedly, good father," replied his 
Lordship, courteously; "I fully appreciate 
the invaluable service, to render which you 
had the kindness to seek my prison. I have 



224 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

been too strict a member of our holy church 
all my life, to be indifferent, now I am so 
near my death, to the sacred duties you have 
come to fulfil. I regard myself as one in 
the last extremity ; and although my confes- 
sion, thanks to the unceasing care of my 
spiritual conductors, contains nothing likely 
to shock your pious ears, I am satisfied I 
shall feel the efficacy of your prayers to 
quite as great a degree as was ever experi- 
enced by more sinful communicants." 

Father Petres seemed in no hurry to 
begin the offices of the Catholic Church, for 
one whom he could only regard as a dying 
sinner. Perhaps he thought the tone of his 
Lordship a little too confident, and would 
not commence his prayers till he had brought 
him to feel the humility of his position. 

" Are you quite prepared to die, my son?" 
inquired the priest, impressively. 

" Quite, holy father," he replied. " In 
the world, in which I have endeavoured to 
perform my part in a manner becoming a 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 225 

Christian, I have found all to be ' vanity and 
vexation of spirit.' Knowledge of the world 
is but a facility of perceiving worldly folly 
— a sensibility to human emotions is but a 
perception of human suffering. I incline 
now to believe, after a life of study both of 
men and books, that those are wisest who 
have had nothing to learn, and those hap- 
piest who are insensible to feeling." 

" Hush, my son ! these are fallacies that 
enter into the mind only when the shadows 
of death involve our experience in an im- 
penetrable gloom. There is a degree of 
little- mindedness in depreciating the world, 
when we find we can enjoy its pleasures no 
longer, which I did not expect to find in a 
nobleman reputed so wise as my Lord Falk- 
land." 

His Lordship seemed surprised to hear 
such a rebuke from his confessor. 

" Father," he observed, " this is the first 
defence I have ever heard of the world, from 
one possessed of your unworldly character. 

l 3 



226 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

" My son," replied the priest, solemnly, 
" I cannot administer to you the offices of 
our holy religion, unless I am satisfied of 
your sincerity. When I hear, from a sinner 
whose whole life has been devoted to worldly 
intrigues and worldly learning, and whose 
heart has long been given up to a worldly 
affection, a renunciation of everything most 
precious to him, it is my duty to test his 
sincerity before I grant him the consolations 
of religion." 

Lord Falkland seemed more surprised 
than before. He had met with priests of 
his faith, from the humblest to the highest, 
both at home and abroad, and had always 
found them extremely indulgent. Even his 
Holiness the Pope had treated him with the 
consideration due to a nobleman of his un- 
blemished descent and high connections. 
The unexpected opposition he now received 
stirred up a great deal of worldly feeling 
which his Lordship thought he had laid to 
rest for ever. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 227 

"My son," continued Father Petres, "this 
resignation is only assumed." 

Lord Falkland started a little, and looked 
somewhat displeased : nevertheless, the other 
continued : 

" Can your Lordship venture to affirm 
that you are ready to abandon, without 
regret, the high reputation you have ob- 
tained throughout Europe as a Statesman? 
Can one to whom the secrets of Cabinets, 
the councils of Princes, have so long been 
confided, pass away for ever from such ex- 
alting confidence without a sigh?" 

Lord Falkland paused. He had been 
proud of the distinction he had enjoyed in 
the service of the unfortunate Prince he 
considered his Sovereign ; and he had been 
in the habit of thinking he had exhibited no 
slight extent of Statesmanship in his nego- 
ciations with foreign powers, whilst engaged 
in that service ; but he believed that religion 
and philosophy together had taught him 
how to reconcile himself to his fate, which 



228 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

so completely let the curtain drop upon his 
Ministry. 

"Ah!" exclaimed his Lordship, with a 
sigh, " it is useless thinking of the past. 
My counsels can no longer benefit his 
Majesty." 

"How do you know that ?" hurriedly 
inquired the priest. " Never was a Prince 
so grievously in want of a counsellor, as his 
Majesty is at the present moment. His 
affairs are irretrievably rained by this fatal 
overthrow of the great project which was to 
effect so beneficial a change for him ; unless 
some wise head and dutiful heart, such as 
his Majesty found in his sagacious Minister 
my Lord Falkland, take them in hand." 

"I grieve to think of his Majesty's 
troubles," said his Lordship, "but I have no 
doubt he will soon find a worthy substitute 
for the adviser he has lost." 

"It is vain to expect such a thing," ob- 
served his companion. " The destruction 
which has overtaken so many of his parti- 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 229 

zans, has smitten others with a panic. They 
believe his cause to be utterly hopeless ; and 
the majority are endeavouring to reconcile 
themselves to the British Government. 
This has caused his best friends to abandon 
him; and at present he has no adviser in 
whom he can place confidence. Bitterly he 
feels the loss of the man whose wisdom so 
long made his cause respected through- 
out Europe; and his grief at your fate is 
only exceeded by his praise of your de- 
votion." 

" Ah, holy father ! my consolation is, that 
I served his Majesty faithfully; and that 
cheers me in the depth of my affliction at 
hearing how shamefully he has been aban- 
doned. But, alas ! all regrets are vain. The 
axe hangs over my head — 'tis time to think 
less of a temporal lord, and more of a 
spiritual one." 

" Yes, my son; but we must first get rid 
of all earthly ties, as easily as you seem dis- 
posed to divest yourself of your loyal predi- 



230 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

lections. Do you forget that you are about 
to abandon to an unsympathising world a 
frail and delicate creature, bowed down to 
the dust by fear and sorrow, whose attach- 
ment to you, her natural protector, her 
nearest and dearest relative, and apprehen- 
sion of your fate, has as nearly unsettled her 
reason, as it has brought her to the brink of 
the grave? " 

" God forgive me if I could forget her ! ' 
exclaimed the unhappy father, giving way 
to his emotions. " This is the pang that 
rends my soul, and robs me of the strength 
I so much require -at this trying hour. Ah, 
holy father ! no one knows better than my- 
self the noble spirit that dwells in that fair 
frame ; no one has seen more clearly than 
myself the mortal struggle that her mind 
has been waging with her affections. I 
thought, by sending her to her relative, that 
it would be better for us both. She might 
be less sensible of my approaching end when 
away from me; and I might be more 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 231 

reconciled to it when out of sight of her 
sufferings. 

u Alas ! dear image of thy sainted mother," 
he cried, clasping his hands together, with 
tears starting to his eyes, " To meet death I 
am prepared ; but to part with thy sustain- 
ing virtues, thy holy affection, thy sweet and 
noble nature, stretches every nerve upon the 
rack." 

" You are not, then, my son, so reconciled 
to the block as, a moment since, you would 
have had me believe ? " demanded the priest. 

" Oh, Father Petres ! you probe me to the 
quick," exclaimed the unhappy man. 

" Now, answer me this question : " said 
the father, " and answer it without evasion 
or reservation, and with a full knowledge of 
the peril in which any deceit, at such an 
awful time as this, will place your immortal 
soul. 

u If it lay within your power," added he, 
in slow and solemn tones, as he looked his 
penitent full in the face, " would you shun 



232 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

the dreadful axe impending over your head ? 
— would you fly from this prison to join 
your beloved daughter and your unfortunate 
prince, if the means of escape were afforded 
you? " 

"Father, you are putting me to a trial as 
dreadful as it must be unprofitable ! " cried 
Lord Falkland, in anguish. 

44 Would you do it? " demanded the priest, 
sharply. 

44 God sees, and will pardon my weakness," 
exclaimed his Lordship, as he covered his 
face with his hands in an agony of grief: 
44 1 would do it but too gladly." 

A smile of triumph seemed to pass over 
the priest's pale features as he glanced at his 
penitent. He then cautiously went to the 
door, opened it, and looked out — closed it, 
and returned as mysteriously to the side of 
his companion. He then bent over him, 
and whispered a few words into his ear. The 
effect seemed magical. The miserable parent 
looked up with a bewildered air — that 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 233 

shortly changed from doubt to transport. 
He gazed in utter astonishment upon the 
pallid face of Father Petres, and then threw 
himself into his arms. 

About the same period, two sentinels were 
on duty at the Traitors' gate, within the 
Tower. It was easy to see, from their uni- 
forms, that they belonged to the Grenadiers 
of the King's Guards. It was not difficult 
to discover from their conversation, as they 
paced their limited line of march before the 
gate, that they were the two identical heroes 
who, as footmen, highwaymen, and soldiers, 
have, it is to be hoped, recommended them- 
selves to the reader's attention. 

They were engaged in an occupation not 
unknown to aspirants for military distinction 
at a later elate. They were " damning the 
service ; " and they did it with that cor- 
diality only known to those members of the 
profession, who, like our old acquaintances of 
the shoulder-knot, had recently tasted its 
discipline in its most stringent shape. 



234 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

As the " Marquis " marched towards his 
comrade, with his bayonetted-musket pro- 
perly shouldered, he would express some 
prodigious anathema upon his eyes and 
limbs for taking the King's pay ; which, with 
his familiar lisp, " Duke " would echo in the 
usual form. Having expended a very hand- 
some allowance of execrations on his own 
everlasting stupidity, the ex- Captain would 
draw a comparison between his position 
when " on the road," and that he now held, 
very much to the advantage of his un-com- 
missioned Captaincy — to the truth of which 
he would confidently appeal to his friend — 
the which appeal, it is scarcely necessary to 
say, was never made in vain. 

Then his retrospection would go a little 
further back; and, though he had been 
wont, when styling himself " Captain," to 
vote his previous state " villainous low and 
vulgar," he now was in a humour to perceive 
the advantages a State-footman had over 
a private soldier, and became quite pathetic 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 235 

while lamenting his abandoned privileges of 
doing nothing, shewing his insolence, and be- 
coming sweet upon the long- lost Mrs. Jenny. 

Of course the mention of Mrs. Jenny- 
elicited from his more sentimental comrade 
a world of lisping lamentations over the 
charming yet faithless Mrs. Susan. A good 
deal of abuse was levelled by the two for- 
saken swains, at the fickleness of women in 
general, and housekeepers and ladies' maids 
in particular ; and this grievance necessarily 
led them to dwell on the inexplicable blind- 
ness of the sex, in neglecting gentlemen 
of their merit, for so low a fellow as " a 
Commoner's valet-de-sham ; " and then our 
travelled acquaintance came in for his share 
of comment, and certainly it must be allowed 
that never was man so heartily abused be- 
hind his back. 

Hitherto they had their conversation com- 
pletely to themselves, and their brief marches 
to and fro were undisturbed by any oc- 
currence that was likely to take off their 



236 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

attention from their own more interesting 
affairs; but just at this time, an individual 
required admittance at the gate, who, when 
he presented himself before them within the 
precincts of the fortress they were guarding, 
appeared to astonish them as much as if he 
had been an enemy come to summon the 
garrison to surrender. 

" Can I believe my eyes ! " cried the 
stranger, gazing from the face of one to that 
of the other, whilst one looked sullen, and the 
other ashamed. " Yes ! as I live, 'tis his Grace 
the Duke, and my noble friend the Marquis. 
Par nobile fratrum, as we said at Cambridge." 

The two worthies looked for a moment as 
uncertain how to receive this recognition ; 
for who should thus suddenly have presented 
himself but the identical " everlasting rascal " 
they had been execrating so heartily for the 
last ten minutes ! Yet he seemed so glad to 
see them, and had apparently so completely 
forgotten that unfortunate little affair of 
theirs he had interrupted on the lung's 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 237 

highway, they could not think of commenc- 
ing a quarrel. 

a 'Pon honour, I 'm delighted to see you, 
Marquis," continued their former fellow- 
servant, in his liveliest strain. " By the 
way, how monstrous well you become your 
regimentals ! 'Tis a thousand pities, though, 
so fine a fellow should not hold a high com- 
mand in the regiment. But Fortuna favet 
fortibus, as we said at Eton. Rest assured, 
such merit as yours will not be long without 
reaching its proper elevation. " 

" Well, that 's mighty civil of you," replied 
the ex-Captain, his prejudices dissolving like 
snow before the warmth of the well-directed 
flattery of his old acquaintance. " Prodi- 
gious civil — strike me dumb ! It 's monstrous 
odd, too, you were the very person we were 
talking about. Wasn't he, Duke?" 

His comrade lisped his affirmation as 
readily as ever. 

The other expressed his high sense of the 
honour that had been done him by his 



238 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

especial friend the Marquis, in which he 
brought in a sentence extremely compli- 
mentary to his estimable friend the Duke, 
who, in terms lisped in his most amiable 
manner, made due acknowledgment of so 
unexpected an act of courtesy. This led to 
other compliments and other gracious replies ; 
and, one thing leading to another, there 
ensued allusions to the good-fellowship they 
had once known in the never-to-be-forgotten 
evenings of " The Upper Servants' Supper 
Club ; " and never was the travelled valet 
so lively in his discourse, so happy in his 
quotations, and so friendly in his remarks, as 
while communicating the " moving acci- 
dents " which had befallen their associates 
at the Admiral Yernon. 

It was not at all extraordinary that, in the 
course of his amusing gossip, Mr. Fibbs 
should have casually mentioned his errand 
in the Tower, as one he had been daily in 
the habit of making for the last fortnight, 
to inquire after the health of one of the 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 23 9 

prisoners, for whose comfort he was then 
carrying a bottle of the then favourite 
spirituous beverage, called gin, which he 
laughingly held up to the light, before the 
eyes of the two soldiers, till their mouths 
watered to see it sparkle so near them. 

Now be it known that this identical beve- 
rage was one much patronized by these 
worthies — so much so, indeed, as to have 
caused their being tied up to the triangles 
so often, as to have created that disgust of 
the service to which we have already al- 
luded; and they no sooner beheld the pale 
liquid flashing before them, than they felt 
an ardent desire to make themselves ac- 
quainted with its flavour. 

Fibbs, as if he read their thoughts, con- 
tinued to laugh very pleasantly, as he held 
up the bottle before the light, and, with two 
or three choice fragments from his travelling 
budget, commended the liquor as the very 
finest of the kind that could be procured. 
While their eyes glistened, and their mouths 



240 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

watered, he asked them if they should not like 
"just the merest taste in the world." They 
had scarcely given evidence of the excessive 
gratification it would give them, when, much 
to the ex-Captain's astonishment, he found 
the bottle in his hand, with the cork drawn. 
He was not a man to require much pressing 
when anything so tempting was put in the 
way; so, as may easily be imagined, the 
mouth of the bottle was in his own, without 
any unnecessary delays. 

It was evident that the Captain's idea of 
" the merest taste in the world " differed 
considerably from the common acceptation 
of it, for he did not pass the bottle to his 
comrade till he had imbibed a respectable 
share of its contents. The Squire was not 
slow in following so admirable an example. 
He took his tithe before he passed the bottle 
back to its proper custodian. Mr. Fibbs 
did not seem either surprised or offended at 
the liberties that had been taken witli it — 
it is very possible it escaped his notice, for he 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 241 

was now monstrously facetious, and was 
amusing his old companions with an anecdote 
of a somewhat marvellous character, of his 
adventures with his clear friend Madame 
Pomme de Terre, at the Chateau Pomme de 
Terre, in the relation of which he was so 
absorbed, that he unconsciously raised the 
bottle to his lips; and after testing the 
quality of the spirit it contained, as uncon- 
sciously passed it to his noble friend — as he 
persisted in styling the once imperious State 
Footman — who, apprehensive of a mistake, 
and with the tempting liquor fresh on his 
tongue, took a longer pull at the bottle than 
he had done before. 

Nothing could more completely shew the 
abandonment of the narrator to the stoiy of 
his own good fortune, than his inattention 
to the liberty his lisping acquaintance was 
now taking with his incomparable Geneva. 
Indeed, the latter seemed so loth to part 
with it, that his impatient comrade snatched 
the bottle from him ; and as if he thought 

VOL, III. M 



242 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

the excellence of the liquor would excuse 
his rudeness, he made another application at 
its mouth, longer too than either of those 
that had preceded it. 

Their vivacious friend was too much taken 
up with the adorable lady of the Chateau, 
to heed the rapid disappearance of the 
liquid — nay, when the empty bottle was 
thrust into his hands, he uttered not a word 
upon its lightness, and seemed oblivious of 
the shameful abuse of his good nature by the 
two reckless grenadiers, who, now not a little 
excited by the potent beverage, seemed only 
inclined to lau^h at their friend's heedless- 
ness in putting such capital stuff in their way. 
They, however, were mightily amused with 
his facetious narrative, and paid him many 
compliments upon the gallantry he had 
shewn in his adventure with the affectionate 
Frenchwoman. They lounged carelessly 
against one of the sentry-boxes; their arms, 
instead of being carried to the shoulder, 
rested with their butt ends upon the ground ; 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 243 

and in their flushed faces and joyous laughs, 
there could be little doubt they were not 
behaving on their post with that military 
order and circumspection which was required 
of them. 

If their surprise had been great to find 
their old acquaintance so confiding with the 
bottle he had been so imprudent as to place 
in their hands, it was beyond all description 
when they beheld him quietly put it, empty 
as it was, in the pocket whence he had taken 
it, and draw a full one from the other, which, 
without interrupting his interesting narra- 
tive, he placed in the hands that were so 
eagerly stretched out for its reception. 

As this went through the same process as 
the other, it is not at all extraordinary that 
the two sentinels should in due course be- 
come rather boisterous in their mirth, and 
vastly demonstrative in their attachment to 
their former implacable foe. All notion of 
military discipline had completely disap- 
peared. Their arms were carried any how, 

M 2 



244 STRAWBERRY HELL. 

their sugar-loaf caps were awry on their 
heads, their eyes were getting very fishy, 
and their complexions of an amazingly chalky 
texture. Indeed, there was no question that 
they were extremely drunk. 

In this state of affairs, the alarm was 
given that some one was coming. The two 
grenadiers, with a confused idea of the 
punishment that awaited them, if the help- 
less state in which they had drunk themselves 
was discovered, made many awkward at- 
tempts to shoulder their muskets, and stand 
in the proper attitude to challenge the party 
approaching. To their great relief it proved 
to be a civilian, who was leaving the fortress ; 
and they without difficulty recognised in 
him the priest they had allowed to pass them 
to visit the Lord Falkland. 

They strove hard to look sufficiently 
serious as he approached; and by partly 
leaning against each other, and partly lean- 
ing against the sentry-box, managed to pre- 
serve something approaching a perpendicular 
position. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 245 

Their generous friend had jumped into 
the sentry-box at the first alarm; and to 
quiet their fears, offered to challenge the 
approaching party for them. He glanced 
over their shoulders at the priest as he ad- 
vanced, as the two delinquents, in a maudlin 
tone, kept expressing their apprehensions of 
the punishment that awaited them, varied 
occasionally by adding a tender reminiscence 
of the several objects of their affections in 
their never-to-be-forgotten days of gold-laced 
breeches and gaudy coats. 

" Here he comes ! " exclaimed Fibbs, in a 
warning voice, " steady, on your lives. If 
he sees anything suspicious about you, he 
may alarm the guard; and then you may 
expect a devil of a flogging, exempli gratia, 
as we said at Eton. 

" Hush ! " whispered their friend, and the 
two drunkards tried hard to gather together 
their scattered senses, and stand steadily as 
the stranger passed them. It was lucky for 
them, perhaps, that he approached with his 



246 STRAWBERRY HELL. 

eyes fixed to the ground, apparently absorbed 
in pious meditation, or he must have noticed 
their caps awry, and the disorderly manner 
in which they stood. If he seemed indis- 
posed to notice them, they were not in a 
state to pay him any particular attention. 

" Who goes there ! " cried the valet, in a 
gruff voice. 

" A friend ! " answered the priest, without 
lifting his eyes from the ground. At this 
moment one of the soldiers made a stumble, 
and would have fallen, had not the ready 
Fibbs held him up. 

44 The pass- word ! " demanded the assumed 
sentry, as the real ones were trembling in 
their shoes. 

" Culloden ! " replied Father Petres. 

The direction to pass on was given ; and 
the priest — to the great relief of the unlucky 
sentries — without taking the slightest notice 
of either of them, proceeded on his way. A 
few seconds only elapsed before Mr. Fibbs 
sprang from his hiding-place. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 247 

" I greatly regret being obliged to leave 
such pleasant company," he said, addressing 
his stupified friends with an air of mock 
courtesy, " but the fact is, I hear the tread 
of the guard coming to relieve you ; and I 
have no desire to share the punishment, of 
which, I will do you the credit to say, there 
is not a pair of rascals in his Majesty's 
dominions more deserving — experto crede, as 
we said at Cambridge. But before we part, 
I will make you both happy with this piece of 
information. My Lord Duke, your adorable 
Mrs. Jenny is married to the man, excepting 
myself, you most detested in the world — 
Sawney M'Foxie, my Lord Bath's Scotch 
steward. My Lord Marquis, your charming 
Mrs. Susan will very shortly be united to 
the man, excepting Sawney M'Foxie, you 
most detested in the world — who is your 
very humble servant. I now leave you to 
the tender mercies of your friend the 
drummer. As we said at Eton — Vale" 

Blind with rage and drunkenness, the 



248 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

two grenadiers simultaneously lowered their 
muskets j and each grasping his weapon 
firmly with both hands, made a furious 
charge with the bayonet at their retreating 
friend, accompanied by sundry spluttered 
epithets that were anything but compli- 
mentary. Their kind intentions towards 
him were defeated, as much by the rapidity 
with which he laughingly disappeared from 
their sight, as by their awkwardness in 
stumbling against each other; which in a 
moment stretched them both on the ground. 
They made various fruitless attempts to 
rise ; and when the guard did come to relieve 
them — for the mischievous valet had given 
them a false alarm — they were found dis- 
armed, with heads uncovered, and accoutre- 
ments grimed with dirt, in a state of 
such helpless intoxication, that they were 
obliged to be carried to the guard-house. 
As might be expected, they were made 
examples of; — and a military example in 
those days was such as the tender autho- 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 249 

rities at the Horse Guards must refer to as 
belonging to a state of perfectibility in " the 
Service," they despair of ever seeing restored 
— in other words, they had so severe a flog- 
ing, that, we are happy to say, they ever 
afterwards abstained from strong waters — 
at least when upon duty. 



m 3 



250 STRAWBERRY HILL. 



CHAPTER XI. 



THE EXILES. 



To an Englishman, the gradual receding 
of the white cliffs of the fair island he re- 
gards with such pride and affection, while 
the vessel in which he embarks to seek his 
fortune on some* distant shore rapidly leaves 
the beloved land behind her, is usually fruit- 
ful of deep regrets ; but there w r ere two per- 
sons on the deck of the " Polry of London," 
in whom the receding cliffs created feelings 
of a totally opposite tendency. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 251 

They were an elderly man and a young 
female — persons, apparently, of distinction, 
from their reserved manners and noble bear- 
ing. They sat together, however, undis- 
turbed, if not unnoticed; the gentleman's 
hand clasped in that of the lady, and their 
looks either fixed on each other in an appa- 
rent ecstasy of fondness, or turned towards 
the distant land that was fast sinking into 
the horizon. 

To them the fading cliffs were a source 
of joy instead of sorrow — though one at 
least of the pair, if not both, were henceforth 
never to see them again. They were exiles, 
with whom exile was regarded as the first 
of blessings, instead of the heaviest misfor- 
tune the native of a free and favoured country 
could endure. They were political exiles, 
whose thoughts clung to the foreign coast 
which offered them an asylum, and shrank 
from that which no longer afforded them 
safety. 

And yet it could scarcely be said that 



252 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

they were happy. They were free — and 
there is no doubt they had a lively sense of 
their liberty. They were safe from the rope 
and the block — of which safety, there can be 
as little question, they had the most lively 
appreciation. Yet it is more than possible 
that, with the deep sense of the priceless 
blessing they enjoyed in each other's society, 
coupled with the conviction of their perfect 
security, there was a feeling, if not of posi- 
tive regret, of very painful retrospection. 

In the colourless complexion of the young 
lady, there were traces of emotion, which 
even the felicity she felt in having effected 
her escape could not overpower. There 
might be read in the eyes — those unfailing 
interpreters of the heart's most hidden feel- 
ings — a sense of suffering which lay too 
deep to be affected by any passing enjoy- 
ment. She seemed to cling to her compa- 
nion with a most touching fondness; but 
there was ever and anon a deep-breathed 
sigh — a kind of spasmodic respiration, which 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 253 

shewed that her thoughts as well as her 
sympathies had another subject to dwell 
upon. 

They were a long time silent; for both 
were oppressed with feelings that lay heavily 
on the mind; they were as if awaking from 
a frightful dream, with a confused sense of 
danger, struggling against a rising convic- 
tion of safety. 

" My father ! " murmured the young fe- 
male at last, pressing her companion's hand, 
and looking affectionately up into his face, 
" the world is all before us : surely we may 
find a nook, in which the little happiness 
that will content us, may be carefully hus- 
banded and wisely enjoyed." 

" My daughter! " replied the gentleman, 
solemnly, " be assured that virtues such as 
yours will meet their due reward, both here 
and hereafter. Believe me, there is much 
happiness in store for you." 

The pale face was illumined with a smile 
— a smile that shewed either that she was 



254 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

pleased, or wished to appear so; but it was 
confined to her lips, around which it played 
with a fitful brilliance, like a flame that 
would not burn. The eyes did not smile — 
they were dry, unsteady, and painful in their 
expression. She still pressed the hand she 
held so affectionately, and still strove to 
look as though the horizon of her hopes 
was bounded by her love for her parent. 

As the reader, perhaps, has already sur- 
mised, these two persons, thus hurrying 
from the land they loved so much, were 
Arabella Falkland and her father. "With 
the assistance of some trusty friends, his 
Lordship had effected his escape from the 
Tov/er the day previously to his execution. 
Apparently he was not so happy as so timely 
an escape ought to have made him, for 
my Lord Falkland was troubled both in 
heart and mind : his pride had been humbled 
by a sense of obligation he never could 
repay ; and his sympathies were most acutely 
excited by a knowledge of the sufferings 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 255 

of his beloved daughter, of which he could 
not conceal from himself that he was the 
cause. 

After for some time vainly endeavouring 
to still his own emotions, he excused him- 
self for leaving her for a few minutes, to 
speak to the Captain ; he was intent only on 
removing from her observation before he 
was quite unmanned. Scarcely had he dis- 
appeared, when the young lady rapidly drew 
a paper from her bosom. It was crumpled, 
and in some places wet with tears. Never- 
theless, she spread it open once more, and 
with a heavy sigh commenced reading the 
following sentences : — 

" Beloved, Adored, Arabella ! 

" Were I to attempt to explain to you the 
earnest and deep-seated passion with which 
your noble and graceful nature inspired me, 
when I was so fortunate as to make your ac- 
quaintance at Eome, I should only take up 
a great deal of your time, without succeeding 



256 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

in my object — for no language is sufficiently 
eloquent to express that new state of being 
with which I became acquainted, when 
dazzled with that rare vision of intellectual 
loveliness that first rose before my enrap- 
tured senses within the honoured walls of 
your Roman Villa. Let it suffice, that I 
saw you and loved you ; without being aware 
of the hopeless dream into which a passion 
for an object so completely out of my sphere 
had lulled me. We were parted — I was 
obliged to acquiesce in the necessity of the 
separation, and left Italy, abandoning the 
priceless treasure for which I had madly 
ventured to aspire; — abandoning it, as it 
seemed, for ever — for fire and water looked 
more likely to coalesce than the famines of 
Falkland and Walpole. 

" I returned to England, and, with a 
younger brother's limited prospects, sought 
to distinguish myself in a public career. 
Thanks to the solicitude of the best of 
fathers and most sagacious of statesmen, I 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 257 

was launched into the turbulent sea of 
politics with advantages rarely possessed by 
so young an adventurer. 

" It was strange to me, that though 
nothing could be more desperate than the 
state of my relations with you, I cherished 
your image as assiduously as though I en- 
joyed the happiness of being an accepted 
lover, and delighted in the conviction that 
our union was not only possible, but very 
near. Under whatever circumstances I 
found myself — whether playing the role of 
a light-hearted votary of fashion — assuming 
the character of the most earnest of politicians 
— or seeking the honours of a studious 
scholar — those classical features rose before 
me with a star-like radiance, such as that 
with which your co-religionists encompass 
the heads of their saints ; and threw a tender 
light on my path, as though to render it 
more attractive or accessible. 

" Nevertheless, every step I took increased 
the distance between us. Without my being 



258 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

aware of it, the path I had chosen was daily 
leading me farther from the object I so 
hopelessly continued to covet. It was not 
till by the singular accident of mistaking 
the house at Bath to which I had been 
invited, I discovered how completely we 
were opposed to each other in thought and 
feeling. Yet even this discovery did not 
remove that heart -worship with which I re- 
garded your noble characteristics. I still 
saw you an object of profound idolatry — to 
be guarded — to be warned — to be saved. I 
found you embarking in a cause I knew to 
be hopeless, and mixed up with a knot of 
reckless spirits in an adventure which could 
not fail of drawing down destruction upon 
the heads of all en owed in it. I would 
have risked everything to warn — I would 
have died to save you ; but you took effectual 
means to prevent 1113' interposition. 

" We met as;ain — how coldlv — how unna- 
turally — I wish not to Fecal to you. Once 
more we met ; and a trifling service I had 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 259 

the good fortune to perform for you, was the 
happy means of producing a renewal of 
that exquisite sympathy which, under a more 
genial sky, made us appear to each other the 
most blest of human beings. Alas ! the 
demon of political discord was thrust in 
between us, and we were again two 
severed hearts, divided by a barrier 
of pride it was vain indeed to hope to 
remove. 

" I remind you of the unfortunate insur- 
rection in which you played so distinguished 
a part, merely to have an opportunity of 
referring to the noble act of womanly devo- 
tion you ventured to perform on my behalf, 
when the cause you had embraced with such 
ardour appeared to have completely tri- 
umphed. Your treasured communication 
from Derby, though it produced no effect 
upon my loyalty, awakened, with more 
than pristine strength, the ardent passion 
with which you had inspired me; and the 
receipt of your affectionate appeal being im- 



260 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

mediately followed by intelligence of the 
retreat of the Scottish army, I sought every 
available channel of obtaining some know- 
ledge of your movements, to rescue you and 
your father from the destruction I knew to 
be impending over the young Prince's par- 
tizans. Imagine the state of my feelings 
when I heard, very shortly afterwards, of 
your capture ! Your arrival in town was 
scarcely notified, when I hurried to your 
prison. 

" I will now say nothing of the wretched 
state of mind into which I was plunged by 
your stern repulse of all my efforts to be 
of service. I pass at once to the unex- 
pected apparition of yourself within my 
threshold. That was an appeal that ought 
to have roused the dead. I have but an im- 
perfect recollection of the state of frantic 
excitement in which I rushed to my father 
in an adjoining room, and implored his inter- 
cession for Lord Falkland ; but I believe I 
expressed some desperate determination if 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 261 

the execution of his Lordship was not 
stayed. 

"My father tried to soothe me; but, 
though on all previous occasions the most 
tractable of sons, I was now wild and reck- 
less, and would not listen to his arguments. 
The more he sought to reason with me on 
the impossibility of any interference, the 
more I raved. At last he paused a moment, 
and told me he was willing to attempt his 
influence with the King on one condition 
only. "Without waiting to hear what he had 
to propose, but catching at the chance of 
saving a life so dear to you, I wildly — madly 
— offered to accept any condition, however 
hard it might be, and urged him to lose not 
a moment in making the attempt. 

" My father — through a private channel, 
known only to himself — immediately com- 
municated with the King, over whom, I have 
reason to believe, his influence is still very 
great ; but, great as his influence was, it was 
insufficient to gain a pardon for Lord Falk- 



262 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

land : all that his Majesty could be induced 
to grant, after the most earnest entreaties, 
was, that facilities should be afforded the 
prisoner to escape, if he chose to avail him- 
self of them. If he succeeded in passing the 
sentinels at the gate of the Tower, who were 
likely to be the only obstacles in his egress 
from that fortress, according to previous 
arrangements, he would be allowed, without 
molestation, to make his way to a ship then 
in the river. 

" I had reason to fear that Lord Falk- 
land would not easily be induced to attempt 
his escape; and having learnt from Lady 
Furbelow the desire he had expressed to see 
a priest, I gladly caught at the opportunity 
thus presented to me of effecting our object. 
Your father, I trust, will pardon the decep- 
tion I practised upon him as Father Petres : 
assuredly, if ever the means justified the 
end, my assumption of so sacred a character 
may find its justification in the rescuing 
from a public death a life so valuable. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 263 

" I had the good fortune to persuade his 
Lordship to wear the ecclesiastical habit in 
which I had introduced myself into his 
prison ; he quitted his chamber, and passed 
unsuspected and unnoticed till he came to the 
gate, where the dexterity of my servant had 
secured his further progress in perfect safety. 

" And now, having effected all that you 
desired, and gained all that I had prayed 
for, I must here take my leave of you for 
ever. The condition on which alone I could 
obtain the boon you had so movingly de- 
manded, was the sacrifice of every hope of 
yourself 1 have pledged myself never to 
hold further communication with you, di- 
rectly or indirectly. To please you, I have 
lost you. To afford you happiness, I have 
abandoned every prospect of my own. The 
world is now a blank to me. It may tempt 
my ambition, it may gratify my intellect, 
but I have shut out from myself the best 
pleasures of existence. I can never be any- 
thing better than a dreamer of dreams. All 



2C4 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

my world must be shadowy, indistinct, and 
untangible. I must labour without a pur- 
pose ; I must struggle without a prospect of 
advantage. 

u Likely enough, we shall never meet 
a train : but be assured that if ever it could 
be said that to me there is one thing impos- 
sible, it is forgetfulness. Like the true be- 
liever, who, be he where he may, in his soli- 
tary devotions never fails to turn in the 
direction of Mecca, I shall as readily, at all 
times and seasons, find the holy city of my 
thoughts esteemed by a lively faith as the 
sepulchre of uiy affections. 

" Farewell, then, fairest, noblest, worthiest 
of your sex ! If I could secure your happi- 
ness, you should have a dower that angels 
might envy. Let me entreat a favourable 
consideration of this forced abandonment; 
and whenever your thoughts stray in that 
direction, regard me as one who would live 
but for your esteem, and who struggles but 
for }'our respect. Farewell. I trust I shall 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 265 

play out my part in the busy world in such 
a manner as may induce you to think kindly, 
as must force you to think worthily of me. 
But under all circumstances, I must remain, 
beloved Arabella, 

" Your devoted and most faithful friend, 
"Horace Walpole." 

The letter was read., some passages more 
than once, and then with a furtive caress 
confined to its depository. It is but justice 
to add, that during the voyage the perusal 
was repeated many times. This did not 
make the fair reader more melancholy — on 
the contrary, it soothed her disturbed spirits. 
That settled despair, which had given so 
painful a character to her features, became 
softened and subdued ; and when she landed 
at Naples she had in a great measure re- 
gained her composure. 

Miss Falkland returned to Rome, but for 
a long time refused to mingle in its society. 
Her father's death happened about ten years 

VOL. III. N 



266 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

after the rebellion, and was brought about 
by the unworthy conduct of the young 
Prince, in whose daring adventure he had 
taken so onerous a part. 

She occasionally corresponded . with her 
relatives in England, particularly with her 
aunt, Lady Furbelow, notwithstanding her 
ladyship had become a furious Methodist, 
a devout follower of the eloquent Whitfield 
— had banished her monkey, her parrot, and 
her other fashionable friends — and raved of 
" Divine Grace," boasted of u a Call," and 
had turned her mansion into a meeting- 
house, where, on alternate nights with her 
card parties, tea and tracts were served out 
to the elect, with a due allowance of inhar- 
monious hymns and interminable holdings 
forth. For all which, her ladyship could not 
occasionally avoid betraying that hankering 
after the world and all its idlest vanities, 
which had exercised such powerful influence 
over her whole life. 

On one occasion the pious dowager alluded 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 267 

to the demise of Prince Frederick — for, to 
the great grief of Bubb Doddington at least, 
his Royal Highness had rather suddenly de- 
parted this life, and with him seemed to have 
departed all hope of the long delayed peerage. 
Nevertheless, that gentleman's losses at 
cards, and his incautious loans to the Heir- 
Apparent, met with a recompense at last. 
A Minister was found to perform that which 
all others had been satisfied with promising ; 
and Bubb Doddington, to his infinite grati- 
fication, became Baron Melcombe of Mel- 
combe Regis. The honours, however, he 
had so long prayed for, he did not long re- 
tain; for he had scarcely got familiar with 
them, when he was deprived, by the hand 
that respects neither rank nor wealth, of 
both his nobility and his life. 

" So the Crown Prince of Hanover is gone 
at last ! " wrote the steady Jacobite. " This 
ought to have been an advantage on our 
side; but as he is no loss to his friends, he 

n2 



268 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

can be no gain to us. I lament much being 
obliged to add, that his less fortunate cousin 
has so grievously fallen off from the promise 
his youth afforded, that many of the most 
staunch adherents of his family here are in- 
different to this removal of a competitor for 
the throne, to which he has so undeniable a 
claim. 

"Few things have given me more pain 
than the discreditable proceedings by which 
his Royal Highness chooses to be known. 
I am afraid the Stuart cause is now utterly 
hopeless, and that we must reconcile our- 
selves to the House of Hanover as well as 
we can. This may be a bitter pill to some 
of us — but it will act beneficially on our 
fortunes, if not on our frames. As for me, 
I am grown as careless of all such sublunary 
matters as might be expected from one whose 
whole thoughts are on the Tabernacle. As 
I told our friend Lady Townshend, Guelph 
or Stuart are nought in the eyes of the 
Elect! 'As far as I know of them,' she re- 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 269 

plied, with a mighty peculiar shake of her 
head, ' both are very naught indeed.' 

" Were I not acquainted with the pitiable 
state of your poor benighted soul, in the 
very stronghold of Papistry, I would ac- 
quaint you with the outpourings of that 
vial of righteousness who hath so completely 
weaned me from the vanities of the world. 
By the way, I am told that you can get 
some monstrous pretty trinkets at Rome — I 
think you may send me a handsome neck- 
lace, and a brooch, and two or three of the 
better sort of rings. 

" Ah ! my beloved niece, the Rev. Mr. 
Sniveltone's discourses are the most moving 
that ever were heard in this vale of sin. I 
can think of nothing else. Indeed, I have 
forsworn all worldly vanities, that I might 
devote myself to the due consideration of my 
eternal weal. Old Lady Snufflewell said 
to me, t'other night, as we were playing 
the last game, c What an edifying sermon 
was that we heard yesterday ! — Spades are 



270 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

trumps, my dear/ says she, as though to re- 
mind me I should return her lead. ' I feel 
it a priceless blessing to listen to so powerful 
a denouncer of the temptations of Satan — 
That is my trick, Ma r am, if you please,' she 
added — ' Indeed, I can say with truth, I 
never was made so sensible of the nothing- 
ness of this world — We score five, Ma'am; 
three by honours and two by cards. ' 

" I almost forget what followed, except 
that we took advantage of the deals to 
sing the praises of this Chosen Vessel; 
and, directly we had scored our points, 
rivalled each other in the expression of 
our congratulations on possessing such a 
saint." 

Such now was the Dowager Lady Furbe- 
low and her great political associates. The 
eccentric spirits of the world of beauty, gal- 
lantry, and fashion, had been transformed by 
the sobering hand of time into a knot of 
pious old Methodists, whose nights were 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 271 

devoted to the card-table as zealously 
as their days were given to the con- 
venticle. Peace be to their manes! Whe- 
they have played their cards well or ill in 
the great game of life, it is now useless to 
inquire — suffice it to say, that true to their 
ruling passion, even in their graves, they 
await "the last trump." 



272 STRAWBERRY HILL. 



CHAPTER XII. 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 



" There is a tide in the affairs of men," 
which our wandering Savans of The British 
Association for the Advancement of Science 
have not as yet embraced in their tidal inves- 
tigations. Nevertheless, we think it presents 
phenomena at least equally worthy of ob- 
servation with those one of this enlightened 
brotherhood discovered in " the flame of a 
common candle." 

The current of human life exhibits as 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 273 

regular an ebbing and flowing as may be 
witnessed every day in the week by any of 
the innumerable natural philosophers who 
" go down to the sea in ships " at the cost of 
eighteen-pence the excursion. When there 
is an unusually high tide in the commercial 
world, it will throw up such strange animals 
as a Railway King — just as its prototype, in 
some extraordinary vagary, sends on our 
shores a spermaceti whale. But when the 
tide is very low indeed, it strands all manner 
of creatures, who, after a long struggle, 
have found it impossible to keep their heads 
above water. It is fatal to Directors, Pro- 
visional Committee-men, and to more singular 
examples of the genus Cervus, than ever 
were overwhelmed by the Great Flood, or 
brought to light by the unwearied diggings 
of fossil geologists. 

That this flux and reflux may also be 
attributed to the moon, is more than probable. 
The records of Hanwell and St, Luke's afford 
strong grounds for this hypothesis, and they 

N o 



274 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

are confirmed by the unanswerable evidence 
of Coroners 7 Inquests. That prodigious 
lunatic, the Ocean, was never more in want 
of a strait waistcoat, than are the indi- 
viduals on whom the force of the tide in their 
affairs has carried out of their proper posi- 
tion in society. Whether they take the 
shape of city dignitaries or experimental 
legislators, they require to be restrained, or 
confined to a padded room, or they are sure 
to do mischief to every body, and knock 
their heads against everything. Y\ 7 ith the 
millionnaire, the moon seems always at the 
full. His actions are only to be accounted 
for by the charitable theory, which makes 
people who have exhibited too intense a 
desire of appropriation — non compos. 

Two subjects, having an intimate connec- 
tion with each other, excite our remarks. 

" Time and tide," says the proverb, " wait 
for no man." Perhaps we have illustrated 
the latter sufficiently; let us now have a 
word or two respecting our venerable friend 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 275 

with the forelock. It is true, he is a prodi- 
gious stickler for punctuality. He waits for 
neither man nor woman — but be it remem- 
bered there are some individuals who will not 
wait for him, of whom it has been already said, 
" Panting Time toils after " in vain. We 
allude not to those distinguished characters 
who have so confidently been pronounced 
" a century before their age. n It would be 
in vain indeed, even were the veteran pedes- 
trian to lighten himself of his perpetual 
scythe and hour-glass, to overtake any one 
having the start of him a hundred years. 

Some persons have singular privileges, and 
do with him very much as they like. They 
are those independent domestics who put the 
clock slow or fast, according to the whim 
of the moment. These are writers of fiction . 
It is with them only that Time goes all 
sorts of paces. He ambles withal — he trots 
withal — he gallops withal — and, honesty 
obliges us to add, too frequently he creeps 
withal. However, so far are we from allow- 



27G STRAWBERRY HILL. 

ing him to creep with us, we mean to stretch 
our privilege to an extent beyond all prece- 
dent. We must, therefore, request the 
gentle reader, (of course,) to understand that 
no less than fifty years have elapsed since 
the last meeting of the hero and heroine of 
this story. 

It is of no more use protesting against 
such a proceeding, than for the British Go- 
vernment to protest against the matrimonial 
manoeuvrings of the King of the French. The 
Author, however, has an excuse for his appa- 
rently unwarrantable step, which Louis Phi- 
lippe had not. With him it is not the result 
of choice, but of necessity. As no doubt the 
reader is sufficiently aware, " Truth is 
strange — stranger than fiction " — and the 
very strange part of Truth in this case is, 
that the hero of these three volumes flou- 
rished full half a century after " our last 
advices." 

And here let us make another justifica- 
tion, for what may have seemed no less a 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 277 

singularity. The locality which gives a 
name to this story, has hitherto not been 
indicated in the narrative. Now, although 
we could at once refer to usage, among some 
of our contemporaries, whose titles it would 
puzzle a greater conjuror even than M. Phi- 
lippe to connect with their stories in any 
way, we, more rationally, lay claim to 
toleration on the broad basis of matter-of- 
fact. Our excuse is identical with that of 
the fair Tilburina, who " could not see the 
Spanish fleet, because 'twas not in sight." 
Up to the date to which we have carried the 
adventures of our hero, the place to which 
he has given so durable a celebrity, as far at 
least as he was concerned, did not exist. 

We cannot venture, in the last chapter of 
the last volume of a novel, to enter upon 
details. In transporting the reader fifty 
years, we can only afford him as rapid a 
glance at the carte du pays, as he could ob- 
tain in a journey of fifty miles by an express 
train on the Great Western. He must 



280 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

Having surfeited upon pictures, bronzes, 
enamels, carvings, china, and every variety 
of elegant curiosity, he was led into an ample 
apartment, in which there appeared to be a 
countless collection, or rather selection, of 
books; many of which, it was well known, 
had cost the owner very large sums. Xot 
the least interesting part of the collection 
was a considerable number which was 
pointed out to him, as quite as much the 
work of the proprietor, as was the house ; 
for when he intermitted his labours in 
building, planting, and furnishing, he had 
quite as industriously taken to writing, 
printing, and publishing. 

It is difficult to say whether more mar- 
vellous things were circulated of this ex- 
traordinary building, or of its extraordinary 
owner. His name became famous far and 
near as an antiquary, an historian, a poet, 
a virtuoso, and an architect : he was an 
Admirable Crichton anions: collectors — a 
Prince in his patronage of art; and from 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 281 

the palaces of the King of England to the 
cottages of the neighbouring labourers, his 
name was a theme of popular gossip. No 
one talked so much of anything as of Straw- 
berry Hill — the name that had been given 
to this new gothic castle. No building in 
England was half so popular. Princely 
Chats worth, and imperial Windsor, were 
overlooked as much as stately Sion, and 
formal Kew. A pilgrimage to Strawberry 
Hill appeared the same thing to the Christian 
of taste, as one to Mecca was to the good 
Mahometan; and the road through Brent- 
ford, as well as that from Richmond, were 
daily thronged by crowds of eager pedes- 
trians and equestrians, while " the silent 
highway " of the silver Thames bore an 
equal freight of proselytes to the faith of the 
modern gothic. 

The fifty years are passed ; and the won- 
derful building, though less a novelty, was 
still an object of great gratification and 
curiosity — indeed, in some respect, curiosity 



284 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

of the neighbouring crows -feet, wrinkles, 
and other evidences of life's wear and tear. 

A dressing gown of a dark yet handsome 
material wrapped his person entirely, except 
one leg, which projecting a little above the 
other, disclosed, by its numerous wrappers 
and shoeless foot, that the individual was 
a martyr to that aristocratic malady, the 
gout; and by an occasional twitching of 
the muscles of the face, and a movement of 
the thin ruffled hands toAvards the afflicted 
member, it seemed quite as evident that he 
still suffered paroxysms of pain. 

The invalid was the Earl of Orford — 
respecting whom the world he appeared to 
have abandoned, after he had borne the repu- 
tation of being one of its choicest spirits for 
half a century, circulated such an abundance 
of curious gossip. Yes, the man who had 
survived the court of George I., in which he 
may be said to have been born — and that of 
George II., of which he was at once the 
ornament and illustrator — and had been for 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 285 

an ordinary man's life one of the notabilities 
of the reign of George III., was obliged to be 
satisfied with one apartment in his own 
house, which he could only traverse by being 
wheeled in his chair from one part to another. 
The apartment in which he was so " cabin- 
ed, cribbed, confined," might perhaps have 
reconciled almost any person to its smallness, 
by the variety and richness of its decorations. 
There could be no question that vast ex- 
pense and very considerable taste had been 
lavished in its adornment. It was called 
the Blue Breakfast Room — probably from 
its blue paper, and blue-and- white hangings. 
A chimney-piece intended to represent the 
gothic style, divided attention with the win- 
dows which were in the same taste. Every 
available space on the walls was covered 
with paintings, drawings, enamels, and 
framed prints ; and every nook and corner 
elsewhere were crowded with china of the 
choicest kinds, alabaster and other orna- 
ments, and handsome articles of plate. 



282 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

had increased, for in consequence of the diffi- 
culty there was in the way of its gratifica- 
tion, very few persons could obtain a sight 
of the treasures of Strawberry Hill: its 
lord, who now bore the title of Earl of 
Orford, had grown very fastidious, as well 
as very old, and would only permit admis- 
sion to his castle when the visitor was 
known to him, or was recommended for 
that especial favour by a mutual friend. 
He was known to be an invalid — it was 
notorious he disliked trouble in his intervals 
of health — and when indisposed, which had 
latterly become frequent, he was rarely ac- 
cessible to his most intimate friends. 

In proportion as the difficulty of admission 
increased, grew the desire of those who knew 
Strawberry Hill and its eccentric possessor 
only by reputation, to obtain a nearer 
acquaintance with both; and all sorts of 
manoeuvres were put in practice, having this 
object in view. But almost always the 
curious were doomed to be satisfied with 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 283 

the marvels that were current in society- 
respecting the modern castle and its 
treasures; and to be provoked by the in- 
numerable anecdotes in circulation illustra- 
tive of the wit, the talent, and the singularity 
of its venerable owner. 

It was in the year 1795, that an old 
gentleman was sitting, or rather reclining, 
on a curious specimen of those wheeled seats, 
usually called invalid chairs. He was evi- 
dently not far from his eightieth year. His 
face was thin and pale ; and from the drawing 
in of the mouth, there could be no doubt his 
jaws were toothless. His head could boast 
of but little hair, which grew mostly at the 
back, which was sprinkled with powder and 
carefully tied with a ribbon, in the fashion 
then common in the polite world towards 
the close of the last century. 

But though his physiognomy gave so many 
traces of the foot -prints of time, there was 
still a vivacity in his clear eyes which seemed 
to give the he to the unequivocal antiquity 



284 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

of the neighbouring crows -feet, wrinkles, 
and other evidences of life's wear and tear. 

A dressing gown of a dark yet handsome 
material wrapped his person entirely, except 
one leg, which projecting a little above the 
other, disclosed, by its numerous wrappers 
and shoeless foot, that the individual was 
a martyr to that aristocratic malady, the 
gout; and by an occasional twitching of 
the muscles of the face, and a movement of 
the thin ruffled hands towards the afflicted 
member, it seemed quite as evident that he 
still suffered paroxysms of pain. 

The invalid was the Earl of Orford — 
respecting whom the world he appeared to 
have abandoned, after he had borne the repu- 
tation of being one of its choicest spirits for 
half a century, circulated such an abundance 
of curious gossip. Yes, the man who had 
survived the court of George I., in which he 
may be said to have been born — and that of 
George II., of which he was at once the 
ornament and illustrator — and had been for 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 285 

an ordinary man's life one of the notabilities 
of the reign of George III., was obliged to be 
satisfied with one apartment in his own 
house, which he could only traverse by being 
wheeled in his chair from one part to another. 
The apartment in which he was so " cabin- 
ed, cribbed, confined," might perhaps have 
reconciled almost any person to its smallness, 
by the variety and richness of its decorations. 
There could be no question that vast ex- 
pense and very considerable taste had been 
lavished in its adornment. It was called 
the Blue Breakfast Room — probably from 
its blue paper, and blue-and- white hangings. 
A chimney-piece intended to represent the 
gothic style, divided attention with the win- 
dows which were in the same taste. Every 
available space on the walls was covered 
with paintings, drawings, enamels, and 
framed prints; and every nook and corner 
elsewhere were crowded with china of the 
choicest kinds, alabaster and other orna- 
ments, and handsome articles of plate. 



286 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

Marqueterie secretaries, with a fair allow- 
ance of chairs and tables, and all other 
necessary articles of upholstery, shewed that 
the apartment was not deficient in any of 
those innumerable things auctioneers place 
under the generic title of " Requisites," over- 
abundant as was the supply of what could 
not very well come under that designation. 

But while we are describing this memor- 
able room, we are committing the unpar- 
donable rudeness of keeping an elderly 
gentleman standing — who had all this time 
remained at a little distance from the Earl, 
apparently about to take his departure. 
There was no mistaking his erect military 
carriage — even if the gentleman had not 
been distinguished by the uniform of an 
officer of the highest distinction in the 
British army. His features were extremely 
pleasing, and indicated that he had been 
eminently handsome in his youth ; and as 
he carried the plumed hat of a General 
Officer on his left arm, while his right hand 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 287 

rested on a chair, he displayed a figure 
which, still commandiDg and dignified, had 
doubtless at one time been the perfection of 
manly symmetry. His countenance was 
grave — much more so even than that of his 
companion — but occasionally there seemed 
to come a smile over his features, that indi- 
cated a secret satisfaction either in himself 
or his associate, that he did not care entirely 
to conceal. 

The reader will be so good as to under- 
stand that these personages were his par- 
ticular' acquaintances, Horace Walpole and 
Henry Conway. In the fifty years that had 
elapsed, the whirligig Time had made strange 
revolutions with the cousins, with whom he 
had brought about his revenges with a ven- 
geance. The young statesman, as we have 
described, had taken some strong distaste of 
public life, and altogether abandoned the 
dreams of his youthful ambition, for the 
reputation of a restorer of gothic architec- 
ture, a man of letters, and the founder of 



288 STEAWBEEBY HILL. 

Strawberry Hill. By the death not only of 
his elder brothers, but of all his nearest 
kindred, the younger son had succeeded to 
his father's earldom. He who had once so 
feverishly aspired for political distinction, 
was content to be an amateur printer, pub- 
lisher, author, collector — anything but a 
Minister. 

And how, in the meantime, had fared 
that more quiet spirit, that could so readily 
discover the bright side of things? The 
honours of his own profession had not con- 
tented him, though he had risen step by 
step till he had attained the highest : he 
had become a Field Marshal — he had filled 
the post of Commander-in-chief. Ultimately 
Marshal Conway had been called to his Ma- 
jesty's Councils, in the very responsible office 
of Secretary of State. There was ample rea- 
son for the once light-hearted soldier looking 
the gravest of grave and reverend seigniors. 

" I must acknowledge, my dear Marshal," 
said the Earl, addressing his cousin in a 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 289 

tone in which mirth seemed struggling with 
gravity, " I cannot help acknowledging, un- 
gracious and ungallant as it may seem in 
one who has been so staunch a friend to her 
dear sex, that I don't care to see this Prin- 
cess of yours. With all due respect to our 
departed friend, who says, 

" Even in their ashes live their wonted fires '* 

I cannot help coming to the conclusion that 
Time has long since tolled the curfew which 
should have rung out my fires to the last 
spark. But, as you say this exalted old 
lady has travelled such a prodigious distance 
to behold me and my belongings, it would 
be an intolerable piece of rudeness in me to 
disappoint her. She speaks English, you 
say? " 

The other answered, that the Princess 
Castrucci spoke it with as much facility 
as her own language. 

"Then I '11 tell you what I will do, 
Marshal," he continued. " This confounded 

vol. in. o 



290 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

gout makes it quite impossible that I can 
wait upon your Princess — even were I not 
too old by a vast deal for playing the agree- 
able to her. Your Princess may be suffi- 
ciently antiquated, as you say, but of course 
she requires a mighty different sort of 
cavalier to what I am likely to make her. 
Prometheus as I am, fixed to this rock 
upon wheels, with a vulture gnawing — not 
my liver, but my great toe, — I am the last 
person likely to do justice or credit to Straw- 
berry Hill; so, my dear Marshal, as come 
she will, I determine that you shall receive 
her, and escort her throughout the castle, 
explaining and describing all you think 
worthy of notice ; and then, if you like, you 
can bring her here : only you must prepare 
her for meeting the deplorable piece of mor- 
tality she has taken the trouble to come so 
far to look at." 

Marshal Conway promised acquiescence ; 
and then it was soon arranged that the ex- 
pected visitor was to be received with the 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 291 

honour due to her rank, as her equipage 
drove to the door; and the Blue Breakfast 
Room was to be the last apartment she was 
to be led into by her military escort. The 
Marshal said little on the subject — indeed 
he was unusually reserved: nevertheless 
there was a twinkle in his eye, and a smile 
playing about the corners of his mouth, 
indicating that the arrangement was one in 
which he felt — though he did not choose 
more openly to betray — much satisfaction. 

In a few minutes the Earl was left alone, 
his cousin having been summoned by a no- 
tice of the arrival of the Princess ; and he 
had ample opportunity to reflect on the 
honour he had received. But it so hap- 
pened that Princesses were no novelties at 
Strawberry Hill — partly from a near kins- 
woman of his own having married into the 
Royal Family, and partly from the extreme 
favour in which the edifice and its treasures 
were held at Court. The Earl of Orford, 
therefore, did not bestow many thoughts 

o 2 



292 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

upon his visitor — and few as these were, 
they were but little to her advantage. In 
his heart he could not help considering her 
as an intruder. 

He had taken up a costly illuminated 
manuscript — which, with a variety of 
other antiquarian bijoux, lay on the table 
before him, and dipping his pen into a 
silver stanclish, commenced writing what 
appeared to be a description of the work 
and its ornaments. He suddenly came to 
a pause in his work. His thoughts had 
wandered into another channel. The scrip- 
tural scenes* and Komish ceremonies, so 
delicately delineated on the vellum of the 
priceless little volume in his hand, had 
called up memories, entombed for half a cen- 
tury, of her whose religion it illustrated. 

It is extraordinary what stubborn stuff 
our natures may become. In some folks a 
short period will render the heart as com- 
plete a fossil, as ever was created under the 
operation of some three or four thousand 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 293 

years. And very old bachelors are gene- 
rally fossilized out of all recollection of ten- 
der sympathy. If they own such a thing 
as a heart, it is in a situation wondrous 
similar to that of a toad in a block of gra- 
nite. There are instances, on the other 
hand, where the affections of the octogena- 
rian seemed to burn like an asbestos lamp 
in ancient tombs. All their mortality may 
be falling into that gradual decay which 
no skill can avert — may be perishing utterly 
and helplessly to that repulsive caput mor- 
tuum, that miserable residuum of dry bones, 
to which the mightiest must come at last — 
when, in the crucible which retains these 
worthless compounds, some have discovered 
that true elixir vitce which alone has the 
power of renewing to the aged the spirit of 
their youth. 

The venerable Earl glanced round his 
handsome apartment. But on the many 
beautiful objects on which his eyes fell, they 
rested without satisfaction. He could not 



294 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

help asking himself, for whom these trea- 
sures had been collected? He was childless 
and wifeless. The doom which had de- 
prived him of the one being, for whom, like 
the patriarch, his soul had wrestled as it 
were with an angel, in the shape of filial 
love, had filled his nature with distaste for 
every thing approaching a second attach- 
ment. And he was now, after long divert- 
ing his mind from his fate, by cultivating 
a taste for intellectual pleasures, standing 
on the brink of that dread gulf to which 
all are destined, unable to take with him 
the slightest portion of his acquisitions, and 
having no one belonging to him on whom 
they could be bestowed. 

A man who has no offspring is scarcely 
half a man: he has lost the link which 
should connect him with the future. He 
may have antecedents, but no posterity. In 
short, he is but an abrupt remnant of that 
mortal fabric which nature has provided to 
be of one piece from time to eternity. Worst 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 295 

of all, wanting them, his life is deprived 
of those ministers of Almighty Love, who 
in their childhood surround him like che- 
rubs, and on his death-bed are the attend- 
ing seraphs to usher him to the gates of 
heaven. 

Thoughts such as these passed through 
his lordship's mind, subduing it to a femi- 
nine softness, that rendered him, in his ill 
state of health, and with his debilitated 
frame, more than ever unfit to receive stran- 
gers : but there was no relief. His sadden- 
ing reveries had lasted long, and he heard 
loud voices approaching him, which he soon 
discovered to be those of his kinsman and 
a female. With more than the customary 
irritability of an invalid, he pronounced a 
wish respecting " the over-curious old wo- 
man," more remarkable for its earnestness 
than its civility ; and if he did not resolve 
to be absolutely rude to her, was far from 
desiring to render himself agreeable. 

Presently they entered. The visitor had 



296 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

been shewn every portion of the remarkable 
edifice, the celebrity of which had reached 
her in her own far distant land : she had 
inspected the Tribune, the Library, the Cha- 
pel, the Hall, the Armoury, the Great Clois- 
ter, the Refectory, the Waiting Room, the 
China Room, the Tea Room, the Little Par- 
lour, the Green Closet, the Gallery, and the 
Round Drawing Room — ay, her attentive 
Cicerone had led her through the Yellow 
Bedchamber or Beauty Room, the Green Bed 
Chamber in the Round Tower, the Blue 
Bedchamber, the Red Chamber, the Star 
Chamber, the Holbein Chamber, and the 
Great North Bedchamber ; and whether 
the attentions of the handsome veteran, or 
the great variety of pleasing objects she 
had met with, had afforded her the most 
gratification, she seemed in high spirits. 

Marshal Conway, with a gallantry that 
distinguished gentlemen of the old school, 
led the lady towards the invalid's chair, and 
with a stately gravity becoming his high 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 297 

command and the rank of his friend's guest, 
introduced the Princess Castrucci to the 
Earl of Orford. His Lordship was in no 
humour for any particular courtesy, but his 
long habits of politeness would not allow 
him to neglect the rules of good breeding. 
He made a courteous inclination of his head, 
as he raised his eyes towards the unseason- 
able intruder. He had expected to behold 
an old woman, and an old woman he cer- 
tainly did see — the ivory-headed staff on 
which she leant, and the ear-trumpet she 
held, were ample proofs that his visitor had 
arrived at an advanced period of life — but 
he could not help confessing to himself that 
there was a sort of elegance in her ex- 
tremely neat and becoming costume, and 
a pleasantness in her well-preserved fea- 
tures, which shewed traces of extraordinary 
beauty, that rendered her in outward ap- 
pearance the most agreeable old woman he 
had ever seen. 

He was subdued so far as to express a 



298 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

graceful welcome to his mansion ; and after 
seeing her seated on a fauteuil, placed by the 
gallant veteran opposite his own seat, he cour- 
teeously thanked her Highness for the honour 
she had done him, and hoped she had not been 
disappointed by her visit, to so great an 
extent as he, better knowing the deficiency 
of Strawberry Hill, had reason to fear she 
had been. His Lordship did not notice the 
earnest scrutiny and touching interest with 
which the Princess was regarding him as 
he spoke. His eyesight was much im- 
paired, or he would have seen that tears 
were trembling on her lids, and that her 
venerable head shook with an unusual 
emotion. These signs, however, soon 
disappeared, as her Highness began to 
express the intense gratification she had ex- 
perienced. 

His Lordship's reserve sensibly diminished, 
as he listened to the lively remarks of his 
visitor. He had never heard opinions better 
expressed; her knowledge of art was not 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 299 

only unusual — there was originality in every 
sentence she uttered on the subject. For 
such a companion he felt he could make 
some efforts; and there presently ensued a 
long and extremely animated gossip between 
them, on a vast variety of subjects. Art, 
literature, poetry, and the drama, were in 
turns exhausted of their interest: from 
letters they proceeded to persons ; and states- 
men, diplomatists, beauties, wits, and all 
the celebrities of the last half century, passed 
in review, with an abundance of illustrated 
anecdote, as characteristic as it was en- 
tertaining. 

Lord Orford had never been so agreeable, 
even in his most entertaining days — his wit 
appeared as exhaustless as his memory : but 
he now began to hesitate, and seemed more 
than once about to say something which 
he scarcely liked to venture upon. The 
Princess had been giving him a thousand 
charming reminiscences of friends he had 
known in Italy, during his early tour in 



300 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

that delightful country. His cousin had 
unaccountably left the position he had taken 
up near him, when he had placed the lady 
in her seat ; and was in a distant part of the 
room, intently examining a print he had seen 
before at least a hundred times. 

" I was about to ask your Highness," he 
observed at last, with a somewhat unsteady 
voice, " respecting a family once settled at 
Rome, that, in the unhappy time of 1745, 
are believed to have suffered from their 
loyalty to the unfortunate Prince they 
served with such admirable devotion — I 
mean the Falklands?" 

It was now the lady's turn to exhibit a 
little hesitation. 

" I remember," he resumed, " reading an 
account of my Lord Falkland's demise. But 
he had a daughter — an only child, I believe. 
I never could learn what became of her. 
No one of my friends who visited Rome 
could learn anything of Miss Falkland, sub- 
sequently to her father's decease. I knew 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 301 

her once, and should have been gratified 
could I have learned that she retained 
any recollection of our acquaintance. There 
can be little doubt that a young lady of her 
singular attractions made a suitable union." 

" She did not marry/' replied the Princess, 
in a voice still more faltering than his own 
had been. " She was faithful to an attach- 
ment she had formed under circumstances 
that forbade its consummation." 

There ensued a silence between them of 
several seconds. 

" Possibly the reason of there being no 
trace of her at Pome, was occasioned by 
her having embraced a religious life, and 
retired from the world of which she was so 
graceful an ornament? " said the Earl. 

" Arabella Falkland did not fly for refuge 
from her troubles to the sanctity of the 
convent," replied the Princess, her hands 
equally tremulous with her voice. " She 
was persuaded to take the name of her 
mother's family, having succeeded to a con- 



302 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

siderable property in a remote part of the 
Roman States, to which she retired. She 
lived in the strictest seclusion; but every- 
day of the long life that was granted to her 
by a beneficent Deity — morning, noon, and 
night — her earnest prayers mingled with 
her heartfelt benedictions for him who had 
purchased her happiness by the sacrifice of 
his own." 

Another pause ensued, equally eloquent. 
The unusual moisture in the old lord's eyes, 
possibly prevented him from seeing that 
tears were chasing each other down the 
cheeks of his venerable companion. 

" Does she live? " he at last ventured to 
inquire. 

" She is here ! " was murmured in reply. 

Marshal Conway had left the well known 
print — had left the room. There was no 
spectator of the simultaneous action that 
locked two trembling, feeble, wasted hands 
together. He had been made aware of the 
feeling which had induced the venerable 



STRAWBERRY HILL. 303 

Princess to visit this country, and the 
object of her affections; and readily lent- 
il imself to the accomplishment of her wishes 
so far as they regarded an introduction to 
his kinsman. 

In the fulfilment of another desire he was 
equally instrumental. It was her last visit 
to Strawberry Hill — her last interview with 
its lord. The unusual excitement she had 
experienced, was fatal to her. On returning 
from her interesting visit, she was attacked 
with paralysis, and in a few days her remains 
were consigned to the family vault, belong- 
ing to her long lost, long loved home — 
Falkland Court. 

In a short time afterwards, a hatchment 
made its appearance in front of Strawberry 
Hill, announcing that the same fate had 
attended its lord. So well had been kept 
the secret of his attachment, that it was not 
till the lamentable dispersion of the col- 
lections the Earl of Orford had employed 
his long life in forming, that the only 



304 STRAWBERRY HILL. 

evidence of it was discovered in the manner 
already related in the Introduction to these 
volumes. Numerous conjectures have been 
made as to the cause of the abrunt abandon- 
ment of Horace Walpole's political career, 
and of the bitterness of spirit which sub- 
sequently so prominently pervaded his 
thoughts and feelings : though the Author 
is not confident that the solution of the 
mystery furnished in this story is the cor- 
rect one, he trusts it may be received as an 
apology for him, till better testimony in his 
favour makes its appearance. 



THE END. 

