
LOVE'S TREASON; 

OR, 

THE VENDETTA AND THE AVENGER. 



CHAPTER I. 



OK BOARD THE SLAVER— BLACK BOSCO — A MAN-OF-WAR IS 

SIGHT. 

The perpendicular rays of the summer tropic sun played 
down in all their fierce fire on the island of Cuba — bright- 
est jewel in the Spanish crown — and the surrounding seas. 

It is about noon at the end of June, 1863 — a time when 
the terrible conflict between the Northern and Southern 
States of America is still being waged with relentless fury. 

At the present moment, however, we have not to deal 
with that eventful struggle, though in the course of our 
fctory it must be introduced. I wish to direct the attention 
of the reader to the rocky and reef-bound coast on the 
northern side of the island of Cuba — that part between Cape 
St. Antonio, the westernmost point of the island, and the 
splendid port and town of Havannah. 

The navigation near the shore is here exceedingly dan- 
gerous, by reason of the shoals and rocks called Los Cabe- 
rallos, which extend, with little interruption, from Cape 
Antonio to Bahia Hinda, some distance west of Havannah. 

These rocks and keys, as they are called, do not constitute 
k continuous line of reef, but are spriukled about at short 
intervals from one another, and at distances from the shore 
tanging from a half to three-quarters of a mile or more . 

Some were altogether sunken, and could only be avoided 
by their presence being known to the captain of the Tessel 



2 LOVE'S TREASON'. 

sailing in close proximity to this dangerous coast, or by a 
vigilant look-out from the mast-head. 

Under anv circumstances, even with the brightest look- 
out and the most skilful and well-informed pilot, the navi- 
gation, near shore, amidst those reefs and rocks, visible and 
sunken, could not but be most dangerous. 

One would naturally fancy that no captain would trust 
his vessel within a mile of them, who could possibly help 
it. 

And with a light, pleasant, fair wind, a vessel rigged as a 
three-masted topsail schooner may be seen making her way 
eastward along the coast. 

Not only is she close to the dangerous reefs and rocks, 
but at times actually passes between, and darts inside, 
p] acing herself between them and the land. 

Again she is steered out through some narrow channel, 
with the sea breaking in foam on the rocks a few fathoms 
on either side, and again after awhile she dives in amongst 
the dangers which most commanders would shudderingly 
avoid, but which her captain seems to court and rejoice in. 

Let us take a nearer look at this vessel, and imagine our- 
selves on her dock. 

Sharp in the bow, she gradually widens till her greatest 
beam is reached, not as is usual, nearly amidships, but much 
farther aft, giving her much the appearance of a wedge, 
viewed from aloft. 

Though with great breadth of beam from the deck to a 
little below the water line, from this she sloped rapidly into 
the keel. 

This sharp build below water, nnd great breadth above, 
gave plenty of room on the upper deck and 'tween decks, 
but little or no hold beneath for cargo. 

She was rigged as a topsail schooner, having an enormous 
tbre-and-aft mainsail and foresail and balloon jib, with 
mizen and gall' topsail aft. 

Her topsails were very large for a vessel of her size, 
apparently about two hundred tons, and she could sot, 
moreover, a large square foresail, lower and topmast stun, 
sails. 

With all these sails spread, she would present a perfect 



ON BOATTD THE RLAVETt. 3 

jloua of canvas to the wind, and from her sharp buiM and 
•*,lear run should prove a very fast clipper. 

On the afterpart of her deck, near the cabin skylight, are 
two small brass cannon, loaded to the muzzle and ready for 
firing. 

They are pointed, not through portholes, but towards tho 
forward part of her own deck. 

From this fact, and from their small size, it would appear 
they could not be meant for offence against other vessels, 
or even to resist an attack from without, bat rather to be 
used in case of mutiny on board. 

Abaft the main hatch there lay on deck, covered with 
tarpaulin, a long, cylindrical object. And before the main 
hatch, also covered with tarpaulin, was another object also 
cylindrical in shape, but not so long as the other. 

The first of these is a smoke funnel, and a slight volume 
of smoke curling up from the stump, not lowered like the 
upper part, told that her fires were alight, and that steam 
could very soon foe got up. 

The vessel was a steamer, although viewing her from a 
little distance not even a sailor could guess such to be the 
fact. 

At least, if not exactly a steamer in that sense of depend- 
ing altogether or principally on steam, she had engines, 
and an auxiliary screw. 

The other shorter object covered with tarpaulin is a 
long rifled swivel gun, the only armament she carries at all 
formidable. 

About tho forepart of the deck the crew are congregated, 
as great a set of desperadoes and as stalwart ruffians as one 
would wish to see. 

About half of them are mulattoes — Malays and Madagas- 
car men principally, for there are reasons against the em- 
ployment of African blacks on board this vessel. 

The rest appear to be Spaniards, Mexicans, or Brazilians, 
by their costume and the gold earrings they all wear. 

The crew, all told, number twenty-eight men, a very good 
complement for a small vessel. Besides those, there are ei^ht 
stokers, engineers, and firemen, and seven more, including 
boatswain, carpenter, blacksmiths, cook, steward. &c. 



4 LOVE'S TREASON. 

This, with the captain and two mates, makes up a comple- 
ment of forty-six, all told. 

And now we will come right aft to the binnacle, where 
stands the mate, Pedro, and the captain, Bosco Xegro (Black 
Bosco), by his side, directing his course, and conversing in a 
low tone of voice. 

• " ThiG trip, Pedro, we've cleared the value of the ship and 
the cargo we took out ten times over. I would not take le« 
than a thousand bright Spanish doubloons for my share." (A 
gold doubloon is worth about three pounds ten shilliu-a 
sterling.) 

"Caragol" replied the mate, "we have indeed been 
lucky." 

" Such small loss too. Ody eighteen out of three hundred 
and sixty ; it is magnificent. My share should be close on 
to five hundred doubloons." 

" Aye, that it should, and well earned, too. The way you 
tricked that rascally old King Kettle out of his canal load 
of thirty, and then shot him through the head to put an end 
to further disputes, was magnificent." 

At this moment there arose a loud and terrific yell from 
the fore hatchway — a piercing wail of agony, as though the 
souls of some of the damned were howling in their mist ly 
for mercy. 

" Whafs all that about ? " 

" Oh, I expect it's a blackbird dead ; they always set up 
that yell when one of them dies — curse them ! " 

" D — n ! " muttered the Black Bosco ; " five and twenty 
doubloons gone." 

Scarcely had he spoken when another and more unearthly 
yell went up to Heaven from the main hatchway. 

" Why, there is not a chap dead down the main hold too, 
I hope ? " 

" No, no, I guess not," said the mate, who had care of the 
cargo ; " it's a way those blackies have got : when one lot 
sets up a howlin' the others do the same jusfc to keep em 
company." 

" Here, I'll take the helm, Pedro. You just go forward 
and fire a charge of dust-shot down the fore and main hatch- 
ways ; that '11 quiet 'em, I reckon." 



ON BOARD A SLAtER. 5 

The mate went forward to execute this cruel order — not 
an unusual one with Black Bosco. 

The two men, although both half-bred Spaniards, spoke 
English, having been much in the Southern States of 
America. 

There was another advantage in speaking English to one 
another. 

No one else on board could understand the language, so 
they had no need to be afraid of being overheard, and occa- 
sionally matters were discussed between them which, had 
some of the desperadoes of the crew known of, would have 
put the slave captain in great danger of an unexpected 
stab from one of the long, cruel-looking knives every man 
carried. 

Of course the reader has ere now discovered that this is a 
slaver, just returned from the coast of Africa, after having 
made a successful run so far. 

And now she is almost in sight of her destination. 

A little creek, not marked down on any chart, about 
twenty miles to the westward of Havannah, is where she is 
to run in and land her live cargo. 

This creek or inlet forms the mouth of a small river or 
stream, which flows through the estate of a wealthy noble- 
man and slave proprietor, one Don Jose de Malatesta. 

He it is who owns this slaver ; it is his money which has 
equipped and sent forth this expedition to the African coast, 
as he has many before. 

A man of great wealth, yet greedy for more, Don Jose is 
active, cruel, unscrupulous, and remorseless, caring not how 
he attains his end. 

The mate Pedro went forward, and carried out to the 
letter the brutal orders of his captain, shouting out, how- 
ever, before he fired down the hatchway, in their native 
tongue — 

" Mind your eyes there, you fellows : I'm going to shoot 
among you." 

At least, he has some little humanity, a looker-on might 
remark, on hearing this warning addressed to the wretched 
victims. 

Nothing of the kind. 



6 love's treason. 

For all the worthy Pedro cared, every living man down 
in that close, foetid hold might have had his eyes paA out 
with hot irons, if it would not spoil him as saleable,' pro- 
perty. 

But as it happened, a blind nigger would be almost worth- 
less, and twenty or thirty such would materially decrease 
his share in the profits of the run. 

Hence his care for the niggers' eyes. 

Aloud chorus of yells and screams followed the discharge 
of small-shot down the crowded hold, for though only a 
small charge of powder was used, purposely, yet there was 
sufficient to drive the little leaden bullets into the skin, and 
cause exquisite pain. 

Having discharged a barrel down each hold, the mate 
shouted in a stentorian voice to the unfortunates below, that 
unless they instantly ceased howling he would repeat the 
dose. This had its effect, and in a short time comparative 
silence reigned in the densely crowded and pestilent 'tween 
decks. 

Having sent a couple of Malays down to bring up the 
dead nigger and throw him overboard, the mate went ofF 
again to the captain. The wind had now fallen very light, 
so that at times the sails flapped against the mast. The 
heat of the sun was intense, and though there was not a 
cloud to be seen in the sky, a sort of haze rose both from 
the land and sea, and objects could not be made out at more 
than a mile or two distant. 

" Wind's a falling light, Pedro, but I think I see signs of 
a breeze springing up from the nor-nor-west, which will suit 
us well. I shall go and lie down for an hour ; keep her a 
clear quarter of a mile from the rocks, and call me at once 
if the breeze freshens, or anything happens ; keep a good 
look-out for sails, especially ahead. We ain't going 
to be riddled within twenty miles or so of port if we 
can help it." 

" All right, Captain Bosco," said the mate, taking the 
wheel, " I'll look out." 

Black Bosco then went below into the cabin, which, for n 
yessel of this kind, was luxuriously furnished. 

At the foremost end was a large full-length mirror, and in 



ON BOARD A SLAVER. 7 

this the captain of the slaver proceeded to survey himself 
with evident satisfaction. 

His appearance was striking enough. 

Of medium height, very broad shouldered, and slightly 
bow legged, he looked a man possessed of great streneth. 

His complexion was very swarthy, as dark, indeed, as that 
of many negroes. 

His features were not altogether bad, but the mouth was 
coarse, the nose broad and thick, though not flat, like that 
of a negro. 

He wore a short black curling beard and whiskers, and 
his hair, of the same ebony colour, hung in long ringlets on 
his shoulders. 

In his ears he wore gold wires, to which were suspended 
small gold coins. A gold chain was round his neck ; he 
had gold rings on his fingers, and a pair of pistols in the 
silk scarf round his waist, with ivory handles, and richly 
ornamented with gold filagree work. 

As for dress, it was picturesque enough for a pirate chief. 

White canvas or duck trousers, with a red silk scarf 
round the waist, set off greatly by the ornamented pistols ; 
a fine white shirt with highly embroidered front, fastened 
at the collar by a heavy gold link ; a gaudy silk handker- 
chief was around his neck. Over his shirt he wore a loose 
quilted jacket of striped yellow and white silk, which pre- 
sented a remarkable contrast to his swarthy complexion and 
olive beard and hair ; a broad-brimmed Panama hat and 
canvas shoes completed the attire of the slave captain. 

After admiring himself in the mirror for some moments, 
he threw himself on a couch, and was soon fast asleep. 

He had slept about an hour, when he was aroused by the 
mate. 

" A large ship standing down on us from the north, under 
steam and sail. I have only just made her out through 
the haze. She is bringing a breeze with her. A Yankee 
man-of-war, I'm afraid." 

" D — n ! " roared Black Bosco, and rushed on deck. 



LOVE'S TREASON. 



CHAPTER II. 

CHASED BY A FRIGATE — ROCKS AND REEFS— A DESPERATE 

EXPEDIENT. 

Black Bosco had not been on deck many moments when 
all was activity aDd bustle ; the wonderful energy of the 
man was shown forth. 

He shouted down the stokehole to the firemen to pile up 
the furnaces ; and himself, with two more, cleared away 
and hoisted the funnel. 

Then he shouted out wildly for more sail to be made — 
darting hither and thither, cursing, cuffing, and imparting 
to the men some of his own energy. 

Next he seized a spy-glass, and ran up to the mast-head 
and took a long look at the strange ship, now fast approach- 
ing. 

What he saw was by no means re-assuring. 

The breeze had caught the vessel now, and drifted away 
all the haze, so that there was a clear view of the sen right 
to the horizon. 

About twelve miles off on his port-beam he saw a large 
square-rigged vessel coming right down on him. 

A column of smoke from her funnel showed that she was 
under steam as well as sail, and her appearance and size 
proclaimed her a man-of-war — a large frigate. 

Sailing as she was, right before the wind, and heading 
direct for the slaver, in an hour, at the outside, she would be 
within easy range, unless he could, by altering his course, 
escape her. 

But the slaver was beating nearly due east, parallel to 
the land and lines of rocks and reefs, distant only a little 
more than a quarter of a knot. 

The land itself was scarcely more than a mile distant, 
bo close had he kept in. 

Under the circumstances, it would seem that the slaver 
was caught in a trap. 

He could not put her helm up and try her speed at a 
stern chase, for there was the land close on her lee. 

It was useless also to turn back, for the frigate would, bv 



CHASED BY A FRIGATE. t 

altering her course slightly, so as to steer across her bows, 
jet within range in less than an hour. 

To keep on ahead seemed open to the same objection ; 
yet nevertheless it was ahead Black Bosco looked, scanning 
minutely and carefully the distant landmarks, and looking 
eagerly among the rocks and reefs for openings aud chan- 
nels. 

After five minutes thus spent he came down. 

All possible sail had been made on the vessel, and the steam 
was fast accumulating in the boilers. 

Meanwhile, the strange vessel, steering a course direct for 
the slaver, bore down at the rate of at least eight miles an 
hour. 

Minutes slipped on, and the slaver, gliding through the 
water like a witch, might have distanced her pursuer with 
ease, could she have made more of a stern chase of it by 
keeping away. 

But the dangerous rocks on her lee, quite close, some- 
times so near that a biscuit might have been tossed into the 
breakers, prevented that ; and it was even necessary to haul 
her wind a little so as to get a better offing. 

All this while Black Bosco was in the foretop, anxiously 
scrutinizing the rocks and reefs ahead, which, at a little dis- 
tance, seemed to form a complete line of barrier, but on get- 
ting up to which, resolved themselves into isolated rocks and 
patches, the sea breaking furiously over all. 

On sped the two vessels — pursuer and pursued — the 
frigate momentarily drawing nearer to the slaver. 

" By the sandals of San Antonio ! " cried Black Bosco, 
shutting up the glass with a bang, " I see the Crab Pas- 



" The Crab Passage ! " exclaimed the mate. " You would 
never attempt to take her through that, under sail, and 
chased ? " 

" By all the saints, T do, though ; I can do it, and she 
shall do it, or leave her ribs on the rocks." 

" Bang ! " 

A puff of white smoke from the bow of the frigate told 
whence the report had come. At the same moment the 
Yankee flag — the stars and stripes — was run up to the breeze. 



Id tiOVEs Treason. 

" Show our ensign — the Spanish flag," said Black Boseo ; 
" in a quarter of an hour more we ought to be nearly safe." 

The Spanish flag was hoisted in reply, but beyond this 
no notice was taken of the gun, which, from a man-of-war, 
always means "heave-to." 

After an interval of a couple of minutes, another puff of 
white smoke belched forth from the bows of the frigate. 
This time it was followed by the roar of a round-shot as 
well as the report, which was much sharper and harder. 
The cannon ball pitched into the water right astern of the 
slaver, and so close as actually to throw the Sf ray over the 
taffrail. 

" Run forward and get the light sails in, Pedro," said 
Black Bosco, " I'll take the helm a bit. Bear a hand." 

The instant the light sails were taken in and secured, 
Black Bosco placed the mate at the wheel, and, seizing the 
speaking-trumpet, prepared to carry out his desperate 
attempt, 

" All hands wear ship, stand by the jib, the mainsail, 
and foresail. Hard down with the helm." 

Answering to her helm, the head of the slaver came 
sweeping round to the north, and in half a minute her 
prow was pointed right in the rocks, and the wind right 
aft. 

" Starboard ! starboard ! Pedro," cried the captain, his 
eyes firmly fixed on a large rock with a conical peak, against 
the base of which the sea beat furiously, sending the spray 
yards off. 

" Steady ! So." 

The slaver was under full steam, and each moment now 
took her farther from her pursuer. 

As for the frigate, she backed her mainsail yard, and lay 
as though her commander was mystified by this sudden and 
strange manoeuvre on the part of the slaver. 

Every moment, every fathom gained, was of vital im- 
portance to the slaver, and under full steam she dashed 
amidst the dangerous locks and reefs. 

" Ain't 1 steering too close to that big rock, captain ?" 
asked Pedro. 

" That big rock's our safety. There's deep water within 



CAPTURE OF THE SLAVER. A 

ten feet of it," replied Black Bosco, emphatically. " Steady ! 
So. That will do." 

Bosco held his breath, half fearing to hear and feel the 
fatal bump which should tell that the ship had struck, and 
all was over with the niggers and his hoped-for doubloons. 

But she escaped with a graze only, and slid along into 
smooth water, to meet another and larger rock right ahead. 

This was avoided by bringing her right up in the wind 
on the port tack, when once more she was kept away, and 
stood direct for the shore. 

"Santissima Trinidada!" he cried, with blasphemous 
glee, as the swift clipper shot into the clear water between 
the rocks and the land, " we have escaped — the saints and 
angels have befriended us." 

Pedro grinned at the idea of Black Bosco, himself, and 
the crew of the slaver, having been befriended by saints and 
angels. 

" I was thinking whether it might not have been the foul 
fiend who had done us a good turn," he remarked, with 
grim humour ; " then no longer will we insult him by call- 
ing him the foul fiend. Steward, bring up a bottle of 
Malaga, and glasses." 

They were brought, and BlacK Bosco, filling his own glass 
and that of his mate, shouted, with a defiant laugh — 

" Here's health and success to the Prince of the Infernal 
Regions — our good friend ; henceforth will we call him not 
the foul, but the fair fiend ! " 

And at that remark the slaver glided into smooth water, 
leaving all rocks and reefs behind her. 



CHAPTER III. 

CAPTURE OF THE SLAVER — ESCAPE OF BLACK BOSCO. 

The frigate, after delivering the last broadside, tacked and 
stood off from the rocks as too dangerous neighbours. 

The captain of the slaver seeing this, threw up his hat. 
and shouted triumphantly — 

" Bravo ! All hail to our patron saint, San Diavolo. Now, 
Pedro, let us drink to St. Diavolo." 



12 love's treason. 

"With these words Black Bosco filled up hit* own and 
Pedro's glass. 

Just as he raised it above his head it was dashed from hia 
hand by a round-shot. 

Bang ! Bang ! 

Bang ! Crash ! 

Three loud reports, and the smashing of timber. 

Black Bosco was reclining lazily on a hen-coop, looking 
out seawards at the Yankee frigate, when this fresh alarm 
came. Instantly he leaped to his feet, ran over to the star- 
board side, leaped on the rail, and holding on to the mizen- 
rigging, looked out in the direction where the cannonade 
came. 

He saw three large man-of-war boats, each with a gun 
counted at the bow. 

From a flag-staff at the stern of each there floated a flag 
— the British ensign. 

" Steward, my glass, roared Black Bosco, still standing on 
the rail, and holding on to the rigging. " Quick, d — n you ! " 

In a moment or two the telescope was brought. 

The captain snatched it from the hand of his steward, 
\l aced it to his eye, and had a look. 

He could read the name on the hatbands of the sailors 
of the English boats. 

" Ten thousand devils ! " he roared ; " it's the boats of the 
Phanix, that chased us on the G-old Coast. She's come in 
first, and laid wait for us. We have been betrayed." 

Scarcely were the words out of his mouth, when — 

Bung ! bang ! ! bang ! 1 ! 

The three guns in the bows of the man-of-war boats were 
again fired, this time at closer quarters, and with more effect. 
Every shot told. 

Two out of three struck the vessel between wind and 
water on the starboard bow, and then she rapidly began to 
till. 

" Port your helm," shouted Black Bosco. " Hard-a-port. 
Go ahead with the engines. Pull speed ! " 

Patting the helm hard-a port caused the vessel's head to 
point straight for the shore. 

Doubtless the slave captain, sis a last resort, wished to run 



LA SENORITA D'ALMAVIRAS. 13 

her on the beach in the hope of landing and securing some 
of the slaves. 

But it was too late. With a ringing cheer the three boats 
came on, and in less than two minutes were close under the 
bows of the slaver. 

" First cutters, follow me," shouted a young officer, as, 
sword and revolver in hand, he clambered on board the 
slaver. A dozen brawny seamen were close behind, and 
in ten minutes, after hardly any resistance, Black Bosco's 
ship was in the hands of the English. But the slave cap- 
tain himself had disappeared. 

He and the mate Pedro lowered the dingy, which hung 
from davits at the taffrail, and as the vessel was boarded over 
the bows, contrived to paddle off to the shore unnoticed. 

In a quarter of an hour the slaver had settled so far down 
in the water, that it was obvious she must sink, so all haste 
was made to release the unlucky slaves from their fetters. 

bhe settled down in shallow water, her upper deck and 
bulwarks remaining above the surface. The crew were 
all put in irons, and arrangements made for transferring the 
slaves to the English man-of-war, whence they would be 
drafted into transports and sent back to the coast of Africa 
—altogether a pretty expensive proceeding for John Bull. 



CHAPTER IV 

LA. SENORITA GIULIA DE CORDOVA D'ALMA-VIRAS. 

It was one of the many saint days which all devout Spani- 
ards think themselves bound to keep holy by abstaining 
from all work, drinking a great quantity of vino Unto, making 
a great noise, and otherwise amusing themselves. On this 
evening the theatres were all crammed, the singing-rooms 
crowded|to overflowing, while the various nostinas audalber- 
qurias with which the streets are plentifully lined, drove a 
roaring trade. 

In addition to the ordinary floating population, there were 
ashore, on the evening of this feast of San Joseph, a number 
of liberty-men from the English and American men-of-war. 



H LOVE'S TREASON. 

The boats of the English vessel, the Phmiix, had the verj 
day before captured a notorious slaver, commanded by a 
well-known man in the trade — ilcapilano Bosco Negro, as 
he was familiarly called. 

So the English sailors had not only liberty, but a prospect 
of good prize-money, for the Government paid liberally for 
the capture of slavers caught m flagrante derelicto. 

Many of the officers of the men-of-war also went ashore, 
;ind amongst them the third lieutenant, with whom we shall 
have a great deal to do — Edward Blake. 

A handsome, strapping young fellow was Lieutenant 
Blake, with curling black hair, keen dark eyes, and a skin 
much too dark for a Saxon. 

This was accounted for by the fact of young Blake's 
mother having been a Spaniard, an exceedingly beautiful 
opera singer, with whom his father chose to fall violently in 
love, and marry. 

He thus offended all his friends and relations, and it was 
not till years after his death that Edward Blake's grand- 
father — a proud old baronet, Sir Sigismund Blake — would 
have anything to say to or do with the orphan boy. 

He took care, however, that the lad should have a good 
education, and when he was fourteen, so far relented as to 
procure him a berth as midshipman in the Royal Navy. 

This was from the only friend or relation Edward Blake 
had in the world. 

True, he must some day suceed to the baronetcy, but the 
old man had the power to dispose of every acre of the pro- 
perty, every sixpence of money, and leave the heir nothing 
but the barren title. 

Under these circumstances, it may well be conceived that 
it was an affair of the utmost importance to young Blake 
to keep on good terms with his captain and superior officers. 

The first lieutenant, however, was his bitter and avowed 
enemy, and as he was, moreover, the son of the captain, Blake 
had considerable difficulty in keeping things even tolerably 
pleasant. 

By studiously avoiding giving offence, however, and re- 
fusing, on his part, to take offence, he managed to keep 
things smooth. 



LA SEN'ORITA D'ALMAVIRAS. 11) 

On the irghfc of the feast of San Joseph an unfortunate 
affair took place in which Edward Blake bore a part. 

It was between eleven and twelve o'clock, and the third 
lieutenant having left the opera, where he had spent the 
evening, was thinking of returning on board the ship. 

Strolling across the Grand Place, he passed the open door 
of a house brilliantly lighted, from which the sounds ot danc- 
ing and music issued. 

"Some public assembly, or ball, I suppose," he said to 
himself, and would have passed on but that he was attracted 
by a conversation at the door. 

He soon recognized English uniforms, and pushed through 
the ci'owd to ascertain what was going on. 

An open carriage was surrounded by a crowd of English 
sailors, half intoxicated, some quite so. 

He was ashamed to observe that there were several officers 
present, who also were the worse for wine, and instead of 
restraining the rioters, encouraged them. 

Amongst these was the first lieutenant. 

Blake's first impulse was to retire, and not give him a 
chance to provoke a quarrel. 

But his own hot temper and indignation at what he saw 
prevailed over prudence. Lieutenant Walters and another 
officer, one of the master's mates, forcibly entered the open 
carriage, in which were already seated two ladies, one dark, 
the other fair, both of whom Edward Blake saw to be very 
beautiful. 

The first lieutenant forced himself into a seat between 
them, and endeavoured then to take one on his knee, 
placing his arm round her waist to do so. 

The young lady screamed, and strove to escape from his 
grasp. 

In so doing the light silk dress she wore was torn, and 
her shawl also having been dragged off, her shoulders ana 
upper part of her body were left bare, exposed to the lewd 
gaze of the drunken rabble. 

Blake's blood boiled at witnessing this gross outrage. 
"Without staying to think or to calculate the consequences, 
be forced his way through the crowd, seized the first 



10 LOVE'S TREASON. 

lieutenant by the collar, and forcibly dragged him from th8 
carriage. 

He did the same with equal promptitude to the master's 
mate, and the ladies found themselves in about half a minute 
freed from their enemies. 

The first lieutenant, however, excited by wine, was not 
disposed to let the affair rest so, and struck Blake, who 
instantly returned the blow. 

" Take that, you coward ! " he cried, as he landed a stinger 
on the right eye of "Walter. 

The latter now drew his sword, and Blake, in self-defence, 
was forced to do the same. 

The combat was very brief ; the first lieutenant was half 
drunk, and had but little command over his weapon. 

In a few seconds he was disarmed, and his wrist sprained. 
In the melee he had received a cut on the forehead, from 
ffhich the blood now poured. 

" You shall answer for this before a court-martial," he 
roared to Blake, as the latter leaped into the carriage iu 
order further to protect the ladies if necessary. 

He, too, had received a slight cut on the hand, but 
nothing serious. 

"Do not be alarmed, ladies," he said in Spanish, which 
he spoke well ; " I will protect you from further insult. 
Where shall I tell your coachman to drive ? " 

" The Villa de Cordova," answered the dark one of the 
two beauties. 

v I will accompany you a part of the way at least." 

" Thanks, senor ; you are too good." 

Blake, standing up in she carriage with drawn sword, 
prevented any further attempt, and the coachman drove oil", 

Blake stopped him when well clear of the crowd, and 
alighted. 

" Whom have I had the honour of rendering some slight 
r.rvice to ? " he said, raising his cap. 

" Ah ! senor, I must take another opportunity of thank- 
ing you. Here is my card. I perceive you are an officer ; 
you must come to my father's grand ball ou the anniversary 
of the birthday of Queen Isabella, a week to-night. Do not 
forget." 



UNDER ARREST. 1? 

As she spoke, she handed him a card, on which was 
engraved in silver letters — 

"La Senorita Giulia, 

Castelmarina de Cordova." 

" The daughter of the Marquis de Cordova ! " Edward 
Blake exclaimed, as he read the name, " the proudest and 
wealthiest nobleman in Cuba. Ah, me ! quite a romantic 
adventure ; one for which, however, I shall have to |>hv 
dearly ; for that vindictive Walters will charge me with 
something, and will swear to any lie before the court- 
martial. Dismissed her Majesty's service, I suppose, will be 
my fate," he muttered, bitterly ; " and so farewell to all my 
prospects." 



CHAPTEE V 

UNDER ARREST. 

Edward Blake, with bitterness in his heart, went down to 
the quay, and hiring a shore-boat, was rowed alongside the 
English man-of-war, and went on board. 

As it happened, he had no duty that night, and there 
were none of his brother officers he cared for on deck, so he 
went below, and turned into his berth. 

H« rose in the morning but little refreshed, and had 
barely dressed himself and taken a cup of coffee, when word 
was brought to him by a midshipman to attend the captain 
in his cabin. 

On entering the state room, he saw the captain seated at 
the head of the table, his son, the first lieutenant, and 
another officer on his right hand, while three more officers 
were on the left. 

All looked stern and solemn. 

Edward Blake marched up to the captain, and after 
saluting, stood awaiting orders. 

" Surrender your sword, Lieutenant Blake." 

The young fellow did so, not without a pallor of the 
cheek and a trembling of the hands, which evinced his con- 
sciousness of the disgrace, albeit unmerited as it was. 

" A serious charge, or rather charges, have been brought 
against you of drunkenness, insolent language; of drawing 

B 



18 LOYKS TREASON. 

on and striking your superior officer, and behaviour 
generally unworthy of an officer and a gentleman." 

" I am innocent, eir," said Blake, firmly. 

The captain pointed to the head of his son. The first 
lieutenant was strapped up with surgical plaisters. 

"That is proof indeed that you must be in some degree 
guilty. Do you deny that it was you who wounded the 
first lieutenant ? " 

u I did it in self-defence. He drew on me first," said the 
young man, calmly. 

" It's a lie ! " said Lieutenant "Walker ; " you struck me 
first, because you were jealous, seeing me enter a carriage* 
with two ladies." 

Edward Blake's cheek flushed, and his eyes flashed at the 
insolence of his accuser. Unable to control his passion, he 
said, vehemently — 

"You lie, yourself, Lieutenant Walker. You ricli'y 
deserved all, and worse than you received. Contemptible 
coward that you are ! " 

Lieutenant "Walker turned to the captain (his father), 
and said, with snake-like craft — 

" You hear, sir, his violent language. I believe, were 
you not present, he would draw a sword and strike me 
unawares again." 

The lieutenant did not think it convenient to remember 
that he himself had set the example of violent language by 
giving Blake the lie. 

"A court-martial shall decide, sir," said the captain 
sternly. " Meanwhile, your violent language and threatening 
demeanour is not likely to do good to your cause. You will 
remain below till the sundown gun-fire, after which you can 
come on deck to take exercise, or go ashore if you choose. 
You will not, however, wear her Majesty's uniform off the 
ship." 

Edward Blake could say nothing in reply, so with a bitter 
heart, he saluted and withdrew. 

Of course he went below, being under arrest, swordless 
and disgraced. 

He occupied a cabin with a young Irishman — an officer 
much junior to himself in the service. 



tJNDER ARREST. 19 

Like most of his countrymen, Jack O'Brien was warm- 
hearted, brave, and impulsive. 

Lie was just brushing up to go on deck and take his watch 
when Edward Blake entered. 

" Hallo, Blake, my boy ! tear and ages, what's the matter ? 
You look as melancholy as Barney Finnigan on his wedding 
morning." 

" I went on deck with my sword on," said Blake gloomily ; 
" I have come down without." 

"Why, you omadhaun ! " cried the volatile Irishman, 
" have you left it on deck or lost it overboard ; or lent it to 
the black cook to skewer a sucking pig with ? " 

" Worse than any of those, Jack, much worse." 

" Worse ! the devil ! What is it, then, anyhow ? " 

" I was ordered to surrender my sword, and am under 
arrest." 

At this O'Brien looked grave. 

" What, for that bit of a scrimmage you were telling me 
of the other night with the first luff ? " 

" That's just it." 

" The mean, skulking hound ! I only wish I had him in 
Connemara. By the piper that played before Moses, some 
of the boys would break every bone in his cursed yellow 
skin!" 

" Ah ! but unfortunately he's on board H.M.S. Phmnix, 
in Havannah Bay, and the captain s son, as well as first 
lieutenant." 

" Look here, old fellow," said Jack O'Brien, giving him his 
hand, " I always liked you. You and I were always sort 
of chums ; and by the boots of my ancestor, Brian Borrhu, 
I'll stick to you and see you safe through this." 

The unfortunate officer, though he felt deeply thankful 
for the warm-hearted Irishman's sympathy and promise of 
standing to him in his trouble, could not help smiling at the 
strange way he expressed it. 

" I didn't know you had royal blood in your veins, Jack," 
he said. 

" Ah ! but I have though, and the real, right down Irish 
royal blood that will make some of the sneaking blackguards 
jump again if they don't look out. See herfe, now, Ned, my 



20 LOVERS TREASON. 

boy; I'm going on duty, but I'll think over this business all 
the time, and concoct a scheme what we shall do — you're 
going to stop below till gun-fire, so just you set to work and 
concoct a scheme too, and this evening we'll talk 'em both 
over and see which is best." 

So saying, Jack O'Brien went on deck, leaving our hero a 
little bit cheered up with the knowledge of having at least 
one friend, but still sad and down-hearted. 

In the evening, the instant the sun-down gun was fired, 
he went on deck, glad to get a breath of fresh air after 
having been below all day. 

Jack O'Brien joined him at the gangway. 

" Well, my honey, have yez thought of a schame, yet ? " 

"I have, Jack. But let's hear yours first, I'm certain 
sure you have got one." 

" I have so, my honey. It's just as simple as it's iligant 
and agreeable." 

" Elegant and agreeable, eh ? I wonder what it can be ? " 

" Why, what in the world else, but just go and see the 
lady yourself — the lovely Spanish princess you saved from 
that vagabone Walker. Down on your bended knees, quire 
gallant like, make a beautiful spache, and sure the thing's 
done. She'll come aboard with her father, and no end of 
nobles, tell the truth, and knock the court-martial to blazes." 

Now this, though expressed in a rather wild ard incohe- 
rent manner, seemed to Ned Blake by no means bad advice, 
especially as it tallied with his own ideas on the subject. 

The next night Jack O'Brien and our hero were being 
rowed across Havannah Bay, towards a quay near the custom- 
house, by a pair of stout Spanish boatmen. 

Blake doubted whether he would have been allowed the 
use of a ship's boat, and, at all events, did not care to risk it. 

They had little difficulty in finding either the town man- 
sion or the villa, a little way out on the shores of the harbour, 
of so wealthy and powerful a nobleman as the Marquis 
d'Almaviras. But beyond that their expedition was an 
utter failure. They learned that he was at his villa, and 
hiring a conveyance, they were driven there. 

A pompous porter, in gorgeous livery of black velvet 
trimmed with scarlet, and with a superabundance of gilt 



EDWARD BLAKE WHITES A LETTER. 21 

buttons on every part of his attire, answered their inquiries. 
They could make no impression on him whatever ; neither 
bribes nor promises had the slightest effect. 



CHAPTER VI. 

EDWARD BLAKE WRITES A LETTER. 

Edward Blake acted imprudently, perhaps, in asking, in 
the first place, for the Senora Giulia. Speaking Spanish 
fluently as he did, it would have been better, perhaps, to have 
requested an interview with the marquis, when he would 
easily have explained the affair. 

The old man looked horrified and astonished beyond 
measure when Blake boldly asked for the young lady, and 
gave his name simply as Lieutenant Blake. 

He disappeared, however, for a moment or two, and they 
were congratulating themselves it was all right, when he 
returned and told them gruffly the lady could not be seen, 
and they had better go about their business. Whereupon 
he slammed the great courtyard door in their faces. 

" I wonder now," said O'Brien, " whether that velvet- 
coated old vagabond took your message to the lady at all ? " 

" I should think, at all events, it was taken to her," said 
our friend bitterly. 

After a pause Blake said, " I'll write her a letter. That 
must reach her, surely." 

" Bight you are, my boy ! It's just my idea, and please 
the pigs, we'll just concoct a lovely epistle before we turn in." 

The letter required great consideration. 

However, it was indited, and approved by both at last. 

It was in Spanish, but we give it in English : — 

H.M.S. Phcenix, 

" Lying in Havannah Bay. 
" Most honoured Senora, — 

I presume to address to you this note, trusting you are 
well in health and mind, as your great charms and virtues deserve. I 
trust you suffered no subsequent inconvenience from the affair of the 
other night when I had the honour of making your acquaintance. I 
regret to say that there will be a court-martial on board our vessel, and 
tUat I an* to be tried. The date is fixed for the 



52 LOVE'S TREASON. 

I trust to §ee or hear from you before then, as you and you only, 
weet senora, can calm my troubled mind and give me assurance of a 
lappy termination. A few words from you, and from the most 
inhappy,your ardent admirer and devoted servant willbecome the most 
ortunate, of men. 
" Farewell ! angels keep you. 

" For ever your humble servant, 

" Edwaid Blake. 
"La Senora Griulia de Girders d'Almaviras." 

The high-flown portion and love passages were solely due 
o O'Brien, who declared that the letter was a great deal too 
rue. 

Edward Blake, on the other hand, though he had yielded 
n some measure to his impulsive friend, feared lest the letter 
hould give offence by reason of its freedom, and the some- 
hat warm language in which it was couched. 

It was not to be sent at once ; not until the date of the 
ourt-martial should be fixed, which, not being known at the 
nesent time, had been left blank. 

But the next afternoon Edward Blake was informed that 
e would be brought before the court-martial four days from 
hat date. 

That evening he and O'Brien went ashore together, in 
■rder to send off the important missive to its destination. 

They wished by no means to present it themselves, lest, 
naming the animosity of the porter, he should destroy it. 

So they employed a courier from one of the principal 
lotels, who was well recommended, and dispatched him with 
he precious document. 

lie returned shortly, and reported that he had dulv 
lelivered it, that it was taken by a fat porter in black velvet 
md gilt buttons, who went inside with it, and returning in 
i few moments, said it was all right ; thereupon he had 
vished him good evening, and ridden off back. 

Blake paid him, and tolerably well satisfied and easy in 
mind, they returned on board the ship. 

From that time till the court-martial Edward Blake 
passed most of his time at a port-hole between decks, looking 
towards the shore. 

Day by day, hour by hour, he looked longingly for the 
appearance of a boat rapidl" awed towards the vessel, 



THE COURT-MARTIAL. 23 

and bearing on board the angel of his dreams, the 
lovely Giulia d'Almaviras, Queen of Andalusia. 

But as day by day passed, and he neither heard nor saw 
anything, he began to fear for the result. 

At last arrived the important morning, which was to 
decide the fate of Edward. 

The English ship of war Panther had arrived in port the 
evening before, and on this morning the commodore, captain, 
and officers, enough to make a full court, came on board the 
Phoenix. 

Edward Blake kept his post at the port between decks, 
keeping an anxious look-out for the expected witness. 

But minute by minute, hour by hour, slipped by, and still 
no signs of the Senorita Giulia de Cordova d'Almaviras, the 
beauty of Andalusia. 

Pour bells — six bells — seven bells— half-past eleven, and 
the court-martial was to assemble at noon precisely. 

Noon came, and no signs of any boat. 

He groaned aloud in the agony of his spirit, and when an 
officer came to summon him to the tribunal, he looked pale, 
crestfallen, guilty. 



CHAPTER VII. 

THE U R T-M A R T I A L. 

On reaching the deck, Blake found two marines with 
shouldered arms waiting to receive him at the top of the 
ladder, and between these he was marched a prisoner to the 
cabin. 

Ere he entered, however, he cast one last longing, linger- 
ing look across the bay, hoping to see the expected boat 
bearing the Giulia to his rescue. 

But alas ! it was not to be seen. 

When he entered the cabin, he found the court already 
assembled. 

He bowed, and took his place at the foot of the tabic, the 
two marines a pace or two behind him. 

First the charges were read out to him by Commodore 
Jackson, of the Panther, president -* the <*ourt. 

To all he pleaded not guilty. 



21 LOVE'S TREASON. 

Then the trial proceeded. 

Lieutenant "Walker gave his evidence. 

Other witnesses were called to prove he was in a state of 
intoxication, tised blasphemous and insolent language, &c. 

But these did not speak at all positively, nor as if the} 
had their hearts in what they said. 

It was pretty well known among a c#rtain party that these 
men were acting under fear of the first lieutenant. 

However, their evidence did not have much effect, and 
probably the prisoner was scarcely damaged by it. 

The evidence for the prosecution being ended, the prisonf-r 
was called upon for his defence. 

He had none ready prepared, but spoke freely, and with- 
out embarrassment. 

His speech, delivered without embarrassment or hesitation, 
produced a favourable effect on the court. 

He neither looked nor spoke like a guilty man. 

Presently, however, the president, to whom Captain 
"Walker, the father of the prosecutor, had been whispering, 
addressed him : — 

" Prisoner, we have listened with attention to your defence, 
and will allow it all the weight it deserves. If you can sub- 
stantiate your assertion it will go far to clear you of the 
charges against you. Have you any witnesses in support of 
your version of the affair ? " 

" Alas ! no, sir ; I have nothing but my innocence 
and the justice of my cause to rely upon." 

The case was now at an end, and it remained only for tho 
court to deliberate on their verdict. 

The prisoner was marched off on deck between the two 
marines, where he awaited his fate. 

In about a quarter of an hour he was again marched back 
into the cabin, and again took up his position at the foot of 
the table. 

"Prisoner," said the president, addressing him ; "after 
careful consideration, the court has decided your case. Until 
the sentence is made known you will be placed under no 
restrictions, except that you are forbidden to wear her 
Majesty's uniform. 

Edward Bkke went down to his berth and wept. 



THE BIRTIU- >ETE. 2.') 

"Ruined — disgraced — dishonored." Such were the 
words he muttered again and again to himself. 

* # # ' * * 

The birthday of the sovereign of Spain is a great occasion 
in Havannah and all Spanish possessions, especially among 
the nobility and the higher classes. The fetes given by the 
brilliant, powerful, and wealthy Marquis d'Alniaviras had 
long been celebrated for their magnificence, and this year 
he seemed determined to keep up their reputation. 



CHAPTER YII1. 

THE BIRTHDAY FETE. 

Edward Blake had made up his mind to attend the fet» 
at the Villa Castelmarina. and he kept to his resolution. 

Jack O'Brien counselled him to go in his lieutenant's 
uniform, as, until the sentence of the court-martial was 
approved of by the admiral and made known, he still had a 
right to wear it. 

Jack urged that though he was forbidden to appear in 
uniform on board, this did not apply to him on shore. 

But Blake was not convinced, and positively refused to 
wear his uniform, deciding to go in plain evening dress. 

The evening came, and the young man, carefully dressing 
himself, wrapped his cloak around him and went ashore, 
accompanied by Jack O'Brien, almost the only friend who 
stuck by him in his trouble. 

But to proceed. 

He and Jack O'Brien were driven in a hired fly to 
Castelmarina. 

The self-same pompous porter opened the gate, and 
recognizing him as having called before, and also noticing 
his dress, looked contemptuously at him, and seemed 
inclined to slam the gate in his face. 

Edward Blake was attired in plain black, with only a 
dress shirt and tie to match. 

The senoritas card gained him instant admission. 

Following his guide he came to two folding doors, which, 
throwing open, Blake saw a hvge and brilliantly-lighted 
saloon — as yet but scantily peopled — for the guests had only 
just begun to arrive, 



26 love's treason. 

" II Senor Edward Blaque," shouted the official, and the 
young man, slightly embarrassed, first passed in. 

There was no one to receive him, and he knew no one, so 
he strolled on alone. 

He was, however, tolerably though not perfectly ac- 
quainted with Spanish customs and etiquette, and knew that 
the host and hostess only received at assemblies for one hour. 
All who came earlier or later had themselves to seek out 
the master or mistress, and pay their respects, in the mean- 
time strolling about and doing exactly as they pleased. 

Edward Blake soon found his way into the open air, and 
wandered down the beautiful grassy slopes and pleasure 
grounds to the water of the bay, which absolutely washed 
the turf at the end of the long garden. Here there was a 
charming pleasure-house and boat-house, where the fair 
Giulia delighted to sit in the cool of the tropical evening. 

There was a full moon, and Edward Blake, charmed with 
the beauty and soft repose of the scene, lighted a cigarette, 
and i^ave himself up to thought. 

He could hear footsteps approaching, and voices — female 
voices. 

" I wonder whether that young Englishman will come to- 
night," he heard one of them say. 

"Oh, you mean the young officer who so gallantly inter- 
fered in our favour the other night ? Of course he will. 
Did you not give him your own card ? " 

"There is no 'of course' about it. These English are 
incomprehensible, and, as a rule, I hate them." 

Here, then, was the solution of the cause of his letter 
being neglected. He bitterly reproached himself for having 
blasted his prospects for such a cold-hearted, false girl as 
this. 

IT APT Kit IX. 

EDWARD BIjAKE'S INTERVIEW WITH Till'! SEXORITA. 

He walked about for some few minutes with the intention 
of letting his excitement calm down. When he thought he 
had got himself thoroughly under control, he strolled 
leisurely up to the villa, doing his best to look careless and 
unconcerned. 



THE BIRTHDAY FETE. fc? 

As be entered, however, he saw his own reflection in a 
mirror, and absolutely started. Fortunately, this was only a 
sort of hall or ante-chamber, and there were none of the 
company present ; so, calling one of the numerous servants, 
he asked him if he could be shown a room where he could 
wash and make himself presentable. 

Doubtless the man thought that he had been indulging 
rather too freely in wine, of which there was an unlimited 
supply ; but he said nothing, and at once conducted him to 
a luxuriously-appointed chamber, where he found every 
possible requisite for the toilette. 

In a quarter of an hour he had thoroughly renovated 
himself, and, but for a certaiu glitter in the eyes, showed no 
sign of his previous excitement. 

Wine being continually offered to him whenever he stood 
still near any of the refreshment buffets or sideboards, he 
partook pretty freely, but not sufficiently to have any effect 
on his head. 

Presently he saw the daughter of the house walking arm- 
in-arm with Ethelinda, a bosom friend of hers. 

He stood on one side, half concealed by a pillar, as they 
passed, and had a good look at them. 

He could not deny that she was ravishingly beautiful. 
Her dark eyes flashed like diamonds. There was a bright 
colour on her lovely cheek, and altogether, as she walked 
with a graceful, undulat'ng motion down the room, bowing 
and smiling occasionally as she saw an acquaintance or 
friend, he thought she was the most splendid specimen of 
womanhood he had ever seen. 

He waited till they had passed and turned to come up the 
room again. 

Then he came forth and advanced to meet them, doing 
his best to look agreeable and unconcerned. He went right 
up to them and bowed. 

Giulia stopped and looked at him in obvious surprise. She 
did not recognize him in plain evening dress. 

Ethelinda, however, was quicker, or her memory mor\ 

retentive, though she, too, for a moment did not know him. 

' Giulia," she said, in a low voice, " it is the gentleman 

who so kindly came to our aid the other night, and to whom 

you gave your card." 



28 LOVE'S TREASON. 

Instantly a flash of recognition lighted up the fair 
Spaniard's face. 

With a bright smile and blush she hastened to greet the 
Englishman. 

Taking his hand in both hers, she cried, with beaming 
eyes, and in tones of what really seemed unfeigned 
pleasure — 

" Ah, senor, I am so glad, so delighted to see you. I was 
afraid you would not come." 

Edward Blake could not answer a word. He was aghast 
at what he considered her consummate effront. But he mis- 
judged her. For she knew nothing of what had 
happened, while he, thinking she knew and treated his mis- 
fortunes with indifference and contempt, felt bitterly 
incensed against her. 

In a little time his spirits rose. A sort of false exhilara- 
tion took possession of him. 

He talked gaily, laughed, and seemed as merry as it was 
possible to be. 

All the time, however, Ethel Verinder, who bad a very 
acute perception, kept watching him furtively. 

There was something in his manner she could not under- 
stand, and vainly she puzzled to decide what it was. 

Giulia, however, noticed nothing of this, but was in 
excellent temper and spirits, 

" I am so glad you speak Spanish," she said ; " and so 
well, too, that, but for a slight accent, I should never have 
known you were not a countryman." 

" I have mixed much among Spaniards," he said, 
guardedly. He did not choose to mention his mother, and 
say that she was a Spanish lady. 

" And now what can I do to show my gratitude to you," 
she said, looking in his face and smiling ; " I mean now, 
•it present ? " 

" Well," he said, with a laugh, which seemed gay enough, 
" I will toll you ; I wonder whether you will refuse." 

" That depends," she said, prudently, " on what it is you 
isk." 

" Dance with me three consecutive dances." 

Ethelinda burst out laughing. 



THE BIRTHDAY FETE. 29 

"Certainly, sir, you will bear out in one respect the 
opinion my friend has formed of Englishmen. You are 
sufficiently audacious ! Three consecutive dances ! " 

" Come, Lady Giulia, yes or no," he said, smiling in her 
face. 

She looked grave. 

" Tell me, sir, are you noble, of good birth ? for if not, I 
have no business to dance with you at all." 

" I have no father," he said, gravely ; " but my grand- 
father is a baronet — Sir Sigismund Blake — I am heir to the 
title, and after him I shall be a baronet also — Sir Edward 
Blake. The banner of my ancestor — the founder of our 
family — was borne without dishonour on the glorious field 
of Agincourt." 

Her countenance brightened up instantly. 

" That will do," she said ; " that is quite sufficient. I 
have heard my father say that many English baronets are of 
better and older family than your modern dukes and earls. 
I accede to your request, I will dance with you for three 
dances consecutively." 

Ethelinda laughed. 

He turned towards her. 

" May I be bold enough to make the same request of 
you, young lady ? " 

" Well, you have got a good share of impudence, I must 
say," she laughed. " However, I shall see ; I am going 
to ask you a question, on your answer mine depends." 

" Go on." 

" Are you a good dancer ? " 

" I think I may say yes without vanity," he replied. 

" Then I, too, consent. So now, Giulia, we are both in 
the same boat. Oh ! what a talk there will be about it !*" 

" And will not Don Jose be furiously jealous ! *' whispered 
Giulia,, laughing and blushing. 

As for Edward Blake, he was in a glow of triumph. 

He could not but be sensible to the great beauty of the 
marquis's daughter, and though he had by no means for- 
given her or meant to forgive her for her seemingly cruel 
neglect, he felt elated at the thought of the envy his good 
fortune would excite. 



30 LOVE'S TREASON. 



CHAPTER X. 

EDWARD BLAKE DANCES THREE TIJIKS WITH THE FAIX 

GIULIA. 

Don Jose de Malatesta was a shrewd and crafty man, and 
one who would not neglect small means to gain his ends. 

Although very wealthy, he was very avaricious. 

Nevertheless, he did not show his avarice in petty mean- 
ness. 

Hence it was that, having set his mind on winning the 
beautiful heiress of the rich Marquis d'Almaviras as his 
wife, he did not fail to behave liberally to all the domestics 
of the household who could in any way assist his suit, or 
who might, if they chose, damage him in her eyes. 

To the major-domo he was especially liberal, for that 
functionary held a post of great confidence. 

It had come to the knowledge of Don Jose that he had 
the responsible task of sifting all letters addressed to the 
young lady, and could stop, or cause to be given to her 
whatever he chose. 

This was an important affair. 

Besides, the house steward knew everybody who came or 
went, whom she gave interviews to, and whom she refused 
to see. 

In fact, he knew all about the inner life of the villa ; and, 
though she knew it not, every action almost of his young 
mistress was dulv chronicled, and when it suited, made use 
of. 

Not that he was a traitor to the master whom he served 
— far from it. But, nevertheless, Sebastian did not see why 
he should not make a profit out of trifling bits of informa- 
tion — mere gossip, in fact— which would do no one any 
harm. 

Giulia d'Almaviras was quite right when she said that 
Don Jose would be furiously jealous at her dancing several 
times with the Englishman. 

He watched her dance a cotillon with Blake first, and 
felt enraged. 

*Ie was about going up to her to ask her to dance with 



EDWARD BLAKE DANCES WITH GIULIa. 31 

him the next dance, when this cursed fellow whirled her 
away in a waltz. 

Again and again they went round — the fair Giulia's eyes 
sparkling, her face flushing, with the pleasurable excitement. 

" Will they never have done ?" muttered Don Jose. " Who 
can this cursed fellow be ? " 

Then he bethought himself of Sebastian, the major-domo, 
and presently espying him moving about, superintending all 
the arrangements, he beckoned him to where he stood leaning 
against a pillar— the picture of jealous rage. 

" Who in the name of all the devils is that fellow your 
young mistress is dancing with ? " he asked. 

Sebastian shrugged his shoulders. 

" This is the second dance she has danced with him," said 
Don Jose, in tones of concentrated rage. 

" Indeed, senor ! " 

" Don't you know who he is at all " 

" I know not who he is," said the steward, cautiously, 
" but— but " 

" But what ? — speak out, man." 

" I know something, but I am afraid I must not speak, 
for see, senor, I hold a most responsible and confidential 
post, and I would not for worlds betray the confidence 
reposed in me." 

Don Jose thought he knew how to overcome the scruples 
of the steward, and quietly slipped a couple of gold doubloons 
into his hand. 

" No betrayal of confidence at all, my good fellow," he 
said ; "ami not a friend of the family and a suitor for the 
hand of the Lady Giulia — and is not my suit favoured by the 
marquis ? I ask you that, Sebastian." 

" Your worship is right, and I thiuk I may speak without 
doing wrong." 

" Speak then." 

" The senor with whom she is dancing is a very particular 
friend." 

" Diavolo," muttered Don Jose, " how know you that ? " 

" He came this evening with the senorita's own card as 
his admission ticket, and right well I know that she very, 
very seldom honours auy one so far as that." 



8* LOVE S TREASON. 

An oath muttered between his clenched teeth was Don 
Jose's reply to this. 

" Well, go on — what more do you know ? " 
" I think he muse be a foreigner by his accent, though he 
Bpeaks Spanish well." 

" His name — I suppose you announced him ? " 
" Ah ! Senor, I cannot be sure of the name. It sounded 
like Blaque." 
" Any title ? " 

" No title, only plain senor." 
" Who the devil can he be ? " 

" A dangerous rival," said Sebastian, who felt really inter- 
ested in the success of Don Jose's suit. " See how her lady- 
ship seems to enjoy the dance." 

In a moment or two the couple whirled by, and the 
Spaniard cursed most bitterly as he looked on. Giulia 
seemed to have given herself up to the passionate intoxica- 
tion of the waltz. 

Her eyes, full of lustre, seemed melting with languishing 
love. 

Her head half reclined on her partner's shoulder, while he, 
with arm around her waist, gazed rapturously into her lovely 
face. 

For the time all his anger had vanished, and he lived but 
in the rapture of the present, basking in the light of her 
eyes and bright smile. 

" If they dance together once m^re," said the major-domo, 
" it is dangerous ; indeed, / nrrrr saw the senorita hole on 
any one as she does on him to -nig lit." 

Don Jose could bear no more. With an oath, not muttered, 
but aloud, he rushed from the saloon into the open air. 

" By all the saints ! " he cried aloud when he was alone in 
the grounds, "but this must be put a stop to — it shall be put 
a stop to — I myself will put a stop to it. This very night I 
will have an explanation with Giulia. This very night I will 
tell her that she must and shall be mine. And by the 
great God of heaven she shall. By fair means or foul — 
Giuiia d'Almaviras shall be my wife." 

After his burst of feeling and terrible oath, Don Jose 
grew gradually cooler, and after pacing hurriedly to and fro 



EDWARD BLAKE DANCES WITH GIULIA. 33 

for some ten minutes, muttering ever and anon to himself, 
he seemed to have decided on some plan of action, and 
returned to the ball saloon. 

His grew face almost livid when he saw that Giulia was 
dancing yet a third dance with the favoured stranger. 

" That man shall die ! " he muttered, grinding his teeth. 
" He shall die as sure as there is a God in heaven." 

Cbuld Giulia have r;een his face then, and known he was 
thinking of her, she would have been horrified, and have felt 
no further pleasure in the dance. 

She knew he would be jealous, but dreamed not of the 
tempest of passion which raged in his breast. 

Don Jose suppressed all outward show of his rage, and, 
going to the steward, asked for wine. 

As Sebastian brought the wine, he said significantly — 

" She has danced with him yet a third time, Don Jose." 

" I know it," he replied sullenly ; and then added, with 
sudden fury : " It is his death-warrant ! " 

The steward recoiled with half a shudder at the terrible, 
the demoniacal expression which crept over the face of Don 
Jose as he spoke these words. 

The latter drained off not one, but two, goblets of wine. 

As he tossed off the last, the music ceased — the dance was 
at an end. 

" See," said Sebastian, " he is leaving her. Will you not 
go and speak to her now ? " 

" No," was the abrupt reply. " When I do speak, I shall 
speak to the purpose. When I strike, I shall strike home." 

And with these words he strode away. 

Sebastain looked after him with something like terror. 

" What an awful temper ! He looks like a demon. I 
much fear that there will be bloodshed follow this." 

As for Edward Slake, we have said that, intoxicated with 
the beauty of Giulia, his resentment was for the time driven 
to the winds. 

His triumph seemed completed. He noticed, with proud 
joy, the envious glances cast on him as he, the favoured one, 
danced again and yet again with the marquis's lovely 
daughter. 

Observed, too, with pride, the looks of curiosity and the 

o 



34 love's treason. 

whisperings with which he was favoured when he had 
finished the third dance. 

As he conducted his beautiful partner to a seat, that she 
might rest after the fatigue of two fast dances in succession, 
he said — 

" One more let me crave, later in the evening — only one 
more." 

" Ah ! insatiable that you are," she said deprecatingly ; 
" already the people will be talking about us." 

" Let them talk. Horn soit qui inal y pense," he replied 
promptly. 

She smiled, and he went off in triumph, for she had not 
refused him, and that was tantamount to consent ; at least, 
so lie persuaded himself. 

He went out into the open air, and, by degrees, as he got 
cool, the memory of his wrongs returned. 

" Ah ! the treacherous siren, she has been my ruin, and 
remorselessly she has seen me disgraced, and yet — and yet — 
I love her! 1 ' 

Then, with strange inconsistency, he cursed her, and next 
proceeded to speculate as to whether she would or would not 
dance with him once again. 

Presently he remembered that he had engaged to dance 
with the fair American, and returning to the saloon, sought 
and found her. 

Perhaps the change from one beautiful partner to another 
had its effect. 

Be that as it may, the misery of his wrongs and misfor- 
tunes gradually returned, and with it resentment at the lovely 
cause thereof. 

"Ah! if I could only win her heart, and then cast her 
from me with scorn, with words of insult and contempt, that 
would indeed be a splendid revenge. I believe her proud 
heart would break." 

_ He danced the three dances with Ethelinda, and after a 
time thought that she was almost, if not quite, as beautiful 
as Giulia. 

And though her style was not so passionate and dazzling 
as that of the Spanish beauty, still she was more amiable, 
more lovable, he said to himself. 



EDWAED BLAKE'S ASSASSINATION PLANNED. Hft 

And so the evening waned on with beautiful music, merry 
la"gH^r, crp.v r'rn t-r,r, o "n^ ir" ,;f ^r r P a fl'ttimr about, and all 
was mirth and revelry. 

" Have you any thins; on vour mind ? " asked Ethelinda, 
when, nfier the third dance, he conducted her to a seat, and 1 
took his place besiHe her. 

" No, indeed. Did I dance badly ? " 

" By no means, excellent; ->ut nevertheless, Senor Blake, 
I am sure you have something on your mind. You are not 
at your ease." 

He coloured, but made no reply. 



CHAPTER XI. 

EDWARD BLAKE'S ASSASSINATION PLANNED. 

Don Jose de Malatesta disappeared from the scene froi 
fully an hour. 

He went out to the gate and dispatched a mounted 
messenger, one of the outriders who rode before his carriage, 
with a note to be delivered in an obscure and disreputable 
part of Havannah. 

He told the man to ride full gallop, and not to spare his 
• horse, though the animal ( r pped with fatigue. 

Then he told the porter that in about an hour and a half 
a person would call for him at the gate, desiring that he 
might be apprised of it at once. 

In an hour and a half precisely there came a man wrapped 
in a large cloak, and with his face almost hidden by a broad- 
brimmed hat. 

To him Don Jose went out at once, and walking a little 
way from the gate, conversed with him for a short time. 

" You have a good man with you ? " 

"A first-rate man, your lordship. He has cut more 
throats than any man in the profession in Havannah." 

" Hush ! mind what you say. Now understand me, this 
affair must be done to-night, and that cleanly and completely. 
The reward is most liberal." 
'i " How much, senor ? " 



36 love's treason. 

" A hundred doubloons — a hundred gold doubloons, and 
for an unarmed man." 

"Bub is he unarmed ? '' 

" Certainly. He came unarmed, and will leave unarmed." 

" How shall I know him ? " 

" He is in neither uniform nor court dress ; he wears a 
cap, and not a hat, and to make all sure, when he comes out, 
the'porier will also run out, leaving the gate open, and will 
look hard after him. I will arrange that." 

" But suppose he hires a carriage ? " 

" 1 will see that that shall be impossible. My servants 
fihall engage them all before, and pay them a part down." 

" Good, my lord ; consider it's done. Shall I wait on you 
to-morrow ? " 

" Yes, with the news that it is finished. But let me 
caution you. Do not attempt anything near here. The 
whole road, for a couple of miles, will be thronged with 
people returning from the fete. It will not do for either of 
you to be taken, not that I should care in the least about 
you suffering death by the hands of the executioner, but 
you might attempt to implicate me." 

"Thanks for your kind wishes, my lord." 

" You are welcome," said Don Jose coolly. " See and do 
your business, and come for your hundred doubloons. See 
to it." 

The marquis then sauntered back again, as though he had 
only been giving some ordinary directions to a servant. 

He now arranged with the porter, who knowing Edward 
Blake, by the fact of his presenting his young mistress's card, 
promised to obey implicitly. 

To do him justice, he had not the least notion why he was 
to leave his gate open, and come out and watch to see which 
way the young man went. 

And thus the assassination of Edward Blake was quickly 
and skilfully planned. 

Already he had suffered disgrace, and all but ruin, through 
the lovely Spaniard, and now, though he knew it not, death 
stared him in the face. 

Ah ! if Giulia could only have known the terrible conse- 
quences to follow from Don Jose's jealous rage, she would 



EDWARD BLAKE'S ASSASSINATION PLANNED. St 

not have danced three times with the Englishman, or at all 
events, she would not have looked so soft and lovingly on him, 
while her detested suitor's evil eyes were upon them. 

Presently Don Jose sought out Giulia. 

" Giulia, a few words with you in private. I have some- 
thing important to say." 
"Will not to- morrow do?" sheasked, "I want to dance now." 
" To-morrow will not do," he replied sternly. "I shall 
not detain you many minutes. Let us come out into the 
open air ; the night is quite warm and fine." 

With a sigh, Giulia accompanied him, expecting something 
unpleasant, but not dreaming of what was actually coming. 

" Giulia," he said, calling her familiarly by her Christian 
name, "you are aware that I am a suitor for your hand ? " 

" I ought to be," she said pettishly. " You have told me 
so, often enough." 

" You know that I have your father's entire consent to my 
suit ? " 

" I neither know nor care. "What I do know is, that you 
have not my consent, and never shall have, Don Jose." 

And as she spoke, she looked him boldly in the eyes. 

A terrible expression came over his face. 

" Giulia, there will be bloodshed for this night's work ; 
and that is not all." 

" Bloodshed ! " she cried, turning pale. " For what ? 
whose blood shall be shed ? " 

" I saw you dance three times consecutively with some 
unknown rapscallion of an adventurer, a fortune-hunter, 
I suppose ? " 

" And what of that, can I not dance with whom I please ? " 

" No I " he cried fiercely ; " or, if you do, let the man's 
blood be on his head." 

She trembled at the tone of his voice, and the savage look 
on his face, as she spoke. 

" I shall do as I please," she said boldy, " and laugh at 
your insolent threats." 

"You will do as you please," hesaid, slowly. "We shall see. 
Listen to me, Giulia d'Almaviras. You shall be my wife ! * 

" Never ! " she cried, excitedly. 

" I swear by all that is most sacred on the earth," he said, 



£8 love's treason. 

'•' that by fair means or foul means, vou shall be my wife — of 
— or— ' ; 

" Or what ? " she asked as boldly as she could, though 
her heart sank within her. 

" Or my mistress, by fair means or foul " 

The hot blood rushed to her face, the blood of Old Castile, 
that had never yet borne insult tamely. 

Her pride, her modesty, her maidenly dignity, were all 
deeply wounded by this bitter, this ruthless insult. 

She — the proud daughter of the proud Marquis d'Al- 
maviras, to be thus outraged at her father's own villa ! 

Her rage broke through all control. 

She panted and glared at him like an angry tigress. 

"Coward! infamous wretch ! and monster! Would to God 
I had a weapon." 

Then she struck him with the back of her hand in the 
face, and darted away. 

" I will go and seek my cousin, Don Rodrigues," she cried 
to him ; " he will kill you for this insult." 

Don Jose remained motionless for a minute or more. 

" What a vixen ; what a she-devil. She seems untame- 
able. Ah ! ha ! but we shall see — we shall see. I will dare 
all — risk all. I fear not d'Almaviras's vengeance, nor that 
of this fire-eating cousin. It would be as well though to 
have him put out of the way at once. They say he is a 
devil of a swordsman, and though I am no child with the 
weapon myself, it is not worth while running any risk. 
Strong measures must be resorted to. I must carry her off, 
and that at once. When I have got her safely in my power, 
when she is mine by possession, then, ah ! then, she will be 
but too glad to be made my wife. It must be done at once, 
and Bosco is the man to do it. I will see him this very night." 

Then Don Jose went to the gate and dispatched another 
mounted messenger. 

He sent a brief note addressed to II Capitano Bosco, at 
an obscure tavern near the Custom-house quay. 

Thus ran the note : — 

"Captain Bosco,— Meet me, without fail, at the wine-shop in ilia 
Toledo, at half-past twelve, precisely — without fail— 0.1 affairs < f 
importance. Malaxesia." 



EDWABD BLAKE'S ASSASSINATION PLANNED. 39 

It was now eleven o'clock, and some of the company who 
had far to go, or who wished to be home early, were already 
leaving. 

Giulia d'Almaviras, deeply agitated by her interview with 
Don Jose, and still burning with indignation at the gross insult 
offered her, sought and found her friend, Ethelinda Verinder. 

The Yankee girl had singular influence over Giulia, and 
soon succeeded in calming her agitation and persuading her 
there was nothing to fear. 

" As for the insult," she said, "of course he must be called 
to account for that ; but as for the man, he is not to be 
feared. A contemptible, blustering coward ! Believe me, 
Giulia, the fellow is a ruffian. Speak to your cousin when 
you see him, and meanwhile, dismiss him from your thoughts. 
He will not trouble you again to-night, believe me." 

"Oh, Ethel! he threatened such dreadful things. He 
gave me to understand that there should be bloodshed: — 
that the senor with whom I danced to-night three times 
should be killed." 

Ethelinda thought for a moment or two. 

" I believe the man is villanous enough to hire an assassin, 
though too great a coward to risk his own body in a fight. 
I will warn this gentleman. Do you know whether he came 
armed ? " 

" I am sure he did not," said Giulia ; "he let drop as much 
accidentally, as he talked. He said, I think, that he would 
be an easy, though unprofitable prey for robbers ; for that 
he had no arms and only half a doubloon in money about 

him. Then he made some Latin quotation — Cantabit 

I forget the rest." 

" Cantabit vacuus coram latrone viator," 6aid Ethel, smiling, 
" which means — he who has nothing can sing in the presence 
of robbers. You must know, Giulia, that we Yankee girls 
are taught Latin. But, seriously, I will go and look for this 
Mr. Blake. He shall not be assassinated, or run the risk of 
it without warning. Can you get such things as a sword 
and revolver pistol, with ammunition, dear ? " 

" Of course I can ; at least, Sebastian, our major-domo, will 
do so for me. I will tell him I want them just for fear. 
He will not refuse me, I know ; besides, he dare not." 



40 lovk's treason. 

She then started off to find Sebastian, while Ethel found 
Edward Blake, who now, a tor nursing and brooding over his 
wrongs for some half-hour, was as miserable and morose as 
possible. 

" Mr. Blake, I have something to say to you very particu- 
lar, and you must no., kuuu at it." 

He bowed, and waited for her to proceed. 

" You know that you have excited jealousy and animosity 
through dancing so often with Giulia. Now, it has come to 
my ears that your life has been threatened. You must know 
that in this beautiful town of Havannah there are such 
wretches as bravoes — hired assassins. Now, I beg of you 
to be on your guard going home. Pray do not neglect this 
warning." 

" I am deeply grateful to you for the interest you take in 
me. I promise you I will not neglect your warning." 

" You are unarmed. I will see that you have a sword 
and revolver pistol, with ammunition ; and then, even if you 
are attacked, you will have an excellent chance, for I am 
told these assassins never use firearms ; they rely altogether 
on the dagger or sword. Are you going soon ? " 

" In twenty minutes from this time I have an appointment 
with a friend, who will meet me half-way on the road." 

" I must go and find Giulia, and 1 will see that the 
major-domo, when he hands you your cap and cloak, also 
gives you the sword and pistol. Adieu, for the present." 

" Ah ! Miss Verinder, how can I ever be sufficiently 
grutefulfor this undeserved kindness?" he cried, impetuously 
seizing her hand and kissing it. 

"There, there, that will do," she cried, laughing and 
blushing. " Giulia will be jealous, Edward." 

Then, before he could stop her or say a word, she darted away. 

Ethelinda soon found her Mend, and proceeded to tell 
lier of the arrangements she had made for the safety of the 
young English officer. 

" He would accept neither the carriage nor the escort," 
said Ethel, " I am sure ; so, dear Giulia, you need trouble 
yourself no more on that point." 

Giulia shrugged her pretty shoulders, and frowned j she 
disliked having her offer refused. 



EDWARD BLAKE'S ASSASSINATION PLANNER. 4l 

" I want to tell you what I am going to do," she said, after 
a pause; "I think you will agree with me that I am bound 
to make some acknowledgment of this young man's gallant 
conduct the other night, bound, in fact, to make him some 
substantial recompense." 

Ethelinda looked grave and doubtful. 

" I don't see how it can be done," she said. 

" Nonsense ; I do. See here." The Senorita d'Almaviras 
then produced a heavy gold chain, to which was attached 
a watch of exquisite workmanship. Ethel took it in her 
hand and regarded it with admiration. 

"It is very beautiful, and must also be extremely valuable. 
The jewels alone with which the watch is studded must be 
worth a large sum. This centre stone, I perceive, is a 
diamond, and both a large and brilliant one." 

"That gem alone, Ethel," said Giulia, with an air of 
triumph, " is worth three hundred doubloons, and each of 
the smaller ones, ten in number, are worth fifty doubloons 
a piece." 

" This splendid piece of jewellery, then," said Ethel in 
astonishment, " must be worth at least nine hundred 
doubloons." 

" It is worth a thousand doubloons (a Spanish gold 
doubloon is worth over three pounds sterling), Ethel," 
replied the young Spanish beauty. 

" Heavens ! " cried Ethel, " more than fifteen thousand 
dollars ; or three thousand pounds English money ! " 

" Yes, I believe so," said Giulia, with quiet satisfaction. 

" And are you really mad enough to offer such a present 
to this young officer ? " asked Ethelinda ; " he will consider 
it an affront." 

" Affront ! " cried Giulia, flushing up, and her beautiful 
eyes flashing with anger. " It is I shall have reason to feel 
affronted, should he be insolent enough to refuse my offered 
present." 

"Very well, Giulia, have your own way. You will find, 
however, that I am right and you wrong." 

" Let it be so then. The fact of his being insolent enough 
to refuse my gifts with rudeness with cancel all obligations 
of gratitude for the slight service he rendered us. I shall 



12 LOVE'S TREASON. 

see you again presently, Ethel; I shall go and seek him 
now." 

And replacing the watch in its little case, she hurried away 



CHAPTER XII. 

THE PRESENT REFUSED. 

The lovely Ginlia d'Alniaviras found Edward Blake in a sort 
of conservatory or green-house connected with one of the 
saloons on the first floor of the villa. 

It was lighted, but not brilliantly, and the moonbeams, 
streaming through the vines and glass, struggled with the 
artificial light of the coloured lanterns, producing a strange, 
ghost-like effect. 

Giulia had been hurrying from room to room ; and this, 
with the effect of her talk with Ethel Verinder, caused her 
to be flushed and excited. 

The young officer, who had been again brooding over his 
wrongs, his shattered prospects, and gloomy future, received 
her coldly, almost haughtily. 

There was nothing absolutely offensive or rude in his 
manner, but she felt chilled and discouraged thereby. 

However, she had made up her mind to do a certain thing — ■ 
had told her friend Ethel that she would do so, and like a 
self-willed, passionate, impulsive girl as she was, went about 
it at once in the worst possible way, in the manner most 
certain to cause offence to the hot-headed and proud young 
man before her. 

" Setior Blake," she said hurriedly, nervously, " I wish 
to make you some recompense for what you have done for 
me aud for any inconvenience you have suffered." 

Foolishly enough, she spoke in English, though she did 
not know the language at all well, while he spoke Spanish 
almost perfectly. 

Hence arose fresh cause of misunderstanding — fresh reason 
for offence on his part. 

" I'm convinced ! " he said to himself, colouring up with 
indignation. " She speaks calmly of my ruin incurred for 
her as inconvenience, and talks of recompensing me." 

He merely bowed, and said with suppressed satire— 



the present refused. .13 

" Really, senorita, you are too good — too condescending." 

There was nothing in the words, bat the tone jarred pain- 
fully on her ear. 

" Nevertheless," she continued, "see here, senor," opening 
the little case in which lay the jewelled watch and chain, 
"is not this pretty — is it not charming ? " 

He took it from her hand and minutely inspected it. 

"It is, indeed, extremely handsome and doubtless valu- 
able," he said, handing it back to her. 

"Yes, it is valuable," she went on. "These diamonds are 
of the first water, and, moreover, they possess this singular 
advantage, that they can be removed, all or separately, with- 
out in any way spoiling the watch. I mean that it would 
appear, though all were taken out, as though there had never 
been any jewels there." 

" That is a novelty, certainly," he replied indifferently, 
" but I scarcely see the advantage of it." 

"Ah ! bah ! how stupid you are!" she said, with a little 
laugh ; " do you not perceive that if at any time the owner 
of this watch should wish for money — for gold in place of 
these glittering jewels, which, though pretty, are really very 
useless — all he would have to do would be to take out one 
or as many as he wanted. Diamonds are like gold, they 
have a certain fixed value, and there is not a large town in 
the world where there are not diamond merchants who will 
either sell or buy." 

" I perceive," he said, freezingly. "I cannot say that inesti- 
mable advantage of the arrangement did at first occur to me." 

Still, though his tone and manner should have warned her 
she was treading on dangerous ground, she persisted in her 
intention. 

"Ah! senor, perhaps some day you may experience the 
convenience of this arrangement." 

This speech prepared him for what was coming, but he 
said never a word. 

He first flushed up, and then turned deadly pale, his eyes 
flashing angrily. 

" It is for you, senor ; I beg you will accept it as a present 
from me — as some acknowledgment and recompense." 

" Recompense ! " 



ii love's treasok. 

He ground his teeth and cursed inwardly at the insulting 
word. 

She placed the watch and chain in his hand herself, 
retaining the little case. 

He held it for a time in dead silence. 

A silence so long and profound that she felt embarrassed 
and uneasy. 

" Well, senor ? " 

It seemed as though it were only by a great effort he 
found words. 

" Senorita d'Almaviras," he said, after a sort of gasp, and 
in a husky voice, which trembled with passion, " I could 
dash this cursed bauble into pieces at your feet." 

" Senor ! " she cried angrily. 

" Hear me out," he said in tones of concentrated rage, 
and do not presume to interrupt. I wanted but this 
crowning insult to complete your cruel treachery. You 
have brought on me disgrace and ruin. Not content with 
that, you now insult me grossly. Take your paltry watch, 
and may the curse of a ruined and disgraced man — no, I 
must remember — I am a gentleman, and will not curse a 
woman, however deep the injury and insult I have suffered. 
Take your watch, I say." 

But she made no attempt to take it. On the contrary, 
she shrunk back as though frightened. 

Then he carelessly half dropped it, half threw it, into a 
vase in which was planted a tropical flower. 

The aim was a trifle incorrect, for although the watch 
fell in the vase, the chain hung over, and the weight dragged 
the watch over. 

The vase was about four feet from the ground, and as the 
Wiitch fell he knew by the sound that at least the glass was 
broken, if no further damage was done. 

She had remained all this time silent and motionless as a 
statue, save when she shrunk back for a moment. 

Deadly pale she was, and trembled violently, for this 
haughty daughter of Spain had never before been so spoken to. 

Presently she gave utterance to a broken gasp, and then, 
the spell being broken, spoke rapidly and decidedly in her 
own language. 



THE PRESENT REFUSED. 45 

" Leave my presence, this moment. How dare you thus 
insult me, ignorant that you are ! Leave me, I say. Go ! 
proud, arrogant Englishman. Were it not for the service 
you have rendered me, I would order my father's servants 
to fling you from the door. Leave me, I say, instantly." 

" With great pleasure, Senorita d'Almaviras. It was a 
cursed day for me I ever saw you." 

Then, with a haughty bow, he stalked silently away. 

She remained standing for a moment or two, watched 
him till out of sight, and then cowering, shrinking away, 
she hid herself among the luxuriant foliage of exotic plants, 
and falling on her knees with one wild gasp, gave way to a 
storm of passion and of sobs. 

These were tears of rage and mortification, more than 
sorrow. 

Bitter tears wrung from her proud heart, by her sense of 
the utter scorn with which he treated her and her offered 
gift. 

Presently she grew more composed, and tried to think, to 
reason with herself. 

" What an eventful evening this has been ! " said she 
with a sigh ; " nothing but trouble ; first I am insulted, and 
have a deadly quarrel with Don Jose de Malatesta, then by 
this mad Englishman. Well, no matter, we have seen the 
last of him. We shall never meet again, at all events on 
speaking terms." 

L'homme propose, mais Dieu dispose. 

Little did Ginlia think under what strange, exciting, 
terrible circumstances they would next meet. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

THE ASSASSINS MEET WITH MORE THAN THEIR MATCH. 

Blake accepted the arms offered him, but not without 
a struggle with his pride. He placed the pistol in his 
breast pocket, and the sword under his naval cloak, in such 
a way that no one would suspect he was armed. 

He passed out, said good night to the fat and sleepy 
porter at the gate, who nevertheless strictly observed the 
directions of Don Jose de Malatesta, left the gate wide open, 



46 love's treason. 

and coming out into the road, looked earnestly after the 
departing guest. 

The latter walked briskly on, in utter ignorance — not 
dreaming that he was a marked man. 

He walked fast for some ten minutes, and then, slackening 
his speed, lighted a cigarette, and proceeded more leisurely 

He halted all at once, thinking he heard footsteps behind 
him. A cloud was over the moon at the moment, and 
though he looked hard and earnestly, he could see no living 
thing. 

Having seen the piVol right, that every barrel was cocked, 
that the powder was in each nipple, and that it was pro- 
perly capped, he walked on again in a quiet, leisurely 
manner. 

"I shall begin to look out for Jack O'Brien soon," he 
said tohimself ; " I think he is sure to come and meet me." 

Hitherto the road had been always open, at least on one 
side, so that there was abundance of room, and it would be 
difficult, if not impossible, for any one to approach close 
unawares. 

But now the road narrowed and led between a sort of 
avenue of trees, whose branches spreading across reudered 
it much darker. 

Still, Edward Blake had no thought of danger, and walked 
leisurely on, deep in thought. 

This avenue, as it may be called, was about three-quarters 
of an English mile in length, and beyond he could see the 
open road bathed in the moonlight. 

Several times he thought he heard noises to the right 
and left, a crackling as of a broken branch trodden upon, or 
something similar. 

But though for the moment, as the saying is, he "pricked 
up his ears," he paid little attention to it, and as he ap- 
proached the end of the trees, kept a bright look out for his 
friend, Jack O'Brien. 

He had arrived within twenty yards of this, and in another 
two minutes or so would have been out in the open moon- 
light, when he was suddenly startled by a loud whoop or 
yell, and the appearance of a man armed bounding towards 
him. 



THE ASSASSINS MEET WITH MORE THAN THEIR MATCH. 47 

At such a time, or under the like circumstances, even the 
bravest might he excused for being momentarily discon- 
certed — even terrified. 

Blake bounded backwards, and, with heart beating at 
double its usual rate, i'elt for his pistol. 

Before he could draw it, the man again made a run, or 
rather several bounds towards him, and he perceived he was 
armed with a short sword. 

The young man now rapidly recovered his self-possession, 
and loosening the fastening of his cloak, he grasped the 
sword in his right hand, then cocked the revolver in his 
left. 

It had always been a pet theory of his that an officer 
armed with a sword should always use a pistol with the left 
hand. 

By great practice he had arrived at such perfection that 
he could aim as well with the left, even better than with 
the right. 

This was a wonderful point in his favour. 

Scarcely had he loosened the clasp of his cloak and made 
these preparations, when the assassin was upon him. 

He was evidently unprepared for the fact of the intended 
victim being armed — for hitherto the sword he carried had 
been concealed by the cloak. 

Accordingly, when he made a savage cut at Blake's head 
and found that it was skilfully received on a sword blade, 
he staggered back with an oath. But apparently thinking 
that though the affair was not so easy as it looked, he cuuld 
still accomplish it without fail, he returned to the attack, at 
the same time shouting some words whose import unfor- 
tunately the young officer did not catch. 

Had he done so, he would have been warned that the 
villain had a confederate, and that he called to him to attack 
the victim behind. 

The bravo found he had got a much tougher customer 
than he expected or bargained for. 

He was a powerful man — skilful with the weapon he 
wielded. 

But Blake's was both heavier and longer, and he being 
also a good swordsman, it gave him a tremendous advantage. 



48 love's treason. 

The villain was forced after the interchange of a few 
passes, to act entirely on the defensive. 

Then he began to retreat, each moment more rapidly, as 
Blake continued to press him more fiercely. Of course the 
assassin could not see behind him, nor had he time to look 
over his shoulder. 

So all at once it happened that he came full butt with 
his back against a tree. For the moment he could retreat 
no farther. 

That moment was fatal to him. 

With a cry of fury and triumph Blake bounded forward, 
and with one vigorous thrust drove his sword right through 
his body, absolutely pinning him to the tree. 

It took him a moment to withdraw his weapon. 

Then, with a shriek of mortal agony, the bravo fell to 
the earth, where he lay writhing in the agonies of death. 

And at that very moment Edward Blake, who had an 
exceedingly quick ear, caught the sound of another foot- 
step. 

Before he could turn round he found himself attacked by 
another man who had crept on him as noiselessly as possible 
from behind. 

His sword, wet with the blood of the man he had run 
through the body, got somehow entangled in his cloak, 
which, unfortunately, he had not entirely thrown off, and 
before he could make a proper guard, the second villain 
delivered a cut at his head. 

He staggered back, hoping so to avoid the cut. 

His own sword only partially warded it off. and at the 
same moment stumbling over the wounded man, he fell 
towards the ground, and the sword at the same moment 
flew from his grasp. 

The second assassin now had the desperate game of life 
and death in his own hauds. 

He proceeded with cruel deliberation to shorten his sword, 
and prepare himself for the slaughter. 

He felt sure that the victim could not escape him, as he 
seemed half stunned, and his sword had flown more than a 
yard away from him. 

" Ah ! Guiseppe," he said, apostrophysing his dying 



THE ABDUCTION Of THE SENORITA PLANNED 49 

comrade, " at all events, I shall avenge you, and what ia 
more, I shall get the whole of the reward." 

Then he proceeded with terrible deliberation to deliver 
the fatal thrust. 



CHAPTER XIV 

THE ABDUCTION OF THE SENORITA PLANNED. 

Don Jose de Malatesta remained longer at the villa of 
the Marquis d'Almaviras than he intended, and Blake had 
been gone half an hour when he entered his carriage at the 
gate. 

He had heard nothing of the solicitude evinced by the 
two ladies towards Edward Blake in sending him forth 
armed, or he would have been even more savage and furious 
than he was. 

" Did you do as I directed you with regard to that English 
fellow ?" he asked of the old porter. 

" I did, my lord," was the reply ; " I left the gate wide 
open, and stared after him till he was out of sight." 

" Good ; that will do," said Don Jose, and carelessly 
tossed him a piece of gold. 

Then he entered his carriage, and ordered the coachman 
where to take him. 

" Drive like fury to the end of the Strad del Toledo," he 
eaid, " and do not go by the road ; go round by the way of 
the Capuchin convent. Don't spare my horses, but use all 
speed." 

"My lord, the way you name is a good two leagues 
farther." 

" No matter. Do as I order you, and make no remarks. - ' 

The route Don Jose had ordered his coachman to take 
was fully double as far as the straight road into the town, 
by which Blake and the assassins had gone. 

The fact of the matter was, Don Jose did not want to 
see, hear, or be compelled to know anything about the ter- 
rible tragedy which must have been enacted by this time. 

It would be awkward to pass a dead body in the road. 

Or perchance he might not be dead, only dying, and then 

D 



50 love's treason. 

his servants would want to stop, and it would look both 
strange and suspicious should he order them to proceed. 

The coachman made such good speed that in about an 
hour the heavy chariot was lumbering through the streets 
of Havannah. 

At the end of the street called Toledo, in the west quarter 
of the town, the horses were pulled up, and their owner 
alighted. 

In was now more than an hour past midnight, but this 
had been a great fete day, and every wine-shop, especially 
places of bad repute, were open. 

Don Jose seemed to know his way well, and after thread- 
ing several narrow lanes and alleys, entered a low-looking 
wine-shop in a street a little wider and more decent than 
those he had passed through. 

On one side of a long room were a series of boxes, with 
curtains across the upper part, such as may be seen in 
many English eating and coffee houses. Stalking up to the 
end, Don Jose took his seat at the last box of all, which had 
only room for two. 

There were two people in the next box to him, and their 
tongues told that they were English — sailors from some of 
the ships, the don said to himself, as this was a part of the 
town where the jolly tars on the spree used to congregate. 

Taking no heed of them, the Spanish noble called for 
wine, and when it was brought proceeded to revile it and 
the landlord. 

"You need not drink it, senor, unless you like," said the 
host, angrily. 

" I do not intend to," replied Don Jose insolently. " I 
don't object to pay for it ; but I do to being poisoned." 

The proprietor was about to make an angry answer, when 
another person appeared on the scene. 

" I wish you a good night, my lord," he said, respectfully 
doffing his cap. 

" Good night, Bosco. Sit down ; I want to talk to you." 

At hearing him called my lord, and seeing the respect 
which Bosco, an old customer, paid to him, a great change 
came over the manner of the host, and he now no longer 
showed any signs of anger. 



THE AfeLUCTlOtt OP THE SENOKITA PLANNED. 5l 

" Who are those people in the next box ? " asked Don 
JoFe, cautiously. " Do you know them ? " 

Bosco, whom our readers will of course recognise as 
the slaver-captain known as Bosco Negro or Black Bosco, 
listened for a moment. 

" They are English," he said. " Sailors, I suppose. This 
is a great neighbourhood for them.'' 

" They can't understand what we say, even if they over- 
hear ? " 

" Not a word ; do not fear, my lord. I will, with your 
permission, talk bad Spanish negro patois — and then, if 
your lordship will deign to do the same, there can be no 
possible danger." 

" Good. __ Now listen to me." 

Then Don Jose, after looking cautiously around to make 
sure that there were no others within ear-shot, commenced. 

" I have business on hand for you. Business which must 
be done at once, and promptly — dangerous business." 

" Tell me its nature, my lord ; I don't shirk danger, as a 
rule." 

" Are you prepared to run a heavy risk for a heavy stake ? " 

" I am," replied the slave-captain bluntly, after thinking 
for a few moments. 

" That was an unfortunate affair, the loss of your vessel, 
with her cargo of slaves, almost in sight of port." 

" Ah ! my lord, do not mention it, it wrings my heart. 
All my hard-earned, honest gains lost at one run. Your 
lordship must also have been a heavy loser," he added. 

" Well, I should think so. I lost not only the slaves, the 
cost of the voyage, and so forth, but even the vessel. Bat 
let us get on." 

"You feel sure those fellows in the next box can't under- 
stand ? " 

At that very moment the people in question called the 
waiter, and it was abundantly evident to Don Jose, by the 
difficulty they had in making themselves understood, that 
they knew no Spanish. 

So Don Jose was perfectly satisfied, and proceeded to un- 
fold his plans without the least fear or restraint. 

He was wrong, howey«j 



52 love's treason. 

For one of those two men heard mid understood every word. 

"You would like to have a smart craft of your own, 
would you not, Bosco ? " 

" Ah ! your lordship, don't talk about it." 

" And it would be all the better if ;_he was a fast sailer ? " 

"Undoubtedly," replied Bosco, shrugging hi: shoulders, 
not exactly seeing to what this conversation tended. 

" And if she had also steam power — a screw and good 
engines ? " 

" Yes, my lord." 

" Well, Bosco, my good friend, it is in your power to 
have such a vessel, to own her yourself, independent of me 
and all the world." 

"Ah ! if that were but possible, I would make my fortune 
in a couple of years." 

" What do you say to the Vendetta ? " 

" What ! " cried Bosco, in the utmost astonishment. 
"The splendid new clipper yacht your lordship has had 
specially built in Boston ! They say she sails like a witch, 
and can steam over twelve knots an hour." 

" Quite true. She is now lying in the harbour all irady 
for sea. She has coals, provisions, even guus, small arms, 
and ammunition on board, for I thought of taking a cruise 
myself. All you will want would be a crew." 

" Ah ! I could get a crew in six hours." 

"Well, the yacht can be yours. A splendid vessel, of 
between four and five hundred tons, well found, and ready 
for sea. And moreover, a couple of handfuls of gold dou- 
bloons, just to start you going. All this can be yours, if 
you dare but earn it." 

The slave-captain's eyes gleamed, and leaning his elbows 
on the table, his chin on his hands, he asked — 

" How ? " 

"You know the Marquis d'Almaviras ? " 

" I do. One of the wealthiest and most powerful noble- 
men in the island, or in Spain either, for. the matter of that. 
1 have reason to know," he added significantly. 

" You know he has a daughter ? " 

" I do — the Senorita Giulia. People say she is the love- 
liest lady and richest heiress in Cuba." 



THE ABDUCTION OF THE SENOPJTA PLANNED. 53 

" Well, it is with her I have to do, or rather you will have 
to do, if you would earn your reward." 

Don Jose paused for a moment or two, while the other 
said not a word, but looked him steadfastly in the face with 
those dark, treacherous, greedy, tigerish eyes of his. 

" She must be carried off by force or stratagem, and that 
at once — to-morrow, even, if possible. She must be con- 
veyed on board this very vessel, and then you must escape 
to sea with her." 

As Don Jose spoke, his hearer's countenance fell, and 
gradually his complexion assumed a dull leaden colour. 

" Well, Bosco,what do you say ? Speak ! " 

" At any moment the Marquis d'Almaviras can cause me 
to be arrested and executed, that I know for a certain fact. 
Judge, senor, whether he would do so or not, were I to 
attempt to abduct his daughter and fail, or were I to suc- 
ceed and afterwards he should discover I had a hand in it." 

"Ah ! bah ! You must arrange so skilfully that it shall 
never be discovered." 

" Nothing could save my neck from the accursed iron 
collar — the garotte — were the marquis even to suspect I 
had a hand in such a deed." 

"Nonsense ; besides, it's only a risk ;" and then Jose 
added with grim pleasantry, " and besides, Bosco, many a 
better man than you has died on the scaffold, and gone to 
heaven, no doubt, singing Ave Maria.'" 

" Tour lordship is pleased to be witty at my expense. I 
do not look at the affair in the light of a joke, however." 

" Yery well, make up your mind ; you know I pay libe- 
rally and promptly when my work is done. I give you five 
minutes to decide.'' 

The five minutes passed, during which the occupants of 
the next box seemed in earnest conversation, nor gave the 
least sign that they had been paying any attention to what 
had passed between their neighbours. 

The five minutes went by. 

" Well, Bosco, your answer — yes or no ? " 

" What is to be done with the lady, even if she should be 
euccessfully carried off." 

"Ah! that we should have to decide. I was thinking 



51 love's treason. 

of taking her to some uninhabited island, and there leav- 
ing her, with sufficient provisions and necessaries to live. 
Then, in the course of a few weeks, I, in another vessel, would 
seek her out, pretend I knew nothing of the abduction, and 
tell her I had come to her rescue, having received informa- 
tion from a traitor among your crew as to where you had left 
her. She would then look on me as a hero, and feel bound 
to me by gratitude. We could even, if we thought proper, 
have a bit of a sham fight, and I in my vessel could defeat you 
in yours, and finally you could make your escape, leaving me 
covered with glory." 

"The plan seems feasible enough," said Bosco, "if we 
could once get the girl on board." 

" It must be done, Bosco ; it can be done, and shall be 
done. I have sworn I would marry that girl, unless, indeed, 
she should prefer a less honourable connection ; which I 
don't think likely." 

" No, indeed," said Bosco musingly. 

" Her spirits would be broken by her lonely residence on 
the desolate island," continued Don Jose, seeming to warm 
to his subject. " She would be utterly cowed. I would takf 
care to have a priest on board, and the affair should be settled 
there and then. You would gain a splendid clipper vessel, 
with steam power and every thing found ; while I should 
wed the loveliest girl and ricLest heiress in the island." 

" The risk is all on my side," said Bosco drily, " and the 
balance of advantage largely on yours." 

"Well, don't let us bandy words. Yes or no, and then 
we will go into details." 

" Yes, then," said Bosco doggedly. " I will run the risk. 
And now then, in the first place, are you acquainted with an 
uninhabited island, out of the track of ships, which would 
suit ? " 

" I know the exact spot, the very island you want. It is 
in the Caribbean Sea. I came across it by accident. Here, 
I have got the latitude and longitude down in my pocket- 
book." 

Then he read out — 

" Lat., — S. ; long., — W. 1 named it Wedge Island, 
because in shape it's something like a gunner's quoin." 



THE WOULD-BE ASSASSIN. 55 

" That will do exactly. I'll make a memorandum of the 
latitude and longitude." 

Strange to say, one of the Englishmen in the next box 
also produced a memorandum book, and proceeded carefully 
to note down the latitude and longitude of Wed";e Island. 



CHAPTER XV 

EDWARD BLAKE DISCOVERS THE INSTIGATOR OF THE 

ASSASSINATION. 

" And now then we will proceed to talk about the best way 
of carrying the girl off. Have you anything to suggest ? " 

" Force won't do," replied Bosco, shaking his head. 

" No ; we must get her unawares, if possible." 

"Aye, if possible." 

"You think it difficult ; but, my stupid Bosco, though a 
very good slave-captain, you wouLl make a very bad general 
as planner of delicate operations. Now, I have already hit on 
a plan which I think certain of success." 

" Your lordship has a longer head than I have," Bosco 
said, deferentially. 

" You understand that the thing must be done at once, 
without a day's delay — to-morrow even, if possible." 

" It is an affair of so unpleasant and dangerous a character 
that I shall be right glad when it is over, senor. Rest 
assured I shall be as anxious as you to get it done." 

At this monent the landlord approached, and busied him- 
self washing some glasses within earshot. 

" Everything is ready, and I repeat that it must be done 
at once. All we have to do is to catch our bird, and then 
away with her on the wings of the wind, and by the aid of 
steam, to Wedge Island." 

" Speak low, your lordship," said Bosco, who, his own 
life being in danger, had good reason to be cautious. 
" Although those hogs of English in the next box don't un- 
derstand Spanish, the landlord does, and pretty sharp ears 
he's got too. He's pretty close to us now." 

Thus admonished, Don Jose proceeded to unfold his plan, 
but almost in a whisper. 

One of the men in the next box seemed greatly annoyed 



5G LOVE'S TREASON. 

at this, and took every possible means to hear, shifting his 
position so as to get as near as possible. 

But in spite of all, he could only catch just a word or two 
here and there — not enough to give him any idea as to the 
nature of Don Jose's plan to abduct the beautiful heiress. 

The two — the noble and the brutal slave-captain, fit 
companions in villainy, though so different in station — talked 
for fully a quarter of an hour. 

But always in the same low tone. 

" Very well, then," said Don Jose, rising ; " the attempt 
shall be made at once, you say." 

" To-morrow, if they are there, or the next day ; or the 
first day they are seen. No cat ever kept a stricter watch 
over a mouse than shall these ladies be watched and waited 
for." 

Don Jose threw down a piece of money in payment, and 
then walked out, followed by Black Bosco. 

The two Englishmen also rose and hastily followed the 
villainous conspirators — one of them proceeding to get a long 
sword he carried in readiness. 

Don Jose also carried a sword. 

He had not gone a dozen yards, still conversing with his 
accomplice, when he felt himself rudely seized by the should, r 
from behind and swung half round. 

"Don Jose de Malatesta, I want you. I have business with 
you," said a stern voice in Spanish. 

Don Jose turned savagely and laid his hand on his sword. 

Black Bosco clapped his hand on a murderous-looking 
dirk he carried, and seemed prepared to fight for his principal! 

"Look out for the other fellow, Jack," said the one who 
had addressed Don Jose, " I will deal with this villain." 

" Carrambo I " cried Don Jose, grinding his teeth ; " who 
the devil are yon, and. what do you want ?" 

Meanwhiie, Jack O'Brien— for he was one of the two men 
in the box— quietly drew a revolver, and cocking it, said to 
Bosco — 

" Don't you interfere, my man, or I'll put a bullet through 
your brain. Both these gentlemen are armed with swords- 
let them settle their little difference in their own way — keep 
your distance, or I'll make cold meat of you very quick." 



THE WOULD-BE ASSASSIN. 57 

" "Who am I, you ask ? My name, Don Jose deMalatesta, is 
Edward Blake, and I have great pleasure in informing you 
that the two assassins you hired to murder me now lie dead, 
weltering in their blood on the road-side between this and 
the villa of the Marquis d'Almaviras, where you and I passed 
the evening. Defend yourself, villain, for I mean you to die 
by my hand. I mean to kill you as I killed both your 
bravoes." 

Don Jose turned deadly pale, and drew back trembling. 

The shock was a terrible one. 

" Come, sir, defend yourself, or I will run you through 
the body." 

The next moment the swords of the two clashed. 



Some little explanation of this sudden appearance of Blake 
and Jack O'Brien is here necessary. 

When he fell, what from the effect of the sword-cut bat 
half warded off, and the shock of the fall together, Edward 
Blake lay half stupefied for some moments. 

But though he lost his sword, he held fast to his 
revolver in his left hand. 

The deliberation of the assassin was his own destruction, 
and the salvation of the intended victim. The former saw 
that his fallen antagonist had lost his sword, and did not 
think for a moment that he had a pistol ready for imme- 
diate use. 

Steadying himself as quickly as possible, Blake lay still, hnt 
contrived, as the hired murderer approached, to get the pistol 
in a favourable position for instant use. 

As the villain raised his arm to strike, the left hand of the 
young officer suddenly appeared from under his cloak, armed 
with the cocked and loaded pistol. 

Aiming at the breast, he fired. 

The next instant the assassin fell all of a heap. 

All power seemed to go out of his limbs, as though he 
were struck by lightning. 

Edward Blake arose, and proceeded to turn over the body, 
which lay on its face motionless, stone dead. 

Xhe bullet had struck the man on the upper lip just beloi[ 



58 love's treason. 

the nose, and crashing through the brain, of course caused 
instant death. 

" Ah ! my fine fellow," soliloquised Blake, "you are settled, 
safe enough. I'm glad I aimed low, if I had fired at his 
head instead of his breast, I, and not he, would be dead. 
Now we'll see how the other fellow gets on. I see he is still 
kicking and groaning." 

He then proceeded to inspect the first of the two whom 
he had run through the body. 

Raising the head of the would-be assassin, who groaned 
dismally the while, Blake proceeded to pour into his mouth, 
from which blood and froth were bubbling, a good dose of 
brandy. 

This had the desire! effect of partially clearing his throat, 
by causing him to cough and mutter, and also reviving the 
fast expiring spark of life. 

"Oh! ah! merci! Santissima Trinulada! Carac/of" 

Thus the dying ruffian went on calling on the Holy 
Trinity, Blessed Virgin, and all the saints, in one breath, 
and the next moment using the most terrible oaths. 

The last agony was upon him. 

" Speak ! " said Edward Blake. " The name — the name 
of the man who hired you to murder me.'' 

" Don Jose " 

The dying man faltered. 

" Speak, or die this instant ! " 

And with the words the knife was raised and gleamed 
ominously in the moonlight. 

Then, as though by a last effort, there came these words — 

"There were two." 

" Their names ? " 

" Don Jose de Malatesta." 

" Ah ! I thought so. And the other ? " 

"The Senorita Giulia d'Almaviras." 



CHAPTER XYI. 

BLAKE RELATES TO O'BRIRS WHAT HAS HAPPENED. 

This fell on Edward Blake's mind with stunning force. 
He believed it. 



BLAKK'S NARRATION TO O'BRIEN. 59 

The man would not die with a lie on his lips, and such a 
lie, after swearing by all that Spaniards think most holy. 

Edward Biake stood gazing down into the face of the dying 
man, now distorted alike by evil passions and pain. 

" Senor — a doctor — you promised me a doctor — quick, or 
I shall bleed to death." 

This recalled him to himself, and he looked up the road 
to see if there was any vehicle or human being in sight to 
help him with the dying man. 

Presently he discerned in the moonlight a small black 
speck far up the road, and knew that it was some one 
approaching. 

Taking out his pistol, which had done him such excellent 
service, he fired off two barrels, with the intention of attract- 
ing the notice of whoever it might be. 

It had the desired effect, for he soon perceived that the 
figure, that of a man, had quickened its pace almost to a run. 

A hollow groan from the wounded man attracted his 
attention, and he perceived that he was past human aid. 

His face was fearfully distorted, and blood spirted from 
his mouth in jets. 

The assassin was in the last agonies, and as the young 
Englishman looked at his livid face, he gave a shudder and 
a gasping cry, and all was over. 

To make certain, he knelt by his side, and felt if his heart 
beat. 

But life had for ever left the body of the lawless, godless 
bravo, who died as he had lived — by violence. 

" Hallo ! Blake," cried Jack O'Brien, breathlessly running 
up ; "why, what the bLzes is the matter — are these two men 
on the ground drunk, eh ? " 

" JSTo, only dead," replied Blake^ quietly ; " they set upon 
me to assassinate me — hired bravoes they were, and in place 
of their killing me I killed them." 

O'Brien, who had not gone through the excitement, was 
naturally considerably shocked, and in reply to his questions, 
his friend proceeded to relate to him what had happened. 

" And now, Jack, we'll just haul these dead bodies on one 
side, and start for Havannah." 

This was soon done, and the corpses of the two would-be 



60 love's treason. 

murderers laid side by side under a tree, their sightless eyes 
glaring up at the clear vault of heaven. 

The two friends stepped out smartly for Havannah, and 
when the town was reached, Blake said — 

" Jack, I don't feel inclined to go aboard yet — don't know 
that I shall all night. At any rate, I feel inclined to cruise 
about for an hour or two, and drink some of the bad black 
wine. It's a gala night, and these Spanish beggars, who sleep 
all day, will keep it up all night." 

" We needn't have bad wine unless we choose. If we go 
into the Corso we can get good wine, either at Tremont Hall, 
the Yankee Hotel, or one of the first-class Spanish houses." 
"No, Jack, I feel inclined for low life to-night. Besides, 
I must get accustomed to low company, sailors' grog-shops, 
and so forth ; for I must not forget that from the moment 
the court-martial sentence is approved, I am no longer an 
officer in her Majesty's service. I'm just an outcast, a pariah 
— dismissed the service with disgrace. I wonder will they 
play the ' Rogue's March' as I go over the gangway, when 
I bid a final adieu to the ship." 

He spoke very bitterly, and Jack O'Brien endeavoured 
to cheer him up, and get him to look on things in a less 
gloomy light. 

But it was all of no avail. 

Edward Blake still kept up his manner of cynical, bitter 
satire, and the warm-hearted Irishman felt quite gbid when 
they entered a low wine-shop in a low neighbourhood, and his 
companion called for a bottle not of the best but of the 
strongest wine. 

They had not been there five minutes before Don Jose 
himself entered, to the great surprise of Blake, who was all 
but betraying himself. He felt inclined to rush upon the 
villain, seize him by the throat, denounce him as a hirer of 
assassins- and call him to account for his deed. 

But chance, or perhaps something above chance, pre- 
vented this. 

Edward Blake scarce knew why, himself, but a certain 
something prompted him to sit quiet and observe the action 
of the Spaniard. 

It flashed across his mind — Perhaps he had appointed to 



*HB DUEL. 61 

meet his bravoes here, learn the result of their attempt, and 
pay them the blood-money. And so it happened that Blake, 
knowing Spanish, heard every word of the infamous plot to 
carry off the lovely Giulia d'Aimaviras. 

Having made a note of the latitude and longitude of 
Wedge Island, where it was proposed to carry the girl when 
abducted, and also being aware that the attempt to carry 
her off would be made by water, he felt pi'etty sure of being 
able to defeat their plans. " She has returned me evil for 
good — has betrayed me, caused my ruin, and insulted me ; 
but I will save her from the fate which threatens her, and 
then — then I will tell the proud Spanish beauty to whom 
she owes her preservation." 



CHAPTER XVII. 

THE DUEL BETWEEN BLAKE AND DON JOSE DE MALATESTA. 

As he listened to the plot for abducting the lovely daughter 
of the Marquis d'Aimaviras, Edward Blake felt a good deal 
staggered in his belief as to the complicity of the young 
lady in his attempted assassination. 

" Surely," he said to himself, " she cannot be hand and 
glove in an assassination plofc with this Don Jose, who is 
plotting against her ! " 

He pondered over this for a moment or two, and then the 
thought came— 

" She, of course, knows nothing of Don Jose's designs 
against herself. Is it just possible, even probable, that in 
her fit of anger against me, she may have hastened to him, 
told him she hated me ; and then, who can say that the 
two did not become partners in iniquity, and plan my 
murder ?" But the more he thought of it, the more his mind. 
revolted from the idea. 

"It is too horrible. I cannot, will not believe that human 
nature — woman's nature — can be so utterly vile, monstrously 
wicked." 

" And yet " — this came as an after-thought — " these Spa- 
niards are a strange race — treacherous, vindictive, and pas- 
sionate, almost beyond belief. And yet, I can't believe it ; 
I won't believe it. That wretch died with a lie on his lips." 



62 LOVE'S TREASON. 

His last thought, and final resolve, as he followed Don 
Jose and Bosco from the wine-shop, took this shape — 

" Let it be as it may, whether she planned my death with 
this ruffian don or not, I will save her from her threatened 
fate, and call him to account for his villany." 

In a few moments more, Blake and Don Jose were engaged 
in mortal combat, O'Brien keeping Bosco quiet by means of 
his revolver pistol, which he levelled every now and again at 
the breast of the slave-captain. 

The combat was not concluded at once. 

Don Jose was a skilful swordsman, while Blake was far 
too impetuous, and once narrowly escaped being run through 
the body, the sword of the Spaniard passing under his arm, 
and even grazing his ribs. 

The keen blades clashed and hissed like angry serpents, 
aud for a while the issue of the combat was doubtful. 

But presently the youth and vigour of Blake began to tell, 
as did also his superiority of sword in weight and length. 

But just as victory seemed about to declare in favour of 
the Englishman, he slipped, all but fell, and received a wound 
in his right shoulder. 

He recovered himself quickly, however, and after a 
moment's breathing-time the fight was again commenced. 

People now came running to the spot, attracted by the 
clash of steel, and the affair grew more exciting each mo- 
ment. Each combatant was encouraged by cries and shouts ; 
the Spaniards taking part with Don Jose, while some Euglish 
sailors cheered for the young officer, who was recognised by 
his uniform cap, with gold band and crown. 

Jack O'Brien, too, had a deal to say, still keeping a sharp 
look-out on Black Bosco, who, but for his vigilance, would 
very quickly have rendered efficient aid to his principal. 

" Keep your point lower, Blake, my boy. Spit him through 
the stomach. There's no ribs to turn the blade aside. Now 
you have him. Give him the Connemara thrust I taught 
you. Ah! then, a ma diaoul! that was a narrow shave." 

Suddenly Blake got an unexpected advantage. The 
Bword-blades became locked in some way, and in the natural 
order of things one or other of the combatants should have 
been disarmed 



THE DUEL. 63 

But either Blake was not prompt enough to seize the 
opportunity, or the don was skilful enough to avoid it. 

An instant after, however, Don Jose lowered the point of 
his sword, sprang back, and sought shelter among the crowd, 
which was now every moment augmenting. 

" The coward ! " shouted Edward Blake, and reckless of 
consequences, dashed after him, exclaiming — "You shall 
not escape me thus." 

" My wrist is sprained," cried Don Jose. 

" It's false. Coward and villain! Stand on one side, you 
people, while I settle accounts with this villain." 

Fortunate was it for the young Eglishman that there were 
a good number of English sailors and marines present, or, 
as he impetuously rushed after his foe, he would most pro- 
bably have got an ugly stab in the back. 

Suddenly the tramp of feet was heard in measured cadence, 
and a body of armed men came sharply round the corner. 

" Ha ! " cried Don Jose in tones of triumph, "the night 
patrol. Arrest me this assassin who attacked me in the 
street. Officer of the guard, I am Don Jose de Malatesta. 

" Assassin yourself ! Coward and traitor ! " shouted 
Edward Blake furiously. " Arrest Don Jose de Malatesta. 
I charge him with hiring two bravoes to murder me. 

" Spaniards," Blake cried in their own language, "this 
night, while returning from the fete of the Marquis d'Al- 
maviras, I was set upon by two assassins. Fortunately, I 
was armed. One I shot through the head, the other I ran 
through the body. Both are now dead ; but, before the 
second one died, I extracted from him — my sword at his 
throat — the name of the villain who employed him. That 
name was, as I suspected, Don Jose de Malatesta, who now 
shrinks away like the coward he is. Arrest him, officer of 
the guard. I charge him with attempted murder." 

Then, in a few brief words, Blake proceeded to address the 
English sailors and marines, of whom there were now a 
goodly number. 

The Spaniards, on hearing this charge made by the Eng- 
lishman against Don Jose, were, for the most part, silent. 
He was a powerful nobleman, and much dreaded by reason 
of the great influence he hari with the authorities. 



64 LOVE S TREASON'. 

Some few murmurs of doubt, or pretended doubt, arose. 

" Impossible ! the Englishman speaks falsely." 

"Viva Don Jose de Malatesta ! " said one more enthusi- 
astic than the rest. 

" Down with Don Jose de Malatesta for a murdering 
scoundrel ! " shouted Blake furiously. " Englishmen, stand 
by me ! Officer of the guard, arrest Don Jose de Malatesta, 
on a charge of murder, of which I, an officer of her 
Britannic Majesty's ship , accuse him." 

"Down with the murdering Spaniard !" was the cry among 
the English sailors, and they clustered together, as if for an 
onslaught on the Spaniards. 

Most of the British tars were at least half drunk, some 
quite so, while few were armed. 

So that in case of a conflict, the odds would be heavily 
against them. 

Don Jose and the Spaniards saw this, and hence their 
demeanour became more bold and defiant. 

Malatesta himself laughed scornfully, and cried out — 

" What an absurdity ! Officer of the guard, do your 
duty, and arrest me this Englishman, who attempted to 
assassinate me. Arrest him, I say." 

The officer, followed by the soldiers of the night patrol, 
advanced towards Blake. 

" Englishmen, stand to me ! " cried the latter, flourishing 
his sword. "I brand that man as an attempted murderer, 
and now he seeks to avoid the punishment of his crime by 
having me arrested." 

" Seize him ! " shouted Malatesta furiously. 

" This for your heart, scoundrel ! " cried Blake, firing his 
revolver. 

Jack O'Brien, however, who, hot-blooded Irishman as he 
was, had on this occasion most prudence, struck up his hand, 
otherwise, it must have wounded some among the crowd, if 
it did not strike Don Jose. 

No one save O'Brien saw whence the shot came, which, as 
events turned out, was fortunate. 

Now, however, the balance of numbers, power, and 
authority, began to show on the side of Don Jose. 

The officer of the patrol, who had hesitated for a moment 



TIIK DUEL. 0*5 

o" two at, niHt, was determined on effecting the arrest of the 
i'Jnglishman. 

The soldiers were ordered to fix bayonets, and deploying 
into line, advanced towards Edward Blake. 

"We must make a bolt of it, Blake, my boy," cried 
O'Brien, "or, bejabers, we'll be in quod before we know where 
we arc" 

"Bolt be " cried Blake excitedly. " I shall stand 

my ground, and if I can get a shot at that scoundrel, Dol 
Jose, I'll put a bullet through his brain as sure as my name 
is Blake." 

But though Edward Blake would not retreat, his more 
prudent friend so contrived that a number of English blue- 
jackets were between him and the Spanish soldiers. 

The latter could not get at Blake, whom they were ordered 
to make prisoner, without first scattering the sailors and 
marines who covered him. 

" Charge ! " shouted the officer, whom Don Jose was pre- 
viously urging on to arrest the Englishman. "Charge, 
men ! be ready to fire if necessary." 

Bloodshed seemed now imminent, when a diversion 
occurred. 

Again the measured tramp of disciplined men was heard, 
and in half a minute a large picket of marines from the 
British men-of-war marched on the scene. 

This produced a total change in the aspect of affairs. 

The Spaniards had now an equal number of Englishmen, 
as well armed as themselves, arrayed against them, and it 
now became evident that the arrest of Blake would not be 
permitted by the officers in command of the British force. 

Jack O'Brien, in a very few words, explained the state of 
affairs, and Edward Blake having been almost forced behind 
the ranks of the marines, the officer in charge advanced to 
parley with the one in command of the Spanish patrol. 

The Englishman accused Don Jose of hiring assassins to 
murder him. 

Don Jose, on his part, accused the Englishman of attempt- 
ing to assassinate him in the street, and demanded his arrest. 

Under the circumstances, a sort of compromise was errived 

At 



68 love's treason. 

It was agreed that the official, half magistrate, half police 
inspector, called alcalde, should have the case submitted tc 
him, and his decision be abided by. 

Accordingly, the whole party marched off to the part of 
the guard-ioom where that official sat ready to hear charges 
and commit prisoners to the cells, to be brought before a 
higher authority in the morning. 

It was an imposing display of force which the Spanish 
patrol and English picket made together, as they marched 
into the courtyard of what we may call the station-house. 

Blake stated his complaint calmly, relating how he had 
been set set upon by two assassins, and how he had slain 
both. 

Also, how he had forced from one, at the point of death, 
an avowal as to who was his employer. 

Don Jose told his tale — How he had been suddenly set 
upon in the streets by this Englishman, whom he did not 
know and thought must be mad. 

" Senor," said the alcalde to Blake, " the court opens at 
twelve o'clock to-morrow. You can, if you please, attend, 
and prefer your charge against his lordship." 

And so the affair ended, by no means to the satisfaction 
of Edward Blake, who had a foreboding that he would gee 
scant satisfaction from Spanish justice. 

As for Don Jose, he bowed slightly to the official, and 
etalked haughtily away. 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

TIIE RESULT OF THE COURT-JtfARTIAL. 

The following day was an eventful one to Ned Blake. In 
one respect it sealed his doom. 

At eight bells he was called aft to the cabin, and there 
the sentence of the court-martial, having been approved of, 
was read to him. 

It was as he had felt assured all along. He was sentenced 
to be dismissed Her Majesty's service, and to forfeit all 
claim to pension or prize-money. The cashiered officer 
bowed in utter silence, and with a white face and sinking 
heart descended to his berth to take off the uniform he had 



THE RESULT OF TIIE CO HUT- MARTIAL. 67 

no longer a right to weir ; to pack up his traps and make 
arrangements for leaving the ship for ever. He felt utterly 
crashed now that the blow had fallen, although he had 
expected it, and was alike heedless of the pitying glances 
bestowed on him by some, and the look of malignant 
triumph with which First Lieutenant Walker favoured him 
as he passed him on his way to his cabin. Even Jack 
O'Brien, the cheery, hopeful, honest-hearted Irishman, his 
true friend, was unable for some time to arouse him from 
the sort of despairing lethargy into which he had sunk. 
Presently, however, a reaction set in, and two or three little 
circumstances contributed to ra>se his spirits. 

Sailors are proverbially superstitious, and have belief in 
omens. 

At the very moment he and Jack O'Brien went over the 
gangway into the boat which was to take them ashore 
— for Jack insisted on accompanying his friend to the 
court to bear witness in his favour, if possible, against the 
Spanish noble — an accident happened to the first lieutenant. 

" Good luck to you, Lieutenant Blake," said a warm- 
hearted sailor, putting his head through one of the bow ports 
as the boat shot by. " There's been a sign for you. You'll 
have good luck yet. The first lieutenant, bad luck to him 
wherever he goes, has just fallen down to the orlop deck 
and smashed his face so that his own mother wouldn't know 
him." 

Ned Blake smiled, more with pleasure at this evidence of 
sympathy on behalf of the seaman thag any malicious plea- 
sure at the accident to his enemy. 

This was omen No. 1. Omen No. 2 was of quite a different 
nature. 

For two days there had hovered about the rigging of the 
vessel a strange bird — a dove — evidently an escaped pet, 
probably of some fair lady who was at that moment mourn- 
ing its loss. The endeavours to capture it had been vain, 
and no one was cruel enough to think of shooting it. 

As the boat carrying Edward Blake and all his property 
ashore left the ship, the bird took wing from the royal yard 
where it had perched, soared a oft, and then descending in 
graceful curves, circled about the boat, and so accompanied 



C8- LOVES TREASON'. 

her to the shore. The men rowing, heedless of the midship- 
man in charge, gave a "hurrah !" and in a few seconds a ring- 
ing cheer from the ship told that the incident had been 
noticed, and that the men sympathised with the disgraced 
officer. 

"There, my boy, cheer up," said Jack O'Brien, clapping 
him on the back, "cheer up, cheer up. Your star will b; 
shortly in the ascendant. Even the birds of the air pro- 
phesy good luck to you." 

Now, to hard-headed, matter-of-fact people, it may s ?cm 
absurd and thildi.di, but Xed Blake felt his spirirs wonder 
fully affected bv these two trifling incidents, especially the 
last'. 

•' All's well that ends well." 

"Xed, my boy," said Jack O'Brien, "who knows but that 
this may not prove a fortunate thing for you in the loni; 
run ? "VYho can tell— it may lead to success, fame, wealth ?" 
" It shall," cried Edward Blake, as he leaped ashore. 
" I have been dismissed with disgrace from the service o*f 
Her Mnjesty of Great Britain ; I will carve out my own 
future with sword, heart, and brain, and the day will c u e 
when all the world shall own the foul injustice done to 
Edward Blake." 



The investigation before the Spanish authorities was con- 
ducted with the greatest apparent fairness. 

The British consul was present, as was an English attor- 
ney, to watch over the interests of a British subject. 

In accordance with Spanidi custom, the bodies of the two 
dead bravoes, which had beeu sought for and found, were 
brought into court, and presented a ghastly spectacle. 

Edward Blake told his tale, and the two corpses con- 
firmed it, as also did the examination of the surgeon, who 
reported that one of the dead men had slight wounds on 
the throat, as though of knife-pricks, which tallied with the 
account of the prisoner as to how he obtained the name of 
the instigator of the bravoes. 

Don Jose, when called upon, simply denied all knowledge 
of the matter, and solemnly swore, standing by the two dead 



THE SENOIUTA DECLINES TO SKE EDWARD BLAKE. (J9 

bodies, that he had never seen them in his life to the best of 
his belief. 

The court took some time to deliberate, and the following 
decision was then announced — 

" That the Englishman had been attacked, as he stated, by 
two villains, who were, however, merely murderous robbers. 

" That one of them, either for malice or in the hist deli- 
rium of death, had accused Don Jose de Malatesta of having 
hired him and his comrade to commit murder. 

" And finally, that the charge against Don Jose was utterly 
false and without a shadow of foundation." 

The Spaniards in court clapped their hands, and in other 
ways manifested their approval of the result. 

Edward Blake, however, was by no means satisfied. The 
matter was ended so far as Spanish justice was concerned, 
but he resolved it should not rest there. 

Contriving to get close to the don ere he left the court-, 
he tapped him on the shoulder. 

" Don Jose de Malatesta, you have failed in your attempt 
to have me assassinated, and I have failed in having you 
punished for your cowardly crime. When next we meet, I 
shall win, and you will bite the dust ! " 

Don Jose only replied with a sarcastic laugh, and then 
1 aughtily turned his back on the young Englishman, as 
though he thought him unworthy of further parley. 



CHAPTER XIX. 

THE SENORITA DECLINES TO SEE EDWARD BLAKE. 
Blakk and O'Brien fiuding themselves baffled in obtain- 
ing satisfaction, lesolvcd to frus'rate the contemplated 
ibd notion of the senorita. 

While on this topic, Bl -ike's attention was attracted by t'.e 
peculiar appearance of a vessel in the bay 

On inquiry,, it proved to be the Vendetta. He re- 
collected the name instantly. O'Brien and he resolved to 
proceed at once to the Villa Castelmarina, to warn the 
marquis. 

To reach there the sooner they hired horses, paying 
extra price for ones in good condition. 



70 loyl's treason. 

Scarcely had our friends galloped off, when several craft 
might have been seen approaching the stea:n yacht — alight 
boat swiftly propelled by half a dozen oarsmen ; several 
other, but heavier and more clumsy, row boats ; and lastly, 
a barge or lighter, which, though she had her sail set, was 
towed by two boats in order to increase her speed. 

They were evidently in a great hurry to get alongside the 
steamer. 

In the course of half an hour all these craft reached her, 
and a few minutes afterwards the light, swift boat, rowed by 
men, left her gangway, and was steered for the shore, making 
as nearly as possible straight for a little pleasure-house 
at the water's edge. 

Had Blake seen them he would have recognised an old ac- 
quaintance in the stern sheets, and also would have noticed 
that the crew of the boat were all negroes — powerful fellows, 
but hideously ugly. 

When within a hundred yards or so from the shore, he in 
command bade them cease rowing, and then lighting a 
cigarette, he lazily reclined in the stern of the boat, allowing 
her to drift slowly up the bay with the tide. 

Occasionally he gave an order for a few strokes to be 
male by a couple of the negroes, and so arranged that the 
boeit, as she floated up the bay, also gradually but surely 
approached the shore. 

We will now leave her and follow the fortunes of our 
friends, Blake and O'Brien, who are bound in hot haste in 
the same direction as the boat. 

Our excitable hero, it may be believed, did not suffer the 
grass to grow beneath his horses' feet, and when they drew 
rein at the gate of the M irquis u'Almaviras' country house, 
both steeds were in a perfect lather of foam. 

Blake struck violently with his whip at the huh wooden 
gate, and when the fat, lazy, and pompous porter appeared, 
cried imperiously — 

"The Marquis d'Almaviras — I must see*him at once." 

" Impossible, seaor." 

" I tell you, I must see him. It is a matter of life and 
death, aye, of greater import perchance than life and death — 
of honour and dishonour to him and his." 



THE SENORITA DECLINES TO SEE EDWARD BLAKE. 71 

He spoke so excitedly, and looked so strange and threat i n- 
ing, that the gate porter felt quite alarmed, and was 
exceedingly civil. 

" But his lordship is not within, senor : so it is impossible 
you can see him." 

" The devil ! Where then is he ? " 

" He was here only an hour ago, senor. T think he has 
gone further up the road, to a farm — La Esmeralda is the 
name of it — about two miles from this." 

" The senorita then, his daughter — she is in." 

" She is in, senor, but it is impossible you should see her." 

"Bat I must see her ; and I will see her. Here, wait a 
minute." 

He took out his pocket-book, and wrote on the back of 
one of his cards— 

" Senoeita, — I wish to see you, and that instantly, if possible, on a 
matter of great importance. 

" Yours obediently, 

"Edwabd Blake." 

" Take her this," he said, handing it to the porter. 

" I will have it forwarded to her presently, senor," replied 
the old man calmly. 

" Ten thousand devils ! send it up at once, I tell you," 
roared Blake. 

" No, senor — not for ten million devils," said the old man 
calmly ; for he had now recovered his equanimity, a little 
disturbed at first by the violent language and excited de- 
meanour of the visitors. 

"You won't — why not? I ask you. Must I dismount 
and strangle you ? " 

" You ask me, why not ? I will tell you," he replied. 
" Her ladyship has just ordered her bath, and cannot be 
disturbed for at least an hour." 

" Give it to her as soon as you can, then ! " cried Blake. 
" Come on, Jack, let's be on the move again." 

" Where to now ? " asked O'Brien. 

" To this farm, La Esmeralda, if we can find it. I woul 1 
quite as soon see the marquis as the girl, in the first instance." 

The next moment the two companions were clattering 
down the road at full gallop. 



Tl LOVE'S TREASON. 

The porter formed just the same opinion as did the host 
of the inn — that one of them at lea*t was stark mad. 

Meanwhile, Blake and O'Brien discovered, in the first 
place, that two miles Spanish was a very diiferent thing from 
the same distance English, and, moreover, after thoroughly 
losing themselves without finding the slightest trace of the 
place they sought, were forced to retrace their steps, 
and, in the course of about a couple of hours, again drew up 
at the gate of the villa with thoroughly jaded horses, them- 
selves almost as much fatigued. 

Excitement keptB!ake up, while O'Brien, staunch to the 
back-bone, would not give in before his friend. 

He had embarked in the adventure with him, and deter- 
mined to see him through it. 

" Now, then, old devilskin," cried Ned Blake, jumping 
from his horse, " show me to the senorita ; she has left her 
bath long before this, I will warrant." 

" Senor, here is a note for you, from her ladyship," was 
the reply. 

Blake took the dainty little document, looked at the 
address, and tore it open. 

Thus it ran — 

" Senor, — I am directed by my friend to say (she not writing English 
fluently) that she declines to have any further communication with 
you in any shape; in fact, declines your acquaintance altogether, and 
desires that you will never again address her cither verbally or ir 
writ.ng. 

"Ethelinda Veeindeb. 

" GlUMA DB COKDOVA d'AlMAVIRAS. 
"To LlETTTEXANT BLAKE, H.M.S. ." 

Blake glared at this laconic epistle, and grew red in the 
face from rage. 

Suddenly a thought seemed to strike him. 

" Where is the senorita ? " he asked of the porter in the 
house. 

For a wonder the old man answered, and truly — 

" She was in the pleasure gardens with the other lady 
when your card was delivered to her." 

"Humph!" 

Blake said nothing, and the pair rode slowly away from 
the gate. 



THE SENORITA declines TO SEE EDWARD BLAKE. 73 

" I mean to ?ee that girl and warn her of her danger, n 
Bpite of herself. I have set my mind on it, and I will do i' ," 
Baid Blake. 

To O'Brien's question as to how he meant to effect hia 
purpose, he said — 

" They are at this time in the garden, yon see, Jack, and 
will very likely stroll about there for a i onple of hours this 
beautiful afternoon. Well, we can't get at the garden by 
land through the house, but there's no reason we should net 
by water." 

" Swim our horses up, I suppose, eh?" remarked O'Brien, 
satirically. 

"Nothing of the sort. Don't be a fool. We'll get a 
boat." 

" Will we ? I'd 1 ike to know where ? " 

" That's soon settled. About a mile up the road I noticed 
a house or hut, close to the edge of the bay." 

" Well, we can't go there in a hcuse or a hut ? " 

"Just wait. Where there's a hut close to the water, the 
chances" are it's a fisherman's, or some one who gets his 
living in some such way." 

" Well ? " 

" Well, don't you see, he wil' have a boat. All we have 
to do, is to fasten up our horses, tell him to feed them, 
take the boat, and quietly row to the end of the garden of 
the Villa Castelmarina, then letting the boat glide up in the 
shade of the trees, effect a landing, and gain our object.", 

"A very pretty little plan indeed, bnt open to a few 
objections. In the first place, if this fisherman, or whatever 
he is, won*t let us have the boat ? " 

" Offer him money. If that won't do, knock him on the 
head, give him nothing, and take the boat by force," replied 
Blake, promptly. 

" Well, you are a cool fellow, certainly, and a most con- 
foundedly obstinate one. I suppose you must have your way " 

And the result was that Blake did have his way ; and 

shortly after, things having turned out as he had guessed, 

the pair of them were paddling gently along the Bhore 

towards the villa. 

Various projections, points, and a luxurious growth of trees, 



74 love's treason. 

prevented their boat being seen by another, with six black 
oarsmen and a man in the stern-sheets. 

And for the same reason they did not see this boat which 
was slowly coming in the same direction. 

Both were approaching the end of the garden of the Villa 
Castelmarina ; that carrying Blake and O'Brien most rapidly, 
for the commander of the other boat was content to let her 
drift, with an occasional dip or two of the oars. 

CHAPTER XX. 

EDWARD BLAKE MANAGES AN INTERVIEW WITH THE 
SENORITA. 

BlaK'I plied the oars of the boat — a small and easily man- 
aged one, while O'Brien steered under his directions. 

The tide being with them also, they approached the 
grounds of the marquis pretty rapidly. 

He took the boat close in shore, and when within fifty 
yards of the end of the garden ceased rowing, and allowed 
her to drift close under the shade of the trees and luxuriant 
vegetation. 

Noiselessly he guided her to a quiet nook, a sort of little 
creek, where he might easily effect a landing. 

As soon as she touched the shore, he sprang out and 
proceeded to make her fast to the root of a tree. 

He was so occupied in this that he did not hear the rustle 
of dresses or light footsteps only a few feet away. 

" Come on, Jack," he said, " get ashore, you may as well 
see the fun." 

O'Brien was not very quick in landing, as he managed to 
stumble over an oar. 

" What a devil of a row you make, Jack, to be sure." 

"Hallo ! " cried O'Brien, suddenly starting back just as 
he was about to leap a'hore, aud gazing in astonishment at 
some object behind Blake. 

'• Why, what the devil's the matter, man ?" cried the latter. 

" Look behind yon." 

There was an op'jn space of turf from where the prow of 
the boat touched land, for some three or four yards, where 
there were some shrubs artificially planted, which hid all 
bevond. 



BLAKE HAS AN INTERVIEW WITH GIULIA. 75 

When Blake turned round, he saw what startled him as 
it did O'Brien, though it was the very object he sought. 

JSTo one else than Ginlia d'Almaviras herself. 

Her friend Echelinda had ju^t pus'ied through the bushes 
and joined her, as Ned Blake turned round and encountered 
their indignant looks. 

As for Giulia, she was pale as death, and speechless with 
anger at this daring intrusion of the Englishmen. She 
absolutely trembled with passion, and Ethel Verinder, noting 
how her eyes flamed and her bosom heaved with rage, sought 
to calm her. 

" Perhaps, dear Giulia, it is a mistake on the part of these 
two young men." 

She said not a word, but stood looking at Blake (who now 
felt very foolish), as though she would like to scorch him 
up or slay him with that glance. 

" Senorita," he said in a faltering voice, " you will pardon 
my seeking this means of an interview." 

She said never a word, but stood looking at him just in 
the same way, waiting for him to go on. 

" Senorita, I must speak with you on matters of import- 
ance." 

" Leave this place instantly," she cried, stamping her 
foot on the ground — " leave it, I say, both of vou, or I will 
call my father's servants, and have you scourged with whips. 
English gentlemen, forsooth ! Gentlemen do not insult 
ladies, and then intrude their hateful presence Begone. 
I say, men ivilhout either shame or honour.'' 

Blake turned white at this deadly insult. O'Brien did 
not understand Spanish, but he knew enough tc be quite 
aware of what the beautiful vixen had called them. 

" Come, Blake ; after that insult we cannot stay. If she 
were on the brink of a precipice, and 'I could save her, I 
would not." 

Ned Blake said never another word, but violently cast off 
the painter, got into the boat, and shoved her off. 

" Senorita," he said, his face pale as death, his eyes now 
in turn flaching fire, "remember my words. You will 
bitterly regret this — most bitterly — and that ere long." 

" Ha ! ha ! ha ! " scornfully laughed the beauty ; " he 



?6 LOVE "^ TREASON. 

threatens ! brave man ! Come. Ethel, let us leave those two 
fellows to their dirty boat. I am tired of seeing them." 

Then she strolled away, arm-in-arm with her friend. 

Edward Blake sat himself down to the oars, and rowed 
furiously, viciously, for some ten minuta§, without any object, 
except to get away from the spot. 

"I sav, don't yon think it would be more sensible to have 
the sail up ? " suggested O'Brien. " If we stand well out 
into the bay, for a mile or thereabouts, we can fetch back to 
the fisherman's hut in one tack." 

His advice was taken, and, in half an hour's time, the pair 
of them were again ashore, seeing. to their tired horses — 
which they found so completely knocked up that at least 
a couple of hours' rest was necessary before they could 
mount them again. Neither had noticed the boat rowed by 
six negroes, and with them a man in the stern-sheets, which, 
always keeping close in shore, was now in turn approaching 
the grounds of the marquis's villa. 

" Well, old boy," said O'Brien, " we've made a pretty 
mess of it. What next ? " 

' I think I shall give her up." 

" That's right, give her up. She's a vixen and no mis- 
take- as handsome and as fierce a3 a tigress." 

'• Yes, ' muttered Blake. "I think I will leave her to her 
fate now : bnt I'll think of it." 



CHAPTER XXI. 

THE ABDUCTION. 

Backwards and forwards paced Giulia and Ethel from a spot 
Dear the house almost down to the water s edge. 

They had no suspicion of a boat quietly and cautiously 
brought alongside the shore in a secluded spot, when they 
were at the end of the garden farthest from the sea. 

They knew nothing of six negroes, directed by another 
man, almost a negro in look, a very demon in crime, creep- 
ing and crouching among the bushes. 

Of all this they were in happy ignorance. 

" Shall we go in ? " asked Ethel, anxiously, for, to tell the 
truth, she was getting tired. 



THE ABDrCTTOV. 77 

" Qaarter of an hour more, Ethel dear : the fresh air seems 
to do me good — the son has scarcely set yet." 

Once more they turned and walked down to the end of the 
garden. It was fully three hundred yards in length, so a 
slight noise at one end would not be heard at the other. 

It was not straight, and besides, there were numbers of 
trees and shrubs, 60 that it was impossible to see from the 
upper end one half way down. . 

Just as the two young ladies reached the little pleasure 
house looking out on the calm bay, where they had spent so 
niauy happy hours — a low whistle was heard. 

So low was it as seareek to attract the attention of either. 

An instant afterwards there was a crashing of shrubs and 
foliage, and the tramp »f heavy feet. 

Giulia had but jnst time to give vent to a faint shriek 
when she found herself surrounded by a number of gigantic 
negroes. 

In a second, a cloth or rug was thrown over her head, and 
she felt herself forcibly held in a grasp of iron. 

She conld neither struggle nor cry out. 

Meanwhile, Ethel Terinda had been served the same way, 
and then both were dragged through the bushes towards the 
boat. 

Arrived there, he who se emed leader of the party said — 

" Get ready to uncover the face of the fair girl. I don't 
want her, so I'll just take the Liberty of gagging her and 
leaving her." 

Black Bosco, for the reader has of course discovered it 
was he, now pulled out a murderous-looking knife. 

" Now, young woman," he said, addressing Ethel, "yoar 
face is going to be uncovered that I may gag you — keep 
quiet, and no further harm shall happen to you. But if 
you open your lips to scream, this knife in your throat shall 
stop the noise — I swear it, by heaven." 

Ethel was a brave girl, but she would have been more 
than mortal if, in face of this threat, and seeing the terrible 
knife, she had dared to scream. 

Certain it is, that Bosco would have kept his word, and 
murdered her instantly. 

Then the body would have been placed in the boat, a 



78 LOVE'S TREASON. 

weight attached to it, and sunk in the sea, which would pro- 
bably for ever have hidden all traces of the erime. 

Ethel was gagged and bound to a tree. 

Of course she would soon be found when they were missed, 
and search made for them ; but by that time the villains 
would have time to escape. 

As for Giulia d'Almaviras, already weakened by excite- 
ment, she fainted clean away, and they had no trouble in 
getting her into the boat. 

" Now, then, my lads, shove off, and pull altogether ; 
you've earned twenty dollars a-piece and the privilege of 
getting drunk once without being flogged, by this evening's 
work." 

The negroes grinned, and in five minutes after the low 
whistle sounded the boat was swiftly shooting over the 
placid wafer of Havannah Bay, towards the vessel we have 
before noticed — Don Jose's yacht, the Vendetta. 

On its way, the boat passed within a hundred yards of that 
containing O'Brien and Blake. 

Little did the latter imagine what inanimate object it was 
that lay in the stern-sheets, covered with a rug and tarpaulin. 

His words of warning, which she took as a threat, had 
indeed rapidly come to pass. 

She had now ample reason to regret bitterly not deigning 
to hear what he had to say. 

In less than half an hour from the time the whistle 
sounded, Giulia was a helpless captive on board the Vendetta. 

And one hour and a half after sunset, while yet a little 
twilight lingered, the elegant vessel steamed out to sea, 
having on board the handsomest girl and richest heiress in 
Cuba. 



CHAPTER XXII. 

THE SENORITA OS BOARD THE VENDETTA. 

Giulia d'Almaviras, whom Blake had tried so hard to warn 
and save from the fate which befel her, awakened from her 
swoon to a sense of her situation. 

She found herself in a luxuriously- appointed saloon, and 
a glance round told her that it was the cabin of a vessel. 



THE SENORITA ON BOARD THE VENDETTA. 79 

The sun had set about an hour, but, by the light of an oil- 
lamp swinging over heal, she was able to examine the place 
to which she had been brought. 

The predominant feeling in her breast was, as may natur- 
ally be supposed, alarm at her position. 

The rough handling she had received, the sudden shock, 
all combined to prostrate her energies and render her unfit 
for calm thought. 

One idea only possessed her mind. From the first mo- 
ment when she had been attacked and seized, the conviction 
flashed itself on her soul that this outrage was the work of 
the insolent Englishman, Blake. 

For, had he not threatened her only a short time before ? 

After awhile aDger and indignation arose in her breast, 
and she became less under the dominion of terror. 

She adjusted her dress — sadly disarranged by the rough 
usage to which she had been subjected — and, standing 
before a large mirror, surveyed herself therein. 

Suddenly there flashed out from some hiding-place — belt 
or bosom— a bright steel blade, with ivory handle. 

"Ah! hal* she said to herself, her native courage 
gleaming from her eyes, "at least, lam not wholly defence- 
less. With this little weapon, toy-like as it seems. I may 
take the life of a strong man ; or, if need be, it shell find a 
Bheath in my own breast." 

She stood before the mirror, looking at once terrible and 
lovely. Now brandishing the blue, bright blade, she seemed 
to strike a blow at an imaginary foe. 

Now turning the point to her own bosom, she made 
as though she would plunge it in, and so end her troubles 
and sorrows. 

So occupied was she in this rehearsal of the tragedy she 
thought it likely she might enact, that she did not hear a 
door slide open, nor the footsteps of a man who advanced 
to her. 

The whole floor of the cabin was covered with costly skins 
in place of carpet, and across these it was possible to walk 
very quietly. 

She saw his figure in the glass as he stealthily crept up 
to her, probably with the intention of possessing himself of 



80 LOVE'S TREASON. 

the deadly little weapon which .»no fielded so gracefully, 
mid jet, wiihal, in a manner which seemed to bespeak a stern 
resolve and deadly intent. 

With a slight scream s'.e started on one side and faced 
the man — no other than Black Bosco. 

" Stand off," she cried, impetuously. " Stand off, I say, 
or I will plunge this knife in your body. Who are you ? 
What are you ? And what is the meaning of this outrage ? 
Restore me to my father or dread his vengeance, for the 
Manpusd'Almaviras is one who wilt take terrible vengeance 
lor tins night's work." 

" I don't doubt it for a moment, senorita," said Black 
Bosco, coolly. " It shall be my most particular care to keep 
out of his lordship's wav now and for ever after." 

u Who are you, and what is the meaning of this ? What 
vessel is this ? " 

" Put up that plaything and I will answer you — so much 
as I think fit," he said qiietly. 

She replaced the dagger in its little sheath — so, however, 
that she could lay her hand on it in an instant, and said — 

" Well, sir, whoever you are, perhaps you will explain the 
meaning of this villanous proceeding ? What vessel is this ? " 

" It is mine." 

"And why have you forcibly carried me on board this 
vessel of yours ? " 

Bosco answered coolly — 

" I am to be well paid for so doing." 

" Ah ! that rascally Englishman, lieutenant of the British 
man-of-war — — , Senor Blake. It is he who has hired you to 
commit this outrage." 

Bosco looked at first puzzled, and then a gleam of intelli- 
gence beamed on his swarthy face. 

He resolved to encourage her in her error. 

He had no definite reason fo$ so acting, but merely a vague 
idea that it might be best to mislead her. 

" Ha ! you do not answer. It is as I thought. Oh ! the 
wretch ! but he shall pay dearly for this — aye, pay for it 
with his life — his life, I say !" she cried, stamping her foot, 
as she worked herself up into a passion. " Go to your base, 
cowardly employer, sir, and. tell him that his life shall pay 



THE SENORlTA ATTEMPTS TO BRIBE BOSCO. SI 

the penalty of this outrage ; that I, Giulia d'Almaviras, have 
said so. Gro, sir, this instant, and take my message." 

" By St. Jago de Cuba !" muttered Bosco, " she gives her 
orders as though she were queen in command, in place of a 
prisoner." 

Then aloud — 

" The Senor Blake is not on board the vessel, senorita.' ; 

" Not on board ? "Where, then, is he ? " 

Black Bosco merely shrugged his shoulders. 

" I will be back shortly," he added, as he heard the sound 
of a shrill whistle on deck. " I am wanted." 

He left th'e cabin, carefully closing the door behind him, 
and of course fastening it securely. 

Giulia, now relieved from fear of immediate danger, 
proceeded to inspect her prison. 

After a minute examination, by which she thoroughly 
satisfied herself of the impossibility of escape without assist- 
ance, she bethought herself how she should act. 

" He said that he was to be liberally paid for this deed 5 
money, then, is his object. I will endeavour to bribe him. 
I know my father is very rich, and my jewels alone would 
be a large fortune to this fellow. If he is avaricious, and 
not too distrustful, I think I can gain him to my views. 
Threats of a terrible vengeance, and promise of a large reward 
combined, may have sufficient influence. We shall see 1 " 



CHAPTER XXIII. 

THE SENORlTA ATTEMPTS TO BRIBE BOSCO. 

Black Bosco was absent from the cabin more than an hour, 
having seen the vessel well out to sea before he again visited 
his prisoner. 

She at once went to the point, and, whatever might be her 
real feelings, carefully suppressed all show of fear. 

" Now, senor capitano," she said, " I wish you to listen to- 
me." 

Bosco nodded in reply. 

"You know that ihe penalty for this outrage on the 
daughter of the Marquis dAlmaviras must, to a certainty, 
be your death, when you are brought to justice ? " 

F 



82 love's treason. 

" I don't suppose I should have much mercy shown me/* 
replied Bosco, " but you forget one thing, young lady — I 
don't mean to be caught — I mean to give Havannah a pretty 
vide berth for the future." 

" That will not avail you ; my father has influence with 
the government, and he will cause the whole globe to be 
scoured to regain his daughter, and visit with a terrible 
vengeance those who have wronged her." 

"Yes, I know all about that," said B.>sco, gloomily, " I 
took it all into account when I decided on the job. It's 
done now, and I mean to stand by it." 

"What price are you to receive from your villanous 
employer ? " 

" This ship, all found in stores and arms, and money 
enough to take her for at least one cruise." 

" My jewels alone are worth more than two such ships. 
Now listen to me ; my father, the marquis is immensely 
rich, in his name I promise you a better and more valuable 
vessel than this, and thrice her value in money — in gold 
doubloons. What say you ? " 

Black Bosco grinned and shook his head. 

" Money and ship would be little use to me as I hung by 
the neck, or after my carcase had been riddled with 
bullets." 

" I will give you an undertaking in writing that you shall 
have a free pardon, that no harm whatever shall befall you. 
This I will give you and sign it with my own name, and 
you know right well that the word of a d'Almaviras once 
pledged is sacred. Were yon the greatest scoundrel on earth, 
and no mitter what crime you mi^ht have committed, a 
promise signed by me would be held as sacred by my father 
as a command from heaven. 

" Come, senor capitano, your course is clear — on the one 
hand fortune and free pardon, on the other a terrible ven- 
geance one day or other." 

After deliberate thought, he shook his head and replied 
sullenly — 

" What you promise is impossible ; I have taken the affair 
in hand and must go through with it." 

(jriulia, who had thoroughly believed that she could win 



THE SENORITA ATTEMPTS TO BRIBE BOSCO. £M 

over this hired ruffian by her promises, now felt her heart 
gink within her. 

She knew not the reasons which induced, almost com. 
pelled, him to refuse her most tempting offers, so was power* 
loss to do more when he again met her with a flat refusal. 

"No, senorita, it cannot be. So long as you keep quiet 
you shall not be molested by me, and can have what you 
want to eat and drink. But what I've undertaken to do, I 
will do." 

" And what have you undertaken to do ? Where are you 
goiug to take me ? " 

To this he would make no answer, but went on deck 
sullen and gloomy, leaving the unhappy girl in a state 
bordering en despair. 

That night she saw him no more. 

As for Bosco, her dazzling promises had wrought an effect 
in his avaricious mind she did not dream of. 

It set him thinking. 

Why should he not outwit Don Jose, and keeping the 
heiress to himself, extort a prodigious ransom from her father? 

The more he thought of it the more it grew upon him, 
and at last it assumed a definite shape. 

Don Jose was a dangerous man to deal with, and if any- 
thing went wrong would at once discover him, and leave all 
to fall on him. 

He might get fabulous sums from the marquis without 
putting himself either in his power or that of Don Jose. 

Peeling the want of a confidant he enlightened his mate 
Pedro as to his plans. 

That worthy's eyes gleamed at the mention of the great 
sums the slave-captain talked of. 

"By all the saints, captain," he cried, "you must be 
indeed a dolt if you part with this golden bird in the cabin ; 
she is worth ten times what Don Jose offers." 

'• I think so too ; but how to pluck her of her golden 
feathers without putting my own neck in danger ? We must 
think on a plan, Pedro — hit upon a scheme." 

They walked the deck together for hours, these two 
villains, the chief one of whom was now earnestly intent on 
the best means of betraying and outwitting his employer. 



84 LOVE'S treason, 

"Bih ! the fool," said Bosco ; "to think that t should be 
satistiei with a ship and a few doabl >ons for such a prize 
as the senorita, and risking raj neck, too, as I have been 
fool enough to do before ! " 

After much talk the two worthies — captain and mate — 
at last settled on a plan, and arranged all the details to their 
entire satisfaction. 

"And now then for Matauzis !" said Black Bosco ; "we 
will run in, get the news, and then be off to the Caribbean 
Sea." 

" Why go into Matanzas at all — is it safe ? " 

" Quire safe. No one could possibly know whither the 
Vendetta was bound, though some might have seen her sail 
out of Havannah Bay last evening. I want to hear what 
news from Don Jose ; whether the sailing of the Vendetta 
has aroused suspicion ; if there is any idea as to what has 
become of the abducted heiress. If there is anything to 
communicate, he will dispatch a mounted courier across 
country from Havannah to Matanzas. That was arranged 
between us." 

So, shortly before noon, the Vendetta was run into Ma- 
tanzas harbour, but did not tome to an anchor. 

No boats were allowed alongside, the vessel being kept 
under steam, and caused to go ahead full speed when any 
endeavoured to approach. 

So poor Giulia had no chance of bettering her position in 
that manner. 

Presently, however, a boat flying a yellow flag with a 
coronet in the centre was seen coming towards the vessel. 

This boat Black Bosco allowed to come alongside. Not to 
the gangway, however, or anywhere near the stern, but close 
under the bows. 

So that it was all in vain that the unfortunate captive 
cried for help through the little ports in the i-leeping-cabin. 

A man in the boat handed up a letter, which Bosco took 
and read. 

Ten minutes later the Vendetta was again standing out 
to sea. 

Black Bosco paced the deck with the paper crumpled up 
in his hand, muttering curses the while. 



THE SENORITA ATTEMPTS TO BEIBE BOSCO. 8f> 

" What course, captain? " asked Pedro, the mate. 

" South-east. I must chance it ; the fellow can only guess. 
But what matter ? — the ship is armed. Pedro, see to the guns 
and ammunition. Get all the caunon mounted, and give 
the men their stations at quarters. It's possible we may 
have hot work in order to keep this golden bird of ours." 

" Why, what's the matter ? " 

" Matter enough. Somehow or another that accursed 
Englishman has got hold of the fact that the girl is on board 
this ship. From what this letter says, I guess there's a 
vessel in pursuit of us." 

" Ten thousand demons ! What does the letter say ? " 

Bosco opened it, apd showed it to the mate. 

" Captain Bosco, — Beware ! An Enslishman — tott know him — tl>e 
same one, has got a knowledge of your sailing and of your cargi. He 
boasts he knows whither you are bo^nd, but that is probably on y 
boast. At all events, keep a look-out, for there will be pursuit. Get 
rid of the dangerous cargo as soon as possible — the only evidence 
against you. Malatesta." 

" What's the dangerous cargo ? " asked Pedro. 

" Why, the prisoner, of course." 

" What does he mean by, 'Get rid of the dangerous cargo 
at once ' ? Throw her overboard — eh ? " 

" No ; he doesn't mean that. Besides, she's too valuable. 
It would indeed be a pity to have to pitch overboard so 
many thousand doubloons. If we are overhauled by a 
Spanish man-of-war, Pedro, it must be done, though." 

" What ! the girl pitched overboard ? " cried the less 
hardened villain, an expression of horror on his face. 

"Aye, mylai. If a Spanish war-ship comes up astern, 
the Senorita Giulia d'Almaviras muse be dropped over the 
bows with a good heavy shot at her feet to steady her." 

" What ! alive ? " 

" Why trouble to kill her on board ? The salt water and 
the sharks will soon settle her business." 

To hear this ruffian talk of the brutal murder of an in- 
nocent girl was enough to make one's blood run cold, and 
even Pedro shuddered. 

" The captain is a terrible man," he said to himself when 
alone. " liight well have they named him Black Bosco ! " 



86 LOVE'S TREASON. 

CHAPTER XXIV 

BLAKE AND MALATESTA AT THE VILLA CASTELMARINA. 

Leaving the Vendetta with the fair prisoner securely confined 
in the cabin, speeding on her way to the Caribbean Sea, we 
will return to Havannah, and our two friends, Blake and 
O'Brien. They were awakened before the expiration of the 
two hours they had given themselves for much needed 
repose by a considerable uproar and noise of voices talking 
loudly and excitedly. 

At a distance, too, they could distinguish the loud clang- 
ing of a bell, and on starting to their feet soon found that 
unusual excitement was afoot. 

Some men in the livery of the Marquis d'Almaviras had 
just run down from the road and were vehemently question- 
ing the proprietor of the hut. 

Soon they, too, came in for eager questioning as to 
whether they had seen anything of a lady being dragged 
away by ruffians. It was supposed that she had been carried 
either in a boat or along the water's edge, as no trace of the 
abductors could be found on the high road. 

The daughter of the Marquis d'A Imaviras had been seized 
while walking in the garden with a friend and forcibly 
carried off by a gang of ruffians— negroes. 

Her fiiend, another young lady, had been gagged and 
bound to a tree, and so completely had the villains succeeded 
that nothing even was known of the affair for nearly an 
hour, when, on the young ladies being missed and a search 
made, one of them had been thus found. 

Edward was not in the least surprised. 

He smiled, even, and for a time a feeling of triumph arose 
in his breast, as he thought of the contumely and scorn with 
which he had been received when he sought to warn her 
of her impending fate. 

But he dismissed this unworthy sentiment, and soon he 
felt sincerely sorry for the unfortunate girl who had fallen 
into the hands of srich ruffians. 

By the aid of the conversation he had overheard, he 
understood the whole affair, and almost his first thought was 



BLAKE AND MALATESTA AT CASTELMARINA. 87 

to go down to the water's edge, and look for the yacht, the 
Vendetta. 

"We'll go and see the marquis now. At least, I will," said 
Blake to O'Brien. " It's not more than a mile to the Villa 
Castelmarina. I'll wager that when I send my card in, with a 
few lines scribbled thereon, I shall get prompt admittance." 

Having ascertained from one of the servants that the 
marquis was still at the villa giving orders for a search, in 
a state almost frantic, Blake had the horses saddled, and 
started on the road, accompanied by O'Brien. 

Various little things delayed them, the lameness of one of 
the horses, the breaking of a girth, and such like little trifles, 
so that when they arrived once more at the gate of the Villa 
Castelmarina, it was little more than an hour from midnight, 
and nearly three hours had elapsed since the abduction. 

Just before they arrived at the gate, a carriage drawn by 
four horses dashed up, and from it there alighted no less 
a personage than Don Jose de Malatesta. 

" Well, he's a cool fellow, certainly," remarked Blake ; 
" come to offer his condolences to the marquis, I suppose. 
Like his impudence ! " 

Taking a card, he wrote on the back — 

" My Lord Maeqtjis, — I have information as to the abduction of 
your daughter, and wish to see you on the subject.'' 

This procured him instant admission. 

" Come in, Jack," he said ; " I've got the trump oard in 
my hand now, and mean to let them know it. I'll see they 
treat me and my friends with proper respect. Here, one of 
you fellows," he cried, to a servant he saw, " take our horses 
to the stable and see them attended to. And here, you," he 
cried to another, as he entered the villa, "get a flagon of 
wine ; my friend and I are thirsty." 

"Well," remarked O'Brien, "you are a cool fish." 

" I mean to be, my boy. It's my turn now. The game 
is in my hands and I mean to play it for my own pleasure 
and advantage. Come, let us go into this apartment— -it 
looks delightfully cool and pleasant this sultry evening." 

So saying, he led the way into a sort of anteroom divided 
from the hall of the villa by a heavy crimson curtain. 



88 L07E'S TREASON. 

A large window reaching from ceiling to floor opened on 
to a part of the gardens, and at a short distance a fountain 
sparkled and glistened in the moonlight, the effect of which 
was wonderfully cool and refreshing. 

The attendant placed the wine on a small table which he 
wheeled close up to our hero, and then delivered the follow- 
ing message — 

" My lord the marquis presents his compliments to you, 
senor, and is anxious to see you at once." 

Ned Blake filled himself a bumper of wine and another 
for Jack O'Brien. 

Having drank these, he made reply — 

" My compliments to his lord-hip the marquis, and say 
that I have been riding about all day in search of him in 
the interest of himself and the senorita his daughter. I am 
now hot, dusty, tired, and hungry, having partaken of next 
to nothing. I feel that some light refreshment is necessary 
before I can converse with his lordship on the very impor- 
tant matter which has brought me here." 

Two servants appeared, carrying in two trays amply 
provided with every delicacy possible to be procured on so 
short a notice. 

"Now, then, Jack, fall to; we're in luck. Fortune's 
wheel has taken a turn in my favour.'' 

Jack O'Brien wanted no second invitation, and the next 
minute the two friends were hard at work discussing the 
viands before them. 

The two things the Marquis d'Almaviras cared for and 
cherished above all else in the world were his pride and his 
beautiful daughter, Giulia. 

It may be imagined, then, what a heavy blow this daring 
abduction was to his lordship. He was doubly wounded, 
both by grief at the loss of his daughter, of whose fate he 
was in utter ignorance, and his pride received a terrible 
shock. 

To add to his perplexity, Ethel could give no coherent 
answer to his vague question. Her mind was sadly shaken 
by the shock the fright had caused her. So the marquis 
had to wait to obtain information from some other source;. 

Don Jose's card lay before him. 



BLAKE AND MALATESTA AT CASTELJIAKINA. 89 

"Show Don Jose up," he said to the servant, who was 
waiting at a respectful distance. 

" My dear marquis," he said in tones of deep condolence, ,- I 
bat just heard of this sal affair, and hastened to see if I 
could be of any use to you. Have you heard anything of 
your daughter, or of the villains who abducted her ? " 

"Not a syllable. All I know is, that she was seized in 
the garden, and carried off in a boat, but whither, heaven 
knows." 

" Do you think she has been taken on board some vessel 
in the harbour ? " 

" I know not what to think. I am distracted," cried the 
marquis. 

" It is possible, probable even, she may have been convej ed 
on board some ship. Perhaps taken out to sea." 

" If so, I have just pure ased a vessel which will be sent 
to sea at onoe to cruise about in search of the piratical 
villains." 

" The vessel you have just purchased ! " cried Don Jose, 
to whom this was news. '* I did not know you had bought 
one." 

" Yes. For certain reasons, which I need not enter on 
here, I have purchased that clipper-built iron steamer 
intended as a privateer for the Confederate Government." 

"What! the Avenger? " 

"Yes." 

" And is she ready for sea ? " 

"Quite — guns, provisions, everything. She wants her 
full crew, but that is not material. By San Jago de Cuba ! 
but if ever she passes into the hands of the S mtherners, 
she'll prove a sharp thorn to the Yankees." 

Don Jose merely felt surprise at the news — no alarm. 
It was merely a singular tbiog that the marquis should have 
bought this tine vessel on the very day he had successfully 
carried off the lovely Giulia and dispatched her to sea in 
the Vendetta. 

Meanwhile the marquis had <jrown impatient at the non- 
appearance of Edward Blake, ;md sent to inquire. 

"Insolent!" he cried, when our friend's cool message 
was brought back to him. " What do you make q! this f " 



90 love's treason. 

And with the words he handed the card to Don Jose. 

Malatesta recognized the name instantly, and changed 
colour. 

" What the devil does this mean ? " he said, after he had 
read the brief missive. " What can he know about it ? " 

"Well, what do you think ?" asked d'Almaviras, who 
had the greatest confidence in the friendship and sympathy 
of the don. 

He knew not what to think. 

So he shrugged his shoulders and told what he knew to 
be a lie. 

" Probably he has some hand in it, and has come about 
the ransom." 

" Perhaps so ;pray heaven he has, this suspense is terrible. 
I shall certainly see him. Will you wait and hear what he 
has to say, Don Jose ? " 

Now Malatesta, although he wished greatly to know the 
business on which Edward Blake had come, yet did not wish 
to be seen by our hero. 

"No," he said, carelessly, "I will stroll into the next 
room and rest on the balcony while you talk to the fellow. If 
he comes, as I suspect, about the rausom, he will not speak 
before a witness." 

Then Don Jose, saluting the marquis, strolled leisurely 
towards the heavy curtain whic t divided this apartment 
from the next, and raising it, passed in. Instantly, how- 
ever, he placed himself ia the most favourable position for 
heaiing all that passed in the larger room. 

This arrangement of curtains and screens in place of doors, 
common in the houses of the wealthy in hot climates, was 
most, favourable to his purpose. 

The next moment E l-vard Blake entered, and saluting 
the maiquis, said — 

" My lord, I am now at your service. Shall \\e talk ?" 

" Do vou know anything of my daughter's fate ? " 

" I do." 

" Were yon concerned in her abduction ? " 

" I was not." 

" You have not, then, corne to ask money for your 
information ? " 



BLAKE AND THE MARQUIS D'ALMAVIRAS. 91 

" Rerjeat that foul aspersion and I leave you — leave your 
daughter to her fate. I am an English gentleman, my lord 
irarquis." 

His manner impressed the Spaniard, who said, bowing 
gravely— 

" Pardon, 'senor. Proceed ; I am all attention." 



CHAPTER XXV 

EDWARD BLAKE AND THE MARQUIS D'ALMAVIRAS. 

Edward Blake at once commenced— 

" My lord marquis, your daughter, Giulia d'Almaviras, has 
been kidnapped by a villain for his own vile purposes." 

" What purpose ? '' 

" To force her to marry him, if possible ; and if he should 
fail in doing so by fair means, to adopt the most infamous 
expedient." 

" What expedient ? " 

Blake hesitated, and scarce knew how to put it in words. 

" He would, if she refused to be his wife, force tier to be 
his mistress." 

" Ten thousand demons ! " yelled d'Almaviras, furiously 
dashing his hand on a small ivory-topped table with such 
violence as to splinter it to fragments. 

" Who dare offer such an indignity to a daughter of the 
house of dAlmaviras ? Tell me the m-m's name, and though 
he had a dozen lives he shall die. His name I say, senor, 
his name ! " 

And the infuriated Spaniard stamped on the floor and 
gnashed his teeth with rage. 

But Ned Blake calmly shook his head. 

" Ydu do not know him," cried the marquis. 

" Oh ! yes, I know perfectly well both principal and agent 
in this villanous business." 

Don Jose started and turned pale as he heard this avowal, 
which had the more effect from being so quietly spoken. 

A shuddering conviction shot through his fiamethat this 
Englishman spoke truly, and really did know what he said. 

As for the marquis, he grew purple with passion, and in 



D2 LOVE S TREASON. 

an instant out flashed his sword, for at the moment he was 
in the uniform of a Spanish general. 

" You kuow and you refuse to tell. My sword shall force 
the name from you. Your life or the names of the villains 
who have carried off my daughter. And more than that. [ 
will have full particulars. Come, sir, speak, or I will killyou." 

The sword of the enraged nobleman flashed about in a 
most unpleasant manner to Edward Blake, who, stepping back 
quietly, threw off his cloak, and drawing his own sword, 
stood on the defensive. 

" At your service, marquis," he said, with quiet irony. 
" We will fiiiht if you insist, unless indeed your prefer to 
murder me in cold b:ood. But allow me to call your atten- 
tion to the result — if I kill you, that will not get back your 
daughter. She will then lose her father, the one man in the 
world most anxious to protect her. If yoa kill me, what I 
know will die with me, and then there will be none alive 
except the villains who planned and executed this outrage 
who can give you any information as to your daughter's 
fate. Nevertheless, marquis, if you insist on fighting, I am 
willing to accommodate you. I killed two hired bravoes 
last night, to-night, perhaps, I may have the honour of run- 
ning a Spanish nobleman through the body!" 

Don Jose, behind the curtain in the next room, was all the 
while muttering curses. 

The coolness and quiet bravado of the Englishman both 
incensed and disquieted him. 

"He must know something," he muttered; "he feels 
pretty sure of his position, or he could not talk and act so." 

As for d'Almaviras, notwithstanding his rage, he saw the 
force of what the Englishman had said. 

Besides, too, he beheld an athletic, stalwart young man 
before him, with fearless eye, bold front, and sword as long 
and keen as his own. He lowered the point of his sword. 

" Well, senor, we will not fight. But why will you not 
tell me who are the villains who carried off my daughter — 
if, indeed, you know, and this is not an idle boast on your 
part ? " 

" It would be both a foolish and unprofitable boast," he 
replied ; " now I will tell you why I refuse to say all I know. 



BLAKE AND THE MATIQUIS D'ALMAAIRVS. 93 

Out before I do so, let me say this. I will do all in my 
power to restore to you your daughter in my own way — on 
my own terms." 

" Ah, it is gold, then, you require ? " 

" My lord marquis, I told you before 1 am an English 
gentleman. Repeat that slander again, hint that I wish to 
extort money, and I leave your daughter to her fate." 

The marquis, whose excitement had now calmed down, 
seemed to resign himself to the situation. 

" Well, Senor Blake, let it be as you say. But before I 
hear what you have to say, tell me who and what you are." 

" An English gentleman, lately an officer on board 
H.M.8. ." 

" Ah ! " 

" I had the honour of making the acquaintance of your 
daughter." 

" Carramho ! " cried d'Almaviras, in the utmost astonish- 
ment, for he had never seen or heard of Edward Bluke, 
although on the previous night the young man had been 
present at the fete. 

" I had the honour of doing her a trifling service." 

" The devil ! " 

"Exactly so. The young lady did not evince much 
gratitude. She gave me evil for good, and now I am about 
to give good for evil." 

"You speak in riddles, senor," said the marquis haughtily. 

" I will now explain. You have staying here a young 
lady, Ethelinda Verinder ; she also is slightly acquainted with 
me ; I should wish her to be present and hear what I have 
to state." 

" Mystery on mystery," said the marquis, but, neverthe- 
less, he sent instantly for the young lady. 

She bowed coldly to Edward Blake, as she entered the 
room. 

" I asked his lordship to send for you, Miss Verinder, 
because I am in possession of important information concern- 
ing the abduction of the Senorita Giulia. When I tell you 
that I know both who planned and who executed the out- 
rage, you will understand that what I have to say is indeed 
important." 



94 love's treason. 

Ethel bowed, but said not a word. 

" As you can corroborate a part of what I have to siy, 1 
wish you to hpar, and decide as to whether I speak truly on 
all points. Allow me to conduct you to a seat." 

Ethelinda bowed, but declining his assistance, seated her- 
self on an ottoman. 

The Marquis d'Almaviras seated himself beside her, 
while Edward Blake, preferring to stand before them, com- 
menced his narration. 



CHAPTER XXVI. 

EDWARD BLAKE'S NARRATIVE. 

" I will first proceed to give you my reason for refusing to 
state the name of the wrong-doers. 

" In the first place, it would not aid you in recovering your 
daughter, andin the second, I should probably bedisbelieved." 

" Why should you think so ? " asked the marquis. 

" Because I have already had experience." 

Then he proceeded to relate his adventure of the previous 
night, his killing' the bravoes, and forcing from one the name 
of his principal. 

Don Jose listened in breathless suspense, to hear whether 
the Englishman would again accuse him. 

But Blake refrained, and refused to say who he believed 
was his would-be assassin at second hand. 

Ethel guessed, however, and listened with increased 
interest. 

Presently he went on to say that the whole plot had come 
to his knowledge. 

The plan to carry the yountr lady off, how she was to be 
taken on board ship, and whither she should then be 
conveyed. 

" I know the very place, a desolate island in the ocean.'' 

Don Jose, who was standing close to the curtain, started 
so violently at hearing this as to cause it to wave to and fro. 

" Perdition ! " he muttered : " he must know something — 
but how much — what does he know ? — that is the question. 
Aud how could he have gained this knowledge ? Can Bosco 
Lave betrayed me ? Scarcely, for Ins own sake." 

Don Jose was deadly pale now, and the peispiration stood 



EDWARD BLAKE'S NARRATIVE. 35 

out on his forehead in beads. 

He began to appreciate the gravity of the situation, to 
realize the fact that he had a deadly and dangerous enemy 
in Lhe Englishman. 

Blake saw the cilrtain shake ; at once it occurred to him 
that there was an eaves-dropper. 

He remembered that Don Jose de Malatesfca had arrived 
just before him, and resolved to be on his guard, 

" You will excuse me, my lord," he said, " but is there any* 
one in the adjoining apartment ? I thought I saw the 
curtain shake." 

" No one, no one ; " he had really forgotten all about Don 
Jose for the moment. 

Blake still looked suspicious. 

" And you say you know where these villains have carried 
my daughter, and will seek her out, and restore her to me, 
or endeavour to do so ?" 

" I will, on conditions." 

" What conditions." 

" That you will aid me ih bringing to an account the 
villain who designed and carried out this outrage." 

" Only too gladly," said the marquis savagely. " I wish 
I had my sword at his throat now." 

" That you will never rest until you have brought about 
the death of this man — on the scaffold, if possible, when I 
shall have revealed to you his name. You will believe me, 
I suppose, when I restore to you your daughter ? " 

"I will, and will do all you say so far, on my honour." 

"Now the other conditions." 

Blake again glanced uneasily at the curtain. Once more 
he had seen it shake in a manner which made him think it 
was something more than the wind. 

Etheliuda Verinder, who had listened as one entranced to 
all the young man had said, and now thoroughly believed 
him, rose. 

" I will see if there is any one in the next room," she said. 

But, when she drew aside the curiain, there was no one, 
although she felt nearly sure she had heard the sounds of 
rapidly-retreating footsteps. 

Edward Blake also had heard the same sounds. 



96 LOVE'S TREASON. 

" I think it would be as well, Miss Verinder," he said in 
English, "if you were to loop the curtains back. I do not 
wish what I have to say to be overheard." 

And so Don Josede Malatesta, who had beat a hasty retreat 
out on to the balcony, lost the remainder of the conversation. 

His state of mind may possibly be imagined, but not 
easily described. 

" I will send off at once and warn Bosco that there may 
be a pursuit," he muttered. " It is best to be on the safe 
side." 

The marquis, after listening to all that Edward Blake 
had to say, asked the opinion of Ethelinda. 

She at once replied — 

" I believe every word this gentleman has spoken to be 
true." 

A complete change had occurred now in her feelings to- 
wards the young Englishman, whom she could not help 
believing. 

" And you believe you can rescue my daughter unharmed, 
safe and sound, as when she was carried oft'? " 

" I do, and for this reason — I know that the principal 
villain, the instigator of the outrage, is himself still in the 
island. He will not leave probably for some days to go to 
the place where his agents have taken the girl, lest his doing 
so should excite suspicion. To denounce him now would 
do little good. He is crafty enough to take care that I 
should have no proof of my words. When, however, I have 
rescued your daughter, and got his agent in my power, then 
he will be in the toils, indeed — then 1 will stike, and strike 
hard." 

" What means have you at your command to do what you 
say ? You will want a ship — men— money ? " 

" I have little enough," replied Blake, simply ; " I will 
give my knowledge and skill to rescue your daughter, and, 
if need be, risk my life. The rest 1 must leave to you." 

Etheiind.i laid her hand on the marquis's arm. 

" Trust him," she s'aid simply. 

"I will, I will," said d'Almaviras, rising. " Senor Blake, 
my fortune is at your service to do what you can ; restore 
me my child. I have a fine steam-vessel here in the harbour, 



THE DUEL. 97 

by to-morrow she can be ready for sea. SI e has guns, am- 
munition, provisions, coal, everything except a portion of 
her crew, which you can easily obtain. To-morrow I will 
give you a letter of unlimited credit on the principal 
bankers of Havannah, and by the afternoon you can set 
sail on your cruise to rescue my daughter." 

" You have a vessel in the harbour ready for sea!" ex- 
claimed Edward Blake ; " this is indeed fortunate." 

"Yes, she was intended for a Confederate privateer, but 
for certain reasons I have bought her. Her name is the 
Avenger " 

" The Avenger ! a splendid vessel indeed ! I am really 
fortunate. Already I feel assured of success." 

" And now for the last condition, senor," said d'Almaviras, 
gravely ; " the one you have kept back to the last." 

" It is very simple — very plain ; you can grant it or refuse 
it. All I want is your word of honour " 

" "What is it you would ask of me ? " said the marquis 
uneasily, and turning pale. 

" The hand of your daughter, Giulia de Cordova d'Al- 
maviras, on my success." 

There was a dead silence. 



CHAPTER XXVII. 

THE DUEL. 

The Marquis dAlmaviras seemed for a time so overwhelmed 
with astonishment — thunderstruck at Blake's demand, that 
for a time he was totally unable to make any reply. The 
blood flew to his face and forehead till his complexion 
was of a deep purple hue, and he seemed in danger of 
apoplexy. He tried to speak several times — gasped and 
sputtered — but something in his throat, rage perhaps, pre- 
rented him uttering any articulate sounds. There was wine 
on a side table, and he felt compelled to swallow a large glass 
ere he could calm himself sufficiently to reply to the auda- 
cious demand of the Englishman. 

" Senor," he said, at last, in accents tremulous with rage, 
"your audacity is astounding. It is an insult — a gross 

G 



98 LOVE'S TREASON. 

affront. By St. Jago de Cuba, to think that a nameless 
adventurer should "dare demand of me the hand of my 
diiu«hter ! " 

" Nameless adventurer! " cried Blake, hotly, interrupting 
him ; " how dare you say so ! Old man, mind what you say. 
T care nothing for your being a Spanish marquis— you may 
be for all I know the noblest hidalgo of all Spain— but if 
you call me a nameless adventurer, I will strike you across 
the face with the flat of my sword." 

D'Almaviras instantly clapped his hand on the hilt of his 
sword and strode forward, his eyes flashing defiance. 

Ethelinda Veriuder, however, interposed, and seizing 
him by the sword-arm, prevented him advancing further to- 
wards' Ned Biake, who— keeping his eye firmly fixed on him 
— stood motionless, ready at once to draw and fight. 

" My lord— my lord ! " urged Ethel, " pray control your 
anger. Consider poor Giulia, now in the hands of bad men. 
Surely all our efforts, all our thoughts, should be directed 
as to how to rescue her, not to brawling among ourselves." 

The marquis made a furious effort to disengage himself 
from the firm, nervous grasp of the Yankee girl, who held 
on, seeing inevitable bloodshed should they once cross 
swords in their present mood. 

D'Almaviras was mad with rage ; and as for Edward 
Blake, what with excitement, want of sleep, and the wine 
he had just partaken of pretty freely, and which had an un- 
wonted effect on him, he seemed utterly reckless as to how 
the affair ended. 

A desperate encounter wasimminent, as it was certain Ethel 
could not much longer restrain the infuriated old noble. 
But in the very nick of time, just as by a rude and violent 
effort, he had almost shaken himself clear of the lovelv en- 
cumbrance, the heavy curtain between this and the adjoining 
loom was drawn aside, ;md Don Jose de Malatesta appeared. 

" Don Jose," cried Ethel, stifling her dislike of the man, 
"help me to restrain these two gentlemen from fighting — • 
at all events now — I implore of you." 

D'Almaviras' attention was drawn to Don Jose, and for 
Ihe moment he ceased endeavouring to reach Blake. 

He had drawn his sword, in spite of the resistance of Miss 



THE DUEL. 99 

Verinder ; and as our friend had done so likewise, they stood 
within a few paces of each other with bare blades. 

Don Jose was the first of the three men to speak. 

"Marquis, if you are going to fight I shall be happy to 
act as your second, and see that no unfair advantage is taken 
of you." 

The threatened encounter suited the plans of Don Jose 
admirably. 

That crafty schemer rapidly turned the affair over in his 
mind, and at once came to the conclusion that it would be 
an excellent thing for him if one or bolh of the two com- 
batants were killed. 

If the marquis fell he would be free froji all dread of his 
vengeance, should the real facts of the young lady's abduc- 
tion ever transpire. 

If Blake were slain, he would be rid of a personal enemy 
— a rival whom he bitterly hated, and moreover, he wonfd 
have nothing to fear from his knowledge of his schemes and 
plans. 

For that he knew something, though he could not tell 
what, nor ho w he obtained the information, was a certain fact. 

So Don Jose stood looking on with a cruel smile on his 
dark, handsome face, waiting for the encounter to besin. 

" Don Jose, I beg of you to prevent this fight ! " cried 
Ethelinda, her natural, womanly dread of bloodshed over- 
powering her pride and dislike of the man to whom she 
appealed. 

" By no means, scnorita," replied Don Jose ; " I should 
be very sorry to interfere in an affair of honour between two 
gentlemen. Doubtless offence has been received on one side 
at least, which necessitates an appeal to the sword. I will 
watch over the interests of my good friend, the Maiquis 
d'Almaviras. In the meanwhile, Senorita, I would counsel 
you to withdraw from this apartment." 

His words were polite, but his manner so insolent and 
sneering as to stir up Ethelinda's anger. 

She walked up to him and said — 

" Cruel wretch, you would stand by and see the blood of 
the old man, your 1 ost, and whom you call your friend, 
stain the floor of his own house, ^-h ! " 



100 love's treason. 

He bowed with a mocking smile. 

" I must again advise you to withdraw, senorita," he 
said. 

Appearing to take no notice of his words, " Ah ! 
coward ! " she cried, " you dare not meet the English- 
man, sword in hand, yourself, so are glad to look on 
while an old, but braver man risks his life. I wonder 
not now that Giula so hated and despised you, reptile that 
you are ! " 

This touched him to the quick. 

At first his dark face flushed, then became of a livid 
leaden colour. 

The shaft had gone home. 

He might have retorted, but at that momeut the harsh 
clash of steel drew their attention to the two combatants. 

The duel had apparently commenced. 

The marquis, impatient of delay, his Spanish blood 
thoroughly roused, his pride wounded, and altogether in- 
furiate, had suddenly bounded forward, and with a short 
cry— 

" Defend yourself ! " had fiercely lunged at Edward Blake, 
who had but just time to parry the thrust. 

Ethelinda gave a little scream as the swords, whisking 
and clashing together, told that the fight had really com- 
menced. 

She pressed both her hands to her eyes to shut out the 
terrible sight of what she dreaded must happen — one or 
other of the two falling — run through the body by the 
cruel steel. 

Suddenly there was a pause in the clash of swords — Ed- 
ward Blake felt pretty confident of victory. 

The marquis was a good swordsman, but his arm wanted 
strength, his frame vigour and agility, though there was no 
lack of courage in the old noble's breast. 

Accordingly, the Englishman suddenly leaped backward 
some paces and lowered his sword. 

" A truce," he cried. 

" Ah, you are afraid ! " replied the marquis, tauntingly. 

" You lie ! " replied Blake, with more promptness than 
courtesy. 



THE DUEL. 101 

A furious oath broke from the marquis, and he prepared 
to renew the battle. 

" I wish to say a few words. I am not afraid of you nor 
of any Spaniard who ever broke bread," said the English- 
man, more quietly, " but I wish to say a few words. When 
I have spoken you can do your worst, kill me or I will kill 
you. This young lady will, I doubt not, bear witness that 
I have acted fairly throughout if you fall, as most likely I 
shall kill you." 

The marquis lowered his sword point, and said, sul- 
lenly— 

" Speak." 

" This is the state of the case, Marquis d'Almaviras. If 
we renew the fight, and you kill me, your daughter is lost 
to you for ever, dishonoured, worse than dead If I kill 
you she is none the less lost, for it cannot be supposed that 
I, having slain the father, should further interest myself in 
the fate of the daughter. In either case your daughter is 
lost, for /, and I only, know whither she has been carried, by 
whose instigation, and for what base purpose." 

" It's a lie ! I won't believe it ! I will rescue her ! 
Defend yourself, you who have both insulted me and 
her." 

Blake was deadly pale. He saw that the deed must end 
seriously. It was impossible to act altogether on the 
defensive against the marquis, who was an excellent 
swordsman, firmly bent on runn ng him through the 
body. 

He must either kill or wound him, or be served in like 
manner himself. 

And for this latter he was by no means inclined. 

Besides, he was also nearly as much enraged as the mar- 
quis at the contumely with which he considered he had 
been treated. 

" So be it, your blood and your daughter's fate be on your 
own head. Remember, I hare warned you. I, and I only, 
can save your daughter from dishonour." 

But the marquis appeared to disregard his words 
utterly. 

The next memeut the swords again clashed. 



LOVE'S TREASON. 

CHAPTER XXVIII. 

THE STEWARD GOXZALVO. 

The feelings of Giulia d'Almaviras when the vessel on 
board which she was a helpless prisoner steamed out of the 
harbour of Matanzas and put to sea, were as near despair 
as it is possible to conceive. 

The day passed, and night came — a night which brought 
to her but little rest, and no sleep, although she found a 
small cabin elegantly fitted up as a bed-chamber, and evi- 
dently iu tended fur her to occupy. 

She did not even lie down, much less undress, but 
reclined on an ottoman, her face ever turned towards the 
companion-stairs, down which Bosco had come when he 
visited her, and by which way any one else who entered the 
cabin must also come. 

She did not forget her dagger, that sharp, deadly little 
blue blade she cherished in her bosom. 

The night passed without incident, and shortly after sun- 
rise exhausted nature claimed her sway, and she fell off into 
a profound sleep. 

When she awoke Black Bosco was standing before her, a 
wicked smile on his dark countenance. 

Instantly, and as it were by instinct, she started up, and 
drew her only weapon — the little dagger. 

" Bah ! " said Bosco, scornfully, " >\ hat nonsense ! I have 
been here these five minutes while you 1-iv asleep. If I had 
chosen, I could have seized you — had you bound and gagged 
— done as I was ordered. As for that plaything, you are 
welcome to keep it. .Should it ever be necessary, I shall 
have no trouble in taking it from you, believe me." 

There was such obvious truth in what he said that she 
could not fail but see it. 

Blushing with anger and mortification at discovering 
how really helpless she was, she replaced the dagger in her 
boso::i. 

" Well, senor, for what purpose have you visited me ? 
You have caught me asleep. It shall not happen 
again.'' 



THE STEWARD G0N2ALV0. J02 

"It is no matte 1 ," he said; "as to what I have come 
for, only to see how you feel disposed for refreshment, food, 
wine, and so forth ; and also I came in order to look over 
my charts, and to get up a nautical instrument, all of which 
I keep in that little cabin forward." 

Following his glance she now saw what she had not 
before noticed — a sliding door openijg into a berth or little 
cabin on the starboard side. 

It was open, and by the sunlight which streamed in 
through the port she saw on a small tray-like table charts. 
a compass, and other nautical things 

Of this she took no note, and replied to his remark about 
refreshments — 

" I want nothing, senor, but my liberty, to be restored to 
my father. Do that, and I will keep the promises I made 
you. yesterday." 

He shrugged his shoulders. 

" Impossible," was the brief reply 

She was about again to urge it on him, but he cut her 
short abruptly, rudely even. 

" Young woman, you waste your breath. As to what you 
say about not wanting anything to eat or drink, I shall send 
for both, you can then please yourself. Try your skill on 
Gonzalvo, my steward-boy, perhaps he may listen to your 
fine promises." 

Thereupon, without taking any further notice of her, he 
went forward to the little cabin just spoken of, and she saw 
him poring over a chart. 

She gave no heed to this whatever at the time. 

His words had set her thoughts into a different channel. 

" Gonzalvo," she said, to herself, " the steward. At all 
events, it will be one more human being to speak to, and 
try to influence. Who knows ? — heaven may soften his 
heart, aDd induce him to listen to me, and give me his 
assistance." 

When Bosco had finished his charts he came out from 
the little cabin, and, after carefully locking it, left her to 
herself, without deigning another word. 

She did not wish to give way to sleep again, so made a 
hasty toilet, bathing her fevered face and forehead in cold 



104 LOVE'S treason. 

water, of which she found a supply in the berth evidently 
intended for her to use as a sleeping-place. 

She took some pains to make herself look attractive. In 
this she had no trouble, as her great beauty was in no wise 
diminished by the terror and fatigues she had gone through. 

" He may be young and impressionable," she said, to 
herself, " this Gonzalvo — •" 

She had scarcely finished when she heard the door of the 
companion-way unlocked, and presently Gonzalvo himself 
descended into the cabin, carrying a tray, on which were 
several bottles of wine, fruit, and other eatables of excellent 
quality. 

" This is for your breakfast, senorita," the steward said, 
respectfully ; " if there is anything else you would like, 
please let me know, and you shall have it, if possible." 

She did not reply at first, but, intently regarding him, 
sighed deeply. 

She saw a slender, light-coloured young mulatto, appa- 
rently not more than nineteen or twenty years of age at the 
outside. 

His features were regular, and decidedly handsome ; his 
hair dark brown, and with but very slight curl. His com- 
plexion was not so dark as that of many Spaniards, and 
he might easily have passed for a white man. 

He had been with Bosco since his childhood, and the 
slave-captain placed the utmost confidence in his fidelity. 
He looked earnestly at Giulia, who, in reply to his words, 
only sighed. 

She dropped her eyes before his, which — large, dark, and 
expressive — regarded her with evident admiration. 

" Is there anything else I can bring you, senorita ? " he 
said again, in a low, soft voice. " In the way of food, I 
mean— anything I can do for you ? " 

" Nothing," she said, suddenly lifting her glorious eyes, 
and flashing their brightness full on his face, " nothing, 
senor, unless you can give me my liberty — restore me to 
my friends." 

"Alas ! senorita," he said, "I am as powerless as your- 
self in that respect. There is but one master on board. He 
orders all — rules all — his will is law." 



THE STEWARD GONZALVO. 105 

It was certain, by the looks and manner of the young 
ulatto, that he was deeply impressed with her beauty, 
.his might be used to win him ovur to assist at, or, at all 
events, connive at, her escape. 

He took his leave, but shortly returned with a large box, 
which he placed on the deck at her feet. 

" For your use, senorita," he said, and with a low bow and 
languishing look, he again took his departure. 

He was evidently smitten. 

Giulia felt certain of that, and resolved to make use of the 
fact at the very earliest opportunity. 

" Black Bosco came down into the saloon once shortly 
after noon, and again two hours later ; on each occasion he 
took little notice of her, but went at once to the little cabin, 
and bent over the charts and maps on the table. 

Her curiosity was excited. 

There was something in that cabin she should like to be 
acquainted with, she thought to herself. 

Bosco always most carefully fastened the door, and even 
made it doubly secure by means of a padlock. 

"Walking up and down the saloon as was her wont when 
Bosco was there (for she could not find patience to sit before 
him) she passed every now and then the door of this little cabin. 

On one occasion Giulia noticed that Bosco was making 
pencil marks on a chart which he was earnestly studying. 

Then it occurred to her he was marking off the course the 
vessel had traversed. 

And perhaps — her heart bounded at the thought — he had 
also marked out the intended course of the vessel, and the 
destination to which she was bound. 

The more she thought, the more she became impressed 
with the idea. 

Finally an eager desire to enter that cabin to inspect the 
charts for herself possessed her. 

She determined that she would do so ; and then feeling 
certain, woman like, that she would find there all that she 
wished, she elaborated a plan for conveying a knowledge of 
her situation, and of the place to which she was being 
carried, to friends whom she felt certain were in search and 
pursuit of her. 



106 LOVE'S TREASON. 

She began at once to prepare for the latter part of her plan. 

She set to work to discover the secret of the cabin. 

Vainly she tried her hand at lock picking, only succeeding 
in hurting her delicate fingers. 

So she resolved to fall back on Gonzalvo, who was now 
madly enamoured of her. 

"At any risk, at any cost, no matter what I promise, 
what I permit him to hope, / must get admission to that 
little cabin, and see those charts. I must and I will, and d 
shall be through Gonzalvo." 

This was her final determination. 



CHAPTER XXIX. 

GONZALVO FALLS IN LOVE. 

To all women it comes easier to play a part requiring skill, 
delicacy, tact, and, I will add, deceit, than it does to man. 

So well did Giulia play the part she had decided on, as 
completely to intoxicate Gonzalvo, giving him reason to 
think that his passion was not hopeless. 

" Ah ! senor," she said, in a plaintive voice, "what a sad 
fate is mine ! Torn away from my friends, carried, I know 
not whither, by cruel, violent men. If I only knew what, 
fate was destined for me, I might perhaps he happier — more 
resigned. But I am alone — friendless — with no human 
being to listen, or give me a kind word, even a kind thought ; 
friendless, in the power of bad men." 

" Say not so, laiy,'' he cried passionately ; " while I have 
life and strength you are not friendless. Say but the word, 
and I will lay down my life for you. Give me but a little 
hope and I am your devoted slave.'' 

"Ah ! senor, you cavaliers can say flattering things to a 
poor damsel in distress, but when it comes to deeds, that is 
a different mutter." 

" Nay, senorita, say not so : there is nothing I will not 
do for your sake — no peril I will not risk, no pain I will not 
suffer, and think myself too well rewarded by a kind glance 
from our eyes, and being permitted to kiss your hand." 

"Ah, well," she said sighing, and with a languishing 
look which sent the blood dancing through his veins, " I 



GONZALVO FALLS IX LOVfi. 10? 

shall perhaps put you to the test before long ; then we shall 
see what truth there is in all your fine words and protes- 
tations." 

" Is there anything I can do for you now, senorita ? " 

"Yes, restore me to liberty and my friends ; then come 
and claim your reward." 

His eyes sparkled. 

" Claim my reward ! Ah ! if I dared say what I should 
esteem the greatest reward on earth." 

" Would you disobey Bla k Bosco ? " she asked suddenly. 

He hesitated for half a moment. 

" For your sake, senorita, I would. Ah ! if you would 
but smile on me." 

She favoured him with a languishing smile, and a look full 
of sad tenderness, which almost drove him delirious with joy. 

Carried away by his passion, he raised her hand to his 
lips, and kissed it not once, but again and again. 

"Senor," she said, "you forget yourself." 

The words were reproving, but the tone was not angry, 
and that carried some consolation to the young man's heart. 

" Ah ! you scorn me, spurn my love," he said in accents 
of profound melancholy. " Well, it is but right. I ought 
not to expect otherwise. To be trampled iu the mud 
beneath your feet, lady, should be reward enough for me." 

" Nay, senor, believe me, I have no such wish, no such 
harsh feeling towards you. But you speak to me of reward, 
of a smile from me being ample recompense for any service 
you could render, yet you seem to forget that hitherto it has 
been only words on your part." 

" Senorita, try me," he cried. 

"Twill," she said, then paused, and remained as if in 
deep thought for some moments. " I wish to know what is 
going on on deck. What Bosco is doing and planning. What 
course the vessel is steering. Whither we are bound to, and 
any other information you can gather." 

His countenance fell. 

" I will do all I can, but, alas ! some things you ask are, 
T fear, impossible. I know not whither the vessel is bound. 
That is a secret locked up in the breast of Captain Bosco." 

" Help me to fiud out, will you ? " she asked eagerly. 



108 love's treason. 

" If I can I will, but how ? " 

" Now listen to me. I am about to put your vaunted 
devotion to the test. In yonder side cabin Captain Bosco 
has charts spread out on a small table. Every day he con- 
sults those charts and makes marks aud memoranda thereon. 
On one of those charts I am convinced he marks down the 
vessel's course each day, and there also is, I am conviuced, 
marked the place of her destination. I wish access to that 
cabin in order to see those charts. You can procure the 
key and enable me to gratify my desire. Will you do so— 
yes or no ? " 

He hesitated — seemed torn by conflicting thoughts. 

Looking up he met her lustrous eyes gazing full on his 
face with an expression which would have sorely tempted an 
anchorite. 

" Lady, I will do as you wish." 

" Thanks. Now I begin to believe in your devotion." 



CHAPTER XXX. 

GIULIA IN BOSCO's CABIN. 

Having once promised Conzalvo showed no hesitation — no 
wish to draw back. 

" Ah ! lady, you doubted my devotion — my deep adoration 
for you. It shall now be my pride and pleasure to convince 
you, you were wrong." 

" Senor," said Giulia, thinking it a good opportunity to 
ascertain how far he would go in serving her, " suppose you 
had it in your power to procure my freedom, would you do 
so — even at the risk of discovery by Bosco, and incurring 
his wrath and vengeance ? " 

" Lady, I have already said that to be assured of your 
favours, I would incur the wrath and vengeance, not of man 
only but of heaven." 

To be assured of your favours ! 

She sacrcely knew what interpretation to put on the words, 
and had a misgiving that this fiery young lover of hers might 
prove very difficult to manage, that he might demand "far 
more than she could promise or grant. 

However, depending on her woman's wit and tact, she 



GIULIA IN BOSCO'S CABIN. 109 

determined to go on as she had begun, and bend him to her 
purpose. 

Now, however, that she experienced the fervency of Gon- 
zalvo's passion, she regretted the necessity which compelled 
her to encourage and mislead him, and did not feel by any 
means so ea°y in her mind. 

However, she had commenced, and had e en opened her 
plans to the young mulatto, and must go on 

She sent him oo deck to ascertain what course the vessel 
was steering, and any other particulars he could. 

He had not been gone many minutes when the door at the 
top of the companion was opened and Bosco himself 
descended. 

He regarded her narrowly, and she thought with suspicion. 

And indeed that was not wonderful, for Giulia had been 
greatly excited by her interview with the youug steward, 
aud showed it in her flushed face, bright eyes, and nervous, 
restless manner. 

Whatever might have been his thoughts he did not give 
utterance to them, but merely asked — 

"Are you well served? Are you in want of anything ?" 

" Yes," cried Giulia, " I want my liberty — to be taken 
back to Havannah and restored to my friends." 

Black Bosco replied never a word. He only grinned, as 
much as to say, " Don't you wish you may get it ; " and 
then unlocking the little cabin, went in and closed the door 
behind him. 

He had not been there many moments when a cry was 
heard aloft. 

" Sail, ho ! " 

Taking down a powerful telescope, Bosco hastened on 
deck, not forgetting, however, to lock the door of the little 
cabin after him. 

Giulia went up to the top of the companion stairs, and 
seating herself at the closed anu fastened door listened 
intently. 

She wished to learn in what direction the vessel in sight 
was, and what was her character. 

For she cherished a wild hope that it might be a vessel 
sent in pursuit bv her father. 



UO LOVE'S treason. 

She heard Bosco hail the mast-head— 

"Where away ?" 

" Dead astern, capitano ! " 

" What do you make of her ? " 

"There are only her upper light sails to he seen ; but she 
seems a large, square-rigged vessel, and I "an make out a 
little smoke." 

Giulia's heart beat high. A vessel right astern — a large, 
square-rigged vessel, and a steamer. 

Probably a man-of-war. 

These were the thoughts which flashed through the mind 
of the captive girl. 

Bosco, suddenly opening the companion door, discovered 
her crouching at the top of the stairs. 

She had not time to get away. 

" Ah ! " he said, starting. " What does this mean ? 
Listening ? " 

She made no reply, but retreated down into the cabin in 
considerable confusion. 

" Bo, ho ! " he cried, after reflecting a moment. "I see. 
You heard the cry, ' Sail, ho ! ' and think that, perhaps, it 
is a vessel sent to rescue you." 

Then, with a sardonic grin, he again unlocked the little 
cabin, entered, and shut himself up. 

In a few minutes he came out again, and coming to the 
after-part of the cabin, looked out through the stern windows 
at the vessel, which was now plainly in sight. 

Shutting up the telescope after a long look, he turned to 
Giulia, and said, savagely — 

" You hope that the vessel you can now see is a Spanish 
man-of-war, in pursuit of this ship, in order to rescue you ? 
If you knew what I know, you would pray to the Virgin 
that it might not be so. If that is a Spanish war-ship, and 
we cannot escape, your Lours are numbered." 

"With these ominous words, which struck terror to the 
heart of the captive, he left her and went on deck. 

Five minutes afterwards Gonzalvo made his appearance, 
to her great joy. 

She told him of the words of Bosco, and he turned 
pale. 



GIULIA IN BOSCO'S CABIN. Ill 

" What do you imagine he meant ? " she asked. " I 
suppose it was only an idle threat to frighten me." 

" As to what he meant — no good," replied the young man 
gloomily ; " and as to idle threats, Bosco never threatens, 
without doing what he threatens. But I have come to tell 
you that he has gone aloft. I have got the key. He will 
probably remain aloft for a quarter of an hour, as is his wont. 
Take the key, and make all possible haste to consult the 
charts. I must go on deck to guard against suspicion." 

It was true that Bosco has gone aloft, but it was none the 
less a fact that he had seen Gonzalvo look around him 
cautiously, and then descend into the cabin where Giulia 
was kept captive. 

The mere fact of his going down would not have excited 
his suspicions, but the wary look around him first did so. 

Bosco kept a keen watch at the cabin companion, and 
when the steward came up again, called to him from aloft, 
and sent him down the fore hold on some pretext, and which 
would keep him at least a quarter of an hour. 

Gonzalvo was in a terrible state of anxiety and perturba- 
tion, but dared not disobey. 

Bosco took another careful look at the vessel astern, and 
then descended in a leisurely manner, and after seeing that 
Gonzalvo was doing what he had ordered, quietly opened 
the companion door with his private key, of which Gonzalvo 
had a duplicate, and went down. 

He looked around the saloon for Giulia. 

She was not to be seen. 

Then he looked in her sleeping-cabin. 

She was not there. 

Astonished and alarmed, his eye again swept round the 
saloon, and he perceived that the door of the little cabin 
where he kept his charts was slightly open. 

He walked up, looked in, and saw her b nding over the 
charts, and then threw wide the door. 

"Fire and fury! what does this mean?" he shouted 
furiously, as he burst into the cabin. 

Giulhi, terrified by so sudden and unexpected an occur- 
rence, shrieked faintly and shrank away. 



LOVE'S TREASON. 

CHAPTER XXXI. 

WHAT GIULIA SAW IN BOSCO'S CABIN. 

When Giulia d'Almaviras received the key of the cabin from 
Gonzalvo, she hastened to make use of it, and scarcely had 
her infatuated admirer gone on deck than she was in the 
little cabin and eagerly scanning the charts spread out on 
the table. 

The first one was a chart of Cuba and the West India 
Islands on Mercator's projection. 

It was crossed with figures denoting soundings, and reefs 
and currents were marked in great abundance. 

There was nothing here from which she could gather any 
information. 

Turning to another chart, which was partially rolled up, 
she saw it was on a larger scale, and almost in outline, the 
interior of all the lands being left blank, and there being 
no sounding marks. The various harbours, headlands, 
lighthouses, and so on, were, however, carefully set down. 

On this chart, however, she perceived pencil-marks, and 
lines traced on the part representing sea, from one port to 
another. There were several such lines, from the coast of 
Africa to Cuba — zigzag, irregular lines sometimes— atothers, 
for a space nearly straight. 

These Giulia rightly surmised to be the tracks of vessels 
Bosco had commanded on his various voyages. Those from 
the south of Africa were slaving voyages. There was a date 
written at the port of departure, and another off the island 
of Cuba, with the remarks denoting the cargo had been safely 
run. The latest dated course of all, however, had a different 
legend at its termination. In rude, ill-spelled Spanish were 
these words — 

" Chased by a Yankee man-of-ivar, and sunk by an accursed 
Englishman." 

And then, still pursuing her researches, she found another 
track from the harbour of Havannah. There was a date, 
that of the night she was abducted and carried off. 

This track — a distinct pencil line — led first into Matanzas, 
ind then, sweeping round to the westward, passed t.hrouo-h 



WHAT GIULlA SAW IN BOSCO'S CABIN. 113 

the narrow channel to the west of the island of Cuba, and 
then led out to sea in a north-easterly direction. 

This she at once concluded was the course which the 
vessel she was once a prisoner in had made. 

The distance run each day was marked by a dot, and she 
was thus able to calculate back from the day of her abduc- 
tion, and make certain that this was indeed the track of the 
vessel. 

Suddenly the pencilled line came to a full stop. The 
course had been marked up to that very day at noon. But 
looking yet more closely, she discovered a very, very faint 
pencil mark leading from this spot in a straight line out into 
the Caribbean Sea. She found that this finally ceased at the 
first of a group of four or five islands. Opposite this island 
was a cross plainly marked, also in pencil. 

Presently she remembered to have seen Black Bosco 
writing on the margin of the chart, and referring to it she 
soon discovered a cross corresponding to that opposite the 
island. 

Beneath were these words in Spanish — 

" Wedge Island, marked in chart nearly 35 deg. N. too far to the ead\ 
Wedge-shaped seen from N.N.B. to E. Nearest land bearing E.S.E." 

Not having much nautical knowledge, Giulia could not 
understand all this. 

Of one thing, however, she persuaded herself, that this 
island, with the cross opposite it, where the faint pencil line 
ended, was their destination. She noticed that a meridian 
of longitude ran right through it, and glancing her eye to 
the Equator to where these were marked, read off mentally — 
longitude — W. 

There was more writing on the margin of the chart, and 
she was just about deciphering it, which would probably 
have given her much more information, when the sudden 
appearance of Black Bosco himself startled her, and caused 
her to shrink away with a shriek of terror. 

His first act was to roll up thi charts, his second to take 
the key from the lock, where she had carelessly 'eft it. 

To do this he had to go outside the small cabin; and she, 
instantly taking advantage of the opportunity, darted out 
into the large saloon. 

U 



U4 LOVE'S TKEASOtf. 

Bosco, the key in his hand, advanced towards her, his 
dark contenance scowling with anger. 

" Keep off, villain. Do not dare to approach me," she 
cried, "or I will kill you and myself also. Keep off, I say." 

And with these words, quick as thought, out flashed the 
keen blue-bladed stiletto she carried. 

Black Bosco paused. 

He neither wished to get an ugly stab himself, nor to drive 
her to plunge it in her own breast, and either, he thought, 
was quite possible. 

" I must get that cursed little dagger from her," he 
muttered, as he stood hesitating what to do. 

" How did you get this key to open my private cabin?" 
he again asked ; " who dared give it to you ? " 

She thought of poor infatuated Gonzalvo, and resolved to 
shield him. 

" I found it on the floor of the saloon," she said ; " you 
dropped it when you were down here last." 

" It's a lie ! " he said ; " I could not drop it, I wear it by 
a chain." 

She said no more, but turned haughtily away, and gazed 
out at the stern port. 

"What do you mean by secretly entering my private 
cabin? What was your object, your reason? It will be 
better for you to speak — better, perhaps, for your accom- 
plice." 

The words made her tremble. She thought of poor Gon- 
zalvo, for whom she entertained a strange mixture of feel- 
ings. She was angry with him for his presumption in daring 
to love her : and yet, with her anger was a sentiment quite 
the reverse, which all women feel towards those who love 
them, even though they have no corresponding feeling. 

Then she pitied his hopeless passion, and dreaded, beyond 
all, his incurring Bosco's vengeance for her sake. 

So she answered boldly, and looking him straight in the 
eyes— 

'•Woman's curiosity, nothing else ; I saw you careful ly 
lock the cabin up when you left, and when I saw the key 
lvi i'i on the floor I determined to see what there was inside 
which you so carefully locked up.'' 



WHAT GIULIA SAW IN BOSCO'S CABIN. lift 

So boldly did she speak, and with such apparent truth- 
fulness and candour, looking him full in the eyes all the 
while, that for a moment or two he was staggered. 

But there was the key — that could not be got over. 

He knew that he always had it on a small gold chain, 
which he kept hung up in his sleeping-cabin. 

One key could not have become detached. He must have 
dropped the chain and all the keys, for her to have gained 
possession of this one in that way. 

However, he said no more, but went up on deck. 

She could not help shuddering at the terrible expression 
on his dark face. He looked more like a vengeful, vindic- 
tive, remorseless fiend, than a human being 1 . 

She trembled, not for herself, but for Gonzalvo, for she 
had but too gooi reason to fear that he suspected by what 
means she had obtained the key. 

However, she had no time to waste, so she hastened to 
put her plan into operation. 

Taking a dozen sheets of paper, she wrote a few lines on 
each, then she rolled up the paper in the shape of a lonj; 
cylinder, and inserted each in an empty bottle, which she 
forthwith proceeded to cork tightly. 

As soon as she had finished the first three, she dropped 
them into the sea out of the stern window. 

Then she prepared all the others in the same way, and 
after waiting a quarter of an hour, threw out three more. 

Then, after another interval, three more. 

And again three more, until the whole twelve were gone. 

By this time she had twelve more prepared in the same 
manner, tightly corked, and each containing a sheet of paper 
with writing thereon. 

These she kept on dropping into the sea, at intervals often 
minutes or a quarter of an hour. 

Before long she had a reserve of two dozen, for she wrote 
the papers and corked them up rapidly. 

These she p'aced in a locker and covered it over carefully. 

Fortunately for the execution of her plans, she was left 
alone all the afternoon. 

And yet this very fact, so favourable to her in one way, 
disquieted her sadly. 



116 LOVE'S TREASON. 

She could not help thinking that it bode J. ill for poof 
Gonzalvo, 

And when, about an hour be p ore sun-down, a stranger— 
not the handsome, soft-spoken young mulatto, bat a hideous, 
coarse, and repulsive. negro— came down, she felt more than 
ever alarmed. 

" You want anything ? " he growled in a horrible patois 
between nigger-English and Spa lisli 

'• Xo. I thank you," she replied, shrinking away from the 
brute instinctively. 

" What time you have your supper ? Oapitano Bosco tell 
me to ask." 

" When you please ; it is indifferent to me,'' she said, only 
too anxious to get rid of him. 

The man went on deck, of course carefully locking her in, 
and she was again alone. 

She dropped three more bottles into the sea. 

" Oh ! kind Virgin," she prayed, with clasped hands, "grant 
that some of these bottles be seen and picked up by the 
vessel I now see plainly astern, or by some other. Have 
pity on your unhappy daughter, and deliver her from the 
hands of her enemies ! " 

She felt relieved after this supplication, and the flame of 
hope began to burn brightly in hei breast. 

The vessel was rapidiy overhauling them. 

She could now see below the lower yards, and soon the 
hull would be in sight. 

" Surely," she said to herself, " they must observe some 
of these bottles, and the fact of their being in threes ought 
to attract attention. Then, if they pick one up and real 
the paper, even if it be not a Spanish man-of-war sent in 
chase, I must be saved. They cannot be cruel enough to be 
deaf to my appeal." 

This is what she had written on each slip of paper — 

"Help! help! in the name of the Virgin, help ! I, G-iulia de Cor» 
dova d'Almaviras, daughter of the Marquis d'Aimaviris, huvo been 
treacherously abducted from Havannah — at the instigation of a villan- 
OU9 Englishman — by a scoundrel capable of any atrocity, known as 
Oapitano Bosco Negro. The vessel is being steered lor an island in 
the Caribbean Sea, in longitude W. exactly, for what purpose I know 



WHAT GIULIA SAW IN BOSCO'S CABIN. 1 1 7 

not. All this I have ascertained beyond doubt. For the love of the Virgiiu 
help ! " 

This, Giulia thought, was an appeal which would move 
the compassion of honourable men of any nation ; and having 
given the longitude of the island, at the very least,, informa- 
tion would be forwarded to her father, should any of the 
bottles be picked up. 

Unfortunately, the fair captive had forgotten something 
very essentia}. 

This was the marginal notes on the side of the chart. 

One was to the effect that the island was marked in the 
chart thirty-five miles farther to the eastward than its true 
position. 

And that other note, of almost equal importance, that the 
shape of the island was only to be observed from N.N.E. 
toE. 

" Now miss, am brought you sapper." 

The voice of the hideous nigger aroused her suddenly. 

Gazing earnestly out of the stern window at the white 
sails of the vessel she hoped was destined to rescue her, she 
had not heard him come down. 

" Thank you," she said, and turned her head away again. 

" Oapitano Bosco send you very nice dish, yah ! " 

She looked round in some astonishment, wondering what 
such unwonted civility could mean. 

She saw on a tray, with a white table cloth, a covered 
silver dish. 

The supper service was excellently appointed — silver plate 
throughout. 

Quite unsuspectingly, she seated herself at the table, and 
the negro removed the cover. 

At the sight which met her eyes she screamed and swooned 
away. 

And well she might. 

The amputated hand of a man — that was the dish set 
before her ! 

And she recognized tha hand as that of the mulatto 
Steward, Gonzalvo, by the emerald ring still on the finger,. 



118 LOVE'S TREASON. 

CHAPTER XXXII. 

GAMBA IN THE CABIN WITH GIULIA. 

The nigger stood and regarded the iaseasible girl with <\ 
hideous grin. 

His eyes gleamed and glared till the whites were seen all 
round, and he kept champing his lips and protruding his 
great tongue, like some unclean animal about to devour his 
prey. 

He looked round towards the companion-way, then took 
a step or two towards Giulia, who still lay in a dead faint. 

This man was an escaped slave from Pensacola, and one 
of the worst types of a brutal and depraved race. 

The nigger who now glared and gloated over the insensi- 
ble form of Giulia d'Almaviras was a bad specimen of a 
debased race. 

Fear evidently struggled with other passions in his breast. 

He would glance at the companion-way, then again at 
the lifeless girl. 

" Ah ! the lovely critter. Wake up ! wake up, missa ! " 

He took her hand, half dragged her up, and then suddenly 
put his other arm round her waist, and rudely hugged her 
to his breast. 

Giulia struggled and moaned feebly as she began to come to. 

But of this the black villain took no notice. 

"Ah! white gal — white gal, you Gamba's gal now — 
yah ! " 

He was about to kiss her delicate face with his hideous 
coarse lips, when a hoarse voice was heard — 

" Gamba, you black scoundrel, where are you ? '' 

Instantly, and as though he had received a suddenblow, he 
let her fall back on the couch and bounded away several feet, 
gazing with the utmost terror at the companion- way, whence 
the voice proceeded. 

The next moment Bosco came down into the saloon. 

It was well for the nigger Gamba that he had not come 
down without first giving him warning. 

The nigger well knew that had he been caught by the 
terrible slave-captain, daring to taste of fruit, not for such as 
he, he would not have had many minutes to live. 



GAMBA. IN THK CABIN WITH GIULIA. 119 

" Well, how did the senorita like the dish I seat her, eh ? 
Ah ! she's down on her back." 

" Went clean into a faint directly she took the cover off, 
capitano. I was just coming to ask you what to do." 

"Ah ! let her be, she'll come round. It'll be a lesson to 
her." 

" Shall I stop and attend her, capitano ? " 

" No, you black thief ; I wouldn't trust you any more than 
I would a hyasna in a sheepfold. If ever you dare come down 
into this cabin without orders, I'll stick a knife in your throat, 
and run you up by the heels to the yard-arm, to bleed to death." 

Gamba looked as if he was utterly cowed. 

The horrible death Bosco had mentioned was a favourite 
punishment of his, and the nigger had seen more than 
one poor wretch struggle in agony suspended by the feet for 
as long as an hour, the blood all the while trickling from 
a wound, purposely a slight one, in the throat. 

Captain Bosco had his crew in thorough subjection ; they 
held him in the most abject awe and terror, and though he 
were alone on board, it is certain that such was the terror of 
his name and his very look that they would not dare rebel. 

The nigger slunk away, not even daring to cast a black 
look on the terrible slave-captain behind his back. 

Bosco gazed on the captive girl, who was just beginning 
to revive, in silence for a moment or two. Then observing 
the hilt of the little stiletto just peeping out from her 
bosom, he went up to her, rudely tore open her dress, and 
took it from her. 

" A dangerous she cat this. It is as well to cut her claws." 

He stood calmly surveying her, with none of the passion- 
ate excitement of the negro G-anaba, waiting till she 
recovered her senses, cruelly anxious to witness her horror 
on again looking on the dish he had sent her for supper. 

And presently she awoke from her faint. 

After gazing wildly around for a moment or two, her 
eyes fell on Bosco. 

And then, as though by an irresistible impulse, although 
she knew what was there, she again looked in that horrible 
dish. 

for on a silver plate, with its own blood for sauce, Bh$ 



LOVE'S TREASON. 

the right hand of the unfortunate G-onzalvo, rudely 
pped off at the wrist. 

The emerald ring he wore on his middle finger, and of 
which the unhappy mulatto was not a little vain, still 
glittered there. 

" Cruel wretch ! " gasped Giulia, and hid her face in her 
hands. 

He stood by, looking on and enjoying the scene with 
fiendish glee. 



CHAPTER XXXIII. 

THE CABINET. 

After a while, Bosco spoke in savage, brutal tones, like the 
growl of a wild beast — 

" Such is the vengeance of Black Bosco, on those who dare 
attempt betraying him. Beware how you venture to trifle 
with me again, my charming senorita. Should you do so. 
I will find another punishment for you." 

" Kill me, if you like, you cruel wretch." 

"Ah ! no, I shall not do that, at least, not first. What 
I shall do will be this. I will come down here to you with 
that handsome nigger, Gamba ; with his assistance I shall 
bind you securely, so that you will be helpless as an infant, 
I shall then leave you with the sweet and amiable Gamba. 
telling him he can do with you as he pleases." 

A sudden fury possessed her as she heard these atrocious 
words. 

Starting to her feet, she sprang at him, crying out in her 
rage and indignation — 

" Monstrous and inhuman wretch ! you shall pay dearly 
for this. My father, my friends, shall hunt you down, aud 
wreak on you a tenible revenge." 

" Perhaps, so. Meanwhile, I, at all events, can be first 
in that line of business." 

" You think, perhaps, you will escape with impunity, but 
you are mistaken. See, even now a noble vessel in pursuit 
gains fast upon you. You will be caught — hanged to the 
yard-arm, and I shall be rescued." 

" As to my being hanged, that may be or may not b§. 



THE CABINET. 121 

They do say that I am bound to be hanged some day. Bat 
as to your being rescued, why, that's just a different matter 
altogether. If that vessel astern is in chase of roe, and boards 
me to search for you, I'll stake every dollar I've got in the 
world they won't find you." 

"Ah! you think you can conceal me in some secret 
cabin? But do not flatter yourself ; they will find me if 
they have to ransack ever} 7 inch of the ship." 

" Ha ! ha ! ha ! let them ransack ! " laughed Black Bosco ; 
" they won't find you — they'll be clever if they do. Ah ! no, 
no, sweet senorita, I have arranged all matters excellent')-. 
I am having prepared for you a charming little cabinet- 
such a comfortable retreat." 

*' A cabinet ! " 

" Yes, a box — a box of wood, in shape not unlike a coffin ' 
in fact, we'll call it a coffin." 

His words and strange look puzzled and alarmed her. 

What could he mean ? A cabinet ! a box ! a coffin ! 

Some more terrible mysteries — more horrors looming in 
the future. 

" Surely," she said to herself, " never was a high-born 
maiden in such miserable plight." 

" Have you quite finished with your supper, senorita," he 
asked scoffingly, " especially the delicacy on the silver dish ? " 

She made him no answer, but shrank shudderingiy away, 
avoiding looking at the dreadful object. 

Bosco took the severed hand, and drew the ring from the 
finger without the least appearance of compunction. 

" Can't afford to feed the fishes on emerald rings. As to 
the other — here goes the hand of a traitor." 

With these words he coolly tossed the amputated hand 
into the sea. 

" AYhen next you attempt to tamper with my servants, 
senorita, it will be the head, not the right hand, I will send 
you for your supper." 

She made him no reply, but kept her face buried in her 
hands, full of horror at the terrible scene enacted before her, 

"There, I'll make you a present of tins ring," he said. 
" It will serve to remind you of your paramour — for such, 
of course, he was," 



122 love's treason. 

He tossed the ring, stained with the blood of the unfor- 
tunate Gonzalvo, on to the ottoman by her side. 

Even this last insult did not arouse the unhappy captive 
or cause her to lift her head or remove her hands, which 
covered her face. She lay and sobbed and moaned till long 
after sundown. 

By degrees she regained her composure, and though heart- 
broken and as utterly wretched as it is possible to conceive, 
the thought of the pursuing vessel astern brought her some 
little consolation. 

Once more she began to hope, and stifling her grief, seated 
herself on the after lockers, and through the open port 
looked out over the sea at the faint speck astern, which she 
knew to be a vessel. 



CHAPTER XXXIV 

MORE STEAil GOT UP. 

The night seemed to Giulia d'Almaviras as though it were 
twenty hours long, instead of about ten, and this the more so 
from the fact that about two hours after midnight clouds 
and mists shut out from her view the dark spot astern 
gradually growing larger and larger, which she knew to be 
the pursuing vessel, and fervently hoped — believed even — to 
be a Spanish man-of-war sent out to rescue her. 

She sat half crouching on the stern lockers, her hands 
clasping her knees, gazing with sad, earnest eyes through 
the port, hoping to see each minute the gleaming lights of 
the steamer astern shining through the obscurity. 

But as morning approached the mist grew heavier, the 
weather thicker generally, and the young girl looking out 
from the stern port could discern nothing but the dark sea, 
broken by phosphorescent flashes, and the grey gloom of the 
night shutting out everything from view at a greater distance 
than half-a-mile from the Yendttla. 

And so waned on the weary night. 

Just as the first faint light of dawn began to tinge the 
dreary waste of darkness with an ashen grey hue, a flash of 
flame leaping forth, as it seemed, from the mist-bank astern 
of the vessel, caused Giulia to start up. 



MORE STEAM GOT UP. 123 

She was on her feet and eagerly gazing out with her haiid 
over her eyes ere the report following the flash had time to 
come. 

Boom ! 

A man-of-warsman could have told at once that it was a 
heavy gun which had just been fired. 

After the flash and report all was again silence and dark- 
ness. 

Giulia remained standing, bending forward with clasped 
hands, like some lovely statue — lips apart — eyes almost 
glaring with eagerness — every faculty, almost every sense, 
si rained to the utmost. 

But minutes passed on, and she neither saw nor heard 
anything. 

She was about sinking down again on the locker utterly 
weary, and feeling a reaction of despondency at no immediate 
consequences following on this first cannon report. 

For she, in her eagerness and ignorance, thought that the 
first shot would be followed up instantly by a vigorous can- 
nonade, and that in the course of some half-hour or so the 
pursuing vessel would be alongside the Vendetta, herself 
rescued, and the villain Bosco brought to a stern account 
for the outrage. 

Woman like, at the first signs of assistance she concluded 
that the affair was finished — the battle won. 

Just as she was thus giving way again to despondency, 
her heart was made to leap again in her bo<som by the sight 
of another flash. 

Shortly following this and before the report was borne 
on the night air she heard a sort of sighing moan aloft. 

It was the round-shot tearing away far overhead, but 
nevertheless in a good direction. 

The fact of its roaring past far aloft proved another fact, 
and a most unwelcome one to Bosco — that the vessel astern 
was well within range. 

He growled forth an oath as he heard the moan of the 
bristling iron, a sound with which he was well acquainted, 
for he had been many times chased. 

It was now almost day, and quite light enough to make 
gut any vessel at some miles distance. 



124 LOVE'S TREASON. 

Pedro, who had been looking dead astern, grasped 
arm. 

" There she is— a Spanish frigate, by all the saints ! " 

Bosco, looking in the same direction, beheld a big ship 
coming out from what was like a wall of fog and mist. 

"Ten thousand devils ! " roared the captain of the Ven- 
detta, i: she will be alongside us in a couple of hours." 

" Her cannon-shot will be alongside, and perhaps into us 
a bit sooner," remarked Pedro drily. 

Both vessels were now plainly in sight of each other, and 
there could not be a shadow of doubt as to the one astern of 
the Vendetta being a man-of-war, and also that she was in 
pursuit, and determined to overhaul her. 

Having given strict orders that, let the risk be what it 
might, steam was to be kept up at its present pitch, he 
went up the ladder. 

Scarcely had he reached the deck than he heard the splash 
of a round-shot, and a ! so a crashing, splintering sound, 
which seemed to denote that the vessel had been hit some- 
where. 

Running aft, he was met by the mate Pedro. 

" She's got it close to the stern-post, capitano, and the 
rudder's damaged." 

Black Bosco gave vent to one of those volleys of oaths 
always at his command. 

Then he stopped considered for a moment, and said — 

"You re sure the rudder's hit ? " 

" At any rate, it's jammed, and is of little or no good till 
it's put straight." 

"Ah ! and before we can do that the stranger will be 
alongside. Very well, we'll obey orders. Take in all scumre 
sails, and get that cabinet along." 

Then he shouted down the engine hatch. 

" Ivise her ! " 

Pari ! v by means of the helm which was not quite in order, 
and partly by means of manoeuvring with the sails, the 
vessel's head was brought round in a direction at right 
angles to her form r course, just as another round-shot 
howling through the air gave a hint that to heave to was 
the most advisable course, 



THE USE OF' THE CABINET. 125 

"Now then," shouted Black Bosco, "hurry aton? with 
that cabinet. Leave it at the top of the cabin coinpauion- 
way, you nippei's. Now then, Pedro, you and I can carry 
it down and fix this pal's business ourselves." 

What was it they were about to do ? 

What meant this mysterious cabinet ? and why was it to 
be taken into the cahin where Giulia was confined ? 



CHAPTER XXXV 

THE USE OF THE CABINET. 

GiuTiTA d'Almaviras, as the prey dawn slowly broke, was 
still seated half crouching on the stern locker. 

She watched eagerly for each flash and report of the 
cannon, and the shriek of the round-shot so disagreeable to 
Black Bosco was sweet music to her ears. 

By-and-by, when it was quite daylight, and the pursuing 
ve?sel was quite distinctly visible, matts, spars, hull, guns, 
everything betokening a large and powerfully-armed frigate. 
there came a flash and a puff of smoke from her bow. 

And in a second or two there was a great splash in the 
water some two hundred yards astern, and then, as the round 
globe of iron ricochetted over the water, it struck the sur- 
face again close under the stern of the steamer. 

Giulia was drenched with the spray thrown up, and now 
for the first time realized the feet that there was actual 
danger to herself in this cannonade, which had so delighted 
her as affording evidence that it was impossible for Bosco to 
escape. 

She had barely finished arranging her wetted hair, and 
removing as best she could the traces of the sea-spray from 
her attire, when she heard the cabin door at the top of the 
companion open, and footsteps descending slowly and with 
difficulty, as if carrying a burden. 

Determined to be discovered in as calm and composed a 
state as possible, she seated herself again on the locker, and 
looked out on the sea. 

To her surprise, and at first to her great dismay, the other 
Vessel was no longer visibls. 



i26 LOVE'S TREASON. 

She noticed, however, that the Vendetta was no longer 
straining and tearing through the waves like a frightened 
animal striving to escape from the fangs of a lion, and then 
if. struck her that Rosco was about to heave his ship to and 
surrender. 

Tt was indeed a fact that he had determined to allow him- 
self to be boarded by the pursuing frigate. 

But he had a scheme in his head for avoiding all penalties 
for his crime, and indeed preventing its ever being known 
beyond surmise, which, for diabolical ingenuity and with no 
less wickedness, out-did all the enormities Bosco had ever 
yet been guilty of. 

As he thought cuer this precious scheme and elaborated 
it in his brain, the slave-captain chuckled to himself. 

He quickly made the necessary preparations for carrying 
out his plan, of which the cabinet formed the principal one. 

" If they do come to look for her, why, then, I guess they'll 
be puzzled to find her," he said with a chuckle to Pedro. 

Down they came with heavy, lumbering steps — Pedro, the 
mate and Black Bosco. Giulia sat still, and seemed to take 
but little notice of them. 

She wished to appear as unmoved as possible, but never- 
theless, could not but feel some curiosity as to what they 
were doing — what their object could be in carrying such a 
strange-looking object. 

Then all at once it struck her that it was the "cabinet" 
of which she had before heard. 

And then she began to speculate as to its use,and their 
intentions in bringing it down here. 

He curiosity overcoming her pride, she arose and ap- 
proached a few paces nearer to them, wondering and puzzling 
as to what possible contrivance it could be, and how it could 
concern her. 

Jt was, as we have said, an oblong box, about six feet in 
neighr, and perhaps a foot and a half or three quarters wide. 

It was, in fact, like a long case without a lid. 

As Giulia gazed, a shudder shot over her. 

It struck her that it resembled a coffin. 

Could it be that they intended to use it as her coffin ? 

Well might she shudder as she guzed on the cunning, 



ffiE USE OF THE CABINET. W. 

malevolent face of Pedro, the mate, and the still more 
villanous countenance of Black Bosco ! 

They looked as though they were capable of any atrocity. 

" Now then, Pedro, are you ready ? '' said the slave- 
captain. 

" All ready, capitano." 

Bosco now came in front, and minutely inspected the 
interior of the cabinet, loosening some straps, and bringing 
them outside, and making other arrangements. 

This done, he came close to Giulia, who, determining to 
keep up a bold front, stood her ground. 

" Now, senorita," he said, " I want to see how this piece 
of furniture fits you. So just step in, if you please." 

"Fits me?"shecried. "I do not understand you. Beware 
how you offer any outrage or violence to me. Those who 
are able and willing to protect and avenge me, if need be, 
are at hand." 

" Will you oblige me by just stepping inside that little 
cabinet ? You will observe that I have carefully lined it 
with canvas, and have also placed a sort of stool for you to 
stand upon. Come, my dark-eyed beauty, time presses." 

With these words, he suddenly stretched out his hand and 
seized her by the arm. 

" Allow me to assist you," he said, with a sardonic smile. 

" Villain, loose me," she cried, passionately, and en- 
deavouring to break away from him. 

But he held her too firmly for her to escape, and the next 
instant Pedro, having crept round behind her, threw him- 
self on her, seizing her by the other arm and shoulder, so that 
almost before she could cry out or even struggle, the two 
powerful men had forced her bodily into the cabinet, her back 
to the back of it, her face looking out. 

Pedro held her whilst Black Bosco hastily secured some 
straps, which passed from side to side within. 

One went across her breast, another over her waist, while 
a third tightly strapped her legs at the knee. 

She found herself in half a minute pinioned, utterly help- 
less, strapped upright in what she had but too good reaso 1 " 
to fear would prove her coffin. 



128 LOVE'S TREASON. 

CHAPTER XXXVI. 

GIULIA BOUND m THE CABINET. 

Scarcely had Black Bosco thus secured the unfortunate 
G-iulia than two loud reports, followed by a shout from some 
of the crew, betokening that something had happened, 
caused him to rush unon deck calling to Pedro to follow him. 

The Vendetta was now going at half-speed only, and in a 
direction crossing the course of the pursuing frigate, instead 
of right away from her as before. 

But the man-of-war did not appear to be satisfied with this, 
and evidently her captain was not in a mood to be trifled 
with. 

Two shots in rapid succession across the bows of the 
Vendetta, the latter of which carried away her bowsprit, 
served as gentle hiuts to Black Bosco to heave to at once. 

Seeing no help for it, he gave the order down the engine- 
room to stop her, and hoisted the Spanish flag. 

He waited and looked to see an answering flag from the 
frigate. 

But no ensign or flag of any sort floated from her peak. 

She came steadily on, without flag or device to denote her 
nation. 

" Come along," said Bosco, hurrying down the companion- 
way into the cabin ; " we have little time to lose ; we must 
make haste and finish this business." 

He found G-inlia fast bound in the cabinet, which he had 
leaned up against a bulkhead. 

As she was strapped in, it was impossible for her to escape, 
or even to move beyond a very little. 

She had struggled desperately for a minute or so, but 
finding it utterly useless, desisted. 

" Heaven's will be done ! " she said passionately. " Holy 
Mother ! if I am to die thus, receive my spirit." 

And then this poor ill-treated, unhappy girl resigned her- 
self with calm composure to whatever fate might be in store 
for her. 

" Murderers, do your worst ! " she said in a calm voice, 
which surprised even Bosco — so deep, firm, and without any 



GIULIA BuUXD IN THE CABINET. 1-0 

trace of fear was it. "I am prepared to die ; you will feel 
the vengeance of man in this w<,rld, and of 0-od in the next, 
for this cruel outrage on a helpless woman.'' 

" We'll chance that," replied the ruffian Bosco, whom 
nothing could daunt or turn aside from his purpose. " Come, 
lay hold, Pedro. You take the feet, I'll manage the head." 

They took up the coffiu-like box containing the form of 
Giulia, and Pedro, crawling up on the locker with his end, 
placed it over the sill of the port. 

" Are the weights at the feet all right ? " asked Bosco. 

Pedro, after a brief examination, replied — 

"All right, capitano." 

" Shove forward, then." 

Involuntarily the unhappy Giulia gave vent to a faint cry. 

"Ah ! Holy Mary ! save and help me ! They are about 
to murder me ! " 

It seemed all plain enough to her now. 

They had fastened her up in this cabinet as in a coffin. 
It was weighted -at the feet, and now that they were about 
to be boarded by her rescuers they were about to cast her 
into the sea, when of course cabinet and all would sink to 
the depths of the sea, leaving no record of either crime — the 
abduction or the murder following on it. 

Giulia was brave, and had prayed for strength, but now 
that the supreme moment had come she felt as though she 
would swoon. 

" Shove forward, Pedro," she heard the voice of Black 
Bosco say. 

Then she felt the bos grate over the sill of the port, and 
knew that her feet hung over the sea. 

Another foot or so and all would be over. 

Her last moment had come ! 

Then her fortitude gave way to this extent, that she gave 
vent to a scream of agony. 

" Now then, what are you making that noise for ?" shouted 
Black Bosco, furiously ; " you are not dead yet, but, by the 
souls of all the men I've killed, if you make that noise once 
more, over you go." 

Giulia, who retained her senses, understood that she was 
not to be immediately murdered. 



l."0 LOVH'S TREASON. 

Bosco now took a > t >iece of thin rope and made it securely 
fast to the head or top part of the cabinet— Giulia's coffin, 
as it seemed likely to tie — calling Pedro to support it the 
while. 

Then he led this rope through a ring-bolt in a beam over- 
head, and then down again through another near the fore 
end of the cabin and the companion-stairs. 

He then hauled on this rope. 

" Lift up, Pedro, lift up her head," he shouted. 

Pedro obeyed, and as he did so Bosco hauled in on the 
rope. 

By this means the end of the cabinet where was Giulia's 
head was hoisted up towards the deck above, or what lands- 
men would call the ceiling. 

It was thus in a slanting position, half hanging out of the 
port, and almost entirely suspended by the rope. 

It was quite certain that if the rope was let go Giulia 
would be plunged into the sea, and sink never to rise again. 

" Now then, listen to me," said Black Bosco, coming close 
up to Giulia ; "what I've got to say to you I shall say in a 
very few words. In the first place, if you scream or make 
any noise I shall instantly drop you into the sea. The 
cabinet in which you are is suspended by a rope fast from 
the head, and it is hanging half out of the port, as perhaps 
you are aware. The rope leads aft to the companion-way, 
and I shall take it on deck and make it fast, so that I can 
cut it at any moment 1 please, when you, box and all, will 
disappear from the scene for ever. Very likely, it will be 
necessary for me to do so, and I shall, without the least 
doubt. So I advise you to prepare for death. If this is a 
Spanish man-of-war sent in pursuit of me, my own safety 
demands that you should not be found on board. You 
observe that it would be hard to conceal you from ea°-er 
searchers, and I thought so too, so I hit upon a dark hiding- 
place where, if I sent you, you would never be found. This 
then, is your shroud. If the frigate has merely overhauled 
me to see if there's slaves on board, or contraband, or for 
any other reason, except of what you hoped a short time 
back, and I think now most likely, why, then you are saved. 
That is to say, if the officer does not insist on penetrating 



THE VENDETTA BOARDED BY THE YANKEE. 131 

to this cabin so as to discover you. If he does, or if they 
are in search of you, why, then you are a dead woman, 
for I am determined they shall never find you." 

Then Black Bosco strode away, followed by Pedro, leaving 
the unhappy Giulia in an agony of terror, expecting each 
moment that the rope would be cut, and that she would be 
engulfed in the sea. 

It was indeed a terrible and awful position . 



CHAPTER XXXVII. 

THE VENDETTA BOARDED BY THE YANKEE. 

As Black Bosco passed up the cabin companion-stairs he 
took the rope which held the unfortunate Giulia suspended 
over the raging waters and made it fast to a cleat. 

" You can stand here, Pedro, on the steps," he said, 
" neither in the cabin nor on deck, so as not to be in Eight. 
The instant you hear me whistle cut the rope with your 
knife. Cut, you understand; don't cast off; it will be 
safer and quicker to cut. You understand ? " 

"All right, capitano," said Pedro, drawing his keen 
sheath-knife and taking up his post on the companion-stairs ; 
" I'll cut quick enough, never fear." 

" Or else," said Black Bosco, by way of final warning, 
" the garotte, you know — the iron collar round your neck?' 

" I tell you I'll do it, capitano," repeated Pedro, with 
gloomy desperation ; " I'll do it if there were a dozen 
innocent maidens at the end of the rope." 

" Good," said Bosco, and hastened on deck. 

In a few minutes a boat from the frigate was alongside, 
and two officers, a lieutenant and a midshipman, boarded 
the Vendetta. 

Black Bosco, affecting an easy unconcern he did not feel, 
tidvanced to the gangway to receive the officer. 

" What vessel's this ? " asked the latter. 

" The Spanish merchant steamer, Vendetta," replied Bosco, 
who now felt a little more at his ease, for he thought he 
could tell for certain that his questioner was not a Spanish 
officer, although he could not distinguish the uniform of 



132 LOVE'S TREASON. 

either him or the midshipman, by reason of the heavy cloaks 
they wore to counteract the cold raw morning air. 

" Merchant stewmer, eh ! " said the officer, with an un- 
mistakable Yankee twang in his speech; "what's them 
guns for, eh? Reckon merchant ships arn't armed in 
gen'ral." 

" Well, you see, sir," replied Bosco, deferentially, " we're 
bound on a trading voyage among the island?, and perhaps 
Borneo and the China Seas, and, as you know, the savages 
are often treacherous and bloodthirsty, and there's heaps of 
pirates about." 

" You're right there, skipper ; I've been in those parts 
with Commodore "Wilkes's expedition, and know a little about 
it. What's your cargo ? " 

" General ; such as is likely to be useful on a trading 
voya^', but we're principally in ballast." 

" Ah ! well, I must search strictly — oil' with your hatches." 

" Certainly, sir," replied Black Bosco ; " but may I ask 
what ship yours is ?■" 

" The U. S. frigate fiapidan," last from cruising off Cuba. 

Bosco's countenance fell as he heard this. 

" Perhaps, after all, they have heard of the abduction, and 
their captain has volunteered to assist a friendly nation in 
overhauling a criminal who has abducted a daughter of the 
Marquis d'Almaviras." 

" May I ask what is your object in boarding and search- 
ing this ship ? " 

" Yes, you're welcome to ask," replied the Yankee officer, 
quietly. 

" Well ? " 

" But I ain't a-going to answer till I've had my search out 
— right fore and aft — do you understand that, mister ? Right 
fore and aft, from forecastle to stern cabin." 

Black Bosco did understand, and his countenance fell. 

He now very strongly suspected that the fair Giulia waa 
the object of the Yankee's search. 

It is true he had means at his disposal — terrible, diabolical 
means — of for ever putting her beyond reach of discovery 
by him or any one else, but in doing so he must perforce 
Jose his prize, his most valuable prisoner. 



THE VENDETTA BOARDED BY THE YANKE*. 133 

" Just as you like," he said, moodily, and gave the order 
for the fore and main hatches to be taken off. 

The Yankee officer, accompanied by Bosco, walked for- 
ward to the fore hatch. 

" Hallo ! what is this ? " he said, pointing to a pale and 
ghastly object stretched on a mattress at the foot of the fore- 
mast. 

A dark complexioned, slender youth, with handsome 
features, which were now, however, ghastly pale and distorted 
Ly pain — the right hand was swathed in linen cloths, which 
were perfectly saturated with blood, so as to present a horrid 
sight. 

It was no other than the unfortunate steward, who, for 
daring to give Giulia the key of the little cabin, had been 
thus barbarously punished by Black Bosco, the slave-captain 
having himself stricken oif the unhappy young man's right 
hand. 

"Oh! it's nothing," replied Bosco, coolly, "only one o. 
my men had an accident — jammed his hand — it's getting 
better." 

" Poor devil, he seems bad enough, and in pain, too — 
looks as if he'd slip his cable." 

"Not much loss; a lazy, sneaking hound." 

The Yankee officer, who was a humane man, looked with 
disgust at the ruffian who could thus speak of an unfortu- 
nate wounded man, evidently in great angony. 

" Lead on down the forehold, sir, and stay — send for 
lanterns." 

Black Bosco obeyed, and the officer made a thorough 
search of the forepart of the vessel, even insisting on having 
the coals turned up. 

But with all his researches and trouble he discovered 
nothing. 

Next he followed the same plan down the forehold, where 
he came across some kegs of powder, ammunition, lead for 
casting bullets, a case of rifles, and another of pistols, be- 
sides about a hundred cutlasses and boarding pikes. 

These, however, Bosco explained were not at all in excess 
of the possible necessities of the voyage, for they were bound 
to parts where not only might a plentiful supply of arms 



134 LOVE'S TREASON. 

and ammunition be needful for defence, but where also such 
articles were the best possible to barter with. 

The Yankee looked suspicious, but finally accepted the 
explanation, and came on deck. 

" Well, sir, I hope you are satisfied," said Black Bosco. 

" So far so good ; but I have not seen all over this craft 
of yours yet — let me see, there is your cabin." 

" Of course, if you insist you can go down in the cabin, 
but there is a lady there very ill," urged Bosco, now much 
disconcerted. 

He still suspected that the real object of the Yankee's 
search was Giulia d'Almaviras, and of course he felt 
proportionately alarmed. 

"Nevertheless, my friend, I must go down into this cabin 
of yours.'' 

Bosco looked as black as thunder. Looking in the 
Yankee officer's face, he saw that the latter meant what he 
said, and it would be utterly useless to attempt to dissuade 
him. 

Giulia's life hung in the balance as the cabinet in which she 
was strapped hung by a rope. 

" Very well, sir, as you please. I will just whistle for my 
steward." 

Then he placed a small silver whistle to his mouth, and 
blew a shrill blast. 

An instant afterwards a faint cry ivas heard. 

" What was that ? " asked the officer. 

" I think it's my sick wife crying out in her pain," 
answered Bosco, fabricating this dreadful lie in very mockery. 

For he knew right well from whence the faint cry realiy 
came. 

Just at that moment the frigate fired a gun, and, looking 
towards her, the lieutenant beheld signals flying, which lie, 
knowing the code nearly by heart, was able to decipher — 

" UUurn ai e ifyou have discovered nothing. Anolh-'i 

sail in si»ht. We must, give chase instantly." 

" Ha !" he cried, " ! must go on board my own vessel 
direct Iv. Wish \ou good voyage, captain." 

" Won't you come down and satisfy yourself as to the 
cabin ? " asked Bosco, who felt secure on that point now. 



THE VENDETTA BOARDED BY THE YANKEE. 135 

This had the effect of disarming the suspicions of the 
Yankee. He hesitated a moment or two. 

" No, not now. I must make haste back." 

" Will you tell me why you boarded me ? " asked Bosco, 
" now that you find out you had no reason ? " 

" Tes, I will tell you now," said the lieutenant, as he went 
over the gangway. " We are cruising in search of a rebel 
privateer, the Turtle Dove, they have the impudence to 
call her. Confound such Turtle Doves, I say. She's done 
more than a million dollars worth of damage within the last 
month to our mercantile marine, and is making prizes of 
our rich homeward-bounders right and left. You answered 
to her description, and we thought you might be the Dovs 
herself. Now you know." 

Then he went down into the boat, and was rowed back to 
the Rapidan. 

" Hem ! " thought Black Bosco, " I might do worse — 
might start this craft as a rebel privateer on my own hook. 
What prizes I might make ! I needn't stick too particular. 
If I don't think that'll be the best plan now the other 
game's all over, the gal being at the bottom of the sea by 
this time ; at least, I suppose she is." 

Pedro came up at this moment. He was ghastly pale — 
a cold sweat was on his face and forehead and neck, and his 
eyes had a wild, horrified look. Murder was written on his 
face. 

" Have you done it — cut the rope ? " asked Bosco. 

He bowed his head in token of acquiescence, as though 
unable to speak. 

" Speak, can't you ? Have you done the business ? " 
asked Bosco savagely. " As it happens, it was not neces- 
sary." 

A sort of a groan of agony and remorse broke from 
Pedro. 

He was a murderer — a cold-blooded murderer of an inno- 
cent, helpless girl ; and now he heard, to his horror, that his 
dreadful crime was unnecessary. 

" What the dickens is the matter with the fellow ? Can't 
you 6peak, curse you ? Have you cut the rope, and sent the 
girl to the bottom of the sea ? " 



136 LOVE'S TREASON. 

" Yes," replied Pedro in a hollow voice, " did you not hear 
her death shriek ? " 



CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

THE FOUR STEAMERS. 

Ox the wings of fancy let us soar high aloft into the bine 
vault of heaven. Higher than ever the strong-winged 
eagle mounted — higher than ever daring aeronaut ventured 
to ascend, and from this giddy height, miles above the cloud?, 
let us look down on the vast expanse of the Spanish Main 
and the Caribbean Sea, all dotted and sprinkled with islets 
and larger islands. 

TTe see, amongst other vessels, merchantmen, coasters, and 
fisher craft, hanging about the coasts, four steamers. 

One with a single funnel and three masts standing to the 
south-east. 

"We have been on board her ; have seen her captain, mate, 
and crew, and witnessed some of the diabolical deeds there 
Derpetrated. 

This is the Vendetta ; Black Bosco the captain. 

Some two hundred miles astern of this vessel another is 
standing, in nearly the same course, to the south-east. 

Both seem bound to the Caribbean Sea. 

The second steamer does not appear to be so large as the 
Vendetta, though in reality there is very little difference in 
their tonnage. 

The second steamer is sharper built, and of a shape 
which, though peculiar, is by no means ungraceful. 

That shape is something like that of the wedge, tapering 
from the bow until close to the quarter within a lew iathoms 
of her stern, where her greatest breadth of beam is. 

As a rule vessels have their greatest beam a little way 
abaft amidships, and by no means so near the stern as is the 
case in this vessel. 

She is evidently built for speed, a clipper probably, under 
sail as under steam. 

She also has three masts, a fore and main mast, with top- 
sail and topgallant yards, and a mizenmast to carry a spanker 
and gaff topsail. 



THE FOtfR STEAMER*. 137 

The whiteness of her decks, the polish of her rails, the 
brightness of her brass guns, and a hundred other little 
things, at once apparent to a seaman's eye, bespeak her 
either a swift war steamer with a dandy captain, or the 
private yacht of some personage of great wealth. 

This latter is the fact. 

She had been built for the private yacht of the Marquis 
d'Almaviras. 

Her name is the Avenger, Captain Edward Blake, and 
the name of the chief lieutenant is John O'Brien. 

So now the reader is again brought into the company of 
seme old friends, of whom we have perhaps for too long a 
time lost sight. 

But before doing so we will glance at the other two 
steamers. There is one at the moment of which we speak, 
bearing about south-east by east from the Avenger, distant 
perhaps a hundred miles. 

As this steamer is steaming direct for the Avenger, it is 
obvious they must soon run in sight of each other, and 
indeed, pass close to each other, the one steering to the north- 
west, tiie other south-east. 

This vessel is the Yankee steam frigate Ra-pidan, by which 
the Vendetta has been boarded, and some of the letter-laden 
buttles committed to the sea by the unfortunate Giulia 
d'Almaviras picked up. 

And lastly we come to the fourth steamer. 

This one is nearly right astern of the Avenger, distant 
some four hundred miles. 

She has not long left the port of Havannah, and having 
rounded the western-most point of the island of Cuba, is 
also steering to the north-east, also bound, it would seem, to 
i he Caribbean Sea. 

So here we have three steamers steering on the same 
course, bound to the same part of the ocean. The Vendetta, 
1 1 Capitano Bosco Negro ; the Avenger, Captain Edward 
Blake, two hundred miles astern ; another four hundred 
miles astern of the Avenger. 

This third one is named the Maritana ; the captain is 
one Joachim Gonzalvez, in his way as great a ruffian as Black 
Bosco himself 



lo8 love's treason. 

One is the ferocious and terrible tiger, the other rather 
resembles the wily, creeping serpent. 

Possibly we shall make a closer acquaintance with her, 
but for the present we will transport ourselves on board the 
Avenger. 

It is early in the forenoon watch, a glorious tropical niorn- 
ing, the wind a gentle breeze, the sea a pleasantly-rippled 
sheet of water. 

iSTed Blake is reclining on the gratings right aft by the 
traffrail, buried in deep thought. 

Jack O'Brien, his faithful friend and lieutenant, coming 
aft on the other side, approaches him and slaps him on the 
shoulder ere he is aware of his presence. 

"Wake up, my boy !" cries the light-hearted Irishman. 
" What the divil are you dreaming of ! — building castles in 
the air, or trying to square the circle by mental arithmetic, 
eh?" 

"Neither, Jack. I was not calculating, and certainly at 
that time I was not building castles in the air, for I was not 
thinking of the future or even of the present." 

" And what the divil are you thinking of then, eh ? " 

" The past, Jack." 

" The past ! " 

" Aye, the past — the black past." 

" To blazes with the past ! I agree with you, my boy, 'tis a 
dirtv past, and for that reason I'd have nothing to do with 
it at all." 

"I can't help thinking of my ruined prospects — my dis- 
graced name." 

" Och ! to blazes with your croaking! Sure you are 
badly treated— very badly treated, and that's all about it. 
Even tiling will come right some of these days, and then you 
will be done lu-tice to." 

il No. )!... Jiclc, ! fear not," said Blake, sadly. 

'" .■>:"• '■■<'•■ it's just a ('erta'iitv — that's all." 

li i - <!" yi-n mnke that out?" a^b-l Blake, with a smile. 

"J ■ Miis '-vhv AVre :-j>ing to find the sennritu, n>cue 
herb. mi i he ■:. a i.ii..- m.f nave curried her off, and restore 
her to her father — are we not ? " 

" We're going to try ? " 



THE POUR STEAMERS. 139 

" And of course we'll do it. Well, then, that done, the 
thine is settled, and the girl will be bound then to come 
forward and prove that your statement before the court- 
martial is absolutely true, and that Lieutenant Walker is a 
perjured villain. She would do that, would she not ? " 

" I think she would, suppose we were so fortunate as to 
rescue her as you say. But, my dear boy, it would be too 
late " 

" Too late ! Why ? " 

" I have been tried — found guilty — sentence has been 
pronounced —approved off — and I have been dismissed her 
Majesty's service iu disgrace." 

"'Bah ! what's that?" 

" Buin to me," replied Blake, gloomily. 

"Nonsense. Sure we can petition the Lords of the 
Admiralty, and lay the whole case before them. They must 
do you justice. If they didn't, we'd petition Parliament; 
and if Parliament couldn't do you justice, why, we'd petition 
her Majesty herself. Leave it to me, my boy. I'll worry 
their lives out but what I'll have justice for you." 

" Devil doubt you as to the worrying, Jack, old boy," 
replied Blake, laughing. " I think, as the saying is, you'd 
make it pretty hot for them." 

" I would so, and I'd win the day, me boy. And we'll 
win the day now in this little business — by the holy poker, 
we will. We'll find the girl, and we'll fight her enemies, 
and we'll thrash 'em all dead, every mother's son of 'em. 
And then we'll sail back iu triumph to her father's hall. 
Iloorah ! glory, my boy. There's a prospect for you !" 

Jack O'Brien, full of spirits, tossed his cap up, and caught 
it again, and, in a measure, infected Blake with his own 
enthusiasm. 

The man at the wheel looked round in some astonishment, 
though the crew- were beginning to get accustomed to the 
vagaries of their light-hearted first lieutenant. 

Edward Blake laughed, and could not help feeling cheer- 
ful aud hopeful under the influence of Jack's sunny nature. 

"Well, now, look here, my boy," pursued Jack O'Brien. 
" Isn't everything in our favour ? Haven't you got the 
command of a splendid steamer — a clipper sailer too, that 



140 LOVE'S tKEASOtt. 

would beat most merchantmen, though she hadn't a pound 
of coal on board ? Isn't she well found — cannon, small anus, 
ammunition, stores, and with a rattling crew ?" 

;i Right, Jack." 

" Haven't you made excellent terms with the old marquis ? 
Haven't you bargained with him for his daughter's hand ? 
Can't you marry her — the richest heiress in Cuba — if you 
like — eh, my boy ? " 

"Yes, if I like, Jack. But I shall not like. I wish to 
have a triumph over her in return for the insulting scorn 
with which she treated me. 1 wish to have a right to her 
hand, and then refuse it — cast it off as some worthless 
thing." 

" Then, bedad, you're a bigger fool than I took you to be. 
I didn't think there could be such a big fool in this created 
world. What ! refuse to take for a wife the handsomest girl 
and the richest heiress in all Cuba ! The man's mad — stark, 
staring mad ! " 

" There's a deal of method in his madness though, Jack. 
Besides, we haven't found her yet eveu, to say nothing as to 
gaining the day ; for I expect those who were audacious 
enough to abduct her will be found strong enough to make 
a desperate resistance." 

" To blazes with their resistance !" cried Jack, contemptu- 
ously. " We'll just smash 'em up entirely, that's what we'll 
do." 

Blake smiled again, and thought to himself—" Surely 
never was there such a high-spirited, hopeful, reckless mortal 
as this, and withal a braver heart or truer friend." 

" Not found her ! " continued O'Brien ; " why, haven't 
you got the latitude and longitude of the place they're going 
to take her to, all complete ? And besides, don't our vessel 
sail and steam like a witch ? By the Piper that played 
before Moses, we'll overhaul the vagabonds before ever they 
reach their island. See if we don't." 

"No such luck, I'm afraid, Jack," said Blake, shaking his 
head. 

At this moment the look-out on the fore topgallant yard 
(Blake always kept a man up there) hailed — 

" Smoke a-head." 



GIULIA D'ALMAVIRAS WAS HAD. 1-11 

" "What do you make of it ? " shouted Ned Blake, going 
forward. 

" A steamer, I think, sir." 

" Can you make out which way she's standing ? " 

"Xo, sir, but we're coining up with her. I've been 
watching her a good quarter of an hour before I h died, to 
make certain, and we're nearer, for the smoke's as plain 
again." 

Jack O'Brien laid his hand on Captain Blake's shoulder. 

" There you are, my boy ; that's the steamer, bet your life." 

" What steamer ? " 

" Why, the steamer that's got the senorita, the marquis's 
daughter, on board, to be sure ; knew we should come up 
with her on the high seas." 

" Oh ! nonsense, Jack." 

" Is it nonsense ? you wait a bit, you'll see. I reckon I'd 
better see to the big guns and set the small arms readv." 

Nothing would convince Jack O'Brien that this was not 
the particular vessel of which they were in pursuit. 

We shall see the result by-anl-by. 



CHAPTER XXXIX. 

GIULIA D'ALMAVIRAS WAS MAD. 

It is quite possible that the reader may wish to hear some- 
thing further of the Vendeita and the doings of Black Bosco. 

Also, perhaps, he may desire to learn something more 
definite and precise concerning the fate of the unhappy 
G-'iiiia d'Almaviras. 

So, leaving the Avenger to pursue her course — rapidly 
drawing nearer to the steamer just sighted — we will once 
again go on board the Vendet'a. 

We will suppose forty-eight hours to have elapsed since 
the events in which Black Bosco and Pedro bore such terrible 
parts. 

So that it is now the second morning since the Vendeita 
wag boarded by the lieutenant and midshipman of the 
Yankee man-of-war. 

The rudder has been repaired, a fresh jibboom rigged out, 
and the. vessel is in perfect order. She is going merrily on 
her course under steam and sail. 



142 LOVE'S TREASON. 

Black Bosco and Pedro the mate are on the topgallant 
forecastle, the former looking a-head through a telescope at 
a low, dark, indistinct line or faint ribbon on the horizon 
which no one but a seaman would notice. 

It is land ; and the captain of the Vendetta is anxiously 
endeavouring to ascertain by its appearance whether it is the 
coast he expects and thinks it is. 

Pedro seems to have recovered altogether from his fit of 
remorse, and now laughs and jokes the captain about his 
patron St. Diavolo, as usual. 

li I'm almost certain it's the island," said Black Bosco, 
" (.hough I can make out neither the point nor Sugar-loaf 
Bill, as I call it." 

"And what about the Quoin — the Gunner's Quoin ? Can 
you see anything of that ? " 

" Of course not, blunderhead; I don't expect to see that 
till we yet round the point." 

" Well, I suppose we shall know for certain in another 
hour." 

" Yes, dead certain. She's doing a good ten knots, and 
the tide's in her favour. We shall be close up with the land 
bef>re noon. See and get a bay of biscuits, a keg of water, 
a musket, a little powder and bullets, some old sail-cloth, a 
small hatchet, some nails, and a coil of rope, and put thein 
in one of the quarter boats. I reckon that will be a toler- 
able fair allowance, and no one can say I ain't a humane man, 
eh, Pedro ? " he added, with a yrin. 

" I Jut what is all this for?" asked Pedro in some surprise. 

" Oh ! I am going to put a passenger ashore on one of 
the islands." 

" A passenger ! " 

" Yes, certainly ; or, if you like it better, a rascalli, 
trail or — " 

'• You mean — •" 

" That cursed mulatto steward, of course, who gave the 
girl the keys of my private cabin. Ah ! by-the-bye, since 
he's so fond of writing, he shall have the materials. See 
there are pens, ink, and paper in the boat also, Pedro. He 
shall write love letters to the seals and penguins on his desert 
island, if he likes." 



GIULIA D'ALMAVIRAS WAS MAD. 143 

They were walking up and down the main deck now, from 
the funnel as far as the forecastle, talking as they walked. 

Neither noticed as they passed the foremast, that on the 
other side the same figure with the ghastly pain-marked 
face, and hand bound up with blood? rags, lay extended on 
a mattress, and nearly covered and concealed by an old sffil. 

This was Giulia's aspiring but unfortunate admirer--tne 
mulatto steward. 

He listened — his heart burning with rage, yearning for 
vengeance — and heard sufficient of Black Bosco's conver- 
sation to learn that the slave-captain's anger was not yet 
satisfied, but that he was doomed to the terrible fate of being 
deserted on an uninhabited island. 

He was helpless, so he did all that he could — lay still and 
listened intently. 

" Well, and after you've dropped your passenger, as you 
call him — where to then, captain ? " 

" Ah, that's the best part of it. I know of such a charm- 
ing little retreat — such a delightful, snug, secret rest — that 
woatd delight the eye of one of the old pirates of the main 
■ — an island surrounded, concealed even, by an archipelago 
of islets, so close together as almost to make a solid circle 
of land. There is but one entrance through this circlet 
of islets — at least, only one tolerably wide and safe 
entrance. I don't doubt but that it might be possible to 
find a passage through some of the others ; but, as there is 
no such thing as map or chart, it would be very dangerous. 
Do you know, Pedro, that these islauds are not marked 
down in any chart, and I believe I, alone, know of their 
existence. 

" Have they anything to do with the Gunner's Quoin — 
Wedge Island. 

" I think they belong to the same group, but they are not 
in sight. As to my particular island, it is completely hidden, 
for the surrounding islets, though small, have high peaks 
and promontories. Oh ! I tell you, it is a charming retreat 
— just the place to hide anything, from plundered treasure 
to you know what." 

And as he spoke, he nodded his head towards the cabin. 

" Just so, captain. And you mean to make for this place 



144 love's treason. 

after you have dropped a passenger here ? You know the 
latitude and longitude ?" 

" That's just it, and then I shall drop another passenger 
there. As to the latitude and longitude, it bears east south- 
east, about a hundivd miles from this island." 

" Oh, ho ! I begin to see. Leave where you will know 
where to find — eh ? " 

" Just so, Pedro, and where no one else will know where 
to find. Every one else on a false scent. Don't you see ? 
I have the game all in my own hands. Now I'll just rouse 
that cursed mulatto up, and give him a treat before he's put 
ashore. "We're drawing up to the island fast. Go and dud 
him, Pedro, and send him to me." 

But the mutilated steward could not be found easily. He 
had overheard the greater part of the conversation between 
captain and mate, not missing that part where Black Bosco 
spoke of the unknown island, and its bearings from the 
Quoin, or Wedge Island. 

Then he had completely covered himself with the old sail. 

At last, however, Pedro ferreted him out, aud summit ed 
him to rise by a not too gentle kick. 

"The captain wants you on the quarter-deck." 

" Ten thousand curses on his ruffian soul," said the un- 
happy man, in low tones of intense hate. " May he burn for 
ever." 

" Likely enough," replied Pedro, coolly, "but that's none 
of your business. What you've got to do now is to go aft to 
him and see what he wants." 

The unfortunate man rose painfully, for he was very weak 
from pain and loss of blood, and made his way slowly aft. 

" Well, my dandy steward, my charming young Don Juan, 
my elegant traitor, I want you to come down into the cabin 
with me. Pedro, see and get those things in the boat I told 
you of." 

The mulatto bowed in silence. 

He was helplessly at the mercy of this inhuman monster, 
and resistance or defiance on his part would, he had too good 
reason to fear, only entail on him fresh agonies, more 
mutilation." 

Black Bosco unlocked the door at the top of the com- 



THE UNINHABITED ISLAND. 145 

pftnion stairs, and went down into the cabin followed by 
the ex-steward. 

And when they both stood within the cabin, a strange sight 
presented itself to their eyes, a sight which Bosco regarded 
with calm unconcern, but which caused the mulatto to start 
back with a cry of dismay, of horror even. 

At the moment they entered a female form had been 
crouching on the lockers aft, but the instant she perceived 
them, she started up and advanced half the length of the 
cabin to meet them. 

Then she stopped abruptly, and stood with body bent for- 
ward, hands clenched behind her, and eyes gleaming with a 
terrible fire, and features convulsed with passion. 

"Avaunt! what want ye here?, back to the accursed 
regions from whence ye came ! Back, dark spirits of night, 
nor dare pollute the realms of day with your accursed pre- 
sence. Away with ye, fiends and imps of Satan ! Away ! 
away, I say, ere I call forth the spirits of liuht ! Away," 
once more she cried, her voice rising almost to a shriek aa 
she ended. 

Well might the mulatto steward start in horror ! 

It was Giulia dAlmaviras he saw before him, the body 
beautiful as ever, but the mind, ah ! that was gone ; strained 
beyond endurance, her reason had given way, and Giulia 
i'Almaviras was mad. 

But the appearance of Giulia, alive and well in bodily 
iealth, requires some explanation, after Pedro having cut 
the rope wliich kept her suspended over the sea, and which 
acr it might be supposed must infallibly plunge her into tho 
waves to sink to the depths of the ocean, and she miserably 
drowning. 



CHAPTER XL. 

THE UNINHABITED ISLAND. 

Black Bosco stood leaning against a bulk-head, surveying, 
with a mocking smile, the wreck he had wrought. 

A man mutilated. 

A woman — a high-born and beautiful damsel— driven mad, 



146 love's treason. 

And on this fiend's work the fiend in human shape could 
gaze with a smile. 

Giulia was as beautiful as ever. Indeed, the wildness of 
her eyes, the look of excitement in her flushed face, her 
nervous, tragic manner, seemed to lend fresh interest, even 
new charms, to the unhappy girl. 

Her dark hair, unkempt, uucared for, flowed loose in wild 
disorder over her neck and shoulders, and even her dress 
was disarranged. 

After talking in a wild, excited manner for a time, a 
change came over her mood, and seating herself on the after 
locker, she commenced singing, or rather chanting, a plain- 
tive Spanish melody. 

It seemed to go to the heart of the unhappy mulatto. 

" Oh, man, if you are a man," he cried excitedly to Bosco, 
" and not a devil in man's shape allowed to prowl about the 
earth for a time, let me leave this, or I, too, shall go mad !" 

Black Bosco laughed his usual mocking laugh. 

" You're a fine fellow, certainly, to play the dangerous 
game of treason with Black Bosco. Bah ! Go on deck, you 
chicken-hearted traitor. I have not done with you yet, I 
wished you to see before I finished with you that my venge- 
ance was complete." 

The mulatto went on deck without a word. 

He had no hope, whatever, having overheard the late .a 
store for him. 

Right well he knew that neither resistance nor emr^'a^s 
would avail him in the least with the hard-hearted rnontfuer 
in whose power he was, and whose vengeance he had 
provoked. 

Black Bosco followed him on deck, and at once saw that 
the boat was got ready, and provided with the slight stock 
of stores he had named. 

They were now within a couple of miles of the island, and 
Black Bosco gave orders for the boat to be lowered. 

" Get in ! " 

That was all he said to the unfortunate man whom he thru 
devoted to a lingering death. 

The wretched mulatto was prepared for this — had nerved 
himself to face inevitable death— a slow, lingering death by 



THE UNINHABITED ISLAND. 14? 

actual starvation, and thirst ; for, of course, the little bag of 
biscuits and keg of water' would not last long. 

He got into the boat without a word, and was quickly 
rowed ashore by four lusty negroes, the mate, Pedro, 
steering. 

The biscuits, water, and stores, were put on shore, and the 
mulatto himself landed. 

Then the boat shoved of, and he was left alone. He stood 
watching it as it sped over the waves in gloomy silence. Once 
he raised his clenched left hand aloft, as though invoking 
the vengeance of heaven on the cruel wretch who had doomed 
bim to such a fate, and then quietly lay down by his little 
pile of stores. 

Even the rough, brutal negroes forming the crew of the 
boat felt a shade of compunction for a fellow-creature thus 
left to perish. 

And Pedro, the mate, who was a timid villain, shuddered 
as he thought of the terrible curse which doubtless ti.e 
mulatto had invoked upon the heads of himself and Bosco. 

The boat reached the ship, an J was hoisted up, and the 
Vmdttta steamed away. And as she put out to sea, the 
mulatto was seen to rise again on his feet, and again uplift 
his clenched left hand. 

Then he knelt, and they knew he was praying. 

Then again he rose, and held his only hand above his head. 

And they knew he was cursing them. 

Curses — prayer — curses — a strange mixture. 

But somehow, Black Bosco, who was seldom moved by 
anything, was evidently uneasy. 

It seemed as if the curses from afar off of the mulatto had 
been able to produce some sensible effect on him. 

In spite of himself a cold shudder went through his iron 
frame, and this man of many murders actually felt some- 
thing akin to compunction. 

He even felt a something, he knew not what, which 
prompted him to return and take the marooned man off the 
island. 

But this he effectually resisted, laughed at his folly, drank 
off a tumbler of aguardiente, and ordered the engineer to 
fire up. 



148 LOVE'S treason. 

.but what of Giulia d'Almaviras ? 

Miraculously almost saved from the jaws of death only to 
he received in the scarce less dreadful embrace of maduess, 
hers was indeed an unhappy fate. 

After the Yankee captain had left the ship, Black Bosco 
did not have occasion for nearly an hour to go down the 
cabin, as he busied himself giving directions for the repiir 
of the rudder. 

He at length went down and Pedro too, both thinking, 
of course, that the unhappy girl lately imprisoned there 
was now a corpse, deep down in the sea. 

Bosco started suddenly, and pointing up to the ring-bolt 
in the beam through which the rope led, exclaimed-^ 

" Why, there's part of the rope." 

Pedro was speechless with astonishment. 

Looking out at the stern cabin window, they beheld the 
cabinet in which the girl was confined, dangling in mid air, 
the foot of it dipping at times in the top of the waves. 

In a few moments they had understood all. 

Pedro had cut the rope instantly on hearing the signal as 
arranged. 

But as it happened, by some means or another there was 
a large knot in the rope, and this, with some kinks, had 
jammed in the ring-bolt, and thus stopped the rope running 
through, and the further descent of the cabinet to the sea. 

Giulia had felt herself shoot downwards, grating against 
the edge of the port, and thinking her last moment 
come, had screamed, and fainted. 

They hoisted her up, and found her insensible. 

After many hours she recovered consciousness so far as 
the power of motion was concerned, but her mind was gone. 

She was perfectly delirious — for the time mad. 

Nor is it to be wondered at, considering the terrible ordeal 
she had undergone, for had she not suffered all the bitterness 
of death, even up to the last supreme second ? 



CHAPTER XLI. 

TIDINGS OE GTULIA D'ALMAVIRAS. 

Let us hie away back from the Vendetta, with her cruel 



TIDINGS OP GIULIA D'ALMAVIRAS, 149 

captain and her murderous doings, to the pursuing and 
avenging Avenger, where, as yet, at least, all is peace and 
quietness. 

It is evening — the sun is just dipping between the horizon, 
and the two steamers, the Avenger and the United States 
frigate, Rapidan (the same the smoke of which was seen in 
the morning by the look-out of the Avenger) have approached 
eacli other almost within hail. 

In ten minutes the boat was lowered and manned, and 
Jack O'Brien seating himself in the stern-sheets, gave the 
word — 

" Give way ! " 

In a very few minutes he was alongside the Yankee frigate, 
and going on board, was received at the gangway by the 
captain, who forthwith invited him into the cabin. 

" I signalled you to come on board, mister," said the 
Yankee, " for a rather peculiar reason. I've got a message 
from the sea, and am requested to pass it on." 

" A message from the sea ? " said Jack O'Brien. 

" Yes ; in a bottle." 

" In a bottle ! I'm all in a fog ! " 

"It's easily explained. The look-out, two days ago, 
reported seeing corked bottles floating on the sea at pretty 
regular intervals. I ordered a boat to be lowered, and we 
picked up two. They each contained a paper, with an 
inscription the same on each. Here is the paper, I will read 
you what is written on it." 

He then proceeded to read what Giulia d'Almaviras had 
written : — 

" Help ! help ! in the name of the Virgin, help. I, Griulia de Cov- 
iova d'Almaviras, daughter of the Marquis d'Almaviras, have been 
treacherously abducted from Havannah — at the instigation of a villan- 
ous Englishman — by a scoundrel capable of any atrocity, known as 
Oapitano Bosco Negro. The vessel is being seered for an island in 

the Caribbean sea, in longitude W. exactly, for what purpose I 

know not. All this I have ascertained beyond doubt. For the love 
of the Virgin, help ! " 

" By all the gods ! " cried Jack O'Brien, starting to his 
feet, " that's the very affair we're after. I must be off back 
t,o my ship with the news," 



150 LOVE'S TREASON. 

" Give way with a will, lads ! " cried the lieutenant of tho 
Avenger, so soon he had taken his place in the stern-sheets 
of the boat ; " pull like blazes." 

He was burning with excitement, eager to communicate 
his news to Edward Blake. 

" By Jove ! old boy, this is fortunate ! It's the hand- 
writing of Giulia d'Almaviras herself!" exclaimed Blake. 

"And of course her information is to be depended upon." 

" It in a measure corroborates my own knowledge, and 
yet does not altogether agree. The place she speaks of in 
this paper can scarcely be the same I overheard Black Bosco 
speak of. At all events, it conclusively proves that at present 
we are on the right track — that the intention is to convey 
her to some secluded island in the Caribbean Sea. Of that 
there can be no doubt. For the present, Jack, we will alter 
the course a point more to the northward, in accordance with 
the latitude and longitude on the paper in Giulia's hand- 
writing. "We will see what that brings forth, and should we 
discover no trace of her, or of the vessel in which she was 
carried off. we can go back to our original intention, and 
make for Wedge Island." 

Tho course was duly altered, and after saluting the frigate, 
the Avenger sped on her way. 



CHAPTER XLII. 

THE AVENGER. 

Tnrc Avenger was well found and equipped ; n every respect. 

A short time before the abduction ol Giuiia d'Almaviras, 
a blockade runner, in endeavouring to escape from a pursuing 
Federal cruiser, ran ashore on one of the reefs near Havan- 
nih, and became a total wreck. 

Amongst other cargo she had a large r'.led cannon, a 
muzzle-loader, and twelve hreech-loadin;; Armstrongs of 
the best construction, and adapted either for firing a conical 
solid shot or shell. 

These, though light and easily handled, were of lon^ 
range, and capable of doing terrible execution in action by 
reason of the rapidity and accuracy of their fire, 



THE AVEXCFER. 151 

They were intended for field batteries for the Confederate?, 
but would answer admirably mounted as ship guns. 

They had carriages, ammunition, and ail complete. 

The great wealth of the Marquis d'Almavirav enabled him 
to purchase these costly and deadly engines of war. 

He did so, and at once sent them on board his beautiful 
yacht, which he had placed at the disposal of Edward Blake. 

A supply of coals and provisions were sent on board with 
equal promptitude, and there only remained to get a crew 
and equip her for sea. 

The marquis transferred her to the name of Edward Blake, 
and had her registered under the British flag. 

The young captain himself took in hand the task of setting 
a crew, and as there were at that time a good many English 
and American seamen ashore in Havannah, he was able to 
obtain a crew about one half English, Scutch, and Irish, and 
the remainder Americans, Dutch, Swedes, and Danes. 

Most of the stokers were niggers, but he was able to get 
English engineers. 

By the time the Avenger approached the islands of the 
Caribbean Sea, all hands had had a turn at the big gun 
exercise, and a very fair degree of discipline had been 
arrived at. 

She steered easily under sail or steam, and for speed was 
a veritable clipper. The Armstrong guns were wonders of 
deadly accuracy, and the gunners worked them with ease 
and rapidity. 

Altogether everthing looked most favourable, and Edward 
Blake could not but be thoroughly satisfied and hopeful. 

All that was wanted was to come across the enemy with 
the girl in his power. Of the result of the encounter the 
young commander had no doubt, if it came to a fight 
between the two ships. 

Should he, however, succeed in putting her ashore and 
fortifying some rocky position, the atiair might be more 
serious, but under any circumstances, Blalie felt persuaded 
that he should return to Havannah in triumph. 

This was the state of affairs when, two days after their 
falling in with the Yankee frigate, they approached some ot 
islands of the Caribbean Sea. 



152 LOVE'S TREASON'. 

Th- ^ itnh I«1and of Jamaica had long been passed, and 
the no: , iH'id f<h'."'^'l whs Martinique, between which and 
BiTfia^^s. the swift steamer glided under sail and steam. 

S lie two >1 ivs previous to this, a slight accident to the 
t;j.i- i ery made it necessary to stop the engines for twelve 
no' i? 

This was a serious loss of time, as the breeze being very 
light, the Avetiyer was able to make but very little progress 
Urnier sail. 

S> that even allowing the Avenger to steam and sail faster 
than the Vendetta, the latter would be enabled by this delay 
to make up all losses, and have as good a start as when she 
sailed from Cuba. 

Thus then, unless the Avenger should greatly outpace the 
the Vendetta, there was every chance of Black Bosco's vessel 
getting first to the goal, supposing, as Captain Blake had 
every reason to do, that the information conveyed to him by 
Giutia's own handwriting was correct, and that the slave- 
captain intended to leave the lady on an island far away from 
the track of ships, where there would be little chance of her 
being discovered, but where he could put his hand on her at 
any time he chose. 

Aware of this, Ned Blahe did not stint the furnaces of 
coal, nor did he spare the engines, but kept them going at 
the highest possible pressure of steam. 

Also he crowded on every possible stitch of sail. The 
swift little steamer dashed through the waves at the rate 
sometimes of twelve knots an hour. 

On the morning of the eighth day after leaving Havannah, 
he calculated by observation that he was only some fifty or 
sixty miles distant from the spot Giulia had mentioned on 
the slip of paper which had fallen into his hands. 

In order to make the shortest possible course to this 
island or group of islands, he had altered his original course 
and did not pass within sight of the latitude aud longitude' 
where he judged Wedge Island to be — the island he had first 
heard Black Bosco speak of as the one to which he would 
convey the abducted girl. 

On this eighth day he caused a vigilant look-out to be 
kept, and shortly after noon the cry— 



THE AVENGER. 153 

" Land-ho ! " was heard from the mast-head. 

The wind was fair, the sea smooth, and the vessel made 
such splendid way, that in less than four hours she was 
close up with a group of small islands, which appeared to 
spread out in a semi-circular form. 

Sailing to the east, then to the south, and then bearing 
to the west, and lastly to the north, Blake ciroum- 
naviga,ted this group before dark, carefully inspecting all the 
islands as he did so. 

But he could discover no sign of the island he sought. 

By none of the indications on the paper written in Giulia's 
own hand, could he discover the spot where she at least felt 
confident she was to be put ashore. 

And yet he was quite certain that so far as her directions 
were concerned he was in the right latitude and longitude. 

Night coming on he hove the vessel to, standing off and on. 

The next day he renewed the search again, making a 
complete circuit of the group, but without any success. 

And the next day he commenced a more minute search 
still, lowering boats and landing on many of the islets. 

And so on, day after day, until a week had been spent. 

And yet not a sign of life, nothing pointing in the 
remotest way to human beings ever having landed on any 
of these islands. 

He now began to suspect that there must be some mis- 
take in Giulia's data, and finally he resolved to sail away 
from this gronp, and endeavour to find Wedge Island, of 
which he had overheard Black Bosco speak. 

He had no doubt of being able to find this if Bosco had 
given the latitude and longitude correctly, for he had heard 
every word distinctly, and knew he could trust his memory. 

And so after a week's search without discovering the 
slightest trace of G-iulia d'Almaviras or her abductors, 
Edward Blake sailed away, for the time discomfited. 

But, nevertheless, this was the group of which Black 
Bosco had spoken to Pedro the mate, when the unfortunate 
mulatto steward overheard him, and among these islets was 
the one which he so extolled as admirably suited for a 
pirate's retreat. 

And, moreover, at that very moment, as the Avenger pu$ 



154 LOVE'S TREASON. 

out to sea, Gmlia d'Almaviras was languishing a solU-.r? 
prisoner on the island. 



CHAPTER XLIII. 

THERE LAY THE BEAD BODY OF A MAN. 

It may well be supposed that this first and partial failure 
hud somewhat of a dispiriting effect on Edward Blake, and 
even on his light-hearted lieutenant, Jack O'Brien. 

The captain of the Avenger was now really the more hope- 
ful of the two ; for though O'Brien talked cheerfully, and 
declared they were sure to win in the long run, his faith 
was a little bit shaken by their non-success. 

Captain Blake looked on the matter in this light— 

The girl had seized an opportunity of writing what she 
thought she knew for certain, corking up in bottles, and 
committing to the sea. She had been mistaken, perhaps, in 
some matter apparently trifling, but which would be quite 
sufficient to throw them out entirely in their reckoning, and 
had clone so. 

Nevertheless, it bore this encouragement. It showed 
that a short time back she was alive and well in these sea 5 ?, 
and, as he thought, in the hands of Black Bosco, who 
at that time was steering a course for the islaud, the lati- 
tude and longtitude of which Blake had himself heard him 
state. 

Not finding any signs of him where they had been, the 
probability was that the girl had been entirely mistaken, 
and that the slave captain had adhered to his original inten- 
tion. 

This was the conclusion Edward Blake had come to, and 
though, perhaps, not so sanguine as before, he had well- 
grounded hopes of finding things as he expected. 

The one incontrovertible fact, which he thought prophe- 
Bied best for their success, was this, that Black Bosco had 
carried the girl down towards the Caribbean Sea, where 
the island to which he had first sp>ken of conveying her 
was situated. And, bearing this in mind, Blake determined 
he would not give up the search so lone 1 as coal and pro- 
visions lasted. 



THERE LAY THE DEAD BODY OF A MAX. 155 

As for the former, now that great speed was no longer an 
object, he carefully husbanded, depending principally on the 
excellent sailing qualities of the vessel. 

"Land-ho!"is heard once again from the mast-head, 
and in an hour or two more islands are seen ahead, and 
presently, to the young commander's great satisfaction, he 
is enabled to single out one particular island. 

On landing on the coast of Wedge Island, the prospect 
was not at first encouraging. 

There was sand up to high-water mark, and then rough 
rocks and bowlders, covered with seaweed and moss. 

Captain Blake had organized an exploring party of ten, 
including himself and O'Brien. 

On landing, he directed them to penetrate inland, keeping 
within hail of each other, and at a distance apart of atout 
three hundred yards, marching in directions parallel to the 
line of the shore. 

On any one discovering anything worth notice, he was to 
fire off his musket, which each one carried. 

Blake himself was rowed slowly along within about fifty 
yards of the shore. 

Scarce half an hour had elapsed when he was startled by 
the sound of a musket-shot. 

" Give way, lads ! " he cried, steering the boat towards 
the shore ; " they have found something." 

In a very few minutes he had made his way to the spot 
whence came the report of the musket, and arrived amidst 
an excited group, breathless and panting. 

And there a strange and terrible sight met his eyes . 

At the foot of a huge rock there was a sort of natural 
hollow or cave. 

At the mouth of this there was the remains of a fire — 
some half-burned sticks and dead embers. 

This was the first thing he noticed, and was sufficient, Oi 
course, to convince him that the place had been visited by 
human beings — or at least one. 

At first he did not observe the object on which all 
regards were bent. 

In the shadow of the cave or hollow there lay the dead 
body of a man, 



153 love's treason. 

It was on its back, the head resting on the remains of a 
bag of biscuits. 

The right arm, from the elbow upwards, was swathed in 
bloody bandages, and, looking more closely, Blake could 
tell that the hand was gene. 

The body was clothed in shirt and trousers only, and, 
from the appearance, it did not seem that death had takeu 
place more than a couple of dns since at most. 

There was in the cave a coil of rope, an axe, a musket, a 
few tools, some old canvas, and, by the head of the corpse, 
paper, and a bottle of ink, with the pen still in it. Also 
there was a small keg which had probably contained water, 
but was now empty. 

As we have said, the body lay on its back, with its glassy 
blind eyes staring vacantly upwards. 

The left hand held a paper — a sheet of foolscap paper — 
covered with an almost illegible scrawl. 

Edward Blake stooped down, and took it from the hand 
of the corpse. 

He glanced at it, and as he deciphered the first few words, 
written in a clumsy, irregular, scrawling hand, he started, 
and a slight exclamation escaped him. 

" Whoever finds this let him read it through. I was steward on 
board the Vendetta, and have been murdered bv her captain, II Bosco 
Negro." 

" Dig a grave for the corpse," said Captain Blake, " some 
of you. In two hours' time I will come and read the burial 
service." 

Then he strolled down to the sea coast, and seating him- 
self in view of the vessel, proceeded to read this message 
from the dead. 

Edward Blake stopped reading, and, rising, walked 
rapidly to and fro, grinding his teeth. 

" Mad ! mad ! That wretch, then, has driven her mad ! 
Can such things be ? Can heaven allow such a monster to 
live ? But whpn we meet, I will have no mercy on him, 
not even the form of a trial shall he have, but the death of 
a dog then and there." 

After a bit Ned Blake calmed down a little, and resumed 



WEDGE ISLAND. 15? 

reading the manuscript, which was by no means an easy 

task. 

On finishing perusing it, he rose, and walked up and 
down for a few minutes in deep thought. 

"Yes, it must be so; the island here spoken of is 
actually among that group which I thought we had so 
thoroughly searched. AVith this additional information we 
cannot fail to find it, and pjrhaps may not only rescue the 
marquis's daughter, but catch Black Bosco like a rat in a 
trap." 

His mind was quickly made up. 

Having given the unfortunate mulatto steward, so 
cruelly doomed to a terrible death, the rites of Christian 
burial, they returned to the vessel, and in another hour the 
Avenger was sailing before a fair wind, back to the islands 
in the Caribbean Sea 8he had left, but a day before 



CHAPTER XLIV 

WEDGE ISLAND. 

The human mind is a wonderfully constituted machine, if 
such a terra may be used, of the thinking, reasoning part of 
man. 

Insanity — that foul and mysterious disease — no better 
understood now than two thousand years ago — makes its 
approach in various ways. 

The worst and most deadly form is when it comes on 
gradually — by slow degrees. The patient is often aware 
of the impending calamity, and fights desperately against 
it. 

And again, it swoops down on the victim suddenly, with- 
out a moment's warning. 

This is usually the effect of some terrible shock on an 
alreidy overstrained mind. 

This was the case with Giulia dAlmaviras. Already in 
the agonies of suspense, deadly terror had done its work ; 
and when Pedro cut the rope, and she felt herself slipping, 
as she thought, to her death, the thin thread of reason 
snapped, and with one short cry her thinking soul fled 
away. 



158 LOVE'S TREASON. 

Perhaps it was hotter so, for she was no longer conscious 
of pain or misery. 

But, as often happens, this state was not destined to last. 

After exh.mstin? herself utterly by her wii 1 ravings and 
rapid motion to and fro in the cabin, the unfortuu ate girl 
grew all at once drowsy, and lyin^ on the bare, hard 
lockers, fell off into a deep sleep, which lasted for many 
hours. 

And when she awoke her reason had returned. 

She was, however, utterly oblivious of all that had 
occurred after the cutting of the rope by Pedro. 

She had no knowledge of Bosco, accompanied by Gon- 
z-ilvo, the mutilated steward, having been down in the 
c tbin — no recollection whatever of her ravings and wild 
fancies. 

She knew that something had occurred which had pre- 
vented her being plunged into the sea, but as to how or in 
what manner she had been saved from this terrible death 
she was in utter ignorance. 

She distinctly remembered the Vendetta being chased and 
ultimately overhauled by a large war ship, but what was 
the result when she was boarded and searched, she knew 
not. 

The nitin-of-war was no longer in sight, and the vessel 
was speeding on her course unmolested — that was all she 
knew on the subject. 

Some days after the Vendetta had been overhauled by the 
Yankee frigate, she might have been seen cautiously steam- 
ing through a narrow channel which ran between two of a 
group of islands. And presently, after threading a maze- 
like course in and out among many islands — for the most 
part barren, rugged, and rocky — a lovely bay, of horseshoe 
shape, opened out before her. 

The shore was covered with white sand, and at a distance 
of some hundred yards from the beach luxurious vegetation 
commenced. 

At first it was only brush, undergrowth, and a species of 
long grass, but gradually the aspect of the island, which 
eloped upwards in regular gradation from the beach, par- 
took more of the nature of forest. 



WEDGE ISLAND. \*9 

About three-fourths of the distance of the mountain there 
was a platform or table land, from which a clear view could 
be commanded of the coast and bay beneath. 

This plateau could be approached from the side of the 
bay by a sort of natural zig-zag path, which wound up from 
the shore. 

On the other side the flat expanse grew narrower and 
narrower, until it merged into a mere ledge, not half a yard 
wide, and quite insufficient to afford safe footing for either 
man or beast. 

So that any one installed on this plateau could command 
a clear view of the bay, and of course perceive any vessel or 
boat approaching, as also any person ascending the moun- 
tain — or, rather, hill. 

On the other hand, the part of the plateau fading away 
into a scarcely distinguishable ledge, would render the 
occupant secure against surprise. 

All things considered, it was a position admirably 
adapted for a look-out, to guard against surprise, as also for 
defence. 

Nature had done much for this place ; but Black Bosco, 
who had selected the island, and notably this eagle's nest, 
as a safe retreat, and hiding-place, if necessary, had done 
more. 

So soon as the Vendetta had cast anchor in the bay, he 
himself landed, and, with a working party of a dozen men, 
laden with tools and blasting powder, ascended the moun- 
tain to this natural plateau. 

Forthwith he proceeded to excavate a cave in the solid 
mountain, which at that part was very rocky. 

By means of the blasting powder he detached huge 
masses of solid rock, and then by means of levers rolled 
them to the edge of the plateau, so as to form a solid breast- 
work. 

Some of these he so disposed that they could be rolled 
down on any man or body of men approaching the position 
from the shore. 

The havoc which one sucn mass of rock would crette aa 
it went thundering down the mountain slope, may perhaps 
be imagined, scarcely described. 



60 love's treason. 

At the entrance to the cave na caused a sort of tent, made 
of tarpaulins, to be erected. 

The rampart of rocks, however, all along the edge &i uhd 
natural platform, was of such a height and so disposed as to 
conceal both cave and tent. 

They were so arranged also as to show no signs 01' 
human handiwork. Any one looking up at this plateau 
from the shore or the bay would fancy that the rampart of 
rocks, purposely built up rugged and irregular, was a 
natural one. 

To this place, then, Giulia d'Almaviras was conducted. 

Black Bosco informed her in a very few words that this 
would be her abode for the future, and counselled her to 
make herself as comfortable as circumstances would permit. 

" As for escape, that is impossible, as you can plainly 
see. And as to your succeeding in corrupting any of your 
guardians, my servants — as was the case withGonzalvo, the 
mulatto — I will take ample precautions against that. You 
may, if you will, plot treachery with the sea birds. You 
shall not have the opportunity of doing so with any living 
man — for I shall leave you here alone, well assured that 
when I want you I shall find you. The existence of this 
island is known only to me, and here you will remain in 
perfect seclusion and safety, until my plans are ripe for 
execution. I leave you food and stores of all kinds, and 
two large hogsheads of water, which will, if necessary, suffice 
you for months. 

"You have no boat, no means of leaving this island, and 
I advise you to submit quietly to your fate. Violence, 
entreaties, and efforts to escape, will all prove equally use- 
less, of that rest assured. And now I leave you to your own 
desires." 

Black Bosco lit a cigarette, and strolled leisurely down 
the mountain slope. 

He embarked in the boat, and went on board the vessel 
with the utmost apparent unconcern. 

Then the anchor was weighed, the engines started, and 
the Vendetta steamed away, leaving our heroine, Giulia, 
alone on this desolate island 

Alone — absolutely alone I 



ALONE ON THE ISLAND! 101 

CHAPTER XLV 

ALONE ON THE ISLAND. 

B'fJT for the sense of desolation — the knowledge of being 
absolutely alone in this place — Griulia d'Almaviras miuht 
have been tolerably contented and easy in mind on the 
island. 

She subsided into a state of quiet melancholy ; and on 
the second day seemed to have resigned herself to her fate, 
to have given up all hope of escape. 

But presently a reaction came, and a restless craving to 
look into the future took possession of her. 

She thought and pondered, and many conjectures arose 
in her mind. 

" For what fate am I destined ? Why have I been thus 
torn away from my home and friends, and by whom ? " 

This was the question constantly before her, and, alas ! 
she could imagine no favourable answer. 

"The Englishman, Blake, is the author of the outrage," 
she said to herself. " The villain, Bosco, is but his hired 
agent. And his reason for this infamous outrage? " 

She had started to her feeet, and burning with rage and 
indignation at the shameful thought, stoud with clenched 
hands, flushed cheeks, gleaming eyes — an enraged tigress, 
beautiful in her anger. 

Instinctively her hand sought her bosom, where she had 
carried the little stiletto of which Bosco had deprived 
her. 

" Ah, my dagger is gone ! " said Giulia. " No matter ; 
there are other means of seeking escape in death." 

She walked to the edge of the rampart of stones, climbing 
up to the top so as to command a view of the bay and 
mountain slope. 

" A leap from here — would that bring death ? Uncertain. 
It might, or might not. I must devise a more sure means. 
A plunge into the water of the bay. I might be rescued, 
and compelled to live against my will — live to be the 
creature — the slave of the villain who planned my abduc- 
tion. No, that will not do. A knife — a swift stab to t'r 



iflf! love's treason. 

heart — that is the onlv sure escape through the gate of 
death." 

But she had no knife capable of inflicting even a danger- 
ous wound. Two had been left, but they were blunt, a^d 
rounded instead of pointed. 

Nevertheless, Giulia's woman's wit came to her aid, and 
she bethought her that it was possible for her to sharpen 
one of these knives— to grind it to a point even enough to 
j'tnetrate to her heart. 

So she set about it, and, with steady perseverance, com- 
menced, and sustained her task of turning a blunt table- 
knife into a sharp-pointed dagger. 

There, was no lack of hard, rough stones ; and selecting 
one of these she thought suitable to her purpose, she com- 
menced grinding away, using all her strength, and not 
relaxing her efforts till, after several hours' work, sheer 
exhaustion compelled her to rest. 

Her beauti f ul arms, unused to such labour, ached terribly, 
and her delicate hands were blistered and sore. 

Still she never thought of giving up, and after a brief 
rest returned with unflinching courage and determination to 
her self-imposed task. 

It took her two whole days, and then her hands were in 
such a state that it would have been impossible for her to 
have worked any more. 

Dai the task was accomplished, and she found herself in 
possession of a keen-pointed, double-edged knife, by means 
of which she could defeu 1 herself, and, as a. List resort, 
ts ape from a fate worse than death by stabbing herself to 
the heart. 

She made a little sheath of canvas for this deadly little 
weapon of her own manufacture, and never was jewel prized 
by lady <.r miser more than was this double-edged, sharp- 
pointed knife. 

Having accomplished this result, she felt more at her ease, 
and resolved to make a survey of the island — to explore it, 
in fact. 

"For," she argued, " it is possible that from another part I 
may command a more extensive prospect, a view of tlw 
open sea, and not merely of the bay, as is the case .here. 



THE SURVEY OF THE ISLAND. 168 

And if I can see the open ocean, ships sailing by m?y be 
able to see a signal, a flag, or beacon fire which I may con- 
trive, and discovering that there is a human creature on the 
island, may come and rescue me." 

Filled with this idea, Giulia descended from her eagle's 
nest on the mountain, and not without difficulty, made her 
way down the steep and rugged natural path to t K e sea- 
shore. 



CHAPTER XLVI. 

THE SURVEY OF THE INLAND. 

It is strange what trifling things will have great effect on 
the human mind and spirits ; how little it takes to lift a 
man or a woman from despondency to hopefulness, from 
helpless, despairing resignation to what seems inevitable 
fate, to cheerful, persistent, and vigorous effort. 

It was so with Giulia d'Almaviras. 

She had conjured up a hideous phantom — a monster 
which crushed her heart and completely robbed her of spirits 
and energy. 

She had definitely decided in her own mind, quite wrongly 
as the reader knows, that Edward Blake was the instigator 
of her abduction, that he was her deadly enemy, that she 
was in his power, and that any day he might come to seize 
his victim. 

And the thought weighed on her mind like some terrible 
incubus. 

But when the happy idea struck her of providing a knife 
for her defence, and also as a means of escape from her 
enemy through the dreadful gate of death, and she had 
actually carried it out, then there came a complete revulsion 
of feeling. 

The idea of hoisting a signal of some sort by day, and 
lighting a beacon-fire by night, had taken firm possession of 
her mind. She did not stay to think what sort of a signal 
she could hoist, so as to be seen afar off, nor how she could 
set about getting dry wood enough to build a big bonfire 
every night. 



16-1 LOVE'S TREASON. 

Her sole thought was to explore the island, and discover 
b spot from which there was a better view than where she 
at present was. 

She thought that she might remove sufficient pro- 
visions from her present place of abode to last her some 
time, and also hoped to erect a tent, or contrive a shelter ef 
some kind. 

And then there came to her a happy thought. 

Not only might she find a spot whence she could make 
signals to vessels out at sea to come to her rescue, but also 
she might perhaps be fortunate enough to conceal herself 
from Bosco and ihe Englishman, Blake, who doubtless would 
come, expecting to find her. 

The more she considered her position the more hopeful 
she grew. 

She felt quite certain that her father would send vessels 
in search of the piratical ship in which she had been carried 
off. 

It did not occur to her that possibly the marquis might 
be in total ignorance of the fact that she had been carried 
off to sea. 

However, she decided in her own mind that vessels 
even at that time were in search of her, and thought she 
had every reason to hope they would discover this island, 
and learn by her signals that there was some human being 
on it. 

She had great faith in the success of her scheme with the 
bottles and paper enclosed, little thinking that an error she 
had made in her statement must have the effect of mislead- 
ing anybody who should pick up one of the bottles and seek, 
by the instructions, to discover this island. 

Nor was she aware how almost completely it was encircled 
and hidden by numerous islets, many of them with high 
peaks and promontories. 

She had made up her mind that she would be sought for 
and found ; and having resolved to set off on an exploring 
tour of the island, at once proceeded to put her intention 
in progress. 

She was very thoughtful and shrewd in making her 
preparations -, indeed, no one who knew her previous life 



tH£ SURVEY OF THE ISLAND. 165 

bow her every want was almost anticipated by one or other 
of a swarm of servants and slaves, would ever have given 
her credit for so much ingenuity and forethought as she dis- 
played in this affair. 

She saw the inconvenience of her long-skirted dress, and, 
indeed, that it would be scarcely possible to climb rugged 
heights, and make her way through thicket and scrub thus 
encumbered. 

So she set to work, and soon rigged herself out in a 
decidedly picturesque costume, in which her limbs would be 
free, and she would not have yards of silk clinging about 
her feet and dragging behind her. 

t^he cut off her silk robe above the knees, and with the 
lower part made a pair of oriental trousers, which fastened 
about six inches above the ankles. 

Then, with some canvas, she made a pair of caiters, or 
mocassins, to protect her feet and lower part of the leg. 

The loose sleeves of her dress she also cut off at the 
elbows, and instead of the loose body made a tight-fitting 
bodice. 

And finding among the miscellaneous assortment of 
articles Bosco had left strno black velvet, she made herself 
a cloak, which, when not wanting to wear, she could roll up 
tightly and carry over her shoulder, as cavalry soldiers 
carry their blankets, and which cloak of thick, warm velvet 
would, on occasion, serve excellency for a rug and wrapper 
in which to sleep. 

For provisions she took enough biscuit and dried fish to 
suffice for three or four days, and also a small keg of 
water, which she carried strapped over her shoulder a la 
vivandiere. 

J ust as she was ready to start she made an important and 
most fortunate discovery. 

She had puzzled a good deal as to how she should cut 
wood in order to make a beacon-fire. 

For she saw that in case she could find a good look-out 
point, and from thence should discover a vessel towards the 
close of the day, her only way of attracting discovery would 
be by lighting a big fire. 

And it fell out that ir on« of the bags of biscuit which 



168 LOVES TREASON. 

Bl i k Bosco had left she found a small hatchet, such as 
the busluuen of Australia call a tomahawk, the handle 
about a foot long, and weighing altogether not more than 
two pounds. 

This she carried at her left side suspended to a b dt she 
had made. A bag of biscuit and dried salt fish, packed as 
tightly as possible, she carried slung over her right shoulder, 
a small keg of water on her right side, and her velvet cloak 
tightly rolled up, completed her equipment, except her self- 
made knife, which she affectionately and carefully kept 
concealed in the bosom of her bodice. 

Thus accoutred, Giulia d'Almaviras set forth from her 
mountain dwelling, and clambering over the rampart of 
rock, desctuded the mountain side. 

Xo one to have seen her, agile and graceful as a chamois, 
springing from rock to rock without a falter or stumble, 
attired and equipped in such an extravagant and pictur- 
esque fashion, would ever have recognized in this wild- 
looking island damsel the proud and haughty Havannah 
beauty — the star of Andalusia, as she was called. 

Having reached the sea-shore, she at once proceeded to 
skirt the eastern side of the bay, and presently, striking 
across a sandy spit of land, saw before her a long line of 
co.ist. cleft at. intervals with inlets and little bays. 

Inland about a quarter of a mile from the sea she saw a 
line of bluffs, in the almost perpendicular sides of which 
was an abundance of dark green foliage. 

At once she perceived that these were inaccessible, so 
continued her course along the coast, being frequently 
oij. ige 1 to strike inland for half a mi'e to gut round the 
numerous inlets, or, as the Americans would sav, bayous. 

The waiking was excellent, the sea being lined by a broad 
strio of firm white sand. 

When night came on she found her lut.ehet of inestimable 
value. With it she cut some dead branches, collected some 
dry leaves, and made a fire close at the foot of one of the 
steep cliffs. 

Here, after a supper of biscuit, water, and dried fish, she 
rolled herself up in her cloak, and was soon fast ash c;>. 

A strange couch truly for the daughter of the Marquie 



ttlUMA EXAMINES THE S1GXAL. It)? 

d'Almaviras, the loveliest lady and richest heiress in 
Cuba. 

But Giulia slept soundly, inspirited by the strong hope 
she had of effecting her escape from the toils of the villains 
who had ensnared her. 

And the prospect was all the brighter and sweeter from 
the thought that if she were rescued, it wuuld be in great 
measure owing to her own courage and exertions. 

How often are such bright hopes and anticipations rudely 
dashed to the ground ! Will it be so in the case of Giulia 
d'Almaviras ? Time will show. 



CHAPTER XLVII. 

GIULIA EXAMINES THE SIGNAL. 

On getting back to the spot from whence she sfarted, she 
thought, at a first glance, everything looked exactly as when 
she left the place. It was not so, however. 

Something white, and with quick, uncertain motion, 
caught her eye. 

At first she thought it was some wild bird by the flutter- 
ing sort of movement. 

But then, as she looked more keenly, she perceived that 
though there was motion, the white object kept always 
exactly in the same place. 

It could not be a bird in the air, for no bird would remain 
so entirely motionless, merely fluttering its wings. 

And then it dawned upon her that it was a small flag of 
some kind. 

" A flag ! yes, a flag 1 Some one has been there, and it 
is hoisted as a signal !" she cried, and instantly started off, 
almost at a run — bounding over the level ground which 
formed the shore of the bay like an antelope. 

But presently she stopped suddenly. 

" Yes, a flag ! a signal ! it is true ! " she said to herself ; 
" but what does it mean ? who is the man, or men, who 
planted it there ? friend or enemy ? Perhaps it indicates 



68 LOVE'S TREASON. 

the return of Bosco. Perhaps the arrival of Blake, the 
insolent Englishman, who caused me to be abducted." 

This was a dilemma, and the fair island prisoner knew not 
how to act. 

If the flag signified the return of Bosco, she would be rnsh- 
ing right into the fowler's net, should she make her way to 
the eagle's nest (the name she had given the platform on the 
mountain). 

But then she thought that Bosco would not be likely to 
hoist a flag. 

His course, knowing that she could scarcely have escaped 
from the island, would be, on missing her, to institute a 
search ; and finally she decided that it was far more likely 
to be a signal hoisted by some one who had landed from the 
vessel she had caught a glimpse of — a signal intended for 
her, to inform her that her rescuers had come to her aid. 

At all events, she could do no good by remaining where 
she was, and then came the sweet consciousness of the pos- 
session of a weapon, and drawing forth the sharp-pointed, 
keen-bladed little knife she had herself sharpened and shaped, 
she gazed at it with affectionate regard. 

" Here, at least, I possess a means of eluding my enemies. 
I can defend myself, and should the worst happen, and resist- 
ance be no longer possible, I can still defy the villanous 
Englishman. I can escape, and save myself from dishonour 
and degradation, by means of one swift blow with this little 
weapon. Fortune, befriend me," she added aloud, " I shall 
go and see what yonder signal portends." 

She started up the mountain path, and in less than an 
hour was close at the foot of the rampart of rock which went 
round the platform. 

To her surprise she saw a man ; he was not fifty yards off, 
and she had no difficulty in recognizing him at a glance- 
Edward Blake, the Englishman who had caused her to be 
abducted. 

This was a shock indeed, and for a moment or so she waa 
utterly unnerved. 

She saw him, and he saw her, for he at once quickened 
his pace, and shouted out — 

" Ah ! senorita, at last I have found you ! " 



, GIULtA AND BLAKE MEET ONCE MOBE. 162 

" Villain ! wretch ! '* she cried. " If you dare come up 
here, I will kill you ! '' 

And with that, knife in hand, she sprang down again on 
to the platform of the eagle's nest, determined to defend 
herself to the last, and then, if need be, seek refuge in the 
arms of grim death. 



CHAPTER XLVIII. 

•GIULIA AND BLAKE MEET ONCE MOBE. 

Fob a moment or two she was incapable of acting, or even 
thinking, but stood facing the rampart, knife in hand, pant- 
ing and with flashing eyes. 

When she could collect her thoughts, she tried to realize 
the situation. 

There was her enemy, the man who had planned her 
abduction, and caused it to be carried out, come to seize his 
prey. 

There could be no reasonable doubt of it, for she had 
seen Black Bosco's vessel, the Vendetta, in which she had 
been carried off. 

Presently she heard sounds as of some one scrambling up 
to the barrier of rocks. It seemed that not knowing the 
easiest path, he was making his way up as best he could. 

This aroused her to the necessity of action, and with face 
filled with fierce determination, she ran to the part of the 
ramparts where she thought he was coming, and looked over. 

All at once she thought of a plan for defending herself 
and destroying her enemy. 

She had no compunction as to the latter, for believing he 
was the man she had most to fear in the world, her most 
deadly enemy — she felt that she would be thoroughly justified 
in bringing about his death. 

She remembered that before Bosco left, in the course of 
building the parapet, he had placed a number of rocks of 
different sizes in such positions that they could be dislodged 
with comparatively little force, and made to fall over the 
edge, when, of course, they would go bounding and thump- 
ing down the hillside, crushing and killing any living thing 
with which they came in contact. 



150 love's treason. 

Giulia beheld Edward Blake within a yard or two of the 
base of her citadel. He was still climbing up, and once he 
got a footing on the rocks, would be on the platform in half 
a minute. 

Without a moment's hesitation, she trie! several great 
rocks on the top of the parapet, and found that she could move 
them all sufficiently to cause them to topple over. 

Then she judged with her eye which one was most certain 
to fall upon Blake as he came straight. 

Having decided this to her satisfaction, she suddenly 
leaped up on the rocks, and revealed herself to the approach- 
ing foe. 

" Hold ! " she cried, " and before you advance another 
step, hear what I have to say." 

He stopped, and looked in wondering admiration at the 
lovely and picturesque figure on the top of the rampart. 

Giulia did not speak for a moment or two — she was think- 
ing what she should say — how she could secure her own 
safety, and yet avoid the necessity of killing this man. 

For, spite of her indignation against him, and the hatred 
in which she held him, or thought she did, her woman's 
nature prevailed, her woman's heart shrank from the thought 
of being the immediate cause of any human being's death, 
even that of her worst enemy. 

" I wish you would not come near me, and, moreover, I 
wish vou to swe.ir by all you hold sacred, that you will leave 
me, will not seek to molest, me any inure. If you refuse, it' 
you endeavour to scale these rocks, I will kill vou instantly. 
Do not doubt my determination or my power to do so. I 
can kill yon at any moment I choose." 

Edward Blake was utterly astonished at this speech on the 
pprt of Giula d'Almaviras. He thought, not unnaturally, that 
she would be only too glad to see him, and would recognize 
the fact that she was now saved from the hands of Black 
Bosco and Don Jose. «d 

That she should receive him as an enemy, and threaten 
his life, was utterly unaccountable. 

He gazed at her for some time in silence, and took in 
every particular of her dress and appearance. 

At first he thought she must be mad ; but although, as the 



GIULIA A\D BLAKE JIEEt ONCE MORE. 171 

reader knows, her senses had once given way for a time, she 
was quite sane and sensible, and this was apparent. Al- 
though she was obviously greatly excited, there was no tinge 
of madness in her manner or speech. 

He observed, too, that she had no weapon in her hand, and 
as the small knife she had pointed and sharpened was con- 
cealed in the bosom of her dress, she appeared to be unarmed. 

" Senorita," he said presently, "you take mc quite by sur- 
prise. This is not the reception I expected. I cannot under- 
stand it. I come as a friend, after having, with great trouble, 
tracked you down to the spot where the villains who abducted 
you had taken you, and you receive me as an enemy " 

Giulia was a little staggered by these words, but after a 
moment's thought she said to herself — 

" He seeks to take me off my guard, to deceive me by soft 
words ; but I am not to be so ensnared. 

" I tell you, Senor Edward Blake, that I know all ; know 
that it was at your instigation that I was abducted, that 
Bosco is in your pay, and that you employed him to carry 
out your cowardly, treacherous scheme ; but I will foil yon 
yet. There is a Providence above which watches over and 
protects the weak and the innocent against such wretches as 
you."_ 

This tirade, and the accusations she levelled against him, 
almost took the young man's breath away. 

" Senorita," he cried, " you are wrong, utterly wrong, mis- 
taken entirely. What could have put it into your head that 
I was the cause of your abduction ? " 

" Ha ! ha ! That is good, and perhaps, senor, as you say 
that yon are not the cause of my abduction, had no complicity 
in it even, you may know who is the chief villain in this 
infamous affair." 

"Yes, I do know," he replied quietly. 

Giulia now felt her curiosity excited. 

" His name, the name of this traitor and villain, my most 
bitter enemy ! " 

" Don Jose de Malatesta ! '' 

"Ah!" 

Giulia gave vent to a cry, and was for a moment quite 
taken aback, unable to speak. 



1?2 LOVE'S treason. 

She was staggered by the words and qniet manner of the 
Englishman, for after all there was a possibility of Don Jose 
iommiting such an outrage. 



CHAPTER XLIX. 

"one step more, and you're a dead matj." 

Edward Blake was on good ground, having gained the top 
of a flat rock, and now stood with folded arms waiting the 
effect of his words. 

He fully expected that he would be believed when he 
thus clearly and boldly stated the truth. 

As to her saying the Vendetta was in the bay, he concluded 
that was a mistake on her part, and that it was his own ship, 
the Avenger, she had seen. 

But she, on her part, was quite certain that she had seen 
the Vendetta, for she recognized a peculiarity she had noticed 
as she was leaving Bosco's vessel to be put ashore on the 
island. 

This was a big hole high up in the funnel, caused by a 
shot when she was pursued by the frigate, and that shot- 
hole she had recognized in the vessel which she had seen 
come slowly steaming into the hay, then stop suddenlv, 
and buck astern out of sight attain behind the promontory 

That vessel was the Vendetta, she felt perfectly sure. 

And she reasoned to herself thus — 

" He has certainly lied in this instance. He said the Ven 
detta was not in the bay. I have seen the Vendetta. 

" A lie ! 

"He said, moreover, that Don Jose de Malatesta was the 
instigator of my abduction. 

" His first statement I know to be a lie. The second, in 
all probability, is a lie also." 

Forming her conclusions on this train of reasoning, slu 
spoke out — 

" Senor Edward Blake, you lie ! " 

"Thank you," he said coolly, for though not quite in such 
pia.in words, she had already given him the lie. 



" ONE STEP MORE, AND YOU'RE A DEAD MAN." 173 

" May I ask what reason you have for thus insulting ma 
by calling me a liar ? " 

" Oh, certainly," she said, with contemptuous scorn. " I 
have every reason. You said the Vendetta was not in the 
bay, which is false." 

" False ! " he cried. " Your reason for saying it is false." 

"A very plain reason," she replied. " I saw her myself. 
I recognized her beyond all doubt or question." 

Blake started. 

He was considerably astonished. 

For he doubted not that she meant what she said, and 
that, at all events, she thought she had seen the Vendetta. 

" Ah ! you must be mistaken," he cried, forgetting, in his 
excitement at hearing this, his anger at her insulting words. 
" It must have been my vessel, the Avenger, you saw. 
When and under what circumstances did you see the Ven- 
detta?" 

She was impressed in a measure by his earnest, eager 
manner ; and a faint sort of suspicion arose in her mind that 
he might be telling the truth, after all. 

She answered him calmly, deliberately, and with much 
emphasis — 

" I saw the Vendetta this day, not long ago, come out 
from behind the western promontory of the bay. She was 
steaming slowly in. Then I observed her stop. Next she 
steamed astern again, and soon was out of sight behind the 
same point of land whence she appeared." 

" B ut the Vendetta — how do you know it was the Vendetta f " 
he asked. 

" I recognized her by a shot-hole in her funnel," she 
answered, promptly; "and besides, though I am not a 
sailor, I knew her by her rig." 

This came on him like a thunderclap. 

He did not doubt her for a moment. 

She had seen the Vendetta enter the mouth of the bay, 
then stop, then steam back. She knew not the reason for 
this manoeuvre, but he did. 

The entrance to the bay, just rounding the west promon- 
tory, was one of the spots from which a view could be com- 
manded of a little gulf or inlet right at the end of the harbour. 



174 LOVE'S TREASON. 

And there, closa mder almost perpendicular cliffs, lay his 
own vessel, the Avenger. 

Giulia d'Almaviras had not seen her ; but Black Bosco, 
as he came quietly sneaking into harbour with the Vendetta, 
to reclaim the prize he left behind him, saw, and, with his 
knowledge of the facts, recognised the Avenger. 

For that reason he stopped his vessel, and steamed back. 
What would be his course ? It was not likely that he would 
make off altogether and relinquish all the fruits of his 
hitherto successful enterprise. 

No ; it was pretty nearly certain that he would return, 
and seize the girl, if possible. Also, it was likely that, knowing 
for what purpose the Avenger was there, he would take the 
first opportunity of attacking her at a disadvantage. 

There was no time to be lost, and Edward Blake resolved 
to act promptly. He did not feel in the humour to be 
thwarted and intimidated by a girl, and at once made up 
his mind he would go up to the position where she was, in 
Bpite of her threats. 

" Senorita," he said, " our enemies are in the neighbour- 
hood. I believe you have seen the Vendetta. My ship is 
also here. Those on board the Vendetta mean to seize you, 
and probably carry you off. I mean to protect and save you, 
in spite of yourself. So, to begin with, I am coming up 
there." 

She hesitated for a moment or two, and then, when she 
saw him deliberately climbing up, she resolved not to trust 
him, although she felt desperately inclined so to do. 

Something whispered to her that he was speaking the 

truth, but she would not, dared not, acton that inner belief. 

" Another step, and you are a dead man ! " she cried. 

He saw she had no pistol, and taking no notice, calmly 

made his way up, resolved at all hazards to gain a footing 

whore she was. 

It was a matter of temper, of foolish pride with him, but 
he carried out his deter urination. 
And so did Giulia. 

For, by a slight eff »rt of strength, she tilted a great rugged 
piece of rock, which the next instant came rushing down on 
him. 



■RECUET. J ( i 

She saw it strike, saw him fall, overwhelmed by the hu^e 
mass, and then, with all a woman's contradictory nature and 
a woman's instinct, shrieked, covered her eyes with ht.i 
hands, and burst into a fit of hysterical sobbing. 

CHAPTER L. 

RKGITET. 

As is often the case, especially with woman, when i, was too 
late, she regretted it, and felt horrified at the deed she had 
done. 

And, to increase her remorse, there flashed across her mind, 
unwelcome and unbidden, a terrible thought. 

" Suppose, after all, he spoke the truth." 

And in spite of herself she could not dismiss a fearful 
misgiving. 

Next she ran to the rampart and clambered to the top, 
and thence looked down on the mountain slope. She saw 
nothing of him whom she had thus ruthlessly slain, but was 
just in time to see the huge rock, which had gone thunder- 
ing down the mountain slope, roll across the base, and 
plunge into the sea. 

" Ah ! villain rock," she cried, with all a woman's perver- 
sity and capriciousness, "you have slain him, and I but 
meant to frighten him away ! " 

She looked earnestly at and all around the spot where she 
had seen him last. 

The rock on which he had stood while addressing her was 
shivered to atoms, the fragments strewn all about. 

But no signs of Edward Blake dead or alive ! 

It was sunset, when she regained the platform. 

Everything was exactly the same as when the sun rose. 

Except one thing ! 

There was a small gap in the upper part of the barrier. 

And as Giulia looked at it, she shuddered. For, from 
thence she had pushed over the rock with which she had 
crushed the Englishman. 

Restless, wretched, and in a state of feverish excitement, 
Bhe paced up and down for a minute or so. 

Then she stopped suddenly, and out flashed her ke^n- 
bladed knife. 



17C LOVE'S TREASON. 

All ! " she cried between her set teeth, " I have ground 
yon and sharpened you, and shaped you to my end. But 
when the hour of need came, you failed me, or I failed my- 
self. My courage failed me ! Would I had let him come 
up, and with this alone in my hand had confronted him. 
But I slew him without mercy. A cruel and cowardly act. 
Away, useless toy ! " 

And passionately she flung the knife from her to the other 
end of the plateau. 

Scarcely were the words out of her mouth, than a figure 
rose from behind a huge boulder close to where the knife 
had fallen. And Edward Blake, springing down, picked up 
her weapon. 

" I quite agree with you, senorita ; a very u eless toy 
indeed, and it was very cruel of you, not to say cowardly, 
to throw two tons of rock down on a poor fellow's head." 



CHAPTER LI. 

BLACK BOSCO DISCOVERS THE AVEXGER. 

Ox leaving "Wedge Islaud where he had discovered the body 
of the unfortunate ttevard Gonzalvo, marooned by Black 
Bo-co, Captain Blake, profiting by the directions on the 
paper in the dead man's hand, steerel the Avengpr straight 
lor the group of islands amidst which lay the snug retreat 
where the slave-captain had left Giulia dAlinaviras. 

It was easy enough to find the group, but far more difficult 
to discover a passage between them. 

Kesolved to use the utmost caution in such dangerous 
waters, Blake ordered out a boat, of which Jack O'Brien 
took the command. 

His business was to keep some fifty yards ahead of the 
vessel, carefully sounding all the while, and reporting the 
depth of water to the officer on the forecastle of the Avenger, 
which slowly steamed on astern. 

Thus cautiously feeling her way, so to speak, the Avenger 
threaded the intricate and dangerous channels between the 
rocks and islets, and slowly approached the island where 
Uiulia was. 

At night, Blake anchored, not choosing to risk the safety 
or his vessel in sucb dangerous navigation. 



feLACK; BOSCO DISCOVERS THE AVENGER. 177 

And shortly after dawn on the second day after mating 
the group, the Avenger came in sight of the mouth of the 
bay, at the heel of which rose the hill on which was situated 
the eagle's nest, as GHulia had herself named it. 

Jack O'Brien and Edward Blake were on the quarter-deck, 
carefully scrutinising the appearance of the land. 

With Blake standing at the helm, O'Brien on the fore- 
castle, keeping a vigilant look out a-head, the Avenger slowly 
steamed up the bay. 

After skirting the western shore, the young captain finally 
steered for an inlet or creek where there seemed to be plenty 
of water. 

It was sheltered on three sides by high cliffs, and, except 
from one point at the entrance of the bay, a vessel once well 
up this inlet could lie quite concealed from view. 

Here, then, Blake moored his vessel by light spring cables, 
head and stern. 

It happened, however, that Black Bosco, after his cruise 
(undertaken for some purpose of his own), returning to look 
after his prize, the captive maiden, got sight of the Avenger 
as she lay at anchor the instant he entered the bay. 

He was aghast, for the time dumbfounded, and a terrible 
volley of oaths escaped him. 

He had sense enough, however, to give the order to stop 
her and go astern, and when again hidden behind the pro- 
montory, he cried to Pedro — 

" Ten thousand devils ! What ship can that be ? " 

" The devil only knows," replied the mate of the Vendetta; 
" ask him ; your're on good terms, I believe." 

" Yes, the devil knows, and I know. It's the steamer the 
marquis has sent in search of his daughter, commanded by 
that accursed Englishman." 

" That's bad," said Pedro, who was, be it observed, by 
no means so excited about it as his captain ; "how the plague 
did they find the island ? " 

" Why, they blundered across Wedge Island, and there 
found the mulatto alive, and I expect from what Lt? let dmp 
that he had found out from my charts and notes where I real i.y 
meant to take the girl. The rest is plain. He gave inform" 
tion how to find this island, and they have done so." 



i78 LOVE'S TREASON. 

"' What shall we do — go back ? " asked Pedro. 

" May I burn for ever i f I do ! " cried Black Bosco furi- 
ously ; " it is possible they may have found the girl, but it is 
certain they have not yet taken her away, or the steamer 
would not be lying there. And I'll take particular care that 
steamer shan't come out of the bay without fighting the 
Vendetta ; and if she don't come out, why, I'll go in and 
blaze away at her. I'll let this whipper-snapper Englishman 
know what it is to have Black Bosco to deal with ! " 

She slave-captain at once commenced to make every 
possible preparation, and neglected no precaution to get his 
ship in the best possible fighting trim. 

" To-morrow will settle it," he said ; " I'll have the girl 
— my lawful prize — or one of two vessels shall go to the 
bottom — the Avenger or the Vendetta ! " 

CHAPTER LII. 

THE REVOLVER PISTOL. 

The confusion and dismay of Giulia d'Almaviras may 
perhaps be imagined on the sudden appearance before her 
of Edward Blake in the flesh, and to all appearance alive 
and well. 

Her first feeling was indefinite, a sort of blank astonish- 
ment mingled with terror. 

Next came a thrill of satisfaction at the thought that he 
was alive, and she had not killed him. 

He did not offer to approach her, but stood quite silent. 

He was placed in a singular dilemma. 

The girl had firmly persuaded herself that he was her 
enemy — that it was himself who had carried her off. 

How to undeceive and calm her needless terror, that was 
the question. 

A thought struck him. " I'll do it, I'll vhk it," he said 
to himself, " if she shoots me for my rashness. 

" As to what you say about placing yourself in my power, 
I will prove to you that your fears are qnite groundless." 

" You cannot, I will not believe your words." 

"You shall have deeds, not words only," he replied 
quietly, and as he spoke he drew a revolver pistol, 

" Ah ! you would murder me. Do so — I fear not death." 



THE REVOLVER PISTOL. 1?9 

" On the contrary, I am about giving you the means oi 
murdering me if you so please." 

" L do not understand you." 

"I will make my meaning plain. You see this revolver 
pistol, it is loaded and capped, and, properly used, carries 
the death of six men. I am about to give it to you." 

" A stratagem by which to approach me. I am not to be 
thus deceived." 

" No. I do not wish to approach you. This is what I 
mean." 

He then threw the pistol from him, and it fell within a 
couple of yards of where she stood. 

"Take it," he said, "and fire a barrel just to satisfy your- 
self that I have spoken truly." 

Then he quietly walked away to the other side of the 
platform, and climbed up on the rocks, so that it was im- 
possible he could take her by surprise. 

She hesitated for a moment, and then springing down, 
seized the pistol, and again took up her post on the rocks. 

It was, as he said, loaded and capped. 

She fired a barrel, aiming at the tarpaulin tent door, and 
saw the hole the bullet made. 

" Now shoot at me if you choose," he said, advancing a 
few paces towards her. " You can kill me if you please. 
Take good aim and fire, I told you I would place myself in 
your power* I have done so." 

She was utterly staggered and confounded, and knew not 
what to do, what to say. 



CHAPTER LTII. 

GIULIA TRIES THE REVOLVER. 

GiULIA. d'Almaviras had good reason for being bewildered 
at the extraordinary turn the affair had taken. 

Torn by conflicting emotions, she knew not what to do, 
what to think even, and stood silent, pistol in hand, when 
his voice awakened her to the necessity of deciding on some 
definite course of action. 



180 LOVE*S TREASON. 

" Come, senorita, why do you not shoot ? you can depend 
upon that pistol. It throws, perhaps, a trifle high, but not 
more than half a foot in twenty ranis." 

She made no reply, but stood gazing silently at him, as 
though she would read his inmost soul. 

"What can I think? what, shall I believe? what shall 
I do?" she said to herself. "Possibly this is a stratagem to 
throw meoffmy guard. Probably it is so. Yes ; I am sure it is." 

His next words utterly astounded her. 

She forgot that her features reflecte 1 too faithfully the 
thought which flashed through her mind. 

Blake noted and rightly interpreted the sudden change of 
expression which, like a cloud across the sun, flitted over her 
beautiful face. 

'If such is your opinion," he said, "why do you not 
shoot and put it to the test whether you are right or wrong. 
Stay, I will come closer, lest you miss your aim." 

And with the word*, he boldly advanced several paces. 

Fearful that he thought to take her unawares and disarm 
her by a sudden rush, she raised the pistol and levelled it at 
his breast. 

" Advance another step and I fire ! " 

"I do not think you will," he said, "and yet I shall 
advance more than a step." 

Then looking her full in the face, he came forward one — 
two — three paces, till he stood close at the foot of the ram- 
part of rocks. 

It was a moment of supreme, intense suspense. 

The pistol was pointed, her finger on the trigger, and he 
could see straight down the shining tube, at the end of which, 
was'a small plug of lead which the next momen; mh'ht 
prove his death. 

" Shoot," he said ; " I defy you ! " 

And all the while he looked her in the face with the same 
steady gaze, a half-smile on his lips. 

Her eyes waudered restlessly for a half-second, then fell 
before his, and almost at the same time the hand "hich held 
the trigger fell by her side. 

The victory was won, and, for the present at least, he wag 
the conqueror. 



GIT7LIA TRIES THE REVOLVER. 181 

M I suppose now," he said, " you believe me, senorita." 

"No," she replied, speaking fitfully and with difficulty ; 
" it was not that ; I cannot say I believe you, but you may 
be speaking truly, and I would not, could not, lay the awful 
responsibility on my soul of taking your life in cold blood." 

''You admit, then," he said, "that I placed my life 
entirely at your mercy ? " 

" I do not admit it," she replied ; " for aught I know, the 
five barrels may not be properly loaded, and in that case, the 
result of my attempting to fire would have been simply the 
snapping of a cap." 

" Oh, that point is easily settled beyond all dispute," he 
said ; " you see that rock," he added, pointing to a huge 
lump of granite some yards from him, "fire at the flat face 
of that. It affords you a good mark, and you can easily 
see where the bullet strikes." 

Taking him at his word, and acting promptly, as washer 
wont, she raised her pistol and fired as directed. 

Instantly her quick eye saw that the shot had taken effect, 
for a puff of dust and splintered stone showed her where 
the bullet had struck. 

Almost at the same moment she observed Blake fall back 
a pace or two, at the same time putting his hand to his face. 

He seemed unsteady on his feet, and she saw with horror, 
when he removed his hand, that blood was streaming down 
his forehead. 

" The bullet has glanced from the rock ! " was the 
thought that flashed through her mind. " After all, I have 
killed him ! " 

At once her animosity, terror, suspicion, were all dis- 
armed, and no longer heeding her own safety, the came 
down from her perch on the rocks. 

Throwing down the pistol on the ground, she ran towards 
him. 

" I have hurt you ! The bullet has glanced from the 
rock ! " she cried, in tones of real distress. 

"No, no !" he replied, recovering himself, "it was only 
a small fragment, a mere splinter of stone. The blow 
staggered me for a moment ; but it is nothing — nothing, I 
assure you," 



182 LOVE'S TREASON. 

He then seated himself, and quietly proceeded to tie a 
handkerchief round his cut temple. 

"There is no harm done at all, I assure you," he said— 
"nothing beyond a broken skin and the loss of a wine- 
glassful of blood perhaps. I should not have got off so 
easily, though, if you had pulled the trigger two minutes 
sooner. Tell the 'truth, now, you had half a mind to fire, 
had you not ? " 

" Heaven be praised I did not ! " she exclaimed, fer- 
vently. 

"That is strange, is it not ?" he said, forcing a smile, 
"for had you done so, you woul 1 have slain your 
enemy — the man whom you have called villain, traitor, 
liar ! " 

" Cease to taunt me ! " she gasped ; " I retract — I was 
mad with terror — I knew not what I said." 

" Giulia d'Almaviras," he said, quietly, " do you believe 
me ? — believe that every word I have spoken is the truth ? 
— that I am a man who never told a lie ? — whose honour is 
as unblemished as yours, or that of any member of your 
family ? " 

" I do not know. I cannot interpret my own thoughts. 
I half believe you, and yet 1 fear you. I cannot say 
more." 

This answer by no means satisfied the captain of the 
Avenger. He, too, was hot-tempered, and had good reason 
to feel aggrieved at her treatment of him. 

" Let it be so," he said, bowing proudly ; " T shall leave 
you, since my presence is so offensive and the cause of such 
terror." 

Thereupon he proceeded to clamber over the rocks, while 
she stood the picture of despair and doubt, dismayed at the 
thought of being again left alone to her own resources, and 
yet too proud to call him back. 

He turned just before he disappeared beyond the parapet 
of rocks, and spoke a few words. 

" I leave you now to think over your folly, and the in- 
gratitude and injustice with which you have treated me. 
But I shall come back, probably to-morrow, when I 
hope you will have got rid of your unworthy suspicions, 



EOSCO PREPARES FOR ACTION. 183 

and be glad to seek shelter and safety on board the 
Avenger. 

" That is to say," he added, after a pause, "if El Capitano 
Bosco Negro, of the Vendetta, has not previously come 
and claimed you on behalf of his employer, Don Jose de 
Malatesta." 

" Stay one moment ! " she cried, her feelings overcoming 
her pride. 

But with a wave of the hand he was gone ! 

As for Giulia d'Almaviras, she felt more utterly 
miserable and desolate than she had since the departure of 
Bosco. 

And, worst of all, it was her own doing — by her own act 
6he had driven him away. 

Vengeance is sweet, they say, and certainly in her then 
state of mind he had ample revenge. 



CHAPTER LIV 

BOSCO PREPARES FOR ACTION. 

For some time Giulia d'Almaviras was incapable of acting 
— even of thinking. She had undergone a great revuls on 
of sentiment, and now felt almost that the Englishmen 
had spoken the truth. 

And if such should prove to be the case, of what egregi- 
ous folly had she not been guilltv ! 

She had certainly seen the Vendetta; and whereas it 
seemed apparent that Blake meant her no harm, it was 
nearly certain that the slave-captain had come back to seize 
his prisoner. 

And he might, at that very moment, be on the island ; 
it was possible that he was already on his way to the plat- 
form. 

But what could she do ? That was now the question. 
Thinking she might see something of the Vendetta, which 
she knew to" be in the neighbourhood, or of the Avenger, 
which Blake so confidently asserted was in the bay, t-he 
mounted the rocky parapet, and proceeded eagerly to scan 
the whole prospect beneath and around her. 



184 LOVES TREASON. 

First she looked out seawards, where she had before seen 
Bosco's ship, and then her gaze fell on the bay, seeking to 
discover the Avenger, which Blake said was there. 

But in this she was unsuccessful, and presently, giving 
the task up as hopeless, came down from her perch, and 
again stood on the plateau. 

But not before she had been descried by the keen eye of 
ODe of her greatest enemies. 

Bosco, keeping his vessel hovering about the bay outside, 
and seeking to watch his enemy without being himself 
observed, wished to have a 'ook at the retreat where he had 
left his prisoner. He thought that if he got a clear view 
of the place, he might perceive something to indicate that 
she was still there. 

So taking his telescope with him, he went up aloft, and 
from thence directed the course of the ship. 

He knew that from his elevated position he coul 1 see 
from the top of the mountain nearly to its foot, without the 
possibility of his vessel being seen from the deck or even 
the mast-head of his enemy. 

For his vessel to be descried by any of the enemy would 
be fatal to his plans, and therefore it was that he took such 
precaution to avoid being seen. 

Cautiously creeping along under cover of the land, Bosco 
so manoeuvred the Vendetta as gradually to disclose the 
mountain side to his view from the summit downwards. 
And ere long he came in sight of the rocky fortress he 
had constructed where he had left Giulia d'Almaviras. 

" Stop her ! " he cried, the moment he could make out 
the retreat. 

And then, as the vessel gradually lost way, and came to 
a standstill, he carefully scrutinized the place through his 
spy-glass. 

It looked the same as when he left it. There was no 
alteration to be observed, nor was there any indication to 
show that any living being was there. 

He was just about descending, satisfied that there waa 
nothing to be seen, and had slung the telescope round his 
neck, when, happening to cast a last glance that way, he 
thought he saw something moving. 



BOSCO PREPARES FOR ACTION. 185 

In half a minute the glass was again focussed and at his 
eye, and then he beheld that which, in his opinion, well 
rewarded him for his trouble and caution. 

Nothing else than Giulia herself, standing on the top of 
a huge rock, and apparently anxiously scanning the bay and 
all around. 

" Tarn her astern ! " he cried, for the top of the mast was 
visible from the mountain where she was, and it was possible, 
though not likely, she or any one else who was there might 
see it. 

" All hands on deck ! " he cried, " and get ready for 
action. Pedro, give the chief gunner the key of the maga- 
zine, and tell him to hand up plenty of ammunition, 
especially round-shot, for I do not mean to come to close 
quarters if I can help it." 

Pedro gave this, and some other necessary orders, and 
then asked — 

" What do you propose, capitano ? " 

" Steam in and attack the other ship just at sundown, 
taking them by surprise, if possible. As soon as the attack 
is fairly commenced, a strong party will land by boat, 
make all haste up the mountain, seize the girl, carry 
her down, get her on board, and then the Vendetta will 
sheer off as if she had had enough of it, and steam away to 
sea." 

The Vendetta was soon ready for action, Bosco himself 
seeing to every detail, especially to the supply of ammuni- 
tion and the state of the guns. 

In half an hour from the moment when Bosco had dis- 
covered Giulia d'Almaviras standing on the rocky rampart, 
the Vendetta was steaming slowly and cautiously into the 
bay, her villanous crew of desperadoes, principally negroes, 
at quarters, arms and ammunition cumbering the decks, 
splinter-nettings rigged, and guns run out. 

The hour of the conflict approached, and Black Bosco, 
1 laving good reason to suppose that he would catch tha 
enemy entirely unprepared, had some reason to count on ar 
easy victory. 

Had Giulia kept her post on the rampart, or even had 
she again mounted some half-hour later, she would havf 



156 LOVE'S TREASON. 

seen the vessel of the dreaded Bosco quietly creeping round 
the point and entering the bay. 

But for a time she did nothing. Bewildered and wretched 
beyond description that she was again left to herself, aban- 
doned, as she thought, to her fate, she wasted precious 
minutes in despairing inaction. 

After awhile she grew more composed, and as the sim 
approached the horizon, had almost made up her mind for 
certain that Edward Blake's story was true, that he was 
indeed her friend, and would come ia the morning to take 
her away. 

She was startled by a loud report, a sound she knew so 
well — that of a cannon. 

It was followed by another and another, and running out 
from the tent she beheld, on mounting the parapet, a sight 
which might well fill her with dismay. 

The Vendetta in the bay, belching forth fire and smoke 
from her bow guns. 

She could not see the vessel against which these guns 
were fired, but she knew beyond all question that Edward 
Blake had spoken the truth, for she could see the water 
thrown up in the air in jets as the round-shot went ricochet- 
ting along the surface, and she guessed but too well that 
they were aimed at Blake's vessel, which was hidden from 
her view. 

And in the course of a minute or two there was ample 
confirmation of this opinion of hers, for an answering can- 
nonade was heard, and the water all around the Vendetta 
was splashed by the shot striking. 

For a time she gazed in awe and wonder at the sight : 
her first experience of a sea battle ; but soon she aroused 
herself, and bethought her of the necessity for action. 

Her first instinctive impulse was the course she 
adopted. 

This was to fly from her rocky retreat, and, making all 
haste down the mountain slope, endeavour to reach the 
shore, near where Blake's ship lay fighting her enemies. 

She made her way with the utmost possible speed down 
the mountain slope. 

Heedless of bush or bramble, her clothes torn, her delir 



THE AVENGER V. THE VENDETTA. 187 

cate skin even often scratched, she bounded along, agile as 
a fawn, narrowly escaping a fall more than once from the 
steepness and roughness of the ground. 

She had traversed more th^n half of the hill, and had 
already gained smoother ground, when an event occurred 
which brought her to a sudden standstill. 

Thinking to make the best of her way towards that part 
of the bay where, as she judged by the sound and by her 
observations from above, Blake's vessel lay, she bore to the 
left. 

There was in front of her a huge rock, to avoid which she 
was obliged to deviate from her course. 

And on rounding it she found herself suddenly in face of 
a party of men, a dozen at least, and at their head the 
ruffian Bosco himself. 

That she should give vent to a scream was only natural, 
but even in these terrible circumstances she did not lose her 
nerve and presence of mind. 

She had Blake's pistol in her girdle, and drawing it she 
levelled it at Bosco. 

" I will not be taken alive by you, you cruel villain ! " 
she cried, gaspingly ; "help is at hand. I will shoot you 
if you advance a step. Call off your ruffians, or you are a 
dead man. Ah ! you may well look astonished. I have a 
pistol, and, moreover, I have practised and learned how to 
use it." 

In truth, Black Bosco was both astonished and taken by 
surprise. 

Indeed, he had no weapon but a sword. Not expecting 
any need for their use at present, he had given over his 
pistols and a short carbine to be carried by one of the 
negroes, so as to render his ascent of the hill more 
easy, for Bosco, though a strong man, was rather short- 
winded. 



CHAPTER LV 

ENGAGEMENT BETWEEN THE AVENGER AND VENDETTA. 

When Black Bosco resolved on boldly steaming into the 
bay and attacking the Avenger, so as to occupy the attei)- 



188 LOVE'S TREASON. 

tion of those on board while he sent a party to secure the 
fair Giulia herself, the prize for which he was about to 
fight, and risk so much — life itself, for be might, of course, 
be killed, or defeated and captured, when death by the 
garotte must be his fate — he probably adopted the best 
possible plan for gaining his end. 

Edward Blake did not anticipate an attack. ITe thought 
that the desperado, even if aware that the Avenyr was m 
the bay, would keep hovering about the mouth of the 
harbour, and if he did attack^at all, that it would be a 
night affair. 

He was of opinion, however, that he would do nothing 
till either he knew for certain where the girl was, or till 
Don Jose reinforced him with another vessel, an event 
which the young commander knew might be looked for at 
any time. 

Accordingly, he laid his plans, and decided on a coui'se of 
action. 

After he had left Giulia's stronghold on the mountain 
where he and she had played such an exciting little drama, 
to no audience but the wild birds, his auger at her treat- 
ment of him began to cool down, and he bethought him>elf 
that it would be cruel and ungenerous to take her at her 
word, and leave her to the mercy of Bosco, whom he quite 
believed to be in the vicinity. 

Certain, however, that the Vendetta was not in the bay at 
that time, he resolved to leave her awhile to her own re- 
flections, and when he got on board his ship send his first 
lieutenant, Jack O'Brien, with a party to her to offer her 
once more shelter and protection from her foes. 

About this there was no hurry, so that those he sent 
reached the place where she was before dark. He had no 
doubt of being able to give O'Brien such directions that he 
could not miss finding her singular abode on the mountain 
where he had discovered her. 

Thus, then, it happened that the captaiu of the Avengor 
was really taken by surprise when the Vendetta appeared iu 
sight, steaming steadily towards where his vessel l.iy 

Taken by surprise, but not unprepared ; for Blake had 
given orders that the ship, immediately on his return fro:p 



fHE AVENGER V. THE VENDETTA. i80 

his expedition up the mountain, should be got ready for 
action. 

The decks were cleared, ammunition laid in readiness, 
and small arms placed in racks convenient to hand. 

He always insisted on a good look-out, and the crew of 
the Avenger were thus employed when the man at the mast- 
head gave the alarm — 

" Sail ho ! A steamer coming up the bay ! " 

Black Bosco stood on the forecastle of the Vendetta as 
she steamed in, directing her course. 

His keen eye noted the sudden confusion on board the 
Avenger — a running to and fro — excitement, in fact. 

" They have seen us," he said to Pedro. " They keep a 
good look-out. Ready with the bow guns. We'll open the 
ball, and perhaps a lucky shot may disable her at the first 
go off." 

In less than two minutes the bow guns were levelled at 
the Avenger, all ready to open fire. 

Bosco himself aimed both, and gave the word. 

The shot was seen to strike the water half a mile or so 
from the enemy, ricochet a few times, and then plunge into 
the sea, to be seen no more, 

The guns were fired with too low an elevation, and Bosco 
hastened to remedy this mistake. 

The next two shots went inside of the mark, and by this 
time the Avenger had commenced to return the fire. 

Bosco found, to his dismay, that the practice of the 
Avenger was excellent, and that she fired shell from some of 
her guns. 

One of these deadly engines of war burst over the main- 
deck, killing two of his men outright, and wounding several 
others. 

On the other hand, his guns were of heavier calibre, and 
he judged it prudent not to approach nearer to his antago- 
nist, thus formidably provided with the newest improvement 
in artillery. 

It was, indeed, with the small Armstrong guns which 
the marquis had fortunately provided, Edward Blake was 
able thus to have the superiority. 

Bosco accordingly gave the order to go astern, all the 



190 love's treason. 

while, however, keeping up a brisk fire, and occasionally 
manoeuvring her so as to present nearly her full broadside 
to the enemy, on which occasions he was able to use his 
other guns. 

By going astern slowly, imperceptibly to those on board 
the Avenger, he altered the range which they had got 
with deadly accuracy, and the dangerous shells began to 
fall about and burst in mid-air before reaching the Yen- 
ietta. 

On the other hand, Bosco saw that he had hit his an- 
tagonist several times in the hull, besides having done a 
good deal of damage about her rigging. 

His guns, loaded with round-shot, were well aimed, and 
as he knew exactly the pace at which the Vendetta was 
going astern, he could make his calculations, and alter the 
elevation of his guns accordingly. 

The consequence . was that his shot fell thick and fast 
about the Avenger, dashing up jets of water, throwing 
spray on board, and several times roarinj? through her 
rigging, and more than once striking her hull. 

The Vendettahad by this time gone astern, so as to be 
folly a quarter of a mile further from the Avenger than she 
was when the action began. 

The fire of the latter was nothing like so accurate and 
dangerous, though they had in a measure recovered the 
range as at first. 

" Pedro," said Bosco, " have one of the boats manned with 
a dozen or so good men, well armed, take the boat on the 
port quarter, the enemy cannot see it lowered, and the hull 
of the ship will hide it from their view, as we row towards 
the shore." 

" You are going ashore, then, capitano ? " asked Pedro. 

"I am ; and shall leave tqe ship in charge of you, till I 
come back. Now just attend to my orders, and see that you 
obey implicitly." 

"Yes, capitano." 

" You will keep the vessel in almost this position, unlesa 
they appear to have got a more accurate range, or fire with 
heavier cannon." 

" Very good, capitano." 



THE AVEKGER V. THE VENDETTA. L\)l 

" In. which case you will back astern still further, bv*, 
Blowly, so that they may not perceive the manoeuvre. By 
this means you will again alter the range, and derange their 
aim." 

" I understand, capitano." 

"Meanwhile, you will not let your fire.slacken, and by -no 
means allow the vessel to get into such a position as to lose 
sight of the enemy. And should the enemy move from her 
moorings as if about to come out into the bay, you will let me 
know." 

" But shall you be in sight ? " 

" Probably not." 

"Then how shall I let you know ?" 

" I shall not be out of hearing." 

" [ do not understand, capitano. You are going ashore, 
which is half a mile distant ; the strongest voice, with the 
best speaking-trumpet, could not be heard so far" 

" Listen, blockhead, and I will tell you," said Bosco ; 
" the moment the enemy casts off from her moorings and 
shows signs of moving, you will acquaint me of the fact by 
suddenly ceasing to fire the bow guns, and, after a short 
interval, will give a salvo with the broadside guns ; fire a 
broadside all at once, no matter whether or not you can aim 
at the enemy." 

"I understand, capitano." 

" Good ; see you attend strictly to my directions. I hope 
to be back in less than an hour, bringing the girl with me." 

" Is the boat ready ? " shouted Black Bosco to the petty 
officer whose duty it was to see to it. 

" All ready, capitano, and at the port gangway." 

With a parting caution to Pedro, the mate, to attend 
strictly to his orders, Bosco went over the side, and took his 
seat in the stern-sheets of the boat. 

" G-ive way, my lads, give way with a will ! " 

The next moment the boat was shooting over the quiet 
waters of the bay, Bosco so steering her as to keep the hull 
of the Vendetta as much as possible between him and the 
enemy, for he was desirous of landing unseen, if possible. 

In this he succeeded, and in less than a quarter of an hour 
stepped on shore, and leaving one man in charge of the 



192 T.OVE'S TREASON. 

boat, proceeded with all haste towards the spot oil tm 
uiuLintain side where he hoped to find his captive. 



CHAPTER LVI. 

THE ENGAGEMENT CONTINUED. 

Blake debated within himself the policy of leaving; his snug 
berth, going out into the bay, and tackling the Vendetta at 
close quarters. 

There was only one thing which made him hesitate in 
doing this— the girl herself, Giulia d'Almaviras, to rescue 
whom he had come on this expedition. 

He knew that a short time previously she was on the 
island, for he had left her on the plateau, and heard her last 
words, bidding him to stay. 

Now he thought it possible that if he went out to fight 
the Vendetta, that vessel would make all sail, and steam 
away and decoy him into pursuit. In the course of the chase, 
B isco, who was a cunning as well as a bold villain, might 
elude him by dodging about the intricate channels among 
the islands, and perhaps might, for the time, get out of 
sight and be able to double back to the bay, seize the girl, 
and escape altogether. 

Had Giulia been on board the Avenger, it would have been 
a different thing altogether. He would have sent her down 
the lower hold, below the water-line, and then have steamed 
boldly out and given battle to the Vendetta, so confident was 
he in the goodness of his cause, and his abiliiy to gain th<" 
victory. 

But under the circumstances, it would not be prudent, ana 
might defeat the very object he had in view. 

The heaviest gun they had on board was disabled, an 
apparently trifling accident to the somewhat complicated 
machinery rendering it useless until repaired. 

An engineer and two skilled workmen were busily em- 
ployed upon this, and Blake eagerly awaited the time when 
he would open fire with this formidable piece of artillery, 
which threw a shell more than double the diameter of any ho 
had yet been able to use. 



BETRAYED. 193 

Blake minutely described the road to the place where he 
had left Giulia, and the appearance of the rocky fortress 
itself. 

" But suppose she won't come," asked Jack O'Brien, who 
was to go for her, " shall I compel her — shall I use force ? " 

Blake mused for a moment or two, and then replied — 

" Yes, decidedly. It will be best, even for her own sake. 
But be as gentle as possible with her." 

" How many men shall I take ? " asked the lieutenant 

" Oh, say eight or ten, or perhaps half-a-dozen may be 
enough. It is always well to be prepared, and that amiable 
Bosco might screw up courage, steam up alongside, and 
attempt to take us by the board." 

In five minutes Jack O'Brien, with seven men armed with 
cutlasses and pistols, were ready to start. 

On landing, they kept to the shore at first, as by that course 
they would come across a certain landmark, and also arrive 
at a spot whence they could see the mountain fortress where 
Blake had last seen Giulia. 

For his own guidance, if he sLoald have occasion to go 
back, Blake had fastened a strip torn from his handkerchief to 
a bush, and another a hundred yards nearer the place they 
wanted to reach, thus distinctly marking the course. 

After an hour's brisk walking, they reached the place indi- 
cated, and Jack O'Brien could clearly discover the barrier of 
rocks some distance up the mountain, behind which he 
believed the fair Giulia then was. 

" Come on, boys ; we'll be there in a quarter of an hour." 

And following him as he went ahead, almost at a run, 
they made very good progress up the slope. 

At this very moment, however, though they knew it not, 
Black Bosco and his party was more than half a mile ahead 
of them. 



CHAPTER LVII. 

BETRAYED. 

We left Giulia d'Almaviras confronting Black Bosco with 
her pistol levelled at his breast, her eyes flaming, no sign o' 
fear in her demeanour, though, to say the truth, her he p 
fluttered in her brea3t in an unwonted manner. 



194 LOVE'S TRE\SOX. 

Her words were not without effect on Bosco, and as he 
gazed at her, like a beautiful she-panther at bay, he thought. 
to himself — 

" By St. Diavolo, it is a high-spirited senorita, this 
daughter of the marquis. She is, I believe, quite capable of 
keeping her word and putting a bullet into me. The pistol 
is levelled true enough, and her hand does not tremble. I 
must talk with her and get possession of her by stratagem 
without giving her the opportunity to hurt me, or to turn 
the weapon against herself, which I believe she would do in 
her rage and despair if she could." 

Bosco was well aware that the money value of his prize 
depended upon her being alive, uninjured, and with her 
beauty unimpaired. 

To kill her would be indeed folly ; so the question was 
how to seize her without giving her a chance to use her 
p ; stol. 

" Do not be rash, senorita," he said, " I wished to speek 
to you quietly." 

" What have you to say ? " 

" Lower your pistol." 

"No." 

" Foolish of you," he replied, coolly ; "your arm will grow 
tired, and before long your hand will tremble, and it will be 
useless to you, for if you fire then you will assuredly 
miss." 

There was much truth in this, and she saw it. 

Glancing quickly around, she lowered her arm, but did not 
take her finger from the trigger. 

She judged that she could level it again and fire at the 
first hostile movement she saw on his part. 

" What have you to say ? " 

" A great deal. In the first place I have to inform you 
that you were not abducted for any purpose of my own.'" 

" Ah ! for what then ? " 

" I was paid, and well paid to do it." 

" Who hired you to commit such an infamous crime '< " 
the cried, interested and thrown off her guard. 

" Don Jose de Malatesta," he answered promptly. 

" Ah ! " she cried, and instantly it flashed across her mind 



BETRAYED. 195 

that this statement tallied with what the Englishman had 
told her, and was probably true. 

" And for what purpose did Don Jose commit such an 
infamy ? What had I done to him that he should thus treaf 
me?" 

" Ah ! " he replied, shrugging his shoulders ; "I do not 
know ; that is his business, and he did not confide his secret 
thoughts to me. I can form a guess, though. But you had 
better ask him yourself when you see him." 

" When I see him ! " she cried. 

" Yes, which will be to-morrow, at the latest ; when he 
will come to seize his prey — that is, if you do not listen to 
reason." 

" But you own that you are in his pay — his agent and 
accomplice in this villainy." 

" I was." 

" You mean to say that you are not so now." 

" I do. Don Jose is a villain ! " 

" I believe it," she replied quickly ; " I quite believe that, 
and also that you are." 

" Granted," he replied, with the utmost sangfroid ; but I 
am no longer Don Jose's villain." 

" How is that ? I do not understand." 

" I have quarrelled with him." 

" How — why ? " she asked. 

"Because he is a mean, dishonourable wretch, and 
wishes to avoid paying me even the sum he promised for 
carrying you off." 

" You have seen him since, then ? " asked Giulia, becom- 
ing more and more interested. 

" I have, and made all haste here to balk him of his prey, 
as he is rascal enough to try to cheat me of my promised 
reward ; a reward well earned, I can tell you, for I risked 
my neck — risked death by the garotte, in carrying yoy 
off." 

" What security have I that you speak truth ? " she asked. 

" I can give no security," he replied. " But I warn you, 
Aat if you refuse, to-morrow, at the latest, Don Jose will be 
here (for he knows where you are) with a large force, and 
will certainly get possession of you, dead or alive." 



196 LOVE'S TREASON. 

"It shall not be alive," Giulia muttered between her 
teeth ; and then said aloud with great imprudence— 

" But there is already here a vessel come to rescue me." 

" A vessel ! What vessel ? " asked Bosco, in affected 
surprise. 

" The Avenger, commanded by a Captain Blake, dispatched 
by my father to find and rescue me." 

Bosco looked astonished, and then laughed aloud — 

" Ha ! ha ! ha ! that is good. The Avenger, commanded 
by the Englishman Blake. Why, he is in league with Don 
Jose de Malatesta. Don Jose sent him off to keep guard 
over you, to see that you did not escape, promising to follow 
in all haste.'' 

Giulia d'Almaviras was bewildered, torn by conflicting 
thoughts and emotions. 

What Bosco said seemed very probable, and agreed with 
her first impression and opinion of the Englishman Blake. 

'' What a crafty villain must this latter be ! " she thought 
to herself, " if indeed he were an accomplice of Don Jose." 

She was debating with herself and trying to think what 
test she could devise, but seeing a movement among his 
followers, and also that he advanced a step, she instantly 
raised her pistol again, and levelled it, as before, at his breast. 

" Fall back, or I fire ! Retire for half an hour ; then 
return, and I will give you my answer." 

Black Bosco fell back as ordered, but there was a look 
on his face, a wicked gleam in his eye, which she could not 
account for. 

She lowered her pistol as she saw him retreat, and at the 
same moment the slave-captain shouted — 

" Now on to her ! " 

And in an instant, before Giulia could even turn to face 
the danger, the brawny arms of a huge negro were around 
her. 

She was powerless, utterly, in that strong grasp, and could 
only shriek aloud. 

Betrayed, beguiled, thrown off her guard by the too- 
cunning Bosco, Giulia d'Almaviras was once more a prisoner 
in his power- 



THE SCREAK. 197 

CHAPTER LVIII. 

THE SCREAM. 

While the events narrated in the last chapter had been 
occurring on shore, on board the Avenger and the Vendetta 
tilings remained for some time as they were when Bosco and 
O'Brien left their respective vessels. 

The Vendetta continued to back astern slowly, firing all 
the while with her bow guns, while the Avenger briskly 
returned the fire. 

Pedro had by this time discovered that heavier artillery 
was practising on him, and hastened to get the Vendetta 
further away, and beyond the range of such unpleasant 
visitors. 

Hence the next two or three shots fell short, and then 
when a higher elevation was used by the gunners of the 
Avenger, the range was not obtained so accurately. 

And in a few minutes it became apparent that the enemy 
was at such a distance as to render it almost a matter of 
pure chance. 

Certainly, she might be hit by a lucky shot, or a shell 
bursting near might do damage ; but there was no certainty 
of anything except burning powder, and using up shell, and 
risking an injury to the somewhat delicate mechanism of the 
Armstrong gun. 

So Blake gave the order to cease firing, and in a short 
time the two vessels lay in sight of each other, distant over 
a mile, silent but watchful. 

The captain of the Avenger now began to expect his lieu- 
tenant, and grew impatient for his arrival. 

At this juncture the second lieutenant said, " I was just 
coming to tell you, sir, that there's a body of men moving 
along under the rocks, about half a mile off. I think it's 
Mr. O'Brien and his party, but they may be enemies ; so I 
thought I'd better tell you." 

" Quite right, Mr. Wilton," replied Blake, mounting the 
rail, and examining the approaching group with his spy-glass 

" Yes, that's our party," said Blake, " beyond doubt. But 
[ don't see Mr. O'Brien ; I suppose he's behind the rest, and 
bo hidden." 



196 love's treason. 

He handed the glass to the second lieutenant. 

" What do you make of them ? " he asked. 

" They're our men right enough, sir, but they seem to come 
on very slowly, and there's something about them I.can'l 
make out. They seem to be all close together — and — yes — 
they are — carrying something." 

Blake took the spy-glass from his lieutenant, and again 
looked out. 

" By Jove ! so they are. Ah ! now I see. The girl was 
foolish and obstinate — refused to come — so O'Brien, 
according to orders, seized her by force, and they are obliged 
to carry her. It's all riarlit ; make haste and get every- 
thing ready for sea. We'll be clear of these islands before 
the moon rises, I hope." 

It was now getting dark, which accounted for Blake being 

unable to discern the real state of affairs, when he looked at 

the approaching party through the telescope. 

***** 

When Giulia d'Almaviras was thus rudely seized from 
behind by one of Bosco' s negroes, she could do nothing, as 
we have said, but scream. 

i\.nd this she did to such good effect, that another of the 
ruffians — the boatswain — said to Bosco — 

" Shall I gag her, capitano ? " 

"No," was the reply; "let her shriek to her heart's 
content. If it pleases her, it does not hurt me." 

So Giulia screamed on, struggling the while, till, from 
sheer exhaustion, her screams and struggles grew fainter and 
feebler, and at last ceased altogether, and this p'W, trapped 
bird lay panting and trembling in the arms of the negro. 

How this was brought about is easily accounted for. 
While Bosco was pretending to listen to her, he was, in 
reality, giving directions to his men behind him. 

" Go round, two of yon ; make a complete circuit round 
that rock, if you have to go half a mile. Steal up quietly 
behind the girl. I will keep her attention engaged, and 
when I give the word, throw yourself upon her before she 
can use the pistol." 

These instructions were but too well carried out, and the 
unhappy Giulia found herself again a prisoner in the hands 



*HE SCREAM. 199 

of the brutal Bosco, the agent and tool of her most bitter 
enemy. 

Giulia, who had now regained the fall command of her 
faculties, and whom familiarity with exciting scenes had 
wonderfully improved in the way of courage and presence 
of mind, looked about. 

Her keen eyes discerned something before Bosco himself. 

To the right, and advancing along the edge of the scrub, 
but still on the open smooth ground, she saw a party of seven 
or eight. 

They were only distant about seventy yards, and her keen 
glance at once made out that they were not of Bosco's party, 
by their attire and general appearance. 

They, too, had come to a sudden halt, and as she gazed, 
she saw come out from among them, and advance a pace or 
two in front, as if to get a good view, an officer in uniform. 

The uniform, though not that of the Royal Navy, was 
certainly English. 

She had knowledge enough to be sure on that point. 

And the next instant she felt equally certain that these 
were Englishmen, probably belonging to Edward Blake's 
ship — the Avenger. 

There was hope in the thought. 

Bosco at that instant perceived them too, and also knew 
who they were. 

"Diavolof" he cried, "hasten — quick, you devils you, 
run for the boats, and you, Gamba, you great brute, use 
your strength and follow me." 

Giulia's mouth was free, she had long since ceased to 
scream, and Bosco forgot that she might do so now. 

"Help, help! for the love of heaven help! Senors, English- 
men, save me ! help, help ! " 

"Ten thousand devils!" yelled Bosco, "hold your 
noise." 

And with the words the brutal ruffian struck the unhappy 
girl a back-handed blow on the mouth, which cut her lip 
and drew blood. 

But she had gained her end. 

Her shrill voice, raised to its highest pitch, sounded clear 
and clarion-like on the evening air. 



200 LOVE'S TREASON. 

Every word she uttered was distinctly heard and under- 
stood by Jack O'Brien, whose party this was. 

At once he perceived that he had been forestalled, and 
the senorita had been seized by the enemy. 

And at the same moment he resolved to recapture her. 

Bosco and his party were soon in fall career towards the 
boat, and as the ground was tolerably smooth, and grew 
more so every yard they got nearer to the beach, if anything 
was to be done it must be at once. 

" Come on, lads," cried O'Brien, "follow me, bejabers! 
we'll foil the villains yet." 

With the words, he started off at a run, not directly 
towards Bosco and his men, but so as to intercept them, to 
get between them and the boat. 

But the Englishmen had nearly double the distance to do. 
It is true they were not cumbered with a burden as was one 
of Bosco'b negroes, and were more nimble and active. 

These latter circumstances enabled them to come up 
rapidly, and in a couple of minutes, though going in a 
diagonal direction, they were within twenty or thirty yards 
of the others. 

" Halt, lads, and give them a volley ; aim at Bosco, the 
one with the red silk scarf round his waist, take good and 
steadyaim — he is the captain, hit him and the game is ours." 

Bosco had imprudently come over from the other side of 
his men, where he was comparatively covered, to this, so as 
to observe the movements of the Englishmen. 

He could see, and, moreover, hear distinctly, and did so, 
with respect to O'Brien's last words. 

He knew he was in imminent danger — exposed to the 
deliberate aim of seven or eight, it would be almost a miracle 
if, at so short a range, he escaped. O'Brien's party halted 
and prepared to fire. 

" Hold hard ! " shouted O'Brien, suddenly, in the greatest 
excitement, " don't fire — let not a man pull a trigger." 

CHAPTER LIX. 

GIUMA IN BOSCO'S POWER AGAIN. 

This order, just as his men were levelling their pistols 
and taking aim with every prospect of success, would seem 



GIULIA IX BOSCO'S POWER AGAIN. 201 

to any one who did nob know the reason, a most strange and 
un advisable one. 

But O'Brien had good reason for it. 

Bosco's habitual cunning came to his aid now, and with 
cruel strategy he seized Giulia from the arms of the. negro, 
Gamba. 

'• Let go ; I'll carry her," he cried, "you get your cutlass 
<md pistol ready." 

Then he, strong as a bull, took her iD his arms, and so dis- 
posed her as to make her a rampart against his own body. 

It was a device as cruel as it was cunning. 

He rightly calculated its effect — what would follow. 

The Englishmen, as he foresaw, forebore to fire for fear of 
injuring the girl, and thus he escaped almost the certainty 
of being killed or wounded. 

Meanwhile he urged his men on to gain the boat. 

By the halt to fire, which order was countermanded, the 
Englishman lost nearly a minute, and Bosco's party had 
almost reached the boat — were within fifty yards of it — 
when they again started. 

" Come on, lads," shouted O'Brien, waving his sword, 
"follow me ; there's not a moment to be lost." 

But though he and his men ran well, the first of Bosco's 
were on the shore alongside the boat, while the English were 
still forty or fifty yards away. 

Bosco himself, though Jaden with Giulia d'Almaviras, was 
not last, and the instant he got up to the boat he flung her 
in with such brutal violence as to bruise and almost render 
her insensible. 

" Look after her, some of you vagabonds ! " he cried to 
his men ; "see that she does not escape ! " 

Escape ! 

Unhappy girl ! She lay bruised, bleeding, panting for 
breath, almost unconscious, her head resting on one of the 
thwarts, which was stained with the blood which flowed 
from a wound on her temple. 

" Father of heaven ! " she murmured in her agony of mind 
and body, " let me die ; take me to Thyself ! " 

" Now, my men, give them a volley ! " cried Bosco, as 
the English charged on. 



202 LOVB*S TREASOtf. 

Seven or eight pistols were fired a second or two aftetf 
this, and the foremost of the English fell. 

This caused, as it invariably does in warfare — with large 
bodies of men as well as small — some confusion and a brief 
halt- 
One of the wounded men was badly hurt— shot in the 
chest — the other had received only a slight flesh wound in 
the thigh, aud picking himself up,' tied a handkerchief round 
the limb, and declared he was all right again. 

And now the charge was turned into a desultory fire on 
either side. 

This is a sort of thing which military officers greatly 
deolore, but strive vainly to prevent even with the bravest 
troops. 

In this case it was some minutes or so before O'Brien 
was able to lead his little force on for another rush, which 
he well knew was the only way to recover the senorita. 

And he had now only six men besides himself, opposed to 
double the number of the enemy. 

These latter had nearly all gained the boat, and the girl 
herself, for whose sake they were fighting, had been thrown 
on board like a bundle of goods. 

Bosco aud about six of his men remained on the bank, in 
order to protect the boat, while she was being cast off and 
tiii' oars shipped. 

Si far, then, as the fight on land was concerned, it 
seemed about even, and Jack O'Brien felt confident of 
success. 

Cheering on his men, and fully a couple of yards in advance 
of the foremost of them, he himself made a dash at Bosco, 
and aimed a furious blow at him with his sword. 

But the ruffian, who had been in many hand-to-hand 
affrays, calmly and easily warded it off, and then thrust 
quirklv in return. 

Our friend, by springing back, was able to avoid a severe 

wound ; but, as it was. Bosco prioked him in the shoulder. 

This gave him a lesson — a pretty sesere one — and he i'elt 

that Bosco was not a man to be vanquished by a blind 

rush. 

By this time O'Brien's men had joined in the fray. Cat- 



GIULIA IN BOSOO'S POWER AGAIJr. 202 

lasses clashed — oaths and yells were heard, as is usually the 
case iu such moments, on all hands — and the sum total was 
a most tremendous din, rendered more exciting b) the 
occasional crack and flash of a pistol. 

The negroes felt the superiority of the English, if not in 
strength, certainly in endurance and courage, and several of 
them falling back, leaped into the boat. 

Bosco saw this — saw that he would shortly be left alone 
— and so also did O'Brien. 

" Come on, my lads ; they are funking. Don't let the 
boat get off. Hurrah for the A veiujer ! " 

Then he made another determined attack on Bosco, his 
men well backing him. 

But Bosco parried his thrusts and guarded his cuts with- 
out great difficulty, although he began to get a little out of 
breath. Herein, in his superior youtii, stamina, and activity, 
lav O'Brien's advantage, and he had every chance of tiring 
out and defeating his formidable antagonist. 

Bat Bosco saw this, and also that most of his men had 
taken to the boat, that the oars were shipped, aud all was 
ready to push off from the shore. 

So he in his turn attacked O'Brien, and as, besides being 
a good swordsman, he was the stronger and heavier man, he 
had a great advantage, and our friend had to retreat. 

But this was only a ruse on Bosco's part. 

No sooner had O'Brien fallen back a little than he him- 
self, glancing over his shoulder, suddenly ran to the shore, 
and sprang into the boat. 

All of his followers had by this time embarked except two, 
and to these he shouted — 

" Now then, jump in, and risk breaking your shins. 
Shove off, you with the boat-hook." 

The next moment the boat was clear of the land, and 
O'Brien beheld himself baffled — defeated. 

Furious at thus failing so ignominiously, his courage and 
rage got the better of his prudence, and he leaped into the 
water, which was nearly up to his middle, and cutting 
savagely with his sword, laid hold of the boat with the other 
hand. 

Some of his men followed him, not with any hope of 



204 LOVE'S TREASON. 

success, but to protect their rash officer, to whom they were 
all devoted. 

Of course he had not a chance, and a sword-thrust through 
the left arm, followed by a terrible blow on the head from 
the man with the boat-hook, decided the affair. 

O'Brien fell back in the water almost senseless, and but 
for his men would have been drowned, while Bosco bore off 
his prize in triumph and gained the Vendetta in safety. 

" San Diavolo, thanks," he muttered, as he stood once 
more on the deck of his ship. " You befriended me this 
time like a good patron saint as you are ! It was a near 
thing. Those English are bold rascals, and hard to beat off." 



CHAPTER LX. 

"AFTER HIM, NED — FIRE AWAT ! " 

Edward Blake, from the moment O'Brien's party had been 
seen approaching, was in a fever of excitement and im- 
patience. 

He was annoyed at the damage done to the Avenger by 
the fire of the Vendetta, and was anxious to get out and 
chastise that audacious buccaneer. 

The spirit of eombativeness, deeply implanted in the breast 
of every man of spirit, was now fully aroused, and he felt 
inclined to fight were it only for fighting's sake, and without 
any object whatever. 

He hastened from end to end of the ship, hurrying up 
and overlooking the preparations for casting off and putting 
to sea, and was here, there, and everywhere. 

" Captain Blake," said the second lieutenant, coming up, 
" two or three minutes back a boat went alongside the 
Vendetta, and now she's slewing round ; they are up to some 
manoeuvre or other." 

Blake hurried to the quarter-deck, took the spy-glass from 
the belaying-pin at the mast where it hung, and looked at 
the enemy. 

*' By Jove! I believe she's going to make a bolt of it. I 
do believe she's going to put to sea," he cried. 

And in ten minutes more this was sufficiently obvious. 



M AFTER HIM, NED — FIRE AWAY." 205 

The Vendetta had turned completely round, and now 
presented her stern instead of her bows. 

" Yes ; she's off, and as it is almost dark will probably 
escape us," said the second lieutenant. 

Jack O'Brien and party arrived soon after this ; he had to 
be assisted on board, Blake ran to receive him at the gang- 
way. 

" You are not badly hurt, my dear boy ? " he said, 
anxiously taking his arm, and assisting him down into the 
cabin. 

" No, not much." 

" Not shot in any vital part ? " 

"No ; only sword-cuts and bruises. Not much hurt in 
body, only weak and faint, and a little sore. But, Blake, I 
am very bad in mind ; for I have failed. That rascal has 
defeated us, and carried off the girl. He's got her onboard. 

He'll be off to sea with her After him, Ned, fire away I 

never mind me ! send the doctor, he'll do for me ! But 
don't let that vagabond Bosco escape ! " 

O'Brien fell back on the couch faint after this speech, and 
Blake, seeing the wisdom of his words, after sending for the 
surgeon hurried on deck, and the instant he was there he 
shouted — 

" Let go all — let go everything but the starboard bow 
hawser and haul in on that." 

The crew, all on deck in a state of anxious excitement, 
let go and hauled in with a will, and in a minute or so the 
Avenger's head swung round and pointed towards the mouth 
of the bay. 

" Go ahead, engineer," shouted Blake down the engine 
hatch, " full speed, and keep yoar fires going, and a 
full head of steam. Mr. Wilson," to the second lieutenant, 
" 1 leave the deck in charge of you for a few minutes 
while I go down to see to poor O'Brien." 



CHAPTER LXI. 

THE CHASE IS IN SIGHT. 

Lieutenant Wilson met Blake at the top of the compan 
way. 



206 LOVE'S TREASOIS 

•'The man at the look-out at the mast-head has seen fire 
and sparks over the land, which he supposes, and so do I, 
come from the funnel of the chase." 

" Where away ? " 

" To the westward, sir." 

" Good ; then she's off to some place between this and 
Havannah, a rendezvous appointed by Don Jose, I fancy. 
Keep her going at full speed. It's dangerous, but I want to 
get clear of these cursed islands while there's any daylight 
left." 

Blake took a look around and aloft, saw that all possible 
canvas was set, and then went aft to the wheel to superintend 
the steering. 

" Go forward on the forecastle, Mr Wilson ; keep a bright 
look-out a-head, and if ever you did use your eyes, do so now." 

" Aye, aye, sir." 

It was indeed dangerous navigation, for although the 
young commander had carefully noted and marked down 
both on a chart of the bay he had made, and on his mind, the 
principal reefs, rocks, and shoals, yet there might be others 
he had not observed. 

As for the islands, or rather islets, for some of them were 
no more than huge rocks, there was still light enough to see 
them. 

The sky was clear, the Avenger tearing ahead at a pro- 
digious rate, and thus Blake calculated on being entirely clear 
of the land and out of danger before it was absolutely 
dark. 

Another hour pa-sed, the strained engines of the Avenger 
groaning, and the good ship creaking and trembling in every 
timber, from the heavy pressure of steam and sail Blake 
kep f on her. 

The light was now quite plainly visible, and it was obvious 
to any one that they were fast coming up with her. 

Ju-t at this time the engines stopped suddenly - 

Something was the matter, that was certain. 

Blake ran to the engine-hatch, and was met by the second 
engineer coining up. 

" What's the matter, Mr. Brown ? " 

" An accident to the machinery of some kind, sir, but 1 



THE CHASE IS IN SIGHT. 207 

can't say what. The chief engineer's attending to it, and 

has sent me to his berth for some tools." 

" The engines broken down ! " cried Blake, in despairing 

accents. " Fortune has indeed deserted me ! " 

###### 

The Vendetta was going through the water at excel lent 
speed, and there was no trace of the Avenger astern ; and 
Bosco flattered himself he had got clear away, and was safe 
from pursuit. 

So fiercely were the furnaces kept burning by his orders, 
that lurid flame and sparks leaped from the funnel. 

This gave him considerable annoyance, as, in case of pur- 
suit, the light would guide the enemy. 

He hesitated for a while whether or not to order the fires 
to be reduced, but he judged it best, on the whole, to keep 
up a high pressure of steam, so as to get over the greatest 
possible distance in case of pursuit. 

For, although Bosco was certainly not a coward, yet he 
did not fancy fighting the Avenger if he could help it ; for 
he had got the prize, the abducted girl, in his hands ; and 
victory would put him in no better a position, while defeat 
would be fatal to him — capture, almost certain death. 

And, moreover, he by no means liked the thought of the 
shells the Avenger fired, as he well knew how deadly they 
would prove at close quarters. 

So, under the circumstances, it is not surprising that 
Bosco should be most dreadfully anxious to escape from and 
get beyond reach of pursuit. 

The clock struck the hour of eleven, and scarcely had the 
last chime sounded, than the engines first eased, then 
stopped altogether. 

Bosco hastened towards the engine-hatch, and was met by 
the chief engineer. 

" What means this stopping ? " asked Bosco. 

" A break down, eapitano," replied the engineer ; " it ia 
no use disguising the matter." 

A volley of oaths escaped Bosco, as was usual when hr 
was annoyed. 

" Will it take long to repair ? " 

" Two hours at least." 



208 LOVES TREASON. 

" Confound it ! if the Avenger is in pursuit, she must 06 
up with us by that time. 



CHAPTER LXJJ. 

THE MARITANA. 

AND now leaving both the Avenger and the Vendetta W\» 
will transport ourselves on board the third steamer, men* 
tioned some chapters back, as being bound apparently to tha 
Caribbean Sea. 

This is the Maritana, Capitano Joachim G-onzalvez, and 
she is cruising about in the neighbourhood of the island 
where Pedro, the mulatto, was maimed and left to perish 
by Black Bosco. 

She has on board Don Jose de Malatesta, and he and the 
captain are eagerly on the look-out for this island. 

The date is the same afternoon on which the fight for the 
possession of Giulia d'Almaviras took place on the island 
between Blake's men and those of Black Bosco. 

Don dose was on deck by sunrise, and after a sleepless 
night. Two hours later a noise like distant thunder was 
heard. 

" What is that — thunder ? " he asked. 

The captain listened and replied — 

" No, not thunder." 

" What then ? " 

" A distant cannonade. Two ships fighting at sea, I 
imagine." 

As the steamer got clear of the land, the sound of the 
distant cannonade grew p'ainer ; and what was at first a 
distant rumbling noise, mid which Don Jose had attributed 
to thunder, assumed a different character. 

The continuous rumbe gave place to distinct reports, 
sometimes faint, and again occasionally very loud, as though 
a broadside or several guns were fired together. 

The captain of the Maritana was thoughtful and reserved ; 
but there was an expression in his face which seemed to say 
that he knew or guessed more than he chose to say, or more 
than he did say, at all events. 



The maritanA. 209 

At the end of an hour Don Jose and the captain were 
anxiously on the look-out for the vessel or vessels they 
expected to see ahead. 

Meanwhile, the Maritana, a large corvette, not required 
by the Spanish Government, and which Don Jose had pur- 
chased at a high price, previously to arranging in the 
abduction of the fair Giulia, had been got ready for action. 

Her decks were cleared, crew mustered, the guns of heavy 
metal cleared, the powder magazine opened, and ammuni- 
tion got in readiness ; in fact, everything was done as though 
a sea battle was a certainty. 

The crew numbered a hundred and thirty men — more 
than there were on board the Avenger and the Vendetta 
together. 

Don Jose had put to sea, thus heavily armed and manned, 
for a very good reason. He knew that Blake, the English- 
man, had already sailed with a swift, armed vessel, in search 
of the Vendetta, and he had some fear that he even knew the 
whereabouts of the island where Bosco was to land the girl. 

Now, Don Jose had had a taste of the young officer's 
pluck and prowess, and determined that if they did meet, 
the advantage should be all on his side. 

And at the last moment he put more guns and fifty 
additional men on board the Maritana. 

To the annoyance of Don Jose and the captain, the 
weather, which had been beautifully clear in the early even- 
ing, now grew rather thick, and there were symptoms of 
rain. But presently the captain cried — 

" There ! ten points on the starboard bow !" Then to the 
helmsman — "South-east-by-south." 

About three or four miles distant a steamer could be made 
out steering straight for them. 

As they gazed, she swerved in her course, so as to present 
part of her broadside to the enemy. 

The next moment there was a flash and puff of smoke, 
followed at a short interval by the report of a heavy gun. 

" There, now we see her plainly," exclaimed the captain. 

" Well, and what do you make of her ?" asked Don Jose, 
who was not so well up in naval matters as the seaman, and 
could not recognize a ship some miles off. 

u 



210 love's treason-. 

" What do I make of her ?— The Vendetta, II Capitano 
Bosco Negro ; there's no doubt about that, and she's chased 
by some vessel, I reckou, by her firing astern." 



CHAPTEE LXIII. 

THE RAPIDAN. 

And now we will pay a visit to yet another vessel, making 
the fourth within the last few chapters. 

This one is the United States man-of-war Bapidan. 

Apparently she has not yet succeeded in coming up with 
and sinking the Confederate privateer, or pirate, as the worthy 
Yankee captain calls her — the cruiser with the gentle name, 
but far from amiable character — the Turtle Dove. 

" Halloa, captain, turn out. T have news for you," shouted 
the first lieutenant, entering the cabin of the commander 
shortly after daybreak on the same morning as the events 
narrated in the last chapter took place. 

" Eh — eh ! what is it ? " cried the captain, springing out 
of his cot, in shirt and drawers. The Turtle Dove in sight ? 
Darned if I didn't dream as we'd come up with her and sunk 
her in twenty minutes, rot her timbers ! " 

" No, captain, the Turtle Dove ain't in sight." 

" What the thunder is then ? " 

" Nothing." 

" What did you wake me up for then ? Why, it can't be 
more than two bells in the morning watch." 

"That's a fact, captain." 

" Well, what, on earth did you wake me up for ? " 

The lieu ; enant, who had been listening intently, cried — 

" Hark ! " 

"foh! What's that, thunder?" said the captain, as a 
low, boomiug sound fell on his ears. 

" No, cap'in, not thunder, it's a noise as we've heard more 
than once both of us." 

" Big gun, by Jehoshaphat ! I'm on deck like a streak of 
lightning." 

Ani indeed the captain was not long in performing hia 
toilette, and was on deck, hair all rough, and half dressed, 
iu less than two niiuutes. 



THE RAPID AN. 211 

" Ship in sight — what do you make of her ? There she 
goes again ! " as the report of a cannon came booming across 
the water. 

" Make of her, cap'in ? just this — it's that cursed Vendetta 
I boarded the other day, and she's chased. What do you say ? " 

The captain took a good look. 

" Right you are, by thunder ! " he exclaimed ; " that's the 
eame darned craft. Wonder what she's been up to." 

"No good, I'll bet my life," said the lieutenant. "If ever 
I saw a hang-dog rascal, her captain is one." 

" Maybe he's got the young lady who threw out the 
bottles, with the paper inside on board." 

" Stop her ! " shouted the captain. 

The lumbering, groaning engines ceased their monotonous 
work, and the ship soon came to a standstill. 

" Ahead easyhard-a-starboard ! " was the next order. 

And then the Rapidan made a half circle, so that her 
stem was presented to the Vendetta. 

" Steady ! go ahead ! full speed ! " shouted the captain. 

"You are going to leave her, cap'in?" asked the mate, 
with some disappointment. 

"Nary bit, my boy ; I'm just going to sheer off a little 
further, so as to keep her from seeing us without losing siuht 
of her. This little affair must be watched. I must just see 
what's up. May be, Uncle Sam may have a word or two to 
say in the matter. The tarnation scoundrel, to go and kid- 
nap a gal ! Blood's thicker than water, mister " 

" It air, by thunder ! " 

It was just at this time that the Maritana came in full 
view of the Vendetta, so that, as we close this chapter, Black 
Bosco's vessel is the object of keen scrutiny by two other 
armed vessels. 



CHAPTER LXIV 

THE MADONNA 

We left the Vendetta just at the time when Bosco was 

apprised by the engineer of the break-down of the engines. 

It was as nearly as possible exactly tba same hour as that 



212 LOVE'S TREASON. 

at which a somewhat similar disaster occurred to the Avenge?. 

Ei r in the latter case it was a connecting-rod which had 
broken : in the Vendetta it was a valve which had given 
Whv, involving also the bursting of a pipe. 

B>'Soo was, as may be imagined, in a furious temper at thia 
mishap, moreover, as a quarter of an hour later the man on 
the look-out cried — 

"Li»tat ho!" 

" "Where away ? " shouted Bosco." 

" Dead astern." 

" Ten thousand furies ! the Avenger, by all that's horrible ! " 
roared Bosco. " Engineer, if you don't start your machinery 
again in a quarter of an hour, you " 

The engineer replied — 

'• It is impossible, oapitano. I will do my best, and if you 
choose to murder me for that, why, I cannot help it." 

Bosco went off growling and swearing, and was met on 
the quarter-deck by Pcclio. 

" Oapitano, this is a bad job." 

" Yes, it is ; we shall have to fight, I reckon ; for, if I'm 
not mistaken, that accursed Avenger is coming up astern." 

" Ah ! capitano, I am sorry for that. I am no coward, as 
you know — I have proved my courage in more than one 
tough fight — but I would rather forfeit all I have, and all I 
may gain by this affair, than fight now." 

" Why, what demon has put it into your head to be faint- 
hearted now, then ? " shouted Bosco ; " by all the fiends, if 
you show the white feather, so as to discourage my men, 
I'll throw you overboard." 

" It was no demon, capitano," replied Pedro, sullenly, 
" that put thoughts of bad luck and disaster to the Vendetta 
ill my head. It was the Blessed Virgin herself," be continued 
solemnly. 

" Is the man mad ? " cried Bosco angrily, but still 
showing some interest in his voice and maimer, for all 
Spaniards, no matter how irreligious, are more or less super- 
stitious ; " do you mean to say that the Virgin has appeared 
to you ? " 

"No, capitano," replied Pedro quietly. 

" Ten thousand furies ! what then has happened ? " 



THE MADONNA. 213 

* You know the image of the Blessed Virgin, which standa 
on a bracket in my cabin ? " 

"Yes." 

" The sea is smooth, is it not ? " 

"Yes." 

" No one can enter my cabin without myself or you seeing 
him." 

" No." 

" The image of the Virgin has never before fallen from 
its stand ? '' 

" Garambo, no ! If it had, it must have been smashed to 
pieces, for it is only of plaster." 

" You know the time at which the engines broke down ? 
" Well, not one minute before that I saw the image slowly 
topple forwards, and fall to the deck, where it was smashed 
to a thousand pieces. It was by no mortal agency it fell." 

" Gar ago ! " said Bosco, and then walked away without 
another word, but growling to himself. 

He was superstitious as to some things, and though he 
scoffed at religion, and would as soon hang a priest as a dog 
or cat, yet he believed in omens. 

He paced the deck, muttering to himself for some minutes, 
then he called the mate. 

" Pedro, not a word of this to any soul on board, as you 
value your life." 

" I do value my life, Capitano Bosco Negro, and will 
fight in defence of it to the last, if fight we must." 

Pedro had none of his captain's furious energy in battle, 
but he possessed a stubborn, sullen spirit of his own, and 
would fight on silently to the last, and if it came to death, 
would die like a hunted fox— without a cry. 

'•Light the battle lanterns," shouted Black Bosco 
presently ; and then addressing Pedro — 

" It is useless to think now of escaping under cover of the 
darkness, the Avenger is in our wake, can see us, and we 
must fight and sink her. 'Tis better to have plenty of light, 
show a bold front, and get the crew in good spirits for the 
encounter, than to try by keeping all dark to elude this 
infernal vessel." 



214 LOVES TREASON. 

CHAPTER L V 

"WE SHALL WIN YET, PEDRO." 

The Vendetta was soon in a blaze of light from stem to 
stern. 

" Beat to quarters ! " roared Black Bosco, getting excited 
himself now, as was always the case with him when a fight 
was imminent. 

Grog was served out, and under the influence of the 
treble allowance of fiery spirit the negroes and Malays 
forming the crew of the Vendetta began to get imroarious. 

Bosco, however, was used to them, and he toou no heed 
of this. Anxiously he looked out astern for some sign of 
the pursuing vessel, the Avenger, the light of which he felt 
convinced he had seen. 

It was this firm persuasion which caused him to give the 
order to light the battle lanterns. 

Of course he did not know, as the reader does, that the 
Avenger had also broken down, and calculated that, on her 
approaching, the sight of the decks of the Vendetta lighted 
up, the crew at quarters, and the vessel quietly awaiting 
attack, as though her captain were quite confident as to the 
result, would produce an effect. 

So when Pedro came to him and asked — 

" Shall I put some more sail on her, capitano ? " he said 
in reply — 

" Has 8he good steerage way, answers her helm 
readily ? " 

" Yes, capitano. She is doing about two knots and a 
half." 

" That is sufficient for fighting and manoeuvring pur- 
poses ; and to attempt flight when it is impossible would he 
absurd, and only have the effect of disheartening our men 
and encouraging the enemy." 

So the Vendetta, her crew at quarters, guns run out, and 
all ready for action, stood slowly on awaiting the approach 
of her antagonist. 

An hour — two hours — three hours passed, and no signs 
of the Avenger. 

The engineers were hard at work repairing the accident 



THE FIGHT BEGINS IN EARNEST. 215 

to the machinery, and before long hoped to start the engines 
again. 

Bosco began to look doubtful and puzzled. Pedro felt 
hopeful. 

" By heavenB ! " cried Bosco, using his favourite oath ; 
" I do believe she has missed ns. Make all sail, Pedro, we 
may get clear off yet." 

And in a few minutes the Vendetta was under every 
possible stitch of canvas, going with a favouring breeze at 
the rate of some five knots an bour. 

And in a couple of hours more the engines would be 
.■eady to start again. 

But what of the Avenger f 



CHAPTER LXYI. 

THE FIGHT BEGINS IN EARNEST. 

Of course it was a heavy blow, a (-ore discouragement to 
the young captain of the Avenger, this most untoward acci- 
dent to the machinery. 

However, he was not one to waste time in idle regrets, 
but instantly gave orders to set all sail. 

The breeze at this time was very light, and the vessel did 
not progress at a greater rate than about a knot an hour, 
just keeping steerage way on. 

However, Blake hoped that the accident to the machinery 
would soon be put straight, and that at daylight the chase 
might be still in view, though perhaps merely a speck on 
the horizon. 

Determined to leave nothing undone to keep within 
seeing distance of the Vendetta, Blake gave the order, " Out 
boats." 

And soon the launch, the two cutters, and gig, well 
manned by a double crew, so th it one half might relieve 
the other, were towing the Avenger, and increased her speed 
through the water from little more than one knot to over 
two. 

All this while the Vendetta was idly lying to, awaiting 
the approach of her adversary. 



216 LOVE'S TREASON. 

Great was the surprise of Edward Blake when a brilliant 
light appeared ahead where all had previously been dark- 
less. 

Looking through the glass from the mast-head, he waB 
able to make out that the decks of the Vendetta (if it was 
indeed that vessel, as he had good reason to suppose) were 
lighted up, and that she was apparently, lying to in readi- 
ness for battle. 

At three hours after midnight the engineer came on deck, 
and reported that the engine might be started, but must be 
worked slowly and cautiously. 

Already dim gray light was apparent in the east, and in 
another hour night would have merged into the light of 
early dawn. 

Jack O'Brien right cheerfully gave the order down the 
stoke-hole — 

" Fire up, down there ! Ahead — easy with the engines ! " 
And the next minute the Avenger was once again under 
steam and sail. 

Jack O'Brien threw up his hat in great glee. 
" Hurrah, lads ! we've got her at last ! we'll be slapping 
it into her in another quarter of an hour. Three cheers for 
the Avenger, my boys ! " 

Three hearty cheers were given, and all was now excite- 
ment and anxious expectation. 

At the time when the order was given to start the 
engines of the Avenger, both she and the Vendetta were 
under all sail. A tolerable brisk breeze had sprung up 
with the approach of day, by which, of course, both vessels 
profited. 

At half-past four Jack O'Brien, who was here, there, and 
everywhere in a great state of excitement, came aft. 

" She's in range, Captain Blake, my boy," he said, " I'm 
sure. Shall I give the order to plump a leaden pill into 
her ? " 

It was now daylight, but hazy, and the Vendetta was dimly 
in view ahead, apparently between two and three miles 
distant. 

Edward Blake had a good look at her, and made his cir- 
culations. 



THE FIGHT BEGINS IN EARNEST. 217 

" I think, perhaps, she is in range of the rifled Arm- 
strong," he said ; " but we'll wait another quarter of an 
hour, to make certain. I'm sure we gain on her." 

The expiration of the quarter of an hour was eagerly 
awaited by the crew, among whom the news spread that in 
that time the first shot was to be fired. 

The gun was carefully loaded and elevated. 

Then the captain, posting himself by the wheel, directed 
the helmsman to give her a good sheer to port. 

" Ready with the gun," he cried, as she presented half 
her broadside to the chase. 

" All ready, sir." 

The flash and smoke of the gun were seen — the sharp 
report heard the next moment — and then the conical steel 
shot went booming through the air — shrieking, as it were, 
Woe to that object I strike ! 

It was observed to plunge into the sea a short distance 
astern of the Vendetta, and then apparently bent from its 
straight course by impact with the waters, went ricochet- 
ting along, and passed ahead of the chase on the starboard 
side. 

"Bravo !" cried O'Brien, "we're well in range. A capital 
shot, but a little short. Half a degree more elevation, and 
we hull her next time." 

The fight now began in earnest. 

Several more shots were fired, and each one passed close 
to the Vendetta, some plumping into the sea close along- 
side. 

" We must have her directly," cried O'Brien. " We'll 
plump one right into her stern cabin windows directly." 

The Vendetta had by this time commenced to return the 
fire, and the action, though at large shots, became quite 
brisk. 

The Avenger had been creeping up to the chase, and was not 
now much more than a mile astern — within easy artillery 
range. 

In another quarter of an hour the broadside of the Avenger 
was presented to the Vendetta, aud the shell guns sent their 
deadly missiles hurling through the air, to burst, scattering 
a terrible iron shower of splinters all around. 



218 LOVE'S TREASON. 

The action now became quite hot. 

The Avenger was hit several times in the rigging, bat 
hitherto had received no serious damage. 

At half-past five, however, an unlucky shot carried away 
her topmast, which fell with all its rigging and hamper over 
the starboard side. 

" Stop her," shouted Blake, "starboard your helm— one 
more broadside, my lads, from the starboard gdns, and then 
all hands clear away the wreck." 

This was imperatively necessary, nor was it safe to keep 
the engines going, lest some of the rigging of the fallen mast 
should foul the screw. 

And so after another broadside, which did some damage, 
the Avenger fell rapidly astern and the fire on either side 
slackened. 

Bosco, who of course could not tell what harm was done, 
hoped that an irretrievable disaster had happened to the 
enemy. 

In this he was disappointed, for in less than half an hour 
the wreck of the topmast had been cleared away, and the 
Avenger once again tore ahead under full steam in pursuit. 

"Confound her," growled Bosco, as he observed this; 
" here she comes again — there's no shaking her jff, it seems." 



CHAPTER LX VI I. 

" IT IS DON JOSE HIMSELF." 

BLACK Bosoo had good reason to curse the Avenger, whicti 
swift vessel clung to him like a staunch dog to a bull. 

He hoped and believed that, in addition to carrying away 
her topmast, he had also hulled her and damaged her 
machinery, so as to cripple her entirely 

His chagrin then was proportionately great when he once 
more saw her coming on in pursuit at full speed. 

The firing between the Avenger and the Vendetta had now 
greatly slackened. Blake was anxious to save the ammu- 
nition of the big gun, of which he had rather a short supply, 
and get to close quarters as quickly as possible. 

He wa3 well aware that the recoil of the heavy gun fired 
ahead appreciably affected the speed of his vessel. 



"IT IS DON JOSE HIMSELF." 219 

Bosco, going on to the forecastle of his vessel, could plainly 
make out a steamer announced from the mast-head. 

Each minute she became more plainly visible as the Ven- 
de^asteamed towards her, and the mist cleared away partially. 

Suddenly Bosco started. 

" By all that's lucky ! " he cried ; " it is— Pedro, do you 
know that steamer ? " 

The mate shook his head. 

" May I burn in purgatory for ever if it is not the Mart- 
tana, Don Jose's vessel ! What brings him ? He thinks 
the girl is on what I call Wedge Island." 

" Perhaps he has been there and found her not." 

" But what should bring him this way ? He could have 
no knowledge of the other island. Ah, diavolo ! I know not 
what to think — whether this meeting at sea is good or evil 
for me." 

" I should say you ought to be thankful . The Mcritana 
is heavily armed ?" 

" I believe so." 

" And well manned ? " 

" Doubtless." 

" Then, we can, between us, make short work of the Aven- 
ger" remarked Pedro ; " sink or burn her, beyond all ques- 
tion, without trouble." 

" Stop her ! " roared Bosco. 

" Capitano," urged Pedro, " do you wish to get within 
easy range of those infernal shell guns sooner than need be ; 
I would advise that we should steam on at full speed and lay 
close to Don Jose's vessel." 

" Go ahead ! " cried Bosco, and again the engines started, 
and the Vendetta progressed. 

The fact was, Black Bosco was completely taken by sur- 
prise by the sudden apparition of Don Jose's vessel in these 
waters. His original plan was to deceive Don Jose, keep the 
girl, and make the best bargain for himself that he could. 

This was now knocked on the head — was impossible — for 
Don Jose, with an armed ship, was close by, and would, of 
course, demand the immediate possession of the girl. 

And this remand he had the power to enforce, even if 
there had been no Avenger in hot pursuit in the case. 



220 LOVE'S TREASON. 

Bosco soon grasped the affair in all its bearings, and made 
\p his mind how to act. 

His game was now obvious enough, and he would not have 
been bewildered or hesitated a moment had he not been taken 
bo utterly by surprise. 

He would now play into Don Jose's hands — deliver up to 
him the girl, as originally intended, and take great credit to 
himself for the skill and daring with which he had kept the 
Englishman at bay. 

He could easily account for not leaving the fair Griulia on 
the island, by saying that it was not safe — that this devil 
of an Englishman was cruising about, and had some sus- 
picion as to the place where the girl was to be landed. 

Don Jose would, of course, believe this. Indeed, he 
could have no possible reason to doubt it, for at that very 
moment the Avenger, Captain Edward Blake, was in pursuit 
of him, they had been hotly engaged, and were even now 
hotly engaged. 

Having explained this as briefly as possible to Don Jose, 
both the Jfaritana and the Vendetta would turn on the 
Avenger, and sink, burn, or blow her up, that is, if she did 
not succeed in finding safety by flight. 

He would press for a larger reward than originally 
promised, on the ground of the great risk he had run, and 
the valour and fidelity with which he had fought for the girl 
on behalf of his lordship. 

Black Bosco laughed aloud as he arrived at this satisfac- 
tory conclusion. 

"Ha! ha! San Diavolo, my patron saint, has not yet 
deserted his most faithful servant," he cried in high glee. 
"Pedro, you see your omen of the broken Madonna has 
turned out a false oue. San Diavolo still protects and aids 
his own." 

" Carago ! " replied Pedro, smiling, " things have certainly 
gone well for us. I like not at all those shells that cursed 
Englishman fires. And a word in your ear, capitano ; if she 
got to close quarters, and a few of those infernal missiles were 
to burst on deck, I do believe our men would run from their 
guns. They like them no more than I do, on my soul." 

" I know it ; I have observed it," replied Bosco. " It i§ 



GtULIA IN DON JOSE 8 POWER AGAIN. 221 

fts well as it is. Ah ! there goes that cursed Englishman 
again," he cried, as a shot from the big gun went whistling 
through the air not a dozen feet from their heads. 

The Vendetta had now approached within a mile of the 
Maritana. The latter had sheered round, and was steaming 
very slowly in the same direction as Bosco' s vessel. 

" Ah ! See, they have lowered a boat ! " exclaimed Pedro 

Bosco took the telescope and looked through it. 

" It is Don Jose himself, coming on board," he said. 



CHAPTER LXVIII. 

GIULIA IN DON JOSE'S POWER AGAIN. 

In a very short space of time Don Jose de Malatesta stood 
on the deck of the Vendetta. 

He was received by Black Bosco at the gangway with 
every mark of respect. 

" What news, Bosco ? What is the meaning of this can- 
nonade, and of the shots I see dancing along the water ? What 
of our prize ? " 

Bosco answered the last question first. 

" The senorita is safe in the cabin." 

" Ah ! " cried Don Jose, " that is right. At last I have 
the proud beauty in my power. And that ship astern — what 
does all this mean ? " 

" That vessel is the Avenger, commanded by an accursed 
Englishman, who has given me much trouble. He is pursu- 
ing me in the hope of rescuing the senorita. She is swift, 
this Avenger ; faster than my ship." 

" And faster than the Maritana ? " 

" I think so." 

" Then, if this Blake were to see us both bearing down to 
him in company, if we commenced to fire into his vessel, he 
might, if he were fortunate, gain safety through the superior 
epeed of his vessel by flight." 

" Your lordship is quite right. He would not, probably, 
venture to await an attack by our two vessels, but endeavour 
to escape." 

" That must be prevented. His ship must be destroyed, 



222 LOVE'S TREASON. 

and the Englishman and all his crew perish without eXccp 
tion." 

"Just so, my lord," replied Bosco, calmly, as though it 
were the commonest thing in the world they were speaking 
of, and not the wholesale slaughter of their fellow-creatures ; 
" the question is, what is the best and easiest way of bring. 
in<r it to pass ? " 

" Ah ! I have it," cried Don Jose. " I have hit upon an 
excellent plan. I will at once return on board the Mar it ana, 
taking the lady with me. It must be managed so that they 
cannot see on board the Englishman. That can be done, I 
suppose ? " 

" I see no difficulty about it," replied Bosco ; " she must 
be securely bound, then lowered into the boat from the gang- 
way farthest removed from the enemy. Once in the boat, 
she can be kept out of sight, covered over with a shawl or 
sail. The same precautions must be used in embarking her 
on board the Maritana, and I will guarantee that though the 
Englishmen have keen eyes, they will never notice the 
transfer." 

" Good. Once on board, I will place her in safety far 
below the water-line ; and then we will proceed to extermin- 
ate this cursed English ship." 

" I await to hear your plan, my lord." 

" The instant she is safely on board, I will sheer off as 
though I had merely sent a boat on board to ascertaiu the 
character of your ship, and was satisfied. I will hoist the 
French flag, and as the Englishmen see my vessel steaming 
away, they will fancy that I am about to leave you to fight 
out your quarrel between yourselves." 

A sudden thought crossed Bosco's mind. Supposing that 
Don Jose, having got the girl in his possession, should really 
steam right away, and leave him to his fate. 

" I could fight, and perhaps be killed or taken," he said to 
himself ; " and then, again, I might haul down my flag and 
surrender. They would not find the girl on board, it is true, 
but there would be abundant proof that she had been in my 
power, and that she was on board this ship. I could tell them 
that the girl had been transferred to the Maritana. Would 
they believe me ? And if they did, would they hold me 



GIULIA IN DON JOSE'S POWER AGAIN. 22E 

harmless for what I had already done ? Would they let me 
go free ? I think not. I fancy that accursed Englishman 
would put me in irons and carry me to Havannah ; and there, 
when he had told his tale, I should receive but scant mercy. 
Ugh ! I do not like the look of affairs at all." 

Time pressed, however ; the Avenger was gaining on the 
Vendetta fast, and the deadly shell from the broadside guns 
might soon be expected to be bursting all around. 

Black Bosco, though he by no means liked letting the girl 
go, and leaving himself at the mercy of Don Jose, who might 
desert him, as he feared, was powerless. By merely holding 
aloof, and looking on at the fight, Don Jose might compass 
the same end, and then, if fortune should declare in favour 
of the Avenger, the heavier Jl.tritana might attack her in 
turn, defeat her, and, after all, Don Jose would gain possession 
of the senorita. 

Bosco was deadly pale and the perspiration stood on his 
forehead and gave his face a horribly damp, corpse-like look. 

" Well, what do you say to my plan, Bosco ? " 

" Excellent, your lordship." 

" Come then, there is no time to be lost ; let us see about 
putting it in practice instantly." 

Indeed it was high time, for the Avenger was now not more 
than a mile distant. 

She had hoisted her flag and eased her engines, as though 
puzzled and uncertain what to make of the strange steamer. 

It was important for the complete success of Don Jose's 
cruel plan — the death of every soul on board the Enelishman 
— that she should be induced to follow up the attack on the 
Vendetta at once. 

" Xow, then, Bosco, send the senorita up and bundle her 
into the boat at once. As soon as I am on the way to the 
Maritana you had better endeavour to temporize — try and 
get the Englishman close on pretence of a parley, as though 
you wished to surrender." 

" Good, my lord ; I thank you for your advice." 

But a deep gloom had fallen over the slave-captain. 



224 



CHAPTER LXIX. 

OS BOABD THE HARITANA. 

Black Bosco did not like the aspect of affairs, and had but 
little doubt as to the result. 

" Ah ! " he said to Pedro, " I think I can deceive the 
Englishman ; and, happen what may, the Avenger, with her 
cursed shell guns, is doomed to destruction. Come with 
me, Pedro ; the senorita may be sulky, in which case we shall 
have to carry her." 

With these words he went down into the cabin, followed 
by Pedro. 

Xow it must be understood that all tiis passed in 
much less time than it tahes for the rentier to understand 
it. 

For the Avenger was still ceding up astern, and though 
for a time she had slackened speed, and no longer belched 
forth fire, smoke, and conical shot, yet she would in all 
probability commence the action again immediately. 

Bosco did not find Giulia d'Almaviras so obstinate as he 
thought possible. 

He bethought jimself that she was thirsty, and so took 
from out of tb/j steward's pantry a caraffe of water, and 
carried it down with him into the cabin. 

" Senorita, you must come on deck," he said ; " here is 
water if you are thirsty." 

She would have died ere she would have asked the wretch 
Bosco for water ; but now that it was offered her, the 
cravings of nature asserted themselves, and taking it quickly 
from his hand she drank eagerly. 

" You must come on deck at once, senorita," repeated 
Bosco. 

She noticed the change in his manner — that he had sud- 
denly become much more respectful — and for a moment or 
two a wild hope took possession of her — that the battle 
had boen gained by the Avenger, or, at all events, thai 
something had occurred which compelled Bosco to give her 
up. 



ON BOARD THE MARITANA. 225 

Alas ! she was doomed to be undeceived, and that in a 
most unpleasant manner. 

In reply to the order to go on deck, she bowed merely, 
and preceded Bosco, who motioned her to go up the com- 
panion-stairs. 

She obeyed, and from the dark, gloomy cabin found her- 
self all at once in the full light of day — the sun just rising. 

Suddenly, just as she reached the waist of the vessel, Don 
Jose, who had been hidden from her sight by the funnel, 
stepped forth, and stood before her. 

" Your most obedient, humble servant, senorita," he said, 
with a mocking bow and smile of deadly import. 

A start, a scream, and she would have fled from him — 
she knew not whither — as though he had been the foul fiend 
himself. 

" Stop her, Bosco ! Into the boat with her ! — there is 
not a moment to be lost." 

Bosco instantly grasped her by the waist, and Don Jose 
advancing, threw a large shawl over her head and shoulders, 
which he proceeded to fasten round her waist. 

" For your own sake," he said, " I advise you to submit 
quietly ; resistance is, I assure you, utterly out of the ques- 
tion. You can do yourself no good, and will only force me 
to more severe measures." 

He spoke quite calmly and quietly now, feeling perfectly 
secure in his triumph. He had at last got the prize in his 
possession, and in a few minutes she would be on board his 
ship. 

A rescue then would be, as a matter of fact, an impossi- 
bility, for he considered the Vendetta more than a match 
for the Avenger, putting the Maritana entirely out of the 
question. 

In half a minute the unfortunate Giulia d' Alma viras, now 
almost in a fainting state at finding herself in the power of 
Don Jose de Malatesta, was bundled into the boat. 

In ten minutes she was on board and safely lodged in the 
cabin. 

After giving the orders to Captain Joachim to start th( 
engines and go ahead, as though about to leave that local 
ity, Don Jcse went belo^ *« eioat ovwhifl prim. 



226 love's treason. 

The dead-lights were up, but the cabin was brilliantly 
lighted by oil-lamps. 

The shawl had been removed from over Giulia's head 
and shoulders by Don Jose's orders, and when he went 
down into the saloon, she stood in the centre of the floor, 
and confronted him. So he looked at her in silence for some 
time. 

Even he, hard-hearted and ruthless as he was, could not 
but feel shocked at the change which terror, grief, and ill- 
usage had made in her appearance. 

" And, my Lord Malatesta, it is you whom I have to 
thank for the insult, hardships, and violence I have 
suffered." 

"Nay, Giulia." 

" Call me not Giulia, villain that you are 1 " she 
cried. " May the curses of an insulted maiden rest on you 
to all eternity ! Don Jose de Malatesta, you shall pay for 
this yet." 

He cowered and quailed before her just indignation — 
before fury which gave her strength — which fired her eye, 
and caused her voice to sound clear and sonorous. 

" Senurica, listen to me. Let me explain. Be seated, I 
pray you ; what I have to say will occupy some little time, 
and you must be weary." 



CHAPTER LXX. 

THE PROPHECY. 

"I am: listening to you, Don Jose de Malatesta," she said, 
seating herself on an ottoman, and drawing the shawl 
around her, for her dress, torn and disordered, was scarcely 
decent, " but seek not to deceive me — I know much more 
than you suppose." 

" I wonder what she does know ? " thought Don Jose. 

For, be it observed, there had been no time for Bosco 
to relate all that had occurred, or even the greater part of 
it. 

" If you have been rudely treated, it has been against my 
wish — against my positive orders even." 



THE PROPHECY. 227 

" Ah ! " cried Giulia, " then you acknowledge that you 
were the instigator of this villainous outrage ? " 

Don Jose bowed, and was about to speak when there 
came a cannon-shot, followed by the roar of a broadside at 
no great distance. 

The sound somehow carried consolation — hope, even, to 
her heart. 

" All is not lost ; that noble Englishman has spoken the 
truth, and will save me yet. The battle begins again. 

" Scoundrel ! " she cried, aloud, " death by the garotte is 
too good for you ; you should be sent to South America, 
ami there suffer the punishment which is, I am told, re- 
served for the most infamous of criminals. You should be 
attached by the feet to wild cattle, and these sent gullopiDg 
over the pampas ; your wretched soul should thus find its 
way to Satan." 

" By St. Antonio, this is going too far ! '' cried Don Jose, 
starting to his feet ; " I bid you beware how you insult 
me ! '' 

" I insult you ! It is as impossible to insult you as it 
is to insult the vilest reptile that crawls ! It is possible to 
kill, to crush you, as it is the reptile, and that is all ! " 

He grew pale from rage ; but putting constraint on his 
passions, he moodily seated himself again. 

" Proceed ; I await until your tirade is finished," 

" Finished ! I feel as though I should never tire of ex- 
pressing scorn and loathing of you — of defying you to the 
utmost ! " 

" Beware ! you are in my power ! " 

" For the present — but not for long," she replied, still 
in the same bold, defiant manner ; "the day of reckoning 
— the day of vengeance has arrived. Hark to the can- 
non ! " 

Again the sound of guns was heard, and it was certain 
that the action was commencing again in earnest. 

Don Jose began to grow impatient. 

" I must put an end to this," he thought. 

"Ah, bah! you think that unfortunate little steamer 
astern will save you." 

" I think and know that the Avenger, Captain 2d ward 



228 LOVE'S TREASON. 

Blake, a noble-hearted Englishman, is the appointed instru- 
ment under Providence to rescue me and bring you to an 
account. Ah, believe me, Don Jose, a stern vengeance will 
be exacted for this outrage on the daughter of the Marquis 
d'Almaviras ! " 

He started violently when he heard her mention the name 
of the Avenger and Captain Blake. 

" She knows more than I supposed," he said to himself ; 
" but an end must be made to this, and at once. I must 
see to the destruction of this accursed ship and the death 
of all her crew. 

" Your words are but as the idle wind. The Vendetta alone 
is more than a match for the Avenger." 

" Then why did the Vendetta flee in terror before the 
nobler vessel ? No, Don Jose, I tell you that the Avenger, 
commanded by Captain Blake, and manned by an English 
crew, will defeat both your vessel and that ot the ruffian 
Bosco. It is not the first time, if I remember history 
aright, that English ships and English men have proved 
victorious against greater odds ! " 

She spoke with the utmost confidence — like one in- 
spired. 

And now, for the first time, a feeling of doubt, of alarm 
even, took possession of him. 

" By heavens ! it might be as she says," he thought, and 
his cheek paled. " But, no ; it is impossible. I will bring 
this interview quickly to an end ; then go on deck, order 
my ship to be steered alongside this insolent Avenger, and 
sink her with a broadside." 

" Senorita," he said, forcing an appearance of ease and 
comfort he was far from feeling, " what you say is pure 
nonsense. This buccaneer of an Englishman has not a 
ghost of a chance. In an hour's time, Captain Blake, who 
you think is going to rescue you, will be hanging from the 
yard-arm by the neck." 

Giulia smiled scornfully. 

" Don Jose Malatesta," she said in the same stern unfal- 
tering voice, " it will not matter. I tell you, you go to 
3 our death — ere the sun reaches the meridian you will be a 
corpse .' * 



SHE HAS STRUCK HER FLAG. 229 

With a cry, half of terror, half of rage, he rushed on 
deck, far more troubled in mind than was his prisoner. 



CHAPTER LXXI. 

SHE HAS STRUCK HER FLAG. 

.When Don Jose reached the deck, pale, and with a strange 
wild look in his eyes, the sound of a salvo of guns broke 
on his ears. 

Looking to port he beheld the Avenger on the larboard 
quarter of the Vendetta, and was just in time to observe 
the white smoke of this last broadside 

" Seems to me, my lord,'' remarked Captain Gonzalves, 
" that Black Bosco has got his work to do with the English- 
man. I have been watching the fight. She is coming to 
close quarters, and delivers her fire with excellent precision 
and quickness ; they stand well to their guns, and work 
them well, these English." 

" Garramlo 1 " cried Don Jose, " you do not mean to say 
that Bosco is getting the worst of it ? " 

" I think so," replied the captain, coolly ; " the splinters 
have been flying in fine style, and moreover the Vendetta 
has been on fire once." 

" Ah, Carago ! there she goes again." 

A moment or two before a shell from the Avenger had 
hulled the Vendetta and exploded, and was quickly followed 
by flame and smoke, leaping from the hatchway. 

" By all the saints ! " cried Don Jose, " we must go to 
his assistance. We must sink this cursed Englishman." 

" We must be quick about it, then," replied Captain 
Gonzalves, " for, on my faith and honour, the Vendetta will 
be a wreck if the Englishman keeps up his fire thus." 

Don Jose resolved to bear down to the assistance of 
Bosco, and, favoured by the battle-smoke and the mist, 
creep up alongside the Avenger unperceived, and deliver 
one tremendous broadside at close quarters. 

This plan was at once acted upon, and the captain gave 
the necessary orders. 

It really seemed quite feasible, for at a little distance 



230 LOVE'S TREASON. 

the two vessels so hotly engaged were completely hidden by 
smoke. 

The fire, too, had slackened on both sides, perhaps, the 
captain suggested, because the combatants could not even 
see each other, or perhaps because the cannon had got too 
hot to be loaded with safety 

Be that as it may, the Maritana, under full steam, pro- 
ceeded to make a half circle round the stern of the two 
vessels thus hotly engaged, nearly broadside to broadside. 

And then the Maritana at half speed crept up so as to 
take a position outside the Avenger and deliver a broadside 
with deadly effect. 

The Avenger would then be between two fires. 

As the Maritana, after making a wide sweep astern, 
steamed up on the port quarter of the Avenger, the roar of 
battle which had grown faint again swelled up, and once 
more volumes of smoke gushed from the bulwarks of the 
two vessels, and jets of flame, and the not-to-be-seen but 
deadly missiles — bursting shells scattering death, fire and 
ruin around ; round shot, crashing their way through plank, 
bulwark, and beam ; and the murderous grape, big bullets 
of iron, which striking the head or body, caused almost 
certain death, and a limb, the loss of it, if the shock to the 
system did not prove fatal. 

" Bosco dies hard," remarked Don Jose's captain, quietly ; 
"he will fight to the last." 

There was at this moment again a temporary lull in the 
fight, and it was possible to converse without shouting at 
the top of the voice. 

" What, then," cried Don Jose, who was in a state of 
wild excitement, " Bosco will be beaten by that accursed 
Englishman ! " 

" He is beaten. His ship has been on fire three times, 
and I guess he has great difficulty in keeping the flames 
tinder at all. A quarter of an hour ago the Englishman 
had the best of him, firing thrice to his twice. Now the 
Avenger fires in the ratio of more than two to one. Ah ! 
but they stand to their guns well, these English. I wished 
you had taken my advice, my lord, and in an important 
aiiair of this kind, shipped a crew all English or American." 



SHE HAS STRUCK HER ELAG. %6\ 

" Bah ! " replied Don Jose, who hated the English, 
" Spaniards are as good seamen, as brave and more intelli- 
gent than these stupid islanders. But is it not time to 
open fire ?" asked Don Jose, impatiently ; "it isfolly to 
look idly on while that accursed vessel is sinking the 
Vendetta." 

" As you please, my lord," replied the captain, and 
then he passed the word forward to man the starboard 
battery." 

"All ready with the guns?" cried Captain Gonzalves, 
after waiting half a minute. 

" All ready." 

" Fire ! " 

The guns of the Maritana then belched forth fire and 
smoke, round shot and grape. 

For some half a minute after the broadside was delivered, 
it was not possible to ascertain the effect, for all three 
vessels were pretty well enveloped in a canopy of smoke. 

This soon began to clear off, drifting lazily away ta 
leeward. 

An exclamation broke from the captain o? the Maritana. 

" What is it, captain ? " asked Don Jose. 

" By all the saints, it is over — it is finished ! " 

" What is finished ?" 

" Look there ! " replied the captain, pointing to the 
mizenpeak of the Avenger, where a moment or two pre- 
viously the British flag floated. 

" She has struck her flag," said Gonzalves, " but we 
must be cautions, there may be some treachery in this. I 
cannot understand her striking after receiving only one 
broadside from us. It is not like the English." 

Captain Gonzalves was right, and Don Jose, looking to 
wliere he pointed, saw the British ensign come slowly down 
from the prcud position it had hitherto held. 

" Cease firing," cried Captain Gonzalves, " the enemy 
has struck." 

" No, no," shouted Don Jose, " fire away — load with 
round shot, and sink the accursed English buccaneer. 

Then to the captain — 

"Are you mad — do you not understand that the Av "tiger 



232 LOVE S TREASON. 

must be sunk, and every soul on board perish ? Fire away 
at her notwithstanding she has struck." 

The Avenger was now seen to be backing astern, and 
thus comiDg towards the Maritana. 

As she did so she delivered a broadside at the Vendetta, 
and a cheer which immediately afterwards rang out from 
her crew told that this last discharge had been effective. 

" Queer behaviour for a ship that has surrendered," re- 
marked Captain Gonzalves, " I guess we'll have trouble 
with this fellow yet." 



CHAPTER LXXII. 

THE ACTION CONTINUED— THE AVENGER'S FLi(J SHOT AWAY. 

The Avenger, goiDg astern with her rudder hard a star- 
board, backed away from the broadside of the Vendetta, and 
at the same time approached the Maritana, across the stern 
of which vessel she would pass in a diagonal direction. 

In other words, she would be in a splendid position to 
deliver a raking-fire as she thus crossed the wake of Don 
Jose's vessel, the Maritana. 

" Read v w ith the port guns," shouted Blake ; " fire one by 
one as we come abreast of her stern-cabin windows. 

The effect of this would be to sweep the decks of the 
Maritana with a most, deadly fire of grape and shell, and 
that, at only half-pisiol-shot distance. It was quite possible 
that such would be the slaughter and havoc caused by this 
rakine-fire on the crowded decks of the Maritana, that she 
might be put hors de combat at once, her men flying from 
their guns. 

"By the Lord Harry!" oried O'Brien suddenly, "our 
flag's down." 

" Shot away, I suppose," replied Blake ; "I see the signal 
halyards are gone ; run up the Union Jack to the foretop- 
mast bead." 

This was the explanation of the lowering of the Avenger's 
flag, which the captain of the Maritana thought was in token 
of surrender. 

" Ready, number one gun, port battery," shouted Blake. 

" All ready, sir." 



THE AVENGER'S FLAG SHOT AWAY. 233 

The stern of the Avenger at this moment crossed the wake 
of the Maritana, and number one gun pointed right into the 
s^ern-cabin windows. 

" Fire ! " 

The order was followed by a flash and report, and the 
crash and splintering of wood- work. 

One of the stern cabin deadlights, or shutters, as landsmen 
would call them, was blown away by the discharge, and 
from the quarter-deck of the Avenger it was possible to see 
into the saloon of the Maritana, where Giulia d'Almaviras, it 
will be remembered, was confined. 

The second gun of the Avenger's port broadside was now 
abreast of the stern windows of the Maritana. 

The captain of the gun was about to fire, having carefully 
trained the piece, when Blake shouted — 

" Cease firing the port guns — man the starboard battery ! 
Stop her — go a-head with the engines." 

" Eh ! man alive," cried Jack, " what are you going to 
do? "Why, we can sweep her decks, cut them down by scores, 
if we rake her." 

" Cease firing with the port guns — man. the starboard 
battery!" cried Blake, repeating his previous order. 

Then turning to his lieutenant, he said, pointing to the 
storn-cabin window, of which the deadlight was demolished — 

" Jack, my boy, look there, and you will see why I have 
given the order to cease firing." 

" The senorita herself," exclaimed O'Brien, "by all that's 
lucky ! " 

And, looking as directed, Jack O'Brien could see the 
interior of the cabin of the Maritana. 

And there, standing by the open port, he saw Giulia 
d'Almaviras. 

She was pale, but calm, and there was no trace of fear in 
her countenance. 

As the two, Blake and his lieutenant, looked, she advanced 
quite close to the open. window, waved her hand, and smiled. 

Her lips moved, and they guessed she spoke words of 
encouragement to them, but amidst the din it was impos* 
sible to hear what she said. 

In another second or two the Avenger moved a-heac", 



23 i LOVE'S TREASON. 

Blake's orders having been obeyed, and the vision of the 
fair Giulia at the open port was seen no more. 

" By all the saints, I was right then ! " cried Jack 
O'Brien. " I told you I saw something hurled into the 
boat ; and it was doubtless the senorita " 

" Ah ! see there," he exclaimed suddenly, and in his turn 
pointing to the Maritana; " look at that man on the quarter- 
deck ; do you recognize him ? " 

" Don Jose de Malatesta ! " cried Blake. " I see it all 
now ; this is his ship come to relieve Bosco of his captive. 
Oh. the villain ! I must have a shot at him." 

He ran to the mast, around which were rifles in a rack. 

Seizing one of these, he aimed at Don Jose, and fired ; 
the shot missed, and the Spaniard at the same moment per- 
ceived him. 

He took off his hat, and bowed with insolent mockery, 
and even laughed, or pretended to laugh. 

" By the holy poker, yon black-muzzled villain," cried 
Jack O'Brien, " we'll make you laugh on the other side of 
your mouth before we've done with you." 

" Fire ! " shouted Don Jose, through the speaking 
trumpet — "fire, and hit the accursed Englishman. Fifty 
doubloons each to every man on board when we have sunk 
the enemy." 

A cheer rang out from the crew of the Maritana at this 
munificient promise, and again her starboard battery 
thundered forth. 

Less than a minute later the carpenter came to Captain 
Blake with a very solemn face— 

"She's hit, sir, badly hit between wind and water; I can't 
get at the hole ; she'll founder in about ten minutes ; the 
water is rushing in like a cataract." 

CHAPTER LXXIII. 

THE AVENGER IN A SINKING STATE. — CAPTURE OF THE 
VENDETTA — DEATH OF BOSCO. 

" What now, captain?" cried O'Brien, coming up at that 
moment, " we have lost a splendid chance of totally crippling 
and defeating our second enemy with one broadside." 



DEATH OE BOSCO. 235 

Edward Blake was now pale, and for the first time since 
the fight began looked anxious and gloomy. 

" I am afraid our forbearance will prove our ruin," he 
said ; " but it cannot be helped : I could not allow the port 
guns to be fired when it was almost a certainty that the 
senorita would have been killed by the discharge." 

" What is wrong ? " 

" Only that, as the carpenter informs me, the Avenger is 
in a sinking state." 

" The devil ! " replied Jack O'Brien, "that is bad news." 

He was silent for a moment or two, and then exclaimed, 
suddenly — 

" By Saint Patrick, I have it now. You say our ship is 
going to sink beneath our feet ? " 

" I am afraid so." 

" Faith then, we must just take one of the enemies. 
Which shall it be, that cursed Vendetta or the big one ?" 

" The Vendetta is almost knocked to pieces herself, and 
moreover, I think they have trouble in keeping the fire down." 

" Then let it be Don Jose's ship here. She's bigger and 
better in every way. 

" Fire with your port battery," shouted Blake, " but aim 
at the fore part of the ship. Spare the poop and quarter-deck. " 

Of course this forbearance on his part told most disas- 
trously on the chance of the Avenger, for as Don Jose and 
the captain and the other officers of the Maritana were all 
aft, they were out of danger. 

Blake, however, was determined that if Don Jose was 
fiend enough to keep the girl in a position of danger when 
she might have been placed in safety down the lower hold, 
he would not be unmanly enough to risk injuring her. 

The Vendetta had now ceased to fire altogether for a time, 
but the Maritana poured in another discharge, principally 
of round-shot, which killed five men and committed terrible 
havoc on the decks, bulwarks, and timbers of the Avenger. 

"This can't last, Jack," he shouted, amid the roar of the 
guns. " We must take the Vendetta by the board, and then 
do our best with Don Jose. Pass the word for the boarders 
to board the enemy from the starboard bow. If we carry 
the Vendetta, 1 will run her full tilt at the other one, and U 



236 LOVE'S TREASON. 

I can hit her amidships, may sink her right off. Ha ! here's 
the carpenter again. What news ? " 

" I've got at the leak, sir, and if you can spare twenty men 
to pump, I think we may keep her afloat.'' 

" Not now, carpenter. I can't spare a man now. I'm 
going to take the Vendetta by the board. If we succeed, 
ihen you may have twenty men. Can you keep her afloat 
for half an hour without pumping ? " 

" Aye, captain, she'll float longer than that." 

" That will do then ; the affair will be decided in twenty 
minutes. Now, Jack, ready with the boarders ! " 

" They're all ready, captain," cried the Irishman, " and so 
is Lieutenant Jack O'Brien to lead them. Hurrah, lads, for 
the Avenger" shouted the Irishman, waving his sword, 
" three cheers, and board her in the smoke." 

" Port your helm," cried Blake, and then as the vessel a 
minute afterwards ran foul of the Vendetta, he shouted — 

" Fire your starboard guns. Boarders away ! " 

The guns were fired, and the boarders made a rush for the 
forecastle and forerigging. Jack O'Brien gave a wild Irish 
yell, and shouting his favourite cry — 

" Three cheers, and board her in the smoke," he leaped 
on the shattered bulwarks of the Vendetta, and the next 
moment a score of English sailors followed, cutlass and pistol 
in hand. 

The negroes, huge giants of strength as they were, already 
disheartened and almost panic-stricken, made scarcely a show 
of resistance. There was a brief melee, some pistol-shots, 
and then they broke and fled, some seeking safety aloft, 
some diving down the hold. 

Bosco, however, with Pedro, and some half-score of the 
more determined, made a stand on the quarter-deck. 

" Now, lads, never mind your pistols, boarding-pikes and 
cutlas-es to the front." 

The Englishmen made a rush at Bosco and his men, 
who stood drawn up across the quarter-deck of the 
Vendetta. 

Two of O'Brien's men fell shot through the body, one by 
Bosco, the other by Pedro, and three more were wounded 
less severely. 



DEATH OF BOSCO. 237 

But the next moment it was a hand-to-hand conflict. 
Bosco cut down the nearest man to him with his sword, but 
a second afterwards he was impaled, an English sailor driving 
a boarding-pike right through his body. 

With a yell of agony Black Bosco fell to the deck, writhing 
in the agonies of death. O'Brien, seeing the pike had gone 
right through his body, and protruded behind, mercifully 
put a pistol to his head, and blew his brains out. The res/ 
retreated aft, crying for quarter. 

" Quarter ! quarter ! " cried Pedro, himself badly wounded ; 
" we surrender ; mercy, good senor ! mercy, I ask ! " 

O'Brien, seeing him endeavour to rise, placed the point 
of his sword to his throat. " Mercy, senor, and I can give 
you some information " 

" Down with your arms," shouted O'Brien to the few who 
had retreated, " down with your arms, and you shall have 
quarter." 

Instantly they all threw down their arms, and the Vendetta 
was the prize of the English. 

Jack O'Brien now turned his attention to Pedro, Bosco's 
second in command. 

He had received a gash on the left shoulder, and was, 
moreover, wounded by a pike in the chest. 

"What have you to say ? speak quick, or I will put you 
out of your misery as I did that ruffian, your captain." 

" You will spare me — your promise ! " cried the wounded 
man. 

" Yes, only speak, don't attempt to trifle, or you are a 
dead man." 

" I will, I will ; only take me on board with you." 

" Speak ! " 

" Get back to your ship, and haul off from the Vendetta, 
for Bosco has put a slow match to the powder-magazine. 
It will explode in less than five minutes, and blow us all up 
together." 

This revelation on the part of the wounded Pedro was 
sufficiently alarming, and was quite enough to cause the 
victorious English to hasten back to their own vessel wlrcb 
still grappled the Vendetta. 

As to this latter, she was in a deplorable state. 



tiOVE'S TREASON. 

CHAPTER LXSIV: 

UNEXPECTED AID. 

Twelvr dead bodies, and twice as many wounded men 
lying about on the decks, all slippery and stained with blood, 
attested the severity of the Avenger's lire. 

Her rigging ^a§ »U cut up, ropes hanging about loose, 
gun carriages upset, great gaps torn in the bulwarks where 
shells had struck and burst, and the decks splintered and 
torn up the whole length of the ship. 

Lieutenant O'Brien glanced aronud on this scene of ruin, 
and then gave the order to his men to make all haste on 
board the Ave>iger. 

Meanwhile a desultory fire had been going on between the 
latter vessel and the Mart tana, which now lay absolutely 
alongside the Avenger. 

Aud just at the moment when the men of the Vendetta 
had thrown down their arms aud surrendered, a boardiug 
party of forty men, led by Captain Joachim Gonzalves, 
crowded on to the fore-part of the deck of the Avenger. 

" Down with the English dogs ! " shouted Don Jose 
through a speaking-trumpet, " kill aud slay — no quarter — 
uo quarter Fifty doubloons for every dead Englishman !" 
Captain Blake saw this attempt on the part of the Mari~ 
lam to take his vessel by the board, with serious appre- 
hension, almost dismay. 

Nearly half his crew, his best men, had followed Jack 
O'Brien on board the Vendetta. 

The Vendetta was carried, and her captain slain, but now 
Edward Blake beheld his own vessel invaded by the enemy, 
to oppose to whom he had only half a crew. 

The men of the Maritana were double in number to the 
crew of the Avenger, and with a part of his men absent 
Captain Blake beheld himself attacked by overwhelming 
odds. 

" All hauds repel boarders," he shouted ; and then 

proceeded to hail O'Brien, who was still on board the 

Avenger, seeing to his wounded men being transhipped to 

the A rentier before following himself with the rest of his men. 

" Vendetta, ahoy 1" 



UNEXPECTED AID. 239 

" Hallo ! " 

"All hands to the Avenger. We are boarded on the 
port bow. 

Meanwhile, some of the grappling-hooks had become 
detached, and the Avenger swung away forward from the 
Vendetta. 

This made the task of getting back on board their own 
ship more difficult to the Englishmen, especially as they 
were encumbered with five wounded men — four of their 
own party, and Pedro, whom O'Brien had promised his life 
should be spared. 

It was fully five minutes from the time when Pedro gave 
the warning before O'Brien and his men had regained the 
Avenger. 

A desperate fight was going on on aboard the latter vessel. 

Blake had got his men aft, and now desperately disputed 
every foot of ground with the foe, who pressed on, yelling, 
shouting, and firing their pistols. 

" Charge them, my lads," shouted the young commander. 
" Give them cold steel. Pikes and cutlasses, follow me. 
Hurrah for the Avenger ! " 

Then, waving his sword, he made a dash at the enemy, 
and crossed swords, with the captain of the Maritana him- 
self, whom he succeeded in wounding in the sword-arm. 

He was loyally followed by his men, who, with a loud 
cheer, charged the Spaniards and drove them back. 

But at this moment a deadly fire of musketry was opened 
on the English from the Maritana, the bulwarks of the 
latter being crowded with men, armed with rifles. 

Five of Blake's men fell under this terrible fire, and the 
English were forced to retreat, taking their wounded with 
them. 

Blake now ran some guns in from the port and extem- 
porised a sort of barricade, behind which he hoped to keep 
the enemy at bay. 

Matters were. now, however, extremely critical — indeed, 
desperate. 

The Avenger had, it is true, made a wreck of the Vendetta, 
and O'Brien's boarding party had gallantly taken Boseo's 
6hip by storm. 



240 LOVE'S TREASON. 

But the Avenger herself was as bad hit between wind and 
water, leaking fast, almost in a sinking state, she was now 
boarded in turn by a party from the Maritana, more 
numerous than the whole crew, while others kept up a 
destructive musketry fire from Don Jose's vessel. 

O'Brien, with his men, joined Blake at this critical time. 

This welcome reinforcement gave Blake and his men fresh 
hope and courage. 

" Now, lads ! Now, O'Brien, let's give them another 
charge, drive them overboard, and then trust to our broad- 
side guns." 

" Hold ! " cried O'Brien. " Cast off from the Vendetta 
first." 

"Hang the Vendetta!" shouted Blake, excitedly. "She's 
a wreck, and we need not trouble about her." 

" But we must, Captain Blake," O'Brien shouted in reply, 
' Bosco has put a slow match to her powder-magazine." 

It was fully a minute before the grappling-hooks could be 
cast off, and the Avenger cleared of the Vendetta. 

" Go ahead with the engines !" roared Blake through the 
speaking-trumpet. 

The Avenger was fast to the Maritana, so when she went 
a-head she dragged the latter vessel with her. 

Don Jose's vessel and that of Blake, locked together in a 
deadly embrace, were soon clear of the Vendetta. 

Seeking shelter as much as possible behind the hastily 
thrown up barricade, Blake ordered his men to keep up a 
slow fire on the Spaniards, who held the fore-part of the deck. 

Meanwhile, the riflemen on board the Maritana, who had 
now got into the rigging and the tops of the vessel, did 
fearful havoc among the little party of Englishmen. 

Ten men were already dead or wounded, and each minute 
some one was hit. 

It was impossible to get under shelter from the fire of the 
rifles, as the deck of the Avenger was completely commanded 
from the tops and rigging of the Maritana, 

'O'Brien, my boy, this can't last," said Blake, to his 
friebd ■. " 3ee, they are turning some of the forward guns on 
us." 

This was unfortunately too true. 



ttitEXPECTED Alt). 241 

The Spaniards held the whole fore-part of the deck, and 
having run in some of the guns, were proceeding to load and 
point them towards the little band of Englishmen. 

"They'll smash up the barricade at the first discharge," 
said O'Brien. " We're done for, Blake, my boy." 

" It is the fortune of war," replied the captain of the 
Avenger. " There is one chance left. We must charge 
them, and at all events, can but die sword in hand. Hark to 
what the scoundrel, Don Jose, is shouting. We can expect 
no mercy." 

" Death to the English ! " Don Jose was roaring through 
the speaking-trumpet from the poop of the Maritana ; ''kill 
them all — no quarter ! Fifty doubloons for every dead 
Englishman ! " 

" Now, my lads," cried Blake, addressing his men, " we 
are about to charge the enemy. It is our only chance. It 
is useless standing here to be picked off one by one. Follow 
me, lads. Death or glory. Hurrah for the Avenger ! " 

As he finished, the Englishmen cheered, and closing up 
together, made ready to charge in a body — the men with the 
boarding-pikes in the front rank. 

But the cheer from the men of the Avenger was almost 
instantly followed by another — a. shout from many voices, 
certainly not of Spaniards. And then was heard the roar 
of big guns, followed by a rattling volley of musketry. 

" What the devil is that ? " cried O'Brien. 

" We're saved — we're saved !" shouted Blake ; " a strangfl 
ship has come to our aid, and is firing into the Spaniard ou 
the other side." 

This was a fact. 

Through the smoke the masts and funnel of a big ship 
could be discerned ; her bulwarks and rigging crowded with 
men who were loading and firing as rapidly as possible into 
the Maritana." 

" Hurrah, lads ! Charge ! Follow me, and drive the 
dons overboard." 

And then, led by Blake, the Englishmen leaped over the 
barricade, and rushed at the Spaniards. 



242 Love's treason. 

CHATTER LXXV 

blood's thicker than water. 

Of late we have lost sight of the American frigate, the 
Rapldan, and it is time we had a look at her and her 
proceedings. 

We lei't her in sight of the two vessels, the Avenger and 
the Vendetta, her captain eagerly watching the affair, and so 
manoeuvring the vessel, as to keep out of view as much as 
possible, and yet still be able to watch the nght. 

" Snakes and glory ! " said the first lieutenant to the 
captain, " I do hope that cussed pirate will get licked by 
the Britisher ! " 

" I reckon that's about a certain fact," remarked the 
captain ; " the Englishman fires quicker and truer a darned 
sight, and he's plumping live shell into him instead of cold 
shot." 

" There goes a blaze and smoke ; reckon she's on fire, 
that Vendeita." 

"And a darned good job too, the piratical scoundrel, to 
go kidnapping a poor girl. I hope the Britisher will blow 
him right bang to pieces. I'd like to have a slap at him 
myself, if it warn't for duty, and that lies in the way of over- 
hauling that cursed rebel pirate, the Turtle Dove." 

" But," said the mate, with a half-smile and a twinkle in 
his eye, " I thought you had settled her business, sunk her 
to the bottom of the sea." 

" Ah ! that was in my dreams. Not but what it'll come 
true enough if ever I do get broadside to broadside with her. 
Twenty minutes I give her, and then down she goes head 
first, just as I saw her in my dream." 

" Jerusalem ! " exclaimed the lieutenant, " if there ain't 
another ship a-crawling up round the sterns of the two 
fighting." 

The Avenger and the Vendetta were now nearly broadside 
to broadside, and the Maritana, unseen by either, was coming 
tip on the port quarter of the English vessel. 

" Snakes and thunder 1 " cried the Yaukee captain. 
" Now I do wonder what that ship's after." 



BLOOD'S THICKER. THAN WATER. 2*13 

" Seems to mo as though she meant to join in the mess." 

A minute or so afterwards the intentions of the third 
vessel were sufficiently apparent, for from the deck of the 
frigate she was seen to lire a broadside into the Arnu/rr. 

" Well, I'm blowed !" said the mate, "the Britisher will 
get pepper now, 1 guess.'' 

" Two to one," said the captain ; " seems to me now, that 
ain't kinder quite fair " 

"Nohow you can fix it, cap n." 

"See here, Mister Lieutenant; seems to me now, that 
Vendetta ain't much belter than a darned pirate." 

" Nary bit, cup' in." 

" And i that other ship that's just, come to help her, and 
nas opened fire on the Britisher, ain't much better.'' 

" Not a darned bit." 

" Seems to me, Mister Lieutenant, that we'll haul up a 
bit closer to where the lighting's going on. Si art the engines 
and steer round the stern of all three vessels, to as to take up a 
position outside all on tho port broadside of this last ship 
that's eomc up." 

" Right you are, eap'n." 

"Just so, mister. Wall, I reckon I'll dive down and 
finish my breakfast. Let me know when we're about fifty 
yards oli'ou the port broadside of the, strange ship." 

" Aye, aye, sir," replied the mate, and then gave the 
necessary orders to the helmsman and to the engineer to go 
ahead with the engines. 

Imitating the mamcuvre of the Mnritmm, the Yankee 
frigate proceeded to make a wide sweep round the stern of the 
three vessels now all hotly engaged. 

And like the Montana, she was able to approach without 
being observed from either of the three ships. 

The attention of all hands on each ship was fully occupied 
with the immediate enemy, and favoured also by the clouds 
of smoke caused by such a cannonade, the Yankee frigate 
took up a position, a little on the port quarter of the Atari- 
tana, and distant less than a hundred fathoms. 

Tho lieutenant in command now stopped the engines, and 
called the captain, who hurried on deck, and rapidly took 
in the state of affairs. 



21 i LOVE'S TREASON. 

" Seems to me that the Britisher's getting the worst of it," 
he remarked. 

" Certain sure." 

" She's beat the cursed pirate on the outside — knocked 
her into a cocked hat, took by the board, and altogether 
given her immortal smash." 

" That's a certain fact, cap'n." 

" And here's this t'other craft, her consort — another 
cursed pirate, I reckon — come up and double- banked her." 

" That's so." 

'• The Britisher can't hold out against such odds. She's 
bound to cave in." 

" That's so." 

"Seemsto me, mister, that ain'taltogether right andsquare." 

" .Nohow you can fix it," replied the lieutenant. 

" I guess it's no business of ours." 

" Right you are, cap'n." 

" But I should like to have a slap at this fellow there. I 
do hate those yellow-faced dons." 

" Same here." 

" We're cruising in these waters to overhaul and capture 
the Turtle Dove:' 

" That's a fact." 

" And neither of these two vessels ain't the Turtle Dove. 

"No." 

" Man the starboard battery, and get riflemen and marines 
all ready in the waist," said the Yankee captain, quietly, 
" and come and report to me when you've done so." 

" Aye, aye, sir," replied the mate, with great alacrity. 

Meanwhile the fight was progressing, as described in the 
last chapter, and the Avenger was getting the worst of it ; 
go much so, that it was obvious she could not long hold out, 
but must be sunk or captured by the Maritana. 

The Yankee captain watched the desperate struggle with 
intense interest. 

" They fight hard, those Britishers," he muttered, " but 
they must be licked — must cave in." 

" All ready with the starboard guns, and the small-arms 
men," the lieutenant reported. 

" Look here, mister," said the Yankee captain, " our 



uEATH OP DON JOSE DE MALATESTA. 245 

business is with the Turtle Dove when we can catch her, 
ain't it ? " 

" That's so, cap'n." 

" Guess Uncle Sam didn't send us out to these seas to 
fight on our own hook." 

" Nary bit." 

"Guess we ain't got no business to interfere with this here 
vessel as is smashing up the Britisher." 

" That's right." 

" But she's a pirate — the consort of that other pirate." 

" That's so." 

"And she ought to have it hot and strong." 

" Serve her right," replied the lieutenant. 

" And I'm bio wed if she shan't," cried the captain, raising 
his voice. " Blood's thicker than water ! Slap into her, 
lads ! Fire with big guns and small arms ! Let her have 
it ! Hurrah for the Rapidan ! " 

And then the Yankee frigate went into the fight, and with 
tremendous effect. 



CHAPTER LXXVI. 

DEATH OP DON JOSE DE MALATESTA. 

The appearance of the Rapidan on the scene was indeed a 
case of Deus ex machina for the Avenger. 

We left, Captain Blake and his little band on the point of 
charging the Spaniards who held possession of the fore-part 
of the deck. 

It was nothing but a forlorn hope — a last desperate 
chance ; and in his heart Blake counted success as almost 
impossible. 

But the roaring guns and the rattling musketry-fire from 
the Yankee put quite a different complexion on the state of 
affairs. 

The men of the Maritana were almost instantly thrown 
into a state of panic, some running below, others rushing to 
and fro in a state of wild confusion. 

As for those who had boarded the Avenger, they quickly 
began to clamber on board their own ship, not waiting for 
$ie Englishmen to charge. 



246 love's treason. 

" Thunder and furies ! " cried Don Jose, furiously, when 
he saw the battle going against him, and perceived the crew 
in a state of panic-terror, and no fight left in them ; " what 
is the meaning of this ? " 

" "We are overmatched," answered the captain ;-" our only 
chance is escape ! " 

" Escape, then, by all means ; send her ahead full speed ! " 
cried Don Jose. 

" Cast off the grapnels ! " shouted Captain Gonzalvez, 
" and go ahead." 

But to get clear of the Avenger was not an easy thing. 

Blake and his men having driven the Spaniards from the 
fore-part of the vessel, now prepared in turn to board the 
Maritana. 

The young commander was hastened in this step by 
learning from the carpenter that the little vessel was filling 
and settling down fast. 

" Boarders away ! " cried Blake ; and then he and 
O'Brien clambered on to the bulwai'ks of the Avenger, and 
in a few moments more had leaped on board the Maritana, 
the crew swarming after them. 

Both vessels were now clear of the Vendetta, having gone 
ahead fully two hundred yards. 

The Bapidan remained calmly where she was, and ceased 
firing, her captain being fully satisfied with the effect the 
first fire and volley of musketry had produced. 

" Guess the Britishers can settle the business themselves 
now, Mister Lieutenant," he said. 

" Guess they have settled it," replied that officer. " The 
dons have run from their guns, scattered like a flock of 
sheep before the wolves." 

" All hands on board this ship 1 " shouted Blake to such 
of his men who still remained on board the other, " the 
Avenger is sinking." 

The instant every man had left Blake's vessel, he gave 
the order to cast off the grappling-irons, and to cut all ropes 
which held the two ships together. 

The engines of the Maritana were still working, while the 
Avenger's had been stopped. 

Consequently, the Maritana, disengaged from the other 



DEATH OF DON JOSE DE MALATESTA. 247 

vessel, went ahead, and was soon a quarter of a mile distant 
from the other three. 

The Vendetta was on fire, the Avenger sinking, while the 
Yankee man-of-war lay-to, looking on. 

Meanwhile, although there was by no means a desperate 
resistance on the part of the Spaniards, the vessel was not 
gained without the interchange of a good many shots and 
the clashing of cutlasses. 

" Surrender ! " shouted Blake, in Spanish, " and your 
lives shall be spared. Down with your arms ! " 

This order was obeyed, the Spaniards, after a few more 
shots, sullenly throwing down their weapons. 

Blake, whose thoughts were on the captive girl in the 
cabin, and for whose safety he had great fears, hastily gave 
orders to his officers to see to the disarming and making 
secure of the Spanish crew. 

Then he himself, sword in hand, went down into the 
cabin, followed only by Jack O'Brien. 

A cry of joy from the fair Giulia herself apprised him 
that she was alive and safe, and next his eyes fell on Don 
Jose de Malatesta, who stood like a tiger at bay, with 
glaring eyeballs, altogether a picture of a baffled and de- 
feated villain. 

He knew not what would be his fate, but had no reason 
to expect any mercy from the conquerors, or from the Spanish 
authorities should he be given up to them, urged as they 
would be to inflict on him the utmost penalty of the law, 
bv the Marquis d'Almaviras and the rest of Giulia's 
friends. 

Blake's blood was now thoroughly up. He felt the ex- 
citement of the strife, the battle fury was on him, and he 
longed to cross swords with the villain who stood half 
cowed — sullen, but still with a remnant of insolent defiance 
in his face and bearing. 

" Don Jose de Malatesta ! Thief — traitor — villain ! at 
last I have you ; defend yourself ! " 

Both were armed with swords, and Blake advancing, 
vigorously they crossed blades. 

" Stand back, O'Brien," cried Blake ; " villain as he is, I 
will give him fair play — let him fight for hjs life — yes, your 



248 LOVE'S TREASON. 

life, Don Jose," he added, pressing him harder and harder ; 
" it is for your life you are fighting." 

The Spaniard at this moment warded off a fierce cut at 
the head, and Blake, not recovering himse'f soon enough 
after the blow, Don Jose was able to inflict a flesh wouud 
on the right arm of his antagonist. Giulia, spectatress 
of this duel, gave a faint cry as she saw her champion 
wounded. 

A moment or two afterwards she shrieked aloud, and hid 
her eyes with her hands. 

Blake, infuriated by the pain of the wound, made a fierce 
assault on Don Jose. 

One cut the latter warded off, one thrust he parried, but 
the next instant Blake's sword flashed beneath his antago- 
nist's guard, the keen blue steel going hissing right through 
the body of the Spanish nobleman. 

The thrust was so vigorously and fiercely delivered, that 
the hilt of the sword came thump against Don Jose's breast, 
and with a groan he fell to the deck, writhing in the agonies 
of death. 

" So perish all such treacherous villains ! " said Blake, 
quietly withdrawing his sword from the still breathing body. 
'•Senorita Giulia d'Almaviras, allow me to congratulate you 
on the issue of the fight. Your enemy is dead, and you 
are safe in the hands of friends, who will dispose of you as 
you may think fit." 

She offered her hand, unable to speak from excitement 
and emotion. 

The next instant there was a flash of lurid fire, followed 
by a great roar. 



EPILOGUE 

Some few weeks have elapsed since the memorable sea-fight 
in which the four vessels — the Avenger, the lendetta, the 
Maritana, and Rapidan — were engaged, in which the two 
former were destroyed. 

It i-i evening — one of those clear, starlight nights only to 
be witnessed in the tropins. 

There is high festival at the Villa Castelmarina, the 
country house of the Marquis d'Almaviras. 



EPILOGS. 249 

There is a grand gala to celebrate the recovery of his 
daughter, and in honour of her deliverer, the gallant English- 
man, Edward Blake, who, on this night, is the hero of the 
hour, the -observed of all observers. 

Myriads of coloured lights, with which every tree an<? 
every shrub in the beautiful and spacious gardens are 
plentifully sprinkled, have the effect of almost turning night 
into day> so far as illumination is concerned. 

Most of the ships in the bay are also lighted up in honour 
of the event, for the marquis is very wealthy, besides com- 
manding great influence and respect, and all Havannah 
just at this time is ringing with the news of the abduction 
of his daughter, her rescue by the Englishman, Blake, the 
death of Don Jose de Malatesta, the instigator of the out- 
rage ; also the story of the sea-fight between the Avenger, 
the Vendetta, and the Maritana ; and the destruction of one 
and capture of the last has been told over and over again in 
many a posada and cafe. 

Scores of boats, too, dot the placid surface of the bay, 
each carrying several lights, and altogether the scene is a 
most beautiful and striking one. 

The Villa Castelmarina itself is a blaze of light from 
basement to roof, and around this centre, like stars and 
planets about a central sun, the illumination of the gardens 
and bay itself spreads gradually, becoming fainter and 
fainter, till, in the far distance, the lights of the boats 
twinkle like little stars on the surface of the calm sea. 

It has been arranged that a grand display of fireworks 
from boats and small vessels moored a short distance from 
the end of the gardens, the soft turf of which slopes down to 
the sea, shall commence the festivities. 

A splendid band playing the national anthem of England, 
out of compliment to Edward Blake, is the signal that the 
fireworks are about to commence. 

The guests, who were assembled in the grand saloon, 
and promenading about the spacious corridors and other 
chambers,hastened out into thegrounds to witness the display. 

The fireworks were of the most elaborate description, no 
expense having been spared to render the affair as splendid 
and perfect as possible. 



250 love's treason. 

The display was to conclude with an explosion on a grand 
scale. 

The Maritana, so gallantly captured by Edward Blake and 
his brave crew, was to be blown up at a given signal. 

She was moored about half a mile from the shore, and a 
clear space was kept all around her for a circuit of about 
five hundred yards, so that no damage might be done by 
falling fragments. 

A rocket shooting up to the sky from one of the balconies 
of the Villa Casteltuarina was the first s goal. 

Instantly red and blue lights blazed our all over the ship, 
and her hull and spars were plainly visible. 

Then a boat wa> observed rapidly rowing away from her, 
and in a short time it was seen that she was on tire in 
various places. 

Barrels of tar and turpentine and other combustibles 
had been purposely spilled over her decks, so that in a very 
short space of time the fire burned furiously and the vessel 
was enveloped in a sheet of flame. 

One by one, with a great crash, the masts and funnels fell, 
and all now looked forward to the grand blow-up, which 
might be expected at any moment. 

At last, after some minutes of anxious suspense, a great 
flash and then a vast jet of flame is seen to shoot upwards to 
the sky. 

Then suddenly there is a great canopy of smoke followed 
by the dull roar of the explosion. 

And then, save for the burning fragments, which fall 
hurtling through the air, and into the sea, all is dark where 
the vessel lay. 

Such was the well-merited end of another of the three 
ships engaged in the great sea-fight we hav-> described. 

The Vendetta, the Acenger, and now the ILiritana, have all 
been sunk or destroyed ; the two first in the course of the 
stirring adventures we have described, the latter as a mani- 
festation of the joi of the marquis, and a celebration of the 
triumph of right over wrong in the rescue of the lovely Giulia 

d'Almaviras and the death of the villain Dou Jose. 
* # # # # 

After the blow-up of the ALaritana, which concluded the 



EPILOGUE. 251 

display of fireworks, most of the guests sought the grand 
saloon, where the magnificent orchestra of the opera, lent 
specially for this occasion, performed dance music. 

Some, however, preferred to stroll about the smooth gravel 
walks of the grounds, bordered by orange and citron trees 
and choice shrubs, and sloping gently down to the sea which 
rippled on the shore. 

There is no moon, but the myriads of variegated lamps, 
hung; in every possible place, give ample light. 

The air is soft and balmy, and laden with the scent of 
orange, jessamine, and many other flowers with which the 
gardens of the Villa Castelmarina abound. 

Amongst those who prefer the quiet and tranquil enjoy- 
ment of a stroll about the beautiful grounds, are two couples 
to whom we wish to draw the reader's attention. 

The first are Edward Blake and Giulia d'Almaviras — the 
gazelle rescued from the very jaws of the tiger. 

The other couple, by no means following closely to the 
first, keeping always at a good distance, so as to be out of 
earshot, are John O'Brien and Giulia's fair American friend, 
Ethelinda Verinder. 

Whatever may be the case with Blake and the senorita 
Giulia, it is abundantly evident that the Irishman has plenty 
to say, for, in fact, he is urging his suit with all the impul- 
siveness and engery of his nature. 

Not yet recovered from the effects of the wounds received 
during the cruise for the rescue of the marquis's daughter, 
he is yet able to make love in a most vehement, almost 
audacious, manner, to his lovely companion. 

Let us listen to a little of the conversation, just the wind 
up of it. 

" Ah, now, Miss Verinder, you will be reasonable, I am 
sure." 

'■ Reasonable," replied the young lady, laughing, and yet 
evidently not displeased, " I think I am a great deal too 
reasonable. You certainly are a most audacious suitor." 

" ' Faint heart never won fair lady,' " remarked 
O'Brien. 

" That may be ; but it by no means follows that a mad cap 
naval officer, no matter how brave his heart may be, should 



232 love's treason. 

carry by storm every lady whom he may choose to honour 
with his addresses." 

"But, see here, Miss Verinder," urged O'Brien ; "if you 
won't have me, I shall just go right away from this place, 
and so will my friend Blake, I'm sure. And what would 
you do then, I'd like to know, if you were abducted like the 
seuorita, your friend ? "Where would you find two such fine 
fellows as myself and Ned Blake to take the sea and rescue 

you?" 

" Upon my word, Mr. O'Brien, you speak of my being 
abducted as though it was a very common tiling here ; 
indeed, almost to be expected." 

" Common or uncommon, we're the boys who will see 
you safe through that or any other dauger, and wjll make 
your enemies smart for auy injury they may attempt against 
you." 

" I don't doubt either your will, courage, or determination , 
Mr. O'Brien," said the young lady, rather seriously. 

" That's right," pursued O'Brien, pushing his advantage ; 
" then just say the few words I want you to." 

" No, no, I cannot." 

"Ah ! but you will now, just to oblige me," he urged, 
taking her hand, which she allowed him to hold unresistingly. 

" You are an English naval officer, and I have made a vow 
to myself that I will never marry an En«;lish r iian." 

" I am not an Englishman, but an Irishnan." 

" No matter ; you are a British subject '' 

" I will get myself naturalized in the United States." 

"You are an English naval officer." 

"No, I have thrown up my commission." 

" Oh ! dear, oh ! dear ; was there ever such a man ? I 
declare you are the most indefatigable tormentor I ever met 
or heard of." 

" Then, just say what I ask you, and I'll torment you no 
more." 

As he spoke, he took h^r other hand, and now held her 
prisoner by both, looking her in the eyes in the most im- 
passioned manner. 

" Leave go my hands, sir." 

"Not until you say what I wish." 



EPILOGUE. 253 

" Mr. O'Brien, this is too bad of yon. Release my 
hands." 

" Ah ! Miss Verinder, say but the few words I want ; it ia 
so little trouble to you. Just one sentence." 

" What is it you wish me to say ?' ' 

" That you accept of my proposals." 

" Well, I will think about it. There, now let go my 
hands." 

He did so, satisfied with having elicited thus much from 
the young lady. 

For who dees not know what a woman means in her heart 
when she says she will think about entertaining any proposal? 

" She who hesitates is lost," was true in this case, so far 
as this, that in agreeing to " think about," Ethelinda Verin- 
der virtually promised to lend a favourable ear to, Jack 
O'B lien's bold suit. 

Meanwhile the other couple, Edward Blake and the lovely 
Giulia d'Almaviras, were not a whit less earnestly, we may 
even say agreeably, engaged. 

They were evidently on the most friendly terms, she 
leaning on his arm, and looking in his face ever and anon, 
with an expression on her beautiful features which a greater 
saint than St. Anthony could never have withstood. 

" And now, Giulia," said the young man, " I am coming 
to something else. I have listened to your praises, your 
flattering words, your expressions of gratitude for the service 
I was fortune enough to render you, till I feel quite ashamed. 
You must not think that I did what I did, risked what ] 
did, unselfishly, without hope of reward." 

" What reward ? " she asked, looking a little surprised, 
for she had thought that this gallant Englishman — a very 
hero of romance in her eyes — was above all mercenarj 
motives. 

"You are lovely, Giulia d'Almaviras, the most beautiful 
girl in this island." 

" I have heard so," she said, casting down her eyes. 

"Your father is very rich, and you will be the most 
wealthy heiress in the island." 

" I believe so," she replied, looking up. 

" Well, I made a bargain with your father." 



254 love's treason. 

" What was its nature ? " 

He took a paper from his pocket book and handed it to hef. 

It was in her father's hand- writing, and ran thus— 

" I do hereby promise on my word of honour as a Spanish noble, 
that in the event of Lieutenant Edward Blake, late of the British 
Nav/, rescuing my daughter from her abductors, and restoring her to 
me, that I will give him her hand in marriage, with a suitable dowry 
— not less than ten thousand gold doubloons — and should my said 
daughter be unwilling, I will lay my commands on her to redeem her 
father's plighted word and bestow h r hand on the said Edward Blake. 

" Signed, D'Almayieas." 

She looked at him with surprise, not unmingled with 
horror. 

" And you actually bargained with my father for my h nd, 
and even as to the amount of my dowry ? " 

" So it seems," he replied shortly. 

" And you will hold my father to his word, whether I am 
willing or not." 

" I did not say so." 

" What, then, will you do ? " 

" I will release your father from his promise thus." 

And with the words he tore the document in two and 
handed the pieces to her. 

" And you do not wish the contract you made with my 
father carried out ? " she asked in a faltering voice. 

" Oh, yes, I do, with regard to yourself, most earnestly, 
always provided it is with your consent. But as to the 
dowry, I care nothing for that. I love you, G-iulia, and not 
your wealth." 

Her eyes beamed with pleasure, and she smiled sweetly 
on him. 

" I will give you my answer in an hour's time. Meet me 
in the grand saloon." 

***** 

He was there punctually to the appointed time, and had 
not long to wait before she appeared with her father. 

Leaving the marquis, she hastened up to Blake, and, 
taking him by the hand, led him up to the old noble. 

" Father," she said, " this gentleman had a contract with 
you concerning me.'" 



EPILOGtfE. 255 

" Yes, my child, a contract which must be performed, for 
the word of a Spanish hidalgo is sacred." 

" But, father, this gentleman, in the most honourable 
manner, has consented to forego his claim, and in proof there- 
of has torn up and handed to me the document you signed." 

" Ha ! " cried the marquis joyfully, "then you are free !" 

" I am ; but I shall not long remain so." 

" I do not understand." 

" I will explain," pursued the lovely girl, her eyes 
sparkling, her cheeks flushed with pleasurable excitement. 
" You and all know what this noble Englishman risked for 
me, how he saved me at the imminent peril of his own life. 
Although he foregoes his claim as a matter of right, he is 
still an aspirant for my hand. On my own behalf, I renew 
the contract which you, my father, made. Edward Blake," 
she said, turning to our hero, and extending her hand in the 
presence of all the assembly, and speaking in a clear, audible 
voice, " you have won my heart, take my hand." 

He raised it to his lips, kissed it respectfully, and then 

placing her arm in his, the happy lovers strolled out into 

the open air. 

# # # # # 

We have little more to say. The affair causing the court- 
martial was submitted to the Lords of the Admiralty in its 
true light, the verdict and sentence were reversed, and he 
was honourably reinstated in his former position. 

His granfather died soon after, and having become recon- 
ciled to the young officer, left him his estates. 

He was now Sir Edward Blake, and was not dependent 
on the fortune of the lovely Giulia, the Star of Andalusia, 
whom he shortly afterwards married. 

Jack O'Brien did the same by Ethelinda Verinder, and 
now wishing them all success and blooming children — both 
boys and girls — we will close this story of the 

Avenger and the Vendetta. 



THE FUGITIVE CAVALIER. 



CHAPTER I. 

WHICH FORMS THE PROLOGUE TO OTJR STORY. 

That steam-vomiting monster, the steam-engine, now 
rushes screaming along over the spot where the peaceful 
village of Mossville once stood, and naught remains to mark 
the spot but the ivy-covered ruins of a church tower. 

The last building, except the church, to defy time, weather, 
and modern notions, was an old inn, the posting-place where 
the coach stopped to change horses, and hungry travellers 
alighted to refresh themselves, and exercise their cramped 
limbs. 

The " Crown and Sceptre " — for that was its sign — had 
none of the appearance of the inns to which we are accus- 
tomed now-a-days. It had no ugly red-brick front, with 
cold, glaring windows. No : the exterior of the " Crown and 
Sceptre " had the appearance of offering comfort, and in- 
vited the passer-by to walk within and rest. 

Perhaps no house ever built could boast of so many angles 
and cables ; but we may vouch for the fact that never a 
house was built in so odd a style since the Deluge. 

It had rooms so large that half a dozen candles looked 
like stars on a misty night. 

These were fitted up with huge screens fantastically 
ornamented, to shut out the dreary waste of oaken panel, 
and make comfortable apartments near the fire. 

The "Crown and Sceptre" could also boast of a state- 
room and bed-chamber, in which it was said royalty had ate, 
drank, and slept ; therefore it may be concluded that such 
an establishment could not stand without a share of super- 
stitious lore being attached to it. 

X 



253 THE FUGITIVE CAVALIER. 

Of conrse the place was haunted — if not, why should the 
wind tale such a fancy to its old corridors and rooms, and 
go moaning up and down, in and out, in a restless manner, 
long after all was (-till without ; and who can account for 
the noises heard by the servants at ni«ht. of heavy footsteps 
on the stnirs, the rattling of chains, and stifled groans in the 
stillness of the night ? 

It was towards the close of the eighteenth day of June, 
1645, that a party of gaily-dressed Cavaliers, six in number, 
rode slowly up the hill on the summit of which stood the 
hostelry of which we have been speaking. 

The appearance of the horses and men themselves denoted 
that they had travelled in haste. Their steeds were covered 
with foam, and the men with dust. 

"At last ! " said the foremost, a fine-looking gentleman 
of about forty years. "At last we are in Mossville 
again. I little thought, Granville," he said, turning and 
speaking to the nearest, " that I should ever see the place 
again." 

"Nor I, Sir Ingram Halliday," returned the Cavalier 
addressed ; " nor is it with feelings of pleasure that I enter, 
as we return from the field beaten and disgraced, our king 
a fugitive, and we like hunted deer with the blood-hounds 
on our track." 

"Tut, Granville !" returned Sir Ingram; "there is light 
and shade to every picture. Grant that the king's followers 
have been beaten — ignominiously beaten if thou wilt — but 
dost thou not think the royal standard will be unfurled 
again ? Aye, Granville, and the glory of his poor, scattered 
army redeemed ! " 

" I would that I could think so," returned the other, 
sadly ; " but be it as it may, it is useless to give way to 
despair. I will hope for the best, and gladly unsheath my 
sword again at the first opportunity." 

They were now opposite the " Crown and Sceptre," and 
John Barton, the landlord, standing in the porch, sainted 
Sir Ingram Halliday. 

" Thou hast heard the news, honest John ? " said tin- 
knight, returning the salute. 



PROLOGUE. 2 5 'J 

" Marry ! an' I have rot," returned John Barton. " God 
grant that it may be good ! " 

" I would that I could confirm thy wish ! '' said Sir Ingram. 
" The tidings are of the worst. The king's army was broken 
up at Naseby, and his majesty himself is now a fugitive." 

" God save him ! " said John, sadly. "I fear, Sir Ingram, 
that such folk as I will fare badly in the hands of the 
Puritans." 

" Keep a good heart," returned Sir Ingram. " The king 
is yet alive, and there are many yet willing to serve him. 
Farewell. Shouldst thou hear news upon which thou canst 
rely, send it me, for I must away to the Hall to prepare for 
its defence." 

The landlord of the inn stood gazing at the retreating 
forms of the Cavaliers until they were lost in the winding of 
the road, and then, turning to the knot of people who had 
gathered round the inn, attracted by the sight of the Cava- 
liers, said — 

" Now, cry ye mercy, ye people of Mossville," he said ; 
" for the king — confound his enemies ! — is defeated again. 
Marry ! we shall soon have the wolves here. Such fat lands 
and full orchards as Mossville contains have not escaped 
their hawkish eyes. Zooks ! what are we to expect when 
these free-thinking, hypocritical Soundheads are not content 
with defeating the king's army, but are hunting them down, 
and slaughtering them, as if they were so many dogs ? What 
will become of us, I ask." 

" But, Master Barton," cried a voice, " Cromwell has 
proclaimed that he bears no personal animosity against 
either the king or his followers : but what he does is for the 
people's good. He is not accountable for the deeds of his 
officers." 

" Zounds ! " returned John ; " the sheep has little cause 
to ask the name of his butcher when the knife is in his 
throat." 

"Thou art right, honest John," replied another from the 
crowd ; " Cromwell seeks his own aggrandisement as much 
as the good of the nation. He would make a footstool of 
the crown, and wear it afterwards." 



260 THE FUGITIVE CAVALIER. 

" Give me thy hand, Master Watkins," said mine host, 
"for thou art as honest a mau as ever crossed the threshold 
of the ' Crown and Sceptre.' " 

John was about to seize the proffered hand, when a mur- 
muring arose among the people, increasing to a cry of — 

" Soldiers ! soldiers ! " 

Shading his eyes with his hand, John Barton gazed in 
the direction indicated, and, as he did so, his rubicund face 
paled . 

" Now, hang me on my own sign ! " he cried, " but we 
are undone ; for, as I live, a body of Oliver Cromwell's 
heavy cavalry are crossing the hill. But it proves the 
old saying-, that if you talk of the devil, either he or one of 
his imps will appear ; and this time he has sent a hundred 
to prove the old adage. (Sir Ingram will be too late." 

Covered with dust, with sunburnt features, and other signs 
of travel upon them, a troop of Eouudhead cavalry rode 
slowly towards the peaceful village of Mossville. 

They were evidently, by their appearance, all picked men, 
and those who had seen rough service. 

Clad in buff coats, large, loose hose of calf-skin, si eel caps 
and corslets, and armed with long, heavy swords and a pair 
of heavy pistols, they looked very warlike. 

At their head rode two persons : one, by his uniform, 
announced himself as the captain or commander of the troop — 
a man of middle stature, his figure thickly set, a pair of jet 
black eyes, and a grizzly beard to match ; the other — a long, 
thin, greasy-looking individual, mounted on a bony horse, 
which well matched his lank, ungainly figure. 

He was clad in a long garment of sad-coloured brown, to 
which was attached a collar of plain linen ; black hose, and 
a pair of shoes with black rosettes. 

" We are expected, I see," said the officer in command, 
turning to his strange companion. " So much the better ; 
for, zounds ! they must play us no pranks, or, by our 
mighty general, Cromwell — perish his enemies ! " 

"Amen!" interrupted the Roundhead, in a sepulchral, 
twanging tone, turning up his eyes until only the whites 
were visible. 



£bologue. 26 i 

"They shall know what cold steel and lead mean," con- 
tinued the officer. " I have the warrant, and will act upon 
it to the letter." 

"Ay, ay ! worthy Master Goodall," returned the Round- 
head ; but nothing must be done rashly ; remember 
that I " 

" Have found favour in Cromwell's eyes, and had the 
luck to fall into a good estate," interrupted the officer, 
smiling grimly. " Fear not, Jabez Carter: nothing shall be 
done until the Royalist rats are driven from their homes, 
and you settled quietly down. But, beshrew me ! these 
country bumpkins, who would lick the dust from the shoes 
of their present master, Sir Ingram Halliday, will do the 
same for thee in a month's time." 

" Is it your intention to stop in the village ? " asked Carter. 

" Yes," returned Goodall ; " both men and horses are 
tired. An hour or two will make little difference." 

"As thou wilt," replied Carter; "but let us not betray 
Dur errand, for these country folk are devoted to their 
master, and might show their devotion by attacking us." 

" Pshaw ! " said the captaiD, " thou canst know but little of 
the lower classes. But here is an inn, an' if I am not mis- 
taken, contains enough provender for our band. What ho, 
there, sir host ! It is well thou hast shown thyself. Bring 
forth what thou hast in thy house — the best both to eat and 
drink — if thou hast no wish to see the roof of thy house 
tumble about thy ears." 

" Thou art a bold cock to crow so loudly," said John 
Barton, "and it is well for thee that thou hast a hundred 
at thy back. Wert thou alone, thou wouldst sing another 
tune." 

" Hold thy saucy tongue, if thou hast any wish to keep 
it," returned Goodall, " and do as thou art bid. If thou 
M r ouldf!t know more, learn that the traitor-king has been 
defeated, and that General Cromwell has sent me here with 
these honest men, to take possession of Mossviile Hall." 

" Which may not be so great news to me as thou mayst 
think," returned the landlord ; " but enter if thou wilt, for 
indeed now all is thine." 



262 THE FUGITIVE CAVALIER. 

" Spoken like a sensible man," said the officer, dismount- 
ing- ; « I will not forget this." 

John Barton turned and entered the inn, and meeting an 
ostler in the passage, stopped hiin, and said — 

" Jocelyn, hasten thou to the Hall, and acquaint Sir 
Ingram that the Ironsides are here. Run as if thou hadst 
wings to thy feet, for not a moment is to be lost." 



CHAPTER II. 

WHAT HAPPENED AT THE HALL. 

Sir Ingram and his few trusty followers rode towards the 
home of his ancestors, totally unconscious that the Round- 
heads were so near. 

Arriving at the Hall, he gave orders for his retainers to 
hold themselves in readiness at a moment's notice, and for 
the drawbridge to be raised. 

The grand entrance to the Hall boasted of a portcullis, 
but the machinery was rusty, and. out of repair, and Sir 
Ingram therefore relied entirely upon the hope that he 
could hold the Hall by keeping up a heavy fiie from the 
roof and windows, or drive the invaders into the moat, 
should it come to a hand-to-hand fight. 

The men, having seen their horses stabled and well fed, 
entered the Hall, and prepared to refresh the inner man. 

They had, however, scarcely sat down, when a voice f'min 
the opposite side of the moat attracted their attention, and 
one of them rising, went to a window and beheld Jocelyn, 
the ostler, almost breathless with running, endeavouring to 
make himself heard. 

" What wouldst thou ? " cried the soldier, from the win- 
dow. " Art mad ? " 

" There be a couple o' hundred o' Ironsides at the ' Crown 
and Sceptre,'" shouted Jocelyn, "an' they will be here in 
an hour." 

" Thou art sure of this ? " inquired the man. 

"As I am that I am standing here," replied Jocel\n. 
" I saw them with my own eyes." 



WHAT HAPPENED AT THE HALL. 283 

" Enough, good fellow," returned the man. " I shall re- 
member thy face. Away,, for thy life is not safe ; and it 
were a pity thy good service should be rewarded with 
death." 

The man, turning to acquaint his comrades of the news, 
found that they had heard sufficient to understand the im- 
port of Jocelyn's communication, and had all risen from 
their seats, their swords drawn. 

" I will to Sir Ingram," said the man who had spoken to 
Jocelyn. 

He rushed from the room, and ran, sword in hand, up the 
stairs leading to Sir Ingram's apartments. 

He found the knight engaged with Lord Granville, Sir 
Horace Temple, and two or three other devoted friends and 
Cavaliers, who rose as the man entered, and whose eyes 
gleamed and faces flushed as they heard the news. 

" Let them come," cried Sir Ingram — " the crop-eared, 
canting knaves ! While there is an unbroken sword or a 
charge of powder, it shall never be said that Mossville Hall 
surrendered to a handful of Noll Cromwell's bloodhounds ! 
Ring the alarm bell ! " he continued, turning to the soldier; 
"and see that the two falconets on the roof are ready for 
use ; collect all the arms possible, guard the entrance, and, 
when I appear, let every man be ready. And thou, Gran- 
ville," he said, as the soldier bowed and left the apartment, 
" wilt take a dozen picked men and defend the left wing." 

" Sir Ingram," replied the young lord, " as thou knowest, 
my sword is at the king's service : but pardon me if I ask if 
this resistance will save the Hall. Consider, that to 
surrender, although so uncavalier-like, and so much against 
the wish of us all, may perhaps not only save this grand 
old mansion, but thy life. Nay, Sir Ingram, do not judge 
me harshly, for I am ready, and at thy command ; but con- 
sider, ere it be too late." 

"Is it thou, Granville," cried Sir Ingram, fiercely, "who 
wonldst have me taint mine honour by surrendering to the 
base-born churls ? I tell you no ; if 1 fall, I believe my 
death will be avenged ; and, God be thanked, my son is 
safe in Oxford ! If there be one here," he went on, fuming, 



264 THE FUGITIVE CAVALIER. 

" who is not willing to join me, let him depart while there 
is time, for I swear by my father's name, that while four 
walls of this house remain they shall find me here ! " 

"Forgive me, Sir Ingram/' said Granville, "if I have 
spoken too harshly. God grant that all will be well ! I am 
ready." 

" It is not thou who shouldst ask forgiveness," said Sir 
Ingram ; " it is I who spoke harshly. But come, the buff- 
coated dogs will not wait for us. Let us away, see to the 
ammunition, and station our forces." 

Beady, with their pikes and pieces, stood the men, wait- 
ing for orders from Sir Ingram. 

They were holding a conversation as to the probability 
of success. 

" I fear," said one, " that we shall make a sorry show in 
this matter." 

" Why," roared another, who was sergeant to the party, 
striking his piece upon the floor, so that the hall rang with the 
echo, " is there a man so chicken-hearted as to fear to face 
a crop-eared bastard ? Peace be to the ashes of the builder, 
say I, for running a moat round the house ! He was a man 
of sense, and with an eve to the future." 

" The ra«»dt will avail us but little," said the first speaker. 

"Bah ! " returned the seraeanb ; " prate not, but look to 
thy powder. Sir Ingram is not the man to be frightened 
by a paltry troop of horse. At any rate, we shall have the 
pleasure of peppering a few of them." 

Sir Ingram here appeared, and, in a quiet tone, made a 
short speech, appealing to his trusty followers, which was 
received with tremendous cheers, and then give out the 
necessary orders, and divided the men, about sixty in number, 
into four portions. 

"I will guard the entrance," he said ; " I should be in 
the front — aye, and strike the blow at the first man who 
crosses the threshold." 

The last words hnd scarcely escaped Sir Ingram's lips, 
when the sound of hoofs was beard, and presently the troop 
of Ironsides appeared, their swords jangling, aud theif 
armour glistening in the sun. 



WHAT HAPPENED AT THE HALL. 265 

"Who is that at their head ?" asked Sir Ingram, of Sir 
Horace Temple ; " I seem to know the face." 

" By St. George," cried Sir Horace, " it is Noll's favour- 
ite cut-throat, a fellow who is known among his companions 
as Worthy Goodall ! I know the villain, and long to cross 
swords with him. See, the trumpeter is about to summon 
us to surrender." 

The loud, brazen summons which followed these words, 
after echoing through the hall and vaulted passages 
of the old mansion, startled the cattle that were browsing 
in the meadows, and then died suddenly away in the 
adjacent forest. 

Sir Ingram stepped to the front and demanded their 
business, to which Goodall replied that as he, Sir Ingram, 
was a friend of the king, and consequently a traitor to the 
cause of the people, it had pleased General Cromwell to 
order him to surrender the Hall to make room for a better 
and fitter person, by name Jabez Carter, to govern the 
estate, and receive such rents and benefits from it as might 
be found belonging and accruing to the same. 

Theanswer from the Cavalier party was a shower of bullets, 
and two Ironsides bit the dust. 

This was quite sufficient answer for the Soundhead officer, 
and the next instant the muskets of the Ironsides rained 
their contents upon the outer walls of Mossville Hall ; but, 
with its drawbridge up, its inmates were, comparatively 
speaking, safe. 

This Goodall knew, yet dared not order his men to cross 
the moat, as he felt certain they would be repulsed with 
great loss ; but night was coming on, and he might find 
some weakly-guarded spot, and force an entrance. 

The sun went down, and the shades of evening, mingled 
with the smoke of discharged powder, settled down upon the 
old mansion. Darker and darker, until the building disap- 
peared altogether, save when a flash from one of the guns 
lit up the air for an instant. 

Now came the time when the utmost vigilance was needed 
on the part of the little party of Royalists. Out-numbered 
three to one, they were ftilly aware they stood no chance ha 



266 THE FUGITIVE CAVALIER. 

a hand-to-hand conflict, but keeping the enemy on the other 
side of the moat, all would be well. 

But how was this to be done ? Sir Ingram was thinking 
the matter over, when suddenly a jell of terror and rage 
came from his men, and to his consternation he beheld the 
drawbridge give way, and fall crashing to the other side of 
the moat. 

The Ironsides who had accomplished this feat had waded 
the moat, and creeping silently up the bank, loosened the 
chains — with what result we know. 

Concealment was now useless, and they rushed into the 
entrance, to be met by a dozen pikes and swords, but in a 
second their comrades were at their backs, and now the 
hand-to-hand fight began. 

The Eoyalist party fought bravely, and for more than an 
hour held their ground ; but at last the tide turned, they 
fell back inch by inch, disputing the ground as they 
retreated ; but when Sir Ingram fell, the remaining few 
turned and fled. 

* • # * * 

That night the troop of Ironsides made merry in Mossville 
Hall. Jabez Carter was master, and the good old knight, 
Sir Ingram Halliday, lay on the floor of the chamber of the 
room in which he had first seen light, a corpse ; a stream of 
blood trickling slowly from a gash in his side, oozing from 
the wound, and streaming upon the carpet, as if attempting 
to write the murderer's name. 



CHAPTER III. 

THIRTEEN YEARS AFTER. 

It is evening ; the sky obscured by sullen, angry clouds, 
which hide the glory of the setting sun. 

The day had been hot ; a day to turn the grass to tinder, 
and to tinge the green corn. 

All is still. No longer is the rumbling of wheels heard, 
nor the voices of labourers returning from their work. 



THIRTEEN TEARS AFTER. 267 

All is silent. There is an unnatural hush in the air ; the 
birds have ceased to twitter, and the very flowers hang their 
heads, as if in dread expectancy of the coining night. 

To the- practised eye, a storm is brewing ; and as the 
hours pass, the heat becomes more oppressive, and black 
patches of jagged cloud appear on the horizon — advance- 
guards to a terrible army behind. 

Night is coming on apace, and with the darkness the 
distant rumbling of thunder. 

Then broad sheets of flame shoot up from behind the 
hills, a few drops of rain, increasing to a deluge, and the 
storm has burst over Mossville. 

At the time when the thunder seemed to rend the very 
air, and jagged streaks of lightning threatened destruction 
on all sides, the dusty roads transformed to rivers, two men 
were straggling into the village. 

They were both young, handsome fellows ; and although 
they were clad in the hideous garb of the period, and that 
very scantily, they had a superior deportment, which 
nothing could disguise. 

"By my sword," said one, shaking the water from his 
hat, " this is the first time I ever verified the fact of rain in 
bucketsful. I am as wet and cold as a leech in a horse- 
pond. What say you, Martin ? "Was it ever your luck to 
be out in such a scene ? " 

" I know not, nor care," replied the other, " so that we 
reach honest John Barton's to-night, for there we are certain 
of a hearty welcome, a change of clothes, and a good meal." 

" Pray Heaven you are right, Martin ! " returned the 
first speaker. " But what if this John Barton is dead — 
hung for being a Royalist, or kicked out of his own house ? " 

" I fear not, Temple," returned the young man addressed 
as Martin. "If honest John is alive, we shall find him 
among his wine-measures. See, there is the house, in the 
street, and there the old sign." 

" Yes," returned Temple, as a flash of lightning made 
everything as plain as day ; "and a flattering portrait of 
that arch-villain, Cromwell, painted upon it." 
"Hush, Temple I" returned Martin; "the very hedge- 



J68 THE FUGITIVE CAVALIEft. 

rows have ears nowadays, and every ear of wheat is gifted 
with the sense of hearing." 

" I care not," returned Temple. " May the thunder bear 
my curse to the villain's ears ! " 

" Tut, Harry ! " said Martin ; " this is folly — madness ! " 

•'Neither so foolish nor so mad as your visit to this 
place," replied Harry Temple. " But I am with you for 
ever. We have been hunted together, starved together, 
fought together, and, as I pray for the restoration of King 
Charles, we'll die together." 

Tnis brought them to the " Lord Protector," in days gone 
by the " Crown and Sceptre." 

A light gleamed from within, and Harry Temple, peering 
into the room, beheld two or three figures, garbed in the 
strictest Puritan style, seated round a table. 

"My worst fears are confirmed," he said, approaching 
Martin, who was endeavouring to relieve his heavy boots of 
as much mud as possible. " Look in there. Your honest 
friend, from your description of him, never courted 6uch 
company as that." 

" Poor John ! " said Martin, as he returned from the 
window ; " I wonder what his fate has been. But, friends or 
foes, we must rest ; another night in the open air would 
cure all earthly ills." 

"Lead on," returned Harry Temple ; "I am with you 
A dmiitiht of sack, and I care not what follows." 

"House, there I house!" shouted Martin, tapping the 
door smartly with the hilt of his sword. " What ho, there ! 
house ! " 

There was a shuffling of feet in a passage, and the door 
was partly opened. 

" What would you ? " asked somebody in a twanging 
tone of voice. " The hour is late, and no more wine will be 
served." 

" We are a pair of travellers, drenched to the skin," said 
Temple ; " with light purses, but enough to reward you if 
you can but give us something to eat and drink, and a bed 
of clean straw." 

" Then come in, in God's name I " said the man, his voice 



FIFTEEN YEARS AFTER. 2K*.i 

altering wonderfully. " This is not a night for a dog to be 
abroad in, much more a human being." 

Martin rushed forward and whispered something in his 
ear, catching the innkeeper's hand. " Nay, speak not aloud," 
lie went on. " Temple, watch yonder door, and see that no 
one is listening." 

John Barton — for the same John Barton it was — could do 
nothing but stare at Martin in a stupefied manner. 

" Aye, John," he continued, " you may look astonished, 
but it is he that stands before you ; but call me not so, call 
me Martin, but beware of mentioning my name, for if I am 
found, certain death will be the consequence." 

" Hold up thy head," said John. " Yes, thou art indeed 
he, and, by my soul, thou art welcome here to-night ! " 

So saying, John Barton secured the door, and led the 
way upstairs. 

"By my sword!" said Harry Temple, flinging himself 
into a chair, " but this is a just reward for all we have suf- 
fered ! A draught of sack, good host, and pray ye send up 
the list of the kitchen, and gadzooks ! make the utmost 
speed, for my stomach is complaining most woefully." 

" The rain, I fear, has washed my appetite away," said 
Martin, smiling ; " but a good night's rest will make me as 
fresh as a daisy ; but zounds ! I know not why I should 
suffer this sodden Roundhead garment to cling about 
me." 

In a twinkling, by some mysterious means, the cloak, 
doublet, hose, and even shoes of the stranger, were strewn 
upon the floor, and the next instant a handsome young 
fellow, clad as a Cavalier, stood before the astonished John 
Barton. 

He wore a doublet of crimson satin, pinked and slashed 
with white tiffany, breeches of the same, silk stockings, and 
a most dainty pair of pumps, upon which glittered diamond 
buckles. 

His companion, Harry Temple, also cast off the puritani- 
cal garment, and appeared dressed in a similar Biyie, but of 
a more rakish cut. 

" Aye, good master," said John, turning to Martin, " thou 



270 THE FUGITIVE CAVALIER. 

art indeed like thy father. Times are changed, and the 
people groan under the burden they bear." 

" Patience, John, patience," replied Martin. " All will be 
well. Every account we have irom London is better than 
the las , and a general rising is expected. Bat, honest 
John, I will speak with thee to-morrow, and inform thee of 
the object of my visit here." 

" I will be gone," said Barton, " and both of thee shall eat 
and drink your fill, and welcome, for the sight of thy faceia 
like seeing the sun after a storm." 

John hastened below to give the necessary orders in the 
kitchen, and, when on the staircase, was startled by a loud 
knocking at the door. 

" What now ! " John growled, and then aloud cried— 
" Who is there ? " 

" Come, master," exclaimed a shrill voice, " dost thou not 
know my knock ? Let me in, I pray thee." 

" Thou imp of darkness," cried the landlord, in return, 
" this house shall be no shelter for thee to-night. Thou 
hast played the truant all day, and it shall cost thee thy bed." 
"Tush, master," returned the shrill voice, "if thou hast 
the sense I have always given thee credit for, thou wilt open 
the door without delay." 

" Why, thou devil's own ?" cried Barton. 
" Because I bring thee news ! " replied the voice. " Quick, 
the rain falls fast, an' if thou makcst me pass a night under 
a hayrick, the tortures of the Star Chamber should not 
mnke me utter a word." 

Mine host, grumbling audibly, shot back the massive 
bolts, and dragged in the owner of the shrill voice. 

It was a boy roughly clad in a tunic of rabbit-skins, and 
hose to match. He wore no covering on his head, but a 
mass of light hair did ample service. 

"Now, thou imp of mischief," said John, holding him at 
arm's length, "what hast thou to say to save thy hr'de a 
tanning ? " 

" Lands off, master," returned the boy, shaking himself 
free. " I can give a good account of myself ; but first let me 
tell tb"s I am not alop ' 



A NARROW ESCAPE. 271 

As he spoke a young fellow strode into the passage and 
enluted Barton. He was a handsome, well-made young 
man — short, curly black hair, and a pair of eyes of the same 
colour, which twinkled and glistened mischievously. He 
was attired in a style between that of the Roundhead and 
Cavalier ; heavy boots of calf-skin, a tunic of black cluth, 
girded at the waist with a belt of leather, and his head was 
partly covered with a rakish little cap, which was worn over 
the right ear. 

" Good morrow, master," gaid the stranger. " I would 
rest here to-night, if thou hast accommodation." 

" There is room enough," returned John Barton, eyeing 
the stranger from head to foot, " but — " 

" No ' buts,' good host. I ask not for much — a little bread, 
meat, and a draught of beer. I am no loitering lozel, who 
wish to eat and drink, and pay thee with spiritual coin, such 
as singing a hymn, or an extempore sermon. Besides, I 
have news for thee." 

He whispered a few words in Barton's ear, whose face 
lost a portion c f its vinegar, and smiled upon the straDger. 

"Good!" said John. "Thou shalt want for nothing ; 
but these tidings have come too late. He is here now, rest- 
ing under this very roof." 

" Thank God ! " said the stranger, fervently. " Tell him 
that Hugh Walbrook is here, whole in skin, sound in bone." 



CHAPTER IV 

A NARROW ESCAPE. 

The three Cavaliers were up betimes the next morning, and 
Temple and Walbrook wended their way towards Mossville 
House, with the intention of seeing either Carter or his 
steward, Worthy Goodall. 

" What thinkest thou ? " said Temple ; "dost think we 
thall be detected ? " 

" I fear but little," replied Walbrook ; " he will not sus- 
pect us, especially as we have the introduction of that pious 



272 THE FUGITIVE CAVALIER. 

Puritan, John Barton. If we succeed in gaining work on 
the estate, our end will be gained." 

" Hush ! '' whispered Temple, " I hear footsteps." 

It was Worthy Goodall walking slowly up the avenue. 

He stopped and gazed at the two young friends, and, 
beckoning them to approach, said — 

" How now, you fellows ; what do ye here ? I see ye are 
uone of ITossville." 

" Thou art right, good master," said Temple ; " we have 
travelled far in search of work. Last night the host of the 
' Lord Protector ' gave us a bed of straw, and bade us go to 
the Hall in the morning, and see an honourable gentleman, 
by name Worthy Goodall, who he believed required 
men." 

" Mine host is a good Samaritan," returned Goodall ; 
" he giveth to the hungry, and shelters the poor. What 
canst thou do ? Dost understand anything of horses ? " 

Temple and Walbrook replied that they had been ac- 
customed to them all their lives, an averment which was 
literally true, though not exactly as it was understood by 
their interrogator, who proceeded to state that he had been 
seeking an ass : stant in the stable, and that he required a 
messenger, and chose Walbrook to act in that capacity. 

" To-morrow at sunrise thy duties will commence," said 
Goodall, turning on his heel. " Fail not, or it were better 
thou hadst never shown thyselves." 

Elated with the success of their mission, Temple and 
Walbrook hastened back to the " Lord Protector," where 
they found Martin and Barton in close conversation. 

" And I, too, am engaged," said Martin, after his friends 
had finished speaking of their success. " Farmer Hall — 
see, there is the house, nestling amid the trees on yon hill — 
has taken me on as a sort of odd man." 

" I thought it well for thy sake," said John, " to advise 
you to apply anywhere but at the Hall. I " 

" You thought I was not to be trusted, and, in a hot 
moment of temper, might ruin all," Martin broke in. 
" Well, perhaps you are right ; but let me recount a few 
of my duties — looking after two horses, feeding the pigs, 



A NARROW ESCAPE. 275 

tending the cows, keeping the garden in order, cleaning 
shoes, running errands, and doing odd jobs." 

" Verily the labourer is worthy of his hire," said Temple. 

" The very words my generous master used," returned 
Martin, "adding, ' You will have little or nothing to do, yet 
vou shall have good victuals, aye, verilv, as much as you can 
eat." 

" Come, that is consoling, at any rate," said Hugh Wal- 
brook, breaking into a rich tone of voice — 

' " He that is a Cavalier 
Need not repine, 

Though his substance grows so very low 
That he can't drink wine. 
So let us sing — 
Long life to the ting, 
And confusion to his enemies.' " 

"Hush ! man," cried Martin. " Hast thou no more dis- 
cretion ? The bird that sings before the fowler gets paid 
for his piping with shot." 

" Aye." cried "Walbrook, " and the bough that flutters in 
every wind shakes'its fruit to the ground. What care I ? my 
tongue is like my sword — too free at times ; but be not 
angry if I have crowed too loud." 

" Thy tongue must not wag so freely, Walbrook," said 
Temple, "or we shall be fitted with hempen collars, and 
learn to dance on nothing." 

" Cease this idle talk, gentlemen," said Barton, " for now- 
a-days I suspect the very walls of listening. Here is health 
to " 

"Cromwell, Lord Protector of England !" cried Walbrook, 
bringing his fist down heavily on the table, " and may his 
enemies be swept from the earth ! " 

Had an earthquake opened beneath their feet, the party 
coul d not have been struck with a more sudden consterna- 
tion and amazement. 

Martin's hand was on his sword, and he was preparing to 
spring to his feet, when a voice from the door arrested him. 

" Repeat the toast, good host s it does one good to hear 
it." 



274 THE FUGITIVE CAVALIEB. 

The speaker was no other than Jabez Carter, the present 
occupant of the Hall. 

He was dressed in precisely the same style as when he 
first rode into Mossville, his hair cropped closer than ever, 
and his face greasier in appearance. 

" These young men are making merry," said John, apolo- 
getically , "they arrived here last evening, having tramped 
many miles in search of work, and meeting with success 
here, are making holiday." 

" Worse might be done," returned Carter ; " but it is not 
meet that young men should be so boisterous. Which of 
those is he that my worthy steward engaged as messenger ? " 

Hugh Walbrook rose, and doffed his cap, implying that 
he was the favoured individual. 

" Be at the eastern entrance at sunrise,'' said Carter, " for 
thou hast a long ride before thee to-morrow. Dost know 
the country weli ? " 

" Not very well, sir," replied Walbrook, " but trust me I 
will do thy errand.'' 

" Enough," rejoined Carter ; " and if I find thee faithful 
in all things, thou shalt have no reason to complain of thy 
master. Remember, to-morrow at sunrise." 

Jabez Carter strode from the room, and John Barton and 
the three disguised Cavaliers breathed more freely. 

" By my sword, a narrow escape ! " said Temple, wiping 
the perspiration from his forehead. " Dost think he heard 
more ? " 

" Nay," returned John ; " an' it is lucky for us all that 
he did not." 



CHAPTER V 

HT DURANOE VILE. 

The sun was shining brightly through the trees, and th* 
birds sang merrily, as Hugh Walbrook rode through the 
street of Mossville. The people stood at their doors enjoy- 
ing the fine morning, and gazed after him as he passed 
riowly along, smiling and saying a civil word to all. 
"Were I not mounted on so sorry a jade," he muttered, 



i8 DtTRANCE VILE. 275 

" I might think myself once more on my way to join the 
king. Ten miles on this hack ; surely 1 snail need awnl;'s 
rest after such a journey. Let me see. Wh<> is this paricet 
for ? Ah ! Lovegrace Goodenou^h, the gendeinau invited 
to expound at the Hall next week." 

The questionable specimen of horseflesh upon which Tin eh 
was mounted here broke into a canter, as if, overhearing its 
rider's remarks, it was determined to astoni>h him 

All journeys must come to an end, and so did Hnph's, 
who, having delivered the packet, and received anotner 
closely sealed, turned the horse's head, and made the best of 
his way back to Mossville. 

It was late in the evening when he arrived, and having 
seen the packet in Carter's own hands, walked slowly to- 
wards the "Crown and Sceptre," where he found Harry 
Temple and Martin outside, enjoying the cool air. 

"We thought you had lost the way," said Martin, as 
Hugh came up. " Lend me thine ear a moment, I have 
good news." 

Hugh Walbrook stooped in obedience to the request ; an 
instant after, his face lit up with smiles, and casting his cap 
high in the air, he gave vent to a shout of delight. 

" Steady ! steady ! " said Martin, gravely. " Eemember 
the narrow escape of last night." 

" To whom are we indebted for this ? *' asked Hugh, 
picking up his cap, and seating himself beside Martin. 

" To that strange boy clad in rabbit-skins ; " returned 
Martin; " he knows every inch of the Hall, and every secret 
passage. Nothing must be done hastily ; let us be cautious, 
and success is certain." 

" The sooner the better," said Harry Temple ; " my con- 
science cries loudly against my sword rusting in its sheath. 
Would that we had an opportunity of crossing blades with 
some of these crop-eared knaves ! yet 'twould not be worth 
while risking a neck-stretching, for the sake of a carrion 
carcass." 

" All in good time," said Martin, " all in good time. 
Look at yon church. See how its beauty has been destroyed. 
Look at its defaced carving. Walk through the graveyard. 



27' THE FUGITIVE OlYAIilEB. 

and vou will tread even now on glass, dashed out by the 1 
me cil-ss pikes of sacrilegious, heartless villains." 

" l hou art a fair youth to preach a sermon," exclaimed 
Walbrook. "Who should be reminded of indiscretion ? 
Come, I am weary with riding, and I am sure that both of 
you must be tired." 

The friends then parted for the night, thankful that the 
morrow was Sunday. 

The next morning the three Cavaliers were up with the 
sun, and, under John's advice, attended the church to hear 
Lovegrace Goodenough. 

Martin's face flushed as he saw the mutilated state of the 
fine old edifice. Not a stained window remained, the screens 
of tapestry were turn, the sculptured oaken work defaced, 
and the effigies of the tombs smashed, their remains still 
littering the church. 

The eyes might wander in vain for the laced cloaks, 
slashed boots, and tall plumes of the Cavaliers. 

All was changed, and yet it was an impressive sight to 
witness the rural congregation converging together from 
the surrounding country, some on foot, some on huge cart- 
horses, all attired in the strict Puritanical style, and, with- 
out exception, wearing long swords or rapiers. 

These men sat in the church, their arms folded, and their 
slouched hats pulled over their eyes. Two or three dogs 
were playing in the aisle, and a few bumpkins in the gallery 
ate apples, and laughed and talked as though they were wait- 
ing for some amusing exhibition. 

Jabez Carter arrived and took his seat in the pew that 
had, in days gone by, been occupied by Sir Ingram 
Halliday ; and soon after, Lovegrace Goodenough'i foot- 
steps were heard, and the service commenced. 

Lovegrace Goodenough was a violent speaker, he flung 
his arms about, worked himself into a heat in denouncing 
the exiled king aud his supporters. 

" Was not," he said, " his father a traitor to his country, 
and was not his army filled with the dirt of the 
land ? " 

" 2s o ! you ragamuffin cushion-cuffer," bellowed Walbrook, 



IN DUKANCE VILE. 27? 

unable to repress his passion, and throwing his cap at the 
preacher. 

A fiery indignation succeeded. A dozen Boimdheads 
sprang to their feet, and, hastily drawing their swords, 
rushed forward to seize Hugh, amid the confused cries ot 
"Down with the blasphemer ! " "Strike him with the 
sword ! '' " Down with the Philistine ! " 

It would have gone hard with Walbrook had not Jabez 
Carter called out in a powerful voice, "Harm him not — 
touch not a hair of his head — he is delivered into our hands. 
Peradventure he is an enemy to the Protector. Let him 
be bound and led away, and to-morrow I will investigate 
the matter. 

Stubborn and stout-hearted as Hugh Walbrook was, he 
could not avoid feeling stung with bitter vexation at this 
scrape, into which he had been led by a few hasty words. 
He gave Martin one look, as if to say, " Assist them, or you 
may perhaps be suspected." 

Both Martin and Temple understood it, and when cords 
were brought they made themselves as busy as the rest, and 
formed part of the escort to the lock-up. 

Hugh was thrown into a damp, dismal cell, in the corner 
of which was some rotten straw. 

Dragging himself on to this, the prisoner lay down, and 
tried to sleep, but in vain. 

The pain of his fetters caused him much annoyance, and, 
as the day wore on, his sufferings became more acute. 

Then his thoughts wandered back to the days when, 
mounted on a charger, he had fought in the king's regiment — 
their perils, victories, defeats, hardships, and the king's 
personal bravery. 

In the midst of one of these reveries he heard a key 
rattle in the lock of the door, which was presently opened, 
and a man entered, bearing some refreshment, in the shape 
of bread and water. 

" Hark ye ! " cried Hugh, as the man placed the water on 
the ground ; " do, prithee, be a good fellow for once in thy 
life, and loosen these cords ft bit ; don't you see they are 
cutting my flesh ? " 



278 TIIE FUGITIVE CAVALIER. 

" I have no wish to be hanged in thy stead," said the 
man ; " thou must remain as thou art till the morning." 

" If I do," groaned Lugh, " I shall require no trial. 
Twist them as much as you like, but, zooks ! you crop- 
eared — I mean good fellow — what need to torment me 
thus ? " 

" Verily," returned the man, " thy flesh is indeed swell- 
ing, and thou shalt share in the tender mercies of the 
elect." 

" Thanks, friend," said Hugh, breathing more freely 
when the cords were loosened ; " if I escape the halter I 
will not forget thee. Tell me, friend, where I shall be sent 
to on the morrow." 

" Perchance to London," said the man ; " but I must not 
talk." 

Hugh turned on his side, and fell into a deep sleep. 

Evening was deepening into night when he awoke, 
refreshed in body, but still in very low spirits. 

Again did he sit communing with his sad thoughts, and 
counting the hours struck by the clock of Mossville Church, 
till the hour of midnight slowly and heavily dragged on. 

The bell had scarcely ceased to vibrate when he heard a 
noise above his head, and, raising his eyes, he perceived the 
figure of a man filing away the rusty bars. 

The man stopped every now and then, as if to speak with 
some one below. 

Another instant, the window casement was softly opened, 
and, in less time than it takes to write it, Hugh was with 
his friends in the road. 

" Who goes there ? " 

The voice ran clear and distinct in the midnight air, and 
the next instant the burly form of the guard confronted 
the rescued prisoner and his two companions. 

" Friends," replied Martin. " Servants of the squire, 
and staunch supporters of the Lord Protector." 

" I must see your faces," said the man. " Honest people 
are not often out this time of the night." 

•' Stand, and let us pass," said Temple, angrily j " dost 
*hink w» «je thieves, or night prowlers ? " 



IN DURAXCE VILE. 279 

"Enough of this parley," said the guard. "Not a man 
shall pass until he can give a good account of himself." 

The man lowered his pike in a line with Martin s breast ; 
but it was dashed aside by Temple's sword, and Martin, 
springing forward, threw the inquisitive guard heavily. 

"What ho!" he cried. "What ho, there! Help! 
Murder ! Thieves ! " 

"Oease thy noise," exclaimed ^1 utin, tightening his 
grasp on the man's throat, " if thou hn.st a wish to live." 

The man struggled to release himself, but his struggles 
were futile. 

" Lend me thy sash," cried Martin to Hugh. " Quick ! 
for if I mistake not, I hear footsteps approaching." 

Before Hugh could comply, several lights flashed from 
the road, and the voices of several of the guards inquired 
the reason of the uproar. 

" Help ! " gasped the man in Martin's grasp. " Help ! or 
I shall be strangled." 

There was a trampling of feet, and a dozen armed men 
faced our heroes. 

Martin gave the fallen guard a parting grip, and spring- 
ing to his feet, drew his sword, which he had concealed 
under the long cloak he wore. 

Harry Temple was already on the alert, and dodging 
about for the first candidate for cold steel, and Hugh Wal- 
brook had possessed himself of the guard's pike, and stood 
waiting for the assault. 

" Hallo, you ragamuffins ! " cried a deep voice, belonging 
evidently to the sergeant of the party. " What is the 
meaning of this ? Are decent people to be aroused from 
their beds by three drunken lozels ? What ! drawn 
steel too ? At them, men, and secure them, dead or alive ! " 

"Sooner said than done," cried Martin, passing his sword 
through the right arm of the foremost, while Hugh drove 
another back at the point of the pike. 

" Yield ! " cried the sergeant, " or we will mow ye down 
like grass ! " 

The Cavaliers did not reply, but, turning, fled into the 
wood which led to the Hall. 



C-jO the fugitive cavauee. 

The night was dark, and they soon left the Ironsides far 
behind. 

" Bear to the left," Martin cried ; " Sprite is somewhere 
about." 

A low whistle followed this remark, and Sprite, the boy 
introduced in the opening of our story, leapt from behind 
a clump of bushes, and beckoned the fugitives to follow 
him. 

" Quick, sirs," he said ; " I know all ; in an hour the 
wood will be surrounded, and then all is lost." 

The party hastened on, and soon the Hall appeared in 
sight. 

Lights were gleaming from one or two of the upper win- 
dows, the rest was in darkness. 

" All's well at present," said Sprite. " Keep well in the 
shadow of the trees, for the watchman has sharp eyes." 

They stopped on the banks of the moat, and Sprite, after 
a short search, dragged aside a bush, and falling on his 
knees, began removing the earth with his hands, the 
Cavaliers keeping guard. 

Sprite did not keep them waiting long, but called them 
to assist him in raising a trap-door, to which was attached 
an iron ring, rusty with age. 

The woodwork of the trap-door was old and decayed, and 
creaked as Martin attempted to raise it. 

Temple came to his assistance, and it presently gave way, 
and disclosed a flight of steps leading to a passage under 
the moat. 

" Good ! " said Sprite, and then, handing Martin a small 
lantern, said, "Take this, and God speed ye ! I will make 
all right above here, and meet ye in ten minutes at the top 
of the flignt of steps beyond the moat." 



THE MYSTERIOUS VOICE. 28] 

CHAPTER VI. 

THE MYSTERIOUS VOICE. 

Jabez Carter sat in his private room, reading and sorting 
some papers which lay before him. 

His steward, Worthy Goodall, sat at the other end of the 
room gazing from the window into the darkness. 

" How many years," said Jabez Carter, suddenly, " have 
I been here ? " 

Goodall started, for it was the first time his master had 
ever referred to the day when Sir Ingram fell. 

" Thirteen, sir," he replied, " and may the Hall see yon 
master for many years to come !" 

Carter Bmiled, and went on for a few minutes reading his 
papers. 

" Sir Ingram had a son, had he not ? " he asked. " Hast 
heard what has become of him ? " 

" Nay, sir, I know not," returned Goodall ; " the boy 
was as arch a traitor as his father. The last I heard of him 
was at the battle of Worcester, where he was fightiog in the 
king's own party. He may have died there for what I 
know to the contrary." 

" I would that your assertion could be confirmed," said 
Carter. " I would give a round sum to know that he was 
dead. I sometimes fear his return." 

"Fear not," laughed Goodall : "young Halliday is too 
cunning a fox to come here. He knows the price put on his 
head, an' I am not mistaken, he has seen the coast of 
France long ere this." 

" Thou mayst be right, but I have heard he was a brave 
and daring youth." 

" Such I believe is true," replied Goodall ; " a devil-may- 
care sort of fellow, every inch a Cavalier, and like his 
arch- traitor of a father, he " 

" Liar ! Sir Ingram was no traitor." 

Jabez Carter sprang to his feet, overturning the inkstand, 



28 2 THE FUGITIVE CAVALIEU. 

and scattering the papers about the floor, and gazed in 
speechless terror on his wonder-stricken steward. 

"Didst hear that?" he gasped, at last. "Didst hear 
that voice ? " 

" Verily," cried Goodall, whose armour jingled with the 
shaking of his frame. " Aye, and surely the spirit of 
darkness abideth here." 

" Sir Ingram was no traitor," repeated the voice, slow'y. 

The sound now seemed to proceed from the side of the 
room at which Goodall stood, causing that brave soldier to 
fall back hastily, upsetting a couple of chairs in his flight. 

"Gadzooks!" he cried, the sword visibly trembling in 
his hand, " we are beset with demons. Come, good master, 
let us hasten away." 

A peal of mocking laughter resounded through the 
apartment. 

Goodall and his master delayed to hear no more, but 
hastened below. 

The news ran like wildfire through the house — the guard 
was roused, and, bearing torches, proceeded to the room in 
which the sounds had been heard. All was quiet. 

They examined the furniture, stabbed the curtains and 
tapestry through and through, and tested the walls ; but 
their efforts to discover an^ hing like a hiding-place were 
futile. 

"Gadzooks!" said one of the searchers, "but this is 
strange. Certes, there is nothing here ; but mortal or 
devil, if he will but show himself, I will give him a chance 
of crossing steel." 

As these words were uttered, a sound like thunder rang 
through the apartment, and the searchers falling back, fled 
as fast as their trembling limbs could carry them. 

It may be imagined that Mossville Hall was that night a 
scene of commotion. 

The guard was doubled, and every entrance closely 
watched to prevent the escape of the offenders. 

Jabez Carter did not retire until a late hour, and when 
he did, a guard of armed men escorted him, and searched 
the apartment ia which he was to sleep. 



THE MYSTERIOUS VOICE. 283 

The Eoundhead was at heart a coward, and, as the door 
clofed and left him standing in the middle of the gloomy 
chamber, he would fain have called the men back. 

Bat soon their heavy tread, as they kept guard below, 
echoed through the building, and, somewhat re-assured, he 
went to bed, leaving a light to burn in the room. 

At first he tried to sleep in vain, and lay for some time 
looking round the apartment, a vague sensation of dread 
creeping upon him, which he could not shake off. 

The oaken panels were ornamented with portraits of the 
former occupants of the Hall, some indistinct with age, 
others standing boldly forward defying time. 

There was one of a youth with one hand on the hilt of 
his sword, and caressing a greyhound, which lay at his feet, 
with the other. 

This attracted Carter's attention more than any other, 
and several times as he turned over in the futile attempt to 
sleep, he muttered — 

" I have seen that face before — but where ? " 

The clock struck the hour of one, and the watches 
announced the hour and pronounced that all was well. 

This had a soothing effect upon Carter, and he soon fell 
asleep. 

An hour could not have elapsed when he awoke with a 
start. 

The light had gone out and the room was dark, pitch 
dark. 

What had roused him so suddenly he could not tell — 
perhaps a dream. 

And he lay for some seconds endeavouring to remember 
if such were the case , 

He listened for the tread of the sentinels, but all was still. 

The men were resting at their posts, or gathered together 
in conversation. 

The vague sensation of loneliness and horror came back. 

He trembled in every limb, and beads of cold perspira- 
tion burst out on his forehead. 

He would have given half his estate to have been at that 
moment with the men on guard. 



284 THE FUGITIVE CAVALIEB. 

All was still, but the inexplicable dread increased everj 
instant. 

Soon other thoughts flashed through his brain. 

What if someone were really secreted in the room, after 
all — had extinguished the light, and was waiting an oppor- 
tunity to assassinate him ! 

What if, at the moment he awoke bo suddenly, the dagger 
was at his heart ! 

He was aroused from this horrible reverie by a sound 
seemingly above his head. 

It was a slight tapping sound, but it ceased soon, and all 
again was still. 

Jabez Carter had not time to give his serious atten- 
tion to this, for, to his unspeakable horror, he heard some- 
body or something moving around the bed in which he 
lay. 

It was not like a footstep, but a smothered sound, as if 
something heavy were being dragged along the floor. 

The curtains of the bed were slowly drawn, causing the 
hair of its occupant to stand on end. 

He would have screamed aloud, but his tongue refused 
its office. 

He could do nothing but lie helpless and terror-bound, 
and gaze into the darkness. 

The darkness was soon relieved by a pale blue light, which 
floated through the apartment like a mist. 

At one time it would illumine one side, leaving the other 
a pitchy black ; at another, it would fall upon the bed, and 
then shift to the portrait of the youth and greyhound, there 
to burn steadily for a time, and then to move restlessly 
round the apartment. 

Suddenly it fell, a bright stream, upon the centre of the 
room, opposite the drawn curtains of the bed, and the next 
instant a form appeared in its midst. 

The terror-stricken Jabez Carter recognized it at once. 

It was that of the late Sir Ingram Halliday ! 

The form was dressed in Cavalier style ; one hand grasped 
a drawn sword, while the other pointed at the occupant qi 
the bed. 



another mystkry. £35 

The face was pale, stern in expression, and an unearthly 
light shone from the eyes. 

" Who art thou ? " jabez gasped at last. " If thou art 
man, speak thy will ; if " 

"Jabez Carter! usurper, villain, and coward!" rei>he<l 
the figure, slowly, " what need to ask who is before thee ? 
Hast thou forgotten the night when I fell ? — hast thou no 
memory of how my brave followers were butchered, and how 
my poor body was spurned as it lay upon the floor of this 
very room ? " 

" Mercy ! " cried the quaking Roundhead — " mercy ! As 
I live, I knew it not. I took no part in the action." 

" Thou hadst never the courage to cross steel with a true 
follower of the king," returned the figure. " Listen ! You 
have put a price on my son's head ; your bloodhound hire- 
lings are on the track, but let them turn from it ; let them 
and you beware of touching one hair of his head ! " 

The Roundhead did not reply, but kept his eyes fixed 
upon the figure, his ears drinking in every word. 

" He is not dead," the figure continued ; " but he is safe 
from thee and thine. Farewell, and ponder well on what I 
have said." 

The figure and light disappeared, and Jabez Carter, wit 
a prolonged cry of horror, fell into a swoon. 



CHAPTER VII. 



ANOTHER MYSTEET. 



As may be imagined, the mysterious sounds and appearance 
of the apparition to Jabez Carter created no little sensation, 
and another search was instituted, but nothing could be 
found to create suspicion. 

Hugh Walbrook and Harry Temple worked hard, and 
receired the praise of the steward. 

They heard of the mysterious occurrences with astonish- 



268 THE FUGITIVE CAVALIEft. 

ment, and, line the other servants and labourers, made t?i* 
best of their way out of the wood before the darkness set 
in. 

One dark and gusty night, soon after the occurrence men- 
tioned in our last chap er, a cart over which was thrown a 
black cloth, and drawn by a di.rk-coloured horse, 6tood in 
the shade of the trees near Xlossville Hall. 

It was attended by two men, whose slouched hats, pulled 
down, completely coverei their faces. 

They carried drawn swords, and it was evident they were 
keeping auaid, and that the cart contained more than they 
would care for the prving eyes of Good all, the steward, to 
Bee. 

In a few minutes a third appeared, bearing something in 
his arms which he deposited with as little noise as possible. 

" All's safe," he said, with a sigh of relief. "Let us move 
forward as quickly as possible." 

The hoofs of the horse and cart-wheels were bound with 
hay-bands to muffle the sound, but these precautions were 
almost unnecessary, for the grass was thick and long. 

The man who appeared last drew his sword and went in 
advance, carrying a dark lantern. Alow whistle was soon 
heard, the horse's head was turned, and the cart proceeded 
towards the high road. 

Every now and then they stopped, and waited until the 
whistle was heard, and then again went on. 

" It is well," said one of the. men guarding the cart, 
" that we chose so dark a night for our expedition." 

"Aye," returned the other, "but we must not holla 
until we are out of the wood, and we are anything but that 
yet." 

" Where do we stop again for the signal ? " asked the 
first. 

" At the big oak about a mile from the lodge. But, 
hist !— what's that ? " 

" A frightened fawn. See, there it goes. Art nervous, 
lad ? " 

" Nay ; but I have no wish to have the guard or night, 
watch upon us, or to risk losing our valuable cargo." 



ANOTHER MYSTERT. 287 

The whistle rang out again, and was immediately re- 
peated. 

" The signal is to stop," said the first. " What has hap- 
pened ? " t 

" Perhaps something very trivial, but rely upon it, if 
anything serious is the matter, Hugh will soon be with us." 

" And here he comes," said Martin, for it was he who 
had spoken first. " What news ? " he asked, as Hugh 
came dashing up. 

" Danger," replied Hugh. " That crop-eared knave 
Goodall is returning from Uxcombe with his guard, and is 
at the lodge this very instant." 

" What is thy advice ? " said Temple. " Certes, we are 
not safe here." 

" Lead the horse to a darker part of the wood," returned 
Hugh Walbrook, " and climb a tree ourselves." 

" Stay ! " exclaimed Temple. " By heaven, we are lost ! 
Since the ghost showed itself at the Hall nothing will suit 
that villain Carter but that the wood shall be scoured. Thou 
hast heard that such is the fact, Martin ? " 

" Yes," returned Martin ; " but good luck and fortune 
may aid us yet. Now let us to work. Not a moment is to 
be thrown away." 

The horse was led slowly away and secured to a tree, 
while the disguised Cavaliers mounted trees at a short dis- 
tance, and listened for the sonnd of their enemies' horses. 
They had not long to wait. Goodall, the steward, and about 
a dozen armed men came riding slowly down the avenue. 

The worthy steward had that day been making merry, 
and seemed inclined to look upon the ghost affair lightly. 

" Some rogue or idiot," he said, " secreted in some sly 
corner." 

" And how, Master Goodall, do you account for the ghost 
the squire saw ? " inquired one of the men. 

"Pshaw ! " replied Goodall. " His nerves were unstrung 
by the voice in the room : he went to bed, suffered from 
nightmare, and there's an end on't." 

" What was that ? " exclaimed one of the men, reining up 
his horse. " Didst not hear a sound? " 



t*8 THE FUGITIVE CAVALIER. 

" Nay," replied Goodall. " But, gadzooks ! what is't in 
trie roa- 1 before us ? " 

The men followed his glance, and beheld, about fifty 
yards ahead, something that danced and skipped about the 
road, now on all-fours, now on its feet, jumping high in 
the air, turning somersaults, walking on its hands, and a 
variety of other manoeuvres, which not only astonished the 
party of Eoundheads, but puzzled them as to whether the 
object of these antics was man, beast, ghost, or hobgoblin. 

" What can it be ? " said one of the men. " Odds-fish, 
but we are swarmed with demons. I vote that we turn 
back ; who knows but yon imp may be leading us to some 
trap ! " 

" Man or devil," said Goodall, " I will have a shot at it." 

So saving, he drew a pistol from his belt, and, taking 
aim, fired. 

There was no reply, but when the smoke cleared away, 
there was the figure, dancing, hopping, and skipping, as 
lively as ever. 

Suddenly it disappeared, and the party rode on for a few 
minutes undisturbed. 

But peace was soon denied them, for a terrific yell ran 
through the air, and the figure dropped from a branch and 
fell within a few yards of the horses, and then disappeared 
with an unearthly scream. 

Goodall's horse reared, nearly throwing its rider, and 
throwing the party, who had taken care to be together, into 
confusion. 

"By my soul!" Goodall muttered, "I scarcely know 
what to think. Either we are beset by a body of evil spirits, 
or a plot is brewing by some of those arch villains, the 
Cavaliers, and these are but tricks to blind us. Forward ! " 
he cried, turning to the men ; " we will to the Hall, 
strengthen our guard, scour the woods, and perchance we 
may find the hornets' i -t." 

A yell of derisive laughter followed this, and a shrill voice 
exclaimed — 

" Take care 1 hornets have stings, and can use them, 
too." 



AXOTIIER MYSTERY. 289 

The men, who were all more or less superstitious, lost no 
time in obeying their commander's orders, but spurred on, 
and, in a minute, the whole party were gallopping towards 
the Hall as if for their lives. 

We must now return to the three fugitive Cavaliers. 

They heard the pistol-shot, the gallopping of the hor?es, 
and, to their great relief, the sounds die away in the distance. 

" Something has alarmed the party," Martin whispered. 
" Dost think we can proceed in safety now ? " 

" Thou mayest do so now," said a voice, seeming to come 
from the earth. " G-ood masters, all is well." 

It was Sprite, the boy at the inn, who spoke. 

" How now ? " said Hugh. " Hast thou left thy post ? " 

"Aye, master," returned Sprite, " an' it were well that 
I did so ; but I will tell thee more anon. But away, or 
the guard will be buzzing about thy ears ; and, see, the moon 
means treason, and is coming out to lighten them on their 



The three Cavaliers swung themselves to the ground, and 
Sprite, taking the horse by the bridle, led the way out of 
the wood. 

They stopped before emerging into the high road, to 
relieve both horse and wheels of the hay-bands, the black 
cloth was removed, and the three Cavaliers separated, while 
Sprite jumped up into the cart, drove boldly down the road, 
whistling a tune, and wishing a cheery good-night to those 
he met. 

" The Lord Protector " soon appeared in sight, and 
Sprite, driving round to the back entrance, was met by 
Barton. 

" Safe ! " said Sprite, softly. " Look in, master, and 
feast thy eyes. All as bright as silver, and longing to be at 
work amongst the Soundheads ! " 

Barton looked into the cart, and a smile broke over his 
face as he said — 

' The time is not far distant when the people of Mossville 
will use them." 



230 THE FUGITIVE CAW-IER. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

THE CAVALIER'S HAUNT. 

The light of the setting sun streamed through the wLiiows 
of one of the unoccupied rooms of Mossville Hall. 

The furniture had not been removed, and the apartment 
remained in the same state as when Sir Ingram Halliday 
had been mas'er. but everything was smothered with dust, 
and the walls and ceilings were covered with cobwebs. 

At the table, his back to the window, stood Martin. 

" Ruined and dilapidated ! " he muttered ; " the work of 
five hundred years destroyed in a few years by this sancti- 
monious, canting, lying scoundrel. Oh ! how I have 
longed to let my rapier taste the villain's blood ! But, no ; 
to act rashly would be utter ruin. I must wait, and should 
the king return, why, then " 

"You would carry out your threat," said another voice. 

A panel slid back and disclosed the form of Hugh Wal- 
brook. 

" Gadzooks ! " he said, as he stepped into the room, " it 
does my heart good to see you so gaily attired, and reminds 
me of old times." 

" I would they were to come again," said the other, 
sorrowfully. 

" And mark me," returned Hugh, " we shall hear good 
news shortly. I was in the village some time ago, and, by 
my soul, the people were talking open treason in the very 
streets. I was riding behind my worthy master, when a 
voice cried — ' God save King Charles ! ' Gadzooks ! you 
may be sure that it made me jump round in my saddle, 
and as for my crope-ared master, he turned as white as the 
ghost he has sworn he saw, and bade me ride closer, for the 
people looked at him with anything but pleasant faces." 

"Have you seen Barton to-day ? " inquired Hugh. 

"Aye, that I have," replied Martin ; "and, by my soul, 
it does one good to see the old cock rub his hands, and hear 
him chuckle. He was at work all last night in his garden, 



THE CAVALIER'S HAUKT. 291 

and he says he has sown seed that will never come up till 
wanted." 

Hugh laughed as he said — 

" John speaks the truth. The crop was ready before the 
seed was sown." 

"And now to business," said Martin. ""Where is 
Temple ? " 

"With Sprite, in the vault," Hugh replied. 

" That is well. If possible, we will attempt to run 
another cargo to-morrow night, but this time more pre- 
caution must be taken. Ma foi ! " he continued, with a 
laugh, " last night I felt the rope round my neck, and my 
body dangling from the same branch from which 1 was 
swinging my legs." 

" A lucky escape," said Hugh, with a laugh. " I think I 
can see that valiant body of horse flying for their lives. 
But come, Temple is expecting us. Much has to be done 
before morning." 

" 1 am yours to commnnd," returned Martin, approach- 
ing the wall, and touching a spring. "Lead on, and I will 
follow." 

At Martin's touch a panel of the wall slid noiselessly 
back, disclosing a long, narrow passage, through which the 
Cavalier went until stopped by another door. 

This was opened in the same manner, and revealed a 
flight of steps leading to the underground portion of the Hall. 

Here Hugh took a dark lantern from his pocket and 
lighted it, bade his companion, in a whif-per, pull off his 
boots, as he explained they were now passing through the 
occupied part of the Hall. 

Martin and Hugh passed through several of these pas- 
sages in silence, until they came to an iron door, in the 
centre of which was a grating. 

Here they halted, and Hugh, sounding a whistle, was 
answered by another, and Sprite presented his face at the 
grating, and opened the door. 

The chamber, or rather vault, into which Sprite admitted 
our two heroes, was one of rather small dimensions, with a 
groined roof, upon which were carved fantastic figures. 



292 THE FUGITIVE CAVAMEB. 

From floor to ceiling it was piled with arms— swords, 
rifles, halberds, muskets, and pistols, in profusion. 

In this snug little armoury sat Henry Temple, who rose 
as his friends entered, and greeted them cordially. 

"Yon were gone so Jong," he said, "that I feared you 
had fallen into the hands of our enemies, but, Heaven be 
thanked ! you are safe." 

"As a roach," exclaimed Martin, "and as hungry is h 
hunter. I have fasted twelve hours." 

Sprite retired to an inner vault, ami shortly appeared 
with a bottle of wine and part of a cold haunch of venison. 
" Marry !" said Martin, with his mouth full, "if this is 
not a better dinner than ever I ate at court. No man can 
fight with an empty belly, nor work with a full one ; but 
as we have to work, and fight to boot, let me not starve. 
Here, lads, fill up your glasses, and drink his majesty's 
health." 

This was done, and when Martin had finished his meal 
the three Cavaliers sat down to Talk of their future plans, 
while Sprite dodged about with a bottle to replenish the 
empty g 1 asses. 

'• It is lucky," said Temple, "that ihe crop-eared knaves 
did not find out this den, or, by my sword ! our visit here 
wi u!d be worth little. Thanks to Sprite, we have arms 
enough for five hundred men." 

" Tell me, Sprite," said Martin, " how you became 
acquainted with these secret passages. Art sure that thou 
and we alone know of them ? '' 

"Surely, master, had the Roundhead, Carter, or any of 
his men. known of them, they would have been searched, 
after both he and his steward were frightened out of their 
senses by a voice." 

" The boy is right," said Temple, " and has a head worth 
all ours put together. But tell us, good Sprite, the history 
of thy discovery " 

"There is little to tell, good masters," Sprite replied. 
"At one time I used to run errands for the Hall, as well aa 
for Mrs. Barton, and one morning I was standing in the 
great room, with my back to the wall, and heard a noise 



tfHE CAVALIER'S ftAUNT. 293 

like that of a rat running between the brick-work and the 
panel. The thought then stru'k me, that there would be 
secret passages in so old a building." 

" A good thought for us," said Hugh. 

" Cease thy prate," exclaimed Temple, " and let the boy 
get on with his story." 

" I passed my hand up and down the panel against which 
i was standing," Sprite went on, "and, to my astonishment, 
saw it slide back. At that moment I heard Goodall's step 
in the passage, and slid it back again." 

" Thou didst well," said Hugh. " Help thyself, lad, the 
wine will freshen thy memory." 

" I said nothing about the discovery," the boy went on, 
" aud I determined to explore the secret passage alone, as I 
had often heard that it was believed that Sir Ingram 
Halliday had stored up a quantity of arms." 

"Amidst which we are now sitting," ejaculated Hugh. 

" But which had never been found. Shortly after that I 
found the trap-door through which you first entered. That 
is all, good masters. That I kept my counsel, you know." 

" And a true-born young Royalist thou wert," cried Harry 
Temple ; " and here is thy health, and I pledge my word 
that should times alter, the first I shall remember will be 
Sprite." 

" Ere we part," said Martin, " let us arrange when we 
meet here again. Another expedition should be made as 
soon as pos ible. Say, comrades, when shall it be." 

" What say you of to-night ? " said Hugh. 

" Nay " returned Martin. " It is not safe. The Round* 
heads are on the alert. Let us give them a day or two's 
rest, and then to work again. To-night I " 

" Must see the pretty maid that lives on the hill," laughed 
Temple ; " and, by my soul ! I envy thee, for a more charm- 
ing girl never lived. Let us meet here to-morrow night at 
sundown." 

" Dost think it safe for me to venture out ? " inquired 
Hugh. " Marry ! but I feel stifled here." 

" You will be safe under Barton's roof," returned Mar- 
tin ; "but under no other." 



294 THE FUGITIVE CAVALIER. 

" You may rely upon my discretion ; but. the devxl him- 
self would not know me now." 

He was dressed in a suit of sad-coloured brown, ard wore 
a fafse beard. 

" Come then," said Martin. " Bat remember the reward 
if you are caught." 

The three Caraliers, headed by Sorite, who this time 
bore the lanTern. traverse! the pa-S'lges, and in ten 'mnutes 
were in the shade of the trees of Mossville Wood. 



CHAPTER IX. 

MARIE SHELFORD. 

The air was fr igrant with the perfume of honeysuckle, and 
the birds made sweet music in the air, as Marie Shelford 
sat in the rich light of a golden sunset, busy at her spinning- 
wheel. 

The mists from the meadows rose, and yet the rays of the 
expiring sun lingered amid her nut-brown tresses, as if loth 
*o leave so glorious a treasure. 

iMane's fingers were busy with the hemp, but they 
worked mechanically, as if the brain that should have 
guided them were otherwise occupied. 

The sun disappeared behind the hills, the birds ceased to 
twitter, and sought their nest : but still she sat, her eyes 
upon the garden gate, her fingers still engaged on the 
wheel. 

" He will not come," she murmured. " What can have 
detained him ? " 

The words had scarcely passed her lips when a footstep 
pounded in the road ; her face lighted up, and running to 
the gate, she met Martin Steynton, who caught her in his 
arms and imprinted a kiss on her lips. 

" Where have you been, truant ? " asked Marie. " I have 
watched and waited more than two hours." 



MARIR SttELFORD. '295 

"I will tell thee anon," Martin replied; "but just 
answer me one thing — Hast seen Jabez Carter to-day ? " 

" Nav." Marie returned. "Father was afc the Hall, and 
brought back the news that the squire was unwell, and 
could not be seen." 

•'• so much the better," said Martin. " Now run away for 
thy hat, and let us walk in the moonlight." 

Another step sounded in the road, and Worthy Goodall 
presented himself at the gate. 

He had evidently been making merry, probably on ac- 
count of his master's illness ; his legs were unsteady, and 
showed a tendency to go their own way, and leave the body 
to take care of itself. 

He sang and talked by turns, and Martin, who had hidden 
himself behind some shrubbery, fancied he heard Marie's 
name mentioned more than once. 

"Ghosts?" hiccupped Goodall; "ghosts? nonsense! 
Gadzooks ! I should like to meet one now." 

He drew his sword and flourished it in the air. 

"I should like to see- the ghost," he went on. "that 
would care to tackle me — or the man who would call him- 
self Eoyalist, for one is as bad as the other — both devils." 

Martin's hand grasped the hilt of his sword, for he saw 
Marie leave the cottage. 

" How now ? " cried Goodall, staggering about the path, 
"here comes that pretty wench of Shelford's. Zonks! a 
likely lass, and who knows may one dav be Mrs. Worthy 
Good nil?" 

" What ! my pretty chick," he cried, addressing Mar'e ; 
" what! going out alone ? Nay, nay, I will accompany thee, 
for thou art a favourite of mine." 

"You will please let me pass," returned Marie, angrily ; 
"if you have business with my father, you will find hhn 
within." 

" A kiss, and thou art free to roam," said Goodall, en- 
deavouring to catch the girl in his arms. 

Marie uttered a slight scream, but it had scarcely left hct 
lips when Martin rushed from his hiding-plate and seized 
the steward's throat with a grasp of iron. 



296 THE FUGITIVE CAVALIElt. 

"What! The foul fiend!" gasped Goodaii. -'Take 
thy hands from my throat, I prithee." 

Martin kept his hat well over his eyes, thus preventing 
the steward from seeing his face. 

" Let go thy hold," cried Goodall, again, " or the morning 
Bun shall see thee swinging on the nearest tree.''' 

Martin heeded neither entreaties, threats, or promises, 
but tightening his grasp, and throwing his weight and 
strength into one effort, threw G-oodall to the ground with 
a crash. 

The fallen Roundhead lay still— he was stunned by the 
fall. 

" So much for such s jnr," said Martin, turning the 
senseless body over witl his feet. " Marry ! he will not 
interrupt us again for an hour or two." 

" But he will know thee, Martin," said Marie, clinging to 
his arm ; " thou must fly." 

" Nay, Marie," returned Martin, " fear not for me. I 
have been through worse adventures when in the service of 
our king, and would do more for your sake. Should it be 
necessary for me to go to Mossville, keep well the secret I 
have entrusted you with ; breathe not a word to your 
dearest friend, or, by the stars above us, I am a lost man." 

" I tremble when I think of thy peril," returned Marie, 
" and would that you were out of danger, and yet " 

" You would have me near thee," said Martin, " nay, 
think me not vain. "Were it not for you, Mossville Hall 
would be without a master this night." 

"Talk not so," returned Marie, covering her face with 
her hands ; "I cannot bear to hear thee speak thus. For 
Heaven's sake, shed no blood." 

Martin was about to reply, when a party of armed men 
passed by on the road, in the direction of the " Lord 
Protector." 

" Another pack of Roundhead hounds," muttered Martin ; 
" who now, I wonder, is to make sport for them ? " 

He was soon to learn. 



2ft? 



CHAPTER X. 

CAPTURE AND ESCAPE. 

Wh^t? Mat l/in left Marie he hastened to John B-irton's inn, 
and there beheld, to his horror, Hugh Walbrook seated on 
horseback, his hands tied, and his face wearing a woebegone 
expression. 

Soldiers were pouring in and out of the inn, and John 
had hard work to keep the glasses and horns filled for his 
hungry customers. 

As Martin strolled, gulping down his wrath and sorrow, 
his eye caught his old companion's. Walbrook struck the 
horse sharply with his heels, causing the animal to rear 
and start forward, nearly throwing its helpless rider. 

" Ma foil " said Walbrook, " if thou hast a wish to take 
me to London without a broken neck, thou hadst best have 
this beast tended, for should he start again thou mightst, 
perhaps, be disappointed of seeing me on Tower Hill." 

"Cease thy prate," said the officer in command, "and 
joke not ; but make the best of the little time left thee. 
Come hither, fellow," he cried to Martin ; " hold this hoi se 
while we rest, and thou shalt be rewarded." 

Martin complied, and holding the bridle in one hand, 
patted the animal's neck with the other. 

There was a great uproar, the men mounting or dis- 
mounting, riding hither or thither, to all appearance paying 
no attention to their prisoner. 

" A bad scrape," said "Walbrook, speaking under his 
breath, " but I do not despair. Should I escape, I shall 
go to Oxford. Dost hear ? " 

" Heaven grant it may be so ! " returned Martin, turning 
his face away. 

" Come, lad," Hugh went on, " do not give way, it cuts 
me to the quick. Better times are at hand. What if r.jy 
head fall ? — it will be in the service of my king, and 1 can 
die happy. I am unarmed, thou hast a knife, pass it under 
the saddle, it may be useful." 



208 THE FUGITIVE CAVALIER. 

Martin had scarcely time to do this when the trumpet 
sounded, and the men mounte.i ready to return. Soon they 
moved away, and Martiu watched the form of Hugh Wal- 
brook until hidden by the darkness. 

"Oh! would that he had never seen Mosbviiii,'- mur- 
mured Martin, sinking clown on a settle outside the inn ; 
" my old schoolfellow, companion in arms, and trusty friend, 
yon have risked life and fame for my sake, and lost all I " 

"We must now return to the troop of Ironsides and their 
captive. 

Tney jogged along for several miles, the men smoking, 
laughing, and talking, and Hugh pondering and weighing 
his chances of escape. 

The prisoner was placed under the guard of two burly 
fellows, who chatted, and made bets as to the place where 
their prisoner would suffer. 

This conversation did not enliven Hugh, and he bade 
them desist ; but they only laughed, and jested the more. 

Hugh tried the cords with which his hands were bound, 
and found that he could easily remove them should a chance 
of escape occur. 

One of the men guarding Hugh stopped to light his pipe ; 
the other rode slowly on alone. The pipe was obstinate, 
and the tohacco damp, and by the time it was rekindled 
most of the men were out of sight, and the other guird 
some two or three hundred yards up the road. Angrily 
dashing his pipe to the ground at this discovery, he set 
spurs to his own horse, and seized the bridle of the one 
upon which Hugh was mounted. 

The soldier's horse started forward, slumbled, and fell, 
throwing its rider violently to the ground. A hope of 
escape passed through Walbrook's mind like lightning. 

He threw himself from the horse, tore the cords from his 
wrists, and darting into the wood which skirted the road on 
either side, plunged into the thickest cover he could find. 

Not an instant was to be wasted. 

This Hugh knew well, as the rest of the party were only 
a trifling distance ahead, and already heard the cries of 
the fallen soldi, r shouting to his companions. The first 



CAPTURE AND ESCAPE. 299 

expedient that occurred to him was the same which the 
king had previously adopted when flying from Worcester — 
to climb a tree. 

Hugh had scarcely selected, climbed, and ensconced him- 
self amid the leafy boughs of an oak, when he heard the 
troopers galloppiug back, and dashing through the under- 
wood beneath. 

Just as they came to the tree in which the Cavalier was 
hidden, a cloud passed over the moon, and left the wood in 
darkness. 

" M- stress," Hugh murmured, "I thank thee for hiding 
thy light. Keep but that nightcap upon thy face, and I 
would defy Noll and his army to find me." 

The men now returned, and, dismounting, commenced 
beating the brushwood, and now and then calling to each 
other, sometimes under the very tree in which Hugh was 
perched, and then proceeded deeper into the wood — to return 
disappointed. 

" By my soul ! " Hugh heard one fellow say, " were he 
not a Cavalier, and an arch-villain to boot, it would be no 
flattery to call him a brave fellow." 

" He comes from a devil-may-care family," said another ; 
" he's a Walbrook — and that's enough. Dost remember his 
f.ther, how he cut and slashed at Naseby ? Gadzooks ! 
but he emptied many a saddle." 

" What became of him ? " inquired the first speaker. 

" He was killed at Worcester," replied the other. "He 
and his son, who has just given us the slip, were the last to 
flee. The father fell, but the devil's luck clung to the boy 
then, as it his done to-night." 

" Dost think it likely that we shall camp here to-night ? " 
asked the first. 

Hugh's feait beat high, and he held his breath as he 
listened for the reply. 

'• Nay," returned the other ; " I heard the captain say he 
considered it useless. The bird cannot easily escape when 
so many fowlers are about ; the country will be well scoured 
to-morrow." 

Hugh breathed freely as he heard this, and sat pondering 



200 THE FUGITIVE CAVAUTKtt. 

on the course he should pursue on the morrow, when the 
bu^le sounded for the troopers to rnenut, aud a few uiautes 
after, Hugh, to his great relief, heard the sound 01 the 
horses' hoofs on the high road. 

''Xow, sweet Sleep," said Hugh, "come to my aid." 

Hugh ascended to a forked branch, and pillowing his 
head on his arm, soon fell fast asleep. 

He was awakened early the next morning by the chirping 
of birds. 

As near as he could calculate, it was about three o'clock. 

After peering cautiously around, he let himself down 
gently from the tree, and walked cautiously over the grass, 
keeping in the thickest parts of the wood, deeming it not 
unlikely that some of the troopers were patrolling up and 
down ; but the silence remaining unbroken, he ventured into 
the more open spaces of the wood, and reached its extremity 
without interruption. 

Here again Hugh paused to listen and ascertain that no 
one was near before he ventured into the open road, but all 
was still, and crossing the highway, he struck into the fields 
beyond. 

During the excitement and chase he had neither felt 
hunger or thirst, but now the pangs of both attacked 
him. 

A spring relieved the latter, but no description of food 
could he get beyond a few wild berries growing upon the 
hedgerows. 

Plucking these as he went along, he suddenly heard a 
footstep behind him, and turning, beheld a man dressed as 
a pedler, with a box in his hand, a pipe in his mouth, and 
aiding himself with a stout staff, advancing at a rapid pace, 
threatening soon to overtake him. 

" Now who can this be ?" muttered Hugh ; " but pshaw ! 
I am as weak as a kitten, and as nervous as a wild rabbit. 
It can be but man to man at the worst." 

Hugh, however, was not over-anxious for a companion, 
and mended his pace, hoping to outstrip the pedler. 

But no ; the pedler stepped out with so vigorous a stride 
that Hugh felt it impossible to avoid being overtaken unless 



CAPTURE AND ESCAPE. 301 

he took to running, which he argued would not only excite 
suspicion, but would be uncavalierlike, to boot. 

Hugh therefore slackened his pace, and humming a tune, 
and affecting nonchalance, hoped that the tramp would pass 
him. 

But here again Hugh was disappointed, for the pedlcr 
when alongside, commenced speaking. 

" Hey ! my merry master," he said, " art crowing the 
sun to rise ! Gadzooks ! I shall be glad when he shows his 
ruddy face, and warms this poor earth." 

" Thou art merry," said Hugh, looking at his companion. 

" And why not ? " returned the pedler ; " nay, comrade, 
never look so glum, let us be merry while we can. I know 
there's an act against may-pole dancing, singing, whistling, 
and humming ballads, but it's hard the cock may not stretch 
his throat when he is liable to have his neck twisted to- 
morrow." 

Hugh "Walbrook was not a little alarmed at this remark, 
and preserving silence, slackened his pace again, hoping 
that his troublesome companion would pass on ; but the 
pedler lounged along by his side, as if determined not to 
be shaken off. 

" Hark ye," he went on, " I see by thy looks that thou 
art hungry, what say thee to a snack of ruff-peck and rome- 
bowse ? "* 

" I understand nothing of your pickpocket's cant," said 
Hugh, losing his temper ; " nor do I want thy company." 

" AVhat ! " exclaimed the pedler ; " a beggar or labourer — 
for such thou art by thy dress — and not know what ruff-peck 
is ? Ha ! ha ! Gadzooks ! wert thou a gentleman, it 
might be different, but beshrew me ! this is indeed spicy. 
Why, where wert thou born, man ?" 

" Now hark ye," exclaimed Hugh, stopping, and facing 
his companion ; '' I have no wish for thy company, nor for 
thy sauciness, and I warn thee, sir pedler, that if thou pester 
me again, I will trounce thee within an inch of thy life." 

" Spoken like a man," returned the pedler, coolly, " b$ 

• Thieves' slang of that day — " bacon and wine," 



S02 THE FUGTTIVTj: CAVAT.IF/B. 

my soul ! But, master, the roads were made for me as well 
as thee. "We poor devils of the road have that one privilege 
left ; we lie at night under hedges, or soundly burrow m a 
hayrick — nay, it is not seldom, ivhen hard pushed, we moini 
a tree and pass the night there ! " 

Hugh felt that he was changing colour, but to hide bis 
confusion, asked the pedler civilly whither he was travelling. 

" To Oxford," was the reply, " if I am not stopped." 

" Stopped ! " echoed Hugh ; " I should imagine that thou 
hast but little fear of that." 

" That is where the error lie?,'' said the pedler ; " every 
man is suspected nowadays, and no man can make a journey 
v> ithout running the gauntlet through a troop of Ironsides. 
Why, 'tis only last night a young Cavalier was taken at 
Mossville, and escaped by a miracle. Poordevil ! he stands 
but little chance ; he might as well have submitted quietly." 

"What said the gossips of this Cavalier?" inquired 
Wal brook. "Who is he?" 

" He is called by the Roundheads Hugh the Devil, but hia 
name is Hugh Walbrook, although, I am informed, his nick- 
name is the more appropriate of the two. Thou art, I see, 
bound for Oxford." 

Starting and colouring at this, Hugh Walbrook deter- 
mined to rid himself of his companion at all risks, and 
turning, said — 

" Nay ; the knave of an innkeeper must have misdirected 
me. I am wandering out of my way " 

To the Cavalier's rage and astonishment, the pedler faced 
round, declaring that all places were alike to him." 

Hugh felt now that he was driven to a stand, and, putting 
himself in a menacing posture, roared — 

" S'blood ! " 

His aggravating companion interrupted him by saying — 

" Stay, friend, there is an act against swearing. Forget 
not the penalty ! " 

" Curse the penalty ! * cried Hugh Walbrook, " and you 
too. Stand from my path, or I will put marks upon thy 
throat that will never leave thee ! " 

" Forgive me, Hugh Walbrook," said the pedler to the 



CAPTURE A^D ESCAPE. 303 

astonished Cavalier ; " I wiil not trifle with thy feelings 
any longer. I am Sir John Morton ! " 

Hugh sprang to his feet with a cry of joy, and seized the 
baronet's hand. 

"Forgive me," Sir John went on, speaking now in his 
natural tone of voice ; " but I was anxious to know if my 
disguise was complete." 

" Gadzooks ! " said Hugh, smiling. " Complete ! thy 
father would not know thee with thy pedler trappings and 
borrowed slang, but now thou hast spoken in thy hearty 
voice, thou art a pedler no longer." 

"Let us march for yonder wood," said Sir John ; "I have 
another suit, that thou must put on, and after that we will 
have breakfast — then hey for Oxford." 

"And on the way," said the now light-hearted Hugh, 
" thou shalt tell me why thou art here." 

" Aye ! " returned Sir John ; " and the object of my 
journey to Oxford." 

Hugh Walbrook having donned the disguise provided by 
Sir John Mcrton, ate a hearty breakfast from his com- 
panion's wallet, and pronounced himself ready to proceed. 

"Like yourself," said Mr John, as they walked along, 
" I have been knocked about from pillar to post. I fol- 
lowed the king to the coast, saw him embark in safety, and 
then returned to Oxford. But there it was too hot lor me, 
and I was compelled to fly." 

" How long have you worn this disguise ? " inquired 
Hugh. 

" Since I left Trevor Hall," returned Sir John, " where 
we held out until we were literally starving. Lord Trevor, 
as you know, was killed at Naseby, and Lady Trevor sent 
to me to take charge of the Hall. 

"I answered to the summons with all speed, collected the 
arms, and in four days was prepared to meet the invaders. 

"Two troops of horse and- one of foot appeared the 
morning after the preparations of defence were com- 
pleted, and called upon us to surrender. I went to Lady 
Trevor, and implored her to fly with her son, but fehe 
refused. 



.04 THE FTTOTTIVR CAVALIER. 

" ' Sir John,' she paid, ' I leave the matter in your hands, 
but I will not fly from the sacrilegious knaves.' 

" 'My lady,' I replied, ' 1 am at your command, and i 
have no doubt but what our men will do their best, but, 
from what I can learn, it is impossible to hold out for more 
than ten or twelve days.' 

" Nor did we so long," pursued Sir John, " for the 
besiegers brought two field pieces to bear upon us, and in 
three days the Roundheads were masters of the situation." 

" What became of Lady Trevor ? " inquired Hugh. 

" She mai aged to escape on the night of the siege," Sir 
John replied, " and fled with her boy to France." 

Tins conversation brought them to a roadside inn, where 
for a time we must leave them to rest and refresh, and 
retrace our footsteps back to Mossville. 

"When Martin left Marie, she ran back to the garden, and 
found Worthy Goodall recovering from the effect of his fall. 

It was evident that he had no idea who the delinquent 
was, but when Marie spoke to him his eyes gleamed 
maliciously. 

" So, wench," he said, " you encourage footpads and 
thieves to throttle thy father's friends. Fear not but he 
shall hear the truth." 

"Thou hast been drinking," returned Marie. "Nay, 
but thou wert anything but sober when thou earnest here. 
Thou has been dreaming." 

" The wench may be right," muttered Goodall, " and yet 
it could not be a dream. No, no. There's something 
at the bottom of this that requires sifting, and for the pre- 
sent I shall do well to keep a still tongue. It may be as 
you say, lass," he said, turning to Marie. " I was in the 
wine-cellar this evening, and the fumes of the abominable 
stuff must have affected me. So farewell. Tell thy father 
1 will see him to-morrow evening." 

" Your message shall be delivered," said Marie. 

Worthy Goodall, turning his back on the cottage, took 
the highway which led direct to the Hall. 

It was a lovely night, the sky with scarcely a cloud, the 
moon at full, and the myriad of starg twinkling brightly. 



blood Money. 305 

The roads were silent, not a sound disturbed the stillness 
6ave the tinkling of the sheep-bells or the barking of a 
distant watch-dog. 

As Goodall turned into the avenue, the thought of the 
myslerious figure he had seen with his men flashed through 
his brain, and the steward quickened his pace, having no 
wish to renew the acquaintance of the apparition. 

Some parts of the avenue were so overhung with trees 
that the light was entirely shut out, and it was in one of 
these that Goodall thought he heard himself called by 
name. 

But attributing it to his fancy, he proceeded, but the 
next instant a cold perspiration burst from his face, and 
trembling in every limb, he stood gazing at a figure which 
had suddenly appeared before him. 

It was the form of Sir Ingram Halliday. 

The figure paced to and fro with noiseless steps, a misty 
blue light following ia its track, and Goodall beheld to his 
horror that the figure threw no shadow. 

" Merciful powers ! " said Goudall, starting back, " it 
was no fancy of my master." 

The figure stopped, and, looking at Goodall, seemed about 
io speak, but the steward's nerves gave way, and covering 
his face with his hands, and uttering a stifled groan of 
horror, he fell to the ground in a swoon. 

When he recovered he was in his room at the Hall, and 
several of the guard and domestics standing round. 

He did not speak of the apparition, but pleading illness, 
retired to rest. 



CHAPTER XI. 

BLOOD MONEY. 

Sprite, the boy at the inn, and friend to the disguised 
Cavaliers, was, perhaps, one of the most remarkable and 
useful youths with which this earth was ever favoured. 
In his wild garb of rabbit skins, his light hair floating 

V 



S06 THE FUGITIVE CAVALIER. 

behind, he might be met on some errand twenty times in 
the day, skimming over the ground as swiftly as the animals 
with whose skins he was clothed. 

Sprite was everywhere at once. 

He found time to fetch water for the villagers, knew the 
names of every herb and wild plant, and not unfrequently 
gave advice to the sick. 

At early morn he was in the fields bird-catching, or irn* 
proving his simple knowledge of botany, yet, when required 
at the inn, he was seldom absent. 

He was a merry, light-hearted rogue, and universally 
liked, especially by his master, John Barton, who looked 
upon the boy as something more than mortal. 

" That boy," he would say to a stranger, " has an old 
head upon a youDg pair of shoulders. He can do anything 
— climb, sing, dance, and fence." 

John knew little or nothing of Sprite's history. 

He had come into the village soon after the battle of 
Worcester, and, locating himself at the inn, had remained 
there to that time. 

The day after Goodall had seen the apparition, Sprite 
was absent nearly all day, returning at even-tide, looking 
very sad and down-hearted. 

" How now ? " inquired John. "What's the matter, lad ? 
Thy face is as long as a side of bacon ! " 

i; I will speak to thee anon," said Sprite. "But bother 
me not now. Stay, take this." 

Sprite placed a handful of coins on the table. 

" What is this ? " exclaimed John. 

" Blood-money," returned Sprite. 

" Who gave it thee — the devil ? " 

" Guess again, master," said Sprite, " and you can't be 
wrong." 

" Then you have been to the Hall," said Barton, after a 
pause. " Beware, boy, what thou doest there. Let not a 
word slip, or all our necks will be fitted with collars of 
hemp." 

" They should tear me to pieces first," returned the boy* 
"But I have not told you all. Those .cursed coins were 



feLOOD Money. SO? 

given toe to watch thee, for Carter suspects thee of har- 
bouring the Cavaliers." 

" When didst thou hear this ? " asked John. 

"Not an hour ago," returned Sprite; " Jabez Carter 
suspects thee. I am to watch thy actions, and convey the 
news every morning to the Hall." 

" And what was thy reply ? " 

"What could I say, good master? I promised h'm 
obedience, and, gadzooks ! I will spin him a yarn long 
enough to fill the Gazette." 

" Dost imagine he has heard anything to create sus- 
picion ? " asked John. 

"I know not," said Sprite ; "nay, I think not, but he is 
afraid of his life, and wears armour under his doublet. 
Since the ghost appeared at the Hall, he is a changed 
man." 

" A mysterious affair that," mused John. 

" Very," returned Sprite, " an' what is stranger still, 
Goodall saw it last evening, and was brought in in a swoon." 

" Now, boy," said John, " I will trust to thee. There are 
lives in thy hands ; act truly and honestly, and in after 
times thou wilt have no cause to repent it ; but this money 
is thine." 

" 1 cannot touch it," exclaimed Sprite ; " think not, 
master, that I am to be bought by a few paltry coins. I 
tell thee that I will go and torment this Carter, that he 
shall wish he had never beheld me." 

" What course do you intend to pursue ? " said John. 

"Leave that to me," Sprite rejoined ; "but, hush ! I hear 
a footstep in the passage." 

The sound approached, the door opened slowly, and 
Carter, pale and haggard, entered the apartment. 

"I greet thee, honest John," he s-aid, taking a seat at 
the table, "and would speak with thee alone." 

Sprite took the hint, and disappeared. 

John could not think for the life of him what Carter had 
to say. 

" Landlord," said Carter, when they were alone, " the 
arch-villain who was arrested in thy house last night was 



^08 THE FUGITIVE CAVALIER. 

L^commended by thee to my steward. What knew you of 
him before he arrived at Mossville ? " 

" Nothing," said John, freely; " he seemed an honest, 
hearty fellow, but I never saw him before in my life." 

" These are times when we must be cautious," said Carter, 
after a pause. 

" Your excellence is right," returned John. " Caution is 
necessary." 

" You knew Sir Ingram Halliday," said Jabez Carter. 
" Wouldst know his son ? " 

" Sir Ingram's son left Mossville when a boy, and — 
•md— " 

Jabez Carter interrupted the landlord by stamping his 
foot on the floor ; the door was thrown open, and in an 
instant the room was filled with armed men. 

" John Barton," said Carter, " I arrest you as a traitor." 

Mine host did not reply, nor a muscle in his rubicund face 
move. 

" Barton," continued the Roundhead, " I trusted thee, 
but thou hast betrayed me. AVhen I first entered Mossville 
I was vested with the power to drive thee from house and 
home." 

'• Enough ! " said John ; " take me where thou wilt, but 
poison not my ears with thy cant nor thy deeds of mercy. 
Just now mention was made of Sir Ingram's son — mark 
well what I say — He will return, and every insult to his name, 
or to that of a true follower of the king, he will avenge — 
Ions life to him, say I, and may he return with the king to 
drive such rats as thee from the land ! " 

During this speech Carter's face had changed from white 
to red, from red to a sickly green. 

For an instant everything swam before his gaze. He had 
heard the words ofthe apparition repeated, " He will return." 
He grew giddy, and would have fallen had he not grasped a 
chair for support. 

Recovering himself, he ordered Barton to be bound. 

" What ! " cried the prisoner, " art afraid of an old man ? 
Hast thou not enough men to guard, thee ? Old Noll had 
best send thee half his arms." 



BLOOD MONET. 309 

" Take him away," cried Carter : " I will hear no more. 
Let him be bound hand and foot, and a guard put upon his 
cell, where he is confined." 

" Hold ! " cried a voice, and Martin, pushing through the 
soldiers, stepped between Cartel 1 and the landlord. 

" Who art thou ? " exclaimed Carter. 

" As honest a man as thyself," returned Martin. " This 
man has befriended me. For what crime is he to be taken 
to prison ?" 

" What right hast thou to ask that ? " crLd Carter. 

" None ! " cried Martin ; " but the prisoner has. Where 
is thy warrant for his arrest ? " 

" None is required," said the Roundhead ; " he has har- 
boured malignant followers of the king. Of this I hare 
evidence. Stand aside, or thou shalt share the same fate as 
the traitor." 

Martin, hastily drawing his sword, lunged at the Round- 
head's head. 

There was a shock, Carter recoiled, and Martin's sword 
was shivered into a dozen pieces. 

" Coward and villain ! " cried Martin, struggling with the 
men who had rushed forward and seized him. "You wear 
armour. A curse upon the man who made it - ; but for such 
a crop-eared dog as thee it is needful ; but the time is cloFe at 
hand when neither armour nor thy hirelings shall avail thee." 

Jabez Carter, white with passion and fear, turned without 
replying, strode from the room, accompanied by the guard, 
who dragged after them the two prisoners. 

The village folk of Mossville were both astonished and 
alarmed to see Barton a prisoner. 

They ran from their houses, and crowding round the guard, 
inquired what John had done ; but the soldiers would answer 
nothing, and drove the people back with pikes. 

" God save King Charles ! " shouted Martin. 

" Aye, aye ! " responded a voice. " God send him a quick 
return. We have had enough of Puritan tyranny." 

A cheer followed this, and several stones were thrown 
at the guard, who lost no time in conveying their prisoners 
to the lock-up. 



310 THE FUGITIVE CAVALIEE 

Here John and Martin were taken to separate cells, and 
pished in, bound as they were. 

Martin recognized the cell to be the same as that which 
Hn<di Walbrook escaped from, but strong bars had been 
added to the window, and he felt that there was little hope 
of escape from that quarter. 

He lay ruminating on the fate of Hush Walbrook, of 
what Harry Temple would think and say, when he heard 
the news of his arrest and the breaking up at the ''Lord 
Protector," and whether he would quit M >ssnlle. 

At last the balm for all wounds — sleep — came to his aid, 
and he fell into a light, pleasant slumber, dreaming of wan- 
dering in green fields with Marie Shelford. 

Suddenly the dream changed ; he was in the dungeon 
agai.i, gazing at a face that was peering at him through the 
window. 

Fust it was Hugh's, then Temple's, and at last dwindled 
down to the sharp features of the boy Sprite. 
He awoke with a start. 

It was dark, but the moon threw a beam across the floor. 
Something hid the beam for a second, and Martin, raising 
ln's eyes, beheld the well-known face of Sprite looking down 
upon him. 

The window opened, and Sprite, inserting his comical face 
between the bars, ca'led Martin by name. 

"Gadzooks!" he whispered, as Martin rose and ap- 
proached the window. " lL>w ln-ky they put thee here, good 
master ! " 

"Why lucky?" said Martin; "there is no hope of 
success, and even you are running a risk for a useless 
purpose." 

" Hark ye, master," returned the boy ; " what if I were to 
drop a knife between the bars ?" 

" My hands are bound," said Martin. 
"Then I will release them," said Sprite, " if I can but 
squeeze my lean body through these bars." 

In a twinkling Sprite was in the cell, and Martin's hands 
released 



EXCHANGE NO ROBBERY. 311 

".Now, master," said Sprite, "I go for help to file away 
the bars." 

" Nay," returned Martin, as a thought flashed through hia 
mind. " Sta, here ; I may need thy assistance." 



CHAPTER XII. 

EXCHANGE NO ROBBERY. 

When Marie Shelford heard the news, her first impulse 
was naturally to go down to the prison, and, if possible, to 
see her lover. 

The accounts she heard of Martin's arrest were various. 

From one she heard that Martin had committed a theft 
at the Hall, from another that he had slain Jabez Carter, 
and that the body was now at the " Lord Protector," and a 
third stated that, not satifcfied with the blood of his 
excellency, he had also run John Barton through the 
body. 

Paying no heed to these reports, Marie hastened to the 
prison gates, where she found several of the guards 
assembled. 

"Why, that's Shelford's pretty wench," said one as she 
approached. " How now, my pretty chick ; what do you do 
here ? " 

" You have a prisoner here," she said, " one Martin Steyn- 
ton, brought here this afternoon." 

" Thou hast never spoken a truer word," said the man, 
" and, gadzooks ! we mean to keep him. No man ever 
fitted himself with the halter better than he has done — the 
Jool ! " 

" What has he done ? " exclaimed Marie. " For the love 
of Heaven, tell me true." 

"How, lass?" said the man. "How does it concern 
thee ? " 

" Ask no questions," cried Marie ; " but tell me what he 
has done." 



312 THE FUGITIVE CAVALIER. 

" Pshaw ! lass," returned the guard, " thou art surely 
mad. I tell thee that he has done that which will fit him 
with a halter. Is that not enough ? " 

" Why speak in riddles ? '' cried Marie, sinking on her 
knees. " I ask — nay, I implore — thee to tell me, why he is 
here." 

" Well, then, since thou art so curious as to the coxcomb's 
fate,'' 6aid the guard, " I will tell thee. He was such a 
fool as to try to let daylight through his excellency ; but 
his sword met with something harder than skin, and flew 
into pieces, and we dragged him here, with that old traitor, 
Barton, and as sure as the sun will rise again, there will be 
two necks stretched to-morrow." 

" Can I see him ? " cried Marie. 

" Nay," said the man. " Our orders are that no one is 

to be admitted." 

****** 

We must now return to Martin and Sprite. 

" It is a great risk, I know," Martin said ; " but if suc- 
cessful, freedom will surely follow. Keep the rope free, and 
ready for use." 

"Never fear, master," returned Sprite, "I'll catch him 
fast enough.'' 

"Hush !" said Martin, placing a hand over Sprite's mouth. 
" I hear footsteps. Are you ready ? " 

Sprite nodded his head to imply that he was. 

The footsteps became louder, a light gleamed under the 
door, the key turned, and one of the guard entered with 
some bread and water for the prisoners. 

Without looking round the cell, he stooped to put the 
lamp on the floor of the cell, when Martin, springing for- 
ward, threw him heavily, and grasping the mans throat 
with one hand, gagged him with the other. 

Meanwhile Sprite was not idle ; but, rushing to Martin's 
assistance, bound the guard's hands and feet. 

Martin possessed himself of the pike which the guard 
carried, and motioned to the man that he required his cap, 
collarette, boots, and corslet. 

These were removed by Sprite, Martin standing guard 



EXCHAIn'OE NO ROBBERY. 813 

over the soldier, pike in hand, should he attempt any resist- 
ance. 

Martin then removed the outer articles of clothing, which 
were dragged from the soldier. 

The Cavalier then donned the soldier's uniform, and pro- 
nounced himself ready. 

Sprite climbed the wall, and was gone in an instant, and 
the Cavalier, slamming the door of the cell, strode slowly 
towards the gates. 

The men were on guard, or gone to their homes, and 
Martin's progress was not arrested, even by the man who 
unlocked the gates and let him out. 

What should he do ? Where should he go ? he asked him- 
self, again and again. 

Evidently it was not safe for him to stay at Mossville, yet 
he was loth to go ; he did not like to leave honest old John 
to his fate. 

At any risk, he must see Temple, and, were death staring 
him in the face, Marie Shelford. 

The morning was just dawning, and as yet the people had 
not risen ; but Martin knew well the labourers would roon 
be abroad, and, not wishing to encounter anybody who might 
recognize him, he quickened his pace towards the wood in 
which Hugh Walbrook had hidden. 

But in this he was disappointed, for he had not gone far 
when he heard the sound of a horse at full gallop, coming 
in his direction. 

It was not long before the horse and its rider appeared in 
sight, and Martin, to his joy, saw that it was his friend, 
Harry Temple. 

" Hillo ! " he cried, " where away so fast ? Gadzooks ! 
but thouridest like a Cavalier. Come, Master Temple, draw 
in thy rein a little." 

Temple would have passed him, but Martin, shouting in 
his own voice, caused Temple to pull up sharply. 

" Heaven be thanked ! " said Temple ; " how didst thou 
escape? " 

" I will tell thee anon," returned Martin ; " but to waste 
words now would be folly — I must reach Oxford before the 
hounds start;," 



3H THE FUGITIVE CAVALIER. 

"Oxford!" cried Temple ; "I have just returned from 
there. When I heard of your arrest, I started at once to 
ask advice of Lord Cathrope." 

" And what did he say ? " inquired Martin. 

"Very little, but gave me tidings that will make every 
Royalist mad with joy, and every Roundhead shake in hia 
shoe-!. Listen, and let your ears drink the words — Noll 
Cromwell is dead ! " 

" Impossible !" exclaimed Martin. 

" All men must die," said Temple. " But let us not stay 
here ; our little vault will afford you more acuotnmo ation 
ami *:ifety than the open ro id," 

" T should be recognized were I to venture near the Hall," 
said Martin. 

'• Tudi ! " said Temple ; " they are not such early birds as 
you think. By Heaven ! we will steal a march upon them 
one ol th se davs. Bat come, or we shall have the guard 
turnmu out. By my soul, Martin, you look evtry inch a 
Rouucthead in that costume." 

Temple descended from his horse, led it into some brush- 
wooj, and having secured it, rejoined his companion. 

" I wdl return for the horse," he said, " when I have seen 
you safe, and heard the outline of your adventures." 

" Which will not take two minutes to relate," returned 
Martin. 

They reached the moat in safety, and, pulling aside the 
bushes which covered the entrance to the secret passages, 
they raised the trap-door, and were soon in their haunt. 

Here they found Sprite busy piling rapiers and pistols. 

Martin greeted him cordially, and having told his adven- 
ture to Temple, they sat down to a meal of bread, meat, and 
milk, which Sprite had managed to smuggle in some mys- 
terious manner of his own. 

" And so the news is true of the death of Cromwell ? " 
said Martin. 

" As that our Bufferings are nearly at an end," returned 
Temple. 

" What mean you ? " rejoined Martin ; " his son Richard 
wiU succeed him.*" 



THE ROADSIDE INN. 815 

"A poor, weak-minded, harmless young fellow," Temple 
replied. " Before six months have passed Charles will be 
king of England." 

" Heaven grant that it may be ! but I fear our troubles 
are not at an end," said Martin ; " but I do not despair, and 
look forward hopefully for better days. Hast heard news 
of Wal brook?"" 

"Nothing," Temple replied, "beyond that he escaped 
by nothing less than a miracle, and has not been heard of 
since." 

" Then he is safe," said Martin, cheerfully, " and long ere 
this with friends. What effect had the great news upon the 
people ? " 

" It would have done your heart good to have seen them," 
said Temple. " Some wept for very joy, and all appeared 
glad. They shouted ' Long live King Charles ! ' till they 
were hoarse, and in vain did the soldiers endeavour to quiet 
them." 

" This is indeed good news," said Martin ; " and some- 
thing must be done to release Barton. Poor old fellow ! he 
is loyal to the bone, and would die cheerfully could he hear 
the news." 

" The news of to-day will put another face on all 
matters," said Temple ; " and, if I mistake not, Jabez 
Carter and his crew will be a little more careful how 
they persecute and hang the despised loyalists. But now 
I must away, for T left my horee to cool himself. He 
brought me well, and, by my sword, he shall not repent 
it!" 



CHAPTEE XIII. 

THE ROADSIDE INN. 

The inn at which Hugh Walbrook and Sir John Morton 
rested was a building very much resembling the unfortunate 
*' kord Protector." 



316 THE FUGITIVE CAVALIER. 

It was conducted by a man of the strictest Roundhead 
principles. 

He was standing at the door when the two fugitives came 
up, and greeted them in a twanging voice, and inquired 
their pleasure. 

" Bring us a bottle of wine," said Sir John. " We are 
early travellers, and have broken our fast hours ago." 

The landlord departed to execute the order, and Hugh and 
Sir John found their way into the parlour and waited 
patiently for the wine. 

A footstep sounded in the passage, and a woman, evi- 
dently the wife of mine host, put her head in at the door, 
and, without saying a word, departed. 

Next came a man of Sifc ostle: class, who, having scru- 
tinized the stranger? tohia heart's content, went as silently 
as the hostess had done. 

A few minutes elapsed, a^d then the landlord appeared, 
but without the wine. 

Hugh began to feel uneasy. This Sir John observed, and 
nudged him to be of good heart. 

" Prithee," said the landlord, " which road did you 
come ? " 

"From Uxcombs," said Sir John. "We should have 
been here last night, but, missing our way, were fain to 
content ourselves with a bed of grass, and the open sky for 
a blanket." 

"Thou hast heard nothing of the escape of a malignant 
from Mossville ? " returned the landlord. "The soldiers 
are in full chase, and — hark ! If I mistake not, here they 
come." 

The landlord quitted the room to see if such was the case, 
and left the Cavaliers to themselves, 

" Gadzooks ! " whispered Hugh, " we are undone." 

" Courage 1" said Sir John, "courage, and we will thwart 
them yet." 

The tramp of the horses could now be heard plainly, and 
it was not long before they appeared at the inn. 

" What news, friend Springall ? " asked the officer in com- 
mand. " Hast seen any strangers hereabout ? " 



THE ROADSIDE INK. 817 

" None to answer your description," returned the landlord. 
" I've had nobody in my house this morning, save a couple 
of tramps, and they are here now. Would^t like to have a 
peep at them ? " 

" Nay," the officer replied ; " time is precious. We will 
call and regale as we return ; but, stay, I may as well see 
these fellows. These Cavaliers are up to such tricks that 
Ihey would cheat the devil himself." 

"Hush!" whispered the landlord; "use not profane 
words in my hearing. Remember the act." 

" The act does not apply to soldiers," returned the officer ; 
" but there, good master S;jringall, for_ive me ; I know it 
was wrong. Now let me see these men." 

Hugh's heart beat high as he heard these words ; but 
Si; f John, with great presence of mil d, took the box 
from his back, and throwing the wares upon the table, 
called upon Hugh to assist in arranging them, at the same 
time rating him severely about some supposed fault he had 
committed. 

" Thou lazybones ! " he roared, as the officer entered, 
" look thee here. Is it not enough that I feed, clothe, and 
pay thee in good coin of the Commonwealth, but thou must 
upset the box through your awkwardness ? A pest upon 
thee, I say." 

" Why these high words ? " inquired the officer. " Tush ! 
— if thy man did upset thy wares, it was an accident." 

" Accident 1" echoed Sir John. "Accident enough, I 
assure ye ; he puts everything down to accident. He goes 
slouching about like a duck out of water, and last night he 
fell, and, spilling my goods in the road, spoilt more than I 
can cover with a rose noble. Accident ! he'll have an acci- 
dent one of these days that will put his neck in the halter, 
the lazy lozel." 

Hugh put on a face of stupid contrition, and gazed from 
the officer to his supposed master in such a ridiculous, lout- 
.sh style, that the officer was perfectly satisfied the man he 
jvantedwas not there, and, walking from the inn, he mounted 
his horse and gave the order to proceed. 

Just then a mounted messenger dashed up to the door. 



SI 8 THE FUGITIVE CAVALIER. 

lb was Harry Temple, and Hugh Walbrook had much to 
do to constrain himself, but he felt that the safety of many 
lives depended upon silence and discretion. 

" Where have you come from ? " demanded the officer ; 
" thou hast been riding swiftly, for thy horse is covered with 
foam." 

"I am messenger now to his excellency Jabez Carter," 
said Temple, " and am bearer of great news from Oxford. 
The Lord Protector is dead, and report says tho king 
has received an invitation to return from a very influential 
body, who in former days supported the Lord Protector." 

" G-adzooks ! " cried the officer, " but this is great and 
terrible news. Dost hear, master Springall ? " 

" The malignants will once more rule the land," said the 
landlord, turning up his eyes until nothing but the whites 
were visible. " They will once more revel, and feast, and 
sing the songs of Satan. The Amalekites will smite the 
righteous. But go on, good soldiers, remember the malig- 
nant of whom you are in search ; go on, capture him, but 
show him none of the mercies of the elect." 

Harry Temple spurred on, and the soldiers departed. 

" OldNolldead !"said Hugh. "What think you of that?" 

" That the devil has his own," returned Sir John ; 
" but I will not be uncharitable. Peace to his ashes, and 
may they never be disturbed. But where's the wine to drink 
the king's health in ? Hi ! landlord, you have quite for- 
gotten us." 

The landlord entered, bearing a tray with a bottle and 
glasses on it. 

The whites of his eyes were still visible, and he was mut- 
tering and calling down curses upon the Cavaliers. 

"Wilt have a glass of thine own wine ? " said Sir John. 
" Come, landlord, we must drown our grief." 

The landlord declined the offer, and left the fugitives to 
themselves. 

" We must not delay," said Sir John, as he filled the 
glasses. " If possible, we r ist reach Oxford before noon ; 
an' I mistake not, we shall find the place in a state of ex- 
citement." 



THE PROTECTOR'S DEATH. 310 

Finishing the wine, they started, Hugh Walbrook taking 
the box this time ; and, with their faces towards Oxford, set 
out with lighter hearts than either of them had carried for 
many a day. 



CHAPTER XIV 

EFFECT OF THE PROTECTOR'S DEATH. 

AS may be expected, the news of the Protector's death 
created a great impression upon the people of Mossville and 
the inmates of the Hall. 

Jabez Carter did not show himself that day, and was for 
several hours closeted with his steward, the end of which 
was an order to release John Barton. Just then a messen- 
ger arrived with the news of Martin's escape, but the order 
was not delayed, nor any search instigated for the escaped 
prisoner. 

Barton's house had the previous night been filled with 
soldiers, who did not scruple at making themselves free with 
the choicest liquors, and the result was naturally that 
several, when called for in the morning, were found snoring 
quietly on the floors of the chambers, and not a few had 
made the cellar a resting-place. 

However, little was done but to discuss the events that 
had followed one another, and the probable result of the 
death of so important a personage as Oliver Cromwell, the 
Lord Protector. 

The day passed quietly at the Hall, and in the evening 
Jabez Carter, with a picked guard, rode out. 

On their return, one of the men called his excellency's 
attention to a light burning in one of the unoccupied rooms 
of the Hall. 

It was a peculiar kind of light ; misty, like that of a lamp 
ehining through a fog. 

Carter reined in his steed, and gazed fixedly at the light 
for a few seconds, and then turning to Goodall, said — 

«' What make you of it, Goodall ? " 



820 THE FUGITIVE CAVALIEIi. 

^ " Godzooks ! " returned the steward, " I can scarcely say. 
The place seems beset with demons." 

"The place shall be searched to-night," said Carter: " I 
cannot sleep in this uncertainty." 

"Your excellency's commands shall be obeyed," Good all 
replied. 

As he spoke, the light expired, and the party, after 
waiting a few minutes to see if it re-appeared, returned to 
the Hall. 

When there, Goodall summoned the guard, an 1 a 
thorough search was made ; but, as before, they found 
nothing. 

The room in which the light had been seen was a large, 
unfurnished apartment. 

The dust lay thick on the floor ; but there were no foot- 
pi ints to denote that anybody had been there. 

The walls were of brick, covered with tapestry, which 
was rotting away, and behind which spiders and beetles 
held high revel. 

The doors of other rooms were burst open and searched ; 
but nothing to excite the least suspicion was found, and the 
searchers returned with a sickly sensation of frar upon them, 
and were glad when they were once more in the habitable 
part of the building. 

That night Jabez Carter did not retire to rest, but sat 
up with the guard ; and the men observed that he started 
at the slightest sound, and whispered to each other that he 
feared assassination. 

The hours wore slowly away until the clock struck the 
hour of two. 

As the bell ceased to vibrate, a trampling of feet was 
heard overhead, and the sound of voices conversing reached 
the watchers. 

The men drew their swords, and looked towards 
Goodall for orders ; but that brave soldier of the Common- 
wealth had closed his eyes, and was, to all appearances, fast 
asleep. 

Not so with Jabez Carter ; he sat grasping the edge of 
the table with his left hand, and a pistol ready in his right. 



THE PROTECTOR'S DEATH. 821 

The tramping ceased, and for a few seconds all was 
still. 

The men began to breathe more freely, but were startled 
by a hollow laugh, which seemed to come from under their 
feet. 

Goodall awoke instantly, and instinctively drew his legs 
up to the edge of the chair. 

The awful sound was repeated, and a voice cried — 

" Beware ! traitor and villain ! Thy master is no 
more ! " 

" Mercy ! mercy ! " cried Jabez Carter, sinking on his 
knees and covering his face with his hands. " Torment me 
not thus, or I shall go mad." 

" Vengeance, vengeance ! " said the voice. " The king 
shall return, and the heir of Mossville shall expel the usurper 
at the point of the sword. Listen ! " 

The men then heard the distant sound of a bell tolling a 
funeral knell. 

A smothered cry of horror burst from their lips, and 
without waiting their commander's orders, they fled from 
the room. 



Six months have passed away, and Eichard, son of Crom- 
well, has retired in favour of the young king. All Eugland 
is gay ; the bells in every steeple ring out the good news ; 
the hideous Puritan garb is cast aside, and once more the 
streets are brilliant with the extravagant dress of the 
Cavalier, and resound with the clanking of swords, jingling 
of spurs, merry laughter, and bright conversation. 

See how brightly the sun shines upon the waving banners 
and gleaming arms ! Hark ! how the people shout with joy, 
as the trumpets pronounce the king crowned ! 

We must now take the reader back to Mossville. 

John Barton's inn is thronged with merry customers, 
and the good old man's face beams with happiness and 
excitement. 

A procession is winding its way down the street. 

At its head, mounted on a magnificent charger, rides 



322 THE FUGITIVE CAVALIER. 

Martin Steynton, f Mowed by Hugh Walbrook, Harry 
Temple, and Sir John Morton. 

The etreet is filled with armed men ; and it required 
but only a glance to show that they were prepared for 
action. 

Martin reined in his steed, and turning to Hugh Wal- 
brook, said — 

" I have altered my mind. This night I will face the 
miscreant alone. Let the wood be surrounded so that 
neither he nor his villain Goodall escape." 

" Nay," returned Hugh. " Why run such a risk ? Now 
that the rat is caged, why give him a chance of biting ? " 

" It were better that I should meet him," said Martin; " I 
fear nothing." 

" As you will," Hugh returned ; " but, marry, I will not 
trust thee out of ear-shot. When wilt thou go ? " 

"To-night," said Martin. " I cannot rest until I have 
met the scoundrel. But let us get on. Ha ! see, there is 
honest old John amongst his measures." 

The procession passed through the ancient street, amid 
the acclamations of the crowd. 

" No more penalties for dancing round the fire ! '' cried 
one. 

"Long live King Charles, and the heir of Mossville !" 
shouted another. 

" God grant him a speedy return ! " exclaimed a third. 

There were no Roundheads about that day ; one or two 
had shown themselves in the morning, and barely escaped 
rough handling from the people. 

Everything was changed. Instead of sour-looking 
countenances, every face wore a smile ; banners waved, 
trumpets sounded, and the bells from the village church 
made the very air rock with jnv. 

* * # " • • • 

How stood matters at the Hall ? 

Surrounded on all sides, hemmed in by several troops, 
Jabez Carter and his few retainers knew that resistance 
would be futile. 

Several times had they offered to surrender, but each time 



THE PROTECTOR'S DEATH. 323 

the reply was that Carter and his steward must be given up 
first. 

As a drowning man clings to a straw, so did Carter cherish 
hopes of his escape, and prevailed upon his men to remain 
in the scantily-provisioned garrison. 

On the night of the entry of Martin, his friends, and 
another detachment of the Royalist troops, Carter sat alone, 
watching from a small window the camp-fires in the adjoin- 
ing wood. 

His face was pale, careworn, and wrinkled, and showed 
plainly that he had suffered much. 

" And this," he muttered, " is the reward for all. What a 
fool I was to accept the favours showered on me ! Here am 
I, worse by far than a prisoner. If captured, certain death ; 
and even should I escape, what hope have I ? " 

He rose to his feet, and pacing up and down the room, 
wrung his hands wildly. 

" I see that upturned face," he cried, " see that form, and 
hear the voice foretelling my doom ! " 

"Thy doom is near ! " cried a voice, apparently close to 
his ear. 

Carter staggered back, and sinking into a chair, and 
covering his face with his hands, cried — 

" Mercy ! I am not fit to die." 

There was a faint clicking sound, a soft footstep, and a 
hand was placed upon his shoulder. 

Carter uncovered his face, and beheld Martin standing 
before him. 

" What want you ? " he inquired, endeavouring to shake 
off the sensation of fear. " What is your business ? " 

Martin sat down opposite the Roundhead, and then draw- 
ing his sword, said — 

" Jabez Carter, I have waited for this meeting since the 
moment my father fell. I need no longer disguise the fact 
— I am Ingram Halliday." 

Jabez Carter started to his feet, and was about to ring a 
bell, when the young Cavalier arrested his hand. 

" Stay, sir," he said : " I am no assassin ; I am alone, 
hence the reason for the drawing of my sword." 



824 THE FUGITIVE CAVALIER. 

A momentary gleam of triumph lit up Carter's eyes. 

" When I say alone," Ingram went on, " I would not 
have you understand that I am the only loyalist within 
these walls. One call with this," holding up a silver whistle, 
" would bring fifty men to my assistance. But I have sworn 
to mett you alone, and now I keep my word." 

"If your visit is to claim the estate," said Carter, "I 
pray thee say no more ; I am willing to surrender all on 
condition that I may be allowed to depart in peace." 

" I have come to hold no parley with respect to the 
estate. I am here to avenge my father's death." 

The Roundhead's face paled, and he grasped the arm of 
his chair convulsively. 

" Your memory has not deserted you. Listen, and carry 
your thoughts back a year. Not content with causing the 
death of Sir Ingram, you set a price on my head. You have 
repeatedly spoken to your steward wishing for my death." 

" How do you know this ? " cried Carter, starting to his 
feet. " Has anybody played me false ? " 

" Patience, and I will tell you all," said Ingram. " When 
I heard of my father's death I was but a lad, but I swore 
to have revenge, and at the first opportunity started for 
Mossvilfe. Many are the chances I have had to run my 
sword through your craven heart, but each time discretion 
came to my aid, and whispered that my hour of triumph 
would come." 

The baffled Roundhead shivered from head to foot. 

"And that hour is come," Ingram went on, his eyes 
gleaming. " I could have thee swung from the nearest tree, 
but such is not my purpose. But listen while I tell thee 
more. A boy called Sprite discovered a secret passage 
under the moat, and led me, in company with two or three 
other fugitives, to a vault under this very room. Here we 
found arms in abundance, a quantity of which were con- 
veyed by night to Barton's, and buried in the garden ; the 
remainder are now in the hands of armed men in the king's 
cause. The secret passages of which I spoke are filled with 
men, and await but my order to drive thy hirelings out, and 
fit thee with a halter." 



THE PROTKCTOR'S DEATti. 325 

Carter did not reply, but sat gazing at the Cavalier with 
a face expressive of terror and baffled rage. 

" But I came here alone to meet you," said Ingram, 
drawing another rapier from under his cloak and placing it 
on the table — " to meet you hand to hand. Choose between 
the death of a gentleman and that of a churl." 

Carter did not reply for a few seconds, but at last, clearing 
his throat, and speaking in a husky tone, he said — 

" Sir Ingram, your father did not fall by my hand, nor 
have I any wish to stain my hands with your blood ; I 
have said the estates are yours — take them, and let me 
go." 

" And is this the courage of an Ironside ? " sneered the 
Cavalier — "to rob, plunder, hunt, and scourge a man, and, 
when face to face, to lick the very dust from his feet, and 
cry for mercy ? Pshaw ! Come, I will give thee three 
minutes, and if thou art not decided then, my men shall 
have thee." 

Carter rose, and taking the rapier from the table, and un- 
sheathing it, looked at it from hilt to point, and after try- 
ing it, said — 

" I accept your challenge : but answer me one thing. 
Should you fall, shall I go free ? " 

" I have left full instructions to that effect," returned 
the Cavalier, "and give you my word of honour such in- 
structions will be carried out." 

Carter did not reply, but placed himself in position, and 
the next instant both swords clashed together. 

For near a minute neither of the combatants moved ; 
they kept their eyes steadily upon each other's, the body 
well supported by the left leg, and both waited for the other 
to commence the attack. 

Both men were skilled with their weapons, Carter 
having the advantage over Ingram in being somewhat 
taller. 

Ingram was the first to lunge. 

The point of his rapier caught in the sleeve of Carter's 
right arm, tearing it, and inflicting a slight wound in the 
shoulder. 



326 THE FUGITIVE CAVALIER. 

Carter, smarting with pain, returned by thrusting 
furiously, but the blows fell harmlessly upon Ingram's 
rapier. 

For some time neither seemed to have the advantage 
upon the other. 

Carter's wound bled profusely, and Ingram had received a 
scratch on the neck. 

Carter received another wound, and, losing his presence of 
mind, rushed forward, attempting to cut down his opponent's 
guard. 

The next instant a shriek of agony rang through the 
apartment, and the Roundhead fell back upon the floor a 
corpse. 

Ingram sounded the whistle. 

The secret door flew open, and in less time than it takes 
to write it, the room was filled with armed men. 



CHAPTER XV. 

ALL'S well that ends well. 

A number of armed men are carousing in the servants' hall 
of the mansion at Mossville. 

They speak in no twaDging tone of voice, nor do they 
turn up their eyes until only the whites are visible. 

The walls ring with the sound of laughter which only 
wine and good fare can provoke, and a bluff voice is sing- 
ing a song of the days of King Charles the First to a ring 
of admirers. 

" Gadzooks ! " cried one, " we have forgotten one toast. 
We've drunk to the king, to Sir Ingram and his friends — 
but we forgot Sprite." 

The toast was drunk with acclamation, and Sprite was 
seized by four lusty fellows, and borne round the spacious 
apartment in triumph. 

When the noise of shouting and laughter had subsided a 



all's well that ends well. 327 

little, the horns were again filled with wine, and the men 
eat down to converse. 

" What thinkest thou," said one, " will be the fate of our 
prisoner ? " 

" I know not," returned the man addressed ; " but I think 
a short shrift and a sudden ending. Remember it was 
Goodall who led the party against Sir Ingram's father ; but 
we shall see in the morning." 

" How does he fare ? " asked the first. 

" But badly," returned the other ; " he has done nothing 
but howl and groan for mercy since he was locked up." 

The next morning the people of Mossville were aroused 
with the braying of trumpets and the rolling of drums, 
and, looking out, beheld a party of soldiers, with worthy 
Goodall in their midst, proceeding towards the Hall. 

Another party of soldiers awaited them at the gates. 

The trumpets were sounded again, and Goodall was led 
into an open glade. 

Here he found Sir Ingram, Hugh Walbrook, and Harry 
Temple. 

" Prisoner," said Sir Ingram, s'ernly, " what have you to 
say that you should not be handed as a traitor ? " 

Goodall did not reply, but cast an imploring look at his 
questioner. 

" I have no wish to shed blood," said Sir Ingram, " and 
therefore spare your life ; but beware of coming nearer 
than twentymiles of Mossville, or your life shall be forfeited." 

Goodall promised to obey, and, thanking Sir Ingram for 
his mercy, left the group and left Mossville for ever. 

" And now," said Sir Ingram, " we will return to the 
Hall, since the place is now thoroughly purged of such 
vermin. By my soul, this great triumph of the king atones 
for all his sufferings ! " 

" Let him beware how he uses his triumph," said Temple; 
" he is gay and extravagant." 

" Cease croaking," said Sir Ingram, smiling. " What is 
a king for but to use and circulate the money ? Tush, lad! 
Look around you and see what an economical government 
has done for the country." 



THE FUGITIVE CAVALIER. 

Another year has flown by on the wings of time. The 
bells of the ancient church are sending forth a boisterous 
peal, deep toned and rich, as if they were ringing for no 
ordinary occurrence. 

The street is full of people in holiday attire ; the women 
and children gaily decked out in ribbons. 

They loiter in the street, and turn their eyes towards the 
road leading to the Hall. 

A bright, handsome boy, in the attire of a page, comes 
slowly along mounted on a pony. The people greet him 
joyfully, as their old favourite, Sprite. 

John Barton once again rears the sign of the " Crown 
and Sceptre," and a noisy crowd of rustics cluster round 
the porch, and drink the health of Sir Ingram in bumpers 
of nut-brown ale. 

" So now he's coming to live with us altogether," said 
one. " God bless him ! we'll make him welcome.'' 

" Old Shelford ought to think himself a lucky man." 

" Nay," exclaimed John, joining the crowd, " Marie is 
lucky to find so good and noble a husband." 

The sun shines brightly, and turns the bubbling stream 
into a thread of silver ; the birds sing in the trees, and tha 
bells clash joyously. 

Sprite rides up and down the street asking and answering 
questions, telling anecdotes of his year of London life. 

The clock strikes ten, and Sir Ingram and Marie Shelford, 
soon tu be Lady Halliday, ride slowly down the road towards 
the church. 

How the people crowd round and cheer him ! His right 
hand is grasped by a hundred faithful followers. 

Hugh Walbrook and Harry Temple are there, and come 
in for their share of cheering and hand-shaking, and by the 
time the church is reached they are all well-nign 
tired. 

Listen ! hew the rich notes of the bells mingle with the 
music of the birds, and how the sun floods the landscape 
with golden light ! 

Hark at the voices of the good people of Mossville ! See 



AtL's WELL THAT ENDS WELL. 32& 

how caps are flung in the air, and the happy bride covered 
with flowers! 
I he church is reached, and the bells cease. The service 

18 T ei M me ^' and the happy pair de P art 
In Mossvile Park there are whole bullocks roasting, and 

a score of cooks are hard at work in the Hall. 

V\ ine ! It flows like a river, and many a rustic will go 
home mellow, to be soundly rated the next morning by his 
better-half. But what of that ! Sir Ingram has returned 
from London. Let us drink and be merry ! 

The feasting and drinking is over, and the lads and lasses 
dance merrily to the notes of a couple of fiddles ; the old 
people, under the shade of giant oaks, watching them with 
eager eyes. 

Then Sir Ingram comes out and walks among his people, 
listens to their delighted expressions on the change of times, 
and the cheering is renewed again and again when he calif 
them to toast Charles, King of England! 



THE END. 

